========================================

Transcribed from the 1895 Oliphant, Anderson and Ferrier edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





BUNYAN CHARACTERS--THIRD SERIES
Lectures Delivered in St. George's Free Church Edinburgh
By Alexander Whyte, D.D.


CHAPTER I--THE BOOK


   '--the book of the wars of the Lord.'--_Moses_.

John Bunyan's _Holy War_ was first published in 1682, six years before
its illustrious author's death.  Bunyan wrote this great book when he was
still in all the fulness of his intellectual power and in all the
ripeness of his spiritual experience.  The _Holy War_ is not the
_Pilgrim's Progress_--there is only one _Pilgrim's Progress_.  At the
same time, we have Lord Macaulay's word for it that if the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ did not exist the _Holy War_ would be the best allegory that
ever was written: and even Mr. Froude admits that the _Holy War_ alone
would have entitled its author to rank high up among the acknowledged
masters of English literature.  The intellectual rank of the _Holy War_
has been fixed before that tribunal over which our accomplished and
competent critics preside; but for a full appreciation of its religious
rank and value we would need to hear the glad testimonies of tens of
thousands of God's saints, whose hard-beset faith and obedience have been
kindled and sustained by the study of this noble book.  The _Pilgrim's
Progress_ sets forth the spiritual life under the scriptural figure of a
long and an uphill journey.  The _Holy War_, on the other hand, is a
military history; it is full of soldiers and battles, defeats and
victories.  And its devout author had much more scriptural suggestion and
support in the composition of the _Holy War_ than he had even in the
composition of the _Pilgrim's Progress_.  For Holy Scripture is full of
wars and rumours of wars: the wars of the Lord; the wars of Joshua and
the Judges; the wars of David, with his and many other magnificent battle-
songs; till the best known name of the God of Israel in the Old Testament
is the Lord of Hosts; and then in the New Testament we have Jesus Christ
described as the Captain of our salvation.  Paul's powerful use of armour
and of armed men is familiar to every student of his epistles; and then
the whole Bible is crowned with a book all sounding with the
battle-cries, the shouts, and the songs of soldiers, till it ends with
that city of peace where they hang the trumpet in the hall and study war
no more.  Military metaphors had taken a powerful hold of our author's
imagination even in the _Pilgrim's Progress_, as his portraits of
Greatheart and Valiant-for-truth and other soldiers sufficiently show;
while the conflict with Apollyon and the destruction of Doubting Castle
are so many sure preludes of the coming _Holy War_.  Bunyan's early
experiences in the great Civil War had taught him many memorable things
about the military art; memorable and suggestive things that he
afterwards put to the most splendid use in the siege, the capture, and
the subjugation of Mansoul.

The _Divine Comedy_ is beyond dispute the greatest book of personal and
experimental religion the world has ever seen.  The consuming intensity
of its author's feelings about sin and holiness, the keenness and the
bitterness of his remorse, and the rigour and the severity of his
revenge, his superb intellect and his universal learning, all set ablaze
by his splendid imagination--all that combines to make the _Divine
Comedy_ the unapproachable masterpiece it is.  John Bunyan, on the other
hand, had no learning to be called learning, but he had a strong and a
healthy English understanding, a conscience and a heart wholly given up
to the life of the best religion of his religious day, and then, by sheer
dint of his sanctified and soaring imagination and his exquisite style,
he stands forth the peer of the foremost men in the intellectual world.
And thus it is that the great unlettered religious world possesses in
John Bunyan all but all that the select and scholarly world possesses in
Dante.  Both Dante and Bunyan devoted their splendid gifts to the noblest
of services--the service of spiritual, and especially of personal
religion; but for one appreciative reader that Dante has had Bunyan has
had a hundred.  Happy in being so like his Master in so many things,
Bunyan is happy in being like his unlettered Master in this also, that
the common people hear him gladly and never weary of hearing him.

It gives by far its noblest interest to Dante's noble book that we have
Dante himself in every page of his book.  Dante is taken down into Hell,
he is then led up through _Purgatory_, and after that still up and up
into the very Paradise of God.  But that hell all the time is the hell
that Dante had dug and darkened and kindled for himself.  In the
Purgatory, again, we see Dante working out his own salvation with fear
and trembling, God all the time working in Dante to will and to do of His
good pleasure.  And then the Paradise, with all its sevenfold glory, is
just that place and that life which God hath prepared for them that love
Him and serve Him as Dante did.  And so it is in the _Holy War_.  John
Bunyan is in the _Pilgrim's Progress_, but there are more men and other
men than its author in that rich and populous book, and other experiences
and other attainments than his.  But in the _Holy War_ we have Bunyan
himself as fully and as exclusively as we have Dante in the _Divine
Comedy_.  In the first edition of the _Holy War_ there is a frontispiece
conceived and executed after the anatomical and symbolical manner which
was so common in that day, and which is to be seen at its perfection in
the English edition of Jacob Behmen.  The frontispiece is a full-length
likeness of the author of the _Holy War_, with his whole soul laid open
and his hidden heart 'anatomised.'  Why, asked Wordsworth, and Matthew
Arnold in our day has echoed the question--why does Homer still so live
and rule without a rival in the world of letters?  And they answer that
it is because he always sang with his eye so fixed upon its object.
'Homer, to thee I turn.'  And so it was with Dante.  And so it was with
Bunyan.  Bunyan's _Holy War_ has its great and abiding and commanding
power over us just because he composed it with his eye fixed on his own
heart.

   My readers, I have somewhat else to do,
   Than with vain stories thus to trouble you;
   What here I say some men do know so well
   They can with tears and joy the story tell . . .
   Then lend thine ear to what I do relate,
   Touching the town of Mansoul and her state:
   For my part, I (myself) was in the town,
   Both when 'twas set up and when pulling down.
   Let no man then count me a fable-maker,
   Nor make my name or credit a partaker
   Of their derision: what is here in view
   Of mine own knowledge, I dare say is true.

The characters in the _Holy War_ are not as a rule nearly so clear-cut or
so full of dramatic life and movement as their fellows are in the
_Pilgrim's Progress_, and Bunyan seems to have felt that to be the case.
He shows all an author's fondness for the children of his imagination in
the _Pilgrim's Progress_.  He returns to and he lingers on their doings
and their sayings and their very names with all a foolish father's fond
delight.  While, on the other hand, when we look to see him in his
confidential addresses to his readers returning upon some of the military
and municipal characters in the _Holy War_, to our disappointment he does
not so much as name a single one of them, though he dwells with all an
author's self-delectation on the outstanding scenes, situations, and
episodes of his remarkable book.

What, then, are some of the more outstanding scenes, situations, and
episodes, as well as military and municipal characters, in the book now
before us?  And what are we to promise ourselves, and to expect, from the
study and the exposition of the _Holy War_ in these lectures?  Well, to
begin with, we shall do our best to enter with mind, and heart, and
conscience, and imagination into Bunyan's great conception of the human
soul as a city, a fair and a delicate city and corporation, with its
situation, surroundings, privileges and fortunes.  We shall then enter
under his guidance into the famous and stately palace of this
metropolitan city; a palace which for strength might be called a castle,
for pleasantness a paradise, and for largeness a place so copious as to
contain all the world.  The walls and the gates of the city will then
occupy and instruct us for several Sabbath evenings, after which we shall
enter on the record of the wars and battles that rolled time after time
round those city walls, and surged up through its captured gates till
they quite overwhelmed the very palace of the king itself.  Then we shall
spend, God willing, one Sabbath evening with Loth-to-stoop, and another
with old Ill-pause, the devil's orator, and another with Captain
Anything, and another with Lord Willbewill, and another with that
notorious villain Clip-promise, by whose doings so much of the king's
coin had been abused, and another with that so angry and so
ill-conditioned churl old Mr. Prejudice, with his sixty deaf men under
him.  Dear Mr. Wet-eyes, with his rope upon his head, will have a fit
congregation one winter night, and Captain Self-denial another.  We shall
have another painful but profitable evening before a communion season
with Mr. Prywell, and so we shall eat of that bread and drink of that
cup.  Emmanuel's livery will occupy us one evening, Mansoul's Magna
Charta another, and her annual Feast-day another.  Her Established Church
and her beneficed clergy will take up one evening, some Skulkers in
Mansoul another, the devil's last prank another, and then, to wind up
with, Emmanuel's last speech and charge to Mansoul from his chariot-step
till He comes again to accomplish her rapture.  All that we shall see and
take part in; unless, indeed, our Captain comes in anger before the time,
and spears us to the earth when He finds us asleep at our post or in the
act of sin at it, which may His abounding mercy forbid!

And now take these three forewarnings and precautions.

1.  First:--All who come here on these coming Sabbath evenings will not
understand the _Holy War_ all at once, and many will not understand it at
all.  And little blame to them, and no wonder.  For, fully to understand
this deep and intricate book demands far more mind, far more experience,
and far more specialised knowledge than the mass of men, as men are, can
possibly bring to it.  This so exacting book demands of us, to begin
with, some little acquaintance with military engineering and
architecture; with the theory of, and if possible with some practice in,
attack and defence in sieges and storms, winter campaigns and long drawn-
out wars.  And then, impossible as it sounds and is, along with all that
we would need to have a really profound, practical, and at first-hand
acquaintance with the anatomy of the human subject, and especially with
cardiac anatomy, as well as with all the conditions, diseases, regimen
and discipline of the corrupt heart of man.  And then it is enough to
terrify any one to open this book or to enter this church when he is told
that if he comes here he must be ready and willing to have the whole of
this terrible and exacting book fulfilled and experienced in himself, in
his own body and in his own soul.

2.  And, then, you will not all like the _Holy War_.  The mass of men
could not be expected to like any such book.  How could the vain and
blind citizen of a vain and blind city like to be wakened up, as Paris
was wakened up within our own remembrance, to find all her gates in the
hands of an iron-hearted enemy?  And how could her sons like to be
reminded, as they sit in their wine gardens, that they are thereby fast
preparing their city for that threatened day when she is to be hung up on
her own walls and bled to the white?  Who would not hate and revile the
book or the preacher who prophesied such rough things as that?  Who could
love the author or the preacher who told him to his face that his eyes
and his ears and all the passes to his heart were already in the hands of
a cruel, ruthless, and masterful enemy?  No wonder that you never read
the _Holy War_.  No wonder that the bulk of men have never once opened
it.  The Downfall is not a favourite book in the night-gardens of Paris.

3.  And then, few, very few, it is to be feared, will be any better of
the _Holy War_.  For, to be any better of such a terrible book as this
is, we must at all costs lay it, and lay it all, and lay it all at once,
to heart.  We must submit ourselves to see ourselves continually in its
blazing glass.  We must stoop to be told that it is all, in all its
terrors and in all its horrors, literally true of ourselves.  We must
deliberately and resolutely set open every gate that opens in on our
heart--Ear-gate and Eye-gate and all the gates of sense and intellect,
day and night, to Jesus Christ to enter in; and we must shut and bolt and
bar every such gate in the devil's very face, and in the face of all his
scouts and orators, day and night also.  But who that thinks, and that
knows by experience what all that means, will feel himself sufficient for
all that?  No man: no sinful man.  But, among many other noble and
blessed things, the _Holy War_ will show us that our sufficiency in this
impossibility also is all of God.  Who, then, will enlist?  Who will risk
all and enlist?  Who will matriculate in the military school of Mansoul?
Who will submit himself to all the severity of its divine discipline?  Who
will be made willing to throw open and to keep open his whole soul, with
all the gates and doors thereof, to all the sieges, assaults,
capitulations, submissions, occupations, and such like of the war of
gospel holiness?  And who will enlist under that banner now?

'Set down my name, sir,' said a man of a very stout countenance to him
who had the inkhorn at the outer gate.  At which those who walked upon
the top of the palace broke out in a very pleasant voice,

   'Come in, come in;
   Eternal glory thou shalt win.'

We have no longer, after what we have come through, any such stoutness in
our countenance, yet will we say to-night with him who had it, Set down
my name also, sir!




CHAPTER II--THE CITY OF MANSOUL AND ITS CINQUE PORTS


   '--a besieged city.'--_Isaiah_.

Our greatest historians have been wont to leave their books behind them
and to make long journeys in order to see with their own eyes the ruined
sites of ancient cities and the famous fields where the great battles of
the world were lost and won.  We all remember how Macaulay made a long
winter journey to see the Pass of Killiecrankie before he sat down to
write upon it; and Carlyle's magnificent battle-pieces are not all
imagination; even that wonderful writer had to see Frederick's
battlefields with his own eyes before he could trust himself to describe
them.  And he tells us himself how Cromwell's splendid generalship all
came up before him as he looked down on the town of Dunbar and out upon
the ever-memorable country round about it.  John Bunyan was not a great
historian; he was only a common soldier in the great Civil War of the
seventeenth century; but what would we not give for a description from
his vivid pen of the famous fields and the great sieges in which he took
part?  What a find John Bunyan's 'Journals' and 'Letters Home from the
Seat of War' would be to our historians and to their readers!  But, alas!
such journals and letters do not exist.  Bunyan's complete silence in all
his books about the battles and the sieges he took his part in is very
remarkable, and his silence is full of significance.  The Puritan soldier
keeps all his military experiences to work them all up into his _Holy
War_, the one and only war that ever kindled all his passions and filled
his every waking thought.  But since John Bunyan was a man of genius,
equal in his own way to Cromwell and Milton themselves, if I were a
soldier I would keep ever before me the great book in which Bunyan's
experiences and observations and reflections as a soldier are all worked
up.  I would set that classical book on the same shelf with Caesar's
_Commentaries_ and Napier's _Peninsula_, and Carlyle's glorious battle-
pieces.  Even Caesar has been accused of too great dryness and coldness
in his Commentaries, but there is neither dryness nor coldness in John
Bunyan's _Holy War_.  To read Bunyan kindles our cold civilian blood like
the waving of a banner and like the sound of a trumpet.

The situation of the city of Mansoul occupies one of the most beautiful
pages of this whole book.  The opening of the _Holy War_, simply as a
piece of English, is worthy to stand beside the best page of the
_Pilgrim's Progress_ itself, and what more can I say than that?  Now, the
situation of a city is a matter of the very first importance.  Indeed,
the insight and the foresight of the great statesmen and the great
soldiers of past ages are seen in nothing more than in the sites they
chose for their citadels and for their defenced cities.  Well, then, as
to the situation of Mansoul, 'it lieth,' says our military author, 'just
between the two worlds.'  That is to say: very much as Germany in our day
lies between France and Russia, and very much as Palestine in her day lay
between Egypt and Assyria, so does Mansoul lie between two immense
empires also.  And, surely, I do not need to explain to any man here who
has a man's soul in his bosom that the two armed empires that besiege his
soul are Heaven above and Hell beneath, and that both Heaven and Hell
would give their best blood and their best treasure to subdue and to
possess his soul.  We do not value our souls at all as Heaven and Hell
value them.  There are savage tribes in Africa and in Asia who inhabit
territories that are sleeplessly envied by the expanding and extending
nations of Europe.  Ancient and mighty empires in Europe raise armies,
and build navies, and levy taxes, and spill the blood of their bravest
sons like water in order to possess the harbours, and the rivers, and the
mountains, and the woods amid which their besotted owners roam in utter
ignorance of all the plots and preparations of the Western world.  And
Heaven and Hell are not unlike those ancient and over-peopled nations of
Europe whose teeming millions must have an outlet to other lands.  Their
life and their activity are too large and too rich for their original
territories, and thus they are compelled to seek out colonies and
dependencies, so that their surplus population may have a home.  And, in
like manner, Heaven is too full of love and of blessedness to have all
that for ever shut up within itself, and Hell is too full of envy and ill-
will, and thus there continually come about those contentions and
collisions of which the _Holy War_ is full.  And, besides, it is with
Mansoul and her neighbour states of Heaven and Hell just as it is with
some of our great European empires in this also.  There is no neutral
zone, no buffer state, no silver streak between Mansoul and her immediate
and military neighbours.  And thus it is that her statesmen, and her
soldiers, and even her very common-soldier sentries must be for ever on
the watch; they must never say peace, peace; they must never leave for
one moment their appointed post.

And then, as for the wall of the city, hear our excellent historian's own
words about that.  'The wall of the town was well built,' so he says.
'Yea, so fast and firm was it knit and compact together that, had it not
been for the townsmen themselves, it could not have been shaken or broken
down for ever.  For here lay the excellent wisdom of Him that builded
Mansoul, that the walls could never be broken down nor hurt by the most
mighty adverse potentate unless the townsmen gave their consent thereto.'
Now, what would the military engineers of Chatham and Paris and Berlin,
who are now at their wits' end, not give for a secret like that!  A wall
impregnable and insurmountable and not to be sapped or mined from the
outside: a wall that could only suffer hurt from the inside!  And then
that wonderful wall was pierced from within with five magnificently
answerable gates.  That is to say, the gates could neither be burst in
nor any way forced from without.  'This famous town of Mansoul had five
gates, in at which to come, out of which to go; and these were made
likewise answerable to the walls; to wit, impregnable, and such as could
never be opened or forced but by the will and leave of those within.  The
names of the gates were these: Ear-gate, Eye-gate, Mouth-gate; in short,
'the five senses,' as we say.

In the south of England, in the time of Edward the Confessor and after
the battle of Hastings, there were five cities which had special
immunities and peculiar privileges bestowed upon them, in recognition of
the special dangers to which they were exposed and the eminent services
they performed as facing the hostile shores of France.  Owing to their
privileges and their position, the 'Cinque Ports' came to be cities of
great strength, till, as time went on, they became a positive weakness
rather than a strength to the land that lay behind them.  Privilege bred
pride, and in their pride the Cinque Ports proclaimed wars and formed
alliances on their own account: piracies by sea and robberies by land
were hatched within their walls; and it took centuries to reduce those
pampered and arrogant ports to the safe and peaceful rank of ordinary
English cities.  The Revolution of 1688 did something, and the Reform
Bill of 1832 did more to make Dover and her insolent sisters like the
other free and equal cities of England; but to this day there are
remnants of public shows and pageantries left in those old towns
sufficient to witness to the former privileges, power, and pride of the
famous Cinque Ports.  Now, Mansoul, in like manner, has her cinque ports.
And the whole of the _Holy War_ is one long and detailed history of how
the five senses are clothed with such power as they possess; how they
abuse and misuse their power; what disloyalty and despite they show to
their sovereign; what conspiracies and depredations they enter into; what
untold miseries they let in upon themselves and upon the land that lies
behind them; what years and years of siege, legislation, and rule it
takes to reduce our bodily senses, those proud and licentious gates, to
their true and proper allegiance, and to make their possessors a people
loyal and contented, law-abiding and happy.

The Apostle has a terrible passage to the Corinthians, in which he treats
of the soul and the senses with tremendous and overwhelming power.  'Your
bodies and your bodily members,' he argues, with crushing indignation,
'are not your own to do with them as you like.  Your bodies and your
souls are both Christ's.  He has bought your body and your soul at an
incalculable cost.  What! know ye not that your body is nothing less than
the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, and ye are not any more
your own? know ye not that your bodies are the very members of Christ?'
And then he says a thing so terrible that I tremble to transcribe it.  For
a more terrible thing was never written.  'Shall I then,' filled with
shame he demands, 'take the members of Christ and make them the members
of an harlot?'  O God, have mercy on me!  I knew all the time that I was
abusing and polluting myself, but I did not know, I did not think, I was
never told that I was abusing and polluting Thy Son, Jesus Christ.  Oh,
too awful thought.  And yet, stupid sinner that I am, I had often read
that if any man defile the temple of God and the members of Christ, him
shall God destroy.  O God, destroy me not as I see now that I deserve.
Spare me that I may cleanse and sanctify myself and the members of Christ
in me, which I have so often embruted and defiled.  Assist me to summon
up my imagination henceforth to my sanctification as Thine apostle has
here taught me the way.  Let me henceforth look at my whole body in all
its senses and in all its members, the most open and the most secret, as
in reality no more my own.  Let me henceforth look at myself with Paul's
deep and holy eyes.  Let me henceforth seat Christ, my Redeemer and my
King, in the very throne of my heart, and then keep every gate of my body
and every avenue of my mind as all not any more mine own but His.  Let me
open my eye, and my ear, and my mouth, as if in all that I were opening
Christ's eye and Christ's ear and Christ's mouth; and let me thrust in
nothing on Him as He dwells within me that will make Him ashamed or
angry, or that will defile and pollute Him.  That thought, O God, I feel
that it will often arrest me in time to come in the very act of sin.  It
will make me start back before I make Christ cruel or false, a
wine-bibber, a glutton, or unclean.  I feel at this moment as if I shall
yet come to ask Him at every meal, and at every other opportunity and
temptation of every kind, what He would have and what He would do before
I go on to take or to do anything myself.  What a check, what a
restraint, what an awful scrupulosity that will henceforth work in me!
But, through that, what a pure, blameless, noble, holy and heavenly life
I shall then lead!  What bodily pains, diseases, premature decays; what
mental remorses, what shames and scandals, what self-loathings and what
self-disgusts, what cups bitterer to drink than blood, I shall then
escape!  Yes, O Paul, I shall henceforth hold with thee that my body is
the temple of Christ, and that I am not my own, but that I am bought with
a transporting price, and can, therefore, do nothing less than glorify
God in my body and in my spirit which are God's.  'This place,' says the
Pauline author of the _Holy War_--'This place the King intended but for
Himself alone, and not for another with Him.'

But, my brethren, lay this well, and as never before, to heart--this,
namely, that when you thus begin to keep any gate for Christ, your King
and Captain and Better-self,--Ear-gate, or Eye-gate, or Mouth-gate, or
any other gate--you will have taken up a task that shall have no end with
you in this life.  Till you begin in dead earnest to watch your heart,
and all the doors of your heart, as if you were watching Christ's heart
for Him and all the doors of His heart, you will have no idea of the
arduousness and the endurance, the sleeplessness and the self-denial, of
the undertaking.

   'Mansoul!  Her wars seemed endless in her eyes;
   She's lost by one, becomes another's prize.
   Mansoul!  Her mighty wars, they did portend
   Her weal or woe and that world without end.
   Wherefore she must be more concern'd than they
   Whose fears begin and end the self-same day.'

'We all thought one battle would decide it,' says Richard Baxter, writing
about the Civil War.  'But we were all very much mistaken,' sardonically
adds Carlyle.  Yes; and you will be very much mistaken too if you enter
on the war with sin in your soul, in your senses and in your members,
with powder and shot for one engagement only.  When you enlist here, lay
well to heart that it is for life.  There is no discharge in this war.
There are no ornamental old pensioners here.  It is a warfare for eternal
life, and nothing will end it but the end of your evil days on earth.




CHAPTER III--EAR-GATE


   'Take heed what ye hear.'--_Our Lord in Mark_.

   'Take heed how you hear.'--_Our Lord in Luke_.

This famous town of Mansoul had five gates, in at which to come, out at
which to go, and these were made likewise answerable to the walls--to
wit, impregnable, and such as could never be opened nor forced but by the
will and leave of those within.  'The names of the gates were these, Ear-
gate, Eye-gate,' and so on.  Dr. George Wilson, who was once Professor of
Technology in our University, took this suggestive passage out of the
_Holy War_ and made it the text of his famous lecture in the
Philosophical Institution, and then he printed the passage on the fly-
leaf of his delightful book _The Five Gateways of Knowledge_.  That is a
book to read sometime, but this evening is to be spent with the master.

For, after all, no one can write at once so beautifully, so quaintly, so
suggestively, and so evangelically as John Bunyan.  'The Lord
Willbewill,' says John Bunyan, 'took special care that the gates should
be secured with double guards, double bolts, and double locks and bars;
and that Ear-gate especially might the better be looked to, for that was
the gate in at which the King's forces sought most to enter.  The Lord
Willbewill therefore made old Mr. Prejudice, an angry and ill-conditioned
fellow, captain of the ward at that gate, and put under his power sixty
men, called Deafmen; men advantageous for that service, forasmuch as they
mattered no words of the captain nor of the soldiers.  And first the
King's officers made their force more formidable against Ear-gate: for
they knew that unless they could penetrate that no good could be done
upon the town.  This done, they put the rest of their men in their
places; after which they gave out the word, which was, Ye must be born
again!  And so the battle began.  Now, they in the town had planted upon
the tower over Ear-gate two great guns, the one called High-mind and the
other Heady.  Unto these two guns they trusted much; they were cast in
the castle by Diabolus's ironfounder, whose name was Mr. Puff-up, and
mischievous pieces they were.  They in the camp also did stoutly, for
they saw that unless they could open Ear-gate it would be in vain to
batter the wall.'  And so on, through many allegorical, and, if sometimes
somewhat laboured, yet always eloquent, pungent, and heart-exposing
pages.

With these for our text let us now take a rapid glance at what some of
the more Bunyan-like passages in the prophets and the psalms say about
the ear; how it is kept and how it is lost; how it is used and how it is
abused.

1.  The Psalmist uses a very striking expression in the 94th Psalm when
he is calling for justice, and is teaching God's providence over men.  'He
that planted the ear,' the Psalmist exclaims, 'shall he not hear?'  And,
considering his church and his day, that is not a bad remark of Cardinal
Bellarmine on that psalm,--'the Psalmist's word _planted_,' says that
able churchman, 'implies design, in that the ear was not spontaneously
evolved by an act of vital force, but was independently created by God
for a certain object, just as a tree, not of indigenous growth, is of set
purpose planted in some new place by the hand of man.'  The same thing is
said in Genesis, you remember, about the Garden of Eden,--the Lord
planted it and put the man and the woman, whose ears he had just planted
also, into the garden to dress it and keep it.  How they dressed the
garden and kept it, and how they held the gate of their ear against him
who squatted down before it with his innuendoes and his lies, we all know
to our as yet unrepaired, though not always irreparable, cost.

2.  One would almost think that the scornful apostle had the Garden of
Eden in his eye when he speaks so bitterly to Timothy of a class of
people who are cursed with 'itching ears.'  Eve's ears itched
unappeasably for the devil's promised secret; and we have all inherited
our first mother's miserable curiosity.  How eager, how restless, how
importunate, we all are to hear that new thing that does not at all
concern us; or only concerns us to our loss and our shame.  And the more
forbidden that secret is to us, and the more full of inward evil to
us--insane sinners that we are--the more determined we are to get at it.
Let any forbidden secret be in the keeping of some one within earshot of
us and we will give him no rest till he has shared the evil thing with
us.  Let any specially evil page be published in a newspaper, and we will
take good care that that day's paper is not thrown into the waste-basket;
we will hide it away, like a dog with a stolen bone, till we are able to
dig it up and chew it dry in secret.  The devil has no need to blockade
or besiege the gate of our ear if he has any of his good things to offer
us.  The gate that can only be opened from within will open at once of
itself if he or any of his newsmongers but squat down for a moment before
it.  Shame on us, and on all of us, for our itching ears.

3.  Isaiah speaks of some men in his day whose ears were 'heavy' and
whose hearts were fat, and the Psalmist speaks of some men in his day
whose ears were 'stopped' up altogether.  And there is not a better thing
in Bunyan at his very best than that surly old churl called Prejudice, so
ill-conditioned and so always on the edge of anger.  By the devil's plan
of battle old Prejudice was appointed to be warder of Ear-gate, and to
enable him to keep that gate for his master he had sixty deaf men put
under him, men most advantageous for that post, forasmuch as it mattered
not to them what Emmanuel and His officers said.  There could be no
manner of doubt who composed that inimitable passage.  There is all the
truth and all the humour and all the satire in Old Prejudice that our
author has accustomed us to in his best pieces.  The common people always
get the best literature along with the best religion in John Bunyan.
'They are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear, and which will not
hearken to the voice of charmers charming never so wisely,' says the
Psalmist, speaking about some bad men in his day.  Now, I will not stand
upon David's natural history here, but his moral and religious meaning is
evident enough.  David is not concerned about adders and their ears, he
is wholly taken up with us and our adder-like animosity against the
truth.  Against what teacher, then; against what preacher; against what
writer; against what doctrine, reproof, correction, has your churlish
prejudice adder-like shut your ear?  Against what truth, human or divine,
have you hitherto stopped up your ear like the Psalmist's serpent?  To
ask that boldly, honestly, and in the sight of God, at yourself to-night,
would end in making you the lifelong friend of some preacher, some
teacher, some soul-saving truth you have up till to-night been prejudiced
against with the rooted prejudice and the sullen obstinacy of sixty deaf
men.  O God, help us to lay aside all this adder-like antipathy at men
and things, both in public and in private life.  Help us to give all men
and all causes a fair field and no favour, but the field and the favour
of an open and an honest mind, and a simple and a sincere heart.  He that
hath ears, let him hear!

4.  As we work our way through the various developments and vicissitudes
of the Holy War we shall find Ear-gate in it and in ourselves passing
through many unexpected experiences; now held by one side and now by
another.  And we find the same succession of vicissitudes set forth in
Holy Scripture.  If you pay any attention to what you read and hear, and
then begin to ask yourselves fair in the face as to your own prejudices,
prepossessions, animosities, and antipathies,--you will at once begin to
reap your reward in having put into your possession what the Scriptures
so often call an 'inclined' ear.  That is to say, an ear not only
unstopped, not only unloaded, but actually prepared and predisposed to
all manner of truth and goodness.  Around our city there are the remains,
the still visible tracks, of roads that at one time took the country
people into our city, but which are now stopped up and made wholly
impassable.  There is no longer any road into Edinburgh that way.  There
are other roads still open, but they are very roundabout, and at best
very uphill.  And then there are other roads so smooth, and level, and
broad, and well kept, that they are full of all kinds of traffic; in the
centre carts and carriages crowd them, on the one side horses and their
riders delight to display themselves, and on the other side pedestrians
and perambulators enjoy the sun.  And then there are still other roads
with such a sweet and gentle incline upon them that it is a positive
pleasure both to man and beast to set their foot upon them.  And so it is
with the minds and the hearts of the men and the women who crowd these
roads.  Just as the various roads are, so are the ears and the
understandings, the affections and the inclinations of those who walk and
ride and drive upon them.  Some of those men's ears are impassably
stopped up by self-love, self-interest, party-spirit, anger, envy, and
ill-will,--impenetrably stopped up against all the men and all the truths
of earth and of heaven that would instruct, enlighten, convict or correct
them.  Some men's minds, again, are not so much shut up as they are
crooked, and warped, and narrow, and full of obstruction and opposition.
Whereas here and there, sometimes on horseback and sometimes on foot;
sometimes a learned man walking out of the city to take the air, and
sometimes an unlettered countryman coming into the city to make his
market, will have his ear hospitably open to every good man he meets, to
every good book he reads, to every good paper he buys at the street
corner, and to every good speech, and report, and letter, and article he
reads in it.  And how happy that man is, how happy his house is at home,
and how happy he makes all those he but smiles to on his afternoon walk,
and in all his walk along the roads of this life.  Never see an I
incline' on a railway or on a driving or a walking road without saying on
it before you leave it, 'I waited patiently for the Lord, and He inclined
His ear unto me and heard my cry.  Because He hath inclined His ear unto
me, therefore will I call upon Him as long as I live.  Incline not my
heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with them that work
iniquity.  Incline my heart unto Thy testimonies, and not to
covetousness.  I have inclined mine heart to perform Thy statutes alway,
even unto the end.'

5.  Shakespeare speaks in _Richard the Second_ of 'the open ear of
youth,' and it is a beautiful truth in a beautiful passage.  Young men,
who are still young men, keep your ears open to all truth and to all duty
and to all goodness, and shut your ears with an adder's determination
against all that which ruined Richard--flattering sounds, reports of
fashions, and lascivious metres.  'Our souls would only be gainers by the
perfection of our bodies were they wisely dealt with,' says Professor
Wilson in his _Five Gateways_.  'And for every human being we should aim
at securing, so far as they can be attained, an eye as keen and piercing
as that of the eagle; an ear as sensitive to the faintest sound as that
of the hare; a nostril as far-scenting as that of the wild deer; a tongue
as delicate as that of the butterfly; and a touch as acute as that of the
spider.  No man ever was so endowed, and no man ever will be; but all men
come infinitely short of what they should achieve were they to make their
senses what they might be made.  The old have outlived their opportunity,
and the diseased never had it; but the young, who have still an undimmed
eye, an undulled ear, and a soft hand; an unblunted nostril, and a tongue
which tastes with relish the plainest fare--the young can so cultivate
their senses as to make the narrow ring, which for the old and the infirm
encircles things sensible, widen for them into an almost limitless
horizon.'

Take heed what you hear, and take heed how you hear.




CHAPTER IV--EYE-GATE


   'Mine eye affecteth mine heart.'--_Jeremiah_.

'Think, in the first place,' says the eloquent author of the _Five
Gateways of Knowledge_, 'how beautiful the human eye is.  The eyes of
many of the lower animals are, doubtless, very beautiful.  You must all
have admired the bold, fierce, bright eye of the eagle; the large,
gentle, brown eye of the ox; the treacherous, green eye of the cat,
waxing and waning like the moon; the pert eye of the sparrow; the sly eye
of the fox; the peering little bead of black enamel in the mouse's head;
the gem-like eye that redeems the toad from ugliness, and the
intelligent, affectionate expression which looks out of the human-like
eye of the horse and dog.  There are many other animals whose eyes are
full of beauty, but there is a glory that excelleth in the eye of a man.
We realise this best when we gaze into the eyes of those we love.  It is
their eyes we look at when we are near them, and it is their eyes we
recall when we are far away from them.  The face is all but a blank
without the eye; the eye seems to concentrate every feature in itself.  It
is the eye that smiles, not the lips; it is the eye that listens, not the
ear; it is the eye that frowns, not the brow; it is the eye that mourns,
not the voice.  The eye sees what it brings the power to see.  How true
is this!  The sailor on the look-out can see a ship where the landsman
can see nothing.  The Esquimaux can distinguish a white fox among the
white snow.  The astronomer can see a star in the sky where to others the
blue expanse is unbroken.  The shepherd can distinguish the face of every
single sheep in his flock,' so Professor Wilson.  And then Dr. Gould
tells us in his mystico-evolutionary, Behmen-and-Darwin book, _The
Meaning and the Method of Life_--a book which those will read who can and
ought--that the eye is the most psychical, the most spiritual, the most
useful, and the most valued and cherished of all the senses; after which
he adds this wonderful and heart-affecting scientific fact, that in death
by starvation, every particle of fat in the body is auto-digested except
the cream-cushion of the eye-ball!  So true is it that the eye is the
mistress, the queen, and the most precious, to Creator and creature
alike, of all the five senses.

Now, in the _Holy War_ John Bunyan says a thing about the ear, as
distinguished from the eye, that I cannot subscribe to in my own
experience at any rate.  In describing the terrible war that raged round
Ear-gate, and finally swept up through that gate and into the streets of
the city, he says that the ear is the shortest and the surest road to the
heart.  I confess I cannot think that to be the actual case.  I am
certain that it is not so in my own case.  My eye is very much nearer my
heart than my ear is.  My eye much sooner affects, and much more
powerfully affects, my heart than my ear ever does.  Not only is my eye
by very much the shortest road to my heart, but, like all other short
roads, it is cram-full of all kinds of traffic when my ear stands
altogether empty.  My eye is constantly crowded and choked with all kinds
of commerce; whole hordes of immigrants and invaders trample one another
down on the congested street that leads from my eye to my heart.  Speaking
for myself, for one assault that is made on my heart through my ear there
are a thousand assaults successfully made through my eye.  Indeed, were
my eye but stopped up; had I but obedience and courage and
self-mortification enough to pluck both my eyes out, that would be half
the cleansing and healing and holiness of my evil heart; or at least, the
half of its corruption, rebellion, and abominable wickedness would
henceforth be hidden from me.  I think I can see what led John Bunyan in
his day and in this book to make that too strong statement about the ear
as against the eye; but it is not like him to have let such an
over-statement stand and continue in his corrected and carefully finished
work.  The prophet Jeremiah, I feel satisfied, would not have subscribed
to what is said in the _Holy War_ in extenuation of the eye.  That heart-
broken prophet does not say that it has been his ear that has made his
head waters.  It is his eye, he says, that has so affected his heart.  The
Prophet of the Captivity had all the _Holy War_ potentially in his
imagination when he penned that so suggestive sentence.  And the Latin
poet of experience, the grown-up man's own poet, says somewhere that the
things that enter by his eye seize and hold his heart much more swiftly
and much more surely than those things that but enter by his ear.  I
shall continue, then, to hold by my text, 'Mine eye affecteth mine
heart.'

1.  Turning then, to the prophets and proverb-makers of Israel, and then
to the New Testament for the true teaching on the eye, I come, in the
first place, on that so pungent saying of Solomon that 'the eyes of a
fool are in the ends of the earth.'  Look at that born fool, says
Solomon, who has his eyes and his heart committed to him to keep.  See
him how he gapes and stares after everything that does not concern him,
and lets the door of his own heart stand open to every entering thief.
London is a city of three million inhabitants, and they are mostly fools,
Carlyle once said.  And let him in this city whose eyes keep at home cast
the first stone at those foreign fools.  I will wager on their side that
many of you here to-night know better what went on in Mashonaland last
week than what went on in your own kitchen downstairs, or in your own
nursery or schoolroom upstairs.  Some of you are ten times more taken up
with the prospects of Her Majesty's Government this session, and with the
plots of Her Majesty's Opposition, than you are with the prospects of the
good and the evil, and the plots of God and the devil, all this winter in
your own hearts.  You rise early, and make a fight to get the first of
the newspaper; but when the minister comes in in the afternoon you blush
because the housemaid has mislaid the Bible.  Did you ever read of the
stargazer who fell into an open well at the street corner?  Like him, you
may be a great astronomer, a great politician, a great theologian, a
great defender of the faith even, and yet may be a stark fool just in
keeping the doors and the windows of your own heart.  'You shall see a
poor soul,' says Dr. Goodwin, 'mean in abilities of wit, or
accomplishments of learning, who knows not how the world goes, nor upon
what wheels its states turn, who yet knows more clearly and
experimentally his own heart than all the learned men in the world know
theirs.  And though the other may better discourse philosophically of the
acts of the soul, yet this poor man sees more into the corruption of it
than they all.'  And in another excellent place he says: 'Many who have
leisure and parts to read much, instead of ballasting their hearts with
divine truth, and building up their souls with its precious words, are
much more versed in play-books, jeering pasquils, romances, and feigned
staves, which are but apes and peacocks' feathers instead of pearls and
precious stones.  Foreign and foolish discourses please their eyes and
their ears; they are more chameleons than men, for they live on the east
wind.'

2.  'If thine eye offend thee'--our Lord lays down this law to all those
who would enter into life--'pluck it out and cast it from thee; for it is
better for thee to enter into life with one eye, rather than, having two
eyes, to be cast into hell-fire.'  Does your eye offend you, my brethren?
Does your eye cause you to stumble and fall, as it is in the etymology?
The right use of the eye is to keep you from stumbling and falling; but
so perverted are the eye and the heart of every sinner that the city
watchman has become a partaker with thieves, and our trusted guide and
guardian a traitor and a knave.  If thine eye, therefore, offends thee;
if it places a stone or a tree in thy way in a dark night; if it digs a
deep ditch right across thy way home; if it in any way leads thee astray,
or lets in upon thee thine enemies--then, surely, thou wert better to be
without that eye altogether.  Pluck it out, then; or, what is still
harder to go on all your days doing, pluck the evil thing out of it.  Shut
up that book and put it away.  Throw that paper and that picture into the
fire.  Cut off that companion, even if he were an adoring lover.  Refuse
that entertainment and that amusement, though all the world were crowding
upto it.  And soon, and soon, till you have plucked your eye as clean of
temptations and snares as it is possible to be in this life.  For this
life is full of that terrible but blessed law of our Lord.  The life of
all His people, that is; and you are one of them, are you not?  You will
know whether or no you are one of them just by the number of the
beautiful things, and the sweet things, and the things to be desired,
that you have plucked out of your eye at His advice and demand.  True
religion, my brethren, on some sides of it, and at some stages of it, is
a terribly severe and sore business; and unless it is proving a terribly
severe and sore business to you, look out! lest, with your two hands and
your two feet and your two eyes, you be cast, with all that your hands
and feet and eyes have feasted on, into the everlasting fires!  Woe unto
the world because of offences, but woe much more to that member and
entrance-gate of the body by which the offence cometh!  Wherefore, if
thine eye offend thee--!

3.  'Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight
before thee.'  Now, if you wish both to preserve your eyes, and to escape
the everlasting fires at the same time, attend to this text.  For this is
almost as good as plucking out your two eyes; indeed, it is almost the
very same thing.  Solomon shall speak to the man in this house to-night
who has the most inflammable, the most ungovernable, and the most
desperately wicked heart.  You, man, with that heart, you know that you
cannot pass up the street without your eye becoming a perfect hell-gate
of lust, of hate, of ill-will, of resentment and of revenge.  Your eye
falls on a man, on a woman, on a house, on a shop, on a school, on a
church, on a carriage, on a cart, on an innocent child's perambulator
even; and, devil let loose that you are, your eye fills your heart on the
spot with absolute hell-fire.  Your presence and your progress poison the
very streets of the city.  And that, not as the short-sighted and the
vulgar will read Solomon's plain-spoken Scripture, with the poison of
lewdness and uncleanness, but with the still more malignant, stealthy,
and deadly poison of social, professional, political, and ecclesiastical
hatred, resentment, and ill-will.  Whoredom and wine openly slay their
thousands on all our streets; but envy and spite, dislike and hatred
their ten thousands.  The fact is, we would never know how malignantly
wicked our hearts are but for our eyes.  But a sudden spark, a single
flash through the eye falling on the gunpowder that fills our hearts,
that lets us know a hundred times every day what at heart we are made of.
'Of a verity, O Lord, I am made of sin, and that my life maketh
manifest,' prays Bishop Andrewes every day.  Why, sir, not to go to the
street, the direction in which your eyes turn in this house this evening
will make this house a very 'den,' as our Lord said--yes, a very den to
you of temptation and transgression.  My son, let thine eyes look right
on.  Ponder the path of thy feet, turn not to the right hand nor to the
left--remove thy foot from all evil!

4.  There is still another eye that is almost as good as an eye out
altogether, and that is a Job's eye.  Job was the first author of that
eye and all we who have that excellent eye take it of him.  'I have made
a covenant with mine eyes,' said that extraordinary man--that
extraordinarily able, honest, exposed and exercised man.  Now, you must
all know what a covenant is.  A covenant is a compact, a contract, an
agreement, an engagement.  In a covenant two parties come to terms with
one another.  The two covenanters strike hands, and solemnly engage
themselves to one another: I will do this for you if you will do that for
me.  It is a bargain, says the other; let us have it sealed with wax and
signed with pen and ink before two witnesses.  As, for instance, at the
Lord's Table.  I swear, you say, over the Body and the Blood of the Son
of God, I swear to make a covenant with mine eyes.  I will never let them
read again that idle, infidel, scoffing, unclean sheet.  I will not let
them look on any of my former images or imaginations of forbidden
pleasures.  I swear, O Thou to whom the night shineth as the day, that I
will never again say, Surely the darkness shall cover me!  See if I do
not henceforth by Thy grace keep my feet off every slippery street.  That,
and many other things like that, was the way that Job made his so noble
covenant with his eyes in his day and in his land.  And it was because he
so made and so kept his covenant that God so boasted over him and said,
Hast thou considered my servant Job?  And then, every covenant has its
two sides.  The other side of Job's covenant, of which God Himself was
the surety, you can read and think over in your solitary lodgings
to-night.  Read Job xxxi. 1, and then Job xl. to the end, and then be
sure you take covenant paper and ink to God before you sleep.  And let
all fashionable young ladies hear what Miss Rossetti expects for herself,
and for all of her sex with her who shall subscribe her covenant.  'True,'
she admits, 'all our life long we shall be bound to refrain our soul, and
keep it low; but what then?  For the books we now refrain to read we
shall one day be endowed with wisdom and knowledge.  For the music we
will not listen to we shall join in the song of the redeemed.  For the
pictures from which we turn we shall gaze unabashed on the Beatific
Vision.  For the companionship we shun we shall be welcomed into angelic
society and the communion of triumphant saints.  For the amusements we
avoid we shall keep the supreme jubilee.  For all the pleasures we miss
we shall abide, and for evermore abide, in the rapture of heaven.'

5.  And then there is the Pauline eye.  An eye, however, that Job would
have shared with Paul and with the Corinthian Church had the patriarch
been privileged to live in our New Testament day.  Ever since the Holy
Ghost with His anointing oil fell on us at Pentecost, says the apostle,
we have had an eye by means of which we look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things that are not seen.  Now, he who has an eye like
that is above both plucking out his eyes or making a covenant with them
either.  It is like what Paul says about the law also.  The law is not
made for a righteous man.  A righteous man is above the law and
independent of it.  The law does not reach to him and he is not hampered
with it.  And so it is with the man who has got Paul's splendid eyes for
the unseen.  He does not need to touch so much as one of his eye-lashes
to pluck them out.  For his eyes are blind, and his ears are deaf, and
his whole body is dead to the things that are temporal.  His eyes are
inwardly ablaze with the things that are eternal.  He whose eyes have
been opened to the truth and the love of his Bible, he will gloat no more
over your books and your papers filled with lies, and slander, and spite,
and lewdness!  He who has his conversation in heaven does not need to set
a watch on his lips lest he take up an ill report about his neighbour.  He
who walks every day on the streets of gold will step as swiftly as may
be, with girt loins, and with a preoccupied eye, out of the slippery and
unsavoury streets of this forsaken earth.  He who has fast working out
for him an exceeding and eternal weight of glory will easily count all
his cups and all his crosses, and all the crooks in his lot but as so
many light afflictions and but for a moment.  My Lord Understanding had
his palace built with high perspective towers on it, and the site of it
was near to Eye-gate, from the top of which his lordship every day looked
not at the things which are temporal, but at the things which are
eternal, and down from his palace towers he every day descended to
administer his heavenly office in the city.

Your eye, then, is the shortest way into your heart.  Watch it well,
therefore; suspect and challenge all outsiders who come near it.  Keep
the passes that lead to your heart with all diligence.  Let nothing
contraband, let nothing that even looks suspicious, ever enter your
hearts; for, if it once enters, and turns out to be evil, you will never
get it all out again as long as you live.  'Death is come up into our
windows,' says our prophet in another place, 'and is entered into our
palaces, to cut off our children in our houses and our young men in our
streets.'  Make a covenant, then, with your eyes.  Take an oath of your
eyes as to which way they are henceforth to look.  For, let them look
this way, and your heart is immediately full of lust, and hate, and envy,
and ill-will.  On the other hand, lead them to look that way and your
heart is as immediately full of truth and beauty, brotherly kindness and
charity.  The light of the body is the eye; if, therefore, thine eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light; but if thine eye be evil,
thy whole body is full of darkness.  If, therefore, the light that is in
thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!




CHAPTER V--THE KING'S PALACE


   'The palace is not for man, but for the Lord God.'--_David_.

'Now, there is in this gallant country a fair and delicate town, a
corporation, called Mansoul: a town for its building so curious, for its
situation so commodious, for its privileges so advantageous, that I may
say of it, there is not its equal under the whole heaven.  Also, there
was reared up in the midst of this town a most famous and stately palace:
for strength, it might be called a castle; for pleasantness, a paradise;
and for largeness, a place so copious as to contain all the world.  This
place the King intended for Himself alone, and not for another with Him,
so great was His delight in it.'  Thus far, our excellent allegorical
author.  But there are other authors that treat of this great matter now
in hand besides the allegorical authors.  You will hear tell sometimes
about a class of authors called the Mystics.  Well, listen at this stage
to one of them, and one of the best of them, on this present matter--the
human heart, that is.  'Our heart,' he says, 'is our manner of existence,
or the state in which we feel ourselves to be; it is an inward life, a
vital sensibility, which contains our manner of feeling what and how we
are; it is the state of our desires and tendencies, of inwardly seeing,
tasting, relishing, and feeling that which passes within us; our heart is
that to us inwardly with regard to ourselves which our senses of seeing,
hearing, feeling, and such like are with regard to things that are
without or external to us.  Your heart is the best and greatest gift of
God to you.  It is the highest, greatest, strongest, and noblest power of
your nature.  It forms your whole life, be it what it will.  All evil and
all good come from your heart.  Your heart alone has the key of life and
death for you.'  I was just about to ask you at this point which of our
two authors, our allegorical or our mystical author upon the heart, you
like best.  But that would be a stupid and a wayward question since you
have them both before you, and both at their best, to possess and to
enjoy.  To go back then to John Bunyan, and to his allegory of the human
heart.

1.  To begin with, then, there was reared up in the midst of this town of
Mansoul a most famous and stately palace.  And that palace and the town
immediately around it were the mirror and the glory of all that its
founder and maker had ever made.  His palace was his very top-piece.  It
was the metropolitan of the whole world round about it; and it had
positive commission and power to demand service and support of all
around.  Yes.  And all that is literally, evidently, and actually true of
the human heart.  For all other earthly things are created and upheld,
are ordered and administered, with an eye to the human heart.  The human
heart is the final cause, as our scholars would say, of absolutely all
other earthly things.  Earth, air, water; light and heat; all the
successively existing worlds, mineral, vegetable, animal, spiritual;
grass, herbs, corn, fruit-trees, cattle and sheep, and all other living
creatures; all are upheld for the use and the support of man.  And, then,
all that is in man himself is in him for the end and the use of his
heart.  All his bodily senses; all his bodily members; every fearfully
and wonderfully made part of his body and of his mind; all administer to
his heart.  She is the sovereign and sits supreme.  And she is worthy and
is fully entitled so to sit.  For there is nothing on the earth greater
or better than the heart, unless it is the Creator Himself, who planned
and executed the heart for Himself and not for another with Him.  'The
body exists,' says a philosophical biologist of our day, 'to furnish the
cerebral centres with prepared food, just as the vegetable world, viewed
biologically, exists to furnish the animal world with similar food.  The
higher is the last formed, the most difficult, and the most complex; but
it is just this that is most precious and significant--all of which shows
His unrolling purpose.  It is the last that alone explains all that went
before, and it is the coming that will alone explain the present.  God
before all, through all, foreseeing all, and still preparing all; God in
all is profoundly evident.'  Yes, profoundly evident to profound minds,
and experimentally and sweetly evident to religious minds, and to renewed
and loving and holy hearts.

2.  For fame and for state a palace, while for strength it might be
called a castle.  In sufficiently ancient times the king's palace was
always a castle also.  David's palace on Mount Zion was as much a
military fortress as a royal residence; and King Priam's palace was the
protection both of itself and of the whole of the country around.  In
those wild times great men built their houses on high places, and then
the weak and endangered people gathered around the strongholds of the
powerful, as we see in our own city.  Our own steep and towering rock
invited to its top the castle-builder of a remote age, and then the
exposed country around began to gather itself together under the shelter
of the bourg.  And thus it is that the military engineering of the _Holy
War_ makes that old allegorical book most excellent to read, not only for
common men like you and me, who are bent on the fortification and the
defence of our own hearts, but for the military historians of those old
times also, for the experts of to-day also, and for all good students of
fortification.  And the New Testament of the Divine peace itself, as well
as the Old Testament so full of the wars of the Lord--they both support
and serve as an encouragement and an example to our spiritual author in
the elaboration of his military allegory.  Every good soldier of Jesus
Christ has by heart the noble paradox of Paul to the Philippians--that
the peace of God which passeth all understanding shall keep their hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus.  Let God's peace, he says, be your man of
war.  Let His surpassing peace do both the work of war and the work of
peace also in your hearts and in your minds.  Let that peace both fortify
with walls, and garrison with soldiers, and watch every gate, and hold
every street and lane of your hearts and of your minds all around your
hearts.  And all through the Prince of Peace, the Captain of all Holy
War, Jesus Christ Himself.  No wonder, then, that in a strength--in a
kind and in a degree of strength--that passeth all understanding, this
stately palace of the heart is also here called a well-garrisoned castle.

3.  And then for pleasantness the human heart is a perfect paradise.  For
pleasantness the human heart is like those famous royal parks of Nineveh
and Babylon that sprang up in after days as if to recover and restore the
Garden of Eden that had been lost to those eastern lands.  But even
Adam's own paradise was but a poor outside imitation in earth and water,
in flowers and fruits, of the far better paradise God had planted within
him.  Take another Mystic at this point upon paradise.  'My dear man,'
exclaims Jacob Behmen, 'the Garden of Eden is not paradise, neither does
Moses say so.  Paradise is the divine joy, and that was in their own
hearts so long as they stood in the love of God.  Paradise is the divine
and angelical joy, pure love, pure joy, pure gladness, in which there is
no fear, no misery, and no death.  Which paradise neither death nor the
devil can touch.  And yet it has no stone wall around it; only a great
gulf which no man or angel can cross but by that new birth of which
Christ spoke to Nicodemus.  Reason asks, Where is paradise to be found?
Is it far off or near?  Is it in this world or is it above the stars?
Where is that desirable native country where there is no death?  Beloved,
there is nothing nearer you at this moment than paradise, if you incline
that way.  God beckons you back into paradise at this moment, and calls
you by name to come.  Come, He says, and be one of My paradise children.
In paradise,' the Teutonic Philosopher goes on, 'there is nothing but
hearty love, a meek and a gentle love; a most friendly and most courteous
discourse: a gracious, amiable, and blessed society, where the one is
always glad to see the other, and to honour the other.  They know of no
malice in paradise, no cunning, no subtlety, and no sly deceit.  But the
fruits of the Spirit of God are common among them in paradise, and one
may make use of all the good things of paradise without causing
disfavour, or hatred, or envy, for there is no contrary affection there,
but all hearts there are knit together in love.  In paradise they love
one another, and rejoice in the beauty, loveliness, and gladness of one
another.  No one esteems or accounts himself more excellent than another
in paradise; but every one has great joy in another, and rejoices in
another's fair beauty, whence their love to one another continually
increases, so that they lead one another by the hand, and so friendly
kiss one another.'  Thus the blessed Behmen saw paradise and had it in
his heart as he sat over his hammer and lapstone in his solitary stall.
For of such as Jacob Behmen and John Bunyan is the kingdom of heaven, and
all such saintly souls have paradise restored again and improved upon in
their own hearts.

4.  And for largeness a place so copious as to contain all the world.
Over against the word 'copious' Bunyan hangs for a key, Ecclesiastes
third and eleventh; and under it Miss Peacock adds this as a
note--'_Copious_, spacious.  Old French, _copieux_; Latin, _copiosus_,
plentiful.'  The human heart, as we have already read to-night, is the
highest, greatest, strongest, and noblest part of human nature.  And so
it is.  Fearfully and wonderfully made as is the whole of human nature,
that fear and that wonder surpass themselves in the spaciousness and the
copiousness of the human heart.  For what is it that the human heart has
not space for, and to spare?  After the whole world is received home into
a human heart, there is room, and, indeed, hunger, for another world, and
after that for still another.  The sun is--I forget how many times bigger
than our whole world, and yet we can open our heart and take down the sun
into it, and shut him out again and restore him to his immeasurable
distances in the heavens, and all in the twinkling of an eye.  As for
instance.  As I wrote these lines I read a report of a lecture by Sir
Robert Ball in which that distinguished astronomer discoursed on recent
solar discoveries.  A globe of coal, Sir Robert said, as big as our
earth, and all set ablaze at the same moment, would not give out so much
heat to the worlds around as the sun gives out in a thousandth part of a
second.  Well, as I read that, and ere ever I was aware what was going
on, my heart had opened over my newspaper, and the sun had swept down
from the sky, and had rushed into my heart, and before I knew where I was
the cry had escaped my lips, 'Great and marvellous are Thy works, Lord
God Almighty!  Who shall not fear Thee and glorify thy name?'  And then
this reflection as suddenly came to me: How good it is to be at peace
with God, and to be able and willing to say, My Father!  That the whole
of the surging and flaming sun was actually down in my straitened and
hampered heart at that idle moment over my paper is scientifically
demonstrable; for only that which is in the heart of a man can kindle the
passions that are in the heart of that man; and nothing is more sure to
me than that the great passions of fear and love, wonder and rapture were
at that moment at a burning point within me.  There is a passage well on
in the _Holy War_, which for terror and for horror, and at the same time
for truth and for power, equals anything either in Dante or in Milton.
Lucifer has stood up at the council board to second the scheme of
Beelzebub.  'Yes,' he said, amid the plaudits of his fellow-princes--'Yes,
I swear it.  Let us fill Mansoul full with our abundance.  Let us make of
this castle, as they vainly call it, a warehouse, as the name is in some
of their cities above.  For if we can only get Mansoul to fill herself
full with much goods she is henceforth ours.  My peers,' he said, 'you
all know His parable of how unblessed riches choke the word; and, again,
we know what happens when the hearts of men are overcharged with
surfeiting and with drunkenness.  Let us give them all that, then, to
their heart's desire.'  This advice of Lucifer, our history tells us, was
highly applauded in hell, and ever since it has proved their masterpiece
to choke Mansoul with the fulness of this world, and to surfeit the heart
with the good things thereof.  But, my brethren, you will outwit hell
herself and all her counsellors and all her machinations, if, out of all
the riches, pleasures, cares, and possessions, that both heaven and earth
and hell can heap into your heart, those riches, pleasures, cares, and
possessions but produce corresponding passions and affections towards God
and man.  Only let fear, and love, and thankfulness, and helpfulness be
kindled and fed to all their fulness in your heart, and all the world and
all that it contains will only leave the more room in your boundless
heart for God and for your brother.  All that God has made, or could make
with all His counsel and all His power laid out, will not fill your
boundless and bottomless heart.  He must come down and come into your
boundless and bottomless heart Himself.  Himself: your Father, your
Redeemer, and your Sanctifier and Comforter also.  Let the whole universe
try to fill your heart, O man of God, and after it all we shall hear you
singing in famine and in loneliness the doleful ditty:

   'O come to my heart, Lord Jesus,
   There is room in my heart for Thee.

5.  'Madame,' said a holy solitary to Madame Guyon in her misery--'Madame,
you are disappointed and perplexed because you seek without what you have
within.  Accustom yourself to seek for God in your own heart and you will
always find Him there.'  From that hour that gifted woman was a Mystic.
The secret of the interior life flashed upon her in a moment.  She had
been starving in the midst of fulness; God was near and not far off; the
kingdom of heaven was within her.  The love of God from that hour took
possession of her soul with an inexpressible happiness.  Prayer, which
had before been so difficult, was now delightful and indispensable; hours
passed away like moments: she could scarcely cease from praying.  Her
domestic trials seemed great to her no longer; her inward joy consumed
like a fire the reluctance, the murmur, and the sorrow, which all had
their birth in herself.  A spirit of comforting peace, a sense of
rejoicing possession, pervaded all her days.  God was continually with
her, and she seemed continually yielded up to God.  'Madame,' said the
solitary, 'you seek without for what you have within.'  Where do you seek
for God when you pray, my brethren?  To what place do you direct your
eyes?  Is it to the roof of your closet?  Is it to the east end of your
consecrated chapel?  Is it to that wooden table in the east end of your
chapel?  Or, passing out of all houses made with hands and consecrated
with holy oil, do you lift up your eyes to the skies where the sun and
the moon and the stars dwell alone?  'What a folly!' exclaims Theophilus,
in the golden dialogue, 'for no way is the true way to God but by the way
of our own heart.  God is nowhere else to be found.  And the heart itself
cannot find Him but by its own love of Him, faith in Him, dependence upon
Him, resignation to Him, and expectation of all from Him.'  'You have
quite carried your point with me,' answered Theogenes after he had heard
all that Theophilus had to say.  'The God of meekness, of patience, and
of love is henceforth the one God of my heart.  It is now the one bent
and desire of my soul to seek for all my salvation in and through the
merits and mediation of the meek, humble, patient, resigned, suffering
Lamb of God, who alone has power to bring forth the blessed birth of
those heavenly virtues in my soul.  What a comfort it is to think that
this Lamb of God, Son of the Father, Light of the World; this Glory of
heaven and this Joy of angels is as near to us, is as truly in the midst
of us, as He is in the midst of heaven.  And that not a thought, look, or
desire of our heart that presses toward Him, longing to catch one small
spark of His heavenly nature, but is as sure a way of finding Him, as the
woman's way was who was healed of her deadly disease by longing to touch
but the border of His garment.'

To sum up.  'There is reared up in the midst of Mansoul a most famous and
stately palace: for strength, it may be called a castle; for
pleasantness, a paradise; and for largeness, a place so copious as to
contain all the world.  This palace the King intends but for Himself
alone, and not another with Him, and He commits the keeping of that
palace day and night to the men of the town.'




CHAPTER VI--MY LORD WILLBEWILL


   --'to will is present with me.'--_Paul_

There is a large and a learned literature on the subject of the will.
There is a philosophical and a theological, and there is a religious and
an experimental literature on the will.  Jonathan Edwards's well-known
work stands out conspicuously at the head of the philosophical and
theological literature on the will, while our own Thomas Boston's
_Fourfold State_ is a very able and impressive treatise on the more
practical and experimental side of the same subject.  The Westminster
Confession of Faith devotes one of its very best chapters to the teaching
of the word of God on the will of man, and the Shorter Catechism touches
on the same subject in Effectual Calling.  Outstanding philosophical and
theological schools have been formed around the will, and both able and
learned and earnest men have taken opposite sides on the subject of the
will under the party names of Necessitarians and Libertarians.  This is
not the time, nor am I the man, to discuss such abstruse subjects; but
those students who wish to master this great matter of the will, so far
as it can be mastered in books, are recommended to begin with Dr. William
Cunningham's works, and then to go on from them to a treatise that will
reward all their talent and all their enterprise, Jonathan Edwards's
perfect masterpiece.

1.  But, to come to my Lord Willbewill, one of the gentry of the famous
town of Mansoul:--well, this Lord Willbewill was as high-born as any man
in Mansoul, and was as much a freeholder as any of them were, if not
more.  Besides, if I remember my tale aright, he had some privileges
peculiar to himself in that famous town.  Now, together with these, he
was a man of great strength, resolution, and courage; nor in his occasion
could any turn him away.  But whether he was too proud of his high
estate, privileges, and strength, or what (but sure it was through pride
of something), he scorns now to be a slave in Mansoul, as his own proud
word is, so that now, next to Diabolus himself, who but my Lord
Willbewill in all that town?  Nor could anything now be done but at his
beck and good pleasure throughout that town.  Indeed, it will not out of
my thoughts what a desperate fellow this Willbewill was when full power
was put into his hand.  All which--how this apostate prince lost power
and got it again, and lost it and got it again--the interested and
curious reader will find set forth with great fulness and clearness in
many powerful pages of the _Holy War_.

John Bunyan was as hard put to it to get the right name for this head of
the gentry of Mansoul as Paul was to get the right name for sin in the
seventh of the Romans.  In that profoundest and intensest of all his
profound and intense passages, the apostle has occasion to seek about for
some expression, some epithet, some adjective, as we say, to apply to sin
so as to help him to bring out to his Roman readers something of the
malignity, deadliness, and unspeakable evil of sin as he had sin living
and working in himself.  But all the resources of the Greek language,
that most resourceful of languages, utterly failed Paul for his pressing
purpose.  And thus it is that, as if in scorn of the feebleness and
futility of that boasted tongue, he tramples its grammars and its
dictionaries under his feet, and makes new and unheard-of words and
combinations of words on the spot for himself and for his subject.  He
heaps up a hyperbole the like of which no orator or rhetorician of Greece
or Rome had ever needed or had ever imagined before.  He takes sin, and
he makes a name for sin out of itself.  The only way to describe sin, he
feels, the only way to characterise sin, the only way to aggravate sin,
is just to call it sin; sinful sin; 'sin by the commandment became
exceeding sinful.'  And, in like manner, John Bunyan, who has only his
own mother tongue to work with, in his straits to get a proper name for
this terrible fellow who was next to Diabolus himself, cannot find a
proud enough name for him but just by giving him his own name, and then
doubling it.  Add will to will, multiply will by will, and multiply it
again, and after you have done all you are no nearer to a proper name for
that apostate, who, for pride, and insolence, and headstrongness, in one
word, for wilfulness, is next to Diabolus himself.  But as Willbewill, if
he is to be named and described at all, is best named and described by
his own naked name; so Bunyan is always best illustrated out of his own
works.  And I turn accordingly to the _Heavenly Footman_ for an excellent
illustration of the wilfulness of the will both in a good man and in a
bad; as, thus: 'Your self-willed people, nobody knows what to do with
them.  We use to say, He will have his own will, do all we can.  If a man
be willing, then any argument shall be matter of encouragement; but if
unwilling, then any argument shall give discouragement.  The saints of
old, they being willing and resolved for heaven, what could stop them?
Could fire and fagot, sword or halter, dungeons, whips, bears, bulls,
lions, cruel rackings, stonings, starvings, nakedness?  So willing had
they been made in the day of His power.  And see, on the other side, the
children of the devil, because they are not willing, how many shifts and
starting-holes they will have!  I have married a wife; I have a farm; I
shall offend my landlord; I shall lose my trade; I shall be mocked and
scoffed at, and therefore I cannot come.  But, alas! the thing is, they
are not willing.  For, were they once soundly willing, these, and a
thousand things such as these, would hold them no faster than the cords
held Samson when he broke them like flax.  I tell you the will is all.
The Lord give thee a will, then, and courage of heart.'

2.  Let that, then, suffice for this man's name and nature, and let us
look at him now when his name and his nature have both become evil; that
is to say, when Willbewill has become Illwill.  You can imagine; no, you
cannot imagine unless you already know, how evil, and how set upon evil,
Illwill was.  His whole mind, we are told, now stood bending itself to
evil.  Nay, so set was he now upon sheer evil that he would act it of his
own accord, and without any instigation at all from Diabolus.  And that
went on till he was looked on in the city as next in wickedness to very
Diabolus himself.  Parable apart, my ill-willed brethren, our ill-will
has made us very fiends in human shape.  What a fall, what a fate, what a
curse it is to be possessed of a devil of ill-will!  Who can put proper
words on it after Paul had to confess himself silent before it?  Who can
utter the diabolical nature, the depth and the secrecy, the subtlety and
the spirituality, the range and the reach-out of an ill-will?  Our hearts
are full of ill-will at those we meet and shake hands with every day.  At
men also we have never seen, and who are totally ignorant even of our
existence.  Over a thousand miles we dart our viperous hearts at innocent
men.  At great statesmen we have ill-will, and at small; at great
churchmen and at small; at great authors and at small; at great, and
famous, and successful men in all lines of life; for it is enough for ill-
will that another man be praised, and well-paid, and prosperous, and then
placed in our eye.  No amount of suffering will satiate ill-will; the
very grave has no seal against it.  And, now and then, you have it thrust
upon you that other men have the same devil in them as deeply and as
actively as he is in you.  You will suddenly run across a man on the
street.  His face was shining with some praise he had just had spoken to
him, or with some recognition he had just received from some great one;
or with some good news for himself he had just heard, before he caught
sight of you.  But the light suddenly dies on his face, and darkness
comes up out of his heart at his sudden glimpse of you.  What is the
matter? you ask yourself as he scowls past you.  What have you done so to
darken any man's heart to you?  And as you stumble on in the sickening
cloud he has left behind him, you suddenly recollect that you were once
compelled to vote against that man on a public question: on some question
of home franchise, or foreign war, or church government, or city
business; or perchance, a family has left his shop to do business in
yours, or his church to worship God in yours, or such like.  It will be a
certain relief to you to recollect such things.  But with it all there
will be a shame and a humiliation and a deep inward pain that will escape
into a cry of prayer for him and for yourself and for all such sinners on
the same street.  If you do not find an escape from your sharp resentment
in ejaculatory prayer and in a heart-cleansing great good-will, your
heart, before you are a hundred steps on, will be as black with ill-will
as his is.  But that must not again be.  Would you hate or strike back at
a blind man who stumbled and fell against you on the street?  Would you
retaliate at a maniac who gnashed his teeth and shook his fist at you on
his way past you to the madhouse?  Or at a corpse being carried past you
that had been too long without burial?  And shall you retaliate on a
miserable man driven mad with diabolical passion?  Or at a poor sinner
whose heart is as rotten as the grave?  Ill-will is abroad in our learned
and religious city at all hours of the day and night.  He glares at us
under the sun by day, and under the street lamps at night.  We suddenly
feel his baleful eye on us as we thoughtlessly pass under his overlooking
windows: it will be a side street and an unfrequented, where you will not
be ashamed and shocked and pained at heart to meet him.  Public men; much
purchased and much praised men; rich and prosperous men; men high in
talent and in place; and, indeed, all manner of men,--walk abroad in this
life softly.  Keep out of sight.  Take the side streets, and return home
quickly.  You have no idea what an offence and what a snare you are to
men you know, and to men you do not know.  If you are a public man, and
if your name is much in men's mouths, then the place you hold, the prices
and the praises you get, do not give you one-tenth of the pleasure that
they give a thousand other men pain.  Men you never heard of, and who
would not know you if they met you, gnaw their hearts at the mere mention
of your name.  Desire, then, to be unknown, as A Kempis says.  O teach me
to love to be concealed, prays Jeremy Taylor.  Be ambitious to be
unknown, Archbishop Leighton also instructs us.  And the great Fenelon
took _Ama nesciri_ for his crest and for his motto.  No wonder that an
apostle cried out under the agony and the shame of ill-will.  No wonder
that to kill it in the hearts of men the Son of God died under it on the
cross.  And no wonder that all the gates of hell are wide open, day and
night, for there is no day there, to receive home all those who will
entertain ill-will in their hearts, and all the gates of heaven shut
close to keep all ill-will for ever out.

3.  But, bad enough as all that is, the half has not been told, and never
will be told in this life.  Butler has a passage that has long stumbled
me, and it stumbles me the more the longer I live and study him and
observe myself.  'Resentment,' he says, in a very deep and a very serious
passage--'Resentment being out of the case, there is not, properly
speaking, any such thing as direct ill-will in one man towards another.'
Well, great and undisputed as Butler's authority is in all these matters,
at the same time he would be the first to admit and to assert that a
man's inward experience transcends all outward authority.  Well, I am
filled with shame and pain and repentance and remorse to have to say it,
but my experience carries me right in the teeth of Butler's doctrine.  I
have dutifully tried to look at Butler's inviting and exonerating
doctrine in all possible lights, and from all possible points of view, in
the anxious wish to prove it true; but I dare not say that I have
succeeded.  The truth for thee--my heart would continually call to me--the
best truth for thee is in me, and not in any Butler!  And when looking as
closely as I can at my own heart in the matter of ill-will, what do I
find--and what will you find?  You will find that after subtracting all
that can in any proper sense come under the head of real resentment, and
in cases where real resentment is out of the question; in cases where you
have received no injury, no neglect, no contempt, no anything whatsoever
of that kind, you will find that there are men innocent of all that to
you, yet men to whom you entertain feelings, animosities, antipathies,
that can be called by no other name than that of ill-will.  Look within
and see.  Watch within and see.  And I am sure you will come to subscribe
with me to the humbling and heart-breaking truth, that, even where there
is no resentment, and no other explanation, excuse, or palliation of that
kind, yet that festering, secret, malignant ill-will is working in the
bottom of your heart.  If you doubt that, if you deny that, if all that
kind of self-observation and self-sentencing is new to you, then observe
yourself, say, for one week, and report at the end of it whether or no
you have had feelings and thoughts and wishes in your secret heart toward
men who never in any way hurt you, which can only be truthfully described
as pure ill-will; that is to say, you have not felt and thought and
wished toward them as you would have them, and all men, feel and think
and wish toward you.

4.  'To will is present with me, but how to perform I find not,' says the
apostle; and again, 'Ye cannot do the things that ye would.'  Or, as
Dante has it,

      'The power which wills
   Bears not supreme control; laughter and tears
   Follow so closely on the passion prompts them,
   They wait not for the motion of the will
   In natures most sincere.'

Now, just here lies a deep distinction that has not been enough taken
account of by our popular, or even by our more profound, spiritual
writers.  The will is often regenerate and right; the will often bends,
as Bunyan has it, to that which is good; but behind the will and beneath
the will the heart is still full of passions, affections, inclinations,
dispositions that are evil; instinctively, impulsively, involuntarily
evil, even 'in natures most sincere.'  And hence arises a conflict, a
combat, a death-grip, an agony, a hell on earth, that every regenerate
and advancing soul of man is full of His will is right.  If his will is
wrong; if he chooses evil; then there is no mystery in the matter so far
as he is concerned.  He is a bad man, and he is so intentionally and
deliberately and of set purpose; and it is a rule in divine truth that
'wilfulness in sinning is the measure of our sinfulness.'  But his will
is right.  To will is present with him.  He is every day like Thomas
Boston one Sabbath-day: 'Though I cannot be free of sin, God Himself
knows that He would be welcome to make havoc of my sins and to make me
holy.  I know no lust that I would not be content to part with to-night.
My will, bound hand and foot, I desire to lay at His feet.'  Now, is it
not as clear as noonday that in the case of such a man as Boston his mind
is one thing and his heart another?  Is it not plain that he has both a
good-will and an ill-will within him?  A will that immediately and
resolutely chooses for God, and for truth, and for righteousness, and for
love; and another law in his members warring against that law of his
mind?  'Before conversion,' says Thomas Shepard, 'the main wound of a man
is in his will.  And then, after conversion, though his will is changed,
yet, _ex infirmitate_, there are many things that he cannot do, so strong
is the remnant of malignity that is still in his heart.  Let him get
Christ to help him here.'  In all that ye see your calling, my brethren.

5.  'Now, if I do that I would not,' adds the apostle, extricating
himself and giving himself fair-play and his simple due among all his
misery and self-accusation--'Now, if I do that I would not, it is no more
I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.'  Or, again, as William Law
has it: 'All our natural evil ceases to be our own evil as soon as our
will turns away from it.  Our natural evil then changes its nature and
loses all its poison and death, and becomes an holy cross on which we die
to self and this life and enter the kingdom of heaven.'  My dear
brethren, tell me, is your sin your cross?  Is your sinfulness your
cross?  Is the evil that is ever present with you your holy cross?  For,
every other cross beside sin is a cross of straw, a cross of feathers, a
paste-board and a painted cross, and not a real and genuine cross at all.
The wood and the nails and the spear all taken together were not our
Lord's real cross.  His real cross was sin; our sin laid on His hands,
and on His heart, and on His imagination, and on His conscience, till it
was all but His very own sin.  Our sin was so fearfully and wonderfully
laid upon Christ that He was as good as a sinner Himself under it.  So
much so that all the nails and all the spears, all the thirst and all the
darkness that His body and His soul could hold were as nothing beside the
sin that was laid upon Him.  And so it is with us; with as many of us as
are His true disciples.  Our sin is our cross; not our actual
transgressions, any more than His; but our inward sinfulness.  And not
the sinfulness of our will; that is no real cross to any man; but the
sinfulness of our hearts against our will, and beneath our will, and
behind our will.  And this is such a cross that if Christ had something
in His cross that we have not, then we have something in ours that He had
not.  He made many sad and sore Psalms His own; but even if He had lived
on earth to read the seventh of the Romans, He could not have made it His
own.  His true people are beyond Him here.  The disciple is above his
Master here.  The Master had His own cross, and it was a sufficient
cross; but we can challenge Him to come down and look and say if He ever
saw a cross like our cross.  He was made a curse.  He was hanged on the
tree.  He bore our sins in His own body on the tree.  But his people are
beyond Him in the real agony and crucifixion of sin.  For He never in
Gethsemane or on Calvary either cried as Paul once cried, and as you and
I cry every day--To will is present with me!  But the good that I would I
do not!  And, oh! the body of this death!

6.  Now, if any total stranger to all that shall ask me: What good there
is in all that? and, Why I so labour in such a world of unaccustomed and
unpleasant things as that?  I have many answers to his censure.  For
example, and first, I labour and will continue to labour more and more in
this world of things, and less and less in any other world, because here
we begin to see things as they are--the deepest things of God and of man,
that is.  Also, because I have the precept, and the example, and the
experience of God's greatest and best saints before me here.  Because,
also, our full and true salvation begins here, goes on here, and ends
here.  Because, also, teaching these things and learning these things
will infallibly make us the humblest of men, the most contrite, the most
self-despising, the most prayerful, and the most patient, meek, and
loving of men.  And, students, I labour in this because this is science;
because this is the first in order and the most fruitful of all the
sciences, if not the noblest and the most glorious of all the sciences.
There is all that good for us in this subject of the will and the heart,
and whole worlds of good lie away out beyond this subject that eye hath
not seen nor ear heard.




CHAPTER VII--SELF-LOVE


   'This know, that men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
   boasters, proud, unthankful, without natural affection,
   truce-breakers, false accusers, traitors, heady, high-minded: from all
   such turn away.'--_Paul_.

'Pray, sir, said Academicus, tell me more plainly just what this self of
ours actually is.  Self, replied Theophilus, is hell, it is the devil, it
is darkness, pain, and disquiet.  It is the one and only enemy of Christ.
It is the great antichrist.  It is the scarlet whore, it is the fiery
dragon, it is the old serpent that is mentioned in the Revelation of St
John.  You rather terrify me than instruct me by this description, said
Academicus.  It is indeed a very frightful matter, returned Theophilus;
for it contains everything that man has to dread and to hate, to resist
and to avoid.  Yet be assured, my friend, that, careless and merry as
this world is, every man that is born into this world has all those
enemies to overcome within himself; and every man, till he is in the way
of regeneration, is more or less governed by those enemies.  No hell in
any remote place, no devil that is separate from you, no darkness or pain
that is not within you, no antichrist either at Rome or in England, no
furious beast, no fiery dragon, without you or apart from you, can do you
any real hurt.  It is your own hell, your own devil, your own beast, your
own antichrist, your own dragon that lives in your own heart's blood that
alone can hurt you.  Die to this self, to this inward nature, and then
all outward enemies are overcome.  Live to this self, and then, when this
life is out, all that is within you, and all that is without you, will be
nothing else but a mere seeing and feeling this hell, serpent, beast, and
fiery dragon.  But, said Theogenes, a third party who stood by, I would,
if I could, more perfectly understand the precise nature of self, or what
it is that makes it to be so full of evil and misery.  To whom Theophilus
turned and replied: Covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath are the four
elements of self.  And hence it is that the whole life of self can be
nothing else but a plague and torment of covetousness, envy, pride, and
wrath, all of which is precisely sinful nature, self, or hell.  Whilst
man lives, indeed, among the vanities of time, his covetousness, his
envy, his pride, and his wrath, may be in a tolerable state, and may help
him to a mixture of peace and trouble; they may have their gratifications
as well as their torments.  But when death has put an end to the vanity
of all earthly cheats, the soul that is not born again of the
supernatural Word and Spirit of God must find itself unavoidably devoured
by itself, shut up in its own insatiable, unchangeable, self-tormenting
covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath.  O Theogenes! that I had power from
God to take those dreadful scales off men's eyes that hinder them from
seeing and feeling the infinite importance of this most certain truth!
God give a blessing, Theophilus, to your good prayer.  And then let me
tell you that you have quite satisfied my question about the nature of
self.  I shall never forget it, nor can I ever possibly after this have
any doubt about the truth of it.'

1.  'All my theology,' said an old friend of mine to me not long ago--'all
my theology is out of Thomas Goodwin to the Ephesians.'  Well, I find
Thomas Goodwin saying in that great book that self is the very
quintessence of original sin; and, again, he says, study self-love for a
thousand years and it is the top and the bottom of original sin; self is
the sin that dwelleth in us and that doth most easily beset us.  Now,
that is just what Academicus and Theophilus and Theogenes have been
saying to us in their own powerful way in their incomparable dialogue.
All sin and all misery; all covetousness, envy, pride, and wrath,--trace
it all back to its roots, travel it all up to its source, and, as sure as
you do that, self and self-love are that source, that root, and that
black bottom.  I do not forget that Butler has said in some stately pages
of his that self-love is morally good; that self-love is coincident with
the principle of virtue and part of the idea; and that it is a proper
motive for man.  But the deep bishop, in saying all that, is away back at
the creation-scheme and Eden-state of human nature.  He has not as yet
come down to human nature in its present state of overthrow,
dismemberment, and self-destruction.  But when he does condescend and
comes close to the mind and the heart of man as they now are in all men,
even Butler becomes as outspoken, and as eloquent, and as full of passion
and pathos as if he were an evangelical Puritan.  Self-love, Butler
startles his sober-minded reader as he bursts out--self-love rends and
distorts the mind of man!  Now, you are a man.  Well, then, do you feel
and confess that rending and distorting to have taken place in you?
Butler is a philosopher, and Goodwin is a preacher, but you are more: you
are a man.  You are the owner of a human heart, and you can say whether
or no it is a rent and a distorted heart.  Is your mind warped and
wrenched by self-love, and is your heart rent and torn by the same wicked
hands?  Do you really feel that it needs nothing more to take you back
again to paradise but that your heart be delivered from self-love?  Do
you now understand that the foundations of heaven itself must be laid in
a heart healed and cleansed and delivered from self-love?  If you do,
then your knowledge of your own heart has set you abreast of the greatest
of philosophers and theologians and preachers.  Nay, before multitudes of
men who are called such.  It is my meditation all the day, you say.  I
have more understanding now than all my teachers; for Thy testimonies are
my meditation.  I understand more than the ancients; because now I keep
Thy precepts.

2.  'Self-love has made us all malicious,' says John Calvin.  We are
Calvinists, were we to call any man master.  But we are to call no man
master, and least of all in the matters of the heart.  Every man must be
his own philosopher, his own moralist, and his own theologian in the
matters of the heart.  He who has a heart in his bosom and an eye in his
head can need no Calvin, no Butler, no Goodwin, and no Law to tell him
what goes on in his own heart.  And, on the other hand, his own heart
will soon tell him whether or no Calvin, and Butler, and Goodwin, and Law
know anything about those matters on which some men would set them up as
our masters.  Well, come away all of you who own a human heart.  Come and
say whether or no your heart, and the self-love of which it is full, have
made you a malicious man.  I do not ask if you are always and to
everybody full of maliciousness.  No; I know quite well that you are
sometimes as sweet as honey and as soft as butter.  For, has not even
Theophilus said that whilst a man still lives among the vanities of time,
his covetousness, his envy, his pride, and his wrath may be in a
tolerable state, and may help him to a mixture of peace and trouble;
these vices may have their gratifications as well as their torments.  No;
I do not trifle with you and with this serious matter so as to ask if you
are full of malice at all times and to all men.  No.  For, let a man be
fortunate enough to be on your side; let him pass over to your party; let
him become profitable to you; let him be clever enough and mean enough to
praise and to flatter you up to the top of your appetite for praise and
flattery, and, no doubt, you will love that man.  Or, if that is not
exactly love, at least it is no longer hate.  But let that man
unfortunately be led to leave your party; let him cease being profitable
to you; let him weary of flattering you with his praise; let him forget
you, neglect you, despise you, and go against you, and then look at your
own heart.  Do you care now to know what malice is?  Well, that is malice
that distorts and rends your heart as often as you meet that man on the
street or even pass by his door.  That is malice that dances in your eyes
when you see his name in print.  That is malice with which you always
break out when his name is mentioned in conversation.  That is malice
that heats your heart when you suddenly recollect him in the multitude of
your thoughts within you.  And you are in good company all the time.  'We,
ourselves,' says Paul to Titus, 'we also at one time lived in malice and
in envy.  We were hateful and we hated one another.'  'Hateful,' Goodwin
goes on in his great book, 'every man is to another man more or less; he
is hated of another and he hateth another more or less; and if his nature
were let out to the full, there is that in him, "every man is against
every man," as is said of Ishmael.  _Homo homini lupus_,' adds our brave
preacher.  And Abbe Grou speaks out with the same challenge from the
opposite church pole, and says: 'Yes; self-love makes us touchy, ready to
take offence, ill-tempered, suspicious, severe, exacting, easily
offended; it keeps alive in our hearts a certain malignity, a secret joy
at the mortifications which befall our neighbour; it nourishes our
readiness to criticise, our dislike at certain persons, our ill-feeling,
our bitterness, and a thousand other things prejudicial to charity.'

3.  'Myself is my own worst enemy,' says Abbe Grou.  That is to say, we
may have enemies who hate us more than we hate ourselves, and enemies who
would hurt us, if they could, as much as we hurt ourselves; but the
Abbe's point is that they cannot.  And he is right.  No man has ever hurt
me as I have hurt myself.  There are men who hate me so much that they
would poison my life of all its peace and happiness if they could.  But
they cannot.  They cannot; but let them not be cast down on that account,
for there is one who can do, and who will do as long as he lives, what
they cannot do.  A man's foes, to be called foes, are in his own house:
they are in his own heart.  Let our enemies attend to their own peace and
happiness, and our self-love will do all, and more than all, that they
would fain do.  At the most, they and their ill-will can only give
occasion to our self-love; but it is our self-love that seizes upon the
occasion, and through it rends and distorts our own hearts.  And were our
hearts only pure of self-love, were our hearts only clothed with meekness
and humility, we could laugh at all the ill-will of our enemies as
leviathan laughs at the shaking of a spear.  'Know thou,' says A Kempis
to his son, 'that the love of thyself doth do thee more hurt than
anything in the whole world.'  Yes; but we shall never know that by
merely reading _The Imitation_.  We must read ourselves.  We must study,
as we study nothing else, our own rent and distorted hearts.  Our own
hearts must be our daily discovery.  We must watch the wounds our hearts
take every day; and we must give all our powers of mind to tracing all
our wounds back to their true causes.  We must say: 'that sore blow came
on my mind and on my heart from such and such a quarter, from such and
such a hand, from such and such a weapon; but this pain, this rankling,
poisoned, and ever-festering wound, this sleepless, gnawing, cancerous
sore, comes from the covetousness, the pride, the envy, and the wrath of
my own heart.'  When we begin to say that, we shall then begin to
understand and to love Thomas; we shall sit daily at his feet and shall
be numbered among his sons.

4.  And this suffering at our own hands goes on till at last the tables
are completely turned against self-love, and till what was once to us the
dearest thing in the whole world becomes, as Pascal says, the most
hateful.  We begin life by hating the men, and the things, who hurt us.
We hate the men who oppose us and hinder us; the men who speak, and
write, and act, and go in any way against us.  We bitterly hate all who
humble us, despise us, trample upon us, and in any way ill-use us.  But
afterwards, when we have become men, men in experience of this life, and,
especially, of ourselves in this life; after we gain some real insight
and attain to some real skill in the life of the heart, we come round to
forgive those we once hated.  We have come now to see why they did it.  We
see now exactly how much they hurt us after all, and how little.  And,
especially, we have come to see,--what at one time we could not have
believed,--that all our hurt, to be called hurt, has come to us from
ourselves.  And thus that great revolution of mind and that great
revulsion of feeling and of passion has taken place, after which we are
left with no one henceforth to hate, to be called hating, but ourselves.
We may still continue to avoid our enemies, and we may do that too long
and too much; we may continue to fear them and be on the watch against
them far too much; but to deliberately hate them is henceforth
impossible.  All our hatred,--all our deliberate, steady, rooted, active
hatred,--is now at ourselves; at ourselves, that is, so far and so long
as we remain under the malignant and hateful dominion of self-love.  When
Butler gets our self-love restored to reasonableness, and made coincident
with virtue and part of the idea; when our self-love becomes uniformly
coincident with the principle of obedience to God's commands, then we
shall love ourselves as our neighbour, and our neighbour as ourselves,
and both in God.  But, till then, there is nothing and no one on earth or
in hell so hateful to us as ourselves and our own hateful hearts.  And if
in that we are treading the winepress alone as far as our fellow-men are
concerned, all the more we have Him with us in all our agony who wept
over the heart of man because He knew what was in it, and what must
always come out of it.  Evil thoughts, He said, and fornications, and
murders, and thefts, and covetousness, and wickedness, and deceit, and an
evil eye, and pride, and folly, and what not.  And Paul has the mind of
Christ with him in the text.  I do not need to repeat again the hateful
words.  Now, what do you say? was Pascal beyond the truth, was he deeper
than the truth or more deadly than the truth when he said with a stab
that self is hateful?  I think not.

5.  'Oh that I were free, then, of myself,' wrote Samuel Rutherford from
Aberdeen in 1637 to John Ferguson of Ochiltree.  'What need we all have
to be ransomed and redeemed from that master-tyrant, that cruel and
lawless lord, ourself!  Even when I am most out of myself, and am best
serving Christ, I have a squint eye on myself.'  And to the Laird of
Cally in the same year and from the same place: 'Myself is the master
idol we all bow down to.  Every man blameth the devil for his sins, but
the house devil of every man that eateth with him and lieth in his bosom
is himself.  Oh blessed are they who can deny themselves!'  And to the
Irish ministers the year after: 'Except men martyr and slay the body of
sin in sanctified self-denial, they shall never be Christ's.  Oh, if I
could but be master of myself, my own mind, my own will, my own credit,
my own love, how blessed were I!  But alas!  I shall die only minting and
aiming at being a Christian.'




CHAPTER VIII--OLD MR. PREJUDICE, THE KEEPER OF EAR-GATE, WITH HIS SIXTY
DEAF MEN UNDER HIM


   'Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the
   waters of Israel?'--_Naaman_.

   'Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?'--_Nathanael_.

   ' . . observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by
   partiality.'--_Paul_.

Old Mr. Prejudice was well known in the wars of Mansoul as an angry,
unhappy, and ill-conditioned old churl.  Old Mr. Prejudice was placed by
Diabolus, his master, as keeper of the ward at the post of Ear-gate, and
for that fatal service he had sixty completely deaf men put under him as
his company.  Men eminently advantageous for that fatal service.
Eminently advantageous,--inasmuch as it mattered not one atom to them
what was spoken in their ear either by God or by man.

1.  Now, to begin with, this churlish old man had already earned for
himself a very evil name.  For what name could well be more full of evil
memories and of evil omens than just this name of Prejudice?  Just
consider what prejudice is.  Prejudice, when we stop over it and take it
to pieces and look well at it,--prejudice is so bad and so abominable
that you would not believe it could be so bad till you had looked at it
and at how it acts in your own case.  For prejudice gives judgment on
your case and gives orders for your execution before your defence has
been heard, before your witnesses have been called, before your summons
has been served, ay, and even before your indictment has been drawn out.
What a scandal and what an uproar a malfeasance of justice like that
would cause if it were to take place in any of our courts of law!  Only,
the thing is impossible; you cannot even imagine it.  We shall have Magna
Charta up before us in the course of these lectures.  Well, ever since
Magna Charta was extorted from King John, such a scandal as I have
supposed has been impossible either in England or in Scotland.  And that
such cases should still be possible in Russia and in Turkey places those
two old despotisms outside the pale of the civilised world.  And yet,
loudly as we all denounce the Czar and the Sultan, eloquently as we boast
over Magna Charta, Habeas Corpus, and what not, every day you and I are
doing what would cost an English king his crown, and an English judge his
head.  We all do it every day, and it never enters one mind out of a
hundred that we are trampling down truth, and righteousness, and fair-
play, and brotherly love.  We do not know what a diabolical wickedness we
are perpetrating every day.  The best men among us are guilty of that
iniquity every day, and they never confess it to themselves; no one ever
accuses them of it; and they go down to death and judgment unsuspicious
of the discovery that they will soon make there.  You would not steal a
stick or a straw that belonged to me; but you steal from me every day
what all your gold and mine can never redeem; you murder me every day in
my best and my noblest life.  You me, and I you.

2.  Old Mr. Prejudice.  Now, there is a golden passage in Jonathan
Edwards's _Diary_ that all old men should lay well to heart and
conscience.  'I observe,' Edwards enters, 'that old men seldom have any
advantage of new discoveries, because these discoveries are beside a way
of thinking they have been long used to.  Resolved, therefore, that, if
ever I live to years, I will be impartial to hear the reasons of all
pretended discoveries, and receive them, if rational, how long soever I
have been used to another way of thinking.  I am too dogmatical; I have
too much of egotism; my disposition is always to be telling of my dislike
and my scorn.'  What a fine, fresh, fruitful, progressive, and peaceful
world we should soon have if all our old and all our fast-ageing men
would enter that extract into their diary!  How the young would then love
and honour and lean upon the old; and how all the fathers would always
abide young and full of youthful life like their children!  Then the
righteous should flourish like the palm-tree; he should grow like a cedar
in Lebanon.  They that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish
in the courts of our God.  They shall still bring forth fruit in old age;
they shall be fat and flourishing.  What a free scope would then be given
to all God's unfolding providences, and what a warm welcome to all His
advancing truths!  What sore and spreading wounds would then be salved,
what health and what vigour would fill all the body political, as well as
all the body mystical!  May the Lord turn the heart of the fathers to the
children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, lest the earth
be smitten with a curse!

3.  Mr. Prejudice was an old man; and this also has been handed down
about him, that he was almost always angry.  And if you keep your eyes
open you will soon see how true to the life that feature of old Mr.
Prejudice still is.  In every conversation, discussion, debate,
correspondence, the angry man is invariably the prejudiced man; and,
according to the age and the depth, the rootedness and the intensity of
his prejudices, so is the ferocity and the savagery of his anger.  He has
already settled this case that you are irritating and wronging him so
much by your still insisting on bringing up.  It is a reproach to his
understanding for you to think that there is anything to be said in that
matter that he has not long ago heard said and fully answered.  Has he
not denounced that bad man and that bad cause for years?  You insult me,
sir, by again opening up that matter in my presence.  He will have none
of you or of your arguments either.  You are as bad yourself as that bad
man is whose advocate you are.  We all know men whose hearts are full of
coals of juniper, burning coals of hate and rage, just by reason of their
ferocious prejudices.  Hate is too feeble a word for their gnashing rage
against this man and that cause, this movement and that institution.
There is an absolutely murderous light in their eye as they work
themselves up against the men and the things they hate.  Charity rejoices
not in iniquity; but you will see otherwise Christian and charitable men
so jockeyed by the devil that they actually rejoice in iniquity and do
not know what they are doing, or who it is that is egging them on to do
it.  You will see otherwise and at other times good men so full of the
rage and madness of prejudice and partiality that they will storm at
every report of goodness and truth and prosperity in the man, or in the
cause, or in the church, or in the party, they are so demented against.
Jockey is not the word.  There is the last triumph of pure devilry in the
way that the prince of the devils turns old Prejudice's very best
things--his love of his fathers, his love of the past, his love of order,
his love of loyalty, his love of the old paths, and his very truest and
best religion itself--into so much fat fuel for the fires of hate and
rage that are consuming his proud heart to red-hot ashes.  If the light
that is in us be darkness, how great is that darkness; and if the life
that is in us be death, how deadly is that death!

4.  Old, angry, and ill-conditioned.  Ill-conditioned is an old-fashioned
word almost gone out of date.  But, all the same, it is a very
expressive, and to us to-night a quite indispensable word.  An
ill-conditioned man is a man of an in-bred, cherished, and confirmed ill-
nature.  His heart, which was a sufficiently bad heart to begin with, is
now so exercised in evil and so accustomed to evil, that,--how can he be
born again when he is so old and so ill-natured?  All the qualities, all
the passions, all the emotions of his heart are out of joint; their bent
is bad; they run out naturally to mischief.  Now, what could possibly be
more ill-conditioned than to judge and sentence, denounce and execute a
man before you have heard his case?  What could be more ill-conditioned
than positively to be afraid lest you should be led to forgive, and
redress, and love, and act with another man?  To be determined not to
hear one word that you can help in his defence, in his favour, and in his
praise?  Could a human heart be in a worse state on this side hell itself
than that?  Nay, that is hell itself in your evil heart already.  Let
prejudice and partiality have their full scope among the wicked passions
of your ill-conditioned heart, and lo! the kingdom of darkness is already
within you.  Not, lo, here! or, lo, there! but within you.  Look to
yourselves, says John to us all, full as we all are of our own
ill-conditions.  Look to yourselves.  But we have no eyes left with which
to see ourselves; we look so much at the faults and the blames of our
neighbour.  'Publius goes to church sometimes, and reads the Scriptures;
but he knows not what he reads or prays, his head is so full of politics.
He is so angry at kings and ministers of state that he has no time nor
disposition to call himself to account.  He has the history of all
parliaments, elections, prosecutions, and impeachments by heart, and he
dies with little or no religion, through a constant fear of Popery.'
Poor, old, ill-conditioned Publius!

5.  And, then, his sixty deaf men under old, angry, ill-conditioned
Prejudice.  We read of engines of sixty-horse power.  And here is a man
with the power of resisting and shutting out the truth equal to that of
sixty men like himself.  We all know such men; we would as soon think of
speaking to those iron pillars about a change of mind as we would to
them.  If you preach to their prejudices and their prepossessions and
their partialities, they are all ears to hear you, and all tongues to
trumpet your praise.  But do not expect them to sit still with ordinary
decency under what they are so prejudiced against; do not expect them to
read a book or buy a passing paper on the other side.  Sixty deaf men
hold their ears; sixty ill-conditioned men hold their hearts.  Habit with
them is all the test of truth; it must be right, they've done it from
their youth.  And thus they go on to the end of their term of life, full
of their own fixed ideas, with their eyes full of beams and jaundices and
darkness and death.  Some people think that we take up too much of our
time with newspapers in our day, and that, if things go on as they are
going, we shall soon have neither time nor taste for anything else but
half a dozen papers a day.  But all that depends on the conditions with
which we read.  If we would read as Jonathan Edwards read the weekly news-
letters of his day; if we read all our papers to see if the kingdom of
God was coming in reply to our prayer; if we read, observing all things,
like Timothy, without prejudice or partiality, then I know no better
reading for an ill-conditioned heart begun to look to itself than just a
good, out-and-out party newspaper.  And if it is a church paper all the
better for your purpose.  If you read with your fingers in your ears; if
you read with a beam in your eye, you had better confine yourself in your
reading; if you feel that your prejudices are inflamed and your
partiality is intensified, then take care what paper you take in.  But if
you read all you read for the love of the truth, for justice, for fair-
play, and for brotherly love, and all that in yourself; if you read all
the time with your eyes on your own ill-conditioned heart, then, as James
says, count it all joy when you fall into divers temptations.  Take up
your political and ecclesiastical paper every morning, saying to
yourself, Go to, O my heart, and get thy daily lesson.  Go to, and enter
thy cleansing and refining furnace.  Go to, and come well out of thy
daily temptation.--A nobler school you will not find anywhere for a
prejudiced, partial, angry, and ill-conditioned heart than just the party
journals of the day.  For the abating of prejudice; for seeing the
odiousness of partiality, and for putting on every day a fair, open,
catholic, Christian mind, commend me to the public life and the public
journals of our living day.  And it is not that this man may be up and
that man down; this cause victorious and that cause defeated; this truth
vindicated and that untruth defeated, that public life rolls on and that
its revolutions are reported to us.  Our own minds and our own hearts are
the final cause, the ultimate drift, and the far-off end and aim of it
all.  We are not made for party and for the partialities and prosperities
of party; party and all its passions and all its successes and all its
defeats are made, and are permitted to be made for us; for our
opportunity of purging ourselves free of all our ill-conditions, of all
our prejudices, of all our partialities, and of all the sin and misery
that come to us of all these things.

6.  'It is the work of a philosopher,' says Addison in one of his best
_Spectators_, 'to be every day subduing his passions and laying aside his
prejudices.'  We are not philosophers, but we shall be enrolled in the
foremost ranks of philosophy if we imitate such philosophers in their
daily work, as we must do and shall do.  Well, are we begun to do it?  Are
we engaged in that work of theirs and ours every day?  Is God our witness
and our judge that we are?  Are we so engaged upon that inward work, and
so succeeding in it, that we can read our most prejudiced newspaper with
the same mind and spirit, with the same profit and progress, with which
we read our Bible?  A good man, a humble man, a man acutely sensible of
his ill-conditions, will look on every day as lost or won according as he
has lost or won in this inward war.  If his partialities are dropping off
his mind; if his prejudices are melting; if he can read books and papers
with pleasure and instruction that once filled him with dark passions and
angry outbursts; if his Calvinism lets him read Thomas A Kempis and
Jeremy Taylor and William Law; if his High-Churchism lets him delight to
worship God in an Independent or a Presbyterian church; if his
Free-Churchism permits him to see the Establishment reviving, and his
State-Churchism admits that the Free Churches have more to say to him
than he had at one time thought; if his Toryism lets him take in a
Radical paper, and his Radicalism a Unionist paper--then let him thank
God, for God is in all that though he knew it not.  And when he counts up
his incalculable benefits at each return of the Lord's table, let him
count up as not the least of them an open mind and a well-conditioned
heart, an unprejudiced mind, and an impartial heart.

7.  And now, to conclude: Take old, angry, ill-conditioned Prejudice, his
daily prayer: 'My Adorable God and Creator!  Thy Holy Church is by the
wickedness of men divided into various communions, all hating,
condemning, and endeavouring to destroy one another.  I made none of
these divisions, nor am I any longer a defender of them.  I wish
everything removed out of every communion that hinders the Common Unity.
The wranglings and disputings of whole churches and nations have so
confounded all things that I have no ability to make a true and just
judgment of the matters between them.  If I knew that any one of these
communions was alone acceptable to Thee, I would do or suffer anything to
make myself a member of it.  For, my Good God, I desire nothing so much
as to know and to love Thee, and to worship Thee in the most acceptable
manner.  And as I humbly presume that Thou wouldst not suffer Thy Church
to be thus universally divided, if no divided portion could offer any
worship acceptable unto Thee; and as I have no knowledge of what is
absolutely best in these divided parts, nor any ability to put an end to
them; so I fully trust in Thy goodness, that Thou wilt not suffer these
divisions to separate me from Thy mercy in Christ Jesus; and that, if
there be any better ways of serving Thee than those I already enjoy, Thou
wilt, according to Thine infinite mercy, lead me into them, O God of my
peace and my love.'  After this manner old, angry, ill-conditioned
Prejudice prayed every day till he died, a little child, in charity with
all men, and in acceptance with Almighty God.




CHAPTER IX--CAPTAIN ANYTHING


   'I am made all things to all men . . . I please all men in all
   things.'--_Paul_

Captain Anything came originally from the ancient town of Fair-speech.

Fair-speech had many royal bounties and many special privileges bestowed
upon it, and Captain Anything and his family had come to many titles and
to great riches in that ancient, loyal, and honourable borough.  My Lord
Turn-about, my Lord Time-server, my Lord Fair-speech (from whose
ancestors that town first took its name), as also such well-known
commoners as Mr. Smooth-man, Mr. Facing-both-ways, and Mr. Two-tongues
were all sprung with Captain Anything from the same ancient and
long-established ancestry.  As to his religion, from a child young
Anything had sat under the parson of the parish, the same Reverend Two-
tongues as has been mentioned above.  And our budding soldier followed
the example of his minister in that he never strove too long against wind
or tide, or was ever to be seen on the same side of the street with
Religion when she was banished from court or had lost her silver
slippers.  The crest of the Anythings was a delicately poised weather-
cock; and the motto engraved around the gyrating bird ran thus: 'Our
judgment always jumps according to the occasion.'  As a military man,
Captain Anything is described in military books as a proper man, and a
man of courage and skill--to appearance.  He and his company under him
were a sort of Swiss guard in Mansoul.  They held themselves open and
ready for any master.  They lived not so much by religion or by loyalty
as by the fates of worldly fortune.  In his secret despatches Diabolus
was wont to address Captain Anything as My Darling; and be sure you
recruit your Switzers well, Diabolus would say; but when the real stress
of the war came, even Diabolus cast Captain Anything off.  And thus it
came about that when both sides were against this despised creature he
had to throw down his arms and flee into a safe skulking place for his
life.

1.  In that half-papist, half-atheistic country called France there is a
class of politicians known by the name of Opportunists.  They are a kind
of public men that, we are thankful to say, are not known in Protestant
and Evangelical England, but they may be pictured out and described to
you in this homely way: An Opportunist stands well out of the sparks of
the fire, and well in behind the stone wall, till the fanatics for
liberty, equality, and fraternity have snatched the chestnuts out of the
fire, and then the Opportunist steps out from his safe place and blandly
divides the well-roasted tid-bits among his family and his friends.  As
long as there is any jeopardy, the Jacobins are denounced and held up to
opprobrium; but when the jeopardy and the risk are well past, the sober-
minded, cautious, conservative, and responsible statesmen walk off with
the portfolios of place and privilege and pay under their honest arms.
But these are the unprincipled papists and infidels of a mushroom
republic; and, thank God, such spurious patriotism, and such sham and
selfish statesmanship, have not yet shown their miserable heads among
faithful, fearless, straightforward, and uncalculating Englishmen.  At
the same time, if ever that continental vice should attack our national
character, we have two well-known essays in our ethical and casuistical
literature that may with perfect safety be pitted against anything that
either France or Italy has produced.  Even if they are but a master's
irony, let all ambitious men keep _Of Cunning_ and _Of Wisdom for a Man's
Self_ under their pillow.  Let all young men who would toady a great man;
let all young ministers who would tune their pulpit to king, or court, or
society; let all tradesmen and merchants who prefer their profits to
their principles--if they have literature enough, let them soak their
honest minds in our great Chancellor's sage counsels; and he who promoted
Anything and dubbed him his Darling, he will, no doubt, publish both a
post and a title on his birthday for you also.

2.  'What religion is he of?' asks Dean Swift.  'He is an Anythingarian,'
is the answer, 'for he makes his self-interest the sole standard of his
life and doctrine.'  And Archbishop Leighton, a very different churchman
from the bitter author of the _Polite Conversations_, is equally
contemptuous toward the self-seeker in divine things.  'Your boasted
peaceableness often proceeds from a superficial temper; and, not seldom,
from a supercilious disdain of whatever has no marketable use or value,
and from your utter indifference to true religion.  Toleration is an herb
of spontaneous growth in the soil of indifference.  Much of our union of
minds proceeds from want of knowledge and from want of affection to
religion.  Many who boast of their church conformity, and that no one
hears of their noise, may thank the ignorance of their minds for that
kind of quietness.'  But by far the most powerful assault that ever was
made upon lukewarmness in religion and upon self-seeking in the Church
was delivered by Dante in the tremendous third canto of his _Inferno_:--

         Various tongues,
   Horrible languages, outcries of woe,
   Accents of anger, voices deep and hoarse,
   With hands together smote that swelled the sounds,
   Made up a tumult that for ever whirls
   Round through that air with solid darkness stain'd,
   Like to the sand that in the whirlwind flies.
   I then, with error yet encompass'd, cried,
   'O master!  What is this I hear?  What race
   Are these, who seem so overcome with woe?'
   He then to me: 'This miserable fate
   Suffer the wretched souls of those who lived
   Without or praise or blame, with that ill band
   Of angels mixed, who nor rebellious proved,
   Nor yet were true to God, but for themselves
   Were only.  Mercy and Justice scorn them both.
   Speak not of them, but look and pass them by.'
   Forthwith, I understood for certain this the tribe
   Of those ill spirits both to God displeasing
   And to His foes.  Those wretches who ne'er lived,
   Went on in nakedness, and sorely stung
   By wasps and hornets, which bedewed their cheeks
   With blood, that mix'd with tears dropp'd to their feet,
   And by disgustful worms was gathered there.

3.  Now, we must all lay it continually and with uttermost humiliation to
heart that we all have Captain Anything's opportunism, his self-interest,
his insincerity, his instability, and his secret deceitfulness in
ourselves.  That man knows little of himself who does not despise and
hate himself for his secret self-seeking even in the service of God.  For,
how the love of praise will seduce and corrupt this man, and the love of
gain that man!  How easy it is to flatter and adulate this man out of all
his former opinions and his deepest principles, and how an expected
advantage will make that other man forget now an old alliance and now a
deep antipathy!  How often the side we take even in the most momentous
matters is decided by the most unworthy motives and the most contemptible
considerations!  Unstable as water, Reuben shall not excel.  Double-minded
men, we, like Jacob's first-born, are unstable in all our ways.  We have
no anchor, or, what anchor we sometimes have soon slips.  We have no
fixed pole-star by which to steer our life.  Any will-o'-the-wisp of
pleasure, or advantage, or praise will run us on the rocks.  The
searchers of Mansoul, after long search, at last lighted on Anything, and
soon made an end of him.  Seek him out in your own soul also.  Be you
sure he is somewhere there.  He is skulking somewhere there.  And, having
found him, if you cannot on the spot make an end of him, keep your eye on
him, and never say that you are safe from him and his company as long as
you are in this soul-deceiving life.  And, that Anything will not be let
enter the gates of the city you are set on seeking, that will go largely
to make that sweet and clean and truthful city your very heaven to you.

4.  'I am made all things to all men, and I please all men in all
things.'  One would almost think that was Captain Anything himself, in a
frank, cynical, and self-censorious moment.  But if you will look it up
you will see that it was a very different man.  The words are the words
of Anything, but the heart behind the words is the heart of Paul.  And
this, again, teaches us that we should be like the Messiah in this also,
not to judge after the sight of our eyes, nor to reprove after the
hearing of our ears.  Miserable Anything! outcast alike of heaven and
hell!  But, O noble and blessed Apostle! the man, says Thomas Goodwin,
who shall be found seated next to Jesus Christ Himself in the kingdom of
God.  Happy Paul: happy even on this earth, since he could say, and in
the measure he could say with truth and with sincerity, such
self-revelations as these: 'Unto the Jews I am become as a Jew that I
might gain the Jews; to them that are under the law, as under the law,
that I might gain them that are under the law.  To them that are without
law, as without law, that I might gain them that are without law.  To the
weak became I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things
to all men, that I might by all means save some.  Giving none offence,
neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.  Even
as I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the
profit of many, that they may be saved.'  Noble words, and inspiring to
read.  Yes: but look within, and think what Paul must have passed
through; think what he must have been put through before he,--a man of
like selfish passions as we are, a man of like selfish passions as
Anything was,--could say all that.  Let his crosses and his thorns; his
raptures up to the third heaven, and his body of death that he bore about
with him all his days; let his magnificent spiritual gifts, and his still
more magnificent spiritual graces tell how they all worked together to
make the chief of sinners out of the blameless Pharisee, and, at the same
time, Christ's own chosen vessel and the apostle of all the churches.
Boasting about his patron apostle, St. Augustine says: 'Far be it from so
great an apostle, a vessel elect of God, an organ of the Holy Ghost, to
be one man when he preached and another when he wrote; one man in private
and another in public.  He was made all things to all men, not by the
craft of a deceiver, but from the affection of a sympathiser, succouring
the diverse diseases of souls with the diverse emotions of compassion; to
the little ones dispensing the lesser doctrines, not false ones, but the
higher mysteries to the perfect--all of them, however, true, harmonious,
and divine.'  The exquisite irony of Socrates comes into my mind in this
connection, and will not be kept out of my mind.  By instinct as well as
by art Socrates mixed up the profoundest seriousness with the humorous
affectation of qualities of mind and even of character the exact opposite
of what all who loved him knew to be the real Socrates.  'Intellectually,'
says Dr. Thomson, 'the acutest man of his age, Socrates represents
himself in all companies as the dullest person present.  Morally the
purest, he affects to be the slave of passion and borrows the language
even of the lewd to describe a love and a good-will far too exalted for
the comprehension of his contemporaries.  This irony of his disarmed
ridicule by anticipating it; it allayed jealousy and propitiated envy;
and it possibly procured him admission into gay circles from which a more
solemn teacher would have been excluded.  But all the time it had for its
basis a real greatness of soul, a hearty and an unaffected disregard of
public opinion, a perfect disinterestedness, and an entire abnegation of
self.  He made himself a fool in order that fools by his folly might be
made wise; he humbled himself to the level of those among whom his work
lay that he might raise some few among them to his own level; he was all
things to all men, if by any means he might save some.  Till Alcibiades
ends the splendid eloge that Plato puts into his mouth with these words,
"All my master's vice and stupidity and worship of wealthy and great men
is counterfeit.  It is all but the Silenus-mask which conceals the
features of the god within; for if you remove the covering, how shall I
describe to you, my friends and boon companions, the excellence of the
beauty you will find within!  Whether any of you have seen Socrates in
his serious mood, when he has thrown aside the mask and disclosed the
divine features beneath it, is more than I know.  But I have seen them,
and I can tell you that they seemed to me glorious and marvellous, and,
truly, godlike in their beauty."'

Well, now, I gather out of all that this great lesson: that it is, to
begin with, a mere matter of temperament, or what William Law would call
a mere matter of complexion and sensibility, whether, to begin with, a
man is hard, and dry, and narrow, and stiff, and proud, and scornful, and
cruel; or again, whether he is soft and tender, broad and open, and full
of sympathy and of the milk of human kindness.  At first, and to begin
with, there is neither praise nor blame as yet in the matter.  A man is
hard just as a stone is hard; it is his nature.  Or he is soft as clay is
soft; it is again his nature.  But, inheriting such a nature, and his
inherited nature beginning to appear, then is the time when the true man
really begins to be made.  The bad man dwells in contentment, and,
indeed, by preference, at home in his own hard, proud, scornful,
resentful heart; or, again, in his facile, fawning, tide-waiting, time-
serving heart; and thus he chooses, accepts, and prefers his evil fate,
and never seeks the help either of God or man to enable him to rise above
it.  Paul was not, when we meet him first, the sweet, humble, affable,
placable, makeable man that he made himself and came to be after a
lifetime of gospel-preaching and of adorning the gospel he preached.  And
all the assistances and all the opportunities that came to Paul are still
coming to you and to me; till, whether naturally pliable and affectionate
or the opposite, we at last shall come to the temperament, the
complexion, and the exquisite sensibility of Paul himself.  Are you,
then, a hard, stiff, severe, censorious, proud, angry, scornful man?  Or
are you a too-easy, too-facile man-pleaser and self-seeker, being all
things to all men that you may make use of all men?  Are you?  Then say
so.  Confess it to be so.  Admit that you have found yourself out.  And
reflect every day what you have got to do in life.  Consider what a new
birth you need and must have.  Number your days that are left you in
which to make you a new heart, and a new nature, and a new character.
Consider well how you are to set about that divine work.  You have a
minister, and your minister is called a divine because by courtesy he is
supposed to understand that divine work, and to be engaged on it night
and day in himself, and in season and out of season among his people.  He
will tell you how you are to make you a new heart.  Or, if he does not
and cannot do that; if he preaches about everything but that to a people
who will listen to anything but that, then your soul is not in his hands
but in your own.  You may not be able to choose your minister, but you
can choose what books you are to buy, or borrow, and read.  And if there
is not a minister within a hundred miles of you who knows his right hand
from his left, then there are surely some booksellers who will advise you
about the classical books of the soul till you can order them for
yourselves.  And thus, if it is your curse and your shame to be as
spongy, and soapy, and oily, and slippery as Anything himself; if you
choose your church and your reading with any originality, sense, and
insight, you need not fear but that you will be let live till you die an
honest, upright, honourable, fearless gentleman: no timid friend to
unfashionable truth, as you are to-night, but a man like Thomas Boston's
Ettrick elder, who lies waiting the last trump under a gravestone
engraven with this legend: Here lies a man who had a brow for every good
cause.  Only, if you would have that written and read on your headstone,
you have no time to lose.  If I were you I would not sit another Sabbath
under a minister whose preaching was not changing my nature, making my
heart new, and transforming my character; no, not though the Queen
herself sat in the same loft.  And I would leave the church even of my
fathers, and become anything as far as churches go, if I could get a
minister who held my face close and ever closer up to my own heart.  Nor
would I spend a shilling or an hour that I could help on any impertinent
book,--any book that did not powerfully help me in the one remaining
interest of my one remaining life: a new nature and a new heart.  No, not
I.  No, not I any more.




CHAPTER X--CLIP-PROMISE


   ' . . . the promise made of none effect.'--_Paul_

Toward the end of the thirteenth century Edward the First, the English
Justinian, brought a select colony of artists from Italy to England and
gave them a commission to execute their best coinage for the English
Mint.  Deft and skilful as those artists were, the work they turned out
was but rude and clumsy compared with some of the gold and silver and
copper coins of our day.  The Florentine artists took a sheet of gold or
of silver and divided the sheet up with great scissors, and then they
hammered the cut-out pieces as only a Florentine hammerman could hammer
them.  But, working with such tools, and working on such methods, those
goldsmiths and silversmiths, with all their art, found it impossible to
give an absolutely equal weight and worth to every piece of money that
they turned out.  For one thing, their cut and hammered coins had no
carved rims round their edges as all our gold and silver and even copper
coinage now has.  And, accordingly, the clever rogues of that day soon
discovered that it was far easier for them to take up a pair of shears
and to clip a sliver of silver off the rough rim of a shilling, or a
shaving of gold off a sovereign, than it was to take of their coats and
work a hard day's work.  Till to clip the coin of the realm soon became
one of the easiest and most profitable kinds of crime.  In the time of
Elizabeth a great improvement was made in the way of coining the public
money; but it was soon found that this had only made matters worse.  For
now, side by side with a pure and unimpaired and full-valued currency,
and mingled up everywhere with it, there was the old, clipped, debased,
and far too light gold and silver money; till troubles arose in
connection with the coinage and circulation of the country that can only
be told by Macaulay's extraordinarily graphic pen.  'It may well be
doubted,' Macaulay says, in the twenty-first chapter of his _History of
England_, 'whether all the misery which has been inflicted on the English
nation in a quarter of a century by bad Kings, bad Ministers, bad
Parliaments, and bad Judges was equal to the misery caused in a single
year by bad crowns and bad shillings.  Whether Whigs or Tories,
Protestants or Papists were uppermost, the grazier drove his beasts to
market, the grocer weighed out his currants, the draper measured out his
broadcloth, the hum of buyers and sellers was as loud as ever in the
towns; the cream overflowed the pails of Cheshire; the apple juice foamed
in the presses of Herefordshire; the piles of crockery glowed in the
furnaces of the Trent, and the barrows of coal rolled fast along the
timber railways of the Tyne.  But when the great instrument of exchange
became thoroughly deranged all trade and all industry were smitten as
with a palsy.  Nothing could be purchased without a dispute.  Over every
counter there was wrangling from morning to night.  The employer and his
workmen had a quarrel as regularly as Saturday night came round.  On a
fair day or a market day the clamours, the disputes, the reproaches, the
taunts, the curses, were incessant.  No merchant would contract to
deliver goods without making some stipulation about the quality of the
coin in which he was to be paid.  The price of the necessaries of life,
of shoes, of ale, of oatmeal, rose fast.  The bit of metal called a
shilling the labourer found would not go so far as sixpence.  One day
Tonson sends forty brass shillings to Dryden, to say nothing of clipped
money.  The great poet sends them all back and demands in their place
good guineas.  "I expect," he says, "good silver, not such as I had
formerly."  Meanwhile, at every session of the Old Bailey the most
terrible example of coiners and clippers was made.  Hurdles, with four,
five, six wretches convicted of counterfeiting or mutilating the money of
the realm, were dragged month after month up Holborn Hill.'  But I cannot
copy the whole chapter, wonderful as the writing is.  Suffice it to say
that before the clippers could be rooted out, and confidence restored
between buyer and seller, the greatest statesmen, the greatest
financiers, and the greatest philosophers were all at their wits' end.
Kings' speeches, cabinet councils, bills of Parliament, and showers of
pamphlets were all full in those days of the clipper and the coiner.  All
John Locke's great intellect came short of grappling successfully with
the terrible crisis the clipper of the coin had brought upon England.
Carry all that, then, over into the life of personal religion, after the
manner of our Lord's parables, and after the manner of the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ and the _Holy War_, and you will see what an able and
impressive use John Bunyan will make of the shears of the coin-clippers
of his day.  Macaulay has but made us ready to open and understand
Bunyan.  'After this, my Lord apprehended Clip-Promise.  Now, because he
was a notorious villain, for by his doings much of the king's coin was
abused, therefore he was made a public example.  He was arraigned and
judged to be set first in the pillory, then to be whipped by all the
children and servants in Mansoul, and then to be hanged till he was dead.
Some may wonder at the severity of this man's punishment, but those that
are honest traders in Mansoul they are sensible of the great abuse that
one clipper of promises in little time may do in the town of Mansoul;
and, truly, my judgment is that all those of his name and life should be
served out even as he.'

The grace of God is like a bullion mass of purest gold, and then Jesus
Christ is the great ingot of that gold, and then Moses, and David, and
Isaiah, and Hosea, and Paul, and Peter, and John are the inspired artists
who have commission to take both bullion and ingot, and out of them to
cut, and beat, and smelt, and shape, and stamp, and superscribe the
promises, and then to issue the promises to pass current in the market of
salvation like so many shekels, and pounds, and pence, and farthings, and
mites, as the case may be.  And it was just these royal coins, imaged and
superscribed so richly and so beautifully, that Clip-Promise so
mutilated, abused, and debased, till for doing so he was hanged by the
neck till he was dead.

1.  The very house of Israel herself, the very Mint-house, Tower Hill,
and Lombard Street of Israel herself, was full of false coiners and
clippers of the promises; as full as ever England was at her very worst.
Israel clipped her Messianic promises and lived upon the clippings
instead of upon the coin.  Her coming Christ, and His salvation already
begun, were the true spiritual currency of Old Testament times; while
round that central Image of her great promise there ran an outside rim of
lesser promises that all took their true and their only value from Him
whose image and superscription stood within.  But those besotted and
infatuated men of Israel, instead of entering into and living by the
great spiritual promises given to them in their Messiah, made lands, and
houses, and meat, and drink, all the Messiah they cared for.  Matthew
Henry says that when we go to the merchant to buy goods, he gives us the
paper and the pack-thread to the bargain.  Well, those children and fools
in Israel actually threw away the goods and hoarded and boasted over the
paper and the pack-thread.  Our old Scottish lawyers have made us
familiar with the distinction in the church between _spiritualia_ and
_temporalia_.  Well, the Jews let the _spiritualia_ go to those who cared
to take such things, while they held fast to the _temporalia_.  And all
that went on till His disciples had the effrontery to clip and coin under
our Lord's very eyes, and even to ask Him to hold the coin while they
sharpened their shears.  'O faithless and perverse generation!  How long
shall I be with you?  How long shall I suffer you?  Have I been so long
with you, and yet hast thou not known Me, Philip?  O fools, and slow of
heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken!  And beginning at
Moses and all the prophets He expounded to them in all the Scriptures the
things concerning Himself.'

2.  But those who live in glass houses must take care not to throw
stones.  And thus the greatest fool in Israel is safe from you and me.
For, like them, and just as if we had never read one word about them, we
bend our hearts and our children's hearts to things seen and temporal,
and then, after things seen and temporal have all cast us off, we begin
to ask if there is any solace or sweetness for a cast-off heart in things
unseen and eternal.  There are great gaps clipt out of our Bibles that
not God Himself can ever print or paste in again.  Look and see if half
the Book of Proverbs, for instance, with all its noble promises to a
godly youth, is not clipt clean out of your dismembered Bible.  That fine
leaf also, 'My son, give Me thine heart,' is clean gone out of the twenty-
third chapter of the Proverbs years and years ago.  As is the best part
of the noble Book of Daniel, and almost the whole of Second Timothy.
'Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and meat and
drink, and wife and child shall be added unto you.'  Your suicidal shears
have cut that golden promise for ever out of your Sermon on the Mount.  So
much so that if any or all of these temporal mercies ever come to you,
they will come of pure and undeserved mercy, for the time has long passed
when you could plead any promise for them.  Still, there are two most
excellent uses left to which you can even yet put your mangled and
dismembered Bible.  You can make a splendid use of its gaps and of its
gashes, and of those waste places where great promises at one time stood.
You can make a grand use even of those gaps if you will descend into them
and draw out of them humiliation and repentance, compunction, contrition,
and resignation.  And this use also: When you are moved to take some man
who is still young into your confidence, ask him to let you see his Bible
and then let him see yours, and point out to him the rents and wounds and
wilderness places in yours.  And thus, by these two uses of a clipped-up
and half-empty Bible, you may make gains that shall yet set you above
those whose Bibles of promises are still as fresh as when they came from
God's own hand.  And Samson said, I will now put forth a riddle unto you:
Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness.

3.  'Go out,' said the Lord of Mansoul, 'and apprehend Clip-Promise and
bring him before me.'  And they did so.  'Go down to Edinburgh to-night,
and go to the door of such and such a church, and, as he comes out arrest
Clip-the-Commandments, for he has heard My word all this day again but
will not do it.'  Where would you be by midnight if God rose up in anger
and swore at this moment that your disobedient time should be no longer?
You would be speechless before such a charge, for the shears are in your
pocket at this moment with which you have clipped to pieces this Sabbath-
day: shears red with the blood of the Fourth Commandment.  For, when did
you rise off your bed this resurrection morning?  And what did you do
when you did rise?  What has your reading and your conversation been this
whole Lord's day?  How full your heart would have been of faith and love
and holiness by this time of night had you not despised the Lord of the
Sabbath, and cast all His commandments and opportunities to you behind
your back?  What private exercise have you had all day with your Father
who sees in secret?  How often have you been on your knees, and where,
and how long, and for what, and for whom?  What work of mercy have you
done to-day, or determined to do to-morrow?  And so with all the divine
commandments: Mosaic and Christian, legal and evangelical.  Such as: A
tenth of all I have given to thee; a covenant with a wandering eye; a
mouth once speaking evil, is it now well watched? not one vessel only,
but all the vessels of thy body sanctified till every thought and
imagination is well under the obedience of Christ.  Lest His anger for
all that begin to burn to-night, make your bed with Eli and Samuel in His
sanctuary to-night, lest the avenger of the blood of the commandments
leap out on you in your sleep!

4.  The Old Serpent took with him the great shears of hell, and clipped
'Thou shalt surely die' out of the second chapter of Genesis.  And the
same enemy of mankind will clip all the terror of the Lord out of your
heart to-night again, if he can.  And he will do it in this way, if he
can.  He will have some one at the church door ready and waiting for you.
As soon as the blessing is pronounced, some one will take you by the arm
and will entertain you with the talk you love, or that you once loved,
till you will be ashamed to confess that there is any terror or turning
to God in your heart.  No!  Thou shalt not surely die, says the serpent
still.  Why, hast thou not trampled Sabbaths and sermons past counting
under thy feet?  What commandment, laid on body or soul, hast thou not
broken, and thou art still adding drunkenness to thirst, and God doth not
know!  'The woman said unto the serpent, We may not eat of it, neither
may we touch it, lest we die.  And the serpent said unto the woman, Ye
shall not surely die.'

5.  You must all have heard of Clito, who used to say that he desired no
more time for rising and dressing and saying his prayers than about a
quarter of an hour.  Well, that was clipping the thing pretty close,
wasn't it?  At the same time it must be admitted that a good deal of
prayer may be got through in a quarter of an hour if you do not lose any
moment of it.  Especially in the first quarter of the day, if you are
expeditious enough to begin to pray before you even begin to dress.  And
prayer is really a very strange experience.  There are things about
prayer that no man has yet fully found out or told to any.  For one
thing, once well began it grows upon a man in a most extraordinary and
unheard-of way.  This same Clito for instance, some time after we find
him at his prayers before his eyes are open; and then he keeps all
morning making his bath, his soap, his towels, his brushes, and his
clothes all one long artifice of prayer.  And that till there is not a
single piece of his dressing-room furniture that is not ready to swear at
the last day that its master long before he died had become a man full of
secret prayer.  There is a fountain filled with blood! he exclaims, as he
throws himself into his bath; and Jeremiah second and twenty-second he
uses regularly to repeat to himself half a dozen times a day as he washes
the smoke and dust of the city off his hands and face.  And then
Revelation third and eighteenth till his toilet is completed.  Nay, this
same Clito has come to be such a devotee to that he had at one time been
so expeditious with, that I have seen him forget himself on the street
and think that his door was shut.  But there is really no use telling you
all that about Clito.  For, till you try closet-prayer for yourself, all
that God or man can say to you on that subject will be water spilt on the
ground.  All we can say is, Try it.  Begin it.  Some desperate day try
it.  Stop when you are on the way to the pond and try it.  Stop when you
are fastening up the rope and try it.  When the poison is moving in the
cup, stop, shut your door first.  Try God first.  See if He is still
waiting.  And, always after, when the steel shears of a too early, too
crowded, and far too exacting day are clipping you out of all time for
prayer, then what should you do?  What do you do when you simply cannot
get your proper fresh air and exercise everyday?  Do you not fall back on
the plasticity and pliability of nature and take your air and exercise in
large parcels?  You take a ride into the country two or three times a
week.  Or, two afternoons a week you have ten miles alone if you cannot
get a godly friend.  And then two or three times a year, if you can
afford it, you climb an Alp or a Grampian every day for a week or a
month; and, so gracious and so adaptable is human nature, that, what
others get daily, you get weekly, or monthly, or quarterly, or yearly.
And, though a soul is not to be too much presumed upon, Clito came to
tell his friends that his soul could on occasion take in prayer and
praise enough for a week in a single morning or afternoon, and, almost,
for a whole year in a good holiday.  As Christ Himself did when He said:
Come away apart into a desert place and rest a while; for there are so
many people coming and going here that we have no time so much as to eat.

6.  But I see I must clip off my last point with you, which was to tell
you what you already know only too well, and that is, what terrible
shears a bad conscience is armed with, and what havoc she makes at all
ages of a poor sinner's Bible.  But you can spare that head.  You can
preach on that text to yourselves far better than all your ministers.
Only, take home with you these two lines I have clipped out of Fraser of
Brea for you.  Nothing in man, he says to us, is to be a ground of
despair, since the whole ground of all our hope is in Christ alone.
Christ's relation is always to men as they are sinners and not as they
are righteous.  I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.  'Tis with sinners, then, Christ has to do.  Nothing damns
but unbelief; and unbelief is just holding back from pressing God with
this promise, that Christ came to save sinners.  This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptation, and it is still to be found
standing in the most clipped-up Bible, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.




CHAPTER XI--STIFF MR. LOTH-TO-STOOP


   'Thy neck is an iron sinew.'--_Jehovah to the house of Jacob_.

   'King Zedekiah humbled not himself, but stiffened his neck.'--_The
   Chronicles_.

   'He humbled himself.'--_Paul on our Lord_.

All John Bunyan's Characters, Situations, and Episodes are collected into
this house to-night.  Obstinate and Pliable are here; Passion and
Patience; Simple, Sloth, and Presumption; Madame Bubble and Mr. Worldly-
wiseman; Talkative and By-ends; Deaf Mr. Prejudice is here also, and,
sitting close beside him, stiff Mr. Loth-to-stoop; while good old Mr. Wet-
eyes and young Captain Self-denial are not wholly wanting.  It gives this
house an immense and an ever-green interest to me to see character after
character coming trooping in, Sabbath evening after Sabbath evening, each
man to see himself and his neighbour in John Bunyan's so truthful and so
fearless glass.  But it stabs me to the heart with a mortal stab to see
how few of us out of this weekly congregation are any better men after
all we come to see and to hear.  At the same time, such a constant
dropping will surely in time wear away the hardest rock.  Let that so
stiff old man, then, stiff old Mr. Loth-to-stoop, came forward and behold
his natural face in John Bunyan's glass again to-night.  'Lord, is it I?'
was a very good question, though put by a very bad man.  Let us, one and
all, then, put the traitor's question to ourselves to-night.  Am I stiff
old Loth-to-stoop?--let every man in this house say to himself all
through this service, and then at home when reviewing the day, and then
all to-morrow when to stoop will be so loathsome and so impossible to us
all.

1.  To begin, then, at the very bottom of this whole matter, take stiff
old Loth-to-stoop as a guilty sinner in the sight of God.  Let us take
this stiff old man in this dreadful character to begin with, because it
is in this deepest and most dreadful aspect of his nature and his
character that he is introduced to us in the _Holy War_.  And I shall
stand aside and let John Bunyan himself describe Loth-to-stoop in the
matter of his justification before God.  'That is a great stoop for a
sinner to have to take,' says our apostolic author in another classical
place, 'a too great stoop to have to suffer the total loss of all his own
righteousness, and, actually, to have to look to another for absolutely
everything of that kind.  That is no easy matter for any man to do.  I
assure you it stretches every vein in his heart before he will be brought
to yield to that.  What! for a man to deny, reject, abhor, and throw away
all his prayers, tears, alms, keeping of Sabbaths, hearing, reading, and
all the rest, and to admit both himself and them to be abominable and
accursed, and to be willing in the very midst of his sins to throw
himself wholly upon the righteousness and obedience of another man!  I
say to do that in deed and in truth is the biggest piece of the cross,
and therefore it is that Paul calls it a suffering.  "I have suffered the
loss of all things that I might win Christ, and be found in Him, not
having mine own righteousness."'  That is John Bunyan's characteristic
comment on stiff old Loth-to-stoop as a guilty sinner, with the offer of
a full forgiveness set before him.

2.  And then our so truthful and so fertile author goes on to give us
Loth-to-stoop as a half-saved sinner; a sinner, that is, trying to make
his own terms with God about his full salvation.  Through three most
powerful pages we see stiff old Loth-to-stoop engaged in beating down
God's unalterable terms of salvation, and in bidding for his full
salvation upon his own reduced and easy terms.  It was the tremendous
stoop of the Son of God from the throne of God to the cradle and the
carpenter's shop; and then, as if that were not enough, it was that other
tremendous stoop of His down to the Garden and the Cross,--it was these
two so tremendous stoops of Jesus Christ that made stiff old
Loth-to-stoop's salvation even possible.  But, with all that, his true
salvation was not possible without stoop after stoop of his own; stoop
after stoop which, if not so tremendous as those of Christ, were yet
tremendous enough, and too tremendous, for him.  Old Loth-to-stoop
carries on a long and a bold debate with Emmanuel in order to lessen the
stoop that Emmanuel demands of him; and your own life and mine, my
brethren, at their deepest and at their closest to our own heart, are
really at bottom, like Loth-to-stoop's life, one long roup of salvation,
in which God tries to get us up to His terms and in which we try to get
Him down to our terms.  His terms are, that we shall sell absolutely all
that we have for the salvation of our souls; and our terms are, salvation
or no salvation, to keep all that we have and to seek every day for more.
God absolutely demands that we shall stoop to the very dust every day,
till we become the poorest, the meanest, the most despicable, and the
most hopeless of men; whereas we meet that divine demand with the proud
reply--Is Thy servant a dog?  It was with this offended mind that stiff
old Loth-to-stoop at last left off from Emmanuel's presence; he would die
rather than come down to such degrading terms.  And as Loth-to-stoop went
away, Emmanuel looked after him, well remembering the terrible night when
He Himself was, not indeed like Loth-to-stoop, nor near like him, but
when His own last stoop was so deep that it made Him cry out, Father,
save Me from this hour! and again, If it be possible let this so
tremendous stoop pass from Me.  For a moment Emmanuel Himself was loth to
stoop, but only for a moment.  For He soon rose from off His face in a
bath of blood, saying, Not My will, but Thine be done!  When Thomas A
Kempis is negotiating with the Loth-to-stoops of his unevangelical day,
we hear him saying to them things like this: 'Jesus Christ was despised
of men, forsaken of His friends and lovers, and in the midst of slanders.
He was willing, under His Father's will, to suffer and to be despised,
and darest thou to complain of any man's usage of thee?  Christ, thy
Master, had enemies and back-biters, and dost thou expect to have all men
to be thy friends and benefactors?  Whence shall thy patience attain her
promised crown if no adversity befall thee?  Suffer thou with Jesus
Christ, and for His sake, if thou wouldst reign with Him.  Set thyself,
therefore, to bear manfully the cross of thy Lord, who, out of love, was
crucified for thee.  Know for certain that thou must lead a daily dying
life.  And the more that thou diest to thyself all that the more shalt
thou live unto God.'  With many such words as these did Thomas teach the
saints of his day to stoop to their daily cross; a daily cross then,
which has now been for long to him and to them an everlasting crown.

3.  And speaking of A Kempis, and having lately read some of his most
apposite chapters, such as that on the Holy Fathers and that on Obedience
and Subjection, leads me on to look at Loth-to-stoop when he enters the
sacred ministry, as he sometimes does.  When a half-converted,
half-subdued, half-saved sinner gets himself called to the sacred
ministry his office will either greatly hasten on his salvation, or else
it will greatly hinder and endanger it.  He will either stoop down every
day to deeper and ever deeper depths of humility, or he will tower up in
pride of office and in pride of heart past all hope of humility, and thus
of salvation.  The holy ministry is a great nursing-house of pride as we
see in a long line of popes, and prelates, and priests, and other lords
over God's heritage.  And our own Presbyterian polity, while it hands
down to us the simplicity, the unity, the brotherhood, and the humility
of the apostolic age, at the same time leaves plenty of temptation and
plenty of opportunity for the pride of the human heart.  Our preaching
and pastoral office, when it is aright laid to our hearts, will always
make us the meekest and the humblest of men, even when we carry the most
magnificent of messages.  But when our own hearts are not right the very
magnificence of our message, and the very authority of our Master, become
all so many subtle temptations to pride, pique, self-importance, and
lothness-to-stoop.  With so much still to learn, how slow we ministers
are to stoop to learn!  How still we stand, and even go back, when all
other men are going forward!  How few of us have made the noble
resolution of Jonathan Edwards: 'Resolved,' he wrote, 'that, as old men
have seldom any advantage of new discoveries because these are beside a
way of thinking they have been long used to: resolved, therefore, if ever
I live to years, that I shall be impartial to hear the reasons of all
pretended discoveries, and to receive them, if rational how long soever I
have been used to another way of thinking.'  Let all ministers, then,
young and old, resolve to stoop with Jonathan Edwards, who shines, in his
life and in his works, like the cherubim with knowledge, and burns like
the seraphim with love.

And then, when, not having so resolved, our thin vein of youthful
knowledge and experience has been worked to the rock; when grey hairs are
here and there upon us, how slow we are to stoop to that!  How unwilling
we are to let it light on our hearts that our time is past; that we are
no longer able to understand, or interest, or attract the young; and,
besides, that that is not all their blame, no, nor ours either, but
simply the order and method of Divine Providence.  How slow we are to see
that Divine Providence has other men standing ready to take up our work
if we would only humbly lay it down;--how loth we are to stoop to see all
that!  How unwilling we are to make up our minds, we old and ageing
ministers, and to humble our hearts to accept an assistant or to submit
to a colleague to stand alongside of us in our unaccomplished work!

4.  In public life also, as we call it, what disasters to the state, to
the services, and to society, are constantly caused by this same Loth-to-
stoop!  When he holds any public office; when he becomes the leader of a
party; when he is promoted to be an adviser of the Crown; when he is put
at the head of a fleet of ships, or of an army of men, what untold evils
does Loth-to-stoop bring both on himself and on the nation!  An old
statesman will have committed himself to some line of legislation or of
administration; a great captain will have committed himself to some
manoeuvre of a squadron or of a division, or to some plan of battle, and
some subordinate will have discovered the error his leader has made, and
will be bold to point it out to him.  But stiff old Loth-to-stoop has
taken his line and has passed his word.  His honour, as he holds it, is
committed to this announced line of action; and, if the Crown itself
should perish before his policy, he will not stoop to change it.  How
often you see that in great affairs as well as in small.  How seldom you
see a public man openly confessing that he has hitherto all along been
wrong, and that he has at last and by others been set right.  Not once in
a generation.  But even that once redeems public life; it ennobles public
life; and it saves the nation and the sovereign who possess such a true
patriot.  Consistency and courage, independence and dignity, are high-
sounding words; but openness of mind, teachableness, diffidence, and
humility always go with true nobility as well as with ultimate success
and lasting honour.




CHAPTER XII--THAT VARLET ILL-PAUSE, THE DEVIL'S ORATOR


   'I made haste and delayed not.'--_David_.

John Bunyan shall himself introduce, describe, and characterise this
varlet, this devil's ally and accomplice, this ancient enemy of Mansoul,
whose name is Ill-pause.  Well, this same Ill-pause, says our author, was
the orator of Diabolus on all difficult occasions, nor took Diabolus any
other one with him on difficult occasions, but just Ill-pause alone.  And
always when Diabolus had any special plot a-foot against Mansoul, and
when the thing went as Diabolus would have it go, then would Ill-pause
stand up, for he was Diabolus his orator.  When Mansoul was under siege
of Emmanuel his four noble captains sent a message to the men of the town
that if they would only throw Ill-pause over the wall to them, that they
might reward him according to his works, then they would hold a parley
with the city; but if this varlet was to be let live in the city, then,
why, the city must see to the consequences.  At which Diabolus, who was
there present, was loth to lose his orator, because, had the four
captains once laid their fingers on Ill-pause, be sure his master had
lost his orator.  And, then, in the last assault, we read that Ill-pause,
the orator that came along with Diabolus, he also received a grievous
wound in the head, some say that his brain-pan was cracked.  This, at any
rate, I have taken notice of, that never after this was he able to do
that mischief to Mansoul as he had done in times past.  And then there
was also at Eye-gate that Ill-pause of whom you have heard before.  The
same was he that was orator to Diabolus.  He did much mischief to the
town of Mansoul, till at last he fell by the hand of the Captain Good-
hope.

1.  Well, to begin with, this Ill-pause was a filthy Diabolonian varlet;
a treacherous and a villainous old varlet, the author of the _Holy War_
calls him.  Now, what is a varlet?  Well, a varlet is just a broken-down
old valet.  A varlet is a valet who has come down, and down, and down,
and down again in the world, till, from once having been the servant and
the trusty friend of the very best of masters, he has come to be the ally
and accomplice of the very worst of masters.  His first name, the name of
his first office, still sticks to him, indeed; but, like himself, and
with himself, his name has become depraved and corrupted till you would
not know it.  A varlet, then, is just short and sharp for a scoundrel who
is ready for anything; and the worse the thing is the more ready he is
for it.  There are riff-raff and refuse always about who are ready to
volunteer for any filibustering expedition; and that full as much for the
sheer devilry of the enterprise as for any real profit it is to be to
themselves.  Wherever mischief is to be done, there your true varlet is
sure to turn up.  Well, just such a land-shark was this Ill-pause, who
was such an ally and accomplice to Diabolus that he had need for no
other.  What possible certificate in evil could exceed this--that the
devil took not any with him when he went out on his worst errand but this
same Ill-pause, who was his orator on all his most difficult occasions?

2.  Ill-pause was a varlet, then, and he was also an orator.  Now, an
orator, as you know, is a great speaker.  An orator is a man who has the
excellent and influential gift of public speech.  And on great occasions
in public life when people are to be instructed, and impressed, and
moved, and won over, then the great orator sets up his platform.
Quintilian teaches us in his _Institutes_ that it is only a good man who
can be a really great orator.  What would that fine writer have said had
he lived to read the _Holy War_, and seen the most successful of all
orators that ever opened a mouth, and who was all the time a diabolical
old varlet?  What would the author of _The Education of an Orator_ have
said to that?  Diabolus did not on every occasion bring up his great
orator Ill-pause.  He did not always come up himself, and he did not
always send up Ill-pause.  It was only on difficult occasions that both
Diabolus and his orator also came up.  You do not hear your great
preachers every Sabbath.  They would not long remain great preachers, and
you would soon cease to pay any attention to them, if they were always in
the pulpit.  Neither do you have your great orators at every street
corner.  Their masters only build theatres for them when some great
occasion arises in the land, and when the best wisdom must straightway be
spoken to the people and in the best way.  Then you bring up Quintilian's
orator if you have him at your call.  As Diabolus has done from time to
time with his great and almost always successful orator Ill-pause.  On
difficult occasions he came himself on the scene and Ill-pause with him.
On such difficult occasions as in the Garden of Eden; as when Noah was
told to make haste and build an ark; as also when Abraham was told to
make haste and leave his father's house; when Jacob was bid remember and
pay the vow he had made when his trouble was upon him; as also when
Joseph had to flee for what was better than life; and on that memorable
occasion when David sent Joab out against Rabbah, but David tarried still
at Jerusalem.  On all these essential, first-class, and difficult
occasions the old serpent brought up Ill-pause.  As also when our Lord
was in the wilderness; when He set His face to go up to Jerusalem; when
He saw certain Greeks among them that came up to the passover; as also
again and again in the Garden.  As also on crucial occasions in your own
life.  As when you had been told not to eat, not to touch, and not even
to look at the forbidden fruit, then Ill-pause, the devil's orator, came
to you and said that it was a tree to be desired.  And, you shall not
surely die.  As also when you were moved to terror and to tears under a
Sabbath, or under a sermon, or at some death-bed, or on your own sick-
bed--Ill-pause got you to put off till a more convenient season your
admitted need of repentance and reformation and peace with God.  On such
difficult occasions as these the devil took Ill-pause to help him with
you, and the result, from the devil's point of view, has justified his
confidence in his orator.  When Ill-pause gets his new honours paid him
in hell; when there is a new joy in hell over another sinner that has not
yet repented, your name will be heard sounding among the infernal cheers.
Just think of your baptismal name and your pet name at home giving them
joy to-night at their supper in hell!  And yet one would not at first
sight think that such triumphs and such toasts, such medals, and clasps,
and garters were to be won on earth or in hell just by saying such simple-
sounding and such commonplace things as those are for which Ill-pause
receives his decorations.  'Take time,' he says.  'Yes,' he admits, 'but
there is no such hurry; to-morrow will do; next year will do; after you
are old will do quite as well.  The darkness shall cover you, and your
sin will not find you out.  Christ died for sin, and it is a faithful
saying that His blood will cleanse you later on from all this sin.'
Everyday and well-known words, indeed, but a true orator is seen in
nothing more than in this, that he can take up what everybody knows and
says, and put it so as to carry everybody captive.  One of Quintilian's
own orators has said that a great speaker only gives back to his hearers
in flood what they have already given to him in vapour.

3.  'I was always pleased,' says Calvin, 'with that saying of Chrysostom,
"The foundation of our philosophy is humility"; and yet more pleased with
that of Augustine: "As," says he, "the rhetorician being asked, What was
the first thing in the rules of eloquence? he answered, Pronunciation;
what was the second? Pronunciation; what was the third? and still he
answered, Pronunciation.  So if you would ask me concerning the precepts
of the Christian religion, I would answer, firstly, secondly, thirdly,
and for ever, Humility."'  And when Ill-pause opened his elocutionary
school for the young orators of hell, he is reported to have said this to
them in his opening address, 'There are only three things in my school,'
he said; 'three rules, and no more to be called rules.  The first is
Delay, the second is Delay, and the third is Delay.  Study the art of
delay, my sons; make all your studies to tell on how to make the fools
delay.  Only get those to whom your master sends you to delay, and you
will not need to envy me my laurels; you will soon have a shining crown
of your own.  Get the father to delay teaching his little boy how to
pray.  Get him on any pretext you can invent to put off speaking in
private to his son about his soul.  Get him to delegate all that to the
minister.  And then by hook or by crook get that son as he grows up to
put off the Lord's Supper.  And after that you will easily get him to put
off purity and prayer till he is a married man and at the head of a
house.  Only get the idea of a more convenient season well into their
heads, and their game is up, and your spurs are won.  Take their arm in
yours, as I used to do, at their church door, if you are posted there,
and say to them as they come out that to-morrow will be time enough to
give what they had thought of giving while they were still in their pew
and the minister or missionary was still in the pulpit.  Only, as you
value your master's praises and the applause of all this place, keep
them, at any cost, from striking while the iron is hot.  Let them fill
their hearts, and their mouths too, if it gives them any comfort, with
the best intentions; only, my scholars, remember that the beginning and
middle and end of your office is by hook or by crook to secure delay.'
And a great crop of young orators sprang up ready for their work under
that teaching and out of the persuasionary school of Ill-pause.  In fine,
Mansoul desired some time in which to prepare its answer.'

There are many men among ourselves who have been bedevilled out of their
best life, out of the salvation of their souls, and out of all that
constitutes and accompanies salvation now for many years.  And still
their sin-deceived hearts are saying to them to-night, Take time!  For
many years, every new year, every birthday, and, for a long time, every
Communion-day, they were just about to be done with their besetting sin;
and now all the years lie behind them, one long downward road all paved,
down to this Sabbath night, with the best intentions.  And, still, as if
that were not enough, that same varlet is squat at their ear.  Well, my
very miserable brother, you have long talked about the end of an old year
and the beginning of a new year as being your set time for repentance and
for reformation.  Let all the weight of those so many remorseful years
fall on your heart at the close of this year, and at last compel you to
take the step that should have been taken, oh! so many unhappy years ago!
Go straight home then, to-night, shut your door, and, after so many
desecrated Sabbath nights, God will still meet you in your secret
chamber.  As soon as you shut your door God will be with you, and you
will be with God.  With GOD!  Think of it, my brother, and the thing is
done.  With GOD!  And then tell Him all.  And if any one knocks at your
door, say that there is Some One with you to-night, and that you cannot
come down.  And continue till you have told it all to God.  He knows it
all already; but that is one of Ill-pause's sophistries still in your
heart.  Tell your Father it all.  Tell Him how many years it is.  Tell
Him all that you so well remember over all those wild, miserable, mad,
remorseful years.  Tell Him that you have not had one really happy, one
really satisfied day all those years, and tell Him that you have spent
all, and are now no longer a young man; youth and health and self-respect
and self-command are all gone, till you are a shipwreck rather than a
man.  And tell Him that if He will take you back that you are to-night at
His feet.

4.  'We seldom overcome any one vice perfectly,' complains A Kempis.  And,
again, 'If only every new year we would root out but one vice.'  Well,
now, what do you say to that, my true and very brethren?  What do you say
to that?  Here we are, by God's grace and long-suffering to usward, near
the end of another year, another vicious year; and why have we been borne
with through so many vicious years but that we should now cease from vice
and begin to learn virtue?  Why are we here over Ill-pause this Sabbath
night?  Why, but that we should shake off that varlet liar before another
new year.  That is the whole reason why we have been spared to see this
Sabbath night.  God decreed it for us that we should have this text and
this discourse here to-night, and that is the reason why you and I have
been so unaccountably spared so long.  Let us select one vice for the axe
then to-night, and give God in heaven the satisfaction of seeing that His
long-suffering with us has not been wholly in vain.  Let us lay the axe
at one vice from this night.  And what one from among so many shall it
be?  What is the mockery of preaching if a preacher does not practise?
And, accordingly, I have selected one vice out of my thicket for next
year.  Will you do the same?  The secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him.  Just make your selection and keep it to yourself, at least
till you are able this time next year to say to us--Come, all ye that
fear God, and I will tell you what He hath done for my soul.  Yes, come
on, and from this day all your days on earth, and all the days of
eternity, you will thank God for John Bunyan and his _Holy War_ and his
Ill-pause.  Make your selection, then, for your new axe.  Attack some one
sin at this so auspicious season.  Swear before God, and unknown to all
men--swear sure death, and that without any more delay, to that selected
sin.  Never once, all your days, do that sin again.  Determine never once
to do it again.  Determine that by prayer, by secret, and at the same
time outspoken, prayer on your knees.  Determine it by faith in the
cleansing blood and renewing spirit of Jesus Christ.  Determine it by
fear of instant death, and by sure hope of everlasting life.  Determine
it by reasons, and motives, and arguments, and encouragements known to no-
one but yourself, and to be suspected by no human being.  Name the doomed
sin.  Denounce it.  Execrate it.  Execute it.  Draw a line across your
short and uncertain life, and say to that besetting and presumptuous sin,
Hitherto, and no further!  Do not say you cannot do it.  You can if you
only will.  You can if you only choose.  And smiting down that one sin
will loosen and shake down the whole evil fabric of sin.  Breaking but
that one link will break the whole of Satan's snare and evil fetter.  Here
is A Kempis's forest of vices out of which he hewed down one every year.
Restless lust, outward senses, empty phantoms, always longing to get,
always sparing to give, careless as to talk, unwilling to sit silent,
eager for food, wakeful for news, weary of a good book, quick to anger,
easy of offence at my neighbour, and too ready to judge him, too merry
over prosperity, and too gloomy, fretful, and peevish in adversity; so
often making good rules for my future life, and coming so little speed
with them all, and so on.  And, in facing even such a terrible thicket as
that, let not even an old man absolutely despair.  At forty, at sixty, at
threescore and ten, let not an old penitent despair.  Only take axe in
hand and see if the sun does not stand still upon Gibeon, and the moon in
the valley of Ajalon till you have avenged yourself on your enemies.  And
always when you stop to wipe your brow, and to whet the edge of your axe,
and to wet your lips with water, keep on saying things like those of
another great sinner deep in his thicket of vice, say this: O God, he
said, Thou hast not cut off as a weaver my life, nor from day even to
night hast Thou made an end of me.  But Thou hast vouchsafed to me life
and breath even to this hour from childhood, youth, and hitherto even
unto old age.  He holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to
slide, rescuing me from perils, sicknesses, poverty, bondage, public
shame, evil chances; keeping me from perishing in my sins, and waiting
patiently for my full conversion.  Glory be to Thee, O Lord, glory to
Thee, for Thine incomprehensible and unimaginable goodness toward me of
all sinners far and away the most unworthy.  The voices and the concert
of voices of angels and men be to Thee; the concert of all thy saints in
heaven and of all Thy creatures in heaven and on earth; and of me,
beneath their feet an unworthy and wretched sinner, Thy abject creature;
my praise also, now, in this day and hour, and every day till my last
breath, and till the end of this world, and then to all eternity, where
they cease not saying, To Him who loved us, Amen!




CHAPTER XIII--MR. PENNY-WISE-AND-POUND-FOOLISH, AND MR.
GET-I'-THE-HUNDRED-AND-LOSE-I'-THE-SHIRE


   'For, what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
   and lose his own soul?'--_Our Lord_.

This whole world is the penny, and our own souls are the pound.  This
whole world is the hundred, while heaven itself is the shire.  And the
question this evening is, Are we wise in the penny and foolish in the
pound?  And, are we getting in the hundred and losing in the shire?

1.  Well, then, to begin at the beginning, we are already begun to be
penny-wise and pound-foolish with our children when we are so particular
with them about their saying their little prayers night and morning,
while all the time we are so inattentive and so indolent to explain to
them how they are to pray, what they are to pray for, and how they are to
wait and how long they are to wait for the things they pray for.  Then,
again, we are penny-wise and pound-foolish with our children when we
train them up into all the proprieties and etiquettes of family and
social life, and at the same time pay so little attention to their inward
life of opening thought and quickening desire and awakening passion.  When
we are so eager also for our children to be great with great people,
without much regard to the moral and religious character of those great
people, then again we are like a man who may be wise for a penny, but is
certainly a fool for a pound.  When we prefer the gay and the fashionable
world to the intellectual, the religious, and the philanthropical world
for our children, then we lose both the penny and the pound as well.
Almost as much as we do when we accept the penny of wealth and station
and so-called connection for a son or a daughter, in room of the pound of
character, and intelligence, and personal religion.

Then, again, even in our own religious life we are ourselves often and
notoriously wise in the penny and foolish in the pound.  As, for
instance, when we are so scrupulous and so conscientious about forms and
ceremonies, about times and places, and so on.  In short, the whole
ritual that has risen up around spiritual religion in all our churches,
from that of the Pope himself out to that of George Fox--it is all the
penny rather than the pound.  This rite and that ceremony; this habit and
that tradition; this ancient and long-established usage, as well as that
new departure and that threatened innovation;--it is all, at its best,
always the penny and never the pound.  Satan busied me about the lesser
matters of religion, says James Fraser of Brea, and made me neglect the
more substantial points.  He made me tithe to God my mint, and my anise
and my cummin, and many other of my herbs, to my all but complete neglect
of justice and mercy and faith and love.  Whether there are any of the
things that Brea would call mint and anise and cummin that are taking up
too much of the time of our controversially-minded men in all our
churches, highland and lowland, to-day is a matter for humbling thought.
Labour, my brethren, for yourselves, at any rate, to get yourselves into
that sane and sober habit of mind that instantly and instinctively puts
all mint and all cummin of all kinds into the second place, and all the
weightier matters, both of law and of gospel, into the first place.  I
wasted myself on too nice points, laments Brea in his deep, honest, clear-
eyed autobiography.  I did not proportion my religious things aright.  The
laird of Brea does not say in as many words that he was wise in the penny
and foolish in the pound, but that is exactly what he means.

Then, again, the narrowness, the partiality, the sickliness, and the
squeamishness of our consciences,--all that makes us to be too often
penny-wise and pound-foolish in our religious life.  A well-instructed,
thoroughly wise, and well-balanced conscience is an immense blessing to
that man who has purchased such a conscience for himself.  There is an
immense and a criminal waste of conscience that goes on among some of our
best Christian people through the want of light and space, room, and
breadth, and balance in their consciences.  We are all pestered with
people every day who are full of all manner of childish scrupulosity and
sickly squeamishness in their ill-nourished, ill-exercised consciences.
As long as a man's conscience is ignorant and weak and sickly it will, it
must, spend and waste itself on the pennyworths of religion and' morals
instead of the pounds.  It will occupy and torture itself with points and
punctilios, jots and tittles, to the all but total oblivion, and to the
all but complete neglect, of the substance and the essence of the
Christian mind, the Christian heart, and the Christian character.  The
washing of hands, of cups, and of pots, was all the conscience that
multitudes had in our Lord's day; and multitudes in our day scatter and
waste their consciences on the same things.  A good man, an otherwise
good and admirable man, will absolutely ruin and destroy his conscience
by points and scruples and traditions of men as fatally as another will
by a life of debauchery.  Some old and decayed ecclesiastical rubric;
some absolutely indifferent form in public worship; some small
casuistical question about a creed or a catechism; some too nice point of
confessional interpretation; the mint and anise and cummin of such
matters will fill and inflame and poison a man's mind and heart and
conscience for months and for years, to the total destruction of all that
for which churches and creeds exist; to the total suspense, if not the
total and lasting destruction, of sobriety of mind, balance and breadth
of judgment, humility, charity, and a hidden and a holy life.  The penny
of a perverted, partial, and fanaticised conscience has swallowed up the
pound of instruction, and truth, and justice, and brotherly love.

2.  'Nor is the man with the long name at all inferior to the other,'
said Lucifer, in laying his infernal plot against the peace and
prosperity of Mansoul.  Now, the man with the long name was just Mr. Get-
i'-the-hundred-and-lose-i'-the-shire.  A hundred in the old county
geography of England was a political subdivision of a shire, in which
five score freemen lived with their freeborn families.  A county or a
shire was described and enumerated by the poll-sheriff of that day as
containing so many enfranchised hundreds; and the total number of
hundreds made up the political unity of the shire.  To this day we still
hear from time to time of the 'Chiltern Hundreds,' which is a division of
Buckinghamshire that belongs, along with its political franchise, to the
Crown, and which is utilised for Crown purposes at certain political
emergencies.  This proverb, then, to get i' the hundred and lose i' the
shire, is now quite plain to us.  You might canvass so as to get a
hundred, several hundreds, many hundreds on your side, and yet you might
lose when it came to counting up the whole shire.  You might possess
yourself of a hundred or two and yet be poor compared with him who
possessed the whole shire.  And then the proverb has been preserved out
of the old political life of England, and has been moralised and
spiritualised to us in the _Holy War_.  And thus after to-night we shall
always call this shrewd proverb to mind when we are tempted to take a
part at the risk of the whole; to receive this world at the loss of the
next world; or, as our Lord has it, to gain the whole world and to lose
our own soul.  Lot's choice of Sodom and Gomorrah, and Esau's purchase of
the mess of pottage in the Old Testament; and then Judas's thirty pieces
of silver, and Ananias and Sapphira's part of the price in the New
Testament, are all so many well-known instances of getting in the hundred
and losing in the shire.  And not Esau's and Lot's only, but our own
lives also have been full up to to-day of the same fatal transaction.
This house, as our Lord again has it, this farm, this merchandise, this
shop, this office, this salary, this honour, this home--all this on the
one hand, and then our Lord Himself, His call, His cause, His Church,
with everlasting life in the other--when it is set down before us in
black and white in that way, the transaction, the proposal, the choice is
preposterous, is insane, is absolutely impossible.  But preposterous,
insane, absolutely impossible, and all, there it is, in our own lives, in
the lives of our sons and daughters, and in the lives of multitudes of
other men and other men's sons and daughters besides ours.  Every day you
will be taken in, and you will stand by and see other men taken in with
the present penny for the future pound: and with the poor pelting hundred
under your eye for the full, far-extending, and ever-enriching shire.
Lucifer is always abroad pressing on us in his malice the penny on the
spot, for the pound which he keeps out of sight; he dazzles our eyes with
the gain of the hundred till we gnash our teeth at the loss of the shire.

   'He hath in sooth good cause for endless grief,
   Who, for the love of thing that lasteth not,
   Despoils himself for ever of THAT LOVE.'

3.  'What also if we join with those two another two of ours, Mr. Sweet-
world and Mr. Present-good, namely, for they are two men full of civility
and cunning.  Let these engage in this business for us, and let Mansoul
be taken up with much business, and if possible with much pleasure, and
this is the way to get ground of them.  Let us but cumber and occupy and
amuse Mansoul sufficiently, and they will make their castle a warehouse
for goods instead of a garrison for men of war.'  This diabolical advice
was highly applauded all through hell till all the lesser devils, while
setting themselves to carry it out, gnashed their teeth with envy and
malice at Lucifer for having thought of this masterpiece and for having
had it received with such loud acclamation.  'Only get them,' so went on
that so able, so well-envied, and so well-hated devil, 'let us only get
those fribble sinners for a night at a time to forget their misery.  And
it will not cost us much to do that.  Only let us offer them in one
another's houses a supper, a dance, a pipe, a newspaper full of their own
shame, a tale full of their own folly, a silly song, and He who loved
them with an everlasting love will soon see of the travail of His soul in
them!'  Yes, my fellow-sinners, Lucifer and his infernal crew know us and
despise us and entrap us at very little trouble, till He who travailed
for us on the tree covers His face in heaven and weeps over us.  As long
as we remember our misery, all the mind, and all the malice, and all the
sleeplessness in hell cannot touch a hair of our head.  But when by any
emissary and opportunity either from earth around us or from hell beneath
us we for another night forget our misery, it is all over with us.  And
yet, to tell the truth, we never can quite forget our misery.  We are too
miserable ever to forget our misery.  In the full steam of Lucifer's best-
spread supper, amid the shouts of laughter and the clapping of hands, and
all the outward appearance of a complete forgetfulness of our misery, yet
it is not so.  It is far from being so.  Our misery is far too
deep-seated for all the devil's drugs.  Only, to give Lucifer his due, we
do sometimes, under him, so get out of touch with the true consolation
for our misery that, night after night, through cumber, through pursuit
of pleasure, through the time being taken up with these and other like
things, we do so far forget our misery as to lie down without dealing
with it; but only to have it awaken us, and take our arm as its own for
another miserable day.  Yes; though never completely successful, yet this
masterpiece of hell is sufficiently successful for Satan's subtlest
purposes; which are, not to make us forget our misery, but to make us put
it away from us at the natural and proper hour for facing it and for
dealing with it in the only proper and successful way.  But, wholly, any
night, or even partially for a few nights at a time, to forget our
misery--no, with all thy subtlety of intellect and with all thy
hell-filled heart, O Lucifer, that is to us impossible!  Forget our
misery!  O devil of devils, no!  Bless God, that can never be with us!
Our misery is too deep, too dreadful, too acute, too all-consuming ever
to be forgotten by us even for an hour.  Our misery is too terrible for
thee, with all thy overthrown intellect and all thy malice-filled heart,
ever to understand!  Didst thou for one midnight hour taste it, and so
understand it, then there would be the same hope for thee that, I bless
God, there still is for me!

Let us bend all our strength and all our wit to this, went on Lucifer, to
make their castle a warehouse instead of a garrison.  Let us set
ourselves and all our allies, he explained to the duller-witted among the
devils, to make their hearts a shop,--some of them, you know, are
shopkeepers; a bank,--some of them are bankers; a farm,--some of them are
farmers; a study,--some of them are students; a pulpit,--some of them
like to preach; a table,--some of them are gluttons; a drawing-room,--some
of them are busybodies who forget their own misery in retailing other
people's misery from house to house.  Be wise as serpents, said the old
serpent; attend, each several fallen angel of you, to his own special
charge.  Study your man.  Get to the bottom of your man.  Follow him
about; never let him out of your sight; be sure before you begin, be sure
you have the joint in his harness, the spot in his heel, the chink in his
wall full in your eye.  I do not surely need to tell you not to scatter
our snares for souls at random, he went on.  Give the minister his study
Bible, the student his classic, the merchant his ledger, the glutton his
well-dressed dish and his elect year of wine, the gossip her sweet
secret, and the flirt her fool.  Study them till they are all naked and
open to your sharp eyes.  Find out what best makes them forget even for
one night their misery and ply them with that.  If I ever see that soul I
have set thee over on his knees on account of his misery I shall fling
thee on the spot into the bottomless pit.  And if any of you shall
anywhere discover a man--and there are such men--a man who forgets his
misery through always thinking and speaking about it, only keep him in
his pulpit, and off his knees, and no man so safe for hell as he.  There
are fools, and there are double-dyed fools, and that man is the chief of
them.  Give him his fill of sin and misery; let him luxuriate himself in
sin and misery; only, keep him there, and I will not forget thy most
excellent service to me.

Make all their hearts, so Lucifer summed up, as he dismissed his
obsequious devils, make all their several hearts each a warehouse, a
shop, a farm, a pulpit, a library, a nursery, a supper-table, a chamber
of wantonness--let it be to each man just after his own heart.  Only,
keep--as you shall answer for it,--keep faith and hope and charity and
innocence and patience and especially prayerfulness out of their hearts.
And when this my counsel is fulfilled, and when the pit closes over thy
charge, I shall pay thee thy wages, and promote thee to honour.  And
before he was well done they were all at their posts.




CHAPTER XIV--THE DEVIL'S LAST CARD


   'Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light'--_Paul_.

Wodrow has an anecdote in his delightful _Analecta_ which shall introduce
us into our subject to-night.  Mr. John Menzies was a very pious and
devoted pastor; he was a learned man also, and well seen in the Popish
and in the Arminian controversies.  And to the end of his life he was
much esteemed of the people of Aberdeen as a foremost preacher of the
gospel.  And yet, 'Oh to have one more Sabbath in my pulpit!' he cried
out on his death-bed.  'What would you then do?' asked some one who sat
at his bedside.  'I would preach to my people on the tremendous
difficulty of salvation!' exclaimed the dying man.

1.  Now, the first difficulty that stands in the way of our salvation is
the stupendous mass of guilt that has accumulated upon all of us.  Our
guilt is so great that we dare not think of it.  It is too horrible to
believe that we shall ever be called to account for one in a thousand of
it.  It crushes our minds with a perfect stupor of horror, when for a
moment we try to imagine a day of judgment when we shall be judged for
all the deeds that we have done in the body.  Heart-beat after
heart-beat, breath after breath, hour after hour, day after day, year
after year, and all full of sin; all nothing but sin from our mother's
womb to our grave.  Sometimes one outstanding act of sin has quite
overwhelmed us.  But before long that awful sin fell out of sight and out
of mind.  Other sins of the same kind succeeded it.  Our sense of sin,
our sense of guilt was soon extinguished by a life of sin, till, at the
present moment the accumulated and tremendous load of our sin and guilt
is no more felt by us than we feel the tremendous load of the atmosphere.
But, all the time, does not our great guilt lie sealed down upon us?
Because we are too seared and too stupefied to feel it, is it therefore
not there?  Because we never think of it, does that prove that both God
and man have forgiven and forgotten it?  Shall the Judge of all the earth
do right in the matter of all men's guilt but ours?  Does the apostle's
warning not hold in our case?--his awful warning that we shall all stand
before the judgment-seat?  And is it only a strong figure of speech that
the books shall be opened till we shall cry to the mountains to fall on
us and to the rocks to cover us?  Oh no! the truth is, the half has not
been told us of the speechless stupefaction that shall fall on us when
the trumpet shall sound and when Alp upon Alp of aggravated guilt shall
rise up high as heaven between us and our salvation.  Difficulty is not
the name for guilt like ours.  Impossibility is the better name we should
always know it by.

2.  Another difficulty or impossibility to our salvation rises out of the
awful corruption and pollution of our hearts.  But is there any use
entering on that subject?  Is there one man in a hundred who even knows
the rudiments of the language I must now speak in?  Is there one man in a
hundred in whose mind any idea arises, and in whose heart any emotion or
passion is kindled, as I proceed to speak of corruption of nature and
pollution of heart?  I do not suppose it.  I do not presume upon it.  I
do not believe it.  That most miserable man who is let down of God's Holy
Spirit into the pit of corruption that is in his own heart,--to him his
corruption, added to his guilt, causes a sadness that nothing in this
world can really relieve; it causes a deep and an increasing melancholy,
such as the ninety and nine who need no repentance and feel no pollution
know nothing of.  All living men flee from the corruption of an unburied
corpse.  The living at once set about to bury their dead.  'I am a
stranger and a sojourner among you,' said Abraham to the children of
Heth; 'give me a possession of a burying-place among you that I may bury
my dead out of my sight.'  But Paul could find no grave in the whole
world in which to bury out of his sight the body of death to which he was
chained fast; that body of sin and death which always makes the holiest
of men the most wretched of men,--till the loathing and the disgust and
the misery that filled the apostle's heart are to be understood by but
one in a thousand even of the people of God.

3.  And then, as if to make our salvation a very hyperbole of
impossibility, the all but almighty power of indwelling sin comes in.
Have you ever tried to break loose from the old fetter of an evil habit?
Have you ever said on a New Year's Day with Thomas A Kempis that this
year you would root that appetite,--naming it,--out of your body, and
that vice,--naming it,--out of your heart?  Have you ever sworn at the
Communion table that you would watch and pray, and set a watch on your
evil heart against that envy, and that revenge, and that ill-will, and
that distaste, dislike, and antipathy?  Then your minister will not need
to come back from his death-bed to preach to you on the difficulty of
salvation.

4.  And yet such is the grace of God, such is the work of Christ, and
such is the power and the patience of the Holy Ghost that, if we had only
an adequate ministry in our pulpits, and an assisting literature in our
homes, even this three-fold impossibility would be overcome and we would
be saved.  But if the ministry that is set over us is an ignorant,
indolent, incompetent, self-deceived ministry; if our own chosen, set-up,
and maintained minister is himself an uninstructed, unspiritual,
unsanctified man; and if the books we buy and borrow and read are all
secular, unspiritual, superficial, ephemeral, silly, stupid, impertinent
books, then the impossibility of our salvation is absolute, and we are as
good as in hell already with all our guilt and all our corruption for
ever on our heads.  Now, that was the exact case of Mansoul in the
allegory of the Holy War at one of the last and acutest stages of that
war.  Or, rather, that would have been her exact case had Diabolus got
his own deep, diabolical way with her.  For what did her ancient enemy do
but sound a parley till he had played his last card in these glozing and
deceitful words;--'I myself,' he had the face to say to Emmanuel, 'if
Thou wilt raise Thy siege and leave the town to me, I will, at my own
proper cost and charge, set up and maintain a sufficient ministry,
besides lecturers, in Mansoul, who shall show to Mansoul that
transgression stands in the way of life; the ministers I shall set up
shall also press the necessity of reformation according to Thy holy law.'
And even now, with the two pulpits, God's and the devil's, and the two
preachers, and the two pastors, in our own city,--how many of you see any
difference, or think that the one is any worse or any better than the
other?  Or, indeed, that the ministry of the last card is not the better
of the two to your interest and to your taste, to the state of your mind
and to the need of your heart?  Let us proceed, then, to look at
Mansoul's two pulpits and her two lectureships as they stand portrayed on
the devil's last card and in Emmanuel's crowning commission; that is, if
our eyes are sharp enough to see any difference.

5.  The first thing, then, on the devil's last card was this, 'A
sufficient ministry, besides lecturers, in Mansoul.'  Now, a sufficient
ministry has never been seen in the true Church of Christ since her
ministry began.  And yet she has had great ministers in her time.  After
Christ Himself, Paul was the greatest and the best minister the Church of
Christ has ever had.  But such was the transcendent greatness of his
office, such were its tremendous responsibilities, such were its
magnificent opportunities and its incessant demands, such were its
ceaseless calls to consecration, to cross-bearing, to crucifixion, to
more and more inwardness of holiness, and to higher and higher heights of
heavenly-mindedness, that the apostle was fain to cry out continually,
Who is sufficient for these things!  But so well did Paul learn that
gospel which he preached to others that amid all his insufficiency he was
able to hear his Master saying to him every day, My grace is sufficient
for thee, and, My strength is made perfect in thy weakness!  And to come
down to the truly Pauline succession of ministers in our own lands and in
our own churches, what preachers and what pastors Christ gave to
Kidderminster, and to Bedford, and to Down and Connor, and to Sodor and
Man, and to Anwoth, and to Ettrick, and to New England, and to St.
Andrews, and places too many to mention.  With all its infirmity and all
its inefficiency, what a truly heavenly power the pulpit is when it is
filled by a man of God who gives his whole mind and heart, his whole time
and thought to it, and to the pastorate that lies around it.  His mind
may be small, and his heart may be full of corruption; his time may be
full of manifold interruptions, and his best study may yield but a poor
result; but if Heaven ever helps those who honestly help themselves, then
that is certainly the case in the Christian ministry.  Let the choicest
of our children, then, be sought out and consecrated to that service; let
our most gifted and most gracious-minded sons be sent to where they shall
be best prepared for the pulpit and the pastorate,--till by the blessing
of her Head all the congregations and all the parishes, all the pulpits
and all the lectureships in the Church, shall be one garden of the Lord.
And then we shall escape that last curse of a ministry such as John
Bunyan saw all around him in the England of his day, and which, had he
been alive in the England and Scotland of our day, he would have painted
again in colours we have neither the boldness nor the skill to mix nor to
put on the canvas.  But let all ministers put it every day to themselves
to what descent and succession they belong.  Let those even who believe
that they have within themselves the best seal and evidence attainable
here that they have been ordained of Emmanuel, let them all the more look
well every day and every Sabbath day how much of another master's
doctrine and discipline, motives, and manners still mixes up with their
best ministry.  And the surest seal that, with all our insufficiency, we
are still the ministers of Christ will be set on us by this, that the
harder we work and the more in secret we pray, the more and ever the more
shall we discover and confess our shameful insufficiency, and the more
shall we, till the day of our death, every day still begin our ministry
of labour and of prayer anew.  Let us do that, for the devil, with all
his boldness and all his subtilty, never threw a card first or last like
that.

6.  After offering a sufficient ministry to Mansoul, and that, too, at
his own proper cost and charge, Diabolus undertook also to see that the
absolute necessity of a reformation should be preached and pressed from
the pulpit he set up.  Now, reformation is all good and necessary, in its
own time and place and order, but God sent His Son not to be a Reformer
but to be a Redeemer.  John came to preach reformation, but Jesus came to
preach regeneration.  Except a man be born again, Jesus persistently
preached to Nicodemus.  'Did it begin with regeneration?' was Dr.
Duncan's reply when a sermon on sanctification was praised in his
hearing.  And like so much else that the learned and profound Dr. John
Duncan said on theology and philosophy, that question went at once to the
root of the matter.  For sanctification, that is to say, salvation, is no
mere reformation of morals or refinement of manners.  It is a maxim in
sound morals that the morality of the man must precede the morality of
his actions.  And much more is it the evangelical law of Jesus Christ.
Make the tree good, our Lawgiver aphoristically said.  Reformation and
sanctification differ, says Dr. Hodge, as clean clothes differ from a
clean heart.  Now, Diabolus was all for clean clothes when he saw that
Mansoul was slipping out of his hands.  He would have all the drunkards
to become moderate drinkers, if not total abstainers; and all the
sensualists to become, if need be, ascetics; and all those who had sowed
out their wild oats to settle down as heads of houses, and members, if
not ministers and elders, in his set-up church.  But we are too well
taught, surely; we have gone too long to another church than that which
Diabolus ever sets up, to be satisfied with his superficial doctrine and
his skin-deep discipline.  We know, do we not, that we may do all that
his last card asks us to do, and yet be as far, ay, and far farther from
salvation than the heathen are who never heard the name.  A hundred
Scriptures tell us that; and our hearts know too much of their own plague
and corruption ever now to be satisfied short of a full regeneration and
a complete sanctification.  'Create in me a clean heart and renew a right
spirit within me.  The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit.  And the
very God of peace sanctify you wholly.  And I pray God your whole spirit
and soul and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.'  The last card has many Scriptures cunningly copied upon
it; but not these.  Its pulpit orators handle many Scripture texts, but
never these.

7.  Yes, the devil comes in even here with that so late, so subtle, and
so contradicting card of his.  Where is it in this world that he does not
come in with some of his cards?  And he comes in here as a very angel of
evangelical light.  He puts on the gown of Geneva here, and he ascends
Emmanuel's own maintained pulpit here, and from that pulpit he preaches,
and where he so preaches he preaches nothing else but the very highest
articles of the Reformed faith.  Carnal-security was strong on assurance,
no other man in Mansoul was so strong; and the devil will let us
preachers be as strong and as often on election, and justification, and
indefectible grace, and the perseverance of the saints as we and our
people like, if we but keep in season and out of season on these
transcendent subjects and keep off morals and manners, walk and
conversation, conduct and character.  In Hooker's and Travers' day,
Thomas Fuller tells us, the Temple pulpit preached pure Canterbury in the
morning and pure Geneva in the afternoon.  And you will get the highest
Calvinism off the last card in one pulpit, and the strictest and most
urgent morality off the same card in another; but never, if the devil can
help it, never both in one and the same pulpit; never both in one and the
same sermon; and never both in one and the same minister.  You have all
heard of the difficulty the voyager had in steering between Scylla and
Charybdis in the Latin adage.  Well, the true preacher's difficulty is
just like that.  Indeed, it is beyond the wit of man, and it takes all
the wit of God, aright to unite the doctrine of our utter inability with
the companion doctrine of our strict responsibility; free grace with a
full reward; the cross of Christ once for all, with the saint's continual
crucifixion; the Saviour's blood with the sinner's; and atonement with
attainment; in short, salvation without works with no salvation without
works.  Deft steersman as the devil is, he never yet took his ship clear
through those Charybdic passages.

One thing there is that I must have preached continually in all my
pulpits and expounded and illustrated and enforced in all my
lectureships, said Emmanuel, and that is, my new example and my new law
of _motive_.  My own motives always made me in all I said and did to be
well-pleasing in My Father's eyes, and at any cost I must have preachers
and lecturers set up in Mansoul who shall assist Me in making Mansoul as
well-pleasing in My Father's sight as I was Myself.

   'For I am ware it is the seed of act
   God holds appraising in His hollow palm,
   Not act grown great thence as the world believes,
   Leafage and branchage vulgar eyes admire.'

Motives! gnashed Diabolus.  And he tore his last card into a thousand
shreds and cast the shreds under his feet in his rage and exasperation.
Motives!  New motives!  Truly Thou art the threatened Seed of the woman!
Truly Thou art the threatened Son of God!--Let all our preachers, then,
preach much on motive to their people.  The commonplace crowd of their
people will not all like that preaching any more than Diabolus did; but
their best people will all afterwards rise up in their salvation and
bless them for it.  On reformation also, let them every Sabbath preach,
but only on the reformation that rises out of a reformed motive, and that
again out of a reformed heart.  And if a reformed motive, a reformed
heart, and a reformed life are found both by preacher and hearer to be
impossible; if all that only brings out the hopelessness of their
salvation by reason of the guilt and the pollution and power of sin; then
all that will only be to them that same ever deeper entering of the law
into their hearts which led Paul to an ever deeper faith and trust in
Jesus Christ.  With a guilt, and a pollution, and a slavery to sin like
ours, salvation from sin would be absolutely impossible.  Absolutely
impossible, that is, but for our Saviour, Jesus Christ.  But with His
atoning blood and His Holy Spirit all things are possible--even our
salvation.

Let us choose, then, a minister like Mr. John Menzies.  Let us read the
great books that make salvation difficult.  Let us work out our own
salvation, day and night, with fear and trembling, and when Wisdom is
justified in her children, we shall be found justified among them.  We
shall be openly acknowledged and acquitted in the day of judgment, and
made perfectly blessed in the full enjoying of God to all eternity.




CHAPTER XV--MR. PRYWELL


   'Search me, O God, and know my heart.'--_David_.

   'Let a man examine himself.'--_Paul_.

   'Look to yourselves.'--_John_.

   'Know thyself.'--_Apollo_.

The year 1668 saw the publication of one of the deepest books in the
whole world, Dr. John Owen's _Remainders of Indwelling Sin in Believers_.
The heart-searching depth; the clear, fearless, humbling truth, the
intense spirituality, and the massive and masculine strength of John
Owen's book have all combined to make it one of the acknowledged
masterpieces of the great Puritan school.  Had John Owen's style been at
all equal to his great learning, to the depth and the grasp of his mind,
and to the lofty holiness of his life, John Owen would have stood in the
very foremost and selectest rank of apostolical and evangelical
theologians.  But in all his books Owen labours under the fatal drawback
of a bad style.  A fine style, a style like that of Hooker, or Taylor, or
Bunyan, or Howe, or Leighton, or Law, is such a winning introduction to
their works and such an abiding charm and spell.  The full title of Dr.
Owen's great work runs thus: _The Nature, Power, Deceit, and Prevalency
of the Remainders of Indwelling Sin in Believers_--a title that will tell
all true students what awaits them when they have courage and enterprise
enough to address themselves to this supreme and all-essential subject.
Fourteen years after the publication of Dr. Owen's epoch-making book,
John Bunyan's _Holy War_ first saw the light.  Equal in scriptural and in
experimental depth, as also in their spiritual loftiness and intensity,
those two books are as different as any two books, written in the same
language, and written on the same subject, could by any possibility be.
John Owen's book is the book of a great scholar who has read the Fathers
and the Schoolmen and the Reformers till he knows them by heart, and till
he has been able to digest all that is true to Scripture and to
experience in them into his rich and ripe book.  A powerful reasoner, a
severe, bald, muscular writer, John Owen in all these respects stands at
the very opposite pole to that of John Bunyan.  The author of the _Holy
War_ had no learning, but he had a mind of immense natural sagacity,
combined with a habit of close and deep observation of human life, and
especially of religious life, and he had now a lifetime of most fruitful
experience as a Christian man and as a Christian minister behind him;
and, all that, taken up into Bunyan's splendid imagination, enabled him
to produce this extraordinarily able and impressive book.  A model of
English style as the _Holy War_ is, at the same time it does not attain
at all to the rank of the _Pilgrim's Progress_; but then, to be second to
the _Pilgrim's Progress_ is reward and honour enough for any book.  Let
all genuine students, then, who would know the best that has been written
on experimental religion, and who would preach to the deepest and
divinest experience of their best people, let them keep continually
within their reach John Owen's _Temptation_, his _Mortification of Sin in
Believers_, his _Nature and Power of Indwelling Sin_, and John Bunyan's
_Holy War made for the Regaining of the Metropolis of this World_.

Well, then, as He who dwells on high would have it, there was one whose
name was Mr. Prywell, a great lover of Mansoul.  And he, as his manner
was, did go listening up and down in Mansoul to see and hear, if at any
time he might, whether there was any design against it or no.  For he was
always a jealous man, and feared some mischief would befall it, either
from within or from some power without.  Mr. Prywell was always a lover
of Mansoul, a sober and a judicious man, a man that was no tattler, nor a
raiser of false reports, but one that loves to look into the very bottom
of matters, and talks nothing of news but by very solid arguments.  And
then, after our historian has told us some of the eminent services that
Mr. Prywell was able to perform both for the King and for the city, he
goes on to tell us how the captains determined that public thanks should
be given by the town of Mansoul to Mr. Prywell for his so diligent
seeking of the welfare of the town; and, further, that, forasmuch as he
was so naturally inclined to seek their good, and also to undermine their
foes, they gave him the commission of Scoutmaster-general for the good of
Mansoul.  And Mr. Prywell managed his charge and the trust that Mansoul
had put into his hands with great conscience and good fidelity; for he
gave himself wholly up to his employ, and that not only within the town,
but he also went outside of the town to pry, to see, and to hear.  Now,
that being so, it may interest and perhaps instruct you to-night to look
for a little at some of the features and at some of the feats of the
Scoutmaster-general of the Holy War, Mr. Prywell, of the town of Mansoul.

1.  'Well, now, as He who dwells on high would have it, there was one
whose name was Mr. Prywell, a great lover of the town of Mansoul.'  In
other words: self-observation, self-examination, strict, jealous,
sleepless self-examination, is of God.  Our God who searches our hearts
and tries our reins would have it so.  And if He does not have it so in
us, our souls are not as our God would have them to be.  'Bunyan employs
_pry_,' says Miss Peacock in her excellent notes, 'in a more favourable
sense than it now bears.  As, for instance, it is said in another part of
this same book that the men of Mansoul were allowed to _pry_ into the
words of the Holy Ghost and to expound them to their best advantage.
Honest anxiety for the welfare of his fellow-townsmen was Mr. Prywell's
chief characteristic.  _Pry_ is another form of _peer_--to look narrowly,
to look closely.'  And God, says John Bunyan, would have it so.

2.  'A great lover of Mansoul,' 'always a lover of Mansoul'; again and
again that is testified concerning Mr. Prywell.  It was not love for the
work that led Mr. Prywell to give up his days and his nights as his
history tells us he did.  Mr. Prywell ran himself into many dangerous
situations both within and without the city, and he lost himself far more
friends than he made by his devotion to his thankless task.  But
necessity was laid upon him.  And what held him up was the sure and
certain knowledge that his King would have that service at his hands.
That, and his love for the city, for the safety and the deliverance of
the city,--all that kept Mr. Prywell's heart fixed.  Am I therefore your
enemy? he would say to some who would have had it otherwise than the King
would have it.  But it is a good thing to be zealously affected in a work
like mine, he would say, in self-defence and in self-encouragement.  And
then, though not many, there were always some in the city who said, Let
him smite me and it shall be a kindness; let him reprove me and it shall
be an excellent oil which shall not break my head.  It was in Mansoul
with Mr. Prywell as it was in Kidderminster with Richard Baxter, when
some of his people said to one another, 'We will take all things well
from one that we know doth entirely love us.'   'Love them,' said
Augustine, 'and then say anything you like to them.'  Now, that was Mr.
Prywell's way.  He loved Mansoul, and then he said many things to her
that a false lover and a flatterer would never have dared to say.

3.  Then, as the saying is, it goes without saying that 'Mr. Prywell was
always a jealous man.'  Great lovers are always jealous men, and Mr.
Prywell showed himself to be a great lover by the great heat of his
jealousy also.  'Vigilant,' says the excellent editress again; 'cautious
against dishonour, reasonably mistrustful--low Latin _zelosus_, full of
zeal.  "And he said, I have been very jealous for the Lord God of
hosts."'  Now, it so happened that some of Mr. Prywell's most private and
not at all professional papers--papers evidently, and on the face of
them, connected with the state of the spy's own soul--came into my hands
as good lot would have it just the other night.  The moth-eaten chest was
full of his old papers, but the pieces that took my heart most were, as
it looked to me, actually gnashed through with his remorseful teeth, and
soaked and sodden past recognition with his sweat and his tears and his
agonising hands.  But after some late hours over those remnants I managed
to make some sense to myself out of them.  There are some parts of the
parchments that pass me; but, if only to show you that this arch-spy's so
vigilant jealousy was not all directed against other people's bad hearts
and bad habits, I shall copy some lines out of the old box.  'Have I
penitence?' he begins without any preface.  'Have I grief, shame, pain,
horror, weariness for my sin?  Do I pray and repent, if not seven times a
day as David did, yet at least three times, as Daniel?  If not as
Solomon, at length, yet shortly as the publican?  If not like Christ, the
whole night, at least for one hour?  If not on the ground and in ashes,
at least not in my bed?  If not in sackcloth, at least not in purple and
fine linen?  If not altogether freed from all, at least from immoderate
desires?  Do I give, if not as Zaccheus did, fourfold, as the law
commands, with the fifth part added?  If not as the rich, yet as the
widow?  If not the half, yet the thirtieth part?  If not above my power,
yet up to my power?'  And then over the page there are some illegible
pencillings from old authors of his such as this from Augustine: 'A good
man would rather know his own infirmity than the foundations of the earth
or the heights of the heavens.'  And this from Cicero: 'There are many
hiding-places and recesses in the mind.'  And this from Seneca: 'You must
know yourself before you can amend yourself.  An unknown sin grows worse
and worse and is deprived of cure.'  And this from Cicero again: 'Cato
exacted from himself an account of every day's business at night'; and
also Pythagoras,

   'Nor let sweet sleep upon thine eyes descend
   Till thou hast judged its deeds at each day's end.'

And this from Seneca again: 'When the light is removed out of sight, and
my wife, who is by this time aware of my practice, is now silent, I pass
the whole of my day under examination, and I review my deeds and my
words.  I hide nothing from myself: I pass over nothing.'  And then in
Mr. Prywell's boldest and least trembling hand: 'O yes! many shall come
from the east and the west and shall sit down with Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, when many of the children of the kingdom
shall be cast out.  O yes.'  Now, this 'O yes!' Miss Peacock tells us, is
the Anglicised form of a French word for our Lord's words, Take heed how
ye hear!

4.  'A sober and a judicious man' it is said of Mr. Prywell also.  To a
certainty that.  It could not be otherwise than that.  For Mr. Prywell's
office, its discoveries and its experiences, would sober any man.  'I am
sprung from a country,' says Abelard, 'of which the soil is light, and
the temper of the inhabitants is light.'  So was it with Mr. Prywell to
begin with.  But even Abelard was sobered in time, and so was Mr.
Prywell.  Life sobered Abelard, and Mr. Prywell too; life's crooks and
life's crosses, life's duties and life's disappointments, especially Mr.
Prywell.  'The more narrowly a man looks into himself,' says A Kempis,
'the more he sorroweth.'  Not sober-mindedness alone comes to him who
looks narrowly into himself, but great sorrow of heart also.  And if you
are not both sobered in your mind and full of an unquenchable sorrow in
your heart, O yes! attend to it, for you are not yet begun to be what God
would have you to be.  Dr. Newman, with all his mistakes and all his
faults, was a master in two things: his own heart and the English
language.  And in writing home to his mother a confidential letter from
college on his birthday, he confides to her that he often 'shudders at
himself.'  'No,' he answered to his mother's fears and advices about food
and air and exercise: 'No, I am neither nervous, nor in ill-health, nor
do I study too much.  I am neither melancholy, nor morose, nor austere,
nor distant, nor reserved, nor sullen.  I am always cheerful, ready and
eager to join in any merriment.  I am not clouded with sadness, nor
absent in mind, nor deficient in action.  No; take me when I am most
foolish at home and extend mirth into childishness; yet all the time I am
shuddering at myself.'  There spake the future author of the immortal
sermons.  There spake a mind and a heart that have deepened the minds and
the hearts of Christian men more than any other influence of the century;
a mind and a heart, moreover, that will shine and beat in our best
literature and in our deepest devotion for centuries to come.  You must
all know by this time another classical passage from the pen of another
spiritual genius in the Church of England, that greatly gifted church.
Let me repeat it to illustrate how sober-mindedness and great sorrow of
heart always come to the best of men.  'Let any man consider that if the
world knew all that of him which he knows of himself; if they saw what
vanity and what passions govern his inside, and what secret tempers sully
and corrupt his best actions; and he would have no more pretence to be
honoured and admired for his goodness and wisdom than a rotten and
distempered body is to be loved and admired for its beauty and
comeliness.  And, perhaps, there are very few people in the world who
would not rather choose to die than to have all their secret follies, the
errors of their judgments, the vanity of their minds, the falseness of
their pretences, the frequency of their vain and disorderly passions,
their uneasinesses, hatreds, envies, and vexations made known to the
world.  And shall pride be entertained in a heart thus conscious of its
own miserable behaviour?'  No wonder that Mr. Prywell was sober-minded!
No wonder that Dr. Newman shuddered at himself!  And no wonder that
William Law chose strangling and the pond rather than that any other man
should see what went on in his heart!

5.  And as if all that were not enough, and more than enough, to commend
Mr. Prywell to us--to our trust, to our confidence, and to our
imitation--his royal certificate continues, 'One that looks into the very
bottom of matters, and talks nothing of news, but by very solid
arguments.'  The very bottom of matters--that is, the very bottom of his
own and other men's hearts.  Mr. Prywell counts nothing else worth a wise
man's looking at.  Let fools and children look at the painted and
deceitful surface of things, but let men, men of matters, and especially
men of divine matters, look only at their own and other men's hearts.  The
very bottom of all matters is there.  All wars, all policies, all
debates, all disputes, all good and all evil counsels, all the much weal
and all the multitudinous woe of Mansoul--all have their bottom in the
heart; in the heart of God, or in the heart of man, or in the heart of
the devil.  The heart is the root of absolutely every matter to Mr.
Prywell.  He would not waste one hour of any day, or one watch of any
night, on anything else.  And it was this that made him both the
extraordinarily successful scout he was, and the extraordinarily sober
and thoughtful and judicious man he was.  O yes, my brethren, the bottom
of matters, when you take to it, will work the same change in you.  'Two
things,' says one who had long looked at his own matters with Mr.
Prywell's eyes--'two things, O Lord, I recognise in myself: nature, which
Thou hast made, and sin, which I have added.'  My brethren, that
recognition, that discovery in yourselves, when it comes to you, will
sober you as it has sobered so many men before you: when it comes to you,
that is, about yourselves.  That discovery made in yourselves will make
you deep-thinking men.  It will make common men and unlearned men among
you to be philosophers and theologians and saints.  It will work in you a
thoughtfulness, a seriousness, a depth, an awe, a holy fear, and a great
desire that will already have made you new creatures.  When, in examining
yourselves and in characterising yourselves, you come on what some clear-
eyed men have come on in themselves, and what one of them has described
as 'the diabolical animus of the human mind'--when you make that
discovery in yourselves, that will sober you, that will humble you and
fill you full of remorse and compunction.  And if in God's grace to you,
that were to begin to be wrought in you this week, there would be one, at
any rate, eating of that bread next Lord's day, and drinking of that cup
as God would have it.

6.  'A man that is no tattler, nor raiser of false reports, and that
talks nothing of news, but by very solid arguments.'  Mr. Prywell was
more taken up with his own matters at home, far more than the greatest
busybodies are with other men's matters abroad.  His name, I fear, will
still sound somewhat ill in your ears, but I can assure you all the ill
for you lies in the sound.  Mr. Prywell would not hurt a hair of your
head: the truth is, he does not know whether there is a hair on your head
or no.  This man's name comes to him and sticks to him, not because he
pries into your affairs, for he does not, and never did, but because he
is so drawn down into his own.  Mr. Prywell has no eye for your windows
and he has no ear for your doors.  If your servant is a leaky slave,
Prywell, of all your neighbours, has no ear for his idle tales.  This man
is no eavesdropper; your evil secrets have only a sobering and a
saddening and a silencing effect upon him.  Your house might be full of
skeletons for anything he would ever discover or remember.  The beam in
his own eye is so big that he cannot see past it to speak about your
small mote.  'The inward Christian,' says A Kempis, 'preferreth the care
of himself before all other cares.  He that diligently attendeth to
himself can easily keep silence concerning other men.  If thou attendest
unto God and unto thyself, thou wilt be but little moved with what thou
seest abroad.'  At the same time, Mr. Prywell was no fool, and no coward,
and no hoodwinked witness.  He could tell his tale, when it was demanded
of him, with such truth, and with such punctuality, and on such ample
grounds, that a conviction of the truth instantly fell on all who heard
him.  'Sirs,' said those who heard him break silence, 'it is not
irrational for us to believe it,' with such solid arguments and with such
an absence of mere suspicion and of all idle tales did he speak.  On one
occasion, on a mere 'inkling,' he woke up the guard; only, it was so true
an inkling that it saved the city.  But I cannot follow Mr. Prywell any
further to-night.  How he went up and down Mansoul listening; how he kept
his eyes and his ears both shut and open; what splendid services he
performed in the progress, and specially toward the end, of the war; how
the thanks of the city were voted to him; how he was made Scoutmaster-
general for the good of the town of Mansoul, and the great conscience and
good fidelity with which he managed that great trust--all that you will
read for yourselves under this marginal index, 'The story of Mr.
Prywell.'

Now, my brethren, as the outcome of all that, we must all examine
ourselves as before God all this week.  We must wait on His word and on
His providences while they examine us all this week.  We must pry well
into ourselves all this week.  Come, let us compel ourselves to do it.
Let us search and try our ways all this week as we shall give an account.
Let us ask ourselves how many Communion tables we have sat at, and at how
many more we are likely to sit.  Let us ask why it is that we have got so
little good out of all our Communions.  Let us ask who is to blame for
that, and where the blame lies.  Let us go to the bottom of matters with
ourselves, and compel ourselves to say just what it is that is the cause
of God's controversy with us.  What vow, what solemn promise, made when
trouble was upon us, have we completely cast behind our back?  What about
secret prayer?  At what times, for what things, and for what people do we
in secret pray?  What about secret sin?  What is its name, and what does
it deserve, and what fruit are we already reaping out of it?  What is our
besetting sin, and what steps do we take, as God knows, to crucify it?  Do
we love money too much?  Do we love praise too much?  Do we love eating
and drinking too much?  Does envy make our heart a very hell?  Let us
name the man we envy, and let us keep our Communion eye upon him.  Let us
mix his name with all the psalms and prayers and sermons of this
Communion season.  Or is it diabolical ill-will?  Or is it a wicked
tongue against an unsuspecting friend?  Let us examine ourselves as Paul
did, as Prywell did, and as God would have us do it, and we shall
discover things in ourselves so bad that if I were to put words on them
to-night, you would stop your ears in horror and flee out of the church.
Let a man see himself at least as others see him; and then he will be led
on from that to see himself as God sees him; and then he will judge
himself so severely as that he shall not need to be judged at the
Judgment Day, and will condemn himself so sufficiently as that he shall
not be condemned with a condemned world at the last.




CHAPTER XVI--YOUNG CAPTAIN SELF-DENIAL


   'If any man will come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his
   cross daily and follow Me.'--_Our Lord_.

'Now the siege was long, and many a fierce attempt did the enemy make
upon the town, and many a shrewd brush did some of the townsmen meet with
from the enemy, especially Captain Self-denial, to whose care both Ear-
gate and Eye-gate had been intrusted.  This Captain Self-denial was a
young man, but stout, and a townsman in Mansoul.  This young captain,
therefore, being a hardy man, and a man of great courage to boot, and
willing to venture himself for the good of the town, he would now and
then sally out upon the enemy; but you must think this could not easily
be done, but he must meet with some sharp brushes himself, and, indeed,
he carried several of such marks on his face, yea, and some on some other
parts of his body.'  Thus, Bunyan.  I shall now go on to-night to offer
you some annotations and some reflections on this short but excellent
history of young Captain Self-denial.

1.  Well, to begin with, this Captain Self-denial was still a young man.
'And, now, it comes into my mind, said Goodman Gains after supper, I will
tell you a story well worth the hearing, as I think.  There were two men
once upon a time that went on pilgrimage; the one began when he was young
and the other began when he was old.  The young man had strong
corruptions to grapple with, whereas the old man's corruptions were
decayed with the decays of nature.  The young man trod his steps as even
as did the old one, and was every way as light as he; who, now, or which
of them, had their graces shining clearest, since both seemed to be
alike?  Why, the young man's, doubtless, answered Mr. Honest.  For that
which heads against the greatest opposition gives best demonstration that
it is strongest.  A young man, therefore, has the advantage of the
fairest discovery of a work of grace within him.  And thus they sat
talking till the break of day.'

Now, I have taken up Captain Self-denial to-night because the young men
and I are to begin a study to-night to which I was first attracted
because it taught me lessons about myself, and about self-denial, and
thus about both a young man's and an old man's deepest and most
persistent corruptions--lessons such as I have never been taught in any
other school.  In all my philosophical, theological, moral, and
experimental reading, so to describe it, I have never met with any school
of authors for one moment to be compared with the great evangelical
mystics, especially when they treat of self, self-love, self-denial, the
daily cross, and all suchlike lessons.  Take the great doctrinal and
experimental Puritans, such as John Owen, Thomas Goodwin, Richard Baxter,
John Howe, and Jonathan Edwards, and add on to them the greatest and best
mystics, such as Jacob Behmen, Thomas A Kempis, Francis Fenelon, Jeremy
Taylor, Samuel Rutherford, Robert Leighton, and William Law, and you will
have the profoundest, the most complete, the most perfect, and, I will
add, the most fascinating and enthralling of spiritual teaching in all
the world.  And I will be bold enough to promise you that if you will but
join our Young Men's Class to-night, and will buy and read our mystical
books, and will resolve to put in practice what you hear and read in the
class, I will promise you, I say, that by the end of our short session
you will not only be ten times more open and hospitably-minded men, but
also ten times more spiritually-minded men, ten times more Christ-like
men, and with your joy in Christ and His joy in you all but full.

2.  The Captain Self-denial was a young man, and he was also a townsman
in Mansoul.  Young Self-denial and one other were all of Emmanuel's
captains who were townsmen in Mansoul.  All his other captains Emmanuel
had brought with him; but the Captains Self-denial and Experience were
both born and reared to their full manhood in that besieged city.  'A
townsman.'  How much there is for us all in that one word!  How much
instruction!  How much encouragement!  How much caution and correction!
Our greatest grace; our most essential and indispensable grace; our most
experimental and evidential grace; that grace, indeed, without which all
our other graces are but specious shows and painted surfaces of graces;
that grace into which our Lord here gathers up all our other graces;--that
greatest of graces cannot be imputed, imported, or introduced; it must be
born, bred, exercised, reared up to its full maturity, and sent forth to
fight and to conquer, and all within the walls of its own native town; in
short, our self-denial must have its beginning and middle and end in our
own heart.  Antinomians there were, as our Puritan fathers nicknamed all
those persons who glorified Christ by letting Him do all things for them,
both His own things and their things too, both their justification and
their sanctification too.  And there are many good but ill-instructed men
among ourselves who have just this taint of that old heresy cleaving to
them still--this taint, namely, that they are tempted to carry over the
suretyship and substitutionary work of Christ into such regions, and to
carry it to such lengths in those regions, as, practically, to make
Christ to minister to their soft and sinful living, and to their excuse
and indulgence of themselves.  I will put it squarely and plainly to some
of my very best friends here to-night.  Is it not the case, now, that you
do not like this direction into which this text, and the truth of this
text, are now travelling?  Is it not so that you shift back in your seat
from the approaching cross?  Is it not the very and actual fact that you
have secret ways of sin, secret habits of self-indulgence in your body
and in your soul, in your mind and in your heart, secret sins that you
mantle over with the robe of Christ's righteousness?  His spotless and
imputed righteousness?  In your present temper you would have disliked
deeply the Sermon on the Mount had you heard it; and I see you shaking
your head over your Sabbath-day dinner at this text when it was first
spoken.  Lay this down for a law, all my brethren,--a New Testament and a
never-to-be-abrogated law,--that the best and the safest religion for you
is that way of religion that is hardest on your pride, on your
self-importance, on your self-esteem, as well as on your purse and on
your belly.  You are not likely to err by practising too much of the
cross.  You may very well have too much of the cross of Christ preached
to you, and too little of your own.  Why! did not Christ die for me? you
indignantly say.  Yes; so He did.  But only that you might die too.  He
was crucified, and so must you be crucified every day before one single
drop of His sin-atoning blood shall ever be wasted on You.  Be not
deceived: the cross is not mocked; for only as a man nails himself, body
and soul, to the cross every day shall he ever be saved from sin and
death and hell by means of it.  And, exactly as a man denies himself--no
more and no less--his appetites, his passions, his thoughts and words and
deeds, every day and every hour of every day, just so much shall He who
searches our hearts and sees us in secret, acknowledge us, both every day
now, and at the last day of all.

3.  This same Captain Self-denial, his history goes on, was stout, he was
an hardy man also, and a man of great courage.  Stout and hardy and of
great courage at home, that is; in his own mind and heart, soul and body,
that is.  Young Captain Self-denial was a perfect hero at saying No! and
at saying No! to himself.  It is a proverb that there is nothing so
difficult as to say that monosyllable.  And the proverb is Scripture
truth if you try to say No! to yourself.  It takes the very stoutest of
hearts, the most noble, the most manly, the most soldierly, and the most
saintly of hearts to say No! to itself, and to keep on saying No! to
itself to the bitter end of every trial and temptation and opportunity.  I
remember reading long ago a page or two of a medical man's diary.  And in
it he made a confession and an appeal I have never forgot; though, to my
loss, I have not always acted upon it.  He said that for many years he
had never been entirely well.  He had constant headaches and depressions,
and it was seldom that he was not to some extent out of sorts.  But, all
the time, he had a shrewd guess within himself as to what was the matter
with him.  He felt ashamed to confess it even to himself that he over-ate
himself every day at table; till, at last, summoning up all divine and
human help, he determined that, however hungry he was, and however
savoury the dish was, and however excellent the wine was, he would never
either ask for or accept a second helping.  And this was his testimony,
that from that stout and hardy day he grew better in health daily; 'my
head became clear, my eye bright, my complexion pure, my mind and
feelings were redeemed from all clouds and depressions.  And to-day I am
a younger man at fifty than I was at thirty.'  Now, if just saying No! to
himself and to the waiter at table did work such a new birth in a
confirmed gourmand of middle life, what would it not have wrought for him
had he carried his answer stoutly and courageously through all the other
parts of his body and soul?--as perhaps he did.  Perhaps, having tasted
the sweet beginnings of salvation, he carried his short and sure regimen
through.  If he has done so, let him give us his full autobiography.  What
a blessed, what a priceless book it would be!

4.  Stout Captain Self-denial was commanded to begin his life as an
officer in Emmanuel's army by taking especial watch over Ear-gate and Eye-
gate; and at our last accounts of our abstemious doctor he had only got
the length of Mouth-gate.  But having begun so well with those three
great outposts of the soul, if those two trusty officers only held on,
and played the man courageously enough, they would soon be promoted to
still more important, still more central, and, if more difficult and
dangerous, then also much more honourable and remunerative posts.
Appetite, deep and deadly as its evils are, is, after all, only an
outwork of the soul; and the same sharp knife that the epicure and the
sot in all their stages must put to their throat, that same knife must be
made to draw blood in all parts of their mind and their heart, in their
will and in their imagination, till a perfect chorus of self-denials
rings like noblest martial music through all the gates, and streets, and
fortresses, and strongholds, and very palaces and temples of the soul.  I
shall here stand aside and let the greatest of the English mystics speak
to you on this present point.  'When we speak of self-denial,' he says,
in his _Christian Perfection_, 'we are apt to confine it to eating and
drinking: but we ought to consider that, though a strict temperance be
necessary in these things, yet that these are the easiest and the
smallest instances of self-denial.  Pride, vanity, self-love,
covetousness, envy, and other inclinations of the like nature call for a
more constant and a more watchful self-denial than the appetites of
hunger and thirst.  And till we enter into this course of universal self-
denial we shall make no progress in real piety, but our lives will be a
ridiculous mixture of I know not what; sober and covetous, proud and
devout, temperate and vain, regular in our forms of devotion and
irregular in all our passions, circumspect in little modes of behaviour
and careless and negligent of tempers the most essential to piety.  And
thus it will necessarily be with us till we lay the axe to the root of
the tree, till we deny and renounce the whole corruption of our nature,
and resign ourselves up entirely to the Spirit of God, to think and speak
and act by the wisdom and the purity of religion.'

5.  Stout as Captain Self-denial was, and notable alarms and some brisk
execution as he did upon the enemy, yet he must meet with some brushes
himself; indeed, he carried several of the marks of such brushes on his
face as well as on some other parts of his body.  If I had read in his
history that Young Captain Self-denial had left his mark upon his
enemies, I would have said, Well done, and I would have added that I
always expected as much.  But it is far more to my purpose to read that
he had not always got himself off without wounds that left lasting scars
both where they were seen of all, and where they were seen and felt only
by Self-denial himself.  And not Self-denial only, but even Paul, in our
flesh, and with like passions with us, had the same experience and has
left us the same record.  'I keep my body under': so our emasculated
English version makes us read it.  But the visual image in the masterly
original Greek is not so mealy-mouthed.  I box and buffet myself day and
night, says Paul.  I play the truculent tyrant over a lewd and lazy
slave.  I hit myself blinding blows on my tenderest part.  I am ashamed
to look at myself in the glass, for all under my eyes I am black and
blue.  If David, after the matter of Uriah, had done that to himself, and
even more than that, we would not have wondered; we would have expected
it, and we would have said, It is no more than we would have done
ourselves.  But that a spotless, gentle, noble soul like Paul should so
have mangled himself,--that quite dumfounders us.  If Paul, then, who,
touching the righteousness which is in the law, was blameless, had to
handle himself in that manner in order to keep himself blameless, shall
any young man here hope to escape temptation without such blows at
himself as shall leave their mark on him all his days?  Nay, not only so,
but after Self-denial had thus exercised himself and subdued himself,
still his enemy sometimes got such an advantage over him as left him as
his history here describes him.  All which is surely full of the most
excellent heartening to all who read, in earnest and for an example, his
fine history.

6.  The last and crowning exploit of our matchless captain was to
capture, and execute, and quarter, and hang up on a gallows at the market-
cross, the head and the hands and the feet of his oldest, most sworn, and
most deadly enemy, one Self-love.  So stout and so insufferable was our
captain in the matter of Self-love that when it was proposed by some of
his many influential friends and high-in-place relations in the city that
the judgment of the court-martial on Self-love should be deferred, our
stout soldier with the cuts on his face and in some other parts of his
body stood up, and said that the city and the army must make up their
mind either to relieve him of his sword, hacked and broken off as it was,
or else to execute the law upon Self-love on the spot.  I will lay down
my commission this very day, he said, with an extraordinary indignation.
Many rich men in the city, and many men deep in the King's service,
muttered mutinous things when their near relative was hurried to the open
cause-way, but by that time the soldiers of Self-denial's company had
brained Self-love with the butts of their muskets.  And it was the stand
that our captain made in the matter of Self-love that at last lifted the
young soldier where many had felt he should have been lifted long ago.
From that day he was made a lord, a military peer, and an adviser of the
crown and the crown officers in all the deepest counsels concerning
Mansoul.  Only, with the cloak and the coronet of Self-denial the present
history all but comes to an end.  For, before the outcast remains of Self-
love had mouldered to their dust on the city gate, the King's chariot had
descended into the street, had ascended up to the palace at the head of
the street, and a new age of the city life had begun, the full history of
which has yet to be told.

Remain behind, then, and begin with us to-night, all you young men.  You
cannot begin this lifelong study and this lifelong pursuit of self-denial
too early.  For, even if you begin to read our books and to practise our
discipline in your very boyhood, when you are old men and very saints of
God you will feel that your self-love is still so full of life and power,
that your self-denial has scarcely begun.  Ah, me! men: both old and
young men.  Ah, me! what a life's task set us of God it is to make us a
new heart, to cleanse out an unclean heart, to lay in the dust a proud
heart, and to keep a heart at all times, and in all places, and toward
all people, with all diligence!  Who is sufficient for these things?

'Now was Christian somewhat in a maze.  But at last, when every man
started back for fear, Christian saw a man of a very stout countenance
come up to him that sat there with the inkhorn to write, saying, Set down
my name, sir!  At which there was a pleasant voice heard from those that
were within, even of those who walked upon the top of that place, saying,

   "Come in, come in:
   Eternal glory thou shalt win."

Then Christian smiled, and said: I think, verily, that I know the meaning
of all this now.'




CHAPTER XVII--FIVE PICKT MEN


   'I took wise men and known and made them captains.'--_Moses_.

John Bunyan never lost his early love for a soldier's life any more than
he ever forgot the rare delights of his bell-ringing days.  John Bunyan,
all his days, never saw a bell-rope that his fingers did not tingle, and
he never saw a soldier in uniform without instinctively shouldering his
youthful musket.  Bunyan was one of those rare men who are of imagination
all compact; and consequently it is that all his books are full of the
scenes, the occupations, and the experiences of his early days.  Not that
he says very much, in as many words, about what happened to him in the
days when he was a soldier; it is only once in all his many books that he
says that when he was a soldier such and such a thing happened to him.  At
the same time, all his books bear the impress of his early days upon
them; and as for this special book of Bunyan's now open before us, it is
full from board to board of the strife and the din of his early battles.
The _Holy War_ is just John Bunyan's soldierly life
spiritualised--spiritualised and so worked up into this fine English
Classic.

Well, then, after Mansoul was taken and reduced, the victorious Prince
determined so to occupy the town with His soldiers that it should never
again either be taken by force from without, or ever again revolt by
weakness or by fear from within.  And with this view He chose out five of
His best captains--My five pickt men, He always called them--and placed
those five captains and their thousands under them in the strongholds of
the town.  On the margin of this page our versatile author speaks of that
step of Emmanuel's in the language of a philosopher, a moralist, and a
divine.  'Five graces,' he says, 'pickt out of an abundance of common
virtues.'  This summing-up sentence stands on his stiff and dry margin.
But in the rich and living flow of the text itself our author goes on
writing like the man of genius he is.  With all the warmth and colour and
dramatic movement of which this whole book is full, this great writer
goes on to set those five choice captains of our salvation before us in a
way that we shall never forget.

1.  'The first was that famous captain, the noble Captain Credence.  His
were the red colours, and Mr. Promise bare them.  And for a scutcheon he
had the Holy Lamb and the golden shield; and he had ten thousand men at
his feet.'  Now, this same Captain Credence from first to last of the war
always led the van both within and around Mansoul.  In ordinary and
peaceful days; in days of truce and parley; when the opposite armies were
laid up in their winter quarters, or were, for any cause, drawn off from
one another, some of the other captains might be more in evidence.  But
in every exploit to be called an exploit; in every single enterprise of
danger; when any new position was to be taken up, or any forlorn hope was
to be led, there, in the very van of labour and of danger, was sure to be
seen Captain Credence with his blood-red colours in his own hand.  You
understand your Bunyan by this time, my brethren?  Captain Credence, your
little boy at school will tell you, is just the soldier-like faith of
your sanctification.  _Credo_, he will tell you, is 'I believe'; it is to
have faith in God and in the word of God.  You will borrow your Latin
from your little boy, and then you will pay him back by telling him how
Captain Credence has always led the van in your soul.  You will tell him
and show him what a wonderful writer on the things of the soul John
Bunyan is, till you make John Bunyan one of your son's choicest authors
for all his days.  You will do this if you will tell him how and when
this same Captain Credence with his crimson colours first led the van in
your salvation.  You will tell him this with more and more depth and more
and more plainness as year after year he reads his _Holy War_, and better
and better understands it, till he has had it all fulfilled in himself as
a pickt captain and good soldier of Jesus Christ.  You will tell him
about yourself, till, at this forlorn hope in his own life, and at that
sounded advance, in some new providence and in some new duty; in this
commanded attack on an inwardly entrenched enemy, and in that resolute
assault on some battlement of evil habit, he recollects his noble,
confiding, and loving father and plays the man again, and that all the
more if only for his father's sake.  Ask your son what he knows and what
you do not know, and then as long as his heart and his ear are open tell
him what you know and what you have by faith come through, and that will
be a priceless possession to him, especially when he is put in possession
of it by you.

Well on toward the end of the war, the Captain Credence had so acquitted
himself that he was summoned one day to the Prince's quarters, when the
following colloquy ensued: 'What hath my Lord to say to His servant?'  And
then, after a sign or two of favour, it was said to him: 'I have made
thee lieutenant over all the forces in Mansoul; so that, from this day
forward, all men in Mansoul shall be at thy word; and thou shalt be he
that shall lead in and that shall lead out Mansoul.  And at thy command
shall all the rest of the captains be.'  My brethren, you will have the
whole key to all that in yourselves if this same war has gone this length
in you.  Faith, your faith in God, and in the word of God, will, as this
inward war goes on, not only lead the van in your heart and in your life,
but just because your faith so leads in all things, and is so fitted to
lead in all things, it will at last be lifted up and set over your soul,
and all the things of your soul, till nothing shall be done in any of the
streets, or gates, or walls thereof that faith in God and in His word
does not first allow and admit.  And then, when it has come to that
within you, that is the best mind, that is the safest, the happiest, and
the most heavenly mind that you can attain to in this present life; and
when faith shall thus lead and rule over all things in thy soul, be thou
always ready, for thy speedy translation to a still better life is just
at the door.

2. 'The second was that famous captain, Good-hope.  His were the blue
colours.  His standard-bearer was Mr. Expectation, and for a scutcheon he
had three golden anchors; and he had ten thousand men at his feet.'  The
time was, my brethren, when all your hopes and mine were as yet anchored
without the veil.  But all that is now changed.  We still hope, in a mild
kind of way, for this thing and for that in this present life; but only
in a mild kind of way.  It would not be right in us not to look forward,
say, from spring-time to summer, and from summer to harvest.  If the
husbandman had not hope in the former and in the latter rain he would not
sow; and as it is with the husbandman so it is with us all: so ought it
to be, and so it must be.  But we say God willing! all the time that we
plot and plan and hope.  And we say God willing! no longer with a sigh,
but, now, always with a smile.  In His will is our tranquillity, we say,
and we know that if it is not His will that this and that slightly
anchored hope should be fulfilled, then that only means that all our
hopes, to be called hopes, are soon to be realised.  Our green and salad
days in the matter of hope are for ever past.  If we had it all
absolutely secured to us that this world is still promising to its salad
dupes, it would not come within a thousand miles of satisfying our
hearts.  Whether the hopes of our hearts are to be fulfilled within the
veil or no, that remains to be seen; but all the things without the veil
taken together do not any longer even pretend to promise a hope to hearts
like ours.  Our Forerunner has carried away our hearts with Him.  We have
no heart left for any one but Him, or for anything without or within the
veil that He is not and is not in.  And till that hope also has made us
ashamed,--till He and His promises have failed us like all the rest,--we
are going to anchor our hearts on that, and on that only, which we
believe is with Him within the veil.  If our Forerunner also disappoints
us; if we enter where He is, only to find that He is not there; or that,
though there, He is not able to satisfy our hope in Him, and make us like
Himself, then we shall be of all men the most miserable.  But not till
then.  No; not till then.  And thus it is that Captain Good-hope has his
billet in our heart; thus it is that his blue colours float over our
house; and thus it is that his three golden anchors are blazing out in
all their beauty on the best wall of our earthly house.

3.  'The third was that valiant captain, the Captain Charity.  His
standard-bearer was Mr. Pitiful, and for his scutcheon he had three naked
orphans embraced in his bosom; and he also had ten thousand men at his
feet.'  O Charity!  O valiant and pitiful Charity!  Divine-natured and
heavenly-minded Charity!  When wilt thou come and dwell in my heart?
When, by thine indwelling, shall I be able to love my neighbour, and all
my neighbours, as myself?  When, in thy strength, shall I cease from
repining at my neighbour's good; and when shall I cease secretly
rejoicing over his evil?  When shall I by thee renewing me, be made able
to cease in everything from seeking first my own will and my own way; my
own praise and my own glory?  When shall it be as much my new nature to
love my neighbour as it is now my old nature to hate him?  When shall I
cease to be so soon angry, and hard, and bitter, and scornful, and
unrelenting, and unforgiving?  When shall my neighbour's presence, his
image, and his name always call up only love and honour, good-will and
affectionate delight?  When and where shall I, under thee, feel for the
last time any evil of any kind in my heart against my brother?  Oh! to
see the day when I shall suffer long and be kind!  When I shall never
again vaunt myself or be puffed up!  When I shall bear all things,
believe all things, hope all things, endure all things!  O blessed,
blessed Charity! with thy divine heart, with thy dove-like eyes, and with
thy bosom full of pity, when wilt thou come into my sinful heart and
bring all heaven in with thee!  O Charity! till thou so comest I shall
wait for thee.  And, till thou comest, thy standard-bearer shall be my
door porter, and thy scutcheon shall hang night and day at my door-post!

4.  'The fourth captain was that gallant commander, the Captain Innocent.
His standard-bearer was Mr. Harmless; his were the white colours, and for
his scutcheon he had three golden doves.'  My brethren, how well it would
have been with us to-day if we had always lived innocently!  Had we only
been innocent of that man's, and that man's, and that man's, and that
man's hurt!  (Let us name all the men to ourselves.)  How many men have
we, first and last, hurt!  Some intentionally, and some unintentionally;
some deliberately, and some only by accident; some of malice, and some
only of misfortune; some innocently and unknowingly, and whom we never
properly hurt.  Some, also, by our mere existence; some by our best
actions; some because we have helped and not hurt others; and some out of
nothing else but the pure original devilry of their own evil hearts.  And
then, when we take all these men home to our hearts, what hearts all
these men give us!  Who, then, is the man here who has done to other men
the most hurt?  Who has caused or been the occasion of most hurt?  Let
that so unhappy man just think that the gallant commander, the Captain
Innocent himself, with his white colours and with his golden doves, is
standing and knocking at your evil door.  O unhappy man!  By all the hurt
and harm you have ever done--by all that you can never now undo--by those
spotless colours that are still snow and not yet scarlet as they wave
over you--by those three golden doves that are an emblem of the life that
still lies open before you, as well as an invitation to you to enter on
that life--why will you die of remorse and despair?  Open the door of
your heart and admit Captain Innocent.  He knows that of all hurtful men
on the face of the earth you are the most hurtful, but he is not on that
account afraid at you; indeed, it is on that account that he has come so
near to you.  By admitting him, by enlisting under him, by serving under
him, some of the most hurtful and injurious men that ever lived have
lived after to be the most innocent and the most harmless of men, with
their hands washed every day in innocency, and with three golden doves as
the scutcheon of their new nature and their Christian character.  Oh come
into my heart, Captain Innocent; there is room in my heart for thee!

5.  'And then the fifth was that truly royal and well-beloved captain,
the Captain Patience.  His standard-bearer was Mr. Suffer-long, and for a
scutcheon he had three arrows through a golden heart.'  Three arrows
through a golden heart!  Most eloquent, most impressive, and most
instructive of emblems!  First, a heart of gold, and then that heart of
gold pierced, and pierced, and then pierced again with arrow after arrow.
Patience was the last of Emmanuel's pickt graces.  Captain Patience with
his pierced heart always brought up the rear when the army marched.  But
when Captain Patience and Mr. Suffer-long did enter and take up their
quarters in any house in Mansoul,--then was there no house more safe,
more protected, more peaceful, more quietly, sweetly, divinely happy than
just that house where this loyal and well-beloved captain bore in his
heart.  Entertain patience, my brethren.  Practise patience, my brethren.
Make your house at home a daily school to you in which to learn patience.
Be sure that you well understand the times, the occasions, the
opportunities, and the invitations of patience, and take profit out of
them; and thus both your profit and that of others also will be great.
Tribulation worketh patience.  Endure tribulation, then, for the sake of
its so excellent work.  Nothing worketh patience like tribulation, and
therefore it is that tribulation so abounds in the lives of God's people.
So much does tribulation abound in the lives of God's people that they
are actually known in heaven and described there by their experience of
tribulation.  'These are they which came out of great tribulation, and
therefore are they before the throne.'  These are they with the three
sharp arrows shot through and through their hearts of gold.




CHAPTER XVIII--MR. DESIRES-AWAKE


   'One thing have I desired.'--_David_.

Mr. Desires-awake dwelt in a very mean cottage in Mansoul.  There were
two very mean cottages in Mansoul, and those two cottages stood beside
one another and leaned upon one another and held one another up.  Mr.
Desires-awake dwelt in the one of those cottages and Mr. Wet-eyes in the
other.  And those two mendicant men were wont to meet together for secret
prayer, when Mr. Desires-awake would put a rope upon his head, while Mr.
Wet-eyes would not be able to speak for wringing his hands in tears all
the time.  Many a time did those two meanest and most despised of men
deliver that city, according to the proverb of the Preacher: Wisdom is
better than strength, and the words of wisdom are to be heard in secret
places, where wisdom is far better than weapons of war.  Why should I not
do all for them and the best I can? said Mr. Desires-awake when the men
of Mansoul came to him in their extremity.  I will even venture my life
again for them at the pavilion of the Prince.  And accordingly this mean
man put his rope upon his head, as was his wont, and went out to the
Prince's tent and asked the reformades if he might see their Master.  Then
the Prince, coming to the place where the petitioner lay on the ground,
demanded what his name was and of what esteem he was in Mansoul, and why
he, of all the multitudes of Mansoul, was sent out to His Royal tent on
such an errand.  Then said the man to the Prince standing over him, he
said: Oh let not my Lord be angry; and why inquirest Thou after the name
of such a dead dog as I am?  Pass by, I pray Thee, and take not notice of
who I am, because there is, as Thou very well knowest, so great a
disproportion between Thee and me.  For my part, I am out of charity with
myself; who, then, should be in love with me?  Yet live I would, and so
would I that my townsmen should; and because both they and myself are
guilty of great transgressions, therefore they have sent me, and I have
come in their names to beg of my Lord for mercy.  Let it please Thee,
therefore, to incline to mercy; but ask not who Thy servant is.  All
this, and how Mr. Desires-awake and Mr. Wet-eyes sped in their petition,
is to be read at length in the Holy History.  And now let us take down
the key that hangs in our author's window and go to work with it on the
sweet mystery of Mr. Desires-awake.

1.  Well, then, to begin with, this poor man's name need not delay us
long seeking it out.  In shorter time, and with surer success than I
could give you the dictionary root of his name, if you will look within
you will all see the visual image of this poor man's name in your own
heart.  For our hearts are all as full as they can hold of all kinds of
desires; some good and some bad, some asleep and some awake, some alive
and some dead, some raging like a hundred hungry lions, and some
satisfied as a sleeping child.  Well, then, this mean man was called Mr.
Desires-awake, and what his desires were awake after and set upon we have
already seen in his head-dress and heard in his prayer.  His house, on
the other hand, will not be so well known.  For it was less a house than
a hut--a hut hidden away out of sight and back behind Mr. Wet-eyes' hut.
Mr. Desires-awake's cottage was so mean and meagre that no one ever came
to visit him unless it was his next-door neighbour.  They never left
their cottages, those two poor men, unless it was to see one another; or,
strange to tell, unless it was to go out at the city gate to see and to
speak with their Prince.  And at such times their venturesomeness both
astonished themselves and amused their Prince.  Sometimes he laughed to
see them back at his door again; but more often he wept to see and hear
them; all which made the guards of his pavilion to wonder who those two
strange men might be.  And thus it was that if at any long interval of
time any of the men of the city desired to see Mr. Desires-awake, he was
sure to be found at the pavilion door of his Prince, or else in his
neighbour's cottage, or else at home in his own.  From year's end to
year's end you might look in vain for either of those two poor men in the
public resorts of Mansoul.  When all the town was abroad on holidays and
fair-days and feast-days, those two mean men were then closest at home.
And when the booths of the town were full of all kinds of wares and
merchandise, and all the greens in the town were full of games, and
plays, and cheats, and fools, and apes, and knaves, only those two
penniless men would abide shut up at home.  At home; or else together
they would go to a market-stance set up by their Prince outside the walls
where one was stationed to stand and to cry: 'Ho! every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money.  Wherefore
do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that
which satisfieth not?  Incline your ear and come to me; hear, and your
soul shall live.'  And sometimes the Prince would go out in person to
meet the two men with nothing to pay, and would Himself say to them, I
counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in the fire, and white raiment, and
anoint thine eyes with eye-salve, till the two men, Mr. Desires-awake and
Mr. Wet-eyes, would go home to their huts laden with their Prince's free
gifts and royal bounties.

2.  But, with all that, Mr. Desires-awake never went out to his Prince's
pavilion till he had again put his rope upon his head.  And, however
laden with royal presents he ever returned to his mean cottage, he never
laid aside his rope.  He ate in his rope, he slept in his rope, he
visited his next-door neighbour in his rope, till the only instruction he
left behind him was to bury him in a ditch, and be sure to put his rope
upon his head.  The men and the boys of the town jeered at Mr. Desires-
awake as he passed up their streets in his rope, and the very mothers in
Mansoul taught their children in arms to run after him and to cry, Go up,
thou roped head!  Go up, thou roped head!  We be free men, the men of the
town called after him; and we never were in bondage to any man'.  Out
with him; out with him!  He is beside himself.  Much repentance hath made
him mad!  But through all that Mr. Desires-awake was as one that heard
them not.  For Mr. Desires-awake was full of louder voices within.  The
voices within his bosom quite drowned the babel around him.  The voices
within called him far worse names than the streets of the city ever
called him; till all he could do was to draw his rope down upon his head
and press on again to the Prince's pavilion.  You understand about that
rope, my brethren, do you not?  Mr. Desires-awake's continual rope?  In
old days when a guilty man came of his own accord to the judge to confess
himself deserving of death, he would put a rope upon his head.  And that
rope as much as said to the judge and to all men--the miserable man as
good as said: This is my desert.  This is the wages of my sin.  I justify
my judge.  I judge myself.  I hereby do myself to death.  And it was this
that so angered the happy holiday-makers of Mansoul.  For they forgave
themselves.  They justified themselves.  They put a high price upon
themselves.  Humiliation and sorrow for sin was not in all their
thoughts; and they hated and hunted back into his hut the humble man
whose gait and garb always reminded them of their past life and of their
latter end.  But for all they could do, Mr. Desires-awake would wear his
rope.  My soul chooseth strangling rather than sin, he would say.  My sin
hath found me out, he would say; I hate myself, he would say, because of
my sin.  I condemn and denounce myself.  I hang myself up with this rope
on the accursed tree.  And thus it was that while other men were
crucifying their Prince afresh, Mr. Desires-awake was crucifying himself
with and after his Prince.  And thus it was that while the men and the
women of the town so hated and so mocked Mr. Desires-awake, his Prince so
loved and so honoured him.

3.  'Oh let not my Lord be angry; and why inquirest Thou after the name
of such a dead dog as I am?' said Desires-awake to his Prince.  'Behold,
now, I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord which am but dust and
ashes,' said Abraham.  'If I wash myself with snow water, and make my
hands never so clean, yet shalt thou plunge me into the ditch, and mine
own clothes shall abhor me,' said Job.  'My wounds stink and are corrupt;
my loins are filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness
in my flesh,' said David.  'But we are all as an unclean thing,' said
Isaiah, 'and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.'  'I am the
chief of sinners,' said the apostle.  'Hold your peace; I am a devil and
not a man,' said Philip Neri to his sons.  'I am a sinner, and worse than
the chief of sinners, yea, a guilty devil,' said Samuel Rutherford.  'I
hated the light; I was a chief--the chief of sinners,' said Oliver
Cromwell.  'I was more loathsome in my own eyes than a toad,' said John
Bunyan.  'Sin and corruption would as naturally bubble out of my heart as
water would bubble out of a fountain.  I could have changed hearts with
anybody.  I thought none but the devil himself could equal me for
wickedness and pollution of mind.'  'O Despise me not,' said Bishop
Andrewes, 'an unclean worm, a dead dog, a putrid corpse.  The just
falleth seven times a day; and I, an exceeding sinner, seventy times
seven.  Me, O Lord, of sinners chief, chiefest, and greatest.'  And
William Law, 'An unclean worm, a dead dog, a stinking carcass.  Drive, I
beseech Thee, the serpent and the beast out of me.  O Lord, I detest and
abhor myself for all these my sins, and for all my abuse of Thine
infinite mercy.'  From all this, then, you will see that this dead dog of
ours with the rope upon his head was no strange sight at Emmanuel's
pavilion.  And you and I shall still be in the same saintly succession if
we go continually with his words in our mouth, and with his instrument in
our hands and on our heads.

4.  'The Prince to whom I went,' said Mr. Desires-awake, 'is such a one
for beauty and for glory that whoso sees Him must ever after both love
and fear Him.  I, for my part,' he said, 'can do no less; but I know not
what the end will be of all these things.'  What made Mr. Desires-awake
say that last thing was that when he was prostrate in his prayer the
Prince turned His head away, as if He was out of humour and out of
patience with His petitioner; while, all the time, the overcome Prince
was weeping with love and with pity for Desires-awake.  Only that poor
man did not see that, and would not have believed that even if he had
seen it.  'I cannot tell what the end will be,' said Desires-awake; 'but
one thing I know, I shall never be able to cease from both loving and
fearing that Prince.  I shall always love Him for His beauty and fear Him
for His glory.'  Can you say anything like that, my brethren?  Have you
been at His seat with sackcloth, and a rope, and ashes, and tears, and
prayers, like Abraham, and David, and Isaiah, and Paul, and John Bunyan,
and Bishop Andrewes?  And, whatever may be the end, do you say that
henceforth and for ever you must both love and fear that Prince?  'Though
He slay me,' said Job, 'yet I shall both love and trust Him.'  Well, the
Prince is the Prince, and He will take both His own time and His own way
of taking off your rope and putting a chain of gold round your neck, and
a new song in your mouth, as He did to Job.  There may be more weeping
yet, both on your side and on His before He does that; but He will do it,
and He will not delay an hour that He can help in doing it.  Only, do you
continue and increase to love His beauty, and to fear His glory.  And
that of itself will be reward and blessing enough to you.  Nay, once you
have seen both His beauty and His glory, then to lie a dog under His
table, and to beg at His door with a rope on your head to all eternity
would be a glorious eternity to you.  Samuel Rutherford said that to see
Christ through the keyhole once in a thousand years would be heaven
enough for him.  Christ wept in heaven as Rutherford wrote that letter in
Aberdeen, and if you make Him weep in the same way He will soon make you
to laugh too.  He will soon make you to laugh as Samuel Rutherford and
Mr. Desires-awake are laughing now.  Only, my brethren, answer this--Are
your desires awakened indeed after Jesus Christ?  You know what a desire
is.  Your hearts are full to the brim of desires.  Well, is there one
desire in a day in your heart for Christ?  In the multitude of your
desires within you, what share and what proportion go out and up to
Christ?  You know what beauty is.  You know and you love the beauty of a
child, of a woman, of a man, of nature, of art, and so on.  Do you know,
have you ever seen, the ineffable beauty of Christ?  Is there one saint
of God here,--and He has many saints here--is there one of you who can
say with David in the text, One thing do I desire?  There should be many
so desiring saints here; for Christ's beauty is far better and far
fairer, far more captivating, far more enthralling, and far more
satisfying to us than it could be to David.  Shall we call you Desires-
awake, then, after this?  Can you say--do you say, One thing do I desire,
and that is no thing and no person, no created beauty and no earthly
sweetness, but my one desire is for God: to be His, and to be like Him,
and to be for ever with Him?  Then, it shall soon all be.  For, what you
truly desire,--all that you already are; and what you already are,--all
that you shall soon completely and for ever be.  Whom have I in heaven
but Thee?  And there is none upon earth that I desire beside Thee.  My
flesh and my heart faileth; but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever.

'As for me,' says the great-hearted, the hungry-hearted Psalmist, 'I
shall be satisfied, when I awake, with Thy likeness.'  One would have
said that David had all that heart could desire even before he fell
asleep.  For he had a throne, the throne of Israel, and a son, a son like
Solomon to sit upon it.  A long life also, full to the brim of all kinds
of temporal and spiritual blessings.  Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all His benefits; who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who
healeth all thy diseases; who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who
crowneth thee with loving-kindness and tender mercies; who satisfieth thy
mouth with good things, so that thy youth is renewed like the eagle's.
All that, and yet not satisfied!  O David! David! surely Desires-awake is
thy new name!  One of our own poets has said:--

   'All thoughts, all passions, all delights,
      Whatever stirs this mortal frame,
   All are but ministers of Love,
      And feed His sacred flame.'

Now, if that is true, as it is true, even of earthly and ephemeral love,
how much more true is it of the love that is in the immortal soul of man
for the everlasting God?  And what a blessed life that already is when
all things that come to us--joy and sorrow, good and evil, nature and
grace, all thoughts, all passions, all delights--are all but so many
ministers to our soul's desire after God, after the Divine Likeness and
for the Beatific Vision.

   'Oh!  Christ, He is the Fountain,
      The deep sweet Well of Love!
   The streams on earth I've tasted,
      More deep I'll drink above;
   There, to an ocean fulness,
      His mercy doth expand;
   And glory--glory dwelleth
      In Emmanuel's land.'




CHAPTER XIX--MR. WET-EYES


   'Oh that my head were waters!'--_Jeremiah_.

   'Tears gain everything.'--_Teresa_.

Now Mr. Desires-awake, when he saw that he must go on this errand,
besought that they would grant that Mr. Wet-eyes might go with him.  Now
this Mr. Wet-eyes was a near neighbour of Mr. Desires-awake, a poor man,
and a man of a broken spirit, yet one that could speak well to a
petition; so they granted that he should go with him.  Wherefore the two
men at once addressed themselves to their serious business.  Mr. Desires-
awake put his rope upon his head, and Mr. Wet-eyes went with his hands
wringing together.  Then said the Prince, And what is he that is become
thy companion in this so weighty a matter?  So Mr. Desires-awake told
Emmanuel that this was a poor neighbour of his, and one of his most
intimate associates.  And his name, said he, may it please your most
excellent Majesty, is Wet-eyes, of the town of Mansoul.  I know that
there are many of that name that are naught, said he; but I hope it will
be no offence to my Lord that I have brought my poor neighbour with me.
Then Mr. Wet-eyes fell on his face to the ground, and made this apology
for his coming with his neighbour to his Lord:--

'Oh, my Lord,' quoth he, 'what I am I know not myself, nor whether my
name be feigned or true, especially when I begin to think what some have
said, and that is that this name was given me because Mr. Repentance was
my father.  But good men have sometimes bad children, and the sincere do
sometimes beget hypocrites.  My mother also called me by this name of
mine from my cradle; but whether she said so because of the moistness of
my brain, or because of the softness of my heart, I cannot tell.  I see
dirt in mine own tears, and filthiness in the bottom of my prayers.  But
I pray Thee (and all this while the gentleman wept) that Thou wouldst not
remember against us our transgressions, nor take offence at the
unqualifiedness of Thy servants, but mercifully pass by the sin of
Mansoul, and refrain from the magnifying of Thy grace no longer.'  So at
His bidding they arose, and both stood trembling before Him.

1.  'His name, may it please your Majesty, is Wet-eyes, of the town of
Mansoul.  I know, at the same time, that there are many of that name that
are naught.'  Naught, that is, for this great enterprise now in hand.  And
thus it was that Mr. Desires-awake in setting out for the Prince's
pavilion besought that Mr. Wet-eyes might go with him.  Mr. Desires-awake
felt keenly how much might turn on who his companion was that day, and
therefore he took Mr. Wet-eyes with him.  David would have made a most
excellent associate for Mr. Desires-awake that day.  'I am weary with my
groaning; all the night make I my bed to swim; I water my couch with my
tears.'  And again, 'Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they
keep not Thy law.'  This, then, was the only manner of man that Mr.
Desires-awake would stake his life alongside of that day.  'I have seen
some persons weep for the loss of sixpence,' said Mr. Desires-awake, 'or
for the breaking of a glass, or at some trifling accident.  And they
cannot pretend to have their tears valued at a bigger rate than they will
confess their passion to be when they weep.  Some are vexed for the
dirtying of their linen, or some such trifle, for which the least passion
is too big an expense.  And thus it is that a man cannot tell his own
heart simply by his tears, or the truth of his repentance by those short
gusts of sorrow.'  Well, then, my brethren, tell me, Do you think that
Mr. Desires-awake would have taken you that day to the pavilion door?
Would his head have been safe with you for his associate?  Your
associates see many gusts in your heart.  Do they ever see your eyes red
because of your sin?  Did you ever weep so much as one good tear-drop for
pure sin?  One true tear: not because your sins have found you out, but
for secret sins that you know can never find you out in this world?  And,
still better, do you ever weep in secret places not for sin, but for
sinfulness--which is a very different matter?  Do you ever weep to
yourself and to God alone over your incurably wicked heart?  If not, then
weep for that with all your might, night and day.  No mortal man has so
much cause to weep as you have.  Go to God on the spot, on every spot,
and say with Bishop Andrewes, who is both Mr. Desires-awake and Mr. Wet-
eyes in one, say with that deep man in his _Private Devotions_, say: 'I
need more grief, O God; I plainly need it.  I can sin much, but I cannot
correspondingly repent.  O Lord, give me a molten heart.  Give me tears;
give me a fountain of tears.  Give me the grace of tears.  Drop down, ye
heavens, and bedew the dryness of my heart.  Give me, O Lord, this saving
grace.  No grace of all the graces were more welcome to me.  If I may not
water my couch with my tears, nor wash Thy feet with my tears, at least
give me one or two little tears that Thou mayest put into Thy bottle and
write in Thy book!'  If your heart is hard, and your eyes dry, make
something like that your continual prayer.

2.  'A poor-man,' said Mr. Desires-awake, about his associate.  'Mr. Wet-
eyes is a poor man, and a man of a broken spirit.'  'Let Oliver take
comfort in his dark sorrows and melancholies.  The quantity of sorrow he
has, does it not mean withal the quantity of sympathy he has, and the
quantity of faculty and of victory he shall yet have?  Our sorrow is the
inverted image of our nobleness.  The depth of our despair measures what
capability and height of claim we have to hope.  Black smoke, as of
Tophet, filling all your universe, it can yet by true heart-energy become
flame, and the brilliancy of heaven.  Courage!'

   'This is the angel of the earth,
   And she is always weeping.'

3.  'A poor man, and a man of a broken spirit, and yet one that can speak
well to a petition.'  Yes; and you will see how true that eulogy of Mr.
Wet-eyes is if you will run over in your mind the outstanding instances
of successful petitioners in the Scriptures.  As you come down the Old
and the New Testaments you will be astonished and encouraged to find how
prevailing a fountain of tears always is with God.  David with his
swimming bed; Jeremiah with his head waters; Mary Magdalene over His feet
with her welling eyes; Peter's bitter cry all his life long as often as
he heard a cock crow, and so on.  So on through a multitude whose names
are written in heaven, and who went up to heaven all the way with
inconsolable sorrow because of their sins.  They took words and turned to
the Lord; but,--better than the best words,--they took tears, or rather,
their tears took them.  The best words, the words that the Holy Ghost
Himself teacheth, if they are without tears, will avail nothing.  Even
inspired words will not pass through; while, all the time, tears, mere
tears, without words, are omnipotent with God.  Words weary Him, while
tears overcome and command Him.  He inhabits the tears of Israel.
Therefore, also, now, saith the Lord, turn ye unto Me with all your
heart, and with weeping and with mourning.  And rend your heart, and not
your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God, for He is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repenteth Him of the
evil.  It is the same with ourselves.  Tears move us.  Tears melt us.  We
cannot resist tears.  Even counterfeit tears, we cannot be sure that they
are not true.  And that is the main reason why our Lord is so good at
speaking to a petition.  It is because His whole heart, and all the
moving passions of His heart, are in His intercessory office.  It is
because He still remembers in the skies His tears, His agonies, and
cries.  It is because He is entered into the holiest with His own tears
as well as with His own blood.  And it is because He will remain and
abide before the Father the Man of Sorrows till our last petition is
answered, and till God has wiped the last tear from our eyes.  When He
was in the coasts of Caesarea-Philippi, our Lord felt a great curiosity
to find out who the people thereabouts took Him to be.  And it must have
touched His heart to be told that some men had insight enough to insist
that He was the prophet Jeremiah come back again to weep over Jerusalem.
He is Elias, said some.  No; He is John the Baptist risen from the dead,
said others.  No, no; said some men who saw deeper than their neighbours.
His head is waters, and His eyes are a fountain of tears.  Do you not see
that He so often escapes into a lodge in the wilderness to weep for our
sins?  No; He is neither John nor Elijah; He is Jeremiah come back again
to weep over Jerusalem!  And even an apostle, looking back at the
beginning of our Lord's priesthood on earth, says that He was prepared
for His office by prayers and supplications, and with strong crying and
tears.  From all that, then, let us learn and lay to heart that if we
would have one to speak well to our petitions, the Man of Sorrows is that
one.  And then, as His remembrancers on our behalf, let us engage all
those among our friends who have the same grace of tears.  But, above
all, let us be men of tears ourselves.  For all the tears and all the
intercessions of our great High Priest, and all the importunings of our
best friends to boot, will avail us nothing if our own eyes are dry.  Let
us, then, turn back to Bishop Andrewes's prayer for the grace of tears,
and offer it every night with him till our head, like his, is holy
waters, and till, like him, we get beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

4.  'Clear as tears' is a Persian proverb when they would praise their
purest spring water.  But Mr. Wet-eyes has from henceforth spoiled the
point of that proverb for us.  'I see,' he said, 'dirt in mine own tears,
and filthiness in the bottom of my prayers.'  Mr. Wet-eyes is hopeless.
Mr. Wet-eyes is intolerable.  Mr. Wet-eyes would weary out the patience
of a saint.  There is no satisfying or pacifying or ever pleasing this
morbose Mr. Wet-eyes.  The man is absolutely insufferable.  Why, prayers
and tears that the most and best of God's people cannot attain to are
spurned and spat upon by Mr. Wet-eyes.  The man is beside himself with
his tears.  For, tears that would console and assure us for a long season
after them, he will weep over them as we scarce weep over our worst sins.
His closet always turns all his comeliness to corruption.  He comes out
of his closet after all night in it with his psalm-book wrung to pulp,
and with all his righteousnesses torn to filthy rags; till all men escape
Mr. Wet-eyes' society--all men except Mr. Desires-awake.  I will go out
on your errand now, said Mr. Desires-awake, if you will send Mr. Wet-eyes
with me.  And thus the two twin sons of sorrow for sin and hunger after
holiness went out arm in arm to the great pavilion together, Mr. Desires-
awake with his rope upon his head, and Mr. Wet-eyes with his hands
wringing together.  Thus they went to the Prince's pavilion.  I gave you
a specimen of one of Mr. Wet-eyes' prayers in the introduction to this
discourse, and you did not discover much the matter with it, did you?  You
did not discover much filthiness in the bottom of that prayer, did you?  I
am sure you did not.  Ah! but that is because you have not yet got Mr.
Wet-eyes' eyes.  When you get his eyes; when you turn and employ upon
yourselves and upon your tears and upon your prayers his always-wet
eyes,--then you will begin to understand and love and take sides with
this inconsolable soul, and will choose his society rather than that of
any other man--as often, at any rate, as you go out to the Prince's
pavilion door.

5.  'Mr. Repentance was my father, but good men sometimes have bad
children, and the most sincere do sometimes beget great hypocrites.  But,
I pray Thee, take not offence at the unqualifiedness of Thy servant.'
Take good note of that uncommon expression, 'unqualifiedness,' in Mr. Wet-
eyes' confession, all of you who are attending to what is being said.  Lay
'unqualifiedness' to heart.  Learn how to qualify yourselves before you
begin to pray.  In his fine comment on the 137th Psalm, Matthew Henry
discourses delightfully on what he calls 'deliberate tears.'  Look up
that raciest of commentators, and see what he there says about the
deliberate tears of the captives in Babylon.  It was the lack of
sufficient deliberation in his tears that condemned and alarmed Mr. Wet-
eyes that day.  He felt now that he had not deliberated and qualified
himself properly before coming to the Prince's pavilion.  Do not take up
your time or your thoughts with mere curiosities, either in your Bible or
in any other good book, says A Kempis.  Read such things rather as may
yield compunction to your heart.  And again, give thyself to compunction,
and thou shalt gain much devotion thereby.  Mr. Wet-eyes, good and true
soul, was afraid that he had not qualified himself enough by compunctious
reading and self-recollection.  The sincere, he sobbed out, do often
beget hypocrites!  'Our hearts are so deceitful in the matter of
repentance,' says Jeremy Taylor, 'that the masters of the spiritual life
are fain to invent suppletory arts and stratagems to secure the duty.'
Take not offence at the lack of all such suppletory arts and stratagems
in thy servant, said poor Wet-eyes.  All which would mean in the most of
us: Take not offence at my rawness and ignorance in the spiritual life,
and especially in the life of inward devotion.  Do not count up against
me the names and the numbers and the prices of my poems, and plays, and
novels, and newspapers, and then the number of my devotional books.
Compare not my outlay on my body and on this life with my outlay on my
soul and on the life to come.  Oh, take not mortal offence at the
shameful and scandalous unqualifiedness of Thy miserable servant.  My
father and my mother read the books of the soul, but they have left
behind them a dry-eyed reprobate in me!  Say that to-night as you look
around on the grievous famine of the suppletory arts and stratagems of
repentance and reformation in your heathenish bedroom.

Spiritual preaching; real face to face, inward, verifiable, experimental,
spiritual preaching; preaching to a heart in the agony of its
sanctification; preaching to men whose whole life is given over to making
them a new heart--that kind of preaching is scarcely ever heard in our
day.  There is great intellectual ability in the pulpit of our day, great
scholarship, great eloquence, and great earnestness, but spiritual
preaching, preaching to the spirit--'wet-eyed' preaching--is a lost art.
At the same time, if that living art is for the present overlaid and
lost, the literature of a deeper spiritual day abides to us, and our
spiritually-minded people are not confined to us, they are not dependent
on us.  Well, this is the Communion week with us yet once more.  Will you
not, then, make it the beginning of some of the suppletory arts and
stratagems of the spiritual life with yourselves?  I cannot preach as I
would like on such subjects, but I can tell you who could, and who,
though dead, yet speak by their immortal books.  You have the wet-eyed
psalms; but they are beyond the depth of most people.  Their meaning
seems to us on the surface, and we all read and sing them, but let us not
therefore think that we understand them.  I cannot compel you to read the
books, and to read little else but the books, that would in time, and by
God's blessing, lead you into the depths of the psalms; but I can wash my
hands so far in making their names so many household words among my
people.  The _Way to Christ_, the _Imitation of Christ_, the _Theologia
Germanica_, Tauler's _Sermons_, the _Mortification of Sin_, and
_Indwelling Sin in Believers_, the _Saint's Rest_, the _Holy Living and
Dying_, the _Privata Sacra_, the _Private Devotions_, the _Serious Call_,
the _Christian Perfection_, the _Religious Affections_, and such like.
All that, and you still unqualified!  All that, and your eyes still dry!




CHAPTER XX--MR. HUMBLE THE JURYMAN, AND MISS HUMBLE-MIND THE SERVANT-MAID


   'Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.'--_Our Lord_.

   'Be clothed with humility.'--_Peter_.

   'God's chiefest saints are the least in their own eyes.'--_A Kempis_.

   'Without humility all our other virtues are but vices.'--_Pascal_.

   'Humility does not consist in having a worse opinion of ourselves than
   we deserve.'--_Law_.

   'Humility lies close upon the heart, and its tests are exceedingly
   delicate and subtle.'--_Newman_.

Our familiar English word 'humility' comes down to us from the Latin root
_humus_, which means the earth or the ground.  Humility, therefore, is
that in the mind and in the heart of a man which is low down even to the
very earth.  A humble-minded man may not have learning enough to know the
etymology of the name which best describes his character, but the divine
nature which is in him teaches him to look down, to walk meekly and
softly, and to speak seldom, and always in love.  For humility, while it
takes its lowly name from earth, all the time has its true nature from
heaven.  Humility is full of all meekness, modesty, submissiveness,
teachableness, sense of inability, sense of unworthiness, sense of ill-
desert.  Till, with that new depth and new intensity that the Scriptures
and religious experience have given to this word, as to so many other
words, humility, in the vocabulary of the spiritual life, has come to be
applied to that low estimate of ourselves which we come to form and to
entertain as we are more and more enlightened about God and about
ourselves; about the majesty, glory, holiness, beauty, and blessedness of
the divine nature, and about our own unspeakable evil, vileness, and
misery as sinners.  And, till humility has come to rank in Holy
Scripture, and in the lives and devotions of all God's saints, as at once
the deepest root and the ripest fruit of all the divine graces that enter
into, and, indeed, constitute the life of God in the heart of man.
Humility, evangelical humility, sings Edwards in his superb and seraphic
poem the _Religious Affections_,--evangelical humility is the sense that
the true Christian has of his own utter insufficiency, despicableness,
and odiousness, a sense which is peculiar to the true saint.  But to
compensate the true saint for this sight and sense of himself, he has
revealed to him an accompanying sense of the absolutely transcendent
beauty of the divine nature and of all divine things; a sight and a sense
that quite overcome the heart and change to holiness all the dispositions
and inclinations and affections of the heart.  The essence of evangelical
humility, says Edwards, consists in such humility as becomes a creature
in himself exceeding sinful, but at the same time, under a dispensation
of grace, and this is the greatest and most essential thing in all true
religion.

1.  Well, then, our Mr. Humble was a juryman in Mansoul, and his name and
his nature eminently fitted him for his office.  I never was a juryman;
but, if I were, I feel sure I would come home from the court a far
humbler man than I went up to it.  I cannot imagine how a judge can
remain a proud man, or an advocate, or a witness, or a juryman, or a
spectator, or even a policeman.  I am never in a criminal court that I do
not tremble with terror all the time.  I say to myself all the
time,--there stands John Newton but for the preventing grace of God.  'I
will not sit as a judge to try General Boulanger, because I hate him,'
said M. Renault in the French Senate.  Mr. Humble himself could not have
made a better speech to the bench than that when his name was called to
be sworn.  Let us all remember John Newton and M. Renault when we would
begin to write or to speak about any arrested, accused, found-out man.
Let other men's arrests, humiliations, accusations, and sentences only
make us search well our own past, and that will make us ever humbler and
ever humbler men ourselves; ever more penitent men, and ever more
prayerful men.

2.  And then Miss Humble-mind, his only daughter, was a servant-maid.
There is no office so humble but that a humble mind will not put on still
more humility in it.  What a lesson in humility, not Peter only got that
night in the upper room, but that happy servant-maid also who brought in
the bason and the towel.  Would she ever after that night grumble and
give up her place in a passion because she had been asked to do what was
beneath her to do?  Would she ever leave that house for any wages?  Would
she ever see that bason without kissing it?  Would that towel not be a
holy thing ever after in her proud eyes?  How happy that house would ever
after that night be, not so much because the Lord's Supper had been
instituted in it, as because a servant was in it who had learned humility
as she went about the house that night.  Let all our servants hold up
their heads and magnify their office.  Their Master was once a servant,
and He left us all, and all servants especially, an example that they
should follow in His steps.  Peter, whose feet were washed that night,
never forgot that night, and his warm heart always warmed to a servant
when he saw her with her bason and her towels, till he gave her half a
chapter to herself in his splendid First Epistle.  'Servants, be
subject,' he said, till his argument rose to a height above which not
even Paul himself ever rose.  Servant-maids, you must all have your own
half-chapter out of First Peter by heart.

3.  But I have as many students of one kind or other here to-night as I
have maid-servants, and they will remember where a great student has said
that knowledge without love but puffeth a student up.  Now, the best
knowledge for us all, and especially so for a student, is to know
himself: his own ignorance, his own foolishness, his blindness of mind,
and, especially, his corruption of heart.  For that knowledge will both
keep him from being puffed up with what he already knows, and it will
also put him and keep him in the way of knowing more.  Self-knowledge
will increase humility, and all the past masters both of science and of
religion will tell him that humility is the certain note of the true
student.  You who are students all know _The Advancement of Learning_,
just as the servants sitting beside you all know the second chapter of
First Peter.  Well, your master Verulam there tells you, and indeed on
every page of his, that it is only to a humble, waiting, childlike temper
that nature, like grace, will ever reveal up her secrets.  'There is
small chance of truth at the goal when there is not a childlike humility
at the starting-post.'  Well, then, all you students who would fain get
to the goal of science, make the Church of Christ your starting-post.
Come first and come continually to the Christian school to learn
humility, and then, as long as your talents, your years, and your
opportunities hold out, both truth and goodness will open up to you at
every step.  Every step will be a goal, and at every goal a new step will
open up.  And God's smile and God's blessing, and all good men's love and
honour and applause will support and reward you in your race.  And,
humble-minded to the truth herself, be, at the same time, humble-minded
toward all who like yourself are seeking to know and to do the truth.  A
lately deceased student of nature was a pattern to all students as long
as he waited on truth in his laboratory; and even as long as he remained
at his desk to tell the world what he and other students had discovered
in their search.  But when any other student in his search after truth
was compelled to cross that hitherto so exemplary student, he immediately
became as insolent as if he had been the greatest boor in the country.
Till, as he spat out scorn at all who differed from him we always
remembered this in A Kempis--'Surely, an humble husbandman that serveth
God is better than a proud philosopher that, neglecting himself,
laboureth to understand the course of the heavens.  It is great wisdom
and perfection to esteem nothing of ourselves, and to think always well
and highly of others.'  Students of arts, students of philosophy,
students of law, students of medicine, and especially, students of
divinity, be humble men.  Labour in humility even more than in your
special science.  Humility will advance you in your special science;
while, all the time, and at the end of time, she will be more to you than
all the other sciences taken together.  And since I have spoken of A
Kempis, take this motto for all your life out of A Kempis, as the great
and good Fenelon did, and it will guide you to the goal: _Ama nescia et
pro nihilo reputari_.

4.  But of all the men in the whole world it is ministers who should
simply, as Peter says, be clothed with humility, and that from head to
foot.  And, first as divinity students, and then as pastors and
preachers, we who are ministers have advantages and opportunities in this
respect quite peculiar and private to ourselves.  For, while other
students are spending their days and their nights on the ancient classics
of Greece and Rome, the student who is to be a minister is buried in the
Psalms, in the Gospels, and in the Epistles.  While the student of law is
deep in his commentaries and his cases, the student of divinity is deep
in the study of experimental religion.  And while the medical student is
full of the diseases of animals and of men, the theological student is
absorbed in the holiness of the divine nature, and in the plague of the
human heart, and, especially, he is drowned deeper every day in his own.
And he who has begun a curriculum like that and is not already putting on
a humility beyond all other men had better lose no more time, but turn
himself at once to some other way of making his bread.  The word of God
and his own heart,--yes; what a sure school of evangelical humility to
every evangelically-minded student is that!  And, then, after that, and
all his days, his congregational communion-roll and his visiting-book.
Let no minister who would be found of God clothed and canopied over with
humility ever lose sight of his communion-roll and pastoral visitation-
book.  I defy any minister to keep those records always open before him
and yet remain a proud man, a self-respecting, self-satisfied,
self-righteous man.  For, what secret histories of his own folly,
neglect, rashness, offensiveness, hot-headedness, self-seeking,
self-pleasing vanity, now puffed up over one man, now cast down and full
of gloom over another, what self-flattery here, and what resentment and
retaliation there; and so on, as only his own eyes and his Divine
Master's eye can read between every diary line.  What shame will cover
that minister as with a mantle when he thinks what the Christian ministry
might be made, and then takes home to himself what he has made it!  Let
any minister shut himself in with his communion-roll and his visiting-
book before each returning communion season, and there will be one worthy
communicant at least in the congregation: one who will have little
appetite all that week for any other food but the broken Body and the
shed Blood of his Redeemer.  But these are professional matters that the
outside world has nothing to do with and would not understand.  Only, let
all young men who would have evangelical humility absolutely secured and
sealed to them,--let them come and be ministers.  Just as all young men
who would have any satisfaction in life, any sense of work well done and
worthy of reward, any taste of a goal attained and an old age earned, let
them take to anything in all this world but the evangelical pulpit and
its accompanying pastorate.

5.  But humility is not a grace of the pulpit and the pastorate only.  It
is not those who are separated by the Holy Ghost to study the word of God
and their own hearts all their life long only, who are called to put on
humility.  All men are called to that grace.  There is no acceptance with
God for any man without that grace.  There is no approach to God for any
man without it.  All salvation begins and ends in it.  Would you, then,
fain possess it?  Would you, then, fain attain to it?  Then let there be
no mystery and no mistake made about it.  Would any man here fain get
down to that deep valley where God's saints walk in the sweet shade and
lie down in green pastures?  Well, I warrant him that just before him,
and already under his eye, there is a flight of steps cut in the hill,
which steps, if he will take them, will, step after step, take him also
down to that bottom.  The whole face of this steep and slippery world is
sculptured deep with such submissive steps.  Indeed, when a man's eyes
are once turned down to that valley, there is nothing to be seen anywhere
in all this world but downward steps.  Look whichever way you will, there
gleams out upon you yet another descending stair.  Look back at the way
you came up.  But take care lest the sight turns you dizzy.  Look at any
spot you once crossed on your way up, and, lo! every foot-print of yours
has become a descending step.  You sink down as you look, broken down
with shame and with horror and with remorse.  There are people, some
still left in this world, and some gone to the other world, people whom
you dare not think of lest you should turn sick and lose hold and hope.
There are places you dare not visit: there are scenes you dare not
recall.  Lucifer himself would be a humble angel with his wings over his
face if he had a past like yours, and would often enough return to look
at it.  And, then, not the past only, but at this present moment there
are people and things placed close beside you, and kept close beside you,
and you close beside them, on divine purpose just to give you continual
occasion and offered opportunity to practise humility.  They are kept
close beside you just on purpose to humiliate you, to cut out your
descending steps, to lend you their hand, and to say to you: Keep near
us.  Only keep your eye on us, and we will see you down!  And then, if
you are resolute enough to look within, if you are able to keep your eye
on what goes on in your own heart like heart--beats, then, already, I
know where you are.  You are under all men's feet.  You are ashamed to
lift up your eyes to meet other men's eyes.  You dare not take their
honest hands.  You could tell Edwards himself things about humiliation
now that would make his terribly searching and humbling book quite tame
and tasteless.

Come, then, O high-minded man, be sane, be wise.  If you were up on a
giddy height, and began to see that certain death was straight and soon
before you, what would you do?  You know what you would do.  You would
look with all your eyes for such steps as would take you safest down to
the solid ground.  You would welcome any hand stretched out to help you.
You would be most attentive and most obedient and most thankful to any
one who would assure you that this is the right way down.  And you would
keep on saying to yourself--Once I were well down, no man shall see me up
here again.  Well, my brethren, humiliation, humility, is to be learned
just in the same way, and it is to be learned in no other way.  He who
would be down must just come down.  That is all.  A step down, and
another step down, and another, and another, and already you are well
down.  A humble act done to-day, a humble word spoken to-morrow;
humiliation after humiliation accepted every day that you would at one
time have spurned from you with passion; and then your own vile, hateful,
unbearable heart-all that is ordained of God to bring you down, down to
the dust; and this last, your own heart, will bring you down to the very
depths of hell.  And thus, after all your other opportunities and
ordinances of humility are embraced and exhausted, then the plunges, the
depths, the abysses of humility that God will open up in your own heart
will all work in you a meetness for heaven and a ripeness for its glory,
that shall for ever reward you for all that degradation and shame and
self-despair which have been to you the sure way and the only way to
everlasting life.




CHAPTER XXI--MASTER THINK-WELL, THE LATE AND ONLY SON OF OLD MR.
MEDITATION


   'As he thinketh in his heart, so is he.'--_A Proverb_.

It was a truly delightful sight to see old Mr. Meditation and his only
son, our little Think-well, out among the woods and hedgerows of a summer
afternoon.  Little Think-well was the son of his father's old age.  That
dry tree used to say to himself that if ever he was intrusted with a son
of his own, he would make his son his most constant and his most
confidential companion all his days.  And so he did.  The eleventh of
Deuteronomy had become a greater and greater text to that childless man
as he passed the mid-time of his days.  'Therefore,' he used to say to
himself, as he walked abroad alone, and as other men passed him with
their children at their side--'Therefore ye shall teach them to your
children, speaking of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when
thou walkest by the way, when thou liest down and when thou risest up.
And thou shalt write them upon the doorposts of thine house and upon thy
gates.'  And thus it was that, as the little lad grew up, there was no
day of all the seven that he so much numbered and waited for as was that
sacred day on which his father was free to take little Think-well by the
hand and lead him out to talk to him.  'No,' said an Edinburgh boy to his
mother the other day--'No, mother,' he said, 'I have no liking for these
Sunday papers with their poor stories and their pictures.  I am to read
the Bible stories and the Bible biographies first.'  He is not my boy.  I
wish my boys were all like him.  'And Plutarch on week-days for such a
boy,' I said to his mother.  How to keep a decent shred of the old
sanctification on the modern Sabbath-day is the anxious inquiry of many
fathers and mothers among us.  My friend with her manly-minded boy, and
Mr. Meditation with little Think-well had no trouble in that matter.

         'And once I said,
   As I remember, looking round upon those rocks
   And hills on which we all of us were born,
   That God who made the Great Book of the world
   Would bless such piety;--
   Never did worthier lads break English bread:
   The finest Sunday that the autumn saw,
   With all its mealy clusters of ripe nuts,
   Could never keep those boys away from church,
   Or tempt them to an hour of Sabbath breach,
   Leonard and James!'

Think-well and that mother's son.

Old Mr. Meditation, the father, was sprung of a poor but honest and
industrious stock in the city.  He had not had many talents or
opportunities to begin with, but he had made the very best of the two he
had.  And then, when the two estates of Mr. Fritter-day and Mr. Let-good-
slip were sequestered to the crown, the advisers of the crown handed over
those two neglected estates to Mr. Meditation to improve them for the
common good, and after him to his son, whose name we know.  The steps of
a good man are ordered of the Lord, and He delighteth in his way.  I have
been young and now am old; yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken,
nor his seed begging bread.

Now, this Think-well old Mr. Meditation had by Mrs. Piety, and she was
the daughter of the old Recorder.   'I am Thy servant,' said Mrs. Piety's
son on occasion all his days--'I am Thy servant and the son of Thine
handmaid.'  And at that so dutiful acknowledgment of his a long
procession of the servants of God pass up before our eyes with their
sainted mothers leaning on the arms of their great sons.  The Psalmist
and his mother, the Baptist and his mother, our Lord and His mother, the
author of the Fourth Gospel and his mother, Paul's son and successor in
the gospel and his mother and grandmother, the author of _The
Confessions_ and his mother; and, in this noble connection, I always
think of Halyburton and his good mother.  And in this ennobling
connection you will all think of your own mother also, and before we go
any further you will all say, I also, O Lord, am Thy servant and the son
of Thine handmaid.  'Fathers and mothers handle children differently,'
says Jeremy Taylor.  And then that princely teacher of the Church of
Christ Catholic goes on to tell us how Mrs. Piety handled her little
Think-well which she had borne to Mr. Meditation.  After other things,
she said this every night before she took sleep to her tired eyelids,
this: 'Oh give me grace to bring him up.  Oh may I always instruct him
with diligence and meekness; govern him with prudence and holiness; lead
him in the paths of religion and justice; never provoking him to wrath,
never indulging him in folly, and never conniving at an unworthy action.
Oh sanctify him in his body, soul, and spirit.  Let all his thoughts be
pure and holy to the Searcher of hearts; let his words be true and
prudent before men; and may he have the portion of the meek and the
humble in the world to come, and all through Jesus Christ our Lord!'  How
could a son get past a father and a mother like that?  Even if, for a
season, he had got past them, he would be sure to come back.  Only, their
young Think-well never did get past his father and his mother.

There was not so much word of heredity in his day; but without so much of
the word young Think-well had the whole of the thing.  And as time went
on, and the child became more and more the father of the man, it was seen
and spoken of by all the neighbours who knew the house, how that their
only child had inherited all his father's head, and all his mother's
heart, and then that he had reverted to his maternal grandfather in his
so keen and quick sense of right and wrong.  All which, under whatever
name it was held, was a most excellent outfit for our young gentleman.
His old father, good natural head and all, had next to no book-learning.
He had only two or three books that he read a hundred times over till he
had them by heart.  And as he sighed over his unlettered lot he always
consoled himself with a saying he had once got out of one of his old
books.  The saying of some great authority was to this effect, that 'an
old and simple woman, if she loves Jesus, may be greater than our great
brother Bonaventure.'  He did not know who Bonaventure was, but he always
got a reproof again out of his name.  Think-well, to his father's immense
delight, was a very methodical little fellow, and his father and he had
orderly little secrets that they told to none.  Little secret plans as to
what they were to read about, and think about, and pray about on certain
days of the week and at certain hours of the day and the night.  You must
not call the father an old pedant, for the fact is, it was the son who
was the pedant if there was one in that happy house.  The two intimate
friends had a word between them they called _agenda_.  And nobody but
themselves knew where they had borrowed that uncouth word, what language
it was, or what it meant.  Only in the old man's tattered pocket-book
there were things like this found by his minister after his death.
Indeed, in a museum of such relics this is still to be read under a glass
case, and in old Mr. Meditation's ramshackle hand: 'Monday, death;
Tuesday, judgment; Wednesday, heaven; Thursday, hell; Friday, my past
life back to my youth; Saturday, the passion of my Saviour; Lord's day,
creation, salvation, and my own.--M.'  And then, on an utterly illegible
page, this: 'Jesus, Thy life and Thy words are a perpetual sermon to me.
I meditate on Thee all the day.  Make my memory a vessel of election.  Let
all my thoughts be plain, honest, pious, simple, prudent, and charitable,
till Thou art pleased to draw the curtain and let me see Thyself, O
Eternal Jesu!'  If I had time I could tell you more about Think-well's
quaint old father.  But the above may be better than nothing about the
rare old gentleman.

A great authority has said--two great authorities have said in their
enigmatic way, that a 'dry light is ever the best.'  That may be so in
some cases and to some uses, but nothing can be more sure than this, that
the light that little Think-well got from his father's head was
excellently drenched in his mother's heart.  The sweet moisture of his
mother's heart mixed up beautifully with his father's drier head and made
a fine combination in their one boy as it turned out.  Her minister,
preaching on one occasion on my text for to-night, had said--and she had
such a memory for a sermon that she had never forgotten it, but had laid
it up in her heart on the spot--'As the philosopher's stone,' the old-
fashioned preacher had said, 'turns all metals into gold, as the bee
sucks honey out of every flower, and as the good stomach sucks out some
sweet and wholesome nourishment out of whatever it takes into itself, so
doth a holy heart, so far as sanctified, convert and digest all things
into spiritual and useful thoughts.  This you may see in Psalm cvii. 43.'
And in her plain, silent, hidden, motherly way Mistress Piety adorned her
old minister's doctrine of the holy heart that he was always preaching
about, till she shared her soft and holy heart with her son, as his
father had shared his clear and deep, if too unlearned, head.

We have one grandmother at least signalised in the Bible; but no
grandfather, so far as I remember.  But amends are made for that in the
_Holy War_.  For Think-well would never have been the man he became had
it not been for the old Recorder, his grandfather on his mother's side.
Some superficial people said that there was too much severity in the old
Recorder; but his grandson who knew him best, never said that.  He was
the best of men, his grandson used to stand up for him, and say, I shall
never forget the debt I owe him.  It was he who taught me first to make
conscience of my thoughts.  Indeed, as for my secret thoughts, I had
taken no notice of them till that summer afternoon walk home from church,
when we sat down among the bushes and he showed me on the spot the way.
And I can say to his memory that scarce for one waking hour have I any
day forgotten the lesson.  The lesson how to make a conscience, as he
said, of all my thoughts about myself and about all my neighbours.  Such,
then, were Think-well's more immediate ancestors, and such was the
inheritance that they all taken together had left him.

Think-well!  Think-well!  My brethren, what do you think, what do you
say, as you hear that fine name?  I will tell you what I think and say.
If I overcome, and have that white stone given to me, and in that stone a
new name written which no man shall know saving he that receiveth it; and
if it were asked me here to-night what I would like my new name to be, I
would say on the spot, Let it be THINK-WELL!  Let my new name among the
saved and the sanctified before the throne be THINK-WELL!  As, O God, it
will be the bottomless pit to me, if I am forsaken of Thee for ever to my
evil thoughts.  Send down and prevent it.  Stir up all Thy strength and
give commandment to prevent it.  Do Thou prevent it.  For, after I have
done all,--after I have made all my overt acts blameless, after I have
tamed my tongue which no man can tame--all that only the more throws my
thoughts into a very devil's garden, a thicket of hell, a secret swamp of
sin to the uttermost.  How, then, am I ever to attain to that white stone
and that shining name?  And that in a world of such truth that every
man's name and title there shall be a strict and true and entirely
accurate and adequate description and exposition of the very thoughts and
intents and imaginations of his heart?  How shall I, how shall you, my
brethren, ever have 'Think-well' written on our forehead?--Well, with God
all things are possible.  With God, with a much meditating mind, and a
true and humble and tender heart, and a pure conscience, a conscience
void of offence, working together with Him--He, with all these
inheritances and all these environments working together with Him, will
at last enable us, you and me, to lift up such a clear and transparent
forehead.  But not without our constant working together.  We must
ourselves make head, and heart, and, especially, conscience of all our
thoughts--for a long lifetime we must do that.  The _Ductor Dubitantium_
has a deep chapter on 'The Thinking Conscience.'  And what a reproof to
many of us lies in the mere name!  For how much evil-thinking and evil-
speaking we have all been guilty of through our unthinking conscience and
through a zeal for God, but a zeal without knowledge.  Look back at the
history of the Church and see; look back at your own history in the
Church and see.  Yes, make conscience of your thoughts: but let it first
be an instructed conscience, a thinking conscience, a conscience full of
the best and the clearest light.  And then let us also make ourselves a
new heart and a new spirit, as Ezekiel has it.  For our hearts are
continually perverting and polluting and poisoning our thoughts.  That is
a fearful thing that is said about the men on whom the flood soon came.
You remember what is said about them, and in explanation and
justification of the flood.  God saw, it is said, that every imagination
of the thoughts of their hearts was evil, and only evil continually.
Fearful!  Far more fearful than ten floods!  O God, Thou seest us.  And
Thou seest all the imaginations of the thoughts of our hearts.  Oh give
us all a mind and a heart and a conscience to think of nothing, to fear
nothing, to watch and to pray about nothing compared with our thoughts.
'As for my secret thoughts,' says the author of the _Holy War_ and the
creator of Master Think-well--'As for my secret thoughts, I paid no
attention to them.  I never knew I had them.  I had no pain, or shame, or
guilt, or horror, or despair on account of them till John Gifford took me
and showed me the way.'  And then when John Bunyan, being the man of
genius he was,--as soon as he began to attend to his own secret thoughts,
then the first faint outline of this fine portrait of Think-well began to
shine out on the screen of this great artist's imagination, and from that
sanctified screen this fine portrait of Think-well and his family has
shined into our hearts to-night.




CHAPTER XXII--MR. GOD'S-PEACE, A GOODLY PERSON, AND A SWEET-NATURED
GENTLEMAN


   'Let the peace of God rule in your hearts,--the peace of God that
   passeth all understanding.'--_Paul_.

John Bunyan is always at his very best in allegory.  In some other
departments of work John Bunyan has had many superiors; but when he lays
down his head on his hand and begins to dream, as we see him in some of
the old woodcuts, then he is alone; there is no one near him.  We have
not a few greater divines in pure divinity than John Bunyan.  We have
some far better expositors of Scripture than John Bunyan, and we have
some far better preachers.  John Bunyan at his best cannot open up a deep
Scripture like that prince of expositors, Thomas Goodwin.  John Bunyan in
all his books has nothing to compare for intellectual strength and for
theological grasp with Goodwin's chapter on the peace of God, in his
sixth book in _The Work of the Holy Ghost_.  John Bunyan cannot set forth
divine truth in an orderly method and in a built-up body like John Owen.
He cannot Platonize divine truth like his Puritan contemporary, John
Howe.  He cannot soar high as heaven in the beauty and the sweetness of
gospel holiness like Jonathan Edwards.  He has nothing of the
philosophical depth of Richard Hooker, and he has nothing of the vast
learning of Jeremy Taylor.  But when John Bunyan's mind and heart begin
to work through his imagination, then--

      'His language is not ours.
   'Tis my belief God speaks; no tinker hath such powers.'

1.  In the beginning of his chapter on 'Speaking peace,' Thomas Goodwin
tells his reader that he is going to fully couch all his intendments
under a metaphor and an allegory.  But Goodwin's reader has read and re-
read the great chapter, and has not yet discovered where the metaphor and
the allegory came in and where they went out.  But Bunyan does not need
to advertise his reader that he is going to couch his teaching in his
imagination.

   'But having now my method by the end,
   Still, as I pulled it came: and so I penned
   It down; until at last it came to be
   For length and breadth the bigness that you see.'

The Blessed Prince, he begins, did also ordain a new officer in the town,
and a goodly person he was.  His name was Mr. God's-peace.  This man was
set over my Lord Will-be-will, my Lord Mayor, Mr. Recorder, the
subordinate preacher, Mr. Mind, and over all the natives of the town of
Mansoul.  Himself was not a native of the town, but came with the Prince
from the court above.  He was a great acquaintance of Captain Credence
and Captain Good-hope; some say they were kin, and I am of that opinion
too.  This man, as I said, was made governor of the town in general,
especially over the castle, and Captain Credence was to help him there.
And I made great observation of it, that so long as all things went in
the town as this sweet-natured gentleman would have them go, the town was
in a most happy condition.  Now there were no jars, no chiding, no
interferings, no unfaithful doings in all the town; every man in Mansoul
kept close to his own employment.  The gentry, the officers, the
soldiers, and all in place, observed their order.  And as for the women
and the children of the town, they followed their business joyfully.  They
would work and sing, work and sing, from morning till night; so that
quite through the town of Mansoul now nothing was to be found but
harmony, quietness, joy, and health.  And this lasted all the summer.  I
shall step aside at this point and shall let Jonathan Edwards comment on
this sweet-natured gentleman and his heavenly name.  'God's peace has an
exquisite sweetness,' says Edwards.  'It is exquisitely sweet because it
has so firm a foundation on the everlasting rock.  It is sweet also
because it is so perfectly agreeable to reason.  It is sweet also because
it riseth from holy and divine principles, which, as they are the virtue,
so are they the proper happiness of man.  This peace is exquisitely sweet
also because of the greatness of the good that the saints enjoy, being no
other than the infinite bounty and fulness of that God who is the
Fountain of all good.  It is sweet also because it shall be enjoyed to
perfection hereafter.'  An enthusiastic student has counted up the number
of times that this divine word 'sweetness' occurs in Edwards, and has
proved that no other word of the kind occurs so often in the author of
_True Virtue_ and _The Religious Affections_.  And I can well believe it;
unless the 'beauty of holiness' runs it close.  Still, this sweet-natured
gentleman will continue to live for us in his government and jurisdiction
in Mansoul and in John Bunyan even more than in Jonathan Edwards.

2.  'Now Mr. God's-peace, the new Governor of Mansoul, was not a native
of the town; he came down with his Prince from the court above.'  'He was
not a native'--let that attribute of his be written in letters of gold on
every gate and door and wall within his jurisdiction.  When you need the
governor and would seek him at any time or in any place in all the town
and cannot find him, recollect yourself where he came from: he may have
returned thither again.  John Bunyan has couched his deepest instruction
to you in that single sentence in which he says, 'Mr. God's-peace was not
a native of the town.'  John Bunyan has gathered up many gospel
Scriptures into that single allegorical sentence.  He has made many old
and familiar passages fresh and full of life again in that one
metaphorical sentence.  It is the work of genius to set forth the wont
and the well known in a clear, simple, and at the same time surprising,
light like that.  There is a peace that is native and natural to the town
of Mansoul, and to understand that peace, its nature, its grounds, its
extent, and its range, is most important to the theologian and to the
saint.  But to understand the peace of God, that supreme peace, the peace
that passeth all understanding,--that is the highest triumph of the
theologian and the highest wisdom of the saint.  The prophets and the
psalmists of the Old Testament are all full of the peace that God gave to
His people Israel.  My peace I give unto you, says our Lord also.  Paul
also has taken up that peace that comes to us through the blood of
Christ, and has made it his grand message to us and to all sinful and sin-
disquieted men.  And John Bunyan has shown how sure and true a successor
of the apostles of Christ he is, just in his portrait of this
sweet-natured gentleman who was not a native of Mansoul, but who came
from that same court from which Emmanuel Himself came.  And it is just
this outlandishness of this sweet-natured gentleman; it is just this
heavenly origin and divine extraction of his that makes him sometimes and
in some things to surpass all earthly understanding.  'I am coming some
day soon,' said a divinity student to me the other Sabbath night, 'to
have you explain and clear up the atonement to me.'  'I shall be glad to
see you,' I said, 'but not on that errand.'  No.  Paul himself could not
do it.  Paul said that the atonement and the peace of it passed all his
understanding.  And John Bunyan says here that not the Prince only, but
his officer Mr. God's-peace also, was not native to the town of Mansoul,
but came straight down from heaven into that town--and what can the man
do who cometh after two kings like Paul and Bunyan?  I have not forgotten
my Edwards where he says that the exquisite sweetness of this peace is
perfectly agreeable to reason.  As, indeed, so it is.  And yet, if reason
will have a clear and finished and all-round answer to all her
difficulties and objections and fault-findings, I fear she cannot have it
here.  The time may come when our reason also shall be so enlarged, and
so sanctified, and so exalted, that she shall be able with all saints to
see the full mystery of that which in this present dispensation passeth
all understanding.  But till then, only let God's peace enter our hearts
with God's Son, and then let our hearts say if that peace must not in
some high and deep way be according to the highest and the deepest
reason, since its coming into our hearts has produced in our hearts and
in our lives such reasonable, and right, and harmonious, and peaceful,
and every way joyful results.

3.  Governor God's-peace had not many in the town of Mansoul to whom he
could confide all his thoughts and with whom he could consult.  But there
were two officer friends of his stationed in the town with whom he was
every day in close correspondence, viz., the Captain Credence and the
Captain Good-hope.  Their so close intimacy will not be wondered at when
it is known that those three officers had all come in together with
Emmanuel the Conqueror.  Those three young captains had done splendid
service, each at the head of his own battalion, in the days of the
invasion and the conquest of Mansoul, and they had all had their present
titles, and privileges, and lands, and offices, patented to them on the
strength of their past services.  The Captain Credence had all along been
the confidential aide-de-camp and secretary of the Prince.  Indeed, the
Prince never called Captain Credence a servant at all, but always a
friend.  The Prince had always conveyed his mind about all Mansoul's
matters first to Captain Credence, and then that confidential captain
conveyed whatever specially concerned God's-peace and Good-hope to those
excellent and trusty soldiers.  Credence first told all matters to God's-
peace and then the two soon talked over Good-hope to their mind and
heart.  Some say that the three officers, Credence, God's-peace, and Good-
hope, were kin, adds our historian, and I, he adds, am of that opinion
too.  And to back up his opinion he takes an extract out of the Herald's
College books which runs thus: 'Romans, fifteenth and thirteenth: Now,
the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye may
abound in hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost.'  Some say the three
officers were of kin, and I am of that opinion too.

4.  On account both of his eminent services and his great abilities, the
Prince saw it good to set Mr. God's-peace over the whole town.  And thus
it was that the governor's jurisdiction extended and held not only over
the people of the town, but also over all the magistrates and all the
other officers of the town, such as my Lord Will-be-will, my Lord Mayor,
Mr. Recorder, Mr. Mind, and all.  It needed all the governor's authority
and ability to keep his feet in his office over all the other rulers of
the town, but by far his greatest trouble always was with the Recorder.
Old Mr. Conscience, the Town Recorder, had a very difficult post to hold
and a very difficult part to play in that still so divided and still so
unsettled town.  What with all those murderers and man-slayers, thieves
and prostitutes, skulkers and secret rebels, on the one hand, and with
Governor God's-peace and his so unaccountable and so autocratic ways, on
the other hand, the Recorder's office was no sinecure.  All the
misdemeanours and malpractices of the town,--and they were happening
every day and every night,--were all reported to the Recorder; they were
all, so to say, charged home upon the Recorder, and he was held
responsible for them all; till his office was a perfect laystall and
cesspool of all the scum and corruption of the town.  And yet, in would
come Governor God's-peace, without either warning or explanation, and
would demand all the Recorder's papers, and proofs, and affidavits, and
what not, it had cost him so much trouble to get collected and indorsed,
and would burn them all before the Recorder's face, and to his utter
confusion, humiliation, and silence.  So autocratic, so despotic, so
absolute, and not-to-be-questioned was Governor God's-peace.  The
Recorder could not understand it, and could barely submit to it; my Lord
Mayor could not understand it, and his clerk, Mr. Mind, would often
oppose it; but there it was: Mr. Governor God's-peace was set over them
all.

5.  But the thing that always in the long-run justified the governorship
of Mr. God's-peace, and reconciled all the other officers to his
supremacy, was the way that the city settled down and prospered under his
benignant rule.  All the other officers admitted that, somehow, his
promotion and power had been the salvation of Mansoul.  They all extolled
their Prince's far-seeing wisdom in the selection, advancement, and
absolute seat of Mr. God's-peace.  And it would ill have become them to
have said anything else; for they had little else to do but bask in the
sun and enjoy the honours and the emoluments of their respective offices
as long as Governor God's-peace held sway, and had all things in the city
to his own mind.  Now, it was on all hands admitted, as we read again
with renewed delight, that there were no jars, no chiding, no
interferings, no unfaithful doings in the town of Mansoul; but every man
kept close to his own employment.  The gentry, the officers, the
soldiers, and all in place, observed their orders.  And as for the women
and children, they all followed their business joyfully.  They would work
and sing, work and sing, from morning till night, so that quite through
the town of Mansoul now nothing was to be found but harmony, quietness,
joy, and health.  What more could be said of any governorship of any town
than that?  The Heavenly Court itself, out of which Governor God's-peace
had come down, was not better governed than that.  Harmony, quietness,
joy, and health.  No; the New Jerusalem itself will not surpass that.
'And this lasted all that summer.'




CHAPTER XXIII--THE ESTABLISHED CHURCH OF MANSOUL, AND MR. CONSCIENCE ONE
OF HER PARISH MINISTERS


   'The Highest Himself shall establish her.'--_David_.

The princes of this world establish churches sometimes out of piety and
sometimes out of policy.  Sometimes their motive is the good of their
people and the glory of God, and sometimes their sole motive is to
buttress up their own Royal House, and to have a clergy around them on
whom they can count.  Prince Emmanuel had His motive, too, in setting up
an establishment in Mansoul.  As thus: When this was over, the Prince
sent again for the elders of the town and communed with them about the
ministry that He intended to establish in Mansoul.  Such a ministry as
might open to them and might instruct them in the things that did concern
their present and their future state.  For, said He to them, of
yourselves, unless you have teachers and guides, you will not be able to
know, and if you do not know, then you cannot do the will of My Father.
At this news, when the elders of Mansoul brought it to the people, the
whole town came running together, and all with one consent implored His
Majesty that He would forthwith establish such a ministry among them as
might teach them both law and judgment, statute and commandment, so that
they might be documented in all good and wholesome things.  So He told
them that He would graciously grant their requests and would straightway
establish such a ministry among them.

Now, I will not enter to-night on the abstract benefits of such an
Establishment.  I will rather take one of the ministers who was presented
to one of the parishes of Mansoul, and shall thus let you see how that
State Church worked out practically in one of its ministers at any rate.
And the preacher and pastor I shall so take up was neither the best
minister in the town nor the worst; but, while a long way subordinate to
the best, he was also by no means the least.  The Reverend Mr. Conscience
was our parish minister's name; his people sometimes called him The
Recorder.

1.  Well, then, to begin with, the Rev. Mr. Conscience was a native of
the same town in which his parish church now stood.  I am not going to
challenge the wisdom of the patron who appointed his protege to this
particular living; only, I have known very good ministers who never got
over the misfortune of having been settled in the same town in which they
had been born and brought up.  Or, rather, their people never got over
it.  One excellent minister, especially, I once knew, whose father had
been a working man in the town, and his son had sometimes assisted his
father before he went to college, and even between his college sessions,
and the people he afterwards came to teach could never get over that.  It
was not wise in my friend to accept that presentation in the
circumstances, as the event abundantly proved.  For, whenever he had to
take his stand in his pulpit or in his pastorate against any of their
evil ways, his people defended themselves and retaliated on him by
reminding him that they knew his father and his mother, and had not
forgotten his own early days.  No doubt, in the case of Emmanuel and
Mansoul and its minister, there were counterbalancing considerations and
advantages both to minister and people; but it is not always so; and it
was not so in the case of my unfortunate friend.

Forasmuch, so ran the Prince's presentation paper, as he is a native of
the town of Mansoul, and thus has personal knowledge of all the laws and
customs of the corporation, therefore he, the Prince, presented Mr.
Conscience.  That is to say, every man who is to be the minister of a
parish should make his own heart and his own life his first parish.  His
own vineyard should be his first knowledge and his first care.  And then
out of that and after that he will be able to speak to his people, and to
correct, and counsel, and take care of them.  In Thomas Boston's
_Memoirs_ we continually come on entries like this: 'Preached on Ps.
xlii. 5, and mostly on my own account.'  And, again, we read in the same
invaluable book for parish ministers, that its author did not wonder to
hear that good had been done by last Sabbath's sermon, because he had
preached it to himself and had got good to himself out of it before he
took it to the pulpit.  Boston kept his eye on himself in a way that the
minister of Mansoul himself could not have excelled.  Till, not in his
pulpit work only, but in such conventional, commonplace, and monotonous
exercises as his family worship, he so read the Scriptures and so sang
the psalms that his family worship was continually yielding him fruit as
well as his public ministry.  As our family worship and our public
ministry will do, too, when we have the eye and the heart and the
conscience that Thomas Boston had.  'I went to hear a preacher,' said
Pascal, 'and I found a man in the pulpit.'  Well, the parish minister of
Mansoul was a man, and so was the parish minister of Ettrick.  And that
was the reason that the people of Simprin and Ettrick so often thought
that Boston had them in his eye.  Good pastor as he was, he could not
have everybody in his eye.  But he had himself in his eye, and that let
him into the hearts and the homes of all his people.  He was a true man,
and thus a true minister.

2.  Both Boston and the minister of Mansoul were well-read men also; so,
indeed, in as many words, their fine biographies assure us.  But that is
just another way of saying what has been said about those two ministers
over and over again already.  William Law never was a parish minister.
The English Crown of that day would not trust him with a parish.  But
what was the everlasting loss of some parish in England has become the
everlasting gain of the whole Church of Christ.  Law's enforced seclusion
from outward ministerial activity only set him the more free to that
inward activity which has been such a blessing to so many, and to so many
ministers especially.  And as to this of every minister being well read,
that master in Israel says: 'Above all, let me tell you that the book of
books to you is your own heart, in which are written and engraven the
deepest lessons of divine instruction.  Learn, therefore, to be deeply
attentive to the presence of God in your own hearts, who is always
speaking, always instructing, always illuminating the heart that is
attentive to Him.'  Jonathan Edwards called the poor parish minister of
Ettrick 'a truly great divine.'  But Law goes on to say, 'A great divine
is but a cant expression unless it signifies a man greatly advanced in
the divine life.  A great divine is one whose own experience and example
are a demonstration of the reality of all the graces and virtues of the
gospel.  No divine has any more of the gospel in him than that which
proves itself by the spirit, the actions, and the form of his life: the
rest is but hypocrisy, not divinity.'  Let all our parish ministers,
then, give themselves to this kind of reading.  Let them all aim at a
doctor's degree in the divinity of their own hearts.

3.  We are done at last, and we are done for ever, in Scotland, with
patrons and with presenters; but I daresay our most Free Church people
would be quite willing to surrender their dear-bought franchise if the
old plan could even yet be made to work in all their parishes as it
worked in Mansoul.  For not only was the presented minister in this case
a well-read man; he was also, what the best of the Scottish people have
always loved and honoured, a man, as this history testifies, with a
tongue as bravely hung as he had a head filled with judgment.  In
Scotland we like our minister to have a tongue bravely hung, even when
that is proved to our own despite.  When any minister, parish minister or
other, is seen to tune his pulpit, our respect for him is gone.  The
Presbyterian pulpit has been proverbially hard to tune, and it will be an
ill day when it becomes easy.  'Here lies a man who had a brow for every
good cause.'  So it was engraven over one of Boston's elders.  And so is
it always: like priest, like people in the matter of the hang of the
minister's tongue and in the boldness of the elder's brow.

'Bravely hung' is an ancient and excellent expression which has several
shades of meaning in Bunyan.  But in the present instance its meaning is
modified and fixed by judgment.  A bravely hung tongue; at the same time
the parish minister of Mansoul's tongue was not a loosely-hung tongue.  It
was not a blustering, headlong, scolding, untamed tongue.  The pulpit of
Mansoul was tuned with judgment.  He who filled that pulpit had a head
filled with judgment.  The ground of judgment is knowledge, and the
minister of Mansoul was a man of knowledge.  It was his early and ever-
increasing knowledge of himself, and thus of other men; and then it was
his excellent judgment as to the use he was to make of that knowledge; it
was his sound knowledge what to say, when to say it, and how to say
it,--it was all this that decided his Prince to make him the minister of
Mansoul.  How excellent and how rare a gift is judgment--judgment in
counsel, judgment in speech, and judgment in action!  'I am very little
serviceable with reference to public management,' writes the parish
minister of Ettrick, 'being exceedingly defective in ecclesiastical
prudence; but the Lord has given me a pulpit gift, not unacceptable: and
who knows what He may do with me in that way?'  Who knows, indeed!  Now,
there are many parish ministers who have a not unacceptable pulpit gift,
and yet who are not content with that, but are always burying that gift
in the earth and running away from it to attempt a public management in
which they are exceedingly and conspicuously defective.  Now, why do they
do that?  Is their pulpit and their parish not sphere and opportunity
enough for them?  Mine is a small parish, said Boston, but then it is
mine.  And a small parish may both rear and occupy a truly great divine.
Let those ministers, then, who are defective in ecclesiastical prudence
not be too much cast down.  Ecclesiastical prudence is not in every case
the highest kind of prudence.  The presbytery, the synod, and the
assembly are not any minister's first or best sphere.  Every minister's
first and best sphere is his parish.  And the presbytery is not the end
of the parish.  The parish, the pastorate, and the pulpit are the end of
both presbytery and synod and assembly.  As for the minister of Mansoul,
he was a well-read man, and also a man of courage to speak out the truth
at every occasion, and he had a tongue as bravely hung as he had a head
filled with judgment.

4.  But there was one thing about the parish pulpit of Mansoul that
always overpowered the people.  They could not always explain it even to
themselves what it was that sometimes so terrified them, and, sometimes,
again, so enthralled them.  They would say sometimes that their minister
was more than a mere man; that he was a prophet and a seer, and that his
Master seemed sometimes to stand and speak again in His servant.  And
'seer' was not at all an inappropriate name for their minister, so far as
I can collect out of some remains of his that I have seen and some
testimonies that I have heard.  There was something awful and overawing,
something seer-like and supernatural, in the pulpit of Mansoul.  Sometimes
the iron chains in which the preacher climbed up into the pulpit, and in
which he both prayed and preached, struck a chill to every heart; and
sometimes the garment of salvation in which he shone carried all their
hearts captive.  Some Sabbath mornings they saw it in his face and heard
it in his voice that he had been on his bed in hell all last night; and
then, next Sabbath, those who came back saw him descending into his
pulpit from his throne in heaven.

   'Yea, this man's brow, like to a title-page
   Foretells the nature of a tragic volume.
   Thou tremblest, and the whiteness in thy cheek
   Is apter than thy tongue to tell thine errand.'

If you think that I am exaggerating and magnifying the parish pulpit of
Mansoul, take this out of the parish records for yourselves.  'And now,'
you will read in one place, 'it was a day gloomy and dark, a day of
clouds and thick darkness with Mansoul.  Well, when the Sabbath-day was
come he took for his text that in the prophet Jonah, "They that observe
lying vanities forsake their own mercy."  And then there was such power
and authority in that sermon, and such dejection seen in the countenances
of the people that day that the like had seldom been heard or seen.  The
people, when the sermon was done, were scarce able to go to their homes,
or to betake themselves to their employments the whole week after.  They
were so sermon-smitten that they knew not what to do.  For not only did
their preacher show to Mansoul its sin, but he did tremble before them
under the sense of his own, still crying out as he preached, Unhappy man
that I am! that I, a preacher, should have lived so senselessly and so
sottishly in my parish, and be one of the foremost in its transgressions!
With these things he also charged all the lords and gentry of Mansoul to
the almost distracting of them.'  It was Sabbaths like that that made the
people of Mansoul call their minister a seer.

5.  And, then, there was another thing that I do not know how better to
describe than by calling it the true catholicity, the true humility, and
the true hospitality of the man.  It is true he had no choice in the
matter, for in setting up a standing ministry in Mansoul Emmanuel had
done so with this reservation and addition.  We have His very words.  'Not
that you are to have your ministers alone,' He said.  'For my four
captains, they can, if need be, and if they be required, not only
privately inform, but publicly preach both good and wholesome doctrine,
that, if heeded, will do thee good in the end.'  Which, again, reminds me
of what Oliver Cromwell wrote to the Honourable Colonel Hacker at
Peebles.  'These: I was not satisfied with your last speech to me about
Empson, that he was a better preacher than fighter--or words to that
effect.  Truly, I think that he that prays and preaches best will fight
best.  I know nothing that will give like courage and confidence as the
knowledge of God in Christ will.  I pray you to receive Captain Empson
lovingly.'

6.  The standing ministry in Mansoul was endowed also; but I cannot
imagine what the court of teinds would make of the instrument of
endowment.  As it has been handed down to us, that old ecclesiastical
instrument reads more like a lesson in the parish minister's class for
the study of Mysticism than a writing for a learned lord to adjudicate
upon.  Here is the Order of Council: 'Therefore I, thy Prince, give thee,
My servant, leave and licence to go when thou wilt to My fountain, My
conduit, and there to drink freely of the blood of My grape, for My
conduit doth always run wine.  Thus doing, thou shalt drive from thine
heart all foul, gross, and hurtful humours.  It will also lighten thine
eyes, and it will strengthen thy memory for the reception and the keeping
of all that My Father's noble secretary will teach thee.'  Thus the
Prince did put Mr. Conscience into the place and office of a minister to
Mansoul, and the chosen and presented man did thankfully accept thereof.

(1)  Now, there are at least three lessons taught us here.  There is, to
begin with, a lesson to all those congregations who are about to choose a
minister.  Let all those congregations, then, who have had devolved on
them the powers of the old patrons,--let them make their election on the
same principles that the Prince of Mansoul patronised.  Let them choose a
probationer who, young though he must be, has the making of a seer in
him.  Let them listen for the future seer in his most stammering prayers.
Somewhere, even in one service, his conscience will make itself heard, if
he has a conscience.  Rather remain ten years vacant than call a minister
who has no conscience.  The parish minister of Mansoul sometimes seemed
to be all conscience, and it was this that made his head so full of
judgment, his tongue so full of a brave boldness, and his heart so full
of holy love.  Your minister may be an anointed bishop, he may be a
gowned and hooded doctor, he may be a king's chaplain, he may be the
minister of the largest and the richest and the most learned parish in
the city, but, unless he strikes terror and pain into your conscience
every Sabbath, unless he makes you tremble every Sabbath under the eye
and the hand of God, he is no true minister to you.  As Goodwin says, he
is a wooden cannon.  As Leighton says, he is a mountebank for a minister.

(2)  The second lesson is to all those who are politically enfranchised,
and who hold a vote for a member of Parliament.  Now, crowds of
candidates and their canvassers will before long be at your door
besieging it and begging you for your vote for or against an Established
church.  Well, before Parliament is dissolved, and the canvass commences,
look you well into your own heart and ask yourself whether or no the
Church of Christ has yet been established there.  Ask if Jesus Christ,
the Head of the Church, has yet set up His throne there, in your heart.
Ask your conscience if His laws are recognised and obeyed there.  Ask
also if His blood has been sprinkled there, and since when.  And, if not,
then it needs no seer to tell you what sacrilege, what profanity it is
for you to touch the ark of God: to speak, or to vote, or to lift a
finger either for or against any church whatsoever.  Intrude your wilful
ignorance and your wicked passions anywhere else.  March up boldly and
vote defiantly on questions of State that you never read a sober line
about, and are as ignorant about as you are of Hebrew; but beware of
touching by a thousand miles the things for which the Son of God laid
down His life.  Thrust yourself in, if you must, anywhere else, but do
not thrust yourself and your brutish stupidity and your fiendish tempers
into the things of the house of God.  Let all parish ministers take for
their text that day 2 Samuel vi. 6, 7:--And when they came to Nachon's
threshing-floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took
hold of it; for the oxen shook it.  And the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Uzzah; and God smote him there for his error; and there he died
by the ark of God.

(3)  There is a third lesson here, but it is a lesson for ministers, and
I shall take it home to myself.




CHAPTER XXIV--A FAST-DAY IN MANSOUL


   'Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders and all
   the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your
   God.'--_Joel_.

In our soft and self-indulgent day the very word 'to fast' has become an
out-of-date and an obsolete word.  We never have occasion to employ that
word in the living language of the present day.  The men of the next
generation will need to have it explained to them what the Fast-days of
their fathers were: when they were instituted, how they were observed,
and why they were abrogated and given up.  If your son should ever ask
you just what the Fast-days of your youth were like, you will do him a
great service, and he may live to recover them, if you will answer him in
this way.  Show him how to take his Cruden and how to make a picture to
his opening mind of the Fast-days of Scripture.  And tell him plainly for
what things in fathers and in sons those fasts were ordained of God.  And
then for the Fast-days of the Puritan period let him read aloud to you
this powerful passage in the _Holy War_.  Public preaching and public
prayer entered largely into the fasting of the Prophetical and the
Puritan periods; and John Bunyan, after Joel, has told us some things
about the Fast-day preaching of his day that it will be well for us, both
preachers and people, to begin with, and to lay well to heart.

1.  In the first place, the preaching of that Fast-day was 'pertinent'
and to the point.  William Law, that divine writer for ministers, warns
ministers against going off upon Euroclydon and the shipwrecks of Paul
when Christ's sheep are looking up to them for their proper food.  What,
he asks, is the nature, the direction, and the strength of that
Mediterranean wind to him who has come up to church under the plague of
his own heart and under the heavy hand of God?  You may be sure that
Boanerges did not lecture that Fast-day forenoon in Mansoul on Acts
xxvii. 14.  We would know that, even if we were not told what his text
that forenoon was.  His text that never-to-be-forgotten Fast-day forenoon
was in Luke xiii. 7--'Cut it down; why cumbereth it the ground?'  And a
very smart sermon he made upon the place.  First, he showed what was the
occasion of the words, namely, because the fig-tree was barren.  Then he
showed what was contained in the sentence, to wit, repentance or utter
desolation.  He then showed also by whose authority this sentence was
pronounced.  And, lastly, he showed the reasons of the point, and then
concluded his sermon.  But he was very pertinent in the application,
insomuch that he made all the elders and all their people in Mansoul to
tremble.  Sidney Smith says that whatever else a sermon may be or may not
be, it must be interesting if it is to do any good.  Now, pertinent
preaching is always interesting preaching.  Nothing interests men like
themselves.  And pertinent preaching is just preaching to men about
themselves,--about their interests, their losses and their gains, their
hopes and their fears, their trials and their tribulations.  Boanerges
took both his text and his treatment of his text from his Master, and we
know how pertinently The Master preached.  His preaching was with such
pertinence that the one half of His hearers went home saying, Never man
spake like this man, while the other half gnashed at Him with their
teeth.  Our Lord never lectured on Euroclydon.  He knew what was in man
and He lectured and preached accordingly.  And if we wish to have praise
of our best people, and of Him whose people they are, let us look into
our own hearts and preach.  That will be pertinent to our people which is
first pertinent to ourselves.  Weep yourself, said an old poet to a new
beginner; weep yourself if you would make me weep.  'For my own part,'
said Thomas Shepard to some ministers from his death-bed, 'I never
preached a sermon which, in the composing, did not cost me prayers, with
strong cries and tears.  I never preached a sermon from which I had not
first got some good to my own soul.'

   'His office and his name agree;
   A shepherd that and Shepard he.'

And many such entries as these occur in Thomas Boston's golden journal:
'I preached in Ps. xlii. 5, and mostly on my own account.'  Again:
'Meditating my sermon next day, I found advantage to my own soul, as also
in delivering it on the Sabbath.'  And again: 'What good this preaching
has done to others I know not, yet I think myself will not the worse of
it.'

2.  The preaching of that Fast-day was with great authority also.  'There
was such power and authority in that sermon,' reports one who was
present, 'that the like had seldom been seen or heard.'  Authority also
was one of the well-remembered marks of our Lord's preaching.  And no
wonder, considering who He was.  But His ministers, if they are indeed
His ministers, will be clothed by Him with something even of His supreme
authority.  'Conscience is an authority,' says one of the most
authoritative preachers that ever lived.  'The Bible is an authority;
such is the Church; such is antiquity; such are the words of the wise;
such are hereditary lessons; such are ethical truths; such are historical
memories; such are legal saws and state maxims; such are proverbs; such
are sentiments, presages, and prepossessions.'  Now, the well-equipped
preacher will from time to time plant his pulpit on all those kinds of
authority, as this kind is now pertinent and then that, and will, with
such a variety and accumulation of authority, preach to his people.
Thomas Boston preached at a certain place with such pertinence and with
such authority that it was complained of him by one of themselves that he
'terrified even the godly.'  Let all our young preachers who would to old
age continue to preach with interest, with pertinence, and with
terrifying authority, among other things have by heart _The Memoirs of
Thomas Boston_, 'that truly great divine.'

3.  A third thing, and, as some of the people who heard it said of it,
the best thing about that sermon was that--'He did not only show us our
sin, but he did visibly tremble before us under the sense of his own.'
Now I know this to be a great difficulty with some young ministers who
have got no help in it at the Divinity Hall.  Are they, they ask, to be
themselves in the pulpit?  How far may they be themselves, and how far
may they be not themselves?  How far are they to be seen to tremble
before their people because of their own sins, and how far are they to
bear themselves as if they had no sin?  Must they keep back the passions
that are tearing their own hearts, and fill the forenoon with Euroclydon
and other suchlike sea-winds?  How far are they to be all gown and bands
in the pulpit, and how far sackcloth and ashes?  One half of their people
are like Pascal in this, that they like to see and hear a man in his
pulpit; but, then, the other half like only to see and hear a proper
preacher.  'He did not only show the men of Mansoul their sin, but he did
tremble before them under the sense of his own.  Still crying out as he
preached to them, Unhappy man that I am! that I should have done so
wicked a thing!  That I, a preacher, should be one of the first in the
transgression!'

This you will remember was the Fast-day.  And so truly had this preacher
kept the Fast-day that the Communion-day was down upon him before he was
ready for it.  He was still deep among his sins when all his people were
fast putting on their beautiful garments.  He was ready with the letter
of his action-sermon, but he was not equal to the delivery of it.  His
colleague, accordingly, whose sense of sin was less acute that day, took
the public worship, while the Fast-day preacher still lay sick in his
closet at home and wrote thus on the ground: 'I am no more worthy to be
called Thy son,' he wrote.  'Behold me here, Lord, a poor, miserable
sinner, weary of myself, and afraid to look up to Thee.  Wilt Thou heal
my sores?  Wilt Thou take out the stains?  Wilt Thou deliver me from the
shame?  Wilt Thou rescue me from this chain of sin?  Cut me not off in
the midst of my sins.  Let me have liberty once again to be among Thy
redeemed ones, eating and drinking at Thy table.  But, O my God, to-day I
am an unclean worm, a dead dog, a dead carcass, deservedly cast out from
the society of Thy saints.  But oh, suffer me so much as to look to the
place where Thy people meet and where Thine honour dwelleth.  Reject not
the sacrifice of a broken heart, but come and speak to me in my secret
place.  O God, let me never see such another day as this is.  Let me
never be again so full of guilt as to have to run away from Thy presence
and to flee from before Thy people.'  He printed more than that, in blood
and in tears, before God that Communion-morning, but that is enough for
my purpose.  Now, would you choose a dead dog like that to be your
minister?  To baptize and admit your children and to marry them when they
grow up?  To mount your pulpits every Sabbath-day, and to come to your
houses every week-day?  Not, I feel sure, if you could help it!  Not if
you knew it!  Not if there was a minister of proper pulpit manners and a
well-ordered mind within a Sabbath-day's journey!  'Like priest like
people,' says Hosea.  'The congregation and the minister are one,' says
Dr. Parker.  'There are men we could not sit still and hear; they are not
the proper ministers for us.  There are other men we could hear always,
because they are our kith and our kin from before the foundation of the
world.'  Happy the hearer who has hit on a minister like the minister of
Mansoul, and who has discovered in him his everlasting kith and kin.  And
happy the minister who, owning kith and kin with Boanerges, has two or
three or even one member in his congregation who likes his minister best
when he likes himself worst.

But what about the fasting all this time?  Was it all preaching, and was
there no fasting?  Well, we do not know much about the fasting of the
prophets and the apostles, but the Puritans sometimes made their people
almost forget about fasting, and about eating and drinking too, they so
took possession of their people with their incomparable preaching.  I
read, for instance, in Calamy's _Life of John Howe_ that on the public
Fast-days, it was Howe's common way to begin about nine in the morning
and to continue reading, preaching, and praying till about four in the
afternoon.  Henry Rogers almost worships John Howe, but John Howe's Fast-
days pass his modern biographers patience; till, if you would see a
nineteenth-century case made out against a seventeenth-century Fast-day,
you have only to turn to the author of _The Eclipse of Faith_ on the
author of _Delighting in God_.  And, no doubt, when we get back our Fast-
days, we shall leave more of the time to reading pertinent books at home
and to secret fasting and to secret prayer, and shall enjoin our
preachers, while they are pertinent and authoritative in their sermons,
not to take up the whole day with their sermons even at their best.  And
then, as to fasting, discredited and discarded as it is in our day, there
are yet some very good reasons for desiring its return and reinstatement
among us.  Very good reasons, both for health and for holiness.  But it
is only of the latter class of reasons that I would fain for a few words
at present speak.  Well, then, let it be frankly said that there is
nothing holy, nothing saintly, nothing at all meritorious in fasting from
our proper food.  It is the motive alone that sanctifies the means.  It
is the end alone that sanctifies the exercise.  If I fast to chastise
myself for my sin; if I fast to reduce the fuel of my sin; if I fast to
keep my flesh low; if I fast to make me more free for my best books, for
my most inward, spiritual, mystical books--for my Kempis, and my Behmen,
and my Law, and my Leighton, and my Goodwin, and my Bunyan, and my
Rutherford, and my Jeremy Taylor, and my Shepard, and my Edwards, and
suchlike; if I fast for the ends of meditation and prayer; if I fast out
of sympathy with my Bible, and my Saviour, and my latter end, and my
Father's house in heaven--then, no doubt, my fasting will be acceptable
with God, as it will certainly be an immediate means of grace to my
sinful soul.  These altars will sanctify many such gifts.  For, who that
knows anything at all about himself, about his own soul, and about the
hindrances and helps to its salvation from sin; who that ever read a page
of Scripture properly, or spent half an hour in that life which is hidden
in God--who of such will deny or doubt that fasting is superseded or
neglected to the sure loss of the spiritual life, to the sensible
lowering of the religious tone and temper, and to the increase both of
the lusts of the flesh and of the mind?  It may perhaps be that the
institution of fasting as a church ordinance has been permitted to be set
aside in order to make it more than ever a part of each earnest man's own
private life.  Perhaps it was in some ways full time that it should be
again said to us, 'Thou, when thou fastest, appear not unto men to fast.'
As also, 'Is not this the fast that I have chosen: to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
outcast to thy house?'  Let us believe that the form of the Fast-day has
been removed out of the way that the spirit may return and fashion a new
form for itself.  And in the belief that that is so, let us, while
parting with our fathers' Fast-days with real regret--as with their
pertinent and pungent preaching--let us meantime lay in a stock of their
pertinent and pungent books, and set apart particular and peculiar
seasons for their sin-subduing and grace-strengthening study.

The short is this.  The one real substance and true essence of all
fasting is self-denial.  And we can never get past either the supreme and
absolute duty of that, or the daily and hourly call to that, as long as
we continue to read the New Testament, to live in this life, and to
listen to the voice of conscience, and to the voice of God speaking to us
in the voice of conscience.  Without strict and constant self-denial, no
man, whatever his experiences or his pretensions, is a disciple of Jesus
Christ, and secret fasting is one of the first, the easiest, and the most
elementary exercises of New Testament self-denial.  And, besides, the
lusts of our flesh and the lusts of our minds are so linked and locked
and riveted together that if one link is loosened, or broken, or even
struck at, the whole thrall is not yet thrown off indeed, but it is all
shaken; it has all received a staggering blow.  So much is this the case
that one single act of self-denial in the region of the body will be felt
for freedom throughout the whole prison-house of the soul.  And a victory
really won over a sensual sin is already a challenge sounded to our most
spiritual sin.  And it is this discovery that has given to fasting the
place it has held in all the original, resolute, and aggressive ages of
the Church.  With little or nothing in their Lord's literal teaching to
make His people fast, they have been so bent on their own spiritual
deliverance, and they have heard and read so much about the deliverances
both of body and of soul that have been attained by fasting and its
accompaniments, that they have taken to it in their despair, and with
results that have filled them in some instances with rapture, and in all
instances with a good conscience and with a good hope.  You would wonder,
even in these degenerate days,--you would be amazed could you be told how
many of your own best friends in their stealthy, smiling, head-anointing,
hypocritical way deny themselves this and that sweetness, this and that
fatness, this and that softness, and are thus attaining to a strength, a
courage, and a self-conquest that you are getting the benefit of in many
ways without your ever guessing the price at which it has all been
purchased.  Now, would you yourself fain be found among those who are in
this way being made strong and victorious inwardly and spiritually?  Would
you?  Then wash your face and anoint your head; and, then, not denying it
before others, deny it in secret to yourself--this and that sweet morsel,
this and that sweet meat, this and that glass of such divine wine.
Unostentatiously, ungrudgingly, generous-heartedly, and not ascetically
or morosely, day after day deny yourself even in little unthought-of
things, and one of the very noblest laws of your noblest life shall
immediately claim you as its own.  That stealthy and shamefaced act of
self-denial for Christ's sake and for His cross's sake will lay the
foundation of a habit of self-denial; ere ever you are aware of what you
are doing the habit will consolidate into a character; and what you begin
little by little in the body will be made perfect in the soul; till what
you did, almost against His command and altogether without His example,
yet because you did it for His sake and in His service, will have placed
you far up among those who have forsaken all, and themselves also, to
follow Jesus Christ, Son of Man and Son of God.  Only, let this always be
admitted, and never for a moment forgotten, that all this is said by
permission and not of commandment.  Our Lord never fasted as we fast.  He
had no need.  And He never commanded His disciples to fast.  He left it
to themselves to find out each man his own case and his own cure.  Let no
man, therefore, take fasting in any of its degrees, or times, or
occasions, on his conscience who does not first find it in his heart.  At
the same time this may be said with perfect safety, that he who finds it
in his heart and then lays it on his conscience to deny himself anything,
great or small, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of his own
salvation,--he will never repent it.  No, he will never repent it.




CHAPTER XXV--A FEAST-DAY IN MANSOUL


   'He brought me into his banqueting house.'--_The Song_.

Emmanuel's feast-day in the Holy War excels in beauty and in eloquence
everything I know in any other author on the Lord's Supper.  The Song of
Solomon stands alone when we sing that song mystically--that is to say,
when we pour into it all the love of God to His Church in Israel and all
Israel's love to God, and then all our Lord's love to us and all our love
back again to Him in return.  But outside of Holy Scripture I know
nothing to compare for beauty, and for sweetness, and for quaintness, and
for tenderness, and for rapture, with John Bunyan's account of the feast
that Prince Emmanuel made for the town of Mansoul.  With his very best
pen John Bunyan tells us how upon a time Emmanuel made a feast in
Mansoul, and how the townsfolk came to the castle to partake of His
banquet, and how He feasted them on all manner of outlandish food--food
that grew not in the fields of Mansoul; it was food that came down from
heaven and from His Father's house.  They drank also of the water that
was made wine, and, altogether, they were very merry and at home with
their Prince.  There was music also all the time at the table, and man
did eat angels' food, and had honey given him out of the rock.  And then
the table was entertained with some curious and delightful riddles that
were made upon the King Himself, upon Emmanuel His Son, and upon His wars
and doings with Mansoul; till, altogether, the state of transportation
the people were in with their entertainment cannot be told by the very
best of pens.  Nor did He, when they returned to their places, send them
empty away; for either they must have a ring, or a gold chain, or a
bracelet, or a white stone or something; so dear was Mansoul to Him now,
so lovely was Mansoul in His eyes.  And, going and coming to the feast, O
how graciously, how lovingly, how courteously, and how tenderly did this
blessed Prince now carry it to the town of Mansoul!  In all the streets,
gardens, orchards, and other places where He came, to be sure the poor
should have His blessing and benediction; yea, He would kiss them; and if
they were ill, He would lay His hands on them and make them well.  And
was it not now something amazing to behold that in that very place where
Diabolus had had his abode, the Prince of princes should now sit eating
and drinking with all His mighty captains, and men of war, and
trumpeters, and with the singing men and the singing women of His
Father's court!  Now did Mansoul's cup run over; now did her conduits run
sweet wine; now did she eat the finest of the wheat, and now drink milk
and honey out of the rock!  Now she said, How great is His goodness, for
ever since I found favour in His eyes, how honourable have I ever been!

1.  Now, the beginning of it all was, and the best of it all was, that
Emmanuel Himself made the feast.  Mansoul did not feast her Deliverer; it
was her Deliverer who feasted her.  Mansoul, in good sooth, had nothing
that she had not first and last received, and it was far more true and
seemly and fit in every way that her Prince Himself should in His own way
and at His own expense seal and celebrate the deliverance, the freedom,
the life, the peace, and the joy of Mansoul.  And, besides, what had
Mansoul to set before her Prince; or, for the matter of that, before
herself?  Mansoul had nothing of herself.  Mansoul was not sufficient of
herself for a single day.  And how, then, should she propose to feast a
Prince?  No, no! the thing was impossible.  It was Emmanuel's feast from
first to last.  Just as it was at the Lord's table in this house this
morning.  You did not spread the table this morning for your Lord.  You
did not make ready for your Saviour and then invite Him in.  He invited
you.  He said, This is My Body broken for you, and This is My Blood shed
for you; drink ye all of it.  And had any one challenged you at the fence
door and asked you how one who could not pay his own debts or provide
himself a proper meal even for a single day, could dare to sit down with
such a company at such a feast as that, you would have told him that he
had not seen half your hunger and your nakedness; but that it was just
your very hunger and nakedness and homelessness that had brought you
here; or, rather, it was all that that had moved the Master of the feast
to send for you and to compel you to come here.  There was nothing in
your mind and in your mouth more all this day than just that this is the
Lord's Supper, and that He had sent for you and had invited you, and had
constrained and compelled you to come and partake of it.  It was the
Lord's Table to-day, and it will be still and still more His table on
that great Communion-Day when all our earthly communions shall be
accomplished and consummated in heaven.

2.  All that Mansoul did in connection with that great feast was to
prepare the place where Diabolus at one time had held his orgies and
carried on his excesses.  Her Prince, Emmanuel, did all the rest; but He
left it to Mansoul to make the banqueting-room ready.  When our Lord
would keep His last passover with His disciples, He said to Peter and
John, Go into the city, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher
of water, and he will show you a large upper room furnished and prepared.
There is some reason to believe that that happy man had been expecting
that message and had done his best to be ready for it.  And now he was
putting the last touch to his preparations by filling the water-pots of
his house with fresh water; little thinking, happy man, that as long as
the world lasts that water will be holy water in all men's eyes, and
shall teach humility to all men's hearts.  And, my brethren, you know
that all you did all last week against to-day was just to prepare the
room.  For the room all last week and all this day was your own heart,
and not and never this house of stone and lime made with men's hands.  You
swept the inner and upper room of your own heart.  You swept it and
garnished its walls and its floors as much as in you lay.  He, whose the
supper really was, told you that He would bring with Him what was to be
eaten and drunken to-day, while you were to prepare the place.  And, next
to the very actual feast itself, and, sometimes, not next to it but equal
to it, and even before it and better than it, were those busy household
hours you spent, like the man with the pitcher, making the room ready.  In
plain English, you had a communion before the Communion as you prepared
your hearts for the Communion.  I shall not intrude into your secret
places and secret seasons with Christ before His open reception of you to-
day.  But it is sure and certain that, just as you in secret entertained
Him in your mother's house and in the chambers of her that bare you, just
in that measure did He say to you openly before all the watchmen that go
about the city and before all the daughters of Jerusalem, Eat, O friends;
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved.  Yes; do you not think that the
man with the pitcher had his reward?  He had his own thoughts as he
furnished, till it was quite ready, his best upper room and carried in
those pitchers of water, and handed down to his children in after days
the perquisite-skin of the paschal lamb that had been supped on by our
Lord and His disciples in his honoured house that night.  Yes; was it not
amazing to behold that in that very place where sometimes Diabolus had
his abode, and had entertained his Diabolonians, the Prince of princes
should sit eating and drinking with His friends?  Was it not truly
amazing?

3.  Now, upon the feasting-day He feasted them with all manner of
outlandish food--food that grew not in all the fields of Mansoul; it was
food that came down with His Father's court.  The fields of Mansoul
yielded their own proper fruits, and fruits that were not to be despised.
But they were not the proper fruits for that day, neither could they be
placed upon that table.  They are good enough fruits for their purpose,
and as far as they go, and for so long as they last and are in their
season.  But our souls are such that they outlive their own best fruits;
their hunger and their thirst outlast all that can be harvested in from
their own fields.  And thus it is that He who made Mansoul at first, and
who has since redeemed her, has out of His own great goodness provided
food convenient for her.  He knows with what an outlandish life He has
quickened Mansoul, and it is only the part of a faithful Creator to
provide for His creature her proper nourishment.  What is it? asked the
children of Israel at one another when they saw a small round thing, as
small as hoarfrost, upon the ground.  For they wist not what it was.  And
Moses said, Gather of it every man according to his eating, an omer for
every man, according to the number of your persons.  And the house of
Israel called the name thereof Manna, and the taste of it was like wafers
made with honey.  He gave them of the corn of heaven to eat, and man did
eat in the wilderness angels' food.  Your fathers did eat manna in the
wilderness, and are dead; but this is the bread of which if any man eat
he shall not die.  And the bread that I will give is My Flesh, which I
will give for the life of the world.  And so outlandish, so supernatural,
and so full of heavenly wonder and heavenly mystery was that bread, that
the Jews strove among themselves over it, and could not understand it.
But, by His goodness and His truth to us this day, we have again, to our
spiritual nourishment and growth in grace, eaten the Flesh and drunk the
Blood of the Son of God; a meat that, as He who Himself is that meat has
said of it, is meat indeed and drink indeed--as, indeed, we have the
witness in ourselves this day that it is.  They drank also of the water
that was made wine, and were very merry with Him all that day at His
table.  And all their mirth was the high mirth of heaven; it was a mirth
and a gladness without sin, without satiety, and without remorse.

4.  There was music also all the while at the table, and the musicians
were not those of the country of Mansoul, but they were the masters of
song come down from the court of the King.  'I love the Lord,' they sang
in the supper room over the paschal lamb--'I love the Lord because He
hath heard my voice and my supplication.  Because He hath inclined His
ear unto me, therefore will I call upon Him as long as I live.  What
shall I render to the Lord,' they challenged one another, 'for all His
benefits towards me?  I will take the cup of salvation, and will call
upon the name of the Lord.'  'Sometimes imagine,' says a great devotional
writer with a great imagination--'Sometimes imagine that you had been one
of those that joined with our blessed Saviour as He sang an hymn.  Strive
to imagine to yourself with what majesty He looked.  Fancy that you had
stood by Him surrounded with His glory.  Think how your heart would have
been inflamed, and what ecstasies of joy you would have then felt when
singing with the Son of God!  Think again and again with what joy and
devotion you would have then sung had this really been your happy state;
and what a punishment you would have thought it to have then been silent.
And let that teach you how to be affected with psalms and hymns of
thanksgiving.'  Yes; and it is no imagination; it was our own experience
only this morning and afternoon to join in a music that was never made in
this world, but which was as outlandish as was the meat which we ate
while the music was being made.

   'Bless, O my soul, the Lord thy God,
      And not forgetful be
   Of all His gracious benefits
      He hath bestow'd on thee.

   Who with abundance of good things
      Doth satisfy thy mouth;
   So that, ev'n as the eagle's age,
      Renewed is thy youth.'

The 103rd Psalm was never made in this world.  Musicians far other than
those native to Mansoul made for us our Lord's-Table Psalm.

5.  And then, the riddles that were made upon the King Himself, and upon
Emmanuel His Son, and upon Emmanuel's wars and all His other doings with
Mansoul.  And when Emmanuel would expound some of those riddles Himself,
oh! how they were lightened!  They saw what they never saw!  They could
not have thought that such rarities could have been couched in so few and
such ordinary words.  Yea, they did gather that the things themselves
were a kind of portraiture, and that, too, of Emmanuel Himself.  This,
they would say, this is the Lamb! this is the Sacrifice! this is the
Rock! this is the Door! and this is the Way! with a great many other
things.  At Gaius's supper-table they sat up over their riddles and nuts
and sweetmeats till the sun was in the sky.  And it would be midnight and
morning if I were to show you the answers to the half of the riddles.
Take one, for an example, and let it be one of the best for the communion-
day.  'In one rare quality of the orator,' says Hugh Miller, writing
about his adored minister, Alexander Stewart of Cromarty, 'Mr. Stewart
stood alone.  Pope refers in his satires to a strange power of creating
love and admiration by just "touching the brink of all we hate."  Now,
into this perilous, but singularly elective department, Mr. Stewart could
enter with safety and at will.  We heard him, scarce a twelvemonth since,
deliver a discourse of singular power on the sin-offering as minutely
described by the divine penman in Leviticus.  He described the
slaughtered animal--foul with dust and blood, its throat gashed across,
its entrails laid open and steaming in its impurity to the sun--a vile
and horrid thing, which no one could look on without disgust, nor touch
without defilement.  The picture appeared too vivid; its introduction too
little in accordance with a just taste.  But this pulpit-master knew what
he was all the time doing.  "And that," he said, as he pointed to the
terrible picture, "that is SIN!"  By one stroke the intended effect was
produced, and the rising disgust and horror transferred from the
revolting, material image to the great moral evil.'  And, in like manner,
This is the LAMB! we all said over the mystical riddle of the bread and
the wine this morning.  This is the SACRIFICE!  This is the DOOR!  This
is EMMANUEL, GOD WITH US, and made sin for us!

6.  In one of his finest chapters, Thomas A Kempis tells us in what way
we are to communicate mystically: that is to say, how we are to keep on
communicating at all times, and in all places, without the intervention
of the consecrated sacramental elements.  And John Bunyan, the sweetest
and most spiritual of mystics, has all that, too, in this same supreme
passage.  Every day was a feast-day now, he tells us.  So much so that
when the elders and the townsmen did not come to Emmanuel, He would send
in much plenty of provisions to them.  Yea, such delicates would He send
them, and therewith would so cover their tables, that whosoever saw it
confessed that the like could not be seen in any other kingdom.  That is
to say, my fellow-communicants, there is nothing that we experienced and
enjoyed in this house this day that we may not experience and enjoy again
to-morrow and every day in our own house at home.  All the mystics worth
the noble name will tell you that all true communicating is always
performed and experienced in the prepared heart, and never in any upper
room, or church, or chapel, or new heaven, or new earth.  The prepared
heart of every worthy communicant is the true upper room; it is the true
banqueting chamber; it is the true and the only house of wine.  Our
Father's House itself, with its supper-table covered with the new wine of
the Kingdom--the best of it all will still be within you.  Prepare
yourselves within yourselves, then, O departing and dispersing
communicants.  Prepare, and keep yourselves always prepared.  And as
often as you so prepare yourselves your Prince will come to you every
day, and will cat and drink with you, till He makes every day on earth a
day of heaven already to you.  See if He will not; for, again and again,
He who keeps all His promises says that He will.




CHAPTER XXVI--EMMANUEL'S LIVERY


   'And to her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
   clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of
   saints.'--_John_.

The Plantagenet kings of ancient England had white and scarlet for their
livery; white and green was the livery of the Tudors; the Stuarts wore
red and yellow; while blue and scarlet colours adorn to-day the House of
Hanover.  And the Prince of the kings of the earth, He has his royal
colours also, and His servants have their badge of honour and their
blazon also.  Then He commanded that those who waited upon Him should go
and bring forth out of His treasury those white and glittering robes,
that I, He said, have provided and laid up in store for my Mansoul.  So
the white garments were fetched out of the treasury and laid forth to the
eyes of the people.  Moreover, it was granted to them that they should
take them and put them on, according, said He, to your size and your
stature.  So the people were all put into white--into fine linen, clean
and white.  Then said the Prince, This, O Mansoul, is My livery, and this
is the badge by which Mine are known from the servants of others.  Yea,
this livery is that which I grant to all them that are Mine, and without
which no man is permitted to see My face.  Wear this livery, therefore,
for My sake, and, also, if you would be known by the world to be Mine.
But now can you think how Mansoul shone!  For Mansoul was fair as the
sun, clear as the moon, and terrible as an army with banners.

White, then, and whiter than snow, is the very livery of heaven.  A
hundred shining Scriptures could be quoted to establish that.  In the
first year of Belshazzar, King of Babylon, Daniel had a dream, and
visions of his head came to Daniel upon his bed.  And, behold, the
Ancient of Days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of
his head like the pure wool.  My beloved, sings the spouse in the Song,
is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand, and altogether
lovely.  Then, again, David in his penitence sings, Purge me with hyssop,
and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.  And what
is it that sets Isaiah at the head of all the prophets?  What but this,
that he is the mouth-piece of such decrees in heaven as this: Though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red like
crimson, they shall be as wool.  The angel, also, who rolled away the
stone from the door of the sepulchre was clothed in a long white garment.
Another evangelist says that his countenance was like lightning and his
raiment white as snow, and for fear of him the keepers did quake, and
became as dead men.  But before that we read that Jesus was transfigured
before Peter and James and John on the Mount, and that His face did shine
as the sun, and His raiment was white as the light.  And, then, the whole
Book of Revelation is written with a pen dipped in heavenly light.  The
whole book is glistening with the whitest light till we cannot read it
for the brightness thereof.  And the multitude that no man can number all
display themselves before our eyes, clothed with white robes and with
palms in their hands, so much so that we sink down under the greatness of
the glory, till One with His head and His hairs white like wool, as white
as snow, lays His hand upon us, and says to us, Fear not, for, behold, I
have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with
change of raiment.

   'I also saw Mansoul clad all in white,
   And heard her Prince call her His heart's delight,
   I saw Him put upon her chains of gold,
   And rings and bracelets goodly to behold.
   What shall I say?  I heard the people's cries,
   And saw the Prince wipe tears from Mansoul's eyes,
   I heard the groans and saw the joy of many;
   Tell you of all, I neither will nor can I.
   But by what here I say you well may see
   That Mansoul's matchless wars no fable be.'

'And to her it was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints.'  We
need no exegesis of that beautiful Scripture beyond that exegesis which
our own hearts supply.  And if we did need that shining text to be
explained to us, to whom could we better go for its explanation than just
to John Bunyan?  Well, then, in our author's _No Way to Heaven but by
Jesus Christ_, he says: 'This fine linen, in my judgment, is the works of
godly men; their works that spring from faith.  But how came they clean?
How came they white?  Not simply because they were the works of faith.
But, mark, they washed their robes and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb.  And therefore they are before the throne of God.  Yea,
therefore it is that their good works stand in such a place.'  'Nor must
we think it strange,' says John Howe, in his _Blessedness of the
Righteous_, 'that all the requisites to our salvation are not found
together in one text of Scripture.  I conceive that imputed righteousness
is not here meant, but that righteousness which is truly subjected in a
child of God and descriptive of him.  The righteousness of Him whom we
adore as made sin for us that we might be made the righteousness of God
in Him, that righteousness has a much higher sphere peculiar and
appropriate to itself.  Though this of which we now speak is necessary
also to be both had and understood.'  Emmanuel's livery, then, is the
righteousness of the saints.  Emmanuel puts that righteousness upon all
His saints; while, at the same time, they put it on themselves; they work
it out for themselves, and for themselves they keep it clean.  They work
it out, put it on, and keep it clean, and yet, all the time, it is not
they that do it, but it is Emmanuel that doeth it all in them.  The truth
is, you must all become mystics before you will admit all the strange
truth that is told about Emmanuel's livery.  For both heaven and earth
unite in this wonderful livery.  Nature and grace unite in it.  It is
woven by the gospel on the loom of the law--till, to tell you all that is
true about it, I neither can nor will I.  Albert Bengel tells us that the
court of heaven has its own jealous and scrupulous etiquette; and our
court journalist and historian, John Bunyan, has supplied his favoured
readers with the very card of etiquette that was issued along with
Mansoul's coat of livery, and it is more than time that we had attended
to that card.

1.  The first item then in that etiquette-card ran in these set terms:
'First, wear these white robes daily, day by day, lest you should at some
time appear to others as if you were none of Mine.--Signed, EMMANUEL.'

Now, we put on anew every morning the garments that we are to wear every
new day.  We have certain pieces of clothing that we wear in the morning;
we have certain pieces that we wear when we are at our work; and, again,
we have certain other pieces that we put on when we go abroad in the
afternoon; and, yet again, certain other pieces that we array ourselves
in when we go out into society in the evening.  After a night in which
Mercy could not sleep for blessing and praising God, they all rose in the
morning with the sun; but the Interpreter would have them tarry a while,
for, said he, you must orderly go from hence.  Then said he to the
damsel, Take them, and have them into the garden to the bath.  Then
Innocent the damsel took them, and had them into the garden, and brought
them to the bath.  Then they went in and washed, yea, they and the boys
and all, and they came out of that bath, not only clean and sweet, but
also much enlivened and much strengthened in their joints.  So when they
came in they looked fairer a deal than when they went out.  Then said the
Interpreter to the damsel that waited upon those women, Go into the
vestry, and fetch out garments for these people.  So she went and fetched
out white raiment and laid it down before him.  And then he commanded
them to put it on.  It was fine linen, white and clean.  Now, therefore,
they began to esteem each other better than themselves.  For, You are
fairer than I am, said one; and, You are more comely than I am, said
another.  The children also stood amazed to see into what fashion they
had been brought.  William Law--I thank God, I think, every day I live
for that good day to me on which He introduced me to His gifted and
saintly servant--well, William Law used every morning after his bath in
the morning to put on his livery, piece by piece, in order, and with
special prayer.  The first piece that he put on, and he put it on every
new morning next his heart to wear it all the day next his heart, was
gratitude to God.  And it was a real, feeling, active, and operative
gratitude that he so put on.  On each new morning as it came, that good
man was full of new gratitude to God.  For the sun new from his Almighty
Maker's hands he had gratitude.  For his house over his head he had
gratitude.  For his Bible and his spiritual books he had gratitude.  For
his opportunities of reading and study, as also for ten o'clock in the
morning when the widows and orphans of King's Cliffe came to his window,
and so on.  A grateful heart feeds itself to a still greater gratitude on
everything that comes to it.  So it was with William Law, till he wakened
the maids in the rooms below with his psalms and his hymns as he went
into his vestry and put on his singing robes so early every morning.  And
then, after his morning hours of study and devotion, Law had a piece of
livery that he always put on and never came downstairs to breakfast
without it.  Other men might put on other pieces; he always clothed
himself next to gratitude with humility.  Men differ, good men differ,
and Emmanuel's livery-men differ in what they put on, at what time, and
in what order.  But that was William Law's way.  You will learn more of
his way, and you will be helped to find out a like way for yourselves, if
you will become students of his incomparable books.  You will find how he
put on charity, 1 Cor. thirteenth chapter; and then how, over all, he put
on the will of God; till, thus equipped and thus accoutred, he was able
to say, as it has seldom been said since it was first said, 'I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me; my judgment was to me as a robe and as
a diadem.  The Almighty was then with me, and my children were about me.
When I washed my steps with butter, and when the rock poured me out
rivers of oil!'  So much for that livery-man of Emmanuel, the author of
the _Christian Perfection_ and the _Spirit of Love_.  As for the women's
vestry in the Interpreter's House, Matthew Henry saw the thirty-first
chapter of the Proverbs hung up on that vestry wall, and Christiana
making her morning toilet before it with Mercy beside her.  Who would
find a virtuous woman, let him look before that looking-glass for her,
and he will be sure to find her and her daughters and her daughters-in-
law putting on their white raiment there.

2.  'Secondly, keep your garments always white; for if they be soiled, it
is a dishonour to Me.  I have a few names even in Sardis which have not
defiled their garments, and they shall walk with Me in white, for they
are worthy.'  Even in Sardis, with every street and every house full of
soil and dishonour to the name of Christ, even in Sardis Emmanuel had
some of whom He could boast Himself.  Would you not immensely like at the
last day to be one of those some in Sardis?  Shall it not be splendid
when Sardis comes up for judgment to be among those few names that
Emmanuel shall then read out of His book, and when, at their few names,
two or three men shall step out into the light in His livery?  Some of
you are in Sardis at this moment.  Some of you are in a city, or in a
house in a city, where it is impossible to keep your garments clean.  And
yet, no; nothing is impossible to Emmanuel and His true livery-men.  Even
in that house where you are, Emmanuel will say over you, I have one there
who is thankful to My Father and to Me; thankful to singing every morning
where there is little, as men see, to sing for.  There is one in that
house humble, where humility itself would almost become high-minded.  And
meek, where Moses himself would have lost his temper.  And submissive,
where rebelliousness would not have been without excuse.  Mark these few
men for Mine, says Emmanuel.  Mark them with the inkhorn for Mine.  For
they shall surely be Mine in that day, and they shall walk with Me in
white, for they are worthy.

3.  'Wherefore gird your garments well up from the ground.'  A
well-dressed man, a well-dressed woman, is a beautiful sight.  Not over-
dressed; not dressed so as to call everybody's attention to their dress;
but dressed decorously, becomingly, tastefully.  Each several piece well
fitted on, and all of a piece, till it all looks as if it had grown by
nature itself upon the well-dressed wearer.  Be like him--be like her--so
runs the third head of the etiquette-card.  Be not slovenly and
disorderly and unseemly in your livery.  Let not your livery be always
falling off, and catching on every bush and briar, and dropping into
every pool and ditch.  Hold yourselves in hand, the instruction goes on.
Brace yourselves up.  Have your temper, your tongue, your eyes, your
ears, and all your members in control.  And then you will escape many a
rent and many a rag; many a seam and many a patch; many a soil and many a
stain.  And then also you will be found walking abroad in comeliness and
at liberty, while others, less careful, are at home mending and washing
and ironing because they went without a girdle when you girt up your
garments well off the ground.  Wherefore always gird well up the loins of
your mind.

4.  'And, fourthly, lose not your robes, lest you walk naked and men see
your shame'; that is to say, the supreme shame of your soul.  For there
is no other shame.  There is nothing else in body or soul to be ashamed
about.  There is a nakedness, indeed, that our children are taught to
cover; but the Bible is a book for men.  And the only nakedness that the
Bible knows about or cares about is the nakedness of the soul.  It was
their sudden soul-nakedness that chased Adam and Eve in among the trees
of the garden.  And it is God's pity for soul-naked sinners that has made
Him send His Son to cry to us: 'I counsel thee,' He cries, 'to buy of Me
gold tried in the fire, that thou mayest be rich; white raiment, that
thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not
appear.  Behold!' He cries in absolute terror, 'Behold!  I come as a
thief!  Blessed is he that walketh and keepeth his garments, lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame.'  Were your soul to be stripped naked to
all its shame to-morrow; were all your past to be laid out absolutely
naked and bare, with all the utter nakedness of your inward life this
day; were all your secret thoughts, and all your stealthy schemes, and
all your mad imaginations, and all your detestable motives, and all your
hatreds like hell, and all your follies like Bedlam to be laid naked--I
suppose the horror of it would make you cry to the rocks and the
mountains to cover you this Sabbath night, or the weeds of the nearest
sea to wrap you down into its depths.  It would be hell before the time
to you if your soul were suddenly to be stripped absolutely bare of its
ragged body, and naked of all the thin integuments of time, and were for
a single day to stand naked to its everlasting shame.  And it is just
because Jesus Christ sees all that as sure as the judgment-day coming to
you, that He stands here to-night and calls to you: I counsel thee!  I
counsel thee!  Before it be too late, I again counsel thee!

5.  But the Prince Emmanuel is persuaded better things of all His livery-
men, though He thus speaks to them to put them on their guard.  Yes,
sternly and severely and threateningly as He sometimes speaks, yet, in
spite of Himself, His real grace always breaks through at the last.  And,
accordingly, his fifth command runs thus: But, it runs, if you should
sully them, if you should defile them, the which I am greatly unwilling
that you should, then speed you to that which is written in My law, that
yet you may stand, and not fall before Me and before My throne.  Always
know this, that I have provided for thee an open fountain to wash thy
garments in.  Look, therefore, that you wash often in that fountain, and
go not for an hour in defiled garments.  Let not, therefore, My garments,
your garments, the garments that I gave thee be ever spotted by the
flesh.  Keep thy garments always white, and let thy head lack no
ointment.--Signed in heaven, EMMANUEL.




CHAPTER XXVII--MANSOUL'S MAGNA CHARTA


   'A better covenant.'--_Paul_.

Magna Charta is a name very dear to the hearts of the English people.
For, ever since that memorable day on which that noble instrument was
extorted from King John at the point of the sword, England has been the
pioneer to all the other nations of the earth in personal freedom, in
public righteousness, in domestic stability, and in foreign influence and
enterprise.  Runnymede is a red-letter spot, and 1215 is a red-letter
year, not only in the history of England, but in the history of the whole
modern world.  The keystone of all sound constitutional government was
laid at that place on that date, and by that great bridge not England
only, but after England the whole civilised world has passed over from
ages of bondage and oppression and injustice into a new world of personal
liberty and security, public equity and good faith, loyalty and peace.
All that has since been obtained, whether on the battle-field or on the
floor of Parliament, has been little more than a confirmation of Magna
Charta or an authoritative comment upon Magna Charta.  And if every
subsequent law were to be blotted out, yet in Magna Charta the
foundations would still remain of a great state and a free people.  'Here
commences,' says Macaulay, 'the history of the English nation.'

Now, after the Prince of Peace had subjugated the rebellious city of
Mansoul, He promulgated a proclamation and appointed a day wherein He
would renew their Charter.  Yea, a day wherein he would renew and enlarge
their Charter, mending several faults in it, so that the yoke of Mansoul
might be made yet more easy to bear.  And this He did without any desire
of theirs, even of His own frankness and nobleness of mind.  So when He
had sent for and seen their old Charter, He laid it by and said, Now that
which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away.  An epitome,
therefore, of that new, and better, and more firm and steady Charter take
as follows: I do grant of Mine own clemency, free, full, and everlasting
forgiveness of all their wrongs, injuries, and offences done against My
Father, against Me, against their neighbours and themselves.  I do give
them also My Testament, with all that is therein contained, for their
everlasting comfort and consolation.  Thirdly, I do also give them a
portion of the self-same grace and goodness that dwells in My Father's
heart and Mine.  Fourthly, I do give, grant, and bestow upon them freely,
the world and all that is therein for their true good; yea, all the
benefits of life and death, of things present and things to come.  Free
leave and full access also at all seasons to Me in My palace, there to
make known all their wants to Me; and I give them, moreover, a promise
that I shall hear and redress all their grievances.  To them and to their
right seed after them, I hereby bestow all these grants, privileges, and
royal immunities.  All this is but a lean epitome of what was that day
laid down in letters of gold and engraven on their doors and their castle
gates.  And what joy, what comfort, what consolation, think you, did now
possess every heart in Mansoul!  The bells rang out, the minstrels
played, the people danced, the captains shouted, the colours waved in the
wind, and the silver trumpets sounded, till every enemy inside and
outside of Mansoul was now glad to hide his head.

Our constitutional authors and commentators are wont to take Magna Charta
clause by clause, and word by word, and letter by letter.  They linger
lovingly and proudly over every jot and tittle of that splendid
instrument.  And you will indulge me this Communion night of all nights
of the year if I expatiate still more lovingly and proudly on that great
Covenant which our Lord has sealed to us again to-day, and has written
again to-day on the walls of our hearts.  Moses made haste as soon as the
old Charter was read over to him, and nothing shall delay us till we have
feasted our eyes, and our ears, and our hearts to-night on the contents
of this our new and better covenant.

1.  The first article of our Magna Charta is free, full, and everlasting
forgiveness of all the wrongs, injuries, and offences we have ever done
against God, against our Saviour, against our neighbour, and against
ourselves.  The English nobles extorted their Charter from their
tyrannical king with their sword at his throat, and after he had signed
it, he cast himself on the ground and gnawed sticks and stones in his
fury, so mad was he at the men who had so humiliated him.  'They have set
four-and-twenty kings over my head,' he gnashed out.  How different was
it with our Charter!  For when we were yet enemies it was already drawn
out in our name.  And after we had been subdued it would never have
entered our fearful hearts to ask for such an instrument.  And, even now,
after we have entered into its liberty, how slow we are to believe all
that is written in our great Charter, and read to us every day out of it.
And who shall cast a stone at us for not easily believing all that is so
written and read?  It is not so easy as you would think to believe in
free forgiveness for all the wrongs, injuries, and offences we have ever
done.  When you try to believe it about yourselves, you will find how
hard it is to accept that covenant and always to keep your feet firm upon
it.  That the forgiveness is absolutely free is its first great
difficulty.  If it had cost us all we could ever do or suffer, both in
this world and in the world to come, then we could have come to terms
with our Prince far more easily; but that our forgiveness should be
absolutely free, it is that that so staggers us.  When I was a little boy
I was once wandering through the streets of a large city seeing the
strange sights.  I had even less Latin in my head that day than I had
money in my pocket.  But I was hungry for knowledge and eager to see rare
and wonderful things.  Over the door of a public institution, containing
a museum and other interesting things, I tried to read a Latin scroll.  I
could not make out the whole of the writing; I could only make out one
word, and not even that, as the event soon showed.  The word was
_gratia_, or some modification of _gratia_, with some still deeper words
engraven round about it.  But on the strength of that one word I mounted
the steps and rang the bell, and asked the porter if I could see the
museum.  He told me that the cost of admission was such and such.  Little
as it was, it was too much for me, and I came down the steps feeling that
the Latin writing above the door had entirely deceived me.  It has not
been the last time that my bad Latin has brought me to shame and
confusion of face.  But Latin, or Greek, or only English, or not even
English, there is no deception and no confusion here.  Forgiveness is
really of free grace.  It costs absolutely nothing, the door is open; or,
if it is not open, then knock, and it shall be opened, without money and
without price.

'Free and full.'  I could imagine a free forgiveness which was not also
full.  I could imagine a charter that would have run somehow thus: Free
forgiveness and full, up to a firmly fixed limit.  Free and full
forgiveness for sins of ignorance and even of infirmity and frailty; for
small sins and for great sins, too, up to a certain age of life and stage
of guilt.  Free and full forgiveness up to a certain line, and then, that
black line of reprobation, as Samuel Rutherford says.  Indeed, it is no
imagination.  I have felt oftener than once that I was at last across
that black line, and gone and lost for ever.  But no--

   'While the lamp holds on to burn,
   The greatest sinner may return.'

'Free, full, and everlasting.'  Pope Innocent the Third came to the
rescue of King John and issued a Papal bull revoking and annulling Magna
Charta.  But neither king, nor pope, nor devil can revoke or annul our
new Covenant.  It is free, full, and everlasting.  If God be for us, who
can be against us?  Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
Neither death nor life, nor angels nor principalities nor powers, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

2.  'Free, full, and everlasting forgiveness of all the wrongs, the
injuries, and the offences you have done against My Father, Me, your
neighbours, and yourselves.'  Now, out of all that let us fix upon
this--the wrongs and the injuries we have done to our neighbours.  For,
as Calvin says somewhere, though our sins against the first table of the
law are our worst sins, yet our sins against the second table, that is,
against our neighbours, are far better for beginning a scrutiny with.  So
they are.  For our wrongs against our neighbours, when they awaken within
us at all, awaken with a terrible fury.  Our wrongs against our
neighbours wound, and burden, and exasperate an awakened conscience in a
fearful way.  We come afterwards to say, Against Thee, Thee only have I
sinned!  But at the first beginning of our repentances it is the wrongs
we have done to our neighbours that drive us beside ourselves.  What
neighbour of yours, then, have you so wronged?  Name him; name her.  You
avoid that name like poison, but it is not poison--it is life and peace.
More depends on your often recollecting and often pronouncing that
hateful name than you would believe.  More depends upon it than your
minister has ever told you.  And, then, in what did you so wrong him?
Name the wrong also.  Give it its Bible name, its newspaper name, its
brutal, vulgar, ill-mannered name.  Do not be too soft, do not be too
courtly with yourself.  Keep your own evil name ever before you.  When
you hear any other man outlawed and ostracised by that same name, say to
yourself: Thou, sir, art the man!  Put out a secret and a painful skill
upon yourself.  Have times and places and ways that nobody knows anything
about--not even those you have wronged; have times and places and ways
they would laugh to be told of, and would not believe it; times, I say,
and places and ways for bringing all those old wrongs you once did ever
and ever back to mind; as often back and as keen to your mind as they
come back to that other mind, which is still so full of the wrong.  Even
if your victim has forgiven and forgotten you, never you forget him, and
never you forgive yourself when you again think of him.  Welcome back
every sudden and sharp recollection of your wrong-doing.  And make haste
at every such sudden recollection and fall down on the spot in a deeper
compunction than ever before.  Do that as you would be a forgiven and
full-chartered soul.  For, free and full and everlasting as God's
forgiveness is, you have no assurance that it is yours if you ever forget
your sin, or ever forgive yourself for having done it.  'Forgive
yourself,' says Augustine, 'and God will condemn you.  But continually
arraign and condemn yourself, and God will forgive and acquit and justify
you.'

3.  'I give also My holy law and testament, and all that therein is
contained, for their everlasting comfort and consolation.'  This is not
the manner of men, O my God.  Kind-hearted men comfort and console those
who have suffered injuries and wrongs at our hands, but the
kindest-hearted of men harden their hearts and set their faces like a
flint against us who have done the wrong.  All Syria sympathised with
Esau for the loss of his birthright, but I do not read that any one came
to whisper one kind word to Jacob on his hard pillow.  All the army
mourned over Uriah, but all the time David's moisture was dried up like
the drought of summer, and not even Nathan came to the King till he could
not help coming.  All Jericho cried, Avenge us of our adversary!  But it
was Jesus who looked up and saw Zaccheus and said: Zaccheus, come down;
make haste and come down, for to-day I must abide at thy house.  'The
injuries they have done themselves also,' so runs the very first head of
our forgiveness covenant.  Ah! yes; O my Lord, Thou knowest all things;
Thou knowest my heart.  Thou knowest that irremediably as I have injured
other men, yet in injuring them I have injured myself much more.  And
much as other men need restitution, reparation, and consolation on my
account, my God, Thou knowest that I need all that much more--ten
thousand times more.  Oh, how my broken heart within me leaps up and
thanks Thee for that Covenant.  Let me repeat it again to Thy praise:
'Full, free, and everlasting forgiveness of all wrongs, injuries, and
offences done by him against his neighbours and against himself.'  Who,
who is a God, O my God, who is a God like unto Thee!

4.  'I do also give them a portion of the self-same grace and goodness
that dwells in My Father's heart and Mine.'  The self-same grace and
goodness, that is, that My Father and I have shown to them.  That is to
say, we shall be made both willing and able to grant to all those men who
have wronged us the very same charter of forgiveness that we have had
granted to us of God.  So that at all those times when we stand praying
for forgiveness we shall suspend that prayer till we have first forgiven
all our enemies, and all who have at any time and in any way wronged or
injured us.  Even when we had the Communion cup at our lips to-day, you
would have seen us setting it down till we had first gone and been
reconciled to our brother.  Yes, my brethren, you are His witnesses that
He has done it.  He has taken you into His covenant till He has made you
both able and willing, both willing and able, to grant and to bequeath to
others, all that free, full, and everlasting forgiveness and love that He
has bequeathed to you.  Till under the very last and supreme wrong that
your worst enemy can do to you and to yours, you are able and forward to
say: Father, forgive him, for he knows not what he has done.  Forgive me
my debts, you will say, as I forgive my debtors.  And always, as you
again say and do that, you will on the spot be made a partaker of the
Divine Nature, according to the heavenly Charter, 'I do also give them a
portion of the self-same grace and goodness that dwells in My Father's
heart and in Mine.'

5.  'I do also,' so Mansoul's Magna Charta travels on, 'I do also give,
grant, and bestow upon them freely the world and all that is therein for
their good; yea, I grant them all the benefits of life and of death, and
of things present and things to come.'  What a magnificent Charter is
that!  'All things are yours: whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are
yours.'  What a superb Charter!  Only, it is too high for us; we cannot
attain to it.  Has any human being ever risen to anything like the full
faith, full assurance, and full victory of all that in this life?  No;
the thing is impossible!  Reason would fall off her throne.  The heart of
a man would break with too much joy if he tried to enter into the full
belief of all that.  No; it hath not entered into the heart of a still
sinful man what God hath chartered to them whom He loves.  This world,
and all that therein is, and then all the coming benefits of life and of
death.  What benefits do believers receive from Christ at their death?  We
all drank in the answer to that with our mother's milk, but what is
behind the words of that answer no mortal tongue can yet tell.  All are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.  Till, what joy, what
comfort, what consolation, think you, did now possess the hearts of the
men of Mansoul!  The bells rang, the minstrels played, the people danced,
the captains shouted, the colours waved in the wind, and the silver
trumpets sounded.

6.  'And till the glory breaks suddenly upon you, and as long as you yet
live in this life of free grace I shall give and grant you leave and free
access to Me in My palace at all seasons, there to make known all your
wants to Me; and I give you, moreover, a promise that I will hear and
redress all your grievances.'  At all seasons; in season and out of
season.  There to make known all your wants to Me.  And all your
grievances.  All that still grieves and vexes you.  All your wrongs.  All
your injuries.  All that men can do to you.  Let them do their worst to
you.  My grace is sufficient for all your grievances.  My goodness in you
shall make you more than a conqueror.  I undertake to give you before you
have asked for it a heart full of free, full, and everlasting forgiveness
and forgetfulness of all that has begun to grieve you.  No word or deed,
written or spoken, of any man shall be able to vex or grieve the spirit
that I shall put within you.  You will immediately avenge yourselves of
your adversaries.  You will instantly repay them all an hundredfold.  For,
when thine enemy hungers, thou shalt feed him; when he is athirst, thou
shalt give him drink.  For thou shalt not be overcome of evil, but thou
shalt overcome evil with good.

7.  'All these grants, privileges, and immunities I bestow upon thee;
upon thee, I say, and upon thy right seed after thee.'  O Almighty God,
our Heavenly Father, give us such a seed!  Give us a seed right with
Thee!  Smite us and our house with everlasting barrenness rather than
that our seed should not be right with Thee.  O God, give us our
children.  Give us our children.  A second time, and by a far better
birth, give us our children to be beside us in Thy holy Covenant.  For it
had been better we had never been born; it had been better we had never
been betrothed; it had been better we had sat all our days solitary
unless all our children are to be right with Thee.  Let the day perish,
and the night wherein it was said, There is a man-child conceived.  Let
that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above; neither let the
light shine upon it, unless all our house is yet to be right with God.  O
my son Absalom!  My son, my son Absalom!  Would God I had died for thee,
O Absalom, my son, my son!  But thou, O God, art Thyself a Father, and
thus hast in Thyself a Father's heart.  Hear us, then, for our children,
O our Father, for such of our children as are not yet right with Thee!  In
season and out of season; we shall not go up into our bed; we shall not
give sleep to our eyes nor slumber to our eyelids till we and all our
seed are right with Thee.  And then how we and all our saved seed beside
us shall praise Thee and bless Thee above all the families on earth or in
heaven, and shall say: Unto Him who loved us and washed us from our sins
in His own blood, and hath bestowed upon us a free, full, and everlasting
forgiveness, and hath made us partakers of His Divine Nature, to Him be
our love and praise and service to all eternity.  Amen and Amen!




CHAPTER XXVIII--EMMANUEL'S LAST CHARGE TO MANSOUL: CONCERNING THE
REMAINDERS OF SIN IN THE REGENERATE


   'Hold fast till I come.'--_Our Lord_.

There are many fine things in Emmanuel's last charge to Mansoul, but by
far the best thing is the answer that He Himself there supplies to this
deep and difficult question,--to this question, namely, Why original sin
is still left to rage in the truly regenerate?  Why does our Lord not
wholly extirpate sin in our regeneration?  What can His reason be for
leaving their original sin to dwell in His best saints till the day of
their death?  For, to use His own sad words about sin in His last charge,
nothing hurts us but sin.  Nothing defiles and debases us but sin.  Why,
then, does He not take our sin clean out of us at once?  He could speak
the word of complete deliverance if He only would.  Why, then, does He
not speak that word?  That has been a mystery and a grief to all God's
saints ever since sanctification began to be.  And the great interest and
the great value of Emmanuel's last charge to Mansoul stands in this, that
He here tells us, if not all, then at least some of His reasons for the
policy He pursues with us in our sanctification.  Dost thou know, He
asks, as He stands on His chariot steps, surrounded with His captains on
the right hand and the left--Dost thou know why I at first did, and do
still, suffer sin to live and dwell and harbour in thy heart?  And then,
after an _O yes_! for silence, the Prince began and thus proceeded:

1.  Dost thou ask at Me why I and My Father have seen it good to allow
the dregs of thy sinfulness still to corrupt and to rot in thine heart?
Dost thou ask why, amid so much in thee that is regenerate, there is
still so much more that is unregenerate?  Why, while thou art, without
controversy, under grace, indwelling sin still so festers and so breaks
out in thee?  Dost thou ask that?  Then, attend, and before I go away to
come again I will try to tell thee, if, indeed, thou art able and willing
to bear it.  Well, then, be silent while I tell thee that I have left all
that of thy original sin in thee to tempt thee, to try thee, to humble
thee, and to thrust, day and night, upon thee, what is still in thine
heart.  To humble thee, take knowledge, take warning, and take
forethought.  To make thee humble, and to keep thee humble.  To hide
pride from thee, and to lay thee all thy days on earth in the dust of
death.  I tell thee this day that in all thy past life I have ordered and
administered all My providences toward thee to humble thee and to prove
thee, and to make thee dust and ashes in thine own eyes.  And I go away
to carry on from heaven this same intention of My Father's and Mine
toward thee.  We shall try thee as silver is tried.  We shall sift thee
as wheat is sifted.  We shall search thee as Jerusalem is searched with
lighted candles.  I tell thee the truth, I shall bend from heaven all My
power which My Father has given Me, and all My wisdom, and all My love,
and all My grace.  What to do, dost thou think?  What to do but to make
thee to know and to acknowledge the plague of thine own heart.  The
deceitfulness, that is, the depth of wickedness, and the abominableness,
past all words, of thine own heart.  I do not ascend to My Father, with
all things in My hand, to make thy seat soft, and thy cup sweet, and thy
name great, and thy seed multiplied.  I have far other predestinations
before Me for thee.  I have loved thee with an everlasting love, and it
is to everlasting life that I am leading thee.  And thou must let Me lead
thee through fire and through water if I am to lead thee to heaven at
last.  I shall have to utterly kill all self-love out of thy heart, and
to plant all humility in its place.  Many and dreadful discoveries shall
I have to make to thee of thy profane and inhuman self-love and
selfishness.  Words will fail thee to confess all thy selfishness in thy
most penitent prayer.  Thy towering pride of heart also, and thy so
contemptible vanity.  As for thy vanity, I shall so overrule it that
double-minded men about thee shall make thee and thy vanity their sport,
their jest, and their prey.  And I shall not leave thee, nor discharge
Myself of My work within thee, till I see thee loathing thyself and
hating thyself and gnashing thy teeth at thyself for thy envy of thy
brother, thy envy concerning his house, his wife and his man-servant, and
his maid-servant, and his ox, and his ass, and everything that is his.
Thou shalt find something in thee that shall allow thee to see thine
enemy prosper, but not thy friend.  Something that shall keep thee from
thy sleep because of his talents, his name, his income, and his place
which I have given him above thee, beside thee, and always in thy sight.
It will be something also that shall make his sickness, his decay, his
defamation, and his death sweet to thee, and his prosperity and return to
life bitter to thee.  Thou shalt have to confess something in
thyself--whatever its nature and whatever its name--something that shall
make thee miserable at good news, and glad and enlarged and full of life
at evil tidings.  It will be something also that shall give a long life
in thy evil heart to anger, and to resentment, and to retaliation, and to
revenge.  For after years and years thou shalt still have it in thine
heart to hate and to hurt that man and his house, because long ago he
left thy side, thy booth in the market, thy party in the state, and thy
church in religion.  As I live, swore Emmanuel, standing up on the step
of His ascending chariot, I shall show thee thyself.  I shall show thee
what an unclean heart is and a wicked.  I shall teach to thee what all
true saints shudder at when they are let see the plague of their own
hearts.  I shall show thee, as I live, how full of pride, and hate, and
envy, and ill-will a regenerate heart can be; and how a true-born man of
God may still love evil and hate good; may still rejoice in iniquity and
pine under the truth.  I shall show thee, also, what thou wilt not as yet
believe, how thy best friend cannot trust his good name with thee; such a
sweet morsel to thee shall be the mote in his eye and the spot on his
praise.  Yes, I shall show thee that I did not die on the cross for
nothing when I died for thee; when I went out to Calvary a shame and a
spitting, an outcast and a curse for thee!  Thou shalt yet arise up and
fall down in thy sin and shalt justify all my thorns, and nails, and
spears, and the last drop of My blood for thee!  Yea, thou shalt remember
all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, and to know what was in
thine heart, and whether thou wouldest keep His commandments or no.

2.  It is also, the still tarrying Prince proceeded--it is also to keep
thee wakeful and to make thee watchful.  Now, what conceivable estate
could any man be put into even by his Maker and Redeemer more calculated
to call forth wakefulness and watchfulness than to have one half of his
heart new and the other half old?  To have one half of his heart
garrisoned by the captains of Emmanuel, and the other half still full of
the spies and the scouts and the emissaries of hell?  Nay, to have the
great bulk of his heart still full of sin and but a small part of his
heart here and there under grace and truth?  Here is material for
fightings without and fears within with a vengeance!  If it somehow suits
and answers God's deep purposes with His people to teach them
watchfulness in this life, then here is a field for watchfulness, a field
of divine depth and scope and opportunity.  There used to be a divinity
question set in the schools in these terms: Where, in the regenerate,
hath sin its lodging-place?  For that sin does still lodge in the
regenerate is too abundantly evident both from Scripture and from
experience.  But where it so lodges is the question.  The Dominican
monks, and some others, were of opinion that original sin is to be found
only in the inferior part of the soul, but not in the mind or the will.
Which, I suppose, we shall soon find contrary both to Scripture and
reason and experience.  Old Andrew Gray speaks feelingly and no less
truly concerning the heart, when he says, 'I think,' he says, 'that if
all the saints since Adam's day, and who shall be to the end of the
world, had but one deceitful heart to guide they would misguide it.'  What
a plot of God, then, it is to seat grace, a little saving grace, in the
midst of such a sea of corruption as a human heart is, and then to set a
sinful man to watch over that spark and to keep the boiling pollutions of
his own heart from extinguishing that spark!  Well may Paul exclaim: Yea,
what carefulness it calls forth in us; yea, what indignation; yea, what
fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea, what zeal; yea, what revenge!  And,
knowing to what He has left our hearts, well may Emmanuel say to us from
His ascending steps, 'Watch ye, therefore; and what I say unto you, I say
unto all, Watch!'

3.  It is to keep thee watchful and to teach thee war also, the Prince
went on.  Bishop Butler is about the last author that we would think of
going to for light on any deep and intricate question in the evangelical
and experimental life.  But Butler is so deeply seen into much of the
heart of man, as also into many of the ways of God, that even here he has
something to say to the point.  'It is vain to object,' he says in his
sober and sobering way, 'that all this trouble and danger might have been
saved us by our being made at once the creatures and the characters which
we were to be.  For we experience that what we are to be is to be the
effect of what we shall do.  And that the conduct of nature is not to
save us trouble and danger, but to make us capable of going through
trouble and danger, and to put it upon us to do it.'  The Apostle Peter
has the same teaching in a passage too little attended to, in which he
tells us that we are set here to work out our own salvation, and that our
salvation will just be what, with fear and trembling, or, as Butler says,
with trouble and danger, we work out.  No man, let all men understand, is
to have his salvation thrust upon him.  No man need expect to waken up at
the end of an idle, indifferent, inattentive life and find his salvation
superinduced upon all that.  No man shall wear the crown of everlasting
life who has not for himself won it.  As every man soweth to the Spirit
so also shall he reap.  As a soldier warreth, so shall he hear it said to
him, Well done.  And as a sinner keeps his heart with all diligence, and
holds it fast till his King comes, so shall he hear it said to him, Thou
hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things.  If thy sins, then, are left in thee to teach thee war, O poor
saint of God, then take to thee the whole armour of God; thou knowest the
pieces of it, and where the armoury is, and, having done all, stand!

4.  And dost thou know, O Mansoul, that it is all to try thy love also?
Now, how, just how, do the remainders of sin in the regenerate try their
love?  Why, surely, in this way.  If we really loved sin at the deepest
bottom of our hearts, and only loved holiness on the surface, would we
not in our deepest hearts close with sin, give ourselves up to it, and
make no stand at all against it?  Would we not in our deepest and most
secret hearts welcome it, and embrace it, look out for it with desire and
delight, and part with it with regret?  But if, as a matter of fact, we
at our deepest and most hidden heart turn from sin, flee from it, fight
against it, rejoice when we are rid of it, and have horror at the return
of it,--what better proof than that could Christ and His angels have that
at bottom we are His and not the devil's?  And that grace, at bottom, has
our hearts, and not sin; heaven, and not hell?  The apostle's protesting
cry is our cry also; we also delight in the law of God after our most
inward man.  For, after our saddest surprises into sin, after its worst
outbreaks and overthrows, such all the time were our reluctances,
recalcitrations, and resistances, that, swept away as we were, yet all
the time, and after it was again over, it was with some good conscience
that we said to Christ that He knew all things, and that He knew that we
loved Him.

   'O benefit of ill! now I find true
      That better is by evil still made better;
   And ruined love, when it is built anew,
      Grows fairer than at first, more strong, far greater,
   So I return rebuked to my content,
      And gain by ill thrice more than I have spent.'

Yes; it is a sure and certain proof how truly we love our dearest friend,
that, after all our envy and ill-will, yet it is as true as that God is
in heaven that, all the time, maugre the devil of self that remains in
our heart,--after he has done his worst--we would still pluck out our
eyes for our friend and shed our blood.  I have no better proof to myself
of the depth and the divineness of my love to my friend than just this,
that I still love him and love him more tenderly and loyally, after
having so treacherously hurt him.  And my heavenly friends and my earthly
friends, if they will still have me, must both be content to go into the
same bundle both of my remaining enmity and my increasing love; my
remainders of sin, and my slow growth in regeneration.  So when they had
dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou Me
more than these?  He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord; Thou knowest that I love
Thee.  He saith unto him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas,
lovest thou Me?  He saith unto Him, Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love
Thee.  He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou
Me?  Peter was grieved because He said unto him the third time, Lovest
thou Me?  And he said unto Him, Lord, Thou knowest all things; Thou
knowest that I love Thee!

5.  And, to sum up all--more than your humility, more than your
watchfulness, more than your prayerfulness, more than to teach you war,
and more than to try your love, the dregs and remainders of sin have been
left in your regenerate heart to exalt and to extol the grace of God.  In
Emmanuel's very words, it has all been to make you a monument of God's
mercy.  I put it to yourselves, then, ye people of God: does that not
satisfy you for a reason, and for an explanation, and for a justification
of all your shame and pain, and of all your bondage and misery and
wretchedness since you knew the Lord?  Is there not a heart in you that
says, Yes! it was worth all my corruption and pollution and misery to
help to manifest forth and to magnify the glory of the grace of God?  You
seize on Emmanuel's word that you are a monument of mercy.  Somehow that
word pleases and reposes you.  Yes, that is what out of all these post-
regeneration years you are.  You would have been a monument to God's
mercy had you, like the thief on the cross, been glorified on the same
day on which you were first justified.  But it will neither be the day of
your justification nor the day of your glorification that will make you
the greatest of all the monuments that shall ever be raised to the praise
of God's grace; it will be the days of your sanctification that will do
that.  Paul was a blasphemer and a persecutor and injurious at his
conversion, but he had to be a lifetime in grace and an apostle above all
the twelve before he became the chiefest of sinners and the most wretched
of saints.  And though your first forgiveness was, no doubt, a great
proof of the grace of God, yet it was nothing, nothing at all, to your
forgiveness to-day.  You had no words for the wonder and the praise of
your forgiveness to-day.  You just took to your lips the cup of salvation
and let that silent action speak aloud your monumental praise.  You were
a sinner at your regeneration, else you would not have been regenerated.
But you were not then the chief of sinners.  But now.  Ah, now!  Those
words, the chief of sinners, were but idle words in Paul's mouth.  He did
not know what he was saying.  For, what has horrified and offended other
men when it has been spoken with bated breath to them about envy, and
hate, and malice, and revenge, and suchlike remainders of hell, all that
has been a breath of life and hope to you.  It has been to you as when
Christian, in the Valley of the Shadow of Death, heard a voice in the
darkness which proved to him that there was another sinner at the mouth
of hell besides himself.  There is no text that comes oftener to your
mind than this, that whoso hateth his brother is a murderer; and,
communicant as you are, you feel and you know and you are sure that there
are many men lying in lime waiting the day of judgment to whom it would
be more tolerable than for you were it not that you are to be at that day
the highest monument in heaven or earth to the redeeming, pardoning, and
saving grace of God.  Yes, this is the name that shall be written on you;
this is the name that shall be read on you of all who shall see you in
heaven; this name that Emmanuel pronounced over Mansoul that day from His
ascending chariot-steps, a very Spectacle of wonder, and a very Monument
of the mercy and the grace of God.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1894 Oliphant Anderson and Ferrier edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





BUNYAN CHARACTERS--SECOND SERIES
Lectures delivered in St. George's Free Church Edinburgh
By Alexander Whyte, D.D.


IGNORANCE


   "I was alive without the law once."--_Paul_.

   "I was now a brisk talker also myself in the matter of
   religion."--_Bunyan_.

This is a new kind of pilgrim.  There are not many pilgrims like this
bright brisk youth.  A few more young gentlemen like this, and the
pilgrimage way would positively soon become fashionable and popular, and
be the thing to do.  Had you met with this young gentleman in society,
had you noticed him beginning to come about your church, you would have
lost no time in finding out who he was.  I can well believe it, you would
have replied.  Indeed, I felt sure of it.  I must ask him to the house.  I
was quite struck with his appearance and his manners.  Yes; ask him at
once to your house; show him some pointed attentions and you will never
regret it.  For if he goes to the bar and works even decently at his
cases, he will be first a sheriff and then a judge in no time.  If he
should take to politics, he will be an under-secretary before his first
parliament is out.  And if he takes to the church, which is not at all
unlikely, our West-end congregations will all be competing for him as
their junior colleague; and, if he elects either of our Established
churches to exercise his profession in it, he will have dined with Her
Majesty while half of his class-fellows are still half-starved
probationers.  Society fathers will point him out with anger to their
unsuccessful sons, and society mothers will smile under their eyelids as
they see him hanging over their daughters.

Well, as this handsome and well-appointed youth stepped out of his own
neat little lane into the rough road on which our two pilgrims were
staggering upward, he felt somewhat ashamed to be seen in their company.
And I do not wonder.  For a greater contrast you would not have seen on
any road in all that country that day.  He was at your very first sight
of him a gentleman and the son of a gentleman.  A little over-dressed
perhaps; as, also, a little lofty to the two rather battered but
otherwise decent enough men who, being so much older than he, took the
liberty of first accosting him.  "Brisk" is his biographer's description
of him.  Feather-headed, flippant, and almost impudent, you might have
been tempted to say of him had you joined the little party at that
moment.  But those two tumbled, broken-winded, and, indeed,
broken-hearted old men had been, as an old author says, so emptied from
vessel to vessel--they had had a life of such sloughs and stiff
climbs--they had been in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness so
often--that it was no wonder that their dandiacal companion walked on a
little ahead of them.  'Gentlemen,' his fine clothes and his cane and his
head in the air all said to his two somewhat disreputable-looking fellow-
travellers,--"Gentlemen, you be utter strangers to me: I know you not.
And, besides, I take my pleasure in walking alone, even more a great deal
than in company, unless I like it better."  But all his society manners,
and all his costly and well-kept clothes, and all his easy and
self-confident airs did not impose upon the two wary old pilgrims.  They
had seen too much of the world, and had been too long mixing among all
kinds of pilgrims, young and old, true and false, to be easily imposed
upon.  Besides, as one could see from their weather-beaten faces, and
their threadbare garments, they had found the upward way so dreadfully
difficult that they both felt a real apprehension as to the future of
this light-hearted and light-headed youth.  "You may find some difficulty
at the gate," somewhat bluntly broke in the oldest of the two pilgrims on
their young comrade.  "I shall, no doubt, do at the gate as other good
people do," replied the young gentleman briskly.  "But what have you to
show at the gate that may cause that the gate be opened to you?"  "Why, I
know my Lord's will, and I have been a good liver all my days, and I pay
every man his own.  I pray, moreover, and I fast.  I pay tithes, and give
alms, and have left my country for whither I am going."  Now, before we
go further: Do all you young gentlemen do as much as that?  Have you
always been good livers?  Have you paid every man and woman their due?  Do
you pray to be called prayer?  And, if so, when, and where, and what for,
and how long at a time?  I do not ask if your private prayer-book is like
Bishop Andrewes' _Devotions_, which was so reduced to pulp with tears and
sweat and the clenching of his agonising hands that his literary
executors were with difficulty able to decipher it.  Clito in the
_Christian Perfection_ was so expeditious with his prayers that he used
to boast that he could both dress and do his devotions in a quarter of an
hour.  What was the longest time you ever took to dress or undress and
say your prayers?  Then, again, there is another Anglican young gentleman
in the same High Church book who always fasts on Good Friday and the
Thirtieth of January.  Did you ever deny yourself a glass of wine or a
cigar or an opera ticket for the church or the poor?  Could you honestly
say that you know what tithes are?  And is there a poor man or woman or
child in this whole city who will by any chance put your name into their
prayers and praises at bedtime to-night?  I am afraid there are not many
young gentlemen in this house to-night who could cast a stone at that
brisk lad Ignorance, Vain-Hope, door in the side of the hill, and all.  He
was not far from the kingdom of heaven; indeed, he got up to the very
gate of it.  How many of you will get half as far?

Now (what think you?), was it not a very bold thing in John Bunyan, whose
own descent was of such a low and inconsiderable generation, his father's
house being of that rank that is meanest and most despised of all the
families in the land--was it not almost too bold in such a clown to take
such a gentleman-scholar as Saul of Tarsus, the future Apostle of the
Lord, and put him into the _Pilgrim's Progress_, and there go on to
describe him as a very brisk lad and nickname him with the nickname of
Ignorance?  For, in knowledge of all kinds to be called knowledge,
Gamaliel's gold medallist could have bought the unlettered tinker of
Elstow in one end of the market and sold him in the other.  And nobody
knew that better than Bunyan did.  And yet such a lion was he for the
truth, such a disciple of Luther was he, and such a defender and preacher
of the one doctrine of a standing or falling church, that he fills page
after page with the crass ignorance of the otherwise most learned of all
the New Testament men.  Bunyan does not accuse the rising hope of the
Pharisees of school or of synagogue ignorance.  That young Hebrew Rabbi
knew every jot and tittle of the law of Moses, and all the accumulated
traditions of the fathers to boot.  But Bunyan has Paul himself with him
when he accuses and convicts Saul of an absolutely brutish ignorance of
his own heart and hidden nature.  That so very brisk lad was always
boasting in himself of the day on which he was circumcised, and of the
old stock of which he had come; of his tribe, of his zeal, of his
blamelessness, and of the profit he had made of his educational and
ecclesiastical opportunities.  Whereas Bunyan is fain to say of himself
in his _Grace Abounding_ that he is "not able to boast of noble blood or
of a high-born state according to the flesh.  Though, all things
considered, I magnify the Heavenly Majesty for that by this door He
brought me into this world to partake of the grace and life that is in
Christ by the Gospel."

As we listen to the conversation that goes on between the two old
pilgrims and this smartly appointed youth, we find them striving hard,
but without any sign of success, to convince him of some of the things
from which he gets his somewhat severe name.  For one thing, they at last
bluntly told him that he evidently did not know the very A B C about
himself.  Till, when too hard pressed by the more ruthless of the two old
men, the exasperated youth at last frankly burst out: "I will never
believe that my heart is thus bad!"  There is a warm touch of Bunyan's
own experience here, mixed up with his so dramatic development of Paul's
morsels of autobiography that he lets drop in his Epistles to the
Philippians and to the Galatians.  "Now was I become godly; now I was
become a right honest man.  Though as yet I was nothing but a poor
painted hypocrite, yet I was proud of my godliness.  I read my Bible, but
as for Paul's Epistles, and such like Scriptures, I could not away with
them; being, as yet, but ignorant both of the corruptions of my nature
and of the want and worth of Jesus Christ to save me.  The new birth did
never enter my mind, neither knew I the deceitfulness and treachery of my
own wicked heart.  And as for secret thoughts, I took no notice of them."
My brethren, old and young, what do you think of all that?  What have you
to say to all that?  Does all that not open a window and let a flood of
daylight into your own breast?  I am sure it does.  That is the best
portrait of you that ever was painted.  Do you not see yourself there as
in a glass?  And do you not turn with disgust and loathing from the
stupid and foolish face?  You complain and tell stories about how
impostors and cheats and liars have come to your door and have impudently
thrust themselves into your innermost rooms; but your own heart, if you
only knew it, is deceitful far above them all.  Not the human heart as it
stands in confessions, and in catechisms, and in deep religious books,
but your own heart that beats out its blood-poison of self-deceit, and
darkness, and death day and night continually.  "My heart is a good
heart," said that poor ill-brought-up boy, who was already destroyed by
his father and his mother for lack of self-knowledge.  I entirely grant
you that those two old sinners by this time were taking very pessimistic
and very melancholy views of human nature, and, therefore, of every human
being, young and old.  They knew that no language had ever been coined in
any scripture, or creed, or catechism, or secret diary of the deepest
penitent, that even half uttered their own evil hearts; and they had
lived long enough to see that we are all cut out of one web, are all dyed
in one vat, and are all corrupted beyond all accusation or confession in
Adam's corruption.  But how was that poor, mishandled lad to know or
believe all that?  He could not.  It was impossible.  "You go so fast,
gentlemen, that I cannot keep pace with you.  Go you on before and I will
stay a while behind."  Then said Christian to his companion: "It pities
me much for this poor lad, for it will certainly go ill with him at
last."  "Alas!" said Hopeful, "there are abundance in our town in his
condition: whole families, yea, whole streets, and that of pilgrims too."
Is your family such a family as this?  And are you yourself just such a
pilgrim as Ignorance was, and are you hastening on to just such an end?

And then, as a consequence, being wholly ignorant of his own corruption
and condemnation in the sight of God, this miserable man must remain
ignorant and outside of all that God has done in Christ for corrupt and
condemned men.  "I believe that Christ died for sinners and that I shall
be justified before God from the curse through His gracious acceptance of
my obedience to His law.  Or, then, to take it this way, Christ makes my
duties that are religious acceptable to His Father by virtue of His
merits, and so shall I be justified."  Now, I verify believe that nine
out of ten of the young men who are here to-night would subscribe that
statement and never suspect there was anything wrong with it or with
themselves.  And yet, what does Christian, who, in this matter, is just
John Bunyan, who again is just the word of God--what does the old pilgrim
say to this confession of this young pilgrim's faith?  "Ignorance is thy
name," he says, "and as thy name is, so art thou: even this thy answer
demonstrateth what I say.  Ignorant thou art of what justifying
righteousness is, and as ignorant how to secure thy soul through the
faith of it from the heavy wrath of God.  Yea, thou also art ignorant of
the true effect of saving faith in this righteousness of Christ's, which
is to bow and win over the heart to God in Christ, to love His name, His
word, His ways, and His people."  Paul sums up all his own early life in
this one word, "ignorant of God's righteousness."  "Going about," he says
also, "to establish our own righteousness, not submitting ourselves to be
justified by the righteousness that God has provided with such wisdom and
grace, and at such a cost in His Son Jesus Christ."  Now, young men, I
defy you to be better born, better brought up, or to have better
prospects than Saul of Tarsus had.  I defy you to have profited more by
all your opportunities and advantages than he had done.  I defy you to be
more blameless in your opening manhood than he was.  And yet it all went
like smoke when he got a true sight of himself, and, with that, a true
sight of Christ and His justifying righteousness.  Read at home to-night,
and read when alone, what that great man of God says about all that in
his classical epistle to the Philippians, and refuse to sleep till you
have made the same submission.  And, to-night, and all your days, let
_submission_, Paul's splendid submission, be the soul and spirit of all
your religious life.  Submission to be searched by God's holy law as by a
lighted candle: submission to be justified from all that that candle
discovers: submission to take Christ as your life and righteousness,
sanctification and redemption: and submission of your mind and your will
and your heart to Him at all times and in all things.  Nay, stay still,
and say where you sit, Lord, I submit.  I submit on the spot to be
pardoned.  I submit now to be saved.  I submit in all things from this
very hour and house of God not any longer to be mine own, but to be
Thine, O God, Thine, Thine, for ever, in Jesus Christ Thy Son and my
Saviour!

"But, one day, as I was passing in the field, and that, too, with some
dashes in my conscience, fearing lest all was not right, suddenly this
sentence fell upon my soul, Thy Righteousness is in heaven!  And,
methought, I saw with the eyes of my soul Jesus Christ at God's right
hand.  There, I saw, was my Righteousness.  I also saw, moreover, that it
was not my good frame of heart that made my Righteousness better, nor my
bad frame of heart that made my Righteousness worse: for my Righteousness
was Jesus Christ Himself, the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.
'Twas glorious to me to see His exaltation, and the worth and prevalency
of His benefits.  And that because I could now look from myself to Him
and should reckon that all those graces of God that were now green in me
were yet but like those crack-groats and four-pence halfpennies that rich
men carry in their purses when their gold is in their trunks at home!  Oh,
I saw that day that my gold was all in my trunk at home!  Even in Christ,
my Lord and Saviour!  Now, Christ was all to me: all my wisdom, all my
righteousness, all my sanctification and all my redemption."

   "Methinks in this God speaks,
   No tinker hath such power."




LITTLE-FAITH


   "O thou of little faith."--_Our Lord_.

Little-Faith, let it never be forgotten, was, all the time, a good man.
With all his mistakes about himself, with his sad misadventure, with all
his loss of blood and of money, and with his whole after-lifetime of
doleful and bitter complaints,--all the time, Little-Faith was all
through, in a way, a good man.  To keep us right on this all-important
point, and to prevent our being prematurely prejudiced against this
pilgrim because of his somewhat prejudicial name--because give a dog a
bad name, you know, and you had better hang him out of hand at
once--because, I say, of this pilgrim's somewhat suspicious name, his
scrupulously just, and, indeed, kindly affected biographer says of him,
and says it of him not once nor twice, but over and over and over again,
that this Little-Faith was really all the time a truly good man.  And,
more than that, this good man's goodness was not a new thing with him it
was not a thing of yesterday.  This man had, happily to begin with, a
good father and a good mother.  And if there was a good town in all those
parts for a boy to be born and brought up in it was surely the town of
Sincere.  "Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old
he will not depart from it."  Well, Little-Faith had been so trained up
both by his father and his mother and his schoolmaster and his minister,
and he never cost either of them a sore heart or even an hour's sleep.
One who knew him well, as well, indeed, as only one young man knows
another, has been fain to testify, when suspicions have been cast on the
purity and integrity of his youth, that nothing will describe this
pilgrim so well in the days of his youth as just those beautiful words
out of the New Testament--"an example to all young men in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith even, and in purity"--and
that, if there was one young man in all that town of Sincere who kept his
garments unspotted it was just our pilgrim of to-night.  Yes, said one
who had known him all his days, if the child is the father of the man,
then Little-Faith, as you so unaccountably to me call him, must have been
all along a good man.

It was said long ago in _Vanity Fair_ about our present Premier that if
he were a worse man he would be a better statesman.  Now, I do not repeat
that in this place because I agree with it, but because it helps to
illustrate, as sometimes a violent paradox will help to illustrate, a
truth that does not lie all at once on the surface.  But it is no paradox
or extravagance or anything but the simple truth to say that if Little-
Faith had had more and earlier discoveries made to him of the innate evil
of his own heart, even if it had been by that innate evil bursting out of
his heart and laying waste his good life, he would either have been
driven out of his little faith altogether or driven into a far deeper
faith.  Had the commandment come to him in the manner it came to Paul;
had it come so as that the sinfulness of his inward nature had revived,
as Paul says, under its entrance; then, either his great goodness or his
little faith must have there and then died.  God's truth and man's
goodness cannot dwell together in the same heart.  Either the truth will
kill the goodness, or the goodness will kill the truth.  Little-Faith, in
short, was such a good man, and had always been such a good man, and had
led such an easy life in consequence, that his faith had not been much
exercised, and therefore had not grown, as it must have been exercised
and must have grown, had he not been such a good man.  In short, and to
put it bluntly, had Little-Faith been a worse sinner, he would have been
a better saint.  "_O felix culpa_!" exclaimed a church father; "O happy
fault, which found for us sinners such a Redeemer."  An apostrophe which
Bishop Ken has put into these four bold lines--

   "What Adam did amiss,
   Turned to our endless bliss;
   O happy sin, which to atone,
   Drew Filial God to leave His throne."

And John Calvin, the soberest of men, supports Augustine, the most
impulsive of men, in saying the same thing.  All things which happen to
the saints are so overruled by God that what the world regards as evil
the issue shows to be good.  For what Augustine says is true, that even
the sins of saints are, through the guiding providence of God, so far
from doing harm to them, that, on the contrary, they serve to advance
their salvation.  And Richard Hooker, a theologian, if possible, still
more judicious than even John Calvin, says on this same subject and in
support of the same great father, "I am not afraid to affirm it boldly
with St. Augustine that men puffed up through a proud opinion of their
own sanctity and holiness receive a benefit at the hands of God, and are
assisted with His grace, when with His grace they are not assisted, but
permitted, and that grievously, to transgress.  Ask the very soul of
Peter, and it shall undoubtedly make you itself this answer: My eager
protestations, made in the glory of my ghostly strength, I am ashamed of;
but those crystal tears, wherewith my sin and weakness were bewailed,
have procured my endless joy: my strength hath been my ruin, and my fall
my stay."  And our own Samuel Rutherford is not likely to be left far
behind by the best of them when the grace of God is to be magnified.  "Had
sin never been we should have wanted the mysterious Emmanuel, the
Beloved, the Chief among ten thousand, Christ, God-man, the Saviour of
sinners.  For, no sick sinners, no soul-physician of sinners; no captive,
no Redeemer; no slave of hell, no lovely ransom-payer of heaven.  Mary
Magdalene with her seven devils, Paul with his hands smoking with the
blood of the saints, and with his heart sick with malice and blasphemy
against Christ and His Church, and all the rest of the washen ones whose
robes are made fair in the blood of the Lamb, and all the multitude that
no man can number in that best of lands, are all but bits of free grace.
O what a depth of unsearchable wisdom to contrive that lovely plot of
free grace.  Come, all intellectual capacities, and warm your hearts at
this fire.  Come, all ye created faculties, and smell the precious
ointment of Christ.  Oh come, sit down under His shadow and eat the
apples of life.  Oh that angels would come, and generations of men, and
wonder, and admire, and fall down before the unsearchable wisdom of this
gospel-art of the unsearchable riches of Christ!"  And always pungent
Thomas Shepard of New England: "You shall find this, that there is not
any carriage or passage of the Lord's providence toward thee but He will
get a name to Himself, first and last, by it.  Hence you shall find that
those very sins that dishonour His name He will even by them get Himself
a better name; for so far will they be from casting you out of His love
that He will actually do thee good by them.  Look and see if it is not so
with thee?  Doth not thy weakness strengthen thee like Paul?  Doth not
thy blindness make thee cry for light?  And hath not God out of darkness
oftentimes brought light?  Thou hast felt venom against Christ and thy
brother, and thou hast on that account loathed thyself the more.  Thy
falls into sin make thee weary of it, watchful against it, long to be rid
of it.  And thus He makes thy poison thy food, thy death thy life, thy
damnation thy salvation, and thy very greatest enemies thy very best
friends.  And hence Mr. Fox said that he thanked God more for his sins
than for his good works.  And the reason is, God will have His name."
And, last, but not least, listen to our old acquaintance, James Fraser of
Brea: "I find advantages by my sins: '_Peccare nocet, peccavisse vero
juvat_.'  I may say, as Mr. Fox said, my sins have, in a manner, done me
more good than my graces.  Grace and mercy have more abounded where sin
had much abounded.  I am by my sins made much more humble, watchful,
revengeful against myself.  I am made to see a greater need to depend
more upon Him and to love Him the more.  I find that true which Shepard
says, 'sin loses strength by every new fall.'"  Have you followed all
that, my brethren?  Or have you stumbled at it?  Do you not understand
it?  Does your superficial gin-horse mind incline to shake its empty head
over all this?  I know that great names, and especially the great names
of your own party, go much farther with you than the truth goes, and
therefore I have sheltered this deep truth under a shield of great names.
For their sakes let this sure truth of God's best saints lie in peace and
undisputed beside you till you arrive to understand it.

But, to proceed,--the thing was this.  At this passage there comes down
from Broadway-gate a lane called Dead-Man's-lane, so called because of
the murders that are commonly done there.  And this Little-Faith going on
pilgrimage, as we now do, chanced to sit down there and fell fast asleep.
Yes; the thing was this: This good man had never been what one would call
really awake.  He was not a bad man, as men went in the town of Sincere,
but he always had a half-slept half-awakened look about his eyes, till
now, at this most unfortunate spot, he fell stone-dead asleep.  You all
know, I shall suppose, what the apostle Paul and John Bunyan mean by
sleep, do you not?  You all know, at any rate, to begin with, what sleep
means in the accident column of the morning papers.  You all know what
sleep meant and what it involved and cost in the Thirsk signal-box the
other night. {1}  When a man is asleep, he is as good as dead, and other
people are as good as dead to him.  He is dead to duty, to danger, to
other people's lives, as well as to his own.  He may be having pleasant
dreams, and may even be laughing aloud in his sleep, but that may only
make his awaking all the more hideous.  He may awake just in time, or he
may awake just too late.  Only, he is asleep and he neither knows nor
cares.  Now, there is a sleep of the soul as well as of the body.  And as
the soul is in worth, as the soul is in its life and in its death to the
body, so is its sleep.  Many of you sitting there are quite as dead to
heaven and hell, to death and judgment, and to what a stake other people
as well as yourselves have in your sleep as that poor sleeper in the
signal-box was dead to what was coming rushing on him through the black
night.  And as all his gnashing of teeth at himself, and all his sobs
before his judge and before the laid-out dead, and before distracted
widows and half-mad husbands did not bring back that fatal moment when he
fell asleep so sweetly, so will it be with you.  Lazarus! come forth!
Wise and foolish virgins both: Behold the Bridegroom cometh!  Awake, thou
that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light!

And, with that, Guilt with a great club that was in his hand struck
Little-Faith on the head, and with that blow felled him to the earth,
where he lay bleeding as one that would soon bleed to death.  Yes, yes,
all true to the very life.  A man may be the boast and the example of all
the town, and yet, unknown to them all, and all but unknown to himself
till he is struck down, he may have had guilt enough on his track all the
time to lay him half dead at the mouth of Dead-Man's-lane.  Good as was
the certificate that all men in their honesty gave to Little-Faith, yet
even he had some bad enough memories behind him and within him had he
only kept them ever present with him.  But, then, it was just this that
all along was the matter with Little-Faith.  Till, somehow, after that
sad and yet not wholly evil sleep, all his past sins leapt out into the
light and suddenly became and remained all the rest of his life like
scarlet.  So loaded, indeed, was the club of Guilt with the nails and
studs and clamps of secret aggravation, that every nail and stud left its
own bleeding bruise in the prostrate man's head.  I have myself, says the
narrator of Little-Faith's story, I have myself been engaged as he was,
and I found it to be a terrible thing.  I would, as the saying is, have
sold my life at that moment for a penny; but that, as God would have it,
I was clothed with armour of proof: ay, and yet though I was thus
harnessed, I found it hard work to quit myself like a man.  No man can
tell what in that combat attends us but he that hath been in the battle
himself.  Great-Grace himself,--whoso looks well upon his face shall see
those cuts and scars that shall easily give demonstration of what I say.

Most unfortunately there was no good Samaritan with his beast on the road
that day to take the half-dead man to an inn.  And thus it was that
Little-Faith was left to lie in his blood till there was almost no more
blood left in him.  Till at last, coming a little to himself, he made a
shift to scrabble on his way.  When he was able to look a little to
himself, besides all his wounds and loss of blood, he found that all his
spending money was gone, and what was he to do, a stranger in such a
plight on a strange road?  There was nothing for it but he must just beg
his way with many a hungry belly for the remainder of his way.  You all
understand the parable at this point?  Our knowledge of gospel truth; our
personal experience of the life of God in our own soul; our sensible
attainments in this grace of the Spirit and in that; in secret prayer, in
love to God, in forgiveness of injuries, in goodwill to all men, and in
self-denial that no one knows of,--in things like these we possess what
may be called the pocket-money of the spiritual life.  All these things,
at their best, are not the true jewel that no thief can break through nor
steal; but though they are not our best and truest riches, yet they have
their place and play their part in sending us up the pilgrim way.  By our
long and close study of the word of God, if that is indeed our case; by
divine truth dwelling richly and experimentally in our hearts; and by a
hidden life that is its own witness, and which always has the Holy
Spirit's seal set upon it that we are the children of God,--all that
keeps, and is designed by God to keep our hearts up amid the labours and
the faintings, the hopes and the fears of the spiritual life.  All that
keeps us at the least and the worst above famine and beggary.  Now, the
whole pity with Little-Faith was, that though he was not a bad man, yet
he never, even at his best days, had much of those things that make a
good and well-furnished pilgrim; and what little he had he had now clean
lost.  He had never been much a reader of his Bible; he had never sat
over it as other men sat over their news-letters and their romances.  He
had never had much taste or talent for spiritual books of any kind.  He
was a good sort of man, but he was not exactly the manner of man on whose
broken heart the Holy Ghost sets the broad seal of heaven.  But for his
dreadful misadventure, he might have plodded on, a decent, humdrum,
commonplace, everyday kind of pilgrim; but when that catastrophe fell on
him he had nothing to fall back upon.  The secret ways of faith and love
and hope were wholly unknown to him.  He had no practice in importunate
prayer.  He had never prayed a whole night all his life.  He had never
needed to do so.  For were we not told when we first met him what a
blameless and pure and true and good man he had always been?  He did not
know how to find his way about in his Bible; and as for the maps and
guide-books that some pilgrims never let out of their hand, even when he
had some spending money about him, he never laid it out that way.  And a
more helpless pilgrim than Little-Faith was all the rest of the way you
never saw.  He was forced to beg as he went, says his historian.  That is
to say, he had to lean upon and look to wiser and better-furnished men
than himself.  He had to share their meals, look to them to pay his
bills, keep close to their company, walk in their foot-prints, and at
night borrow their oil, and it was only in this poor dependent way that
Little-Faith managed to struggle on to the end of his dim and joyless
journey.

It would have been far more becoming and far more profitable if Christian
and Hopeful, instead of falling out of temper and calling one another bad
names over the sad case of Little-Faith, had tried to tell one another
why that unhappy pilgrim's faith was so small, and how both their own
faith and his might from that day have been made more.  Hopeful, for some
reason or other, was in a rude and boastful mood of mind that day, and
Christian was more tart and snappish than we have ever before seen him;
and, altogether, the opportunity of learning something useful out of
Little-Faith's story has been all but lost to us.  But, now, since there
are so many of Little-Faith's kindred among ourselves--so many good men
who are either half asleep in their religious life or are begging their
way from door to door--let them be told, in closing, one or two out of
many other ways in which their too little faith may possibly be made
stronger and more fruitful.

Well, then, faith, like everything else, once we have it, grows greater
by our continual exercise of it.  Exercise, then, intentionally and
seriously and on system your faith every day.  And exercise it habitually
and increasingly on your Bible, on heaven, and on Jesus Christ.  And let
your faith on all these things, and places, and persons, work by love,--by
love and by imagination.  Our love is cold and our faith is small and
weak for lack of imagination.  Read your Psalm, your Gospel, your Epistle
every morning and every night with your eye upon the object.  Think you
see the Psalmist amid all his deep and divine experiences.  Think you see
Jesus Christ speaking His parables, saying His prayers, and doing His
good works.  Walk up and down with Him, observing His manner, His look,
His gait, His divinity in your humanity, till Galilee and Jerusalem
become Scotland and Edinburgh; that is, till He is as much with you, and
more, than He was with Peter and James and John.  Never close your eye a
single night till you have again laid your hand on the very head of the
Lamb of God, and till you feel that your sin and guilt have all passed
off your hand and on upon His head.  And never rise without, like William
Law, saluting the rising sun in the name of God, as if he had just been
created and sent up into your sky to let you see to serve God and your
neighbour for another day.  And be often out of this world and up in
heaven.  Beat all about you at building castles in the air; you have more
material and more reason.  For is not faith the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen?  Walk often in heaven's
friendly streets.  Pass often into heaven's many mansions filled with
happy families.  Imagine this unhappy life at an end, and imagine
yourself sent back to this probationary world to play the man for a few
short years before heaven finally calls you home.  Little-Faith was a
good man, but there was no speculation in his eyes and no secrets of love
in his heart.  And if your faith also is little, and your spending money
also is run low, try this way of love and imagination.  If you have a
better way, then go on with it and be happy yourself and helpful to
others; but if your faith is at a standstill and is stricken with
barrenness, try my counsel of putting more heart and more inward eye,
more holy love and more heavenly joy, into your frigid and sterile
religion.




THE FLATTERER


   "A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his
   feet."--_The Wise Man_.

Both Ignorance and Little-Faith would have had their revenge and
satisfaction upon Christian and Hopeful had they seen those two so
Pharisaical old men taken in the Flatterer's net.  For it was nothing
else but the swaggering pride of Hopeful over the pitiful case of Little-
Faith, taken along with the hard and hasty ways of Christian with that
unhappy youth Ignorance, that so soon laid them both down under the small
cords of the Shining One.  This word of the wise man, that pride goeth
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall, was fulfilled to
the very letter in Christian and Hopeful that high-minded day.  At the
same time, it must be admitted that Christian and Hopeful would have been
more than human if they had not both felt and let fall some superiority,
some scorn, and some impatience in the presence of such a silly and
upsetting stripling as Ignorance was; as, also, over the story of such a
poor-spirited and spunging creature as Little-Faith was.  Christian and
Hopeful had just come down from their delightful time among the
Delectable Mountains, and they were as full as they could hold of all
kinds of knowledge, and faith, and hope, and assurance; when, most
unfortunately, as it turned out, they first came across Ignorance, and
then, after quarrelling with him, they fell out between themselves over
the case of Little-Faith.  Their superior knowledge of the truth, and
their superior strength of faith, ought to have made them more able to
bear with the infirmities of the weak, and with the passing moods,
however provoking, of one another.  But no.  And their impatience and
contempt and bad temper all came at this crisis to such a head with them
that they could only be cured by the small cords and the stinging words
of the Shining One.  The true key to this so painful part of the parable
hangs at our own girdle.  We who have been born and brought up in an
evangelical church are thrown from time to time into the company of
men--ministers and people--who have not had our advantages and
opportunities.  They have been born, baptized, and brought up in
communities and churches the clean opposite of ours; and they are as
ignorant of all New Testament religion as Ignorance himself was; or, on
the other hand, they are as full of superstition and terror and spiritual
starvation as Little-Faith was.  And then, instead of recollecting and
laying to heart Who made us to differ from such ignorance and such
unbelief, and thus putting on love and humility and patience toward our
neighbours, we speak scornfully and roughly to them, and boast ourselves
over them, and as good as say to them, Stand by thyself, come not near to
me, for I am wiser, wider-minded, stronger, and better every way than
thou.  And then, ere ever we are aware of what we are doing, we have let
the arch-flatterer of religious superiority and of spiritual pride seduce
us aside out of the lowly and heavenly way of love and humility till we
are again brought back to it with rebukes of conscience and with other
chastisements.  You all understand, my brethren, that the man black of
flesh but covered with a white robe was no wayside seducer who met
Christian and Hopeful at that dangerous part of the road only and only on
that high-minded day.  You know from yourselves surely that both
Christian and Hopeful carried that black but smooth-spoken man within
themselves.  The Flatterer who led the two pilgrims so fatally wrong that
day was just their own heart taken out of their own bosom and personified
and dramatised by Bunyan's dramatic genius, and so made to walk and talk
and flatter and puff up outside of themselves till they came again to see
who in reality he was and whence he came,--that is to say, till they were
brought to see what they themselves still were, and would always be, when
they were left to themselves.  "Where did you lie last night? asked the
Shining One with the whip.  With the Shepherds on the Delectable
Mountains, they answered.  He asked them then if they had not of those
shepherds a note of direction for the way?  They answered, Yes.  But did
you not, said he, when you were at a stand pluck out and read your note?
They answered, No.  He asked them why?  They said they forgot.  He asked,
moreover if the shepherds did not bid them beware of the Flatterer?  They
answered, Yes; but we did not imagine, said they, that this fine-spoken
man had been he."

All good literature, both sacred and profane, both ancient and modern, is
full of the Flatterer.  Let me not, protests Elihu in his powerful speech
in the book of Job, let me not accept any man's person; neither let me
give flattering titles unto man, lest in so doing my Maker should soon
take me away.  And the Psalmist in his powerful description of the wicked
men of his day: There is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward
part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter
with their tongue.  And again: They speak with flattering lips, and with
a double heart do they speak.  But the Lord shall cut off all flattering
lips, and the tongue that speaketh proud things.  "The perpetual
hyperbole" of pure love becomes in the lips of impure love the impure
bait that leads the simple ones astray on the streets of the city as seen
and heard by the wise man out of his casement.  My son, say unto wisdom,
Thou art my sister, and call understanding thy kinswoman; that they may
keep thee from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth thee
with her words, which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth
the covenant of her God.  And then in the same book of Hebrew aphorisms
we find this text which Bunyan puts on the margin of the page: "A man
that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet."  And now,
before we leave the ancient world, if you would not think it beneath the
dignity of the place we are in, I would like to read to you a passage out
of a round-about paper written by a satirist of Greece about the time of
Ezra and Nehemiah in Jerusalem.  You will easily remark the difference of
tone between the seriousness and pathos of the Hebrew prophet and the
light and chaffing touch of Theophrastus.  "The Flatterer is a person,"
says that satirist of Greek society, "who will say to you as he walks
with you, 'Do you observe how people are looking at you?  This happens to
no man in Athens but to you.  A fine compliment was paid you yesterday in
the Porch.  More than thirty persons were sitting there when the question
was started, Who is our foremost man?  Every one mentioned you first, and
ended by coming back to your name.'  The Flatterer will laugh also at
your stalest joke, and will stuff his cloak into his mouth as if he could
not repress his amusement when you again tell it.  He will buy apples and
pears and will give to your children when you are by, and will kiss them
all and will say, 'Chicks of a good father.'  Also, when he assists at
the purchase of slippers he will declare that the foot is more shapely
than the shoe.  He is the first of the guests to praise the wine and to
say as he reclines next the host, 'How delicate your fare always is'; and
taking up something from the table, 'Now, how excellent that is!'"  And
so on.  Yes, we have heard it all over and over again in Modern Athens
also.  The Greek fable also of the fox and the crow and the piece of
cheese is only another illustration of the truth that the God of truth
and integrity never left Himself without a witness.  Our own literature
also is scattered full of the Flatterer and his too willing dupes.  "Of
praise a mere glutton," says Goldsmith of David Garrick, "he swallowed
what came.  The puff of a dunce he mistook it for fame."  "Delicious
essence," exclaims Sterne, "how refreshing thou art to poor human nature!
How sweetly dost thou mix with the blood, and help it through the most
difficult and tortuous passages to the heart."  "He that slanders me,"
says Cowper, "paints me blacker than I am, and he that flatters me
whiter.  They both daub me, and when I look in the glass of conscience, I
see myself disguised by both."  And then he sings:

   "The worth of these three kingdoms I defy
   To lure me to the baseness of a lie;
   And of all lies (be that one poet's boast),
   The lie that flatters I abhor the most."

Now, praise, which is one of the best and sweetest things in human life,
so soon passes over into flattery, which is one of the worst things, that
something must here be said and laid to heart about praise also.  But, to
begin with, praise itself must first be praised.  There is nothing nobler
than true praise in him who speaks it, and there is nothing dearer and
sweeter to him who hears it.  God Himself inhabits the praises of Israel.
All God's works praise Him.  Whoso offereth praise glorifieth Me.  Praise
waiteth for Thee, O God, in Zion.  Enter into His gates with
thanksgiving, and into His courts with praise.  Violence shall no more be
heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou
shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.  And such also is
all true praise between man and man.  How deliciously sweet is praise!
How we labour after it! how we look for it and wait for it! and how we
languish and die if we do not get it!  Again, when it comes to us, how it
cheers us up and makes our face to shine!  For a long time after it our
step is so swift on the street and our face beams so that all men can
quite well see what has come to us.  Praise is like wine in our blood; it
is new life to our fainting heart.  So much is this the case that a
salutation of praise is to be our first taste of heaven itself.  It will
wipe all tears off our eyes when we hear our Lord saying to us, "Well
done!" when all our good works that we have done in the body shall be
found unto praise and honour and glory in the great day of Jesus Christ.

At the same time, this same love of praise is one of our most besetting
and fatal temptations as long as we are in this false and double and
deceptive world.  Sin, God curse it! has corrupted and poisoned
everything, the very best things of this life, and when the best things
are corrupted and poisoned they become the worst things.  And praise does
not escape this universal and fatal law.  Weak, evil, and self-seeking
men are near us, and we lean upon them, look to them, and listen to them.
We make them our strength and support, and seek repose and refreshment
from them.  They cannot be all or any of these things to us; but we are
far on in life, we are done with life, before we have discovered that and
will admit that.  Most men never discover and admit that till they are
out of this life altogether.  Christ's praise and the applause of His
saints and angels are so future and so far away from us, and man's praise
and the applause of this world, hollow and false as it is, is so near us,
that we feed our souls on offal and garbage, when, already, in the
witness of a good conscience, we might be feasting our souls on the
finest of the wheat, and satisfying them with honey out of the rock.  And,
then, this insatiable appetite of our hearts, being so degraded and
perverted, like all degraded and perverted appetites, becomes an iron-
fast slave to what it feeds upon.  What miserable slaves we all are to
the approval and the praise of men!  How they hold us in their bondage!
How we lick their hands and sit up on our haunches and go through our
postures for a crumb!  How we crawl on our belly and lick their feet for
a stroke and a smile!  What a hound's life does that man lead who lives
upon the approval and the praise and the patronage of men!  What meanness
fills his mind; what baseness fills his heart!  What a shameful leash he
is led about the world in!  How kicked about and spat upon he is; while
not half so much as he knows all the time that he deserves to be!  Better
far be a dog at once and bay the moon than be a man and fawn upon the
praises of men.

If you would be a man at all, not to speak of a Christian man, starve
this appetite till you have quite extirpated it.  You will never be safe
from it as long as it stirs within you.  Extirpate it!  Extirpate it!  You
will never know true self-respect and you will never deserve to know it,
till you have wholly extirpated your appetite for praise.  Put your foot
upon it, put it out of your heart.  Stop fishing for it, and when you see
it coming, turn away and stop your ears against it.  And should it still
insinuate itself, at any rate do not repeat to others what has already so
flattered and humbled and weakened you.  Telling it to others will only
humble and weaken you more.  By repeating the praise that you have heard
or read about yourself you only expose yourself and purchase
well-deserved contempt for yourself.  And, more than that, by fishing for
praise you lay yourself open to all sorts of flatterers.  Honest men, men
who truly respect and admire you, will show you their dignified regard
and appreciation of you and your work by their silence; while your leaky
slaves will crowd around you with floods of praise that they know well
will please and purchase you.  And when you cannot with all your arts
squeeze a drop out of those who love and honour you, gallons will be
poured upon you by those who have respect neither for themselves nor for
you.  Faugh!  Flee from flatterers, and take up only with sternly true
and faithful men.  "I am much less regardful," says Richard Baxter, "of
the approbation of men, and set much lighter store by their praise and
their blame, than I once did.  All worldly things appear most vain and
unsatisfying to those who have tried them most.  But while I feel that
this has had some hand in my distaste for man's praise, yet it is the
increasing impression on my heart of man's nothingness and God's
transcendent greatness; it is the brevity and vanity of all earthly
things, taken along with the nearness of eternity;--it is all this that
has at last lifted me above the blame and the praise of men."

To conclude; let us make up our mind and determine to pass on to God on
the spot every syllable of praise that ever comes to our eyes or our
ears--if, in this cold, selfish, envious, and grudging world, any
syllable of praise ever should come to us.  Even if pure and generous and
well-deserved praise should at any time come to us, all that does not
make it ours.  The best earned usury is not the steward's own money to do
with it what he likes.  The principal and the interest, and the trader
too, are all his master's.  And, more than that, after the wisest and the
best trader has done his best, he will remain, to himself at least, a
most unprofitable servant.  Pass on then immediately, dutifully, and to
its very last syllable, to God all the praise that comes to you.  Wash
your hands of it and say, Not unto us, O God, not unto us, but unto Thy
name.  And then, to take the most selfish and hungry-hearted view of this
whole matter, what you thus pass on to God as not your own but His, He
will soon, and in a better and safer world, return again to the full with
usury to you, and you again to God, and He again to you, and so on, all
down the pure and true and sweet and blessed life of heaven.




ATHEIST


   " . . . without God [literally, atheists] in the world."--_Paul_.

"Yonder is a man with his back toward Zion, and he is coming to meet us.
So he drew nearer and nearer, and at last came up to them.  His name was
Atheist, and he asked them whither they were going?  We are going to the
Mount Zion, they answered.  Then Atheist fell into a very great laughter.
What is the meaning of your laughter? they asked.  I laugh to see what
ignorant persons you are to take upon you so tedious a journey, and yet
are like to have nothing but your travel for your pains.  Why, man?  Do
you think we shall not be received? they said.  Received!  There is no
such place as you dream of in all this world.  But there is in the world
to come, replied Christian.  When I was at home, Atheist went on, in mine
own country I heard as you now affirm, and, from that hearing, I went out
to see, and have been seeking this city you speak of this twenty years,
but find no more of it than I did the first day I set out.  And, still
laughing, he went his way."

Having begun to tell us about Atheist, why did Bunyan not tell us more?
We would have thanked him warmly to-night for a little more about this
unhappy man.  Why did the dreamer not take another eight or ten pages in
order to tell us, as only he could have told us, how this man that is now
Atheist had spent his past twenty years seeking Mount Zion?  Those
precious unwritten pages are now buried in John Strudwick's vault in
Bunhill Fields, and no other man has arisen able to handle Bunyan's
biographic pen.  Had Bunyan but put off the entrance of Christian and
Hopeful into the city till he had told us something more about the twenty
years it had taken this once earnest pilgrim to become an atheist, how
valuable an interpolation that would have been!  What was it that made
this man to set out so long ago for the Celestial City?  What was it that
so stoutly determined him to leave off all his old companions and turn
his back on the sweet refreshments of his youth?  How did he do at the
Slough of Despond?  Did he come that way?  What about the Wicket Gate,
and the House Beautiful, and the Interpreter's House, and the Delectable
Mountains?  What men, and especially what women, did he meet and converse
with on his way?  What were his fortunes, and what his misfortunes?  How
much did he lay out at Vanity Fair, and on what?  At what point of his
twenty years' way did his youthful faith begin to shake, and his youthful
love begin to become lukewarm?  And what was it that at last made him
quite turn round his back on Zion and his face to his own country?  I
cannot forgive Bunyan to-night for not telling us the story of Atheist's
conversion, his pilgrimage, and his apostasy in full.

At the same time, though it cannot be denied that Bunyan has lost at this
point a great opportunity for his genius and for our advantage,--at the
same time, he undoubtedly did a very courageous thing in introducing
Atheist at all; and, especially, in introducing him to us and making him
laugh so loudly at us when we are on the very borders of the land of
Beulah.  A less courageous writer, and a writer less sure of his ground,
would have left out Atheist altogether; or, if he had felt constrained to
introduce him, would have introduced him at any other period of our
history rather than at this period.  Under other hands than Bunyan's we
would have met with this mocking reprobate just outside the City of
Destruction; or, perhaps, among the booths of Vanity Fair; or, indeed,
anywhere but where we now meet him.  And, that our greater-minded author
does not let loose the laughter of Atheist upon us till we are almost out
of the body is a stroke of skill and truth and boldness that makes us
glad indeed that we possess such a sketch at Bunyan's hand at all, all
too abrupt and all too short as that sketch is.  In the absence, then, of
a full-length and finished portrait of Atheist, we must be content to
fall back on some of the reflections and lessons that the mere mention of
his name, the spot he passes us on, and the ridicule of his laughter, all
taken together, awaken in our minds.  One rapid stroke of such a brush as
that of John Bunyan conveys more to us than a full-length likeness, with
all the strongest colours, of any other artist would be able to do.

1.  One thing the life-long admiration of John Bunyan's books has helped
to kindle and burn into my mind and my imagination is this: What a
universe of things is the heart of man!  Were there nothing else in the
heart of man but all the places and all the persons and all the
adventures that John Bunyan saw in his sleep, what a world that would
open up in all our bosoms!  All the pilgrims, good and bad--they, or the
seed and possibility of them all, are all in your heart and in mine.  All
the cities, all the roads that lead from one city to another, with all
the paths and all the by-paths,--all the adventures, experiences,
endurances, conflicts, overthrows, victories,--all are within us and
never are to be seen anywhere else.  Heaven and hell, God and the devil,
life and death, salvation and damnation, time and eternity, all are
within us.  "There is no Mount Zion in all this world," bellowed out this
blinded fool.  "No; I know that quite well," quickly responded Christian;
"but there is in the world to come."  He would have said the whole truth,
and he would have been entirely right, had he taken time to add, "and in
the world within."  "And more," he should have said to Atheist, "much
more in the world within than in any possible world to come."  The
Celestial City, every Sabbath-school child begins gradually to
understand, is not up among the stars; till, as he grows older, he takes
in the whole of the New Testament truth that the kingdom of heaven is
wholly within him.  You all understand, my brethren, that were we swept
in a moment up to the furthest star, by all that infinite flight we would
not be one hair's-breadth nearer the heavenly city.  That is not the
right direction to that city.  The city whose builder and maker is God
lies in quite a different direction from that altogether; not by
ascending up beyond sun and moon and stars to all eternity would we ever
get one hand's-breadth nearer God.  But if you deny yourself sleep to-
night till you have read His book and bowed your knees in His closet; if,
for His sake, you deny yourself to-morrow when you are eating and
drinking; as often as you say, "Not my will, but Thine be done"; as often
as you humble yourself when others exalt themselves; as often as you
refuse praise and despise blame for His sake; as often as you forgive
before God your enemy, and rejoice with your friend,--Behold! the kingdom
of heaven, with its King and all His shining court of angels and saints
is around you;--is, indeed, within you.  No; there is no such place.
Heaven is not in any place: heaven is in a person where it is at all; and
you are that person as often as you put off an earthly and put on a
heavenly mind.  That mocking reprobate, with his secret heart all through
those twenty years hungering after the lusts of his youth,--he was wholly
right in what he so unintentionally said; there is no such place in all
this world.  And, even if there were, it would spue him and all who are
like him out of its mouth.

2.  And, then, in all that universe of things that fills that bottomless
pit and shoreless sea the human heart, there is nothing deeper down in it
than just its deep and unsearchable atheism.  The very deepest thing, and
the most absolutely inexpugnable thing, in every human heart is its
theism; its original and inextinguishable convictions about itself and
about God.  But, all but as deep as that--for all around that, and all
over that, and soaking all through that--there lies a superincumbent mass
of sullen, brutish, malignant atheism.  Nay, so deep down is the atheism
of all our hearts, that it is only one here and another there of the
holiest and the ripest of God's saints who ever get down to it, or even
get at their deepest within sight of it.  Robert Fleming tells us about
Robert Bruce, that he was a man that had much inward exercise about his
own personal case, and had been often assaulted anent that great
foundation truth, if there was a God.  And often, when he had come up to
the pulpit, after being some time silent, which was his usual way, he
would say, "I think it is a great matter to believe there is a God";
telling the people that it was another thing to believe that than they
judged.  But it was also known to his friends what extraordinary
confirmations he had from the Lord therein, and what near familiarity he
did attain to in his heart-converse with God: Yea, truly, adds Fleming,
some things I have had thereanent that seem so strange and marvellous
that I forbear to set them down.  And in Halyburton's priceless _Memoirs_
we read: "Hereby I was brought into a doubt about the truths of religion,
the being of God, and things eternal.  Whenever I was in dangers or
straits and would build upon these things, a suspicion secretly haunted
me, what if the things are not?  This perplexity was somewhat eased while
one day I was reading how Robert Bruce was shaken about the being of God,
and how at length he came to the fullest satisfaction."  And in another
place: "Some days ago reading Ex. ix. and x., and finding this, 'That ye
may know that I am God' frequently repeated, and elsewhere in passages
innumerable, as the end of God's manifesting Himself in His word and
works; I observe from it that atheism is deeply rooted even in the Lord's
people, seeing they need to be taught this so much.  The great difficulty
that the whole of revelation has to grapple with is atheism; its whole
struggle is to recover man to his first impressions of a God.  This one
point comprehends the whole of man's recovery, just as atheism is the
whole of man's apostasy."  And, again, in another part of the same great
book, Halyburton says: "I must observe, also, the wise providence of God,
that the greatest difficulties that lie against religion are hid from
atheists.  All the objections I meet with in their writings are not
nearly so subtle as those which are often suggested to myself.  The
reason of this is obvious from the very nature of the thing--such persons
take not a near-hand view of religion, and while persons stand at a
distance neither are the advantages nor the difficulties of religion
discerned."  And now listen to Bunyan, that arch-atheist: "Whole floods
of blasphemies both against God, Christ, and the Scriptures were poured
upon my spirit, to my great confusion and astonishment.  Against the very
being of God and of His only beloved Son; or, whether there were, in
truth, a God and a Christ, or no.  Of all the temptations that ever I met
with in my life, to question the being of God and the truth of the Gospel
is the worst, and the worst to be borne.  When this temptation comes it
takes away my girdle from me, and removeth the foundation from under me."

   "Fool, said my Muse to me, look in thy heart and write."

And John Bunyan looked into his own deep and holy heart, and out of it he
composed this incident of Atheist.

3.  It may not be out of place at this point to look for a moment at some
of the things that agitate, stir up, and make the secret atheism of our
hearts to fluctuate and overflow.  Butler has a fine passage in which he
points out that it is only the higher class of minds that are tempted
with speculative difficulties such as those were that assaulted Christian
and Hopeful after they were so near the end of their journey.  Coarse,
commonplace, and mean-minded men have their probation appointed them
among coarse, mean, and commonplace things; whereas enlightened,
enlarged, and elevated men are exercised after the manner of Robert
Bruce, Thomas Halyburton, John Bunyan, and Butler himself.  "The chief
temptations of the generality of the world are the ordinary motives to
injustice or unrestrained pleasure; but there are other persons without
this shallowness of temper; persons of a deeper sense as to what is
invisible and future.  Now, these persons have their moral discipline set
them in that high region."  The profound bishop means that while their
appetites and their tempers are the stumbling-stones of the most of men,
the difficult problems of natural and revealed and experimental religion
are the test and the triumph of other men.  As we have just seen in the
men mentioned above.  Students, whose temptations lie fully as much in
their intellects as in their senses, should buy (for a few pence)
Halyburton's Memoirs.  "With Halyburton," says Dr. John Duncan, "I feel
great intellectual congruity.  Halyburton was naturally a sceptic, but
God gave that sceptic great faith."

Then again, what Atheist calls the "tediousness" of the journey has
undoubtedly a great hand in making some half-in-earnest men sceptics, if
not scoffers.  Many of us here to-night who can never now take this
miserable man's way out of the tedium of the Christian life, yet most
bitterly feel it.  Whether that tedium is inherent in that life, and
inevitable to such men as we are who are attempting that life; how far
that feature belongs to the very essence of the pilgrim life, and how far
we import our own tedium into the pilgrimage; the fact remains as Atheist
puts it.  As Atheist in this book says, so the Atheist who is in our
hearts often says: We are like to have nothing for all our pains but a
lifetime of tedious travel.  Yes, wherever the blame lies, there can be
no doubt about it, that what this hilarious scoffer calls the tediousness
of the way is but a too common experience among many of those who,
tediousness and all, will still cleave fast to it and will never leave
it.

Then, again, great trials in life, great straits, dark and
too-long-continued providences, prayer unanswered, or not yet answered in
the way we dictate, bad men and bad causes growing like a green bay tree,
and good men and good work languishing and dying; these things, and many
more things such as these, of which this world of faith and patience is
full, prove quite too much for some men till they give themselves up to a
state of mind that is nothing better than atheism.  "My evidences and my
certainty," says Halyburton, "were not answerable to the weight I was
compelled to lay upon them."  A figure which Goodwin in his own tender
and graphic way takes up thus: "Set pins in a wall and fix them in ever
so loosely, yet, if you hang nothing upon them they will seem to stand
firm; but hang a heavy weight upon them, or even give them the least jog
as you pass, and the whole thing will suddenly come down.  The wall is
God's word, the slack pin is our faith, and the weight and the jog are
the heavy burdens and the sudden shocks of life, and down our hearts go,
wall and pin and suspended vessel and all."

When the church and her ministers, when the Scriptures and their
anomalies, and when the faults and failings of Christian men are made the
subject of mockery and laughter, the reverence, the fear, the awe, the
respect that all enter so largely into religion, and especially into the
religion of young people, is too easily destroyed; and not seldom the
first seeds of practical and sometimes of speculative atheism are thus
sown.  The mischief that has been done by mockery and laughter to the
souls, especially of the young and the inexperienced, only the great day
will fully disclose.

And then, two men of great weight and authority with us, tell us what we
who are ministers would have found out without them: this, namely, that
the greatest atheists are they who are ever handling holy things without
feeling them.

"Is it true," said Christian to Hopeful, his fellow, "is it true what
this man hath said?"  "Take heed," said Hopeful, "remember what it hath
cost us already for hearkening to such kind of fellows.  What!  No Mount
Zion!  Did we not see from the Delectable Mountains the gate of the City?
And, besides, are we not to walk by faith?  Let us go on lest the man
with the whip overtakes us again."  Christian: "My brother, I said that
but to prove thee, and to fetch from thee a fruit of the honesty of thy
heart."  Many a deep and powerful passage has Butler composed on that
thesis which Hopeful here supplies him with; and many a brilliant sermon
has Newman preached on that same text till he has made our
"predispositions to faith" a fruitful and an ever fresh commonplace to
hundreds of preachers.  Yes; the best bulwark of faith is a good and
honest heart.  To such a happy heart the truth is its own unshaken
evidence.  To whom can we go but to Thee?--they who have such a heart
protest.  The whole bent of such men's minds is toward the truth of the
gospel.  Their instincts keep them on the right way even when their
reason and their observation are both confounded.  As Newman keeps on
saying, they are "easy of belief."  They cannot keep away from Christ and
His church.  They cannot turn back.  They must go on.  Though He slay
them they will die yearning after Him.  They often fall into great error
and into great guilt, but their seed remaineth in them, and they cannot
continue in error or in guilt, because they are born of God.  They are
they in whom

   "Persuasion and belief
   Have ripened into faith; and faith become
   A passionate intuition."




HOPEFUL


   "We are saved by hope."--_Paul_

Up till the time when Christian and Faithful passed through Vanity Fair
on their way to the Celestial City, Hopeful was one of the most light-
minded men in all that light-minded town.  By his birth, and both on his
father's and his mother's side, Hopeful was, to begin with, a youth of an
unusually shallow and silly mind.  In the jargon of our day he was a man
of a peculiarly optimistic temperament.  No one ever blamed him for being
too subjective and introspective.  It took many sharp trials and many
bitter disappointments to take the inborn frivolity and superficiality
out of this young man's heart.  He was far on in his life, he was far on
even in his religious life, before you would have ever thought of calling
him a serious-minded man.  Hopeful had been born and brought up to early
manhood in the town of Vanity, and he knew nothing better and desired
nothing better than to lay out his whole life and to rest all his hopes
on the things of the fair; on such things, that is, as houses, lands,
places, honours, preferments, titles, pleasures, and delights of all
sorts.  And that vain and empty life went on with him, till, as he told
his companion afterwards, it had all ended with him in revelling, and
drinking, and uncleanness, and Sabbath-breaking, and all such things as
destroyed his soul.  But in Hopeful's happy case also the blood of the
martyrs became the seed of the church.  Hopeful, as he was afterwards
called, had suffered so many bitter disappointments and shipwrecks of
expectation from the things of the fair, that is to say, from the houses,
the places, the preferments, the pleasures and what not, of the fair,
that even his heart was ripe for something better than any of those
things, when, as God would have it, Christian and Faithful came to the
town.  Hopeful was still hanging about the booths of the fair; he was
just fingering his last sixpence over a commodity that he knew quite well
would be like gall in his belly as soon as he had bought it; when,--what
is that hubbub that rolls down the street?  Hopeful was always the first
to see and to hear every new thing that came to the town, and thus it was
that he was soon in the thick of the tumult that rose around Christian
and Faithful.  Had those two pilgrims come to the town at any former
time, Hopeful would have been among the foremost to mock at and smite the
two men; but, to-day, Hopeful's heart is so empty, and his purse also,
that he is already won to their side by the loving looks and the wise and
sweet words of the two ill-used men.  Some of the men of the town said
that the two pilgrims were outlandish and bedlamite men, but Hopeful took
courage to reprove some of the foremost of the mob.  Till, at last, when
Faithful was at the stake, it was all that his companions could do to
keep back Hopeful from leaping up on the burning pile and embracing the
expiring man.  And then, when He who overrules all things so brought it
about that Christian escaped out of their hands, who should come forth
and join him at the upward gate of the city but just Hopeful, who not
only joined himself to the lonely pilgrim, but told him also that there
were many more of the men of the city who would take their time and
follow after.  And thus, adds his biographer, when one died to make his
testimony to the truth, another rose up out of his ashes to be a
companion to Christian.

When Madame Krudener was getting her foot measured by a pietist
shoemaker, she was so struck with the repose and the sweetness and the
heavenly joy of the poor man's look and manner that she could not help
but ask him what had happened to him that he had such a look on his
countenance and such a light in his eye.  She was miserable, though she
had all that heart could wish.  She had all that made her one of the most
envied women in Europe; she had birth, talents, riches, rank, and the
friendship of princes and princesses, and yet she was of all women the
most miserable.  And here was a poor chance shoemaker whose whole heart
was running over with a joy such that all her wealth could not purchase
to her heart one single drop of it.  The simple soul soon told her his
secret; it was no secret: it was just Jesus Christ who had done it all.
And thus her poor shoemaker's happy face was the means of this great
lady's conversion.  And, in like manner, it was the beholding of
Christian and Faithful in their words and in their behaviour at the fair
that decided Hopeful to join himself to Christian and henceforth to be
his companion.

What were the things, asked Christian of his young companion, that first
led you to leave off the vanities of the fair and to think to be a
pilgrim?  Many things, replied Hopeful.  Sometimes if I did but meet a
good man in the street.  Or if mine head began unaccountably, or mine
heart, to ache.  Or if some one of my companions became suddenly sick.  Or
if I heard the bell toll that some one was dead.  But, especially, when I
thought of myself that I must quickly come to judgment.  And then it is
told in the best style of the book how peace and rest and the beginning
of true satisfaction came to poor Hopeful's heart at last.  But you must
promise me to read the passage for yourselves before you sleep to-night;
and to read it again and again till, like Hopeful's, your heart also is
full of joy, and your eyes full of tears, and your affections running
over with love to the name and to the people and to all the ways of Jesus
Christ.

And then, it is very encouraging and reassuring to us to see how
Hopeful's true conversion so deepened and sobered and strengthened his
whole character.  He remained to the end in his mental constitution and
whole temperament, as we say, the same man he had always been; but, while
remaining the same man, at the same time a most wonderful change
gradually began to come over him, till, by slow but sure degrees, he
became the Hopeful we know and look to and lean upon.  To use his own
autobiographic words about himself, it was "by hearing and considering of
things that are Divine" that his natural levity was so completely whipped
out of his soul till he was made at last an indispensable companion to
Christian, strong-minded and serious-minded man as he was.  "Conversion
to God," says William Law, "is often very sudden and instantaneous,
unexpectedly raised from variety of occasions.  Thus, one by seeing only
a withered tree, another by reading the lives and deaths of the
antediluvian fathers, one by hearing of heaven, another of hell, one by
reading of the love or wrath of God, another of the sufferings of Christ,
may find himself, as it were, melted into penitence all of a sudden.  It
may be granted also that the greatest sinner may in a moment be converted
to God, and may feel himself wounded in such a degree as perhaps those
never were who have been turning to God all their lives.  But, then, it
is to be observed that this suddenness of change or flash of conviction
is by no means of the essence of true conversion.  This stroke of
conversion is not to be considered as signifying our high state of a new
birth in Christ, or a proof that we are on a sudden made new creatures,
but that we are thus suddenly called upon and stirred up to look after a
newness of nature.  The renewal of our first birth and state is something
entirely distinct from our first sudden conversion and call to
repentance.  That is not a thing done in an instant, but is a certain
process, a gradual release from our captivity and disorder, consisting of
several stages and degrees, both of life and death, which the soul must
go through before it can have thoroughly put off the old man.  It is well
worth observing that our Saviour's greatest trials were near the end of
His life.  This might sufficiently show us that our first awakenings have
carried us but a little way; that we should not then begin to be self-
assured of our own salvation, but should remember that we stand at a
great distance from, and are in great ignorance of, our severest trials."
Such was the way that Christian in his experience and in his wisdom
talked to his young companion till his outward trials and the consequent
discoveries he made of his own weakness and corruption made even Hopeful
himself a sober-minded and a thoughtful man.  "Where pain ends, gain ends
too."

Then, again, no one can read Hopeful's remarkable history without
discovering this about him, that he showed best in adversity and
distress, just as he showed worst in deliverance and prosperity.  It is a
fine lesson in Christian hope to descend into Giant Despair's dungeon and
hear the older pilgrim groaning and the younger pilgrim consoling him,
and, again, to stand on the bank of the last river and hear Hopeful
holding up Christian's drowning head.  "Be of good cheer, my brother, for
I feel the bottom, and it is good!"  Bless Hopeful for that, all you
whose deathbeds are still before you.  For never was more true and fit
word spoken for a dying hour than that.  Read, till you have it by heart
and in the dark, Hopeful's whole history, but especially his triumphant
end.  And have some one bespoken beforehand to read Hopeful in the River
to you when you have in a great measure lost your senses, and when a
great horror has taken hold of your mind.  "I sink in deep waters," cried
Christian, as his sins came to his mind, even the sins which he had
committed both since and before he came to be a pilgrim.  "But I see the
gate," said Hopeful, "and men standing at it ready to receive us."  "Read
to me where I first cast my anchor," said John Knox to his weeping wife.

The Enchanted Ground, on the other hand, threatened to throw Hopeful back
again into his former light-minded state.  And there is no saying what
shipwreck he might have made there had the older man not been with him to
steady and reprove and instruct him.  As it was, a touch now and then of
his old vain temper returned to him till it took all his companion's
watchfulness and wariness to carry them both out of that second Vanity
Fair.  "I acknowledge myself in a fault," said Hopeful to Christian, "and
had I been here alone I had run in danger of death.  Hitherto, thy
company hath been my mercy, and thou shalt have a good reward for all thy
labour."

Now, my brethren, in my opinion we owe a great debt of gratitude to John
Bunyan for the large and the displayed place he has given to Hopeful in
the _Pilgrim's Progress_.  The fulness and balance and proportion of the
_Pilgrim's Progress_ are features of that wonderful book far too much
overlooked.  So far as my reading goes I do not know any other author who
has at all done the justice to the saving grace of hope that John Bunyan
has done both in his doctrinal and in his allegorical works.  Bunyan
stands alone and supreme not only for the insight, and the power with
which he has constructed the character and the career of Hopeful, but
even for having given him the space at all adequate to his merits and his
services.  In those eighty-seven so suggestive pages that form the index
to Dr. Thomas Goodwin's works I find some hundred and twenty-four
references to "faith," while there are only two references to "hope."  And
that same oversight and neglect runs through all our religious
literature, and I suppose, as a consequence, through all our preaching
too.  Now that is not the treatment the Bible gives to this so essential
Christian grace, as any one may see at a glance who takes the trouble to
turn up his Cruden.  Hope has a great place alongside of faith and love
in the Holy Scriptures, and it has a correspondingly large and eloquent
place in Bunyan.  Now, that being so, why is it that this so great and so
blessed grace has so fallen out of our sermons and out of our hearts?  May
God grant that our reading of Hopeful's autobiography and his subsequent
history to-night may do something to restore the blessed grace of hope to
its proper place both in our pulpit and in all our hearts.

To kindle then, to quicken, and to anchor your hope, my brethren, may I
have God's help to speak for a little longer to your hearts concerning
this neglected grace!  For, what is hope?  Hope is a passion of the soul,
wise or foolish, to be ashamed of or to be proud of, just according to
the thing hoped for, and just according to the grounds of the hope.  Hope
is made up of these two ingredients--desire and expectation.  What we
greatly desire we take no rest till we find good grounds on which to
build up our expectations of it; and when we have found good grounds for
our expectations, then a glad hope takes possession of our hearts.  Now,
to begin with, how is it with your desires?  You are afraid to say much
about your expectations and your hopes.  Well; let us come to your
hearts' desires.--Men of God, I will enter into your hearts and I will
tell you your hearts' desires better than you know them yourselves; for
the heart is deceitful above all things.  The time was, when, like this
young pilgrim before he became a pilgrim, your desires were all set on
houses, and lands, and places, and honours, and preferments, and wives,
and children, and silver, and gold, and what not.  These things at one
time were the utmost limit of your desires.  But that has all been
changed.  For now you have begun to desire a better city, that is, an
heavenly.  What is your chief desire for this New Year? {2}   Is it not a
new heart?  Is it not a clean heart?  Is it not a holy heart?  Is it not
that the Holy Ghost would write the golden rule on the tables of your
heart?  Does not God know that it is the deepest desire of your heart to
be able to love your neighbour as yourself?  To be able to rejoice with
him in his joy as well as to weep with him in his sorrow?  What would you
not give never again to feel envy in your heart at your brother, or
straitness and pining at his prosperity?  One thing do I desire, said the
Psalmist, that mine ear may be nailed to the doorpost of my God: that I
may always be His servant, and may never wander from His service.  Now,
that is your desire too.  I am sure it is.  You would not say it of
yourself, but I defy you to deny it when it is said about you.  Well,
then, such things being found among your desires, what grounds have you
for expecting the fulfilment of such desires?  What grounds?  The best of
grounds and every ground.  For you have the sure ground of God's word.
And you have more than His word: you have His very nature, and the very
nature of things.  For shall God create such desires in any man's heart
only to starve and torture that man?  Impossible!  It were blasphemy to
suspect it.  No.  Where God has made any man to be so far a partaker of
the Divine nature as to change all that man's deepest desires, and to
turn them from vanity to wisdom, from earth to heaven, and from the
creature to the Creator, doubt not, wherever He has begun such a work,
that He will hasten to finish it.  Yes; lift up your heavy hearts, all ye
who desire such things, for God hath sent His Son to say to you, Blessed
are ye that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for ye shall be
filled.  Only, keep desiring.  Desire every day with a stronger and a
more inconsolable desire.  Desire, and ground your desire on God's word,
and then heave your hope like an anchor within the veil whither the
Forerunner is for you entered.  May I so hope? you say.  May I venture to
hope?  Yes; not only may you hope, but you must hope.  You are commanded
to hope.  It is as much your bounden duty to hope always, and to hope for
the greatest and best things, as it is to repent of your sins, to love
God and your neighbour, to keep yourself pure, and to set a watch on the
door of your lips.  You have been destroyed, I confess and lament it, for
lack of knowledge about the nature, the grounds, and the duty of hope.
But make up now for past neglect.  Hope steadfastly, hope constantly,
hope boldly; hope for the best things, the greatest things, the most
divine and the most blessed things.  If you forget to-night all else you
have heard to-day, I implore you not any longer to forget and neglect
this, that hope is your immediate, constant, imperative duty.  No sin, no
depth of corruption in your heart, no assault on your heart from your
conscience, can justify you in ceasing to hope.  Even when trouble "comes
tumbling over the neck of all your reformations" as it came tumbling on
Hopeful, let that only drive you the more deeply down into the true
grounds of hope; even against hope rejoice in hope.  Remember the
Psalmist in the hundred-and-thirtieth Psalm,--down in the deeps, if ever
a fallen sinner was.  Yet hear him when you cannot see him saying: I hope
in Thy word!  And--for it is worthy to stand beside even that splendid
psalm,--I beseech you to read and lay to heart what Hopeful says about
himself in his conversion despair.

And then, as if to justify that hope, there always come with it such
sanctifying influences and such sure results.  The hope that you are one
day to awaken in the Divine likeness will make you lie down on your bed
every night in self-examination, repentance, prayer, and praise.  The
hope that your eyes are one day to see Christ as He is will make you
purify yourself as nothing else will.  The hope that you are to walk with
Christ in white will make you keep your garments clean; it will make you
wash them many times every day in the blood of the Lamb.  The hope that
you are to cast your crown at His feet will make you watch that no man
takes your crown from you.  The hope that you are to drink wine with Him
in His Father's kingdom will reconcile you meanwhile to water, lest with
your wine you stumble any of His little ones.  The hope of hearing Him
say, Well done!--how that will make you labour and endure and not faint!
And the hope that you shall one day enter in through the gates into the
city, and have a right to the tree of life,--how scrupulous that will
make you to keep all His commandments!  And this is one of His
commandments, that you gird up the loins of your mind, and hope to the
end for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ.




TEMPORARY


   "They are they, which, when they hear, receive the word with joy; and
   have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of temptation
   fall away."--_Our Lord_.

"Well, then, did you not know about ten years ago one Temporary in your
parts who was a forward man in religion?  Know him! replied the other.
Yes.  For my house not being above three miles from his house he would
ofttimes come to me, and that with many tears.  Truly I pitied the man,
and was not altogether without hope of him; but one may see that it is
not every one who cries Lord, Lord.  And now, since we are talking about
him, let us a little inquire into the reason of the sudden backsliding of
him and such others.  It may be very profitable, said Christian, but do
you begin.  Well, then, there are in my judgment several reasons for it."
And then, with the older man's entire approval, Hopeful sets forth
several reasons, taken from his own observation of backsliders, why so
many men's religion is such a temporary thing; why so many run well for a
time, and then stand still, and then turn back.

1.  The fear of man bringeth a snare, said Hopeful, moralising over his
old acquaintance Temporary.  And how true that observation is every
evangelical minister knows to his deep disappointment.  A young man comes
to his minister at some time of distress in his life, or at some time of
revival of religion in the community, or at an ordinary communion season,
and gives every sign that he is early and fairly embarked on an
honourable Christian life.  He takes his place in the Church of Christ,
and he puts out his hand to her work, till we begin to look forward with
boastfulness to a life of great stability and great attainment for that
man.  Our Lord, as we see from so many of His parables, must have had
many such cases among His first followers.  Our Lord might be speaking
prophetically, as well as out of His own experience, so well do His
regretful and lamenting words fit into so many of our own cases to-day.
For, look at that young business man.  He has been born and brought up in
the Church of Christ.  He has gladdened more hearts than he knows by the
noble promise of his early days.  Many admiring and loving eyes have been
turned on him as he took so hopefully the upward way.  But a sifting-time
soon comes.  A time of temptation comes.  A time comes when sides must be
taken in some moral, religious, ecclesiastical controversy.  This young
man is at that moment a candidate for a post that will bring distinction,
wealth, and social influence to him who holds it.  And the candidate we
are so much interested in is admittedly a man of such outstanding talents
that he would at once get the post were it not that the holder of that
post must not have his name so much associated with such and such a
church, such and such political and religious opinions, and such and such
public men.  He is told that.  Indeed, he is not so dull as to need to be
told that.  He has seen that all along.  And at first it is a dreadful
wrench to him.  He feels how far he is falling from his high ideals in
life; and, at first, and for a long time, it is a dreadful humiliation to
him.  But, then, there are splendid compensations.  And, better than
that, there are some good, and indeed compelling, reasons that begin to
rise up in our minds when we need them and begin to look for them, till
what at first seemed so mean and so contemptible, and so ungrateful, and
so dishonourable, as well as so spiritually perilous, comes to be faced
and gone through with positively on a ground of high principle, and,
indeed, of stern moral necessity.  So deceitful is the human heart that
you could not believe what compelling reasons such a mean-spirited man
will face you with as to why he should leave all the ways he once so
delighted in for a piece of bread, and for the smile of the open enemies
of his church, and his faith, not to say his Saviour.  You will meet with
several such men any afternoon coming home from their business.  Sometimes
they have still some honest shame on their faces when they meet you; but
still oftener they pass you with a sullen hatred and a fierce defiance.
This is he who heard the word, and anon with joy received it.  Yet had he
not root in himself, but dured for a while; for when tribulation or
persecution arose because of the word by and by he was offended.  They
went out from us, says John, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.

2.  Guilt, again, Hopeful went on, and to meditate terror, are so
grievous to most men, that they rather choose such ways as will but
harden their hearts still more and more.  You all know what it is to
meditate terror?  "Thine heart shall meditate terror," says the prophet,
"when thou sayest to thyself, who among us shall dwell with the devouring
fire? who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?"  The fifty-
first Psalm is perhaps the best meditation both of guilt and of terror
that we have in the whole Bible.  But there are many other psalms and
passages of psalms only second to the fifty-first Psalm, such as the
twenty-second, the thirty-eighth, the sixty-ninth, and the hundred-and-
thirtieth.  Our Lord Himself also was meditating terror in the garden of
Gethsemane, and Paul both guilt and terror when he imagined himself both
an apostate preacher and a castaway soul.  And John's meditations of
terror in the Revelation rose into those magnificent pictures of the Last
Judgment with which he has to all time covered the walls of the Seven
Churches.  In his own _Grace Abounding_ there are meditations of terror
quite worthy to stand beside the most terrible things of that kind that
ever were written, as also in many others of our author's dramatical and
homiletical books.  I read to you the other Sabbath morning a meditation
of terror that was found among Bishop Andrewes' private papers after his
death.  You will not all have forgotten that meditation, but I will read
it to you to-night again.  "How fearful," says Andrewes, in his terror,
"will Thy judgment be, O Lord, when the thrones are set, and the angels
stand around, and men are brought in, and the books are opened, and all
our works are inquired into, and all our thoughts are examined, and all
the hidden things of darkness!  What, O God, shall Thy judgment that day
be upon me?  Who shall quench my flame, who shall lighten my darkness, if
Thou pity me not?  Lord, as Thou art loving, give me tears, give me
floods of tears, and give me all that this day, before it be too late.
For then will be the incorruptible Judge, the horrible judgment-seat, the
answer without excuse, the inevitable charge, the shameful punishment,
the endless Gehenna, the pitiless angels, the yawning hell, the roaring
stream of fire, the unquenchable flame, the dark prison, the rayless
darkness, the bed of live coals, the unwearied worm, the indissoluble
chains, the bottomless chaos, the impassable wall, the inconsolable cry.
And none to stand by me; none to plead for me; none to snatch me out."
Now, no Temporary ever possessed anything like that in his own
handwriting among his private papers.  A meditation like that, written
out with his own hand, and hidden away under lock and key, will secure
any man from it, even if he had been appointed to backsliding and
reprobation.  Bishop Andrewes, as any one will see who reads his _Private
Devotions_, was the chief of sinners; but his discovered and deciphered
papers will all speak for him when they are spread out before the great
white throne, "glorious in their deformity, being slubbered," as his
editors say, "with his pious hands, and watered with his penitential
tears."

Thomas Shepard's _Ten Virgins_ is the most terrible book upon Temporaries
that ever was written.  Temporaries never once saw their true vileness,
he keeps on saying.  Temporaries are, no doubt, wounded for sin
sometimes, but never in the right place nor to the right depth.  And
again, sin, and especially heart-sin, is never really bitter to
Temporaries.  In an "exhortation to all new beginners, and so to all
others," "Be sure," Shepard says, "your wound for sin at first is deep
enough.  For all the error in a man's faith and sanctification springs
from his first error in his humiliation.  If a man's humiliation be
false, or even weak or little, then his faith and his hold of Christ are
weak and little, and his sanctification counterfeit.  But if a man's
wound be right, and his humiliation deep enough, that man's faith will be
right and his sanctification will be glorious.  The esteem of Christ is
always little where sin lies light."  And Hopeful himself says a thing at
this point that is quite worthy of Shepard himself, such is its depth and
insight.  He speaks of the righteous actually _loving_ the sight of their
misery.  He does not explain what he means by that startling language
because he is talking all the time, as he knows quite well, to one who
understood all that before he was born.  Nor will I attempt to explain or
to vindicate what he says.  Those of you who love the sight of your own
misery as sinners will understand what Hopeful says without any
explanation; while those who do not understand him would only be the more
stumbled by any explanation of him.  The love of the sight of their
misery, and the unearthly sweetness of their sorrow for sin, are only
another two of those provoking paradoxes of which the lives of God's true
saints are full--paradoxes and impossibilities and incoherencies that
make the literature of experimental religion to be positively hateful and
unbearable to Temporary and to all his self-seeking and apostate kindred.

3.  But even where the consciences of such men are occasionally awakened,
proceeds Hopeful, in his so searching discovery of Temporaries, yet their
minds are not changed.  There you are pretty near the business, replied
his fellow; for the bottom of all is, for want of a change of their mind
and will.  Now, one would have been afraid and ashamed for one moment to
suspect that Temporary's mind was not completely changed, so "forward"
was he at first in his religion.  But, no: forward before all his
neighbours as Temporary was, to begin with, yet all the time his mind was
not really changed.  His forwardness did not properly spring out of his
true mind at all, but only out of his momentarily awakened conscience and
his momentarily excited heart.  A sinner with a truly changed mind is
never forward.  His mind is so changed that forwardness in anything is
utterly alien to it, and especially all forwardness in the profession of
religion.  The change that had taken place in Temporary, whatever was the
seat of it, only led him to bully men like Christian and Hopeful, who
would not go fast enough for him.  "Come," said Pliable, in the beginning
of the book, "come on and let us mend our pace."  "I cannot go so fast as
I would," humbly replied Christian, "because of this burden on my back."
It is a common observation among mountaineers that he who takes the hill
at the greatest spurt is the last climber to come to the top, and that
many who so ostentatiously make spurts at the bottom of the hill never
come within sight of the top at all.  And this is one of the constant
dangers that wait on all revivals, religious retreats, conferences, and
even communion seasons.  Our hot fits, the hotter they are, are only the
more likely, unless we take the greatest care, to cast us down into all
the more deadly a chill.  It is this danger that our Lord points out so
plainly in His parable of apostasy.  The same is he, says our Lord, that
heareth the word, and anon with joy receiveth it; yet hath he not root in
himself, but dureth for a while.  In Hopeful's words, his mind and will
were never changed with all his joy, only his passing moods and his
momentary emotions.

Multitudes of men who are as forward at first as Pliable and Temporary
were turn out at last to have no root in themselves; but here and there
you will discover a man who is all root together.  There are some men
whose whole mind and heart and will, whose whole inward man, has gone to
root.  All the strength and all the fatness of their religious life
retreat into its root.  They have no leaves at all, and they have too
little fruit as yet; but you should see their roots.  Only, no eye but
the eye of God can see sorrow for sin--secret and sore humiliation on
account of secret sin--the incessant agony that goes on within between
the flesh and the spirit, between sin and grace, between very hell and
heaven itself.  To know your own evil hearts, my brethren, say to you on
that subject what any Temporary will, is the very root of the whole
matter to you.  Whatever Dr. Newman's mistakes as to outward churches may
have been, he was a master of the human heart, the most difficult of all
matters to master.  Listen, then, to what he says on the matter now in
hand.  "Now, unless we have some just idea of our hearts and of sin, we
can have no right idea of a Moral Governor, a Saviour, or a Sanctifier;
that is, in professing to believe in them we shall be using words without
attaching any distinct meaning to them.  Thus self-knowledge is at the
root of all real religious knowledge; and it is vain,--it is worse than
vain,--it is a deceit and a mischief, to think to understand the
Christian doctrines as a matter of course, merely by being taught by
books, or by attending sermons, or by any outward means, however
excellent, taken by themselves.  For it is in proportion as we search our
hearts and understand our own nature that we understand what is meant by
an Infinite Governor and Judge; it is in proportion as we comprehend the
nature of disobedience and our actual sinfulness that we feel what is the
blessing of the removal of sin, redemption, pardon, sanctification, which
otherwise are mere words.  God speaks to us primarily in our hearts.  Self-
knowledge is the key to the precepts and doctrines of Scripture.  The
very utmost that any outward notices of religion can do is to startle us
and make us turn inward and search our hearts; and then, when we have
experienced what it is to read ourselves, we shall profit by the doctrine
of the Church and the Bible."  My brethren, the temper in which you
receive that passage, and receive it from its author, may be safely taken
by you as a sure presage whether you are to turn out a Temporary and a
Castaway or no.

Now, to conclude with a word of admission, and, bound up with it, a word
of encouragement.  After all that has been said, I fully admit that we
are all Temporaries to begin with.  We all cool down from our first heat
in religion.  We all halt from our first spurt.  We all turn back from
faith and from duty and from privilege through our fear of men, or
through our corrupt love of ourselves, or through our coarse-minded love
of this present world.  Only, those who are appointed to perseverance,
and through that to eternal life, always kindle again; they are kindled
again, and they love the return of their lost warmth.  They recover
themselves and address themselves again and again to the race that is
still set before them.  They prove themselves not to be of those who draw
back unto perdition, but of those that believe to the saving of the soul.
Now, if you have only too good ground to suspect that you are but a
temporary believer, what are you to do to make your sure escape out of
that perilous state?  What, but to keep on believing?  You must cry
constantly, Lord, I believe, help Thou mine unbelief!  When at any time
you are under any temptation or corruption, and you feel that your faith
and your love are letting slip their hold of Christ and of eternal life,
then knot your weak heart all the faster to the throne of grace, to the
cross of Christ, and to the gate of heaven.  Give up all your mind and
heart, and all that is within you, to the one thing needful.  Labour
night and day in your own heart at believing on Christ, at loving your
neighbour, and at discovering, denying, and crucifying yourself.  It will
all pay you in the long run.  For if you do all these things, and
persistently do them, then, though you are at this moment all but dead to
all divine things, and all but a reprobate, it will be found at last that
all the time your name was written among the elect in heaven.

The perseverance of the saints, the "five points" notwithstanding, is not
a foregone conclusion.  The final perseverance of the ripest and surest
saint is all made up of ever-new beginnings in repentance, in faith, in
love, and in obedience.  Begin, then, every new day to repent anew, to
return anew, to believe and to love anew.  And if all your New-Year
repentances and returnings and reformations are all already proved to be
but temporary--even if they lie all around you already a bitter mockery
of all your professions--still, begin again.  Begin to-night, and begin
again to-morrow morning.  Spend all the remainder of your days on earth
beginning.  And, ere ever you are aware, the final perseverance of
another predestinated saint will be found accomplished in you.




SECRET


   "The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him."--_David_.

A truly religious life is always a secret life: it is a life hid, as Paul
has it, with Christ in God.  The secret of the Lord, says the Psalmist,
is with them that fear Him.  And thus it is that when men begin to fear
God, both their hearts and their lives are henceforth full of all kinds
of secrets that are known to themselves and to God only.  It was when
Christiana's fearful thoughts began to work in her mind about her husband
whom she had lost--it was when all her unkind, unnatural, and ungodly
carriages to her dear friend came into her mind in swarms, clogged her
conscience, and loaded her with guilt--it was then that Secret knocked at
her door.  "Next morning," so her opening history runs, "when she was up,
and had prayed to God, and talked with her children awhile, one knocked
hard at the door to whom she spake out, saying, If thou comest in God's
name, come in.  So he who was at the door said, Amen, and opened the
door, and saluted her with, Peace be to this house.  The which when he
had done, he said, Christiana, knowest thou wherefore I am come?  Then
she blushed and trembled, also her heart began to wax warm with desires
to know whence he came, and what was his errand to her.  So he said unto
her, My name is Secret, I dwell with those that are high.  It is talked
of where I dwell as if thou hadst a desire to go thither; also, there is
a report that thou art aware now of the evil thou formerly didst to thy
husband in hardening of thy heart against his way, and in keeping of thy
babes in their ignorance.  Christiana, the Merciful One has sent me to
tell thee that He is a God ready to forgive, and that He taketh delight
to multiply to pardon offences.  He would also have thee know that He
inviteth thee to come into His presence, even to His table, and that He
will there feed thee with the fat of His house, and with the heritage of
Jacob thy father.  Christiana at all this was greatly abashed in herself,
and she bowed her head to the ground, while her visitor proceeded and
said, Christiana, here is a letter for thee which I have brought from thy
husband's King.  So she took it and opened it, and, as she opened it, it
smelt after the manner of the best perfume; also it was written in
lettering of gold.  The contents of the letter was to this effect, that
the King would have her do as did Christian her husband, for that was the
way to come to the city and to dwell in His presence with joy for ever.
At this the good woman was completely overcome.  So she said to her
visitor, Sir, will you carry me and my children with you that we may go
and worship this King?  Then said the heavenly visitor, Christiana, the
bitter is before the sweet.  Thou must through troubles, as did he that
went before thee, enter this celestial city."  And so on.

1.  Now, to begin with, you will have noticed the way in which Christiana
was prepared for the entrance of Secret into her house.  She was a widow.
She sat alone in that loneliness which only widows know and understand.
More than lonely, she was very miserable.  "Mark this," says the author
on the margin, "you that are churls to your godly relations."  For this
widow felt sure that her husband had been taken from her because of her
cruel behaviour to him.  Her past unnatural carriages toward her husband
now rent the very caul of her heart in sunder.  And, again and again,
about that same time strange dreams would sometimes visit her.  Dreams
such as this.  She would see her husband in a place of bliss with a harp
in his hand, standing and playing upon it before One that sat on a throne
with a rainbow round His head.  She saw also as if he bowed his head with
his face to the paved work that was under the Prince's feet, saying, I
heartily thank my Lord and King for bringing me to this place.  You will
easily see how ready this lone woman was with all that for his entrance
who knocked and said, Peace be to this house, and handed her a letter of
perfume from her husband's King.  Then you will have remarked also some
of the things this visitor from on high said to her of the place whence
he had come.  He told her, to begin with, how they sometimes talked about
her in his country.  She thought that she was a lonely and forgotten
widow, and that no one cared what became of her.  But her visitor assured
her she was quite wrong in thinking that.  He had often himself heard her
name mentioned in conversation above; and the most hopeful reports, he
told her, were circulated from door to door that she was actually all but
started on the upward way.  Yes, he said, and we have a place prepared
for you on the strength of these reports, a place among the immortals
close beside your husband.  And all that, as you will not wonder, was the
beginning of Christiana's secret life.  After that morning she never
again felt alone or forgotten.  I am not alone, she would after that say,
when any of her old neighbours knocked at her door.  No, I am not alone,
but if thou comest in God's name, come in.

2.  And from that day a long succession of secret providences began to
enter Christiana's life, till, as time went on, her whole life was filled
full of secret providences.  And not her present life only, but her
discoveries of God's secret providences towards her and hers became
retrospective also, till both her own parentage and birth, her husband's
parentage and birth also, the day she first saw him, the day of their
espousals, the day of their marriage, and the day of his death, all shone
out now as so many secret and special providences of God toward her.
Bishop Martensen has a fine passage on the fragmentariness of our
knowledge, not only of divine providence as a whole, but even of those
divine providences that fill up our own lives.  And he warns us that,
till we have heard the "Prologue in Heaven," many a riddle in our lives
must of necessity remain unsolved.  Christiana could not have told her
inquiring children what a prologue was, nor an epilogue either, but many
were the wise and winning discourses she held with her boys about their
father now in heaven, about her happiness in having had such a father for
her children, and about their happiness that the road was open before
them to go to where he now is.  And there are many poor widows among
ourselves who are wiser than all their teachers, because they are in that
school of experience into which God takes His afflicted people and opens
to them His deepest secrets.  They remember, with Job, when the secret of
the Lord was first upon their tabernacle.  Their widowed hearts are full
of holy household memories.  They remember the days when the candle of
the Lord shone upon their head when they washed their steps with butter,
and the rock poured them out rivers of oil.  And still, when, like Job
also, they sit solitary among the ashes, the secret of the Lord is only
the more secretly and intimately with them.  John Bunyan was well fitted
to be Christiana's biographer, because his own life was as full as it
could hold of these same secret and special providences.  One day he was
walking--so he tells us--in a good man's shop, bemoaning himself of his
sad and doleful state--when a mighty rushing wind came in through the
window and seemed to carry words of Scripture on its wings to Bunyan's
disconsolate soul.  He candidly tells us that he does not know, after
twenty years' reflection, what to make of that strange dispensation.  That
it took place, and that it left the most blessed results behind it, he is
sure; but as to how God did it, by what means, by what instruments, both
the rushing wind itself and the salutation that accompanied it, he is
fain to let lie till the day of judgment.  And many of ourselves have had
strange dispensations too that we must leave alone, and seek no other
explanation of them for the present but the blessed results of them.  We
have had divine descents into our lives that we can never attempt to
describe.  Interpositions as plain to us as if we had both seen and
spoken with the angel who executed them.  Miraculous deliverances that
throw many Old and New Testament miracles into the shade.  Providential
adaptations and readjustments also, as if all things were actually and
openly and without a veil being made to work together for our good.
Extrications also; nets broken, snares snapped, and such pavilions of
safety and solace opened to us that we can find no psalm secret and
special enough in which to utter our life-long astonishment.  Importunate
prayers anticipated, postponed, denied, translated, transmuted, and then
answered till our cup was too full; sweet changed to bitter, and bitter
changed to sweet, so wonderfully, so graciously, and so often, that words
fail us, and we can only now laugh and now weep over it all.  Poor Cowper
knew something about it--

   "God moves in a mysterious way
      His wonders to perform;
   He plants His footsteps in the sea,
      And rides upon the storm.

   "Ye fearful saints, fresh courage take,
      The clouds ye so much dread
   Are big with mercy, and shall break
      In blessings on your head.

   "Blind unbelief is sure to err,
      And scan his work in vain;
   God is His own interpreter,
      And He will make it plain."

3.  Secret scriptures also--from that enlightening day Christiana's Bible
became full of them.  Peter says that no prophecy is of any private
interpretation; and, whatever he means by that, what he says must be
true.  But Christiana would have understood the apostle better if he had
said the exact opposite of that,--if not about the prophecies, at least
about the psalms.  Leave the prophecies in this connection alone; but of
the psalms it may safely be said that it is neither the literal nor the
historical nor the mystical interpretation that gets at the heart of
those supreme scriptures.  It is the private, personal, and, indeed,
secret interpretation that gets best at the deepest heart of the psalms.
An old Bible came into my hands the other day--a Bible that had seen
service--and it opened of its own accord at the Book of Psalms.  On
turning over the yellow leaves I found a date and a deep indentation
opposite these words: "Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in Him:
and He will bring it to pass."  And as I looked at the figures on the
margin, and at the underscored text, I felt as if I were on the brink of
an old-world secret.  "Create in me a clean heart" had a significant
initial also; as had this: "The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit."
The whole of the hundred-and-third psalm was bracketed off from all
public interpretation; while the tenth, the cardinal verse of that secret
psalm, had a special seal set upon it.  Judging from its stains and scars
and other accidents, the whole of the hundred-and-nineteenth psalm had
been a special favourite; while the hundred-and-forty-third also was all
broidered round with shorthand symbols.  But the secret key of all those
symbols and dates and enigmatical marks was no longer to be found; it had
been carried away in the owner's own heart.  But, my head being full of
Christiana at the time, I felt as if I held her own old Bible in my hand
as I turned over those ancient leaves.

4.  Our Lord so practised secrecy Himself in His fasting, in His praying,
and in His almsgiving, and He makes so much of that same secrecy in all
His teaching, as almost to make the essence of all true religion to stand
in its secrecy.  "When thou prayest," says our Lord, "shut thy door and
pray in secret."  As much as to say that we are scarcely praying at all
when we are praying in public.  Praying in public is so difficult that
new beginners, like His disciples, have to practise that so difficult art
for a long time in secret.  Public prayer has so many besetting sins, it
is open to so many temptations, distractions, and corruptions, that it is
almost impossible to preserve the real essence of prayer in public
prayer.  But in secret all those temptations and distractions are happily
absent.  We have no temptation to be too long in secret prayer, or too
loud, or too eloquent.  Stately old English goes for nothing in secret
prayer.  We never need to go to our knees in secret trembling, lest we
lose the thread of our prayer, or forget that so fit and so fine
expression.  The longer we are the better in secret prayer.  Much
speaking is really a virtue in secret prayer; much speaking and many
repetitions.  Also, we can put things into our secret prayers that we
dare not come within a thousand miles of in the pulpit, or the prayer-
meeting, or the family.  We can enter into the most plain-spoken
particulars about ourselves in secret.  We can put our proper name upon
ourselves, and upon our actions, and especially upon our thoughts when
our door is shut.  Then, again, we can pray for other people by name in
secret; we can enter, so far as we know them, into all their
circumstances in a way it is impossible to do anywhere but in the utmost
secrecy.  We can, in short, be ourselves in secret; and, unless it is to
please or to impress men, we had better not pray at all unless we are
ourselves when we are engaged in it.  You can be yourself, your very
worst self; nay, you must be, else you will not long pray in secret, and
even if you did you would not be heard.  I do not remember that very much
is said in so many words in her after-history about Christiana's habits
of closet-prayer.  But that Secret taught her the way, and waited till
she had tasted the sweetness and the strength of being a good while on
her knees alone, I am safe to say; indeed, I read it between the lines in
all her after-life.  She was rewarded openly in a way that testifies to
much secret prayer; that is to say, in the early conversion of her
children, in the way they settled in life, and such like things.  Pray
much for those things in secret that you wish to possess openly.

5.  But perhaps the best and most infallible evidence we can have of the
truth of our religion in this life is in the steady increase of our
secret sinfulness.  Christiana had no trouble with her own wicked heart
so long as she was a woman of a wicked life.  But directly she became a
new creature, her heart began to swarm, such is her own expression, with
sinful memories, sinful thoughts, and sinful feelings; till she had need
of some one ever near her, like Greatheart, constantly to assure her that
those cruel and deadly swarms, instead of being a bad sign of her
salvation, were the very best signs possible of her good estate.  Humility
is the foundation of all our graces, and there is no humility so deep and
so ever-deepening as that evangelical humility which in its turn rises
out of and rests upon secret sinfulness.  Not upon acts of secret sin.  Do
not mistake me.  Acts of secret sin harden the heart and debauch the
conscience.  But I speak of that secret, original, unexplored, and
inexpugnable sinfulness out of which all a sinner's actual sins, both
open sins and secret, spring; and out of which a like life of open and
actual sins would spring in God's very best saints, if only both He and
they did not watch night and day against them.  Sensibility to sin, or
rather to sinfulness, is far and away the best evidence of sanctification
that is possible to us in this life.  It is this keen and bitter
sensibility that secures, amid all oppositions and obstructions, the true
saint's onward and upward progress.  Were it not for the misery of their
own hearts, God's best saints would fall asleep and go back like other
men.  A sinful heart is the misery of all miseries.  It is the deepest
and darkest of all dungeons.  It is the most painful and the most
loathsome of all diseases.  And the secrecy of it all adds to the
bitterness and the gall of it all.  We may know that other men's hearts
are as sinful as our own, but we do not feel their sinfulness.  We cannot
sensibly feel humiliation, bondage, sickness, and self-loathing on
account of another man's envy, or ill-will, or resentment, or cruelty, or
falsehood, or impurity.  All these things must be our own before we can
enter into the pain and the shame of them; but, when we do, then we taste
what death and hell are indeed.  As I write these feeble words about it,
a devil's shaft of envy that was shot all against my will into my heart
this morning, still, after a whole day, rankles and festers there.  I
have been on my knees with it again and again; I have stood and looked
into an open grave to-day; but there it is sucking at my heart's blood
still, like a leech of hell.  Who can understand his errors?  Cleanse
Thou me from secret faults.  Create in me a clean heart, O God, O
wretched man that I am!  "Let a man," says William Law when he is
enforcing humility, "but consider that if the world knew all that of him
which he knows of himself: if they saw what vanity and what passions
govern his inside, and what secret tempers sully and corrupt his best
actions, he would have no more pretence to be honoured and admired for
his goodness and wisdom than a rotten and distempered body to be loved
and admired for its beauty and comeliness.  This is so true, and so known
to the hearts of almost all people, that nothing would appear more
dreadful to them than to have their hearts fully discovered to the eyes
of all beholders.  And, perhaps, there are very few people in the world
who would not rather choose to die than to have all their secret follies,
the errors of their judgments, the vanity of their minds, the falseness
of their pretences, the frequency of their vain and disorderly passions,
their uneasinesses, hatreds, envies, and vexations made known to all the
world."  Where did William Law get that terrible passage?  Where could he
get it but in the secret heart of the miserable author of the _Serious
Call_?

6.  The half cannot be told of the guilt and the corruption, the pain and
the shame and the manifold misery of secret sin; but all that will be
told, believed, and understood by all men long before the full
magnificence of their sanctification, and the superb transcendence of
their blessedness, will even begin to be described to God's secret
saints.  For, all that sleepless, cruel, and soul-killing pain, and all
that shameful and humbling corruption,--all that means, all that is, so
much holiness, so much heaven, working itself out in the soul.  All that
is so much immortal life, spotless beauty, and incorruptible joy already
begun in the soul.  Every such pang in a holy heart is a death-pang of
another sin and a birth-pang of another grace.  Brotherly love is at last
being born never to die in that heart where envy and malice and
resentment and revenge are causing inward agony.  And humility and
meekness and the whole mind of Christ are there where pride and anger and
ill-will are felt to be very hell itself.  And holiness, even as God is
holy, will soon be there for ever where the sinfulness of sin is a
sinner's acutest sorrow.  "As for me," said one whose sin was ever before
him, "I will behold Thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when
I wake with Thy likeness."




MRS. TIMOROUS


   "But the fearful [literally, the timid and the cowardly] shall have
   their part in the second death."--_Revelation xxi_.

No sooner had Secret bidden Christiana farewell than she began with all
her might to make ready for her great journey.  "Come, my children, let
us pack up and begone to the gate that leads to the Celestial City, that
we may see your father and be with him, and with his companions, in
peace, according to the laws of that land."  And then: "Come in, if you
come in God's name!" Christiana called out, as two of her neighbours
knocked at her door.  "Having little to do at home this morning," said
the elder of the two women, "I have come across to kill a little time
with you.  I spent last night with Mrs. Light-mind, and I have some good
news for you this morning."  "I am just preparing for a journey this
morning," said Christiana, packing up all the time, "and I have not so
much as one moment to spare."  You know yourselves what Christiana's
nervousness and almost impatience were.  You know how it upsets your good
temper and all your civility when you are packing up for a long absence
from home, and some one comes in, and will talk, and will not see how
behindhand and how busy you are.  "For what journey, I pray you?" asked
Mrs. Timorous, for that was her visitor's name.  "Even to go after my
good husband," the busy woman said, and with that she fell a-weeping.  But
you must read the whole account of that eventful morning in Christiana's
memoirs for yourselves till you have it, as Secret said, by
root-of-heart.  On the understanding that you are not total strangers to
that so excellently-written passage I shall now venture a few
observations upon it.

1.  Well, to begin with, Mrs. Timorous was not a bad woman, as women went
in that town and in that day.  Her companions,--her gossips, as she would
have called them,--were far worse women than she was; and, had it not
been for her family infirmity, had it not been for that timid,
hesitating, lukewarm, and half-and-half habit of mind which she had
inherited from her father, there is no saying what part she might have
played in the famous expedition of Christiana and Mercy and the boys.  Her
father had been a pilgrim himself at one time; but he had now for a long
time been known in the town as a turncoat and a temporary, and all his
children had unhappily taken after their father in that.  Had her father
held on as he at one time had begun--had he held on in the face of all
fear and all danger as Christiana's noble husband had done--to a
certainty his daughter would have started that morning with Christiana
and her company, and would have been, if a timid, easily scared, and
troublesome pilgrim, yet as true a pilgrim, and made as welcome at last,
as, say, Miss Much-afraid, Mr. Fearing, and Mr. Ready-to-halt were made.
But her father's superficiality and shakiness, and at bottom his warm
love of this world and his lukewarm love of the world to come, had
unfortunately all descended to his daughter, till we find her actually
reviling Christiana on that decisive morning, and returning to her dish
of tea and tittle-tattle with Mrs. Bats-eyes, Mrs. Inconsiderate, Mrs.
Light-mind, and Mrs. Know-nothing.

2.  The thing that positively terrified Mrs. Timorous at the very thought
of setting out with Christiana that morning was that intolerable way in
which Christiana had begun to go back upon her past life as a wife and a
mother.  Christiana could not hide her deep distress, and, indeed, she
did not much try.  Such were the swarms of painful memories that her
husband's late death, the visit of Secret, and one thing and another had
let loose upon Christiana's mind, that she could take pleasure in nothing
but in how she was to escape away from her past life, and how she could
in any way mend it and make up for it where she could not escape from it.
"You may judge yourself," said Mrs. Timorous to Mrs. Light-mind, "whether
I was likely to find much entertainment with a woman like that!"  For,
Mrs. Timorous too, you must know, had a past life of her own; and it was
that past life of hers all brought back by Christiana's words that
morning that made Mrs. Timorous so revile her old friend and return to
the society we so soon see her with.  Now, is not this the case, that we
all have swarms of evil memories that we dare not face?  There is no
single relationship in life that we can boldly look back upon and fully
face.  As son or as daughter, as brother or as sister, as friend or as
lover, as husband or as wife, as minister or as member, as master or as
servant--what swarms of hornet-memories darken our hearts as we so look
back!  Let any grown-up man, with some imagination, tenderness of heart,
and integrity of conscience, go back step by step, taking some time to
it,--at a new year, say, or a birthday, or on some such suitable
occasion: let him go over his past life back to his youth and
childhood--and what an intolerable burden will be laid on his heart
before he is done!  What a panorama of scarlet pictures will pass before
his inward eye!  What a forest of accusing fingers will be pointed at
him!  What hissing curses will be spat at him both by the lips of the
living and the dead!  What untold pains he will see that he has caused to
the innocent and the helpless!  What desolating disappointments, what
shipwrecks of hope to this man and to that woman!  What a stone of
stumbling he has been to many who on that stone have been for ever broken
and lost!  What a rock of offence even his mere innocent existence, all
unknown to himself till afterwards, has been!  Swarms, said Christiana.
Swarms of hornets armed, said Samson.  And many of us understand what
that bitter word means better than any commentator on Bunyan or on Milton
can tell us.  One of the holiest men the Church of England ever produced,
and one of her best devotional writers, used to shut his door on the
night of every first day of the week, and on his knees spread out a
prayer which always contained this passage: "I worship Thee, O God, on my
face.  I smite my breast and say with the publican, God be merciful to me
a sinner; the chief of sinners; a sinner far above the publican.  Despise
me not--an unclean worm, a dead dog, a putrid corpse.  Despise me not,
despise me not, O Lord.  But look upon me with those eyes with which Thou
didst look upon Magdalene at the feast, Peter in the hall, and the thief
on the cross.  O that mine eyes were a fountain of tears that I might
weep night and day before Thee!  I despise and bruise myself that my
penitence is not deeper, is not fuller.  Help Thou mine impenitence, and
more and more pierce, rend, and crush my heart.  My sins are more in
number than the sand.  My iniquities are multiplied, and I have no
relief."  Perish your Puritanism, and your prayer-books too!  I hear some
high-minded and indignant man saying.  Perish your Celestial City and all
my desire after it, before I say the like of that about myself!  Brave
words, my brother; brave words!  But there have been men as blameless as
you are, and as brave-hearted over it, who, when the scales fell off
their eyes, were heard crying out ever after: O wretched man that I am!
And: Have mercy on me, the chief of sinners!  And so, if it so please
God, will it yet be with you.

3.  "Having had little to do this morning," said Mrs. Timorous to Mrs.
Light-mind, "I went to give Christiana a visit."  "Law," I read in his
most impressive Life, "by this time was well turned fifty, but he rose as
early and was as soon at his desk as when he was still a new,
enthusiastic, and scrupulously methodical student at Cambridge."  Summer
and winter Law rose to his devotions and his studies at five o'clock, not
because he had imperative sermons to prepare, but because, in his own
words, it is more reasonable to suppose a person up early because he is a
Christian than because he is a labourer or a tradesman or a servant.  I
have a great deal of business to do, he would say.  I have a hardened
heart to change; I have still the whole spirit of religion to get.  When
Law at any time felt a temptation to relax his rule of early devotion, he
again reminded himself how fast he was becoming an old man, and how far
back his sanctification still was, till he flung himself out of bed and
began to make himself a new heart before the servants had lighted their
fires or the farmers had yoked their horses.  Shame on you, he said to
himself, to lie folded up in a bed when you might be pouring out your
heart in prayer and in praise, and thus be preparing yourself for a place
among those blessed beings who rest not day and night saying, Holy, Holy,
Holy.  "I have little to do this morning," said Mrs. Timorous.  "But I am
preparing for a journey," said Christiana.  "I have now a price put into
my hand to get gain, and I should be a fool of the greatest size if I
should have no heart to strike in with the opportunity."

4.  Another thing that completely threw out Christiana's idle visitor and
made her downright angry was the way she would finger and kiss and read
pieces out of the fragrant letter she held in her hand.  You will
remember how Christiana came by that letter she was now so fond of.
"Here," said Secret, "is a letter I have brought thee from thy husband's
King."  So she took it and opened it, and it smelt after the manner of
the best perfume; also it was written in letters of gold.  "I advise
thee," said Secret, "that thou put this letter in thy bosom, that thou
read therein to thy children until you have all got it by root-of-heart."
"His messenger was here," said Christiana to Mrs. Timorous, "and has
brought me a letter which invites me to come."  And with that she plucked
out the letter and read to her out of it, and said: "What now do you say
to all that?"  That, again, is so true to our own life.  For there is
nothing that more distastes and disrelishes many people among us than
just that we should name to them our favourite books, and read a passage
out of them, and ask them to say what they think of such wonderful words.
Samuel Rutherford's _Letters_, for instance; a book that smells to some
nostrils with the same heavenly perfume as Secret's own letter did.  A
book, moreover, that is written in the same ink of gold.  Ask at
afternoon tea to-morrow, even in so-called Christian homes, when any of
the ladies round the table last read, and how often they have read,
_Grace Abounding, The Saint's Rest, The Religious Affections, Jeremy
Taylor, Law, a Kempis, Fenelon_, or such like, and they will smile to one
another and remark after you are gone on your strange taste for
old-fashioned and long-winded and introspective books.  "Julia has buried
her husband and married her daughters, and since that she spends her time
in reading.  She is always reading foolish and unedifying books.  She
tells you every time she sees you that she is almost at the end of the
silliest book that ever she read in her life.  But the best of it is that
it serves to dispose of a good deal of her spare time.  She tells you all
romances are sad stuff, yet she is very impatient till she can get all
she can hear of.  Histories of intrigue and scandal are the books that
Julia thinks are always too short.  The truth is, she lives upon folly
and scandal and impertinence.  These things are the support of her dull
hours.  And yet she does not see that in all this she is plainly telling
you that she is in a miserable, disordered, reprobate state of mind.  Now,
whether you read her books or no, you perhaps think with her that it is a
dull task to read only religious and especially spiritual books.  But
when you have the spirit of true religion, when you can think of God as
your only happiness, when you are not afraid of the joys of eternity, you
will think it a dull task to read any other books.  When it is the care
of your soul to be humble, holy, pure, and heavenly-minded; when you know
anything of the guilt and misery of sin, or feel a real need of
salvation, then you will find religious and truly spiritual books to be
the greatest feast and joy of your mind and heart."  Yes.  And then we
shall thank God every day we live that He raised us up such helpers in
our salvation as the gifted and gracious authors we have been speaking
of.

5.  "The further I go the more danger I meet with," said old Timorous,
the father, to Christian, when Christian asked him on the Hill Difficulty
why he was running the wrong way.  "I, too, was going to the City of
Zion," he said; "but the further on I go the more danger I meet with."
And, in saying that, the old runaway gave our persevering pilgrim
something to think about for all his days.  For, again and again, and
times without number, Christian would have gone back too if only he had
known where to go.  Go on, therefore, he must.  To go back to him was
simply impossible.  Every day he lived he felt the bitter truth of what
that old apostate had so unwittingly said.  But, with all that he kept
himself in his onward way till, dangers and difficulties, death and hell
and all, he came to the blessed end of it.  And that same has been the
universal experience of all the true and out-and-out saints of God in all
time.  If poor old Timorous had only known it, if he had only had some
one beside him to remind him of it, the very thing that so fatally turned
him back was the best proof possible that he was on the right and the
only right way; ay, and fast coming, poor old castaway, to the very city
he had at one time set out to seek.  Now, it is only too likely that
there are some of my hearers at this with it to-night, that they are on
the point of giving up the life of faith, and hope, and love, and holy
living; because the deeper they carry that life into their own hearts the
more impossible they find it to live that life there.  The more they aim
their hearts at God's law the more they despair of ever coming within
sight of it.  My supremely miserable brother! if this is any consolation
to you, if you can take any crumb of consolation out of it, let this be
told you, that, as a matter of fact, all truly holy men have in their
heart of hearts had your very experience.  That is no strange and unheard-
of thing which is passing within you.  And, indeed, if you could but
believe it, that is one of the surest signs and seals of a true and
genuine child of God.  Dante, one of the bravest, but hardest bestead of
God's saints, was, just like you, well-nigh giving up the mountain
altogether when his Greatheart, who was always at his side, divining what
was going on within him, said to him--

   "Those scars
   That when they pain thee most then kindliest heal."

"The more I do," complained one of Thomas Shepard's best friends to him,
"the worse I am."  "The best saints are the most sensible of sin," wrote
Samuel Rutherford.  And, again he wrote, "Sin rages far more in the godly
than ever it does in the ungodly."  And you dare not deny but that Samuel
Rutherford was one of the holiest men that ever lived, or that in saying
all that he was speaking of himself.  And Newman: "Every one who tries to
do God's will"--and that also is Newman himself--"will feel himself to be
full of all imperfection and sin; and the more he succeeds in regulating
his heart, the more will he discern its original bitterness and guilt."
As our own hymn has it:

   "They who fain would serve Thee best
   Are conscious most of wrong within."

Without knowing it, Mrs. Timorous's runaway father was speaking the same
language as the chief of the saints.  Only he said, "Therefore I have
turned back," whereas, first Christian, and then Christiana his widow,
said, "Yet I must venture!"

And so say you.  Say, I must and I will venture!  Say it; clench your
teeth and your hands and say it.  Say that you are determined to go on
towards heaven where the holy are--absolutely determined, though you are
quite well aware that you are carrying up with you the blackest, the
wickedest, the most corrupt, and the most abominable heart either out of
hell or in it.  Say that, say all that, and still venture.  Say all that
and all the more venture.  Venture upon God of whom such reassuring
things are said.  Venture upon the Son of God of whom His Father is
represented as saying such inviting things.  Venture upon the cross.
Survey the wondrous cross and then make a bold venture upon it.  Think
who that is who is bleeding to death upon the cross, and why?  Look at
Him till you never afterwards can see anything else.  Look at God's
Eternal, Divine, Well-pleasing Son with all the wages of sin dealt out to
Him, body and soul, on that tree to the uttermost farthing.  And, devil
incarnate though you indeed are, yet, say, if that spectacle does not
satisfy you, and encourage you, and carry your cowardice captive.
Venture! I say, venture!  And if you find at last that you have ventured
too far--if you have sinned and corrupted yourself beyond redemption--then
it will be some consolation and distinction to you in hell that you had
out-sinned the infinite grace of God, and had seen the end of the
unsearchable riches of Christ.  Timid sinner, I but mock thee, therefore
venture!  Fearful sinner, venture!  Cowardly sinner, venture.  Venture
thyself upon thy God, upon Christ thy Saviour, and upon His cross.
Venture all thy guilt and all thy corruption taken together upon Christ
hanging upon His cross, and make that tremendous venture now!




MERCY


   "Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy."--_Our Lord_.

The first time that we see Mercy she is standing one sunshine morning
knocking along with another at Christiana's door.  And all that we
afterwards hear of Mercy might be described as, A morning call and all
that came of it; or, How a godly matron led on a poor maid to fall in
love with her own salvation.  John Bunyan, her biographer, in all his
devotion to Mercy, does not make it at all clear to us why such a sweet
and good girl as Mercy was could be on such intimate terms with Mrs.
Timorous and all her so questionable circle.  Could it be that Mercy's
mother was one of that unhappy set?  And had this dear little woman-child
been brought up so as to know no better than to figure in their
assemblies, and go out on their morning rounds with Mrs. Light-mind and
Mrs. Know-nothing?  Or, was poor Mercy an orphan with no one to watch
over her, and had her sweet face, her handsome figure, and her winning
manners made her one of the attractions of old Madam Wanton's midnight
routs?  However it came about, there was Mercy out on a series of morning
calls with a woman twice her age, but a woman whose many years had taught
her neither womanliness nor wisdom.  "If you come in God's name, come
in," a voice from the inside answered the knocking of Mrs. Timorous and
Mercy, her companion, at Christiana's door.  In all their rounds that
morning the two women had not been met with another salutation like that;
and that strange salutation so disconcerted and so confounded them that
they did not know whether to lift the latch and go in, or to run away and
leave those to go in who could take their delight in such outlandish
language.  "If you come in God's name, come in."  At this the women were
stunned, for this kind of language they used not to hear or to perceive
to drop from the lips of Christiana.  Yet they came in; but, behold, they
found the good woman preparing to be gone from her house.  The
conversation that ensued was all carried on by the two elder women.  For
it was often remarked about Mercy all her after-days that her voice was
ever soft, and low, and, especially, seldom heard.  But her ears were not
idle.  For all the time the debate went on--because by this time the
conversation had risen to be a debate--Mercy was taking silent sides with
Christiana and her distress and her intended enterprise, till, when Mrs.
Timorous reviled Christiana and said, "Come away, Mercy, and leave her in
her own hands," Mercy by that time was brought to a standstill.  For,
like a rose among thorns, Mercy was thoughtful and wise and womanly far
beyond her years.  So much so, that already she had made up her mind to
offer herself as a maidservant to help the widow with her work and to see
her so far on her way, and, indeed, though she kept that to herself, to
go all the way with her, if the way should prove open to her.  First, her
heart yearned over Christiana; so she said within herself, If my
neighbour will needs be gone, I will go a little way with her to help
her.  Secondly, her heart yearned over her own soul's salvation, for what
Christiana had said had taken some hold upon Mercy's mind.  Wherefore she
said within herself, I will yet have more talk with this Christiana, and
if I find truth and life in what she shall say, myself with all my heart
shall also go with her.  "Neighbour," spoke out Mercy to Mrs. Timorous,
"I did indeed come with you to see Christiana this morning, and since she
is, as you see, a-taking of her last farewell of her country, I think to
walk this sunshine morning a little way with her to help her on the way."
But she told her not of her second reason, but kept that to herself.  I
would fain go on with Mercy's memoirs all night.  But you will take up
that inviting thread for yourselves.  And meantime I shall stop here and
gather up under two or three heads some of the more memorable results and
lessons of that sunshine-morning call.

1.  Well, then, to begin with, there was something quite queen-like,
something absolutely commanding, about Christiana's look and manner, as
well as about all she said and did that morning.  Mercy's morning
companion had all the advantages that dress and equipage could give her;
while Christiana stood in the middle of the floor in her housewife's
clothes, covered with dust and surrounded with all her dismantled house;
but, with all that, there was something about Christiana that took
Mercy's heart completely captive.  All that Christiana had by this time
come through had blanched her cheek and whitened her hair: but all that
only the more commanded Mercy's sensitive and noble soul.  To be open to
impressions of that kind is one of the finest endowments of a finely
endowed nature; and, all through, the attentive reader of her history
will be sure to remark and imitate Mercy's exquisite and tenacious
sensibility to all that is true and good, upright and honourable and
noble.  And then, what a blessing it is to a girl of Mercy's mould to
meet at opening womanhood with another woman, be it a mother, a mistress,
or a neighbour, whose character then, and as life goes on, can supply the
part of the supporting and sheltering oak to the springing and clinging
vine.  Christiana being now the new woman she was, as well as a woman of
great natural wisdom, dignity, and stability of character, the safety,
the salvation of poor motherless Mercy was as good as sure.  Indeed, all
Mercy's subsequent history is only one long and growing tribute to the
worth, the constant love, and the sleepless solicitude of this true
mother in Israel.

2.  Now, it was so, that, wholly unknown to all her companions, young and
old, in her own very remarkable words, Mercy had for a long time been
hungering with all her heart to meet with some genuinely good
people,--with some people, as she said herself,--"of truth and of life."
These are remarkable words to hear drop from the lips of a young girl,
and especially a girl of Mercy's environment.  Now, had there been
anything hollow, had there been one atom of insincerity or exaggeration
about Christiana that morning, had she talked too much, had all her
actions not far more than borne out all her words, had there not been in
the broken-hearted woman a depth of mind and a warmth of heart far beyond
all her words, Mercy would never have become a pilgrim.  But the natural
dignity of Christiana's character; her capable, commanding, resolute
ways; the reality, even to agony, of her sorrow for her past life--all
taken together with her iron-fast determination to enter at once on a new
life--all that carried Mercy's heart completely captive.  Mercy felt that
there was a solemnity, an awesomeness, and a mystery about her new
friend's experiences and memories that it was not for a child like
herself to attempt to intrude into.  But, all the more because of that, a
spell of love and fear and reverence lay on Mercy's heart and mind all
her after-days from that so solemn and so eventful morning when she first
saw Christiana's haggard countenance and heard her remorseful cries.  My
so churlish carriages to him!  Now, such carriages between man and wife
had often pained and made ashamed Mercy's maidenly heart beyond all
expression.  Till she had sometimes said to herself, blushing with shame
before herself as she said it, that if ever she was a wife--may my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth before I say one churlish word to him who
is my husband!  And thus it was that nothing that Christiana said that
morning in the uprush of her remorse moved Mercy more with pity and with
love than just what Christiana beat her breast about as concerning her
lost husband.  Mercy used to say that she saw truth and life enough in
one hour that morning to sober and to solemnise and to warn her to set a
watch on the door of her lips for all her after-days.

3.  Before Mrs. Timorous was well out of the door, Mercy had already
plucked off her gloves, and hung up her morning bonnet on a nail in the
wall, so much did her heart heave to help the cumbered widow and her
fatherless children.  "If thou wilt, I will hire thee," said Christiana,
"and thou shalt go with me as my servant.  Yet we will have all things
common betwixt thee and me; only, now thou art here, go along with me."
At this Mercy fell on Christiana's neck and kissed her mother; for after
that morning Christiana had always a daughter of her own, and Mercy a
mother.  And you may be sure, with two such women working with all their
might, all things were soon ready for their happy departure.

Mr. Kerr Bain invites his readers to compare John Bunyan's Mercy at this
point with William Law's Miranda.  I shall not tarry to draw out the full
comparison here, but shall content myself with simply repeating Mr.
Bain's happy reference.  Only, I shall not content myself till all to
whom my voice can reach, and who are able to enjoy only a first-rate
book, have Mr. Bain's book beside their _Pilgrim's Progress_.  That
morning, then, on which Mrs. Timorous, having nothing to do at home, set
out with Mercy on a round of calls--that was Mercy's last idle morning
for all her days.  For her mind was, ever after that, to be always
busying of herself in doing, for when she had nothing to do for herself
she would be making of hosen and garments for others, and would bestow
them upon those that had need.  I will warrant her a good housewife,
quoth Mr. Brisk to himself.  So much so that at any place they stopped on
the way, even for a day and a night to rest and refresh themselves, Mercy
would seek out all the poor and all the old people, and ere ever she was
aware what she was doing, already a good report had spread abroad
concerning the pilgrims and their pilgrimage.  At the same time, it must
be told that poor Mercy's heart was more heavy for the souls of the poor
people than for their naked bodies and hungry bellies.  So much was this
so that when the shepherds, Knowledge, Experience, Watchful, and Sincere,
took her to a place where she saw one Fool and one Want-wit washing of an
Ethiopian with intention to make him white, but the more they washed him
the blacker he was, Mercy blushed and felt guilty before the
shepherds,--she so took home to her charitable heart the bootless work of
Fool and Want-wit.  Mercy put on the Salvationist bonnet at her first
outset to the Celestial City, and she never put it off till she came to
that land where there are no more poor to make hosen and hats for, and no
more Ethiopians to take to the fountain.

4.  There are not a few young communicants here to-night, as well as not
a few who are afraid as yet to offer themselves for the Lord's table;
and, as it so falls out to-night, Mercy's case contains both an
encouragement and an example to all such.  For never surely had a young
communicant less to go upon than Mercy had that best morning of all her
life.  For she had nothing to go upon but a great desire to help
Christiana with her work; some desire for truth and for life; and some
first and feeble yearnings over her own soul,--yearnings, however, that
she kept entirely to herself.  That was all.  She had no remorses like
those which had ploughed up Christiana's cheeks into such channels of
tears.  She had no dark past out of which swarms of hornets stung her
guilty conscience.  Nor on the other hand, had she any such sweet dreams
and inviting visions as those that were sent to cheer and encourage the
disconsolate widow.  She will have her own sweet dreams yet, that will
make her laugh loud out in her sleep.  But that will be long after this,
when she has discovered how hard her heart is and how great God's grace
is.  "How shall I be ascertained," she put it to Christiana, "that I also
shall be entertained?  Had I but this hope, from one that can tell, I
would make no stick at all, but would go, being helped by Him that can
help, though the way was never so tedious.  Had I as good hope for a
loving reception as you have, I think no Slough of Despond would
discourage me."  "Well," said the other, "you know your sore, and I know
mine; and, good friend, we shall all have enough evil before we come to
our journey's end."  And soon after that, of all places on the upward
way, Mercy's evil began at the Wicket Gate.  "I have a companion," said
Christiana, "that stands without.  One that is much dejected in her mind,
for that she comes, as she thinks, without sending for; whereas I was
sent to by my husband's King."  So the porter opened the gate and looked
out; but Mercy was fallen down in a swoon, for she fainted and was afraid
that the gate would not be opened to her.  "O sir," she said, "I am
faint; there is scarce life left in me."  But he answered her that one
once said, "When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my
prayer came in into Thee, into Thy holy temple.  Fear not, but stand up
upon thy feet, and tell me wherefore thou art come."  "I am come, sir,
into that for which I never was invited, as my friend Christiana was.  Her
invitation was from the Lord, and mine was but from her.  Wherefore, I
fear that I presume."  Then said he to those that stood by, "Fetch
something and give it to Mercy to smell on, thereby to stay her
fainting."  So they fetched her a bundle of myrrh, and a while after she
revived.--Let young communicants be content with Mercy's invitation.  She
started for the City just because she liked to be beside a good woman who
was starting thither.  She wished to help a good woman who was going
thither; and just a little desire began at first to awaken in her heart
to go to the city too.  Till, having once set her face to go up, one
thing after another worked together to lead her up till she, too, had her
life full of those invitations and experiences and interests and
occupations and enjoyments that make Mercy's name so memorable, and her
happy case such an example and such an inspiration, to all God-fearing
young women especially.

5.  John Bunyan must be held responsible for the strong dash of romance
that he so boldly throws into Mercy's memoirs.  But I shall postpone Mr.
Brisk and his love-making and his answer to another lecture.  I shall not
enter on Mercy's love matters here at all, but shall leave them to be
read at home by those who like to read romances.  Only, since we have
seen so much of Mercy as a maiden, one longs to see how she turned out as
a wife.  I can only imagine how Mercy turned out as a wife; but there is
a picture of a Scottish Covenanting girl as a married wife which always
rises up before my mind when I think of Mercy's matronly days.  That
picture might hang in Bunyan's own peculiar gallery, so beautiful is the
drawing, and so warm and so eloquent the colouring.  Take, then, this
portrait of one of the daughters of the Scottish Covenant.  "She was a
woman of great worth, whom I therefore passionately loved and inwardly
honoured.  A stately, beautiful, and comely personage; truly pious and
fearing the Lord.  Of an evenly temper, patient in our common
tribulations and under her personal distresses.  A woman of bright
natural parts, and of an uncommon stock of prudence; of a quick and
lively apprehension in things she applied herself to, and of great
presence of mind in surprising incidents.  Sagacious and acute in
discerning the qualities of persons, and therefore not easily imposed
upon.  [See Mr. Brisk's interviews with Mercy.]  Modest and grave in her
deportment, but naturally cheerful; wise and affable in conversation,
also having a good faculty at speaking and expressing herself with
assurance.  Being a pattern of frugality and wise management in household
affairs, all such were therefore entirely committed to her; well fitted
for and careful of the virtuous education of her children; remarkably
useful in the countryside, both in the Merse and in the Forest, through
her skill in physic and surgery, which in many instances a peculiar
blessing appeared to be commanded upon from heaven.  And, finally, a
crown to me in my public station and pulpit appearances.  During the time
we have lived together we have passed through a sea of trouble, as yet
not seeing the shore but afar off."

"The words of King Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught him.  What,
my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of my vows?  Who
can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above rubies.  Her
children arise up and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praiseth
her.  Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain; but a woman that feareth
the Lord, she shall be praised."




MR. BRISK


   "Be ye not unequally yoked."--_Paul_.

There were some severe precisians in John Bunyan's day who took the
objection to the author of the _Pilgrim's Progress_ that he sometimes
laughed too loud.

   "One may (I think) say, both he laughs and cries,
   May well be guessed at by his watery eyes.
   Some things are of that nature as to make
   One's fancy chuckle while his heart doth ake.
   When Jacob saw his Rachel with the sheep,
   At the same time he did both laugh and weep."

And even Dr. Cheever, in his excellent lectures on the _Pilgrim's
Progress_, confesses that though the Second Part never ceases for a
moment to tell the serious story of the Pilgrimage, at the same time, it
sometimes becomes so merry as almost to pass over into absolute comedy.
"There is one passage," says Cheever, "which for exquisite humour, quiet
satire, and naturalness in the development of character is scarcely
surpassed in the language.  It is the account of the courtship between
Mr. Brisk and Mercy which took place at the House Beautiful."

Now, the insertion of such an episode as that of Mr. Brisk into such a
book as the _Pilgrim's Progress_ is only yet another proof of the health,
the strength, and the truth to nature of John Bunyan's mind.  His was
eminently an honest, straightforward, manly, English understanding.  A
smaller man would not have ventured on Mr. Brisk in such a book as the
_Pilgrim's Progress_.  But there is no affectation, there is no prudery,
there is no superiority to nature in John Bunyan.  He knew quite well
that of the thousands of men and women who were reading his _Pilgrim_
there was no subject, not even religion itself, that was taking up half
so much of their thoughts as just love-making and marriage.  And, like
the wise man and the true teacher he was, he here points out to all his
readers how well true religion and the fullest satisfaction of the
warmest and the most universal of human affections can be both harmonised
and made mutually helpful.  In Bunyan's day love was too much left to the
playwrights, just as in our day it is too much left to the poets and the
novelists.  And thus it is that in too many instances affection and
passion have taken full possession of the hearts and the lives of our
young people before any moral or religious lesson on these all-important
subjects has been given to them: any lesson such as John Bunyan so
winningly and so beautifully gives here.  "This incident," says Thomas
Scott, "is very properly introduced, and it is replete with instruction."

Now, Mr. Brisk, to begin with, was, so we are told, a young man of some
breeding,--that is to say, he was a young man of some social position,
some education, and of a certain good manner, at least on the surface.  In
David Scott's Illustrations Mr. Brisk stands before us a handsome and
well-dressed young man of the period, with his well-belted doublet, his
voluminous ruffles, his heavily-studded cuffs, his small cane, his
divided hair, and his delicate hand,--altogether answering excellently to
his name, were it not for the dashed look of surprise with which he gets
his answer, and, with what jauntiness he can at the moment command, takes
his departure.  "Mr. Brisk was a man of some breeding," says Bunyan, "and
that pretended to religion; but a man that stuck very close to the
world."  That Mr. Brisk made any pretence to religion at any other time
and in any other place is not said; only that he put on that pretence
with his best clothes when he came once or twice or more to Mercy and
offered love to her at the House Beautiful.  The man with the least
religion at other times, even the man with no pretence to religion at
other times at all, will pretend to some religion when he is in love with
a young woman of Mercy's mind.  And yet it would not be fair to say that
it is all pretence even in such a man at such a time.  Grant that a man
is really in love; then, since all love is of the nature of religion, for
the time, the true lover is really on the borders of a truly religious
life.  It may with perfect truth be said of all men when they first fall
in love that they are, for the time, not very far away from the kingdom
of heaven.  For all love is good, so far as it goes.  God is Love; and
all love, in the long-run, has a touch of the divine nature in it.  And
for once, if never again, every man who is deeply in love has a far-off
glimpse of the beauty of holiness, and a far-off taste of that ineffable
sweetness of which the satisfied saints of God sing so ecstatically.  But,
in too many instances, a young man's love having been kindled only by the
creature, and, never rising from her to his and her Creator, as a rule,
it sooner or later burns low and at last burns out, and leaves nothing
but embers and ashes in his once so ardent heart.  Mr. Brisk's
love-making might have ended in his becoming a pilgrim but for this fatal
flaw in his heart, that even in his love-making he stuck so fast to the
world.  It is almost incredible: you may well refuse to believe it--that
any young man in love, and especially a young gentleman of Mr. Brisk's
breeding, would approach his mistress with the question how much she
could earn a day.  As Mr. Brisk looks at Mercy's lap so full of hats and
hosen and says it, I can see his natty cane beginning to lengthen itself
out in his soft-skinned hand and to send out teeth like a muck-rake.  Give
Mr. Brisk another thirty years or so and he will be an ancient churl,
raking to himself the sticks and the straws and the dust of the earth,
neither looking up to nor regarding the celestial crown that is still
offered to him in exchange for his instrument.

"Now, Mercy was of a fair countenance, and, therefore, all the more
alluring."  But her fair countenance was really no temptation to her.
"Sit still, my daughter," said Naomi to Ruth in the Old Testament.  And
it was entirely Mercy's maidenly nature to sit still.  Even before she
had come to her full womanhood under Christiana's motherly care she would
have been an example to Ruth.  Long ago, while Mercy was still a mere
girl, when Mrs. Light-mind said something to her one day that made her
blush, Mercy at last looked up in real anger and said, We women should be
wooed; we were not made to woo.  And thus it was that all their time at
the House Beautiful Mercy stayed close at home and worked with her needle
and thread just as if she had been the plainest girl in all the town.  "I
might have had husbands afore now," she said, with a cast of her head
over the coat that lay on her lap, "though I spake not of it to any.  But
they were such as did not like my conditions, though never did any of
them find fault with my person.  So they and I could not agree."  Once
Mercy's mouth was opened on the subject of possible husbands it is a
miracle that she did not go on in confidence to name some of the husbands
she might have had.  Mercy was too truthful and too honourable a maiden
to have said even on that subject what she did say if it had not been
true.  No doubt she believed it true.  And the belief so long as she
mentioned no names, did not break any man's bones and did not spoil any
man's market.  Don't set up too prudishly and say that it is a pity that
Mercy so far forgot herself as to make her little confidential boast.  We
would not have had her without that little boast.  Keep-at-home,
sit-still, hats and hosen and all--her little boast only proves Mercy to
have been at heart a true daughter of Eve after all.

There is an old-fashioned word that comes up again and again in the
account of Mr. Brisk's courtship,--a word that contains far more interest
and instruction for us than might on the surface appear.  When Mr. Brisk
was rallied upon his ill-success with Mercy, he was wont to say that
undoubtedly Mistress Mercy was a very pretty lass, only she was troubled
with ill conditions.  And then, when Mercy was confiding to Prudence all
about her possible husbands, she said that they were all such as did not
like her conditions.  To which Prudence, keeping her countenance,
replied, that the men were but few in their day that could abide the
practice that was set forth by such conditions as those of Mercy.  Well,
tossed out Mercy, if nobody will have me I will die a maid, or my
conditions shall be to me as a husband!  As I came again and again across
that old seventeenth-century word "conditions," I said to myself, I feel
sure that Dr. Murray of the Oxford Scriptorium will have noted this
striking passage.  And on turning up the Sixth Part of the _New English
Dictionary_, there, to be sure, was the old word standing in this present
setting.  Five long, rich, closely packed columns stood under the head of
"Condition"; and amid a thousand illustrations of its use, the text:
"1684, Bunyan, Pilgr., ii. 84.  He said that Mercy was a pretty lass, but
troubled with ill conditions."  Poor illiterate John Bunyan stood in the
centre of a group of learned and famous men, composed of Chaucer, Wyclif,
Skelton, Palsgrave, Raleigh, Featly, Richard Steel, and Walter Scott--all
agreeing in their use of our word, and all supplying examples of its use
in the best English books.  By Mercy's conditions, then, is just meant
her cast of mind, her moral nature, her temper and her temperament, her
dispositions and her inclinations, her habits of thought, habits of
heart, habits of life, and so on.

"Well," said Mercy proudly, "if nobody will have me, I will die a maid,
or my conditions shall be to me as a husband.  For I cannot change my
nature, and to have one that lies cross to me in this,--that I purpose
never to admit of as long as I live."  By this time, though she is still
little more than a girl, Mercy had her habits formed, her character cast,
and, more than all, her whole heart irrevocably set on her soul's
salvation.  And everything--husband and children and all--must condition
themselves to that, else she will have none of them.  She had sought
first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and she will seek
nothing, she will accept nothing--no, not even a husband--who crosses her
choice in that.  She has chosen her life, and her husband with it.  Not
the man as yet, but the whole manner of the man.  The conditions of the
man, as she said about herself; else she will boldly and bravely die a
maid.  And there are multitudes of married women who, when they read this
page about Mercy, will gnash their teeth at the madness of their youth,
and will wildly wish that they only were maids again; and, then, like
Mercy, they would take good care to make for themselves husbands of their
own conditions too--of their own means, their own dispositions,
inclinations, tastes, and pursuits.  For, according as our conditions to
one another are or are not in our marriages,

   "They locally contain or heaven or hell;
   There is no third place in them."

What untold good, then, may all our young women not get out of the loving
study of Mercy's sweet, steadfast, noble character!  And what untold
misery may they not escape!  From first to last--and we are not yet come
to her last--I most affectionately recommend Mercy to the hearts and
minds of all young women here.  Single and married; setting out on
pilgrimage and steadfastly persevering in it; sitting still till the
husband with the right conditions comes, and then rising up with her
warm, well-kept heart to meet him--if any maiden here has no mother, or
no elder sister, or no wise and prudent friend like Prudence or
Christiana to take counsel of--and even if she has--let Mercy be her
meditation and her model through all her maidenly days.

"Nay, then," said Mercy, "I will look no more on him, for I purpose never
to have a clog to my soul."  A pungent resolve for every husband to read
and to think to himself about, who has married a wife with a soul.  Let
all husbands who have such wives halt here and ask themselves with some
imagination as to what may sometimes go on, at communion times, say, in
the souls of their wives.  It is not every wife, it is true, who has a
soul to clog; but some of our wives have.  Well, now, let us ask
ourselves: How do we stand related to their souls?  Do our wives, when
examining the state of their souls since they married us, have to say
that at one time they had hoped to be further on in the life of the soul
than they yet are?  And are they compelled before God to admit that the
marriage they have made, and would make, has terribly hindered them?
Would they have been better women, would they have been living a better
life, and doing far more good in the world, if they had taken their
maidenly ideals, like Mercy, for a husband?  Let us sometimes imagine
ourselves into the secrets of our wives' souls, and ask if they ever feel
that they are unequally and injuriously yoked in their deepest and best
life.  Do we ever see a tear falling in secret, or hear a stolen sigh
heaved, or stumble on them at a stealthy prayer?  A Roman lady on being
asked why she sometimes let a sob escape her and a tear fall, when she
had such a gentleman of breeding and rank and riches to her husband,
touched her slipper with her finger and said: "Is not that a well-made, a
neat, and a costly shoe?  And yet you would not believe how it pinches
and pains me sometimes."

But some every whit as good women as Mercy was have purposed as nobly and
as firmly as Mercy did, and yet have wakened up, when it was too late, to
find that, with all their high ideals, and with all their prudence, their
husband is not in himself, and is not to them, what they at one time felt
sure he would be.  Mercy had a sister named Bountiful, who made that
mistake and that dreadful discovery; and what Mercy had seen of married
life in her sister's house almost absolutely turned her against marriage
altogether.  "The one thing certain," says Thomas Mozley in his chapter
on Ideal Wife and Husband, "is that both wife and husband are different
in the result from the expectation.  Age, illness, an increasing family,
no family at all, household cares, want of means, isolation, incompatible
prejudices, quarrels, social difficulties, and such like, all tell on
married people, and make them far other than they once promised to be."
When that awakening comes there is only one solace, and women take to
that supreme solace much more often than men.  And that solace, as you
all know, is true, if too late, religion.  And even where true religion
has already been, there is still a deeper and a more inward religion
suited to the new experiences and the new needs of life.  And if both
husband and wife in such a crisis truly betake themselves to Him who
gathereth the solitary into families, the result will be such a
remarriage of depth and tenderness, loyalty and mutual help, as their
early dreams never came within sight of.  Not early love, not children,
not plenty of means, not all the best amenities of married life taken
together, will repair a marriage and keep a marriage in repair for one
moment like a living and an intense faith in God; a living and an intense
love to God; and then that faith in and love for one another that spring
out of God and out of His love alone.

   "The tree
   Sucks kindlier nurture from a soil enriched
   By its own fallen leaves; and man is made,
   In heart and spirit, from deciduous hopes
   And things that seem to perish."




MR. SKILL


   "The vine of Sodom."--_Moses_.

With infinite delicacy John Bunyan here tells us the sad story of
Matthew's sore sickness at the House Beautiful.  The cause of the sore
sickness, its symptoms, its serious nature, and its complete cures are
all told with the utmost plainness; but, at the same time, with the most
exquisite delicacy.  Bunyan calls the ancient physician who is summoned
in and who effects the cure, Mr. Skill, but you must believe that Bunyan
himself is Mr. Skill; and I question if this skilful writer ever wrote a
more skilful page than just this page that now lies open before him who
has the eyes to read it.

Matthew, it must always be remembered, was by this time a young man.  He
was the eldest son of Christiana his mother, and for some time now she
had been a sorely burdened widow.  Matthew's father was no longer near
his son to watch over him and to warn him against the temptations and the
dangers that wait on opening manhood.  And thus his mother, with all her
other cares, had to be both father and mother to her eldest son; and,
with all her good sense and all her long and close acquaintance with the
world, she was too fond a mother to suspect any evil of her eldest son.
And thus it was that Christiana had nearly lost her eldest son before her
eyes were open to the terrible dangers he had for a long time been
running.  For it was so, that the upward way that this household without
a head had to travel lay through a land full of all kinds of dangers both
to the bodies and to the souls of such travellers as they were.  And what
well-nigh proved a fatal danger to Matthew lay right in his way.  It was
Beelzebub's orchard.  Not that this young man's way lay through that
orchard exactly; yet, walled up as was that orchard with all its
forbidden fruit, that evil fruit would hang over the wall so that if any
lusty youth wished to taste it, he had only to reach up to the
over-hanging branches and plash down on himself some of the forbidden
bunches.  Now, that was just what Matthew had done.  Till we have him
lying at the House Beautiful, not only not able to enjoy the delights of
the House and of the season, but so pained in his bowels and so pulled
together with inward pains, that he sometimes cried out as if he were
being torn to pieces.  At that moment Mr. Skill, the ancient physician,
entered the sick-room, when, having a little observed Matthew's intense
agony, with a certain mixture of goodness and severity he recited these
professional verses over the trembling bed:

   "O conscience, who can stand against thy power?
   Endure thy gripes and agonies one hour?
   Stone, gout, strappado, racks, whatever is
   Dreadful to sense, are only toys to this--
   No pleasures, riches, honours, friends can tell
   How to give ease to this, 'tis like to hell."

And then, turning to the sick man's mother, who stood at the bed's head
wringing her hands, the ancient leech said to her: "This boy of yours has
been tampering with the forbidden fruit!"  At which the angry mother
turned on the well-approved physician as if he had caused all the trouble
that he had come to cure.  But the ancient man knew both the son and the
mother too, and therefore he addressed her with some asperity: "I tell
you both that strong measures must be taken instantly, else he will die."
When Mr. Skill had seen that the first purge was too weak, he made him
one to the purpose; and it was made, as he so learnedly said, _ex carne
et sanguine Christi_.  The pills were to be taken three at a time,
fasting, in half a quarter of a pint of the tears of repentance.  After
some coaxing, such as mothers know best how to use, Matthew took the
medicine and was soon walking about again with a staff, and was able to
go from room to room of the hospitable and happy house.  Understandest
thou what thou readest? said Philip the deacon to Queen Candace's
treasurer as he sat down beside him in the chariot and opened up to him
the fifty-third of the prophet Isaiah.  And, understandest thou what thou
here readest in Matthew and Mr. Skill?

1.  Now, on this almost too closely veiled case I shall venture to
remark, in the first place, that multitudes of boys grow up into young
men, and go out of our most godly homes and into a whole world of
temptation without due warning being given them as to where they are
going.  "I do marvel that none did warn him of it," said Mr. Skill, with
some anger.  What Matthew's father might have done in this matter had he
been still in this world when his son became a man in it we can only
guess.  As it was, it never entered his mother's too fond mind to take
her fatherless boy by himself when she saw Beelzebub's orchard before
him, and tell him what Solomon told his son, and to point out to him the
prophecy that King Lemuel's mother prophesied to her son.  Poor Matthew
was a young man before his mother was aware of it.  And, poor woman, she
only found that out when Mr. Skill was in the sick-room and was looking
at her with eyes that seemed to say to her that she had murdered her
child.  She had loved too long to look on her first-born as still a
child.  When he went at any time for a season out of her sight, she had
never followed him with her knowledge of the world; she had never
prevented him with an awakened and an anxious imagination; till now she
had got him home with no rest in his bones because of his sin.  And then
she began to cry too late, O naughty boy, and, O careless mother, what
shall I do for my son!

2.  "That food, to wit, that fruit," said Mr. Skill, "is even the most
hurtful of all.  It is the fruit of Beelzebub's orchard."  So it is.
There is no fruit that hurts at all like that fruit.  How it hurts at the
time, we see in Matthew's sick-room; and how it hurts all a man's after
days we see in Jacob, and in Job, and in David, and in a thousand sin-
sick souls of whose psalms of remorse and repentance the world cannot
contain all the books that should be written.  "And yet I marvel," said
the indignant physician, "that none did warn him of it; many have died
thereof."  Oh if I could but get the ears of all the sons of godly
fathers and mothers who are beginning to tamper with Beelzebub's orchard-
trees, I feel as if I could warn them to-night, and out of this text, of
what they are doing!  I have known so many who have died thereof.  Oh if
I could but save them in time from those gripes of conscience that will
pull them to pieces on the softest and the most fragrant bed that shall
ever be made for them on earth!  It will be well with them if they do not
lie down torn to pieces on their bed in hell, and curse the day they
first plashed down into their youthful hands the vine of Sodom.  Both the
way to hell and the way to heaven are full of many kinds of hurtful
fruits; but that species of fruit that poor misguided Matthew plucked and
ate after he had well passed the gate that is at the head of the way is,
by all men's testimony, by far the most hurtful of all forbidden fruits.

3.  The whole scene in Matthew's sick-room reads, after all, less like a
skilful invention than a real occurrence.  Inventive and realistic as
John Bunyan is, there is surely something here that goes beyond even his
genius.  After making all allowance for Bunyan's unparalleled powers of
creation and narration, I am inclined to think, the oftener I read it,
that, after all, we have not so much John Bunyan here as very Nature
herself.  Yes; John Gifford surely was Mr. Skill.  Sister Bosworth surely
was Matthew's mother.  And Matthew himself was Sister Bosworth's eldest
son, while one John Bunyan, a travelling tinker, was busy with his
furnaces and his soldering-irons in Dame Bosworth's kitchen.  Young
Bunyan, with all his blackguardism, had never plashed down Beelzebub's
orchard.  He swears he never did, and we are bound to believe him.  But
young Bosworth had been tampering with the forbidden fruit, and Gifford
saw at a glance what was wrong.  John Gifford was first an officer in the
Royalist army, then a doctor in Bedford, and now a Baptist Puritan
pastor; and the young tinker looked up to Gifford as the most wonderful
man for learning in books and in bodies and souls of men in all the
world.  And when Gifford talked over young Bosworth's bed half to himself
and half to them about a medicine made _ex carne et sanguine Christi_,
the future author of the _Pilgrim's Progress_ never forgot the phrase.  At
a glance Gifford saw what was the whole matter with the sick man.  And
painful as the truth was to the sick man's mother, and humiliating with a
life-long humiliation to the sick man himself, Gifford was not the man or
the minister to beat about the bush at such a solemn moment.  "This boy
has been tampering with that which will kill him unless he gets it taken
off his conscience and out of his heart immediately."  Now, this same
divination into our pastoral cases is by far and away the most difficult
part of a minister's work.  It is easy and pleasant with a fluent tongue
to get through our pulpit work; but to descend the pulpit stairs and deal
with life, and with this and that sin in the lives of our people,--that
is another matter.  "We must labour," says Richard Baxter in his
_Reformed Pastor_, "to be acquainted with the state of all our people as
fully as we can; both to know the persons and their inclinations and
conversation; to know what sins they are most in danger of, what duties
they neglect, and what temptations they are most liable to.  For, if we
know not their temperament or their disease, we are likely to prove but
unsuccessful physicians."  But when we begin to reform our pastorate to
that pattern, we are soon compelled to set down such entries in our
secret diary as that of Thomas Shepard of Harvard University: "Sabbath,
5th April 1641.  Nothing I do, nay, none under my shadow prosper.  I so
want wisdom for my place, and to guide others."  Yes; for what wisdom is
needed for the place of a minister like John Gifford, John Bunyan,
Richard Baxter, and Thomas Shepard!  What wisdom, what divine genius, to
dive into and divine the secret history of a soul from a twinge of
conscience, even from a drop of the eye, a tone of the voice, or a
gesture of the hand or of the head!  And yet, with some natural taste for
the holy work, with study, with experience, and with life-long expert
reading, even a plain minister with no genius, but with some grace and
truth, may come to great eminence in the matters of the soul.  And then,
with what an interest, solemn and awful, with what a sleepless interest
such a pastor goes about among his diseased, sin-torn, and scattered
flock!  All their souls are naked and open under his divining eye.  They
need not to tell him where they ail, and of what sickness they are nigh
unto death.  That food, he says, with some sternness over their sick-bed,
I warned you of it; I told you with all plainness that many have died of
eating that fruit!  "We must be ready," Baxter continues, "to give advice
to those that come to us with cases of conscience.  A minister is not
only for public preaching, but to be a known counsellor for his people's
souls as the lawyer is for their estates, and the physician is for their
bodies.  And because the people are grown unacquainted with this office
of the ministry, and their own necessity and duty herein, it belongeth to
us to acquaint them herewith, and to press them publicly to come to us
for advice concerning their souls.  We must not only be willing of the
trouble, but draw it upon ourselves by inviting them hereto.  To this end
it is very necessary to be acquainted with practical cases and able to
assist them in trying their states.  One word of seasonable and prudent
advice hath done that good that many sermons would not have done."

4.  As he went on pounding and preparing his well-approved pill, the (at
the bottom of his heart) kind old leech talked encouragingly to the
mother and to her sick son, and said: "Come, come; after all, do not he
too much cast down.  Had we lived in the days of the old medicine, I
would have been compounding a purge out of the blood of a goat, and the
ashes of an heifer, and the juice of hyssop.  But I have a far better
medicine under my hands here.  This moment I will make you a purge to the
purpose."  And then the learned man, half-doctor, half-divine, chanted
again the sacred incantation as he bent over his pestle and mortar,
saying: _Ex carne et sanguine Christi_!  Those shrewd old eyes soon saw
that, in spite of all their defences and all their denials, damage had
been done to the conscience and the heart that nothing would set right
but a frank admission of the evil that had been done, and a prompt
submission to the regimen appointed and the medicine prepared.  And how
often we ministers puddle and peddle with goat's blood and heifer's ashes
and hyssop juice when we should instantly prescribe stern fasting and
secret prayer and long spaces of repentance, and then the body and the
blood of Christ.  How often our people cheat us into healing their hurt
slightly!  How often they succeed in putting us off, after we are called
in, with their own account of their cases, and set us out on a wild-goose
chase!  I myself have more than once presented young men in their trouble
with apologetic books, University sermons, and watered-down explanations
of the Confession and the Catechism, when, had I known all I came
afterwards to know, I would have sent them Bunyan's _Sighs from Hell_.  I
have sent soul-sick women also _The Bruised Reed_, and _The Mission of
the Comforter_ with sympathising inscriptions, and sweet scriptures
written inside, when, had I had Mr. Skill's keen eyes in my stupid head,
I would have gone to them with the total abstinence pledge in my one
hand, and Jeremy Taylor's _Holy Living and Dying_ in my other.  "No diet
but that which is wholesome!" almost in anger answered the sick man's
mother.  "I tell you," the honest leech replied, in more anger, "this boy
has been tampering with Beelzebub's orchard.  And many have died of it!"

5.  It was while all the rest of the House Beautiful were supping on lamb
and wine, and while there was such music in the House that made Mercy
exclaim over it with wonder--it was at the smell of the supper and at the
sound of the psalmody that Matthew's gripes seized upon him worse than
ever.  All the time the others sat late into the night Matthew lay on the
rack pulled to pieces.  After William Law's death at King's Cliffe, his
executors found among his most secret papers a prayer he had composed for
his own alone use on a certain communion day when he was self-debarred
from the Lord's table.  I do not know for certain just what fruit the
young non-juror had stolen out of Beelzebub's orchard before that
communion season; but I can see that he was in poor Matthew's exact
experience that communion night,--literally torn to pieces with agonies
of conscience while all his fellow-worshippers were at the table of the
Lord.  While the psalms and hymns are being sung at the supper-table, lay
your ear to Law's closet door.  "Whilst all Thy faithful servants are on
this day offering to Thee the comfortable sacrifice of the body and the
blood of Christ, and feasting at that holy table which Thou hast ordained
for the refreshment, joy, and comfort of their souls, I, unhappy wretch,
full of guilt, am justly denied any share of these comforts that are
common to the Christian world.  O my God, I am an unclean worm, a dead
dog, a stinking carcass, justly removed from that society of saints who
this day kneel about Thine altar.  But, oh! suffer me to look toward Thy
holy Sanctuary; suffer my soul again to be in the place where Thine
honour dwelleth.  Reject not the sacrifice of a broken heart, and do Thou
be with me in secret, though I am not fit to appear in Thy public
worship.  Lord, if Thou wilt Thou canst make me clean.  Lord, speak but
the word, and Thy servant shall be healed."  It is the fruit of
Beelzebub's orchard.  Many have died thereof.

6.  "Pray, sir, make me up twelve boxes of them; for if I can get these,
I will never take other physic."  "These same pills," he replied, "are
good also to prevent diseases as well as to cure when one is sick.  But,
good woman, thou must take these pills no other way but as I have
prescribed; for if you do, they will do no good."  I have taken one
illustration from William Law's life; I shall take another from that
world of such illustrations and so close.  "O God, let me never see such
another day as this.  Let the dreadful punishment of this day never be
out of my mind."  And it never was.  For, after that day in hell, Law
never laid down his head on his pillow that he did not seem to remember
that dreadful day.  William Law would have satisfied Dr. Skill for a
convalescent.  For he never felt that he had any right to touch the body
and blood of Christ, either at communion times, or a thousand times every
day, till he had again got ready his heart of true repentance.  My
brethren, self-destroyed out of Beelzebub's orchard, and all my brethren,
live a life henceforth of true repentance.  Not out of the sins of your
youth only, but out of the best, the most watchful, and the most
blameless day you ever live, distil your half-pint of repentance every
night before you sleep.  For, as dear old Skill said, unless you do,
neither flesh nor blood of Christ, nor anything else, will do you any
genuine good.




THE SHEPHERD BOY


   "He humbled Himself."--_Paul_.

"Now as they were going along and talking, they espied a boy feeding his
father's sheep.  The boy was in very mean clothes, but of a very fresh
and well-favoured countenance, and as he sat by himself he sang.  Hark,
said Mr. Greatheart, to what the shepherd boy saith.  So they hearkened
and he said:

      He that is down, needs fear no fall;
   He that is low no pride:
   He that is humble, ever shall
   Have God to be his guide.

      I am content with what I have,
   Little be it or much:
   And, Lord, contentment still I crave,
   Because thou savest such.

      Fulness to such a burden is
   That go on pilgrimage:
   Here little, and hereafter bliss,
   Is best from age to age.

Then said their guide, Do you hear him?  I will dare say that this boy
lives a merrier life and wears more of that herb called Heart's-ease in
his bosom than he that is clad in silk and velvet."

Now, notwithstanding all that, nobody knew better than John Bunyan knew,
that no shepherd boy that ever lived on the face of the earth ever sang
that song; only one Boy ever sang that song, and He was not the son of a
shepherd at all, but the son of a carpenter.  And, saying that leads me
on to say this before I begin, that I look for a man of John Bunyan's
inventive and sanctified genius to arise some day, and armed also to boot
with all our latest and best New Testament studies.  When that sorely-
needed man so arises he will take us back to Nazareth where that
carpenter's Boy was brought up, and he will let us see Him with our own
eyes being brought up.  He will lead us into Mary's house on Sabbath
days, and into Joseph's workshop on week days, and he will show us the
child Jesus, not so much learning His letters and then putting on His
carpenter's clothes, as learning obedience by the things that He every
day suffered.  That choice author will show us our Lord, both before He
had discovered Himself to be our Lord, as well as after He had made that
great discovery, always clothing Himself with humility as with a garment;
taking up His yoke of meekness and lowly-mindedness every day, and never
for one moment laying it down.  When some writer with as holy an
imagination as that of John Bunyan, and with as sweet an English style,
and with a New Testament scholarship of the first order so arises, and so
addresses himself to the inward life of our Lord, what a blessing to our
children that writer will be!  For he will make them see and feel just
what all that was in which our Lord's perfect humility consisted, and how
His perfect humility fulfilled itself in Him from day to day; up through
all His childhood days, school and synagogue days, workshop and holy
days, early manhood and mature manhood days; till He was so meek in all
His heart and so humble in all His mind that all men were sent to Him to
learn their meekness and their humility of Him.  I envy that gifted man
the deep delight he will have in his work, and the splendid reward he
will have in the love and the debt of all coming generations.  Only, may
he be really sent to us, and that soon!  Theodor Keim comes nearest a far-
off glimpse of that eminent service of any New Testament scholar I know.
Jeremy Taylor and Thomas Goodwin also, in their own time and in their own
way, had occasional inspirations toward this still-waiting treatment of
the master-subject of all learning and all genius--the inward
sanctification, the growth in grace, and then the self-discovery of the
incarnate Son of God.  But, so let it please God, some contemporary
scholar will arise some day soon, combining in himself Goodwin's
incomparable Christology, and Taylor's incomparable eloquence, and Keim's
incomparably digested learning, with John Bunyan's incomparable
imagination and incomparable English style, and the waiting work will be
done, and theology for this life will take on its copestone.  In his
absence, and till he comes, let us attempt a few annotations to-night on
this so-called shepherd boy's song in the Valley of Humiliation.

   He that is down, needs fear no fall.

The whole scenery of the surrounding valley is set before us in that
single eloquent stanza.  The sweet-voiced boy sits well off the wayside
as he sings his song to himself.  He looks up to the hill-tops that hang
over his valley, and every shining tooth of those many hill-tops has for
him its own evil legend.  He thinks he sees a little heap of bleaching
bones just under where that eagle hangs and wheels and screams.  Not one
traveller through these perilous parts in a thousand gets down those
cruel rocks unhurt; and many travellers have been irrecoverably lost
among those deadly rocks, and have never received Christian burial.  All
the shepherds' cottages and all the hostel supper-tables for many miles
round are full of terrible stories of the Hill Difficulty and the Descent
Dangerous.  And thus it is that this shepherd boy looks up with such fear
at those sharp peaks and shining precipices, and lifts his fresh and well-
favoured countenance to heaven and sings again: "He that is down, needs
fear no fall."  Down in his own esteem, that is.  For this is a song of
the heart rather than of the highway.  Down--safe, that is, from the
steep and slippery places of self-estimation, self-exaltation,
self-satisfaction.  Down--so as to be delivered from all ambition and
emulation and envy.  Down, and safe, thank God, from all pride, all high-
mindedness, and all stout-heartedness.  Down from the hard and cruel
hills, and buried deep out of sight among those meadows where that herb
grows which is called Heart's-ease.  Down, where the green pastures grow
and the quiet waters flow.  No, indeed; he that is down into this sweet
bottom needs fear no fall.  For there is nowhere here for a man to fall
from.  And, even if he did fall, he would only fall upon a
fragrance-breathing bed of lilies.  The very herbs and flowers here would
conspire to hold him up.  Many a day, as He grew up, the carpenter's son
sat in that same valley and sang that same song to His own humble and
happy heart.  He loved much to be here.  He loved also to walk these
meadows, for He found the air was pleasant.  Methinks, He often said with
Mercy, I am as well in this valley as I have been anywhere else in My
journey.  The place, methinks, suits with My spirit.  I love to be in
such places where there is no rattling with coaches nor rumbling with
wheels.  Methinks, also, here one may without much molestation be
thinking what he is, whence he came, and to what his King has called him.

   He that is low, no pride.

Low in his own eyes, that is.  For pride goeth before destruction, and a
haughty spirit before a fall.  Yes; but he who is low enough already--none
of the sure destructions that pride always works shall ever come near to
him.  "The proud man," says Sir Henry Taylor, "is of all men the most
vulnerable.  'Who calls?' asks the old shepherd in _As You Like It_.
'Your betters,' is the insolent answer.  And what is the shepherd's
rejoinder?  'Else are they very wretched.'  By what retort, reprisal, or
repartee could it have been made half so manifest that the insult had
lighted upon armour of proof?  Such is the invincible independence and
invulnerability of humility."

   He that is humble ever shall
      Have God to be his guide.

For thus saith the high and holy One that inhabiteth eternity, whose name
is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the heart of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones . . . All those things hath Mine
hand made, but to this man will I look, saith the Lord, even to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit, and who trembleth at My word . . .
Though the Lord be high, yet hath He respect unto the lowly; but the
proud He knoweth afar off . . . Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves
unto the elder.  Yea, all of you be subject one to another, and be
clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to
the humble . . . Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty,
neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for
me.  Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned
of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child . . . Take My yoke upon
you and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find
rest unto your souls.  For My yoke is easy and My burden is light.

   I am content with what I have,
      Little be it, or much:
   And, Lord, contentment still I crave,
      Because thou savest such.

The only thing this sweet singer is discontented with is his own
contentment.  He will not be content as long as he has a shadow of
discontent left in his heart.  And how blessed is such holy discontent!
For, would you know, asks Law, who is the greatest saint in all the
world?  Well, it is not he who prays most or fasts most; it is not he who
gives most alms or is most eminent for temperance, chastity, or justice.
But it is he who is always thankful to God, who wills everything that God
willeth, who receives everything as an instance of God's goodness, and
has a heart always ready to praise God for it.  "Perhaps the shepherd's
boy," says Thomas Scott, "may refer to the obscure and quiet stations of
some pastors over small congregations, who live almost unknown to their
brethren, but are in a measure useful and very comfortable."  Perhaps he
does.  And, whether he does or no, at any rate such a song will suit some
of our brethren very well as they go about among their few and far-off
flocks.  They are not church leaders or popular preachers.  There is not
much rattling with coaches or rumbling with wheels at their church door.
But, then, methinks, they have their compensation.  They are without much
molestation.  They can be all the more thinking what they are, whence
they came, and to what their King has called them.  Let them be happy in
their shut-in valleys.  For I will dare to say that they wear more of
that herb called Heart's-ease in their bosom than those ministers do they
are sometimes tempted to emulate.  I will add in this place that to the
men who live and trace these grounds the Lord hath left a yearly revenue
to be faithfully paid them at certain seasons for their maintenance by
the way, and for their further encouragement to go on in their
pilgrimage.

   Here little, and hereafter bliss,
   Is best from age to age.

But, now, from the shepherd boy and from his valley and his song, let us
go on without any more poetry or parable to look our own selves full in
the face and to ask our own hearts whether they are the hearts of really
humble-minded and New Testament men or no.  Dr. Newman, "that subtle,
devout man," as Dr. Duncan calls him, says that "humility is one of the
most difficult of virtues both to attain and to ascertain.  It lies," he
says, "close upon the heart itself, and its tests are exceedingly
delicate and subtle.  Its counterfeits abound."  Most true.  And yet
humility is not intended for experts in morals only, or for men of a rare
religious genius only.  The plainest of men, the least skilled and the
most unlettered of men, may not only excel in humility, but may also be
permitted to know that they are indeed planted, and are growing slowly
but surely in that grace of all graces.  No doubt our Lord had, so to
describe it, the most delicate and the most subtle of human minds; and,
no doubt whatever, He had the most practised skill in reading off what
lay closest to His own heart.  And, then, it was just His attainment of
the most perfect humility, and then His absolute ascertainment of the
same, that enabled Him to say: Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me.  At
the same time, divine as the grace is, and divine as the insight is that
is able to trace it out in all its exquisite refinements of thought and
feeling in the sanctified soul, yet humility is a human virtue after all,
and it is open to all men to attain to it and intelligently and lovingly
to exercise it.  The simplest and the least philosophical soul now in
this house may apply to himself some of the subtlest and most sensitive
tests of humility, as much as if he were Dr. Duncan or Dr. Newman
themselves; and may thus with all assurance of hope know whether he is a
counterfeit and a castaway or no.

Take this test for one, then.  Explain this text to me: Phil. ii. 3--"In
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than himself."  Explain
and illustrate that.  Not from a commentary, but straight out from your
own heart.  What does your heart make of that scripture?  Does your heart
turn away from that scripture almost in anger at it?  Do you say you are
certain that there must be some other explanation of it than that?  Do
you hold that this is just another of Paul's perpetual hyperboles, and
that the New Testament is the last book in the world to be taken as it
reads?  Yes; both bold and subtle father that he is: counterfeits abound!

Another much blunter test, but, perhaps, a sufficiently sharp test, is
this: How do you receive correction and instruction?  Does your heart
meekly and spontaneously and naturally take to correction and instruction
as the most natural and proper thing possible to you?  And do you
immediately, and before all men, show forth and exhibit the correction
and the instruction?  Or, does this rather take place?  Does your heart
beat, and swell, and boil, and boil over at him who dares to correct or
counsel you?  If this is a fair test to put our humility to, how little
humility there is among us!  How few men any of us could name among our
friends to whom we would risk telling all the things that behind their
backs we point out continually to others?  We are terrified to face their
pride.  We once did it, and we are not to do it again, if we can help it!
Let a man not have too many irons in the fire; let him examine himself
just by these two tests for the time--what he thinks of himself, and what
he thinks of those who attempt, and especially before other people, to
set him right.  And after these two tests have been satisfied, others
will no doubt be supplied till that so humble man is made very humility
itself.

And now, in the hope that there may be one or two men here who are really
and not counterfeitly in earnest to clothe themselves with humility
before God and man, let them take these two looms to themselves out of
which whole webs of such garments will be delivered to them every
day--their past life, and their present heart.  With a past life like
ours, my brethren--and everyman knows his own--pride is surely the
maddest state of mind that any of us can allow ourselves in.  The first
king of Bohemia kept his clouted old shoes ever in his sight, that he
might never forget that he had once been a ploughman.  And another wise
king used to drink out of a coarse cup at table, and excused himself to
his guests that he had made the rude thing in his rude potter days.  Look
with Primislaus and Agathocles at the hole of the pit out of which you
also have been dug; look often enough, deep enough, and long enough, and
you will be found passing up through the Valley of Humiliation singing:

   "With us He dealt not as we sinn'd,
   Nor did requite our ill!"

Another excellent use of the past is, if you are equal to it, to call
yourself aloud sometimes, or in writing, some of the names that other
people who know your past are certainly calling you.  It is a terrible
discipline, but it is the terror of the Lord, and He will not let it hurt
you too much.  I was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and
injurious, says Paul.  And, to show Titus, his gospel-son, the way, he
said to him: We ourselves were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived,
serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful,
and hating one another.  And John Bunyan calls himself a blackguard, and
many other worse names; only he swears that neither with his soldiering
nor with his tinkering hands did he ever plash down Beelzebub's orchard.
But if you have done that, or anything like that, call yourself aloud by
your true name on your knees to-night.  William Law testifies, after five-
and-twenty years' experience of it, that he never heard of any harm that
he had done to any in his house by his habit of singing his secret psalms
aloud, and sometimes, ere ever he was aware, bursting out in his
penitential prayers.

And, then, how any man with a man's heart in his bosom for a single day
can escape being the chief of sinners, and consequently the humblest of
men for all the rest of his life on earth, passes my comprehension!  How
a spark of pride can live in such a hell as every human heart is would be
past belief, did we not know that God avenges sin by more sin; avenges
Himself on a wicked and a false heart by more wickedness and more
falsehood, all ending in Satanic pride.

Too long as I have kept you in this valley to-night, I dare not let you
out of it till I have shared with you a few sentences on evangelical
humiliation out of that other so subtle and devout man, Jonathan Edwards.
But what special kind of humiliation is evangelical humiliation? you will
ask.  Hear, then, what this master in Israel says.  "Evangelical
humiliation is the sense that a Christian man has of his own utter
insufficiency, utter despicableness, and utter odiousness; with an always
answerable frame of heart.  This humiliation is peculiar to the true
saints.  It arises from the special influence of the Spirit of God
implanting and exercising supernatural and divine principles; and it is
accompanied with a sense of the transcendent beauty of divine things.
And, thus, God's true saints all more or less see their own odiousness on
account of sin, and the exceedingly hateful nature of all sin.  The very
essence of evangelical humiliation consists in such humility as becomes a
man in himself exceeding sinful but now under a dispensation of grace.  It
consists in a mean esteem of himself, as in himself nothing, and
altogether contemptible and odious.  This, indeed, is the greatest and
the most essential thing in true religion."  And so on through a whole
chapter of beaten gold.  To which noble chapter I shall only add that
such teaching is as sweet, as strengthening, and as reassuring to the
truly Christian heart as it is bitter and hateful to the counterfeit
heart.




OLD HONEST


   "An honest heart."--_Our Lord_.

   Next tell them of Old Honest, who you found
   With his white hairs treading the pilgrim's ground;
   Yea, tell them how plain-hearted this man was,
   How after his good Lord he bare his cross:
   Perhaps with some grey head this may prevail,
   With Christ to fall in love, and sin bewail.

You would have said that no pilgrim to the Celestial City could possibly
have come from a worse place, or a more unlikely place, than was that
place from which Christian and Christiana and Matthew and Mercy had come.
And yet so it was.  For Old Honest, this most excellent and every way
most delightful old saint, hailed from a far less likely place than even
the City of Destruction.  For he came, this rare old soul, of all places
in the world, from the Town of Stupidity.  So he tells us himself.  And,
partly to explain to us the humiliating name of his native town, and
partly to exhibit himself as a wonder to many, the frank old gentleman
goes on to tell us that his birthplace actually lies four degrees further
away from the sun than does the far-enough away City of Destruction
itself.  So that you see this grey-haired saint is all that he always
said he was--a living witness to the fact that his Lord is able to save
to the uttermost, and to gather in His Father's elect from the utmost
corner of the land.  Men are mountains of ice in my country, said Old
Honest.  I was one of the biggest of those icebergs myself, he said.  No
man was ever more cold and senseless to divine things than I was, and
still sometimes am.  It takes the Sun of Righteousness all His might to
melt the men of my country.  But that He can do it when He rises to do
it, and when He puts out His full strength to do it--Look at me! said the
genial old soul.

We have to construct this pilgrim's birth and boyhood and youth from his
after-character and conversation; and we have no difficulty at all in
doing that.  For, if the child is the father of the man, then the man
must be the outcome of the child, and we can have no hesitation in
picturing to ourselves what kind of child and boy and young man dear Old
Honest must always have been.  He never was a bright child, bright and
beaming old man as he is.  He was always slow and heavy at his lessons;
indeed, I would not like to repeat to you all the bad names that his
schoolmasters sometimes in their impatience called the stupid child.
Only, this was to be said of him, that dulness of uptake and
disappointment of his teachers were the worst things about this poor boy;
he was not so ill-behaved as many were who were made more of.  When his
wits began to waken up after he had come some length he had no little
leeway to make up in his learning; but that was the chief drawback to Old
Honest's pilgrimage.  For one thing, no young man had a cleaner record
behind him than our Honest had; his youthful garments were as unspotted
as ever any pilgrim's garments were.  Even as a young man he had had the
good sense to keep company with one Good-conscience; and that friend of
his youth kept true to Old Honest all his days, and even lent him his
hand and helped him over the river at last.  In his own manly, hearty,
blunt, breezy, cheery, and genial way Old Honest is a pilgrim we could
ill have spared.  Old Honest has a warm place all for himself in every
good and honest heart.

"Now, a little before the pilgrims stood an oak, and under it when they
came up to it they found an old pilgrim fast asleep; they knew that he
was a pilgrim by his clothes and his staff and his girdle.  So the guide,
Mr. Greatheart, awaked him, and the old gentleman, as he lifted up his
eyes, cried out: What's the matter?  Who are you?  And what is your
business here?  Come, man, said the guide, be not so hot; here is none
but friends!  Yet the old man gets up and stands upon his guard, and will
know of them what they are."  That weather-beaten oak-tree under which we
first meet with Old Honest is an excellent emblem of the man.  When he
sat down to rest his old bones that day he did not look out for a bank of
soft moss or for a bed of fragrant roses; that knotted oak-tree alone had
power to draw down under its sturdy trunk this heart of human oak.  It
was a sight to see those thin grey haffets making a soft pillow of that
jutting knee of gnarled and knotty oak, and with his well-worn
quarterstaff held close in a hand all wrinkled skin and scraggy bone.  And
from that day till he waved his quarterstaff when half over the river and
shouted, Grace reigns! there is no pilgrim of them all that affords us
half the good humour, sagacity, continual entertainment, and brave
encouragement we enjoy through this same old Christian gentleman.

1.  Now, let us try to learn two or three lessons to-night from Old
Honest, his history, his character, and his conversation.  And, to begin
with, let all those attend to Old Honest who are slow in the uptake in
the things of religion.  O fools and slow of heart! exclaimed our Lord at
the two travellers to Emmaus.  And this was Old Honest to the letter when
he first entered on the pilgrimage life; he was slow as sloth itself in
the things of the soul.  I have often wondered, said Greatheart, that any
should come from your place; for your town is worse than is the City of
Destruction itself.  Yes, answered Honest, we lie more off from the sun,
and so are more cold and senseless.  And his biographer here annotates on
the margin this reflection: "Stupefied ones are worse than merely
carnal."  So they are; though it takes some insight to see that, and some
courage to carry that through.  Now, to be downright stupid in a man's
natural intellects is sad enough, but to be stupid in the intellects of
the soul and of the spirit is far more sad.  You will often see this if
you have any eyes in your head, and are not one of the stupid people
yourself.  You will see very clever people in the intellects of the head
who are yet as stupid as the beasts in the stall in the far nobler
intellects of the heart.  You will meet every day with men and women who
have received the best college education this city can give them, who are
yet stark stupid in everything that belongs to true religion.  They are
quick to find out the inefficiency of a university chair, or a
schoolmaster's desk, but they know no more of what a New Testament pulpit
has been set up for than the stupidest sot in the city.  The Divine
Nature, human nature, sin, grace, redemption, salvation, holiness, heart-
corruption, spiritual life, prayer, communion with God, a conversation
and a treasure in heaven,--to all these noblest of studies and divinest
of exercises they are as a beast before God.  When you come upon a man
who is a sot in his senses and in his understanding, you expect him to be
the same in his spiritual life.  But to meet with an expert in science, a
classical scholar, an author or a critic in letters, a leader in
political or ecclesiastical or municipal life, and yet to discover that
he is as stupid as any sot in the things of his own soul, is one of the
saddest and most disheartening sights you can see.  Much sadder and much
more disheartening than to see stairs and streets of people who can
neither read nor write.  And yet our city is full of such stupid people.
You will find as utter spiritual stupidity among the rich and the
lettered and the refined of this city as you will find among the ignorant
and the vicious and the criminal classes.  Is stupidity a sin? asks
Thomas in his Forty-Sixth Question.  And the great schoolman answers
himself, "Stupidity may come of natural incapacity, in which case it is
not a sin.  But it may come, on the other hand, of a man immersing his
soul in the things of this world so as to shut out all the things of God
and of the world to come, in which case stupidity is a deadly sin."  Now,
from all that, you must already see what you are to do in order to escape
from your inborn and superinduced stupidity.  You are, like Old Honest,
to open your gross, cold, senseless heart to the Sun of Righteousness,
and you are to take care every day to walk abroad under His beams.  You
are to emigrate south for your life, as our well-to-do invalids do, to
where the sun shines in his strength all the day.  You are to choose such
a minister, buy and read such a literature, cultivate such an
acquaintanceship, and follow out such a new life of habits and practices
as shall bring you into the full sunshine, till your heart of ice is
melted, and your stupefied soul is filled with spiritual sensibility.
For, "were a man a mountain of ice," said Old Honest, "yet if the Sun of
Righteousness will arise upon him his frozen heart shall feel a thaw; and
thus hath it been with me."  Your poets and your philosophers have no
resource against the stupidity that opposes them.  "Even the gods," they
complain, "fight unvictorious against stupidity."  But your divines and
your preachers have hope beside the dullest and the stupidest and even
the most imbruted.  They point themselves and their slowest and dullest-
witted hearers to Old Honest, this rare old saint; and they set up their
pulpit with hope and boldness on the very causeway of the town of
Stupidity itself.

2.  In the second place,--on this fine old pilgrim's birth and boyhood
and youth.  The apostle says that there is no real difference between one
of us and another; and what he says on that subject must be true.  No;
there is really no difference compared with the Celestial City whether a
pilgrim is born in Stupidity, in Destruction, in Vanity, or in Darkland.
At the same time, nature, as well as grace, is of God, and He maketh,
when it pleaseth Him, one man to differ in some most important respects
from another.  You see such differences every day.  Some children are
naturally, and from their very infancy, false and cruel, mean and greedy;
while their brothers and sisters are open and frank and generous.  One
son in a house is born a vulgar snob, and one daughter a shallow-hearted
and shameless little flirt; while another brother is a born gentleman,
and another sister a born saint.  Some children are tender-hearted,
easily melted, and easily moulded; while others in the same family are
hard as stone and cold as ice.  Sometimes a noble and a truly Christian
father will have all his days to weep and pray over a son who is his
shame; and then, in the next generation, a grandson will be born to him
who will more than recover the lost image of his father's father.  And so
is it sometimes with father Adam's family.  Here and there, in Darkland,
in Destruction, and in Stupidity, a child will be born with a surprising
likeness to the first Adam in his first estate.  That happy child at his
best is but the relics and ruins of his first father; at the same time,
in him the relics are more abundant and the ruins more easy to trace out.
And little Honest was such a well-born child.  For, Stupidity and all,
there was a real inborn and inbred integrity, uprightness,
straightforwardness, and nobleness about this little and not over-clever
man-child.  And, on the principle of "to him that hath shall be given,"
there was something like a special providence that hedged this boy about
from the beginning.  "I girded thee though thou hast not known Me" was
never out of Old Honest's mouth as often as he remembered the days of his
own youth and heard other pilgrims mourning over theirs.  "I have
surnamed thee though thou hast not known Me," he would say to himself in
his sleep.  Slow-witted as he was, no one had been able to cheat young
Honest out of his youthful integrity.  He had not been led, and he had
led no one else, into the paths of the destroyer.  He could say about
himself all that John Bunyan so boldly and so bluntly said about himself
when his enemies charged him with youthful immorality.  He left the town
in nobody's debt.  He left the print of his heels on no man or woman or
child when he took his staff in his hand to be a pilgrim.  The upward
walk of too many pilgrims is less a walk than an escape and a flight.  The
avenger of men's blood and women's honour has hunted many men deep into
heaven's innermost gate.  But Old Honest took his time.  He walked, if
ever pilgrim walked, all the way with an easy mind.  He lay down to sleep
under the oaks on the wayside, and smiled like a child in his sleep.  And,
when he was suddenly awaked, instead of crying out for mercy and starting
to his heels, he grasped his staff and demanded even of an armed man what
business he had to break in on an honest pilgrim's midday repose!  The
King of the Celestial City had a few names even in Stupidity which had
not defiled their garments, and Old Honest was one of them.  And all his
days his strength was as the strength of ten, because his heart was pure.

3.  At the same time, honesty is not holiness; and no one knew that
better than did this honest old saint.  When any one spoke to Old Honest
about his blameless youth, the look in his eye made them keep at arm's-
length as he growled out that without holiness no man shall see God!
Writing from Aberdeen to John Bell of Hentoun, Samuel Rutherford says: "I
beseech you, in the Lord Jesus, to mind your country above; and now, when
old age is come upon you, advise with Christ before you put your foot
into the last ship and turn your back on this life.  Many are beguiled
with this that they are free of scandalous sins.  But common honesty will
not take men to heaven.  Alas! that men should think that ever they met
with Christ who had never a sick night or a sore heart for sin.  I have
known a man turn a key in a door and lock it by."  "I can," says John
Owen, "and I do, commend moral virtues and honesty as much as any man
ought to do, and I am sure there is no grace where they are not.  Yet to
make anything to be our holiness that is not derived from Jesus Christ,--I
know not what I do more abhor."  "Are morally honest and sober men
qualified for the Lord's Supper?" asks John Flavel.  "No; civility and
morality do not make a man a worthy communicant.  They are not the
wedding garment; but regenerating grace and faith in the smallest measure
are."  "My outside may be honest," said this honest old pilgrim, "while
all the time my heart is most unholy.  My life is open to all men, but I
must hide my heart with Christ in God."

4.  And then this racy-hearted old bachelor was as full of delight in
children, and in children's parties, with all their sweetmeats and nuts
and games and riddles,--quite as much so--as if he had been their very
grandfather himself.  Nay, this rosy-hearted old rogue was as inveterate
a matchmaker as if he had been a mother of the world with a houseful of
daughters on her hands and with the sons of the nobility dangling around.
It would make you wish you could kiss the two dear old souls, Gaius the
innkeeper and Old Honest his guest, if you would only read how they laid
their grey heads together to help forward the love-making of Matthew and
Mercy.  Yes, it would be a great pity, said Old Honest,--thinking with a
sigh of his own childless old age,--it would be a great pity if this
excellent family of our sainted brother should fail for want of children,
and die out like mine.  And the two old plotters went together to the
mother of the bridegroom, and told her with an aspect of authority that
she must put no obstacle in her son's way, but take Mercy as soon as
convenient into a closer relation to herself.  And Gaius said that he for
his part would give the marriage supper.  And I shall make no will, said
Honest, but hand all I have over to Matthew my son.  This is the way,
said Old Honest; and he skipped and smiled and kissed the cheek of the
aged mother and said, Then thy two children shall preserve thee and thy
husband a posterity in the earth!  Then he turned to the boys and he
said, Matthew, be thou like Matthew the publican, not in vice, but in
virtue.  Samuel, he said, be thou like Samuel the prophet, a man of faith
and of prayer.  Joseph, said he, be thou like Joseph in Potiphar's house,
chaste, and one that flees from temptation.  And James, be thou like
James the Just, and like James the brother of our Lord.  Mercy, he said,
is thy name, and by mercy shalt thou be sustained and carried through all
thy difficulties that shall assault thee in the way, till thou shalt come
thither where thou shalt look the Fountain of Mercy in the face with
comfort.  And all this while the guide, Mr. Greatheart, was very much
pleased, and smiled upon the nimble old gentleman.

5.  "Then it came to pass a while after that there was a post in the town
that inquired for Mr. Honest.  So he came to his house where he was, and
delivered to his hands these lines, Thou art commanded to be ready
against this day seven night, to present thyself before thy Lord at His
Father's house.  And for a token that my message is true, all thy
daughters of music shall be brought low.  Then Mr. Honest called for his
friends and said unto them, I die, but shall make no will.  As for my
honesty, it shall go with me: let him that comes after me be told of
this.  When the day that he was to be gone was come he addressed himself
to go over the river.  Now, the river at that time overflowed the banks
at some places.  But Mr. Honest in his lifetime had spoken to one Good-
conscience to meet him there, the which he also did, and lent him his
hand, and so helped him over.  The last words of Mr. Honest were, Grace
reigns!  So he left the world."  Look at that picture and now look at
this: "They then addressed themselves to the water, and, entering,
Christian began to sink, and crying out to his good friend Hopeful, he
said, I sink in deep waves, the billows go over my head, all His waters
go over me.  Then said the other, Be of good cheer, my brother, I feel
the bottom, and it is good.  Then said Christian, Ah, my friend, the
sorrows of death have compassed me about; I shall not see the land that
flows with milk and honey.  And with that a great horror and darkness
fell upon Christian, so that he could not see before him; and all the
words that he spoke still tended to discover that he had horror of mind
lest he should die in that river and never obtain entrance in at the
gate.  Here also, as they that stood by perceived, he was much in the
troublesome thoughts of the sins that he had committed, both since and
before he began to be a pilgrim.  'Twas also observed that he was
troubled with apparitions of hobgoblins and evil spirits.  Hopeful,
therefore, had much ado to keep his brother's head above water.  Yea,
sometimes he would be quite gone down, and then ere a while he would rise
up again half dead."  My brethren, all my brethren, be not deceived; God
is not mocked; for whatsoever a man soweth that shall he also reap.  Whom
the Lord loveth He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.
Thou, O God, wast a God that forgavest them, but Thou tookest vengeance
on their inventions.




MR. FEARING


   "Happy is the man that feareth alway."--_Solomon_

For humour, for pathos, for tenderness, for acute and sympathetic insight
at once into nature and grace, for absolutely artless literary skill, and
for the sweetest, most musical, and most exquisite English, show me
another passage in our whole literature to compare with John Bunyan's
portrait of Mr. Fearing.  You cannot do it.  I defy you to do it.
Spenser, who, like John Bunyan, wrote an elaborate allegory, says: It is
not in me.  Take all Mr. Fearing's features together, and even
Shakespeare himself has no such heart-touching and heart-comforting
character.  Addison may have some of the humour and Lamb some of the
tenderness; but, then, they have not the religion.  Scott has the insight
into nature, but he has no eye at all for grace; while Thackeray, who, in
some respects, comes nearest to John Bunyan of them all, would be the
foremost to confess that he is not worthy to touch the shoe-latchet of
the Bedford tinker.  As Dr. Duncan said in his class one day when telling
us to read Augustine's Autobiography and Halyburton's:--"But," he said,
"be prepared for this, that the tinker beats them all!"  "Methinks," says
Browning, "in this God speaks, no tinker hath such powers."

Now, as they walked along together, the guide asked the old gentleman if
he knew one Mr. Fearing that came on pilgrimage out of his parts.  "Yes,"
said Mr. Honest, "very well.  He was a man that had the root of the
matter in him; but he was one of the most troublesome pilgrims that ever
I met with in all my days."  "I perceive you knew him," said the guide,
"for you have given a very right character of him."  "Knew him!"
exclaimed Honest, "I was a great companion of his; I was with him most an
end.  When he first began to think of what would come upon us hereafter,
I was with him."  "And I was his guide," said Greatheart, "from my
Master's house to the gates of the Celestial City."  "Then," said Mr.
Honest, "it seems he was well at last."  "Yes, yes," answered the guide,
"I never had any doubt about him; he was a man of a choice spirit, only
he was always kept very low, and that made his life so burdensome to
himself and so troublesome to others.  He was, above many, tender of sin;
he was so afraid of doing injuries to others that he would often deny
himself of that which was lawful because he would not offend."  "But
what," asked Honest, "should be the reason that such a good man should be
all his days so much in the dark?"  "There are two sorts of reasons for
it," said the guide; "one is, the wise God will have it so: some must
pipe and some must weep.  Now, Mr. Fearing was one that played upon this
base.  He and his fellows sound the sackbut, whose notes are more doleful
than the notes of other music are.  Though, indeed, some say that the
base is the ground of music.  And, for my part, I care not at all for
that profession that begins not with heaviness of mind.  The first string
that the musician usually touches is the base when he intends to put all
in tune.  God also plays upon this string first when He sets the soul in
tune for Himself.  Only, here was the imperfection of Mr. Fearing, that
he could play upon no other music but this till toward his latter end."

1.  Take Mr. Fearing, then, to begin with, at the Slough of Despond.
Christian and Pliable, they being heedless, did both fall into that bog.
But Mr. Fearing, whatever faults you may think he had--and faults, too,
that you think you could mend in him--at any rate, he was never heedless.
Everybody has his fault to find with poor Mr. Fearing.  Everybody blames
poor Mr. Fearing.  Everybody can improve upon poor Mr. Fearing.  But I
will say again for Mr. Fearing that he was never heedless.  Had Peter
been on the road at that period he would have stood up for Mr. Fearing,
and would have taken his judges and would have said to them, with some
scorn--Go to, and pass the time of your sojourning here with something of
the same silence and the same fear!  Christian's excuse for falling into
the Slough was that fear so followed him that he fled the next way, and
so fell in.  But Mr. Fearing had no such fear behind him in his city as
Christian had in his.  All Mr. Fearing's fears were within himself.  If
you can take up the distinction between actual and indwelling sin,
between guilt and corruption, you have already in that the whole key to
Mr. Fearing.  He was blamed and counselled and corrected and pitied and
patronised by every morning-cloud and early-dew neophyte, while all the
time he lived far down from the strife of tongues where the root of the
matter strikes its deep roots still deeper every day.  "It took him a
whole month," tells Greatheart, "to face the Slough.  But he would not go
back neither.  Till, one sunshiny morning, nobody ever knew how, he
ventured, and so got over.  But the fact of the matter is," said the
shrewd-headed guide, "Mr. Fearing had, I think, a slough of despond in
his own mind; and a slough that he carried everywhere with him."  Yes,
that was it.  Greatheart in that has hit the nail on the head.  With one
happy stroke he has given us the whole secret of poor Mr. Fearing's life-
long trouble.  Just so; it was the slough in himself that so kept poor
Mr. Fearing back.  This poor pilgrim, who had so little to fear in his
past life, had yet so much scum and filth, spume and mire in his present
heart, that how to get on the other side of that cost him not a month's
roaring only, but all the months and all the years till he went over the
River not much above wet-shod.  And, till then, not twenty million cart-
loads of wholesome instructions, nor any number of good and substantial
steps, would lift poor Mr. Fearing over the ditch that ran so deep and so
foul continually within himself.  "Yes, he had, I think, a slough of
despond in his mind, a slough that he carried everywhere with him, or
else he never could have been the man he was."  I, for one, thank the
great-hearted guide for that fine sentence.

2.  It was a sight to see poor Mr. Fearing at the wicket gate.  "Knock,
and it shall be opened unto you."  He read the inscription over the gate
a thousand times, but every time he read it his slough-filled heart said
to him, Yes, but that is not for such as you.  Pilgrim after pilgrim came
up the way, read the writing, knocked, and was taken in; but still Mr.
Fearing stood back, shaking and shrinking.  At last he ventured to take
hold of the hammer that hung on the gate and gave with it a small rap
such as a mouse might make.  But small as the sound was, the Gatekeeper
had had his eye on his man all the time out of his watch-window; and
before Mr. Fearing had time to turn and run, Goodwill had him by the
collar.  But that sudden assault only made Mr. Fearing sink to the earth,
faint and half-dead.  "Peace be to thee, O trembling man!" said Goodwill.
"Come in, and welcome!"  When he did venture in, Mr. Fearing's face was
as white as a sheet.  You would have said that an officer had caught a
thief if you had seen poor Mr. Fearing hiding his face, and the
Gatekeeper hauling him in.  And not all the entertainment for which the
Gate was famous, nor all the encouragement that Goodwill was able to
speak, could make terrified Mr. Fearing for once to smile.  A more hard-
to-entertain pilgrim, all the Gate declared when he had gone, they had
never had in their hospitable house.

3.  "So he came," said the guide, "till he came to our House; but as he
behaved himself at the Gate, so he did at my Master the Interpreter's
door.  He lay about in the cold a good while before he would adventure to
call.  Yet he would not go back neither.  And the nights were cold and
long then.  At last I think I looked out of the window, and perceiving a
man to be up and down about the door, I went out to him, and asked what
he was; but, poor man, the water stood in his eyes.  So I perceived what
he wanted.  I went in, therefore, and told it in the house, and we showed
the thing to our Lord.  So He sent me out again to entreat him to come
in, but I dare say I had hard work to do it.  At last he came in, and I
will say that for my Lord, He carried it wonderful lovingly to Mr.
Fearing.  There were but a few good bits at the table, but some of it was
laid upon his trencher."  In this way the guide tells us his first
introduction to Mr. Fearing, and how Mr. Fearing behaved himself in the
Interpreter's House.  For instance, in the parlour full of dust, when the
Interpreter said that the dust is original sin and inward corruption, you
would have thought that the Interpreter had stabbed poor Mr. Fearing to
the heart, so did he break out and weep.  Before the damsel could come
with the pitcher, Mr. Fearing's eyes alone would have laid the dust, they
were such a fountain of tears.  When he saw Passion and Patience, each
one in his chair--"I am that child in rags," said Mr. Fearing; "I have
already received all my good things!"  Also, at the wall where the fire
burned because oil was poured into it from the other side, he perversely
turned that fire also against himself.  And when they came to the man in
the iron cage, you could not have told whether the miserable man inside
the cage or the miserable man outside of it sighed the loudest.  And so
on, through all the significant rooms.  The spider-room overwhelmed him
altogether, till his sobs and the beating of his breast were heard all
over the house.  The robin also when gobbling up spiders he made an
emblem of himself, and the tree that was rotten at the heart,--till the
Interpreter's patience with this so perverse pilgrim was fairly worn out.
So the Interpreter shut up his significant rooms, and had this so
troublesome pilgrim into his own chamber, and there carried it so
tenderly to Mr. Fearing that at last he did seem to have taken some
little heart of grace.  "And then we," said Greatheart, "set forward, and
I went before him; but the man was of few words, only he would often sigh
aloud."

4.  "Dumpish at the House Beautiful" is his biographer's not very
respectful comment on the margin of the history.  There were too many
merry-hearted damsels running up and down that house for Mr. Fearing.  He
could not lift his eyes but one of those too-tripping maidens was looking
at him.  He could not stir a foot but he suddenly ran against a talking
and laughing bevy of them.  There was one thing he loved above
everything, and that was to overhear the talk that went on at that season
in that house about the City above, and about the King of that City, and
about His wonderful ways with pilgrims, and the entertainment they all
got who entered that City.  But to get a word out of Mr. Fearing upon any
of these subjects,--all the king's horses could not have dragged it out
of him.  Only, the screen was always seen to move during such
conversations, till it soon came to be known to all the house who was
behind the screen.  And the talkers only talked a little louder as the
screen moved, and took up, with a smile to one another, another and a yet
more comforting topic.

The Rarity Rooms also were more to Mr. Fearing than his necessary food.
He would be up in the morning and waiting at the doors of those rooms
before the keepers had come with their keys.  And they had to tell him
that the candles were to be put out at night before he would go away.  He
was always reading, as if he had never read it before, the pedigree of
the Lord of the Hill.  Moses' rod, Shamgar's goad, David's sling and
stone, and what not--he laughed and danced and sang like a child around
these ancient tables.  The armoury-room also held him, where were the
swords, and shields, and helmets, and breast-plates, and shoes that would
not wear out.  You would have thought you had your man all right as long
as you had him alone among these old relics; but, let supper be ready,
and the house gathered, and Mr. Fearing was as dumpish as ever.  Eat he
would not, drink he would not, nor would he sit at the same table with
those who ate and drank with such gladness.  I remembered Mr. Fearing at
the House Beautiful when I was present at a communion season some time
back in Ross-shire.  The church was half full of Mr. Fearing's close
kindred that communion morning.  For, all that the minister himself could
do, and all that the assisting minister could do--no! to the table those
self-examined, self-condemned, fear-filled souls would not come.  The two
ministers, like Mr. Greatheart's Master, carried it wonderful lovingly
with those poor saints that day; but those who are in deed, and not in
name only, passing the time of their sojourning here in fear--they cannot
all at once be lifted above all their fears, even by the ablest action
sermons, or by the most wise and tender table-addresses.  And, truth to
tell, though you will rebuke me all the way home to-night for saying it,
my heart sat somewhat nearer to those old people who were perhaps a
little too dumpish in their repentance and their faith and their hope
that morning, than it did to those who took to the table with a light
heart.  I know all your flippant cant about gospel liberty and against
Highland introspection, as you call it--as well as all your habitual
neglect of a close and deep self-examination, as Paul called it; but I
tell you all to-night that it would be the salvation of your soul if you
too worked your way up to every returning Lord's table with much more
fear and much more trembling.  Let a man examine himself, Saxon as well
as Celt, in Edinburgh as well as in Ross-shire, and so let him eat of
that flesh and drink of that blood.  "These pills," said Mr. Skill, "are
to be taken three at a time fasting in half a quarter of a pint of the
tears of repentance; these pills are good to prevent diseases, as well as
to cure when one is sick.  Yea, I dare say it, and stand to it, that if a
man will but use this physic as he should, it will make him live for
ever.  But thou must give these pills no other way but as I have
prescribed; for, if you do, they will do no good."  "Then he and I set
forward," said the guide, "and I went before; but my man was of but few
words, only he would often sigh aloud."

5.  As to the Hill Difficulty, that was no stick at all to Mr. Fearing;
and as for the lions, he pulled their whiskers and snapped his fingers in
their dumfoundered faces.  For you must know that Mr. Fearing's trouble
was not about such things as these at all; his only fear was about his
acceptance at last.  He beat Mr. Greatheart himself at getting down into
the Valley of Humiliation, till the guide was fain to confess that he
went down as well as he ever saw man go down in all his life.  This
pilgrim cared not how mean he was, so he might be but happy at last.  That
is the reason why so many of God's best saints take so kindly and so
quietly to things that drive other men mad.  You wonder sometimes when
you see an innocent man sit down quietly under accusations and insults
and injuries that you spend all the rest of your life resenting and
repaying.  And that is the reason also that so many of God's best saints
in other ages and other communions used to pursue evangelical humility
and ascetic poverty and seclusion till they obliterated themselves out of
all human remembrance, and buried themselves in retreats of silence and
of prayer.  Yes, you are quite right.  A garment of sackcloth may cover
an unsanctified heart; and the fathers of the desert did not all escape
the depths of Satan and the plague of their own heart.  Quite true.  A
contrite heart may be carried about an applauding city in a coach and
six; and a crucified heart may be clothed in purple and fine linen, and
may fare sumptuously every day.  A saint of God will sometimes sit on a
throne with a more weaned mind than that with which Elijah or the Baptist
will macerate themselves in the wilderness.  Every man who is really set
on heaven must find his own way thither; and he who is really intent on
his own way thither will neither have the time nor the heart to throw
stones at his brother who thinks he has discovered his own best way.  All
the pilgrims who got to the City at last did not get down Difficulty and
through Humiliation so well as Mr. Fearing did; nor was it absolutely
necessary that they should.  It was not to lay down an iron-fast rule for
others, but it was only to amuse the way with his account of Mr. Fearing,
that the guide went on to say: "Yes, I think there was a kind of sympathy
betwixt that valley and my man.  For I never saw him better in all his
pilgrimage than when he was in that valley.  For here he would lie down,
embrace the ground, and kiss the very flowers that grew in this valley.
He would now be up every morning by break of day, tracing and walking to
and fro in that valley."

6.  Now, do you think you could guess how Mr. Fearing conducted himself
in Vanity Fair?  Your guess is important to us and to you to-night; for
it will show whether or no John Bunyan and Mr. Greatheart have spent
their strength for nought and in vain on you.  It will show whether or no
you have got inside of Mr. Fearing with all that has been said; and thus,
inside of yourself.  Guess, then.  How did Mr. Fearing do in Vanity Fair,
do you think?  To give you a clue, recollect that he was the timidest of
souls.  And remember how you have often been afraid to look at things in
a shop window lest the shopkeeper should come out and hold you to the
thing you were looking at.  Remember also that you are the life-long
owners of some things just because they were thrown at your head.
Remember how you sauntered into a sale on one occasion, and, out of sheer
idleness and pure fun, made a bid, and to your consternation the
encumbrance was knocked down to your name; and it fills up your house to-
day till you would give ten times its value to some one to take it away
for ever out of your sight.  Well, what was it that those who were so
shamelessly and so pesteringly cadging about places, and titles, and
preferments, and wives, and gold, and silver, and such like--what was it
they prevailed on this poor stupid countryman to cheapen and buy?  Do you
guess, or do you give it up?  Well, Greatheart himself was again and
again almost taken in; and would have been had not Mr. Fearing been
beside him.  But Mr. Fearing looked at all the jugglers, and cheats, and
knaves, and apes, and fools as if he would have bitten a firebrand.  "I
thought he would have fought with all the men of the fair; I feared there
we should have both been knock'd o' th' head, so hot was he against their
fooleries."  And then--for Greatheart was a bit of a philosopher, and
liked to entertain and while the away with tracing things up to their
causes--"it was all," he said, "because Mr. Fearing was so tender of sin.
He was above many tender of sin.  He was so afraid, not for himself only,
but of doing injury to others, that he would deny himself the purchase
and possession and enjoyment even of that which was lawful, because he
would not offend."  "All this while," says Bunyan himself, in the eighty-
second paragraph of _Grace Abounding_, "as to the act of sinning I was
never more tender than now.  I durst not take a pin or a stick, though
but so big as a straw, for my conscience now was sore and would smart at
every touch.  I could not now tell how to speak my words for fear I
should misplace them."  "The highest flames," says Jeremy Taylor in his
_Life of Christ_, "are the most tremulous."

7.  "But when he was come at the river where was no bridge, there, again,
Mr. Fearing was in a heavy case.  Now, he said, he should be drowned for
ever, and so never see that Face with comfort that he had come so many
miles to behold.  And here also I took notice of what was very
remarkable; the water of that river was lower at this time than ever I
saw it in all my life, so he went over at last not much above wet-shod."
Then said Christiana, "This relation of Mr. Fearing has done me good.  I
thought nobody had been like me, but I see there was some semblance
betwixt this good man and I, only we differed in two things.  His
troubles were so great that they broke out, but mine I kept within.  His
also lay so hard upon him that he could not knock at the houses provided
for entertainment, but my trouble was always such that it made me knock
the louder."  "If I might also speak my heart," said Mercy, "I must say
that something of him has also dwelt in me.  For I have ever been more
afraid of the lake, and the loss of a place in Paradise, than I have been
of the loss of other things.  Oh! thought I, may I have the happiness to
have a habitation there: 'tis enough though I part with all the world to
win it."  Then said Matthew, "Fear was one thing that made me think that
I was far from having that within me that accompanies salvation; but if
it was so with such a good man as he, why may it not also go well with
me?"  "No fears, no grace," said James.  "Though there is not always
grace where there is fear of hell; yet, to be sure, there is no grace
where there is no fear of God."  "Well said, James," said Greatheart;
"thou hast hit the mark, for the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom;
and, to be sure, they that want the beginning have neither middle nor
end."  But we shall here conclude our discourse of Mr. Fearing after we
have sent after him this farewell:--

         "It is because
   Then thou didst fear, that now thou dost not fear.
   Thou hast forestalled the agony, and so
   For thee the bitterness of death is past.
   Also, because already in thy soul
   The judgment is begun.  That day of doom,
   One and the same for this collected world--
   That solemn consummation for all flesh,
   Is, in the case of each, anticipate
   Upon his death; and, as the last great day
   In the particular judgment is rehearsed,
   So now, too, ere thou comest to the Throne,
   A presage falls upon thee, as a ray
   Straight from the Judge, expressive of thy lot.
   That calm and joy uprising in thy soul
   Is first-fruit to thy recompense,
   And heaven begun."




FEEBLE-MIND


   "Comfort the feeble-minded."--_Paul_.

Feeble-mind shall first tell you his own story in his own words, and then
I shall perhaps venture a few observations upon his history and his
character.

"I am but a sickly man, as you see," said Feeble-mind to Greatheart, "and
because Death did usually knock once a day at my door, I thought I should
never be well at home.  So I betook myself to a pilgrim's life, and have
travelled hither from the town of Uncertain, where I and my father were
born.  I am a man of no strength at all of body, nor yet of mind; but
would, if I could, though I can but crawl, spend my life in the pilgrim's
way.  When I came at the gate that is at the head of the way, the Lord of
that place did entertain me freely.  Neither objected he against my
weakly looks, nor against my feeble mind; but gave me such things as were
necessary for my journey, and bade me hope to the end.  When I came to
the house of the Interpreter I received much kindness there; and, because
the Hill Difficulty was judged too hard for me, I was carried up that
hill by one of his servants.  Indeed I have found much relief from
pilgrims, though none were willing to go so softly as I am forced to do.
Yet, still, as they came on, they bid me be of good cheer, and said that
it was the will of their Lord that comfort should be given to the feeble-
minded, and so went on their own pace.  I look for brunts by the way; but
this I have resolved on, to wit, to run when I can, to go when I cannot
run, and to creep when I cannot go.  As to the main, I thank Him that
loves me, I am fixed.  My way is before me, my mind is beyond the river
that has no bridge, though I am, as you see, but of a feeble mind."

Then said old Mr. Honest, "Have you not some time ago been acquainted
with one Mr. Fearing, a pilgrim?"  "Acquainted with him! yes.  He came
from the town of Stupidity, which lies four degrees to the northward of
the City of Destruction, and as many off where I was born.  Yet we were
well acquainted; for, indeed, he was mine uncle, my father's brother.  He
and I have been much of a temper; he was a little shorter than I, but yet
we were much of a complexion."  "I perceive that you know him," said Mr.
Honest, "and I am apt to believe also that you were related one to
another; for you have his whitely look, a cast like his with your eye,
and your speech is much alike."

"Alas!" Feeble-mind went on, "I want a suitable companion.  You are all
lusty and strong, but I, as you see, am weak.  I choose therefore rather
to come behind, lest, by reason of my many infirmities, I should be both
a burden to myself and to you.  I am, as I said, a man of a weak and
feeble mind, and shall be offended and made weak at that which others can
bear.  I shall like no laughing; I shall like no gay attire; I shall like
no unprofitable questions.  Nay, I am so weak a man as to be offended
with what others have a liberty to do.  I do not yet know all the truth.
I am a very ignorant Christian man.  Sometimes, if I hear some rejoice in
the Lord, it troubles me because I cannot do so too.  It is with me as
with a weak man among the strong, or as with a sickly man among the
healthy, or as a lamp despised."  "But, brother," said Greatheart, "I
have it in commission to comfort the feeble-minded and to support the
weak."  Thus therefore, they went on--Mr. Greatheart and Mr. Honest went
before; Christiana and her children went next; and Mr. Feeble-mind and
Mr. Ready-to-halt came behind with his crutches.

1.  In the first place, a single word as to Feeble-mind's family tree.

Thackeray says that _The Peerage_ is the Family Bible of every true-born
Englishman.  Every genuine Englishman, he tells us, teaches that sacred
book diligently to his children.  He talks out of it to them when he sits
in the house and when he walks by the way.  He binds it upon his
children's hands, and it is as a frontlet between their eyes.  He writes
its names upon the doorposts of his house, and makes pictures out of it
upon his gates.  Now, John Bunyan was a born Englishman in his liking for
a family tree.  He had no such tree himself--scarcely so much as a
bramble bush; but, all the same, let the tinker take his pen in hand, and
the pedigrees and genealogies of all his pilgrims are sure to be set
forth as much as if they were to form the certificates that those
pilgrims were to hand in at the gate.

Feeble-mind, then, was of an old, a well-rooted and a wide-spread race.
The county of Indecision was full of that ancient stock.  They had
intermarried in-and-in also till their small stature, their whitely look,
the droop of their eye, and their weak leaky speech all made them to be
easily recognised wherever they went.  It was Feeble-mind's salvation
that Death had knocked at his door every day from his youth up.  He was
feeble in body as well as in mind; only the feebleness of his body had
put a certain strength into his mind; the only strength he ever showed,
indeed, was the strength that had its roots in a weak constitution at
which sickness and death struck their dissolving blows every day.  To
escape death, both the first and the second death, any man with a
particle of strength left would run with all his might; and Feeble-mind
had strength enough somewhere among his weak joints to make him say, "But
this I have resolved on, to wit, to run when I can, to go when I cannot
run, and to creep when I cannot go.  As to the main, I am fixed!"

2.  At the Wicket Gate pilgrim Feeble-mind met with nothing but the
kindest and the most condescending entertainment.  It was the gatekeepers
way to become all things to all men.  The gatekeeper's nature was all in
his name; for he was all Goodwill together.  No kind of pilgrim ever came
wrong to Goodwill.  He never found fault with any.  Only let them knock
and come in and he will see to all the rest.  The way is full of all the
gatekeeper's kind words and still kinder actions.  Every several pilgrim
has his wager with all the rest that no one ever got such kindness at the
gate as he got.  And even Feeble-mind gave the gatekeeper this
praise--"The Lord of the place," he said, "did entertain me freely.
Neither objected he against my weakly looks nor against my feeble mind.
But he gave me such things as were necessary for my journey, and bade me
hope to the end."  All things considered, that is perhaps the best praise
that Goodwill and his house ever earned.  For, to receive and to secure
Feeble-mind as a pilgrim--to make it impossible for Feeble-mind to
entertain a scruple or a suspicion that was not removed beforehand--to
make it impossible for Feeble-mind to find in all the house and in all
its grounds so much as a straw over which he could stumble--that was
extraordinary attention, kindness, and condescension in Goodwill and all
his good-willed house.  "Go on, go on, dear Mr. Feeble mind," said
Goodwill giving his hand to Mr. Fearing's nephew, "go on: keep your
feeble mind open to the truth, and still hope to the end!"

3.  "As to the Interpreter's House, I received much kindness there."  That
is all.  But in that short speech I think there must he hid no little
shame and remorse.  No words could possibly be a severer condemnation of
Feeble-mind than his own two or three so irrelevant words about the
Interpreter's house.  No doubt at all, Feeble-mind received kindness
there; but that is not the point.  That noble house was not built at such
cost, and fitted up, and kept open all the year round, and filled with
fresh furniture from year to year, merely that those who passed through
its significant rooms might report that they had received no rudeness at
the hands of the Interpreter.   "'Come,' said the Interpreter to Feeble-
mind, 'and I will show thee what will be profitable to thee.'  So he
commanded his man to light the candle and bid Feeble-mind follow him.  But
it was all to no use.  Feeble-mind had neither the taste nor the capacity
for the significant rooms.  Nay, as one after another of those rich rooms
was opened to him, Feeble-mind took a positive dislike to them.  Nothing
interested him; nothing instructed him.  But many things stumbled and
angered him.  The parlour full of dust, and how the dust was raised and
laid; Passion and Patience; the man in the iron cage; the spider-room;
the muck-rake room; the robin with its red breast and its pretty note,
and yet with its coarse food; the tree, green outside but rotten at the
heart,--all the thanks the Interpreter took that day for all that from
Feeble-mind was in such speeches as these: You make me lose my head.  I
do not know where I am.  I did not leave the town of Uncertain to be
confused and perplexed in my mind with sights and sounds like these.  Let
me out at the door I came in at, and I shall go back to the gate.
Goodwill had none of these unhappy rooms in his sweet house!"  Nothing
could exceed the kindness of the Interpreter himself; but his house was
full of annoyances and offences and obstructions to Mr. Feeble-mind.  He
did not like the Interpreter's house, and he got out of it as fast as he
could, with his mind as feeble as when he entered it; and, what was
worse, with his temper not a little ruffled.

And we see this very same intellectual laziness, this very same downright
dislike at divine truth, in our own people every day.  There are in every
congregation people who take up their lodgings at the gate and refuse to
go one step farther on the way.  A visit to the Interpreter's House
always upsets them.  It turns their empty head.  They do not know where
they are.  They will not give what mind they have to divine truth, all
you can do to draw them on to it, till they die as feeble-minded, as
ignorant, and as inexperienced as they were born.  They never read a
religious book that has any brain or heart in it.  The feeble _Lives_ of
feeble-minded Christians, written by feeble-minded authors, and published
by feeble-minded publishers,--we all know the spoon-meat that multitudes
of our people go down to their second childhood upon.  Jonathan Edwards--a
name they never hear at home, but one of the most masculine and seraphic
of interpreters--has a noble discourse on The Importance and Advantage of
a thorough Knowledge of Divine Truth.  "Consider yourselves," he says,
"as scholars or disciples put into the school of Christ, and therefore be
diligent to make proficiency in Christian knowledge.  Content not
yourselves with this, that you have been taught your Catechism in your
childhood, and that you know as much of the principles of religion as is
necessary to salvation.  Let not your teachers have cause to complain
that while they spend and are spent to impart knowledge to you, you take
little pains to learn.  Be assiduous in reading the Holy Scriptures.  And
when you read, observe what you read.  Observe how things come in.
Compare one scripture with another.  Procure and diligently use other
books which may help you to grow in this knowledge.  There are many
excellent books extant which might greatly forward you in this knowledge.
There is a great defect in many, that through a lothness to be at a
little expense, they provide themselves with no more helps of this
nature."  Weighty, wise, and lamentably true words.

"Mundanus," says William Law, "is a man of excellent parts, and clear
apprehension.  He is well advanced in age, and has made a great figure in
business.  He has aimed at the greatest perfection in everything.  The
only thing which has not fallen under his improvement, nor received any
benefit from his judicious mind, is his devotion; this is just in the
same poor state it was when he was six years of age, and the old man
prays now in that little form of words which his mother used to hear him
repeat night and morning.  This Mundanus that hardly ever saw the poorest
utensil without considering how it might be made or used to better
advantage, has gone on all his life long praying in the same manner as
when he was a child; without ever considering how much better or oftener
he might pray; without considering how improvable the spirit of devotion
is, how many helps a wise and reasonable man may call to his assistance,
and how necessary it is that our prayers should be enlarged, varied, and
suited to the particular state and condition of our lives.  How poor and
pitiable is the conduct of this man of sense, who has so much judgment
and understanding in everything but that which is the whole wisdom of
man!"  How true to every syllable is that!  How simple-looking, and yet
how manly, and able, and noble!  We close our young men's session with
Law and Butler to-night, and I cannot believe that our session with those
two giants has left one feeble mind in the two classes; they were all
weeded out after the first fortnight of the session; though, after all is
done, there are still plenty left both among old and young in the
congregation.  Even Homer sometimes nods; and I cannot but think that
John Bunyan has made a slip in saying that Feeble-mind enjoyed the
Interpreter's House.  At any rate, I wish I could say as much about all
the feeble minds known to me.

4.  The Hill Difficulty, which might have helped to make a man of Feeble-
mind, saw a laughable, if it had not been such a lamentable, spectacle.
For it saw this poor creature hanging as limp as wet linen on the back of
one of the Interpreter's sweating servants.  Your little boy will explain
the parable to you.  Shall I do this? or, shall I rather do that? asks
Feeble-mind at every stop.  Would it be right? or, would it be wrong?
Shall I read that book?  Shall I go to that ball?  Shall I marry that
man?  Tell me what to do.  Give me your hand.  Take me up upon your back,
and carry me over this difficult hill.  "I was carried up that," says
poor Feeble-mind, "by one of his servants."

5.  "The one calamity of Mr. Feeble-mind's history," says our ablest
commentator on Bunyan, "was the finest mercy of his history."  That one
calamity was his falling into Giant Slay-good's hands, and his finest
mercy was his rescue by Greatheart, and his consequent companionship with
his deliverer, with Mr. Honest, and with Christiana and her party till
they came to the river.  You constantly see the same thing in the life of
the Church and of the Christian Family.  Some calamity throws a weak,
ignorant, and immoral creature into close contact with a minister or an
elder or a Christian visitor, who not only relieves him from his present
distress, but continues to keep his eye upon his new acquaintance,
introduces him to wise and good friends, invites him to his house, gives
him books to read, and keeps him under good influences, till, of a weak,
feeble, and sometimes vicious character, he is made a Christian man, till
he is able for himself to say, It was good for me to be afflicted; the
one calamity of my history has been my best mercy!

6.  Feeble-mind, I am ashamed to have to admit, behaved himself in a
perfectly scandalous manner at the house of Gaius mine host.  He went
beyond all bounds during those eventful weeks.  Those weeks were one long
temptation to Feeble-mind--and he went down in a pitiful way before his
temptation.  Two marriages and two honeymoons, with suppers and dances
every night, made the old hostelry like very Pandemonium itself to poor
Feeble-mind.  He would have had Matthew's and James's marriages conducted
next door to a funeral.  Because he would not eat flesh himself, he
protested against Gaius killing a sheep.  "Man," said old Honest, almost
laying his quarterstaff over Feeble-mind's shoulders--"Man, dost thou
think because thou art virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?"
"I shall like no laughing," said Feeble-mind; "I shall like no gay
attire; I shall like no unprofitable questions."  I think it took some
self-conceit to refuse to sit at table beside Christiana because of her
gay attire.  And I hope Mercy did not give up dressing well, even after
she was married, to please that weak-minded old churl.  And as to
unprofitable questions--we are all tempted to think that question
unprofitable which our incapacity or our ignorance keeps us silent upon
at table.  We think that topic both ill-timed and impertinent and unsafe
to which we are not invited to contribute anything.  "I am a very
ignorant man," he went on to say; and, if that was said in any humility,
Feeble-mind never said a truer word.  "It is with me as it is with a weak
man among the strong, or as with a sick man among the healthy, or as a
lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease."  All which only
brought Greatheart out in his very best colours.  "But, brother," said
the guide, "I have it in commission to comfort the feeble-minded, and to
support the weak.  You must needs go along with us; we will wait for you,
we will lend you our help, we will deny ourselves of some things, both
opinionative and practical, for your sake; we will not enter into
doubtful disputations before you; we will be made all things to you
rather than that you shall be left behind."

7.  The first thing that did Mr. Feeble-mind any real good was his being
made military guard over the women and the children while the men went
out to demolish Doubting Castle.  _Quis custodiet_? you will smile and
say when you hear that.  Who shall protect the protector? you will say.
But wait a little.  Greatheart knew his business.  For not only did
Feeble-mind rise to the occasion, when he was put to it; but, more than
that, he was the soul of good company at supper-time that night.  "Jocund
and merry" are the very words.  Yes; give your feeble and fault-finding
folk something to do.  Send them to teach a class.  Send them down into a
mission district.  Lay a sense of responsibility upon them.  Leave them
to deal with this and that emergency themselves.  Cease carrying them on
your back, and lay weak and evil and self-willed people on their back.
Let them feel that they are of some real use.  As Matthew Arnold says,
Let the critic but try practice, and you will make a new man of him.  As
Greatheart made of Feeble-mind by making him mount guard over the
Celestial caravan while the fighting men were all up at Doubting Castle.

8.  "Mark this," says Mr. Feeble-mind's biographer on the early margin of
his history, lest we should be tempted to forget the good parts of this
troublesome and provoking pilgrim--"Mark this."  This, namely, which
Feeble-mind says to his guide.  "As to the main, I thank Him that loves
me, I am fixed.  My way is before me, my mind is beyond the river that
has no bridge, though I am, as you see, but of a feeble mind."  And that
leads us with returning regard and love to turn to the end of his
history, where we read: "After this Mr. Feeble-mind had tidings brought
him that the post sounded his horn at his chamber door.  Then he came in
and told him, saying, I am come to tell thee that thy Master hath need of
thee, and that in very little time thou must behold His face in
brightness.  Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends, and told them
what errand had been brought to him, and what token he had received of
the truth of the message.  As for my feeble mind he said, that I shall
leave behind me, for I shall have no need of that in the place whither I
go.  Nor is it worth bestowing upon the poorest pilgrim.  Wherefore, when
I am gone, I desire that you would bury it in a dung-hill.  This done,
and the day being come in which he was about to depart, he entered the
river as the rest.  His last words were, Hold out, faith and patience!  So
he went over to the other side."




GREAT-HEART


   "--when thou shalt enlarge my heart."--_David_.

On Sabbath, the 12th December 1886, I heard the late Canon Liddon preach
a sermon in St. Paul's Cathedral, in which he classed Oliver Cromwell
with Alexander the Sixth and with Richard the Third.  I had taken my
estimate of the great Protector's character largely from Carlyle's famous
book, and you can judge with what feelings I heard the canon's
comparison.  And, besides, I had been wont to think of the Protector as
having entered largely into John Bunyan's portrait of Greatheart, the
pilgrim guide.  And the researches and the judgments of Dr. Gardiner have
only gone to convince me, the eloquent canon notwithstanding, that Bunyan
could not have chosen a better contemporary groundwork for his Greatheart
than just the great Puritan soldier.  Cromwell's "mental struggles before
his conversion," his life-long "searchings of heart," his "utter absence
of vindictiveness," his unequalled capacity for "seeing into the heart of
a situation," and his own "all-embracing hospitality of heart"--all have
gone to reassure me that my first guess as to Bunyan's employment of the
Protector's matchless personality and services had not been so far
astray.  And the oftener I read the noble history of Greatheart, the
better I seem to hear, beating behind his fine figure, by far the
greatest heart that ever ruled over the realm of England.

1.  The first time that we catch a glimpse of Greatheart's weather-beaten
and sword-seamed face is when he is taking a stolen look out of the
window at Mr. Fearing, who is conducting himself more like a chicken than
a man around the Interpreter's door.  And from that moment till Mr.
Fearing shouted "Grace reigns!" as he cleared the last river, never
sportsman surely stalked a startled deer so patiently and so skilfully
and so successfully as Greatheart circumvented that chicken-hearted
pilgrim.  "At last I looked out of the window, and perceiving a man to be
up and down about the door, I went out to him and asked him what he was;
but, poor man, the water stood ill his eyes.  So I perceived what he
wanted.  I went in, therefore, and told it in the house, and we showed
the thing to our Lord.  So He sent me out again to entreat him to come
in; but I dare say I had hard work to do it."  Greatheart's whole account
of Mr. Fearing always brings the water to my eyes also.  It is indeed a
delicious piece of English prose.  If I were a professor of _belles
lettres_ instead of what I am, I would compel all my students, under pain
of rustication, to get those three or four classical pages by heart till
they could neither perpetrate nor tolerate bad English any more.  This
camp-fire tale, told by an old soldier, about a troublesome young recruit
and all his adventures, touches, surely, the high-water mark of sweet and
undefiled English.  Greatheart was not the first soldier who could handle
both the sword and the pen, and he has not been the last.  But not Caesar
and not Napier themselves ever handled those two instruments better.

2.  Greatheart had just returned to his Master's house from having seen
Mr. Fearing safely through all his troubles and well over the river,
when, behold, another caravan of pilgrims is ready for his convoy.  For
Greatheart, you must know, was the Interpreter's armed servant.  When at
any time Greatheart was off duty, which in those days was but seldom, he
took up his quarters again in the Interpreter's house.  As he says
himself, he came back from the river-side only to look out of the
Interpreter's window to see if there was any more work on the way for him
to do.  And, as good luck would have it, as has been said, the guide was
just come back from his adventures with Mr. Fearing when a pilgrim party,
than which he had never seen one more to his mind, was introduced to him
by his Master, the Interpreter.  "The Interpreter," so we read at this
point, "then called for a man-servant of his, one Greatheart, and bid him
take sword, and helmet, and shield, and take these, my daughters," said
he, "and conduct them to the house called Beautiful, at which place they
will rest next.  So he took his weapons and went before them, and the
Interpreter said, God-speed."

3.  Now I saw in my dream that they went on, and Greatheart went before
them, so they came to the place where Christian's burden fell off his
back and tumbled into a sepulchre.  Here, then, they made a pause, and
here also they blessed God.  "Now," said Christiana, "it comes to my mind
what was said to us at the gate; to wit, that we should have pardon by
word and by deed.  What it is to have pardon by deed, Mr. Greatheart, I
suppose you know; wherefore, if you please, let us hear your discourse
thereof."  "So then, to speak to the question," said Greatheart.  You
have all heard about the "question-day" at Highland communions.  That day
is so called because questions that have arisen in the minds of "the men"
in connection with doctrine and with experience are on that day set
forth, debated out, and solved by much meditation and prayer; age,
saintliness, doctrinal and experimental reading, and personal experience
all making their contribution to the solution of the question in hand.
Just such a question, then, and handled in such a manner, was that
question which whiled the way and cheated the toil till the pilgrims came
to the House Beautiful.  The great doctrinal and experimental Puritans,
with Hooker at their head, put forth their full strength and laid out
their finest work just on this same question that Christiana gave out at
the place, somewhat ascending, upon which stood a cross, and a little
below, in the bottom, a sepulchre.  But not the great Comment on The
Galatians itself, next to the Holy Bible as it is, as most fit for a
wounded conscience; no, nor that perfect mass of purest gold, The Learned
Discourse of Justification, nor anything else of that kind known to me,
is for one moment, to compare in beauty, in tenderness, in eloquence, in
scriptural depth, and in scriptural simplicity with Greatheart's noble
resolution of Christiana's question which he made on the way from the
Interpreter's house to the House Beautiful.  "This is brave!" exclaimed
that mother in Israel, when the guide had come to an end.  "Methinks it
makes my heart to bleed to think that He should bleed for me.  O Thou
loving One!  O Thou blessed One!  Thou deservest to have me, for Thou
hast bought me.  No marvel that this made the water to stand in my
husband's eyes, and that it made him trudge so nimbly on.  O Mercy, that
thy father and thy mother were here; yea, and Mrs. Timorous too!  Nay, I
wish now with all my heart that here was Madam Wanton too.  Surely,
surely their hearts would be affected here!"  Promise me to read at home
Greatheart's discourse on the Righteousness of Christ, and you will thank
me for having exacted the promise.

The incongruity of a soldier handling such questions, and especially in
such a style, has stumbled some of John Bunyan's fault-finding readers.
The same incongruity stumbled "the Honourable Colonel Hacker, at Peebles
or elsewhere," to whom Cromwell sent these from Edinburgh on the 25th
December 1650--"But indeed I was not satisfied with your last speech to
me about Empson, that he was a better preacher than fighter or soldier--or
words to that effect.  Truly, I think that he that prays and preaches
best will fight best.  I know nothing that will give like courage and
confidence as the knowledge of God in Christ will; and I bless God to see
any in this army able and willing to impart the knowledge they have for
the good of others.  I pray you receive Captain Empson lovingly: I dare
assure you he is a good man and a good officer; I would we had no worse."

4.  "Will you not go in and stay till morning?" said the porter to
Greatheart, at the gate of the House Beautiful.  "No," said the guide; "I
will return to my lord to-night."  "O sir!" cried Christiana and Mercy,
"we know not how to be willing you should leave us in our pilgrimage.  Oh
that we might have your company till our journey's end."  Then said
James, the youngest of the boys, "Pray be persuaded to go with us and
help us, because we are so weak and the way so dangerous as it is."  "I
am at my lord's commandment," said Greatheart.  "If he shall allow me to
be your guide quite through, I shall willingly wait upon you.  But here
you failed at first; for when he bid me come thus far with you, then you
should have begged me of him to have gone quite through with you, and he
would have granted your request.  However, at present, I must withdraw,
and so, good Christiana, Mercy, and my brave children, adieu!"  "Help
lost for want of asking for," is our author's condemnatory comment on the
margin at this point in the history.  And there is not a single page in
my history, or in yours, my brethren, on which the same marginal lament
is not written.  What help we would have had on our Lord's promise if we
had but taken the trouble to ask for it!  And what help we once had, and
have now lost, just because when we had it we did not ask for a
continuance of it!  "No," said Greatheart to the porter, and to the two
women, and to James--"No.  I will return to my lord to-night.  I am at my
lord's commandment; only, if he shall still allot me I shall willingly
wait upon you."

Now, what with the House Beautiful, so full of the most delightful
company; what with music in the house and music in the heart; what with
Mr. Brisk's courtship of Mercy, Matthew's illness, Mr. Skill's cure of
the sick man, and what not--a whole month passed by like a day in that so
happy house.  But at last Christiana and Mercy signified it to those of
the house that it was time for them to be up and going.  Then said Joseph
to his mother, "It is convenient that you send back to the house of Mr.
Interpreter to pray him to grant that Mr. Greatheart should be sent to us
that he may be our conductor the rest of our way."  "Good boy," said she,
"I had almost forgot."  So she drew up a petition and prayed Mr. Watchful
the porter to send it by some fit man to her good friend, Mr.
Interpreter; who, when it was come and he had seen the contents of the
petition, said to the messenger, "Go, tell them that I will send him." .
. . Now, about this time one knocked at the door.  So the porter opened,
and, behold, Mr. Greatheart was there!  But when he came in, what joy was
there!  Then said Mr. Greatheart to the two women, "My lord has sent each
of you a bottle of wine, and also some parched corn, together with a
couple of pomegranates.  He has also sent the boys some figs and raisins
to refresh you on your way."  "The weak may sometimes call the strong to
prayers," I read again in the margin opposite the mention of Joseph's
name.  Not that I am strong, and not that she is weak, but one of my
people I spent an hour with last afternoon whom you would to a certainty
have called weak had you seen her and her surrounding,--she so called me
to prayer that I had to hurry home and go straight to it.  And all last
night and all this morning I have had as many pomegranates as I could eat
and as much wine as I could drink.  Yes; you attend to what the weakest
will sometimes say to you, and they will often put you on the way to get
Greatheart back again with a load of wines and fruits and corn on his
shoulder to refresh you on your journey.  "Good boy!" said Christiana to
Joseph her youngest son, "Good boy!  I had almost forgot!"

5.  When old Mr. Honest began to nod after the good supper that Gaius
mine host gave to the pilgrims, "What, sir," cried Greatheart, "you begin
to be drowsy; come, rub up; now here's a riddle for you."  Then said Mr.
Honest, "Let's hear it."  Then said Mr. Greatheart,

   "He that will kill, must first be overcome;
   Who live abroad would, first must die at home."

"Hah!" said Mr. Honest, "it is a hard one; hard to expound, and harder
still to practise."  Yes; this after-supper riddle of Mr. Greatheart is a
hard one in both respects; and for this reason, because the learned and
much experienced guide--learned with all that his life-long quarters in
the Interpreter's House could teach him, and experienced with a
lifetime's accumulated experience of the pilgrim life--has put all his
learning and all his life into these two mysterious lines.  But old
Honest, once he had sufficiently rubbed up his eyes and his intellects,
gave the answer:

   "He first by grace must conquered be
      That sin would mortify.
   And who, that lives, would convince me,
      Unto himself must die."

Exactly; shrewd old Honest; you have hit off both Greatheart and his
riddle too.  You have dived into the deepest heart of the Interpreter's
man-servant.  "The magnanimous man" was Aristotle's masterpiece.  That
great teacher of mind and morals created for the Greek world their
Greatheart.  But, "thou must understand," says Bunyan to his readers,
"that I never went to school to Aristotle or Plato.  No; but to Paul, who
taught Bunyan that what Aristotle calls magnanimity is really
pride--taught him that, till there is far more of the Christian religion
in those two doggerel lines at Gaius's supper-table than there is in all
The Ethics taken together.  And it is only from a personal experience of
the same life as that which the guide puts here into his riddle that any
man's proud heart will become really humble and thus really great, really
enlarged, and of an all-embracing hospitality like Cromwell's and
Greatheart's and John Bunyan's own.  Would you, then, become a Greatheart
too?  And would you be employed in your day as they were employed in
their day?  Then expound to yourself, and practise, and follow out that
deep riddle with which Greatheart so woke up old Honest:

   "He that will kill, must first be overcome;
   Who live abroad would, first must die at home.

6.  Greatheart again and again at the river-side, Greatheart sending
pilgrim after pilgrim over the river with rapture, and he himself still
summoned to turn his back on the Celestial City, and to retrace his steps
through the land of Beulah, through the Valley of the Shadow of Death,
and through the Valley of Humiliation, and back to the Interpreter's
house to take on another and another and another convoy of fresh
pilgrims, and his own abundant entrance still put off and never to
come,--our hearts bleed for poor Greatheart.  Back and forward, back and
forward, year after year, this noble soul uncomplainingly goes.  And,
ever as he waves his hand to another pilgrim entering with trumpets
within the gates, he salutes his next pilgrim charge with the brave
words: "Yet what I shall choose I wot not.  For I am in a strait betwixt
two: having a desire to depart and to be with Christ.  Nevertheless to
abide in the flesh is more needful for you, for your furtherance and joy
of faith by my coming to you again."  If Greatheart could not "usher
himself out of this life" along with Christiana, and Mercy, and Mr.
Honest, and Standfast, and Valiant-for-truth--if he had still to toil
back and bleed his way up again at the head of another happy band of
pilgrims--well, after all is said, what had the Celestial City itself to
give to Greatheart better than such blessed work?  With every such
returning journey he got a more and more enlarged, detached, hospitable,
and Christ-like heart, and the King's palace in very glory itself had
nothing better in store for this soldier-guide than that.  A nobler
heaven Greatheart could not taste than he had already in himself, as he
championed another and another pilgrim company from his Master's earthly
gate to his Master's heavenly gate.  Like Paul, his apostolic prototype,
Greatheart sometimes vacillated just for a moment when he came a little
too near heaven, and felt its magnificent and almost dissolving
attractions full in his soul.  You will see Greatheart's mind staggering
for a moment between rest and labour, between war and peace, between
"Christ" on earth and "Christ" in heaven--you will see all that set forth
with great sympathy and great ability in Principal Rainy's new book on
Paul's Epistle to the Philippians, and in the chapter entitled, The
Apostle's Choice between Living and Dying.

Then there came a summons for Mr. Standfast.  At which he called to him
Mr. Greatheart, and said unto him, "Sir, although it was not my hap to be
much in your good company in the days of my pilgrimage, yet, since the
time I knew you, you have been profitable to me.  When I came from home I
left behind me a wife and five small children.  Let me entreat you, at
your return (for I know that you will go and return to your master's
house in hopes that you may be a conductor to more of the holy pilgrims),
that you send to my family and let them be acquainted with all that hath
and shall happen to me.  Tell them, moreover, of my happy arrival to this
place, and of the present late blessed condition I am in, and so on for
many other messages and charges."  Yes, Mr. Standfast; very good.  But I
would have liked you on your deathbed much better if you had had a word
to spare from yourself and your wife and your children for poor
Greatheart himself, who had neither wife nor children, nor near hope of
heaven, but only your trust and charge and many suchlike trusts and
charges to carry out when you are at home and free of all trust and all
charge and all care.  But yours is the way of all the pilgrims--so long,
at least, as they are in this selfish life.  Let them and their children
only be well looked after, and they have not many thoughts or many words
left for those who sweat and bleed to death for them and theirs.  They
lean on this and that Greatheart all their own way up, and then they
leave their widows and children to lean on whatever Greatheart is sent to
meet them; but it is not one pilgrim in ten who takes the thought or has
the heart to send a message to Mr. Greatheart himself for his own
consolation and support.  I read that Mr. Ready-to-halt alone, good soul,
had the good feeling to do it.  He thanked Mr. Greatheart for his conduct
and for his kindness, and so addressed himself to his journey.  All the
same, noble Greatheart! go on in thy magnanimous work.  Take back all
their errands.  Seek out at any trouble all their wives and children.
Embark again and again on all thy former battles and hardships for the
good of other men.  But be assured that all this thy labour is not in
vain in thy Lord.  Be well assured that not one drop of thy blood or thy
sweat or thy tears shall fall to the ground on that day when they that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn
many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.  Go back, then,
from thy well-earned rest, O brave Greatheart! go back to thy waiting
task.  Put on again thy whole armour.  Receive again, and again fulfil,
thy Master's commission, till He has no more commissions left for thy
brave heart and thy bold hand to execute.  And, one glorious day, while
thou art still returning to thy task, it shall suddenly sound in thy
dutiful ears:--"Well done! good and faithful servant!"  And then thou too

   "Shalt hang thy trumpet in the hall
   And study war no more."




MR. READY-TO-HALT


   "For I am ready to halt."--_David_.

Mr. Ready-to-halt is the Mephibosheth of the pilgrimage.  While
Mephibosheth was still a child in arms, his nurse let the young prince
fall, and from that day to the day of his death he was lame in both his
feet.  Mephibosheth's life-long lameness, and then David's extraordinary
grace to the disinherited cripple in commanding him to eat continually at
the king's table; in those two points we have all that we know about Mr.
Ready-to-halt also.  We have no proper portrait, as we say, of Mr. Ready-
to-halt.  Mr. Ready-to-halt is but a name on John Bunyan's pages--a name
set upon two crutches; but, then, his simple name is so suggestive and
his two crutches are so eloquent, that I feel as if we might venture to
take this life-long lameter and his so serviceable crutches for our
character-lecture to-night.

John Bunyan, who could so easily and so delightfully have done it, has
given us no information at all about Mr. Ready-to-halt's early days.  For
once his English passion for a pedigree has not compelled our author's
pen.  We would have liked immensely to have been told the name, and to
have seen displayed the whole family tree of young Ready-to-halt's
father; and, especially, of his mother.  Who was his nurse also?  And did
she ever forgive herself for the terrible injury she had done her young
master?  What were his occupations and amusements as a little cripple
boy?  Who made him his first crutch?  Of what wood was it made?  And at
what age, and under whose kind and tender directions did he begin to use
it?  And, then, with such an infirmity, what ever put it into Mr. Ready-
to-halt's head to attempt the pilgrimage?  For the pilgrimage was a task
and a toil that took all the limbs and all the lungs and all the labours
and all the endurances that the strongest and the bravest of men could
bring to bear upon it.  How did this complete cripple ever get through
the Slough, and first up and then down the Hill Difficulty, and past all
the lions, and over a thousand other obstacles and stumbling-blocks, till
he arrived at mine host's so hospitable door?  The first surprised sight
we get of this so handicapped pilgrim is when Greatheart and Feeble-mind
are in the heat of their discourse at the hostelry door.  At that moment
Mr. Ready-to-halt came by with his crutches in his hand, and he also was
going on pilgrimage.  Thus, therefore, they went on.  Mr. Greatheart and
Mr. Honest went on before, Christiana and her children went next, and Mr.
Feeble-mind and Mr. Ready-to-halt came behind with his crutches.

   "Put by the curtains, look within my veil,
   Turn up my metaphors, and do not fail,
   There, if thou seekest them, such things to find,
   As will be helpful to an honest mind."

1.  Well, then, when we put by the curtains and turn up the metaphors,
what do we find?  What, but just this, that poor Mr. Ready-to-halt was,
after all, the greatest and the best believer, as the New Testament would
have called him, in all the pilgrimage.  We have not found so great faith
as that of Mr. Ready-to-halt, no, not in the very best of the pilgrim
bands.  Each several pilgrim had, no doubt, his own good qualities; but,
at pure and downright believing--at taking God at His bare and simple
word--Mr. Ready-to-halt beat them all.  All that flashes in upon us from
one shining word that stands on the margin of our so metaphorical author.
This single word, the "promises," hangs like a key of gold beside the
first mention of Mr. Ready-to-halt's crutches--a key such that in a
moment it throws open the whole of Mr. Ready-to-halt's otherwise lockfast
and secret and inexplicable life.  There it all is, as plain as a pike-
staff now!  Yes; Mr. Ready-to-halt's crutches are just the divine
promises.  I wonder I did not see that all the time.  Why, I could
compose all his past life myself now.  I have his father and his mother
and his nurse at my finger-ends now.  This poor pilgrim--unless it would
be impertinence to call him poor any more--had no limbs to be called
limbs.  Such limbs as he had were only an encumbrance to this unique
pedestrian.  All the limbs he had were in his crutches.  He had not one
atom of strength to lean upon apart from his crutches.  A bone, a muscle,
a tendon, a sinew, may be ill-nourished, undeveloped, green, and unknit,
but, at the worst, they are inside of a man and they are his own.  But a
crutch, of however good wood it may be made, and however good a lame man
may be at using it--still, a crutch at its best is but an outside
additament; it is not really and originally a part of a man's very self
at all.  And yet a lame man is not himself without his crutch.  Other men
do not need to give a moment's forethought when they wish to rise up to
walk, or to run, or to leap, or to dance.  But the lame man has to wait
till his crutches are brought to him; and then, after slowly and
painfully hoisting himself up upon his crutches, with great labour, he at
last takes the road.  Mr. Ready-to-halt, then, is a man of God; but he is
one of those men of God who have no godliness within themselves.  He has
no inward graces.  He has no past experiences.  He has no attainments
that he can for one safe moment take his stand upon, or even partly lean
upon.  Mr. Ready-to-halt is absolutely and always dependent upon the
promises.  The promises of God in Holy Scripture are this man's very
life.  All his religion stands in the promises.  Take away the promises,
and Mr. Ready-to-halt is a heap of heaving rags on the roadside.  He
cannot take a single step unless upon a promise.  But, at the same time,
give Mr. Ready-to-halt a promise in his hand and he will wade the Slough
upon it, and scale up and slide down the Hill Difficulty upon it, and
fight a lion, and even brain Beelzebub with it, till he will with a
grudge and a doubt exchange it even for the chariots and the horses that
wait him at the river.  What a delight our Lord would have taken in Mr.
Ready-to-halt had He come across him on His way to the passover!  How He
would have given Mr. Ready-to-halt His arm; how He would have made
Himself late by walking with him, and would still have waited for him!
Nay, had that been a day of chap-books in carpenters' shops and on the
village stalls, how He would have had Mr. Ready-to-halt's story by heart
had any brass-worker in Galilee told the history!  Our Lord was within an
inch of telling that story Himself, when He showed Thomas His hands and
His side.  And at another time and in another place we might well have
had Mr. Ready-to-halt as one more of our Lord's parables for the common
people.  Only, He left the delight and the reward of drawing out this
parable to one He already saw and dearly loved in a far-off island of the
sea, the Puritan tinker of Evangelical England.

2.  And now, after all that, would you think it going too far if I were
to say that in making Himself like unto all His brethren, our Lord made
Himself like Mr. Ready-to-halt too?  Indeed He did.  And it was because
his Lord did this, that Mr. Ready-to-halt so loved his Lord as to follow
Him upon crutches.  It would not be thought seemly, perhaps, to carry the
figure too close to our Lord.  But, figure apart, it is only orthodox and
scriptural to say that our Lord accomplished His pilgrimage and finished
His work leaning all along upon His Father's promises.  Esaias is very
bold about this also, for he tells his readers again and again that their
Messiah, when He comes, will have to be held up.  He will have to be
encouraged, comforted, and carried through by Jehovah.  And in one
remarkable passage he lets us see Jehovah hooping Messiah's staff first
with brass, and then with silver, and then with gold.  Let Thomas
Goodwin's genius set the heavenly scene full before us.  "You have it
dialoguewise set forth," says that great preacher.  "First Christ shows
His commission, telling God how He had called Him and fitted Him for the
work of redemption, and He would know what reward He should receive of
Him for so great an undertaking.  God at first offers low; only the elect
of Israel.  Christ thinks these too few, and not worth so great a labour
and work, because few of the Jews would come in; and therefore He says
that He would labour in vain if this were all His recompense; and yet
withal He tells God that seeing His heart is so much set on saving
sinners, to satisfy Him, He will do it even for those few.  Upon this God
comes off more freely, and openeth His heart more largely to Him, as
meaning more amply to content Him for His pains in dying.  'It is a light
thing,' says God to Him, 'that Thou shouldest be My servant to raise up
the tribes of Jacob--that is not worth Thy dying for.  I value Thy
sufferings more than so.  I will give Thee for a salvation to the ends of
the earth.'  Upon this He made a promise to Christ, a promise which God,
who cannot lie, promised before the world began.  God cannot lie, and,
most of all, not to His Son."

And, then, more even than that.  This same deep divine tells us that it
is a certain rule in divinity that, whatsoever we receive from Christ,
that He Himself first receives in Himself for us.  All the promises of
God's word are made and fulfilled to Christ first, and so to us in and
after Him.  In other words, our Lord's life was so planned for Him in
heaven and was so followed out and fulfilled by Him on earth, that, to
take up the metaphor again, He actually tried every crutch and every
staff with His own hands and with His own armpits; He actually leaned
again and again His own whole weight upon every several one of them.
Every single promise, the most unlikely for Him to lean upon and to
plead, yet, be sure of it, He somehow made experiment upon them all, and
made sure that there was sufficient and serviceable grace within and
under every one of them.  So that, Mr. Ready-to-halt, there is no
possible staff you can take into your hand that has not already been in
the hand of your Lord.  Think of that, O Mr. Ready-to-halt!  Reverence,
then, and almost worship thy staff!  Throw all thy weight upon thy staff.
Confide all thy weakness to it.  Talk to it as thou walkest with it.  Make
it talk to thee.  Worm out of it all its secrets about its first Owner.
And let it instruct thee about how He walked with it and how He handled
it.  The Bible is very bold with its Master.  It calls Him by the most
startling names sometimes.  There is no name that a penitent and a
returning sinner goes by that the Bible does not put somewhere upon the
sinner's Saviour.  And in one place it as good as calls Him Ready-to-halt
in as many words.  Nay, it lets us see Him halting altogether for a time;
ay, oftener than once; and only taking the road again, when a still
stronger staff was put into his trembling hand.  And if John had but had
room in his crowded gospel he would have given us the very identical
psalm with which our Lord took to the upward way again, strong in His new
staff.  "For I am ready to halt," was His psalm in the house of His
pilgrimage, "and My sorrow is continually before Me.  Mine enemies are
lively, and they are strong; and they that hate Me wrongfully are
multiplied.  They also that render evil for good are Mine adversaries;
because I follow the thing that good is.  Forsake Me not, O Lord; O My
God, be not far from Me.  Make haste to help Me, O Lord My salvation."

3.  Among all the devout and beautiful fables of the "dispensation of
paganism," there is nothing finer than the fable of blind Tiresias and
his staff.  By some sad calamity this old prophet had lost the sight of
his eyes, and to compensate their servant for that great loss the gods
endowed him with a staff with eyes.  As Aaron's rod budded before the
testimony and bloomed blossoms and yielded almonds, so Tiresias' staff
budded eyes, and divine eyes too, for the blind prophet's guidance and
direction.  Tiresias had but to take his heaven-given staff in his hand,
when, straightway, such a divinity entered into the staff that it both
saw for him with divine eyes, and heard for him with divine ears, and
then led him and directed him, and never once in all his after journeys
let him go off the right way.  All other men about him, prophets and
priests both, often lost their way, but Tiresias after his blindness,
never, till Tiresias and his staff became a proverb and a parable in the
land.  And just such a staff, just such a crutch, just such a pair of
crutches, were the crutches of our own so homely Mr. Ready-to-halt.  With
all their lusty limbs, all the other pilgrims often stumbled and went out
of their way till they had to be helped up, led back, and their faces set
right again.  But, last as Mr. Ready-to-halt always came in the
procession--behind even the women and the children as his crutches always
kept him--you will seek in vain for the dot of those crutches on any by-
path or on any wrong road.  No; the fact is, if you wish to go to the
same city, and are afraid you lose the way; as Evangelist said, "Do you
see yon shining light?" so I would say to you to-night, "Do you see these
crutch-marks on the road?"  Well, keep your feet in the prints of these
crutches, and as sure as you do that they will lead you straight to a
chariot and horses, which, again, will carry you inside the city gates.
For Mr. Ready-to-halt's crutches have not only eyes like Tiresias' staff,
they have ears also, and hands and feet.  A lamp also burns on those
crutches; and wine and oil distil from their wonderful wood.  Happy
blindness that brings such a staff!  Happy exchange! eyes full of earth
and sin for eyes full of heaven and holiness!

4.  "They began to be merry," says our Lord, telling the story of the
heart-broken father who had got back his younger son from a far country.
And even Feeble-mind and Ready-to-halt begin to be merry on the green
that day after Doubting Castle has fallen to Greatheart's arms.  Now,
Christiana, if need was, could play upon the viol, and her daughter Mercy
upon the lute; and, since they were so merry disposed, she played them a
lesson, and Mr. Ready-to-halt would dance.  So he paid a boy a penny to
hold one of his crutches, and, taking Miss Much-afraid by the hand, to
dancing they went.  And, I promise you he footed it well; the lame man
leaped as an hart; also the girl was to be commended, for she answered
the music handsomely.  In spite of his life-long infirmity, there was
deep down in Mr. Ready-to-halt an unsuspected fund of good-humour.  There
was no heartier merriment on the green that day than was the merriment
that Mr. Ready-to-halt knocked out of his nimble crutch.  "True, he could
not dance without one crutch in his hand."  True, dear and noble Bunyan,
thou canst not write a single page at any time or on any subject without
thy genius and thy tenderness and thy divine grace marking the page as
thine own alone!

5.  The next time we see Mr. Ready-to-halt he is coming in on his
crutches to see Christiana, for she has sent for him to see him.  So she
said to him, "Thy travel hither hath been with difficulty, but that will
make thy rest the sweeter."  And then in process of time there came a
post to the town and his business this time was with Mr. Ready-to-halt.
"I am come to thee in the name of Him whom thou hast loved and followed,
though upon crutches.  And my message is to tell thee that He expects
thee at His table to sup with Him in His kingdom the next day after
Easter."  "I am sent for," said Mr. Ready-to-halt to his fellow-pilgrims,
"and God shall surely visit you also.  These crutches," he said, "I
bequeath to my son that shall tread in my steps, with an hundred warm
wishes that he may prove better than I have done."  Isaac was a child of
promise, and Mr. Ready-to-halt had an Isaac also on whom his last
thoughts turned.  Isaac had been born to Abraham by a special and
extraordinary and supernatural interposition of the grace and the power
of God; and Mr. Ready-to-halt had always looked on himself as a second
Abraham in that respect.  A second Abraham, and more.  True, his son was
not yet a pilgrim; perhaps he was too young to be so called; but
Greatheart will take back the old man's crutches--Greatheart was both man-
of-war and beast-of-burden to the pilgrims and their wives and
children--and will in spare hours teach young Ready-to-halt the use of
the crutch, till the son can use with the same effect as his father his
father's instrument.  Is your child a child of promise?  Is he to you a
product of nature, or of grace?  Did you receive him and his brothers and
sisters from God after you were as good as dead?  Did you ever steal in
when his nurse was at supper and say over his young cradle, He hath not
dealt with me after my sins, nor rewarded me according to my iniquities?
Is it in your will laid up with Christ in God about your crutches and
your son what Mr. Ready-to-halt dictated on his deathbed?  And does God
know that there is no wish in your old heart a hundred times so warm for
your son as is this wish,--that he may prove better at handling God's
promises than you have been?  Then, happy son, who has old Mr. Ready-to-
halt for his father!

6.  "He whom thou hast loved and followed, though upon crutches, expects
thee at His table the next day after Easter."  Take comfort, cripples!
Had it been said that the King so expects Greatheart, or Standfast, or
Valiant-for-truth, that would have been after the manner of the kings of
this world.  But to insist on having Mr. Ready-to-halt beside Him by such
and such a day; to send such a post to a pilgrim who has not a single
sound bone in all his body; to a sinner without a single trustworthy
grace in all his heart; to a poor and simple believer who has nothing in
his hand but one of God's own promises--Who is a king like unto our King?
Surely King David was never a better type of Christ than when he said to
Mephibosheth, lame in both his feet from his nurse's arms: "Fear not,
Mephibosheth, for I will surely show thee kindness, and thou shalt eat
bread at my table continually."  And Mephibosheth shall always be our
spokesman when he bows himself and says in return: "What is thy servant,
that thou shouldst look upon such a dead dog as I am?"




VALIANT-FOR-TRUTH


   "--They are not valiant for the truth."--_Jeremiah_

   "--Ye should contend earnestly for the faith."--_Jude_.

   "Forget not Master Valiant-for-the-Truth,
   That man of courage, tho' a very youth.
   Tell every one his spirit was so stout,
   No man could ever make him face about."
   _Bunyan_.

"I am of Dark-land, for there was I born, and there my father and mother
are still."  "Dark-land," said the guide; "doth not that lie upon the
same coast as the City of Destruction?"  "Yes, it doth," replied Valiant-
for-truth.  "And had I not found incommodity there, I had not forsaken it
at all; but finding it altogether unsuitable to me, and very unprofitable
for me, I forsook it for this way.  Now, that which caused me to come on
pilgrimage was this.  We had one Mr. Tell-true came into our parts, and
he told it about what Christian had done, that went from the City of
Destruction.  That man so told the story of Christian and his travels
that my heart fell into a burning haste to be gone after him, nor could
my father and mother stay me, so I got from them, and am come thus far on
my way."

1.  A very plain and practical lesson is already read to us all in
Valiant-for-truth's explanation of his own pilgrimage.  He tells the
guide that he was made a pilgrim just by having the story of The Pilgrim
told to him.  All that Tell-true did was just to recite the story of the
pilgrim, when young Valiant's heart fell into a burning haste to be a
pilgrim too.  My brethren, could any lesson be plainer?  Read the
_Pilgrim's Progress_ with your children.  And, after a time, read it
again till they call it beautiful, and till you see the same burning
haste in their hearts that young Valiant felt in his heart.  Circulate
the _Pilgrim's Progress_.  Make opportunities to give the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ to the telegraph boys and errand boys at your door.  Never go
on a holiday without taking a dozen cheap and tasteful copies of _The
Pilgrim_ to give to boys and girls in the country.  Make sure that no
one, old or young, of your acquaintance, in town or country, is without a
good copy of _The Pilgrim_.  And the darker their house is, make all the
more sure that John Bunyan is in it.

   "Now may this little book a blessing be,
   To those that love this little book and me
   And may its buyer have no cause to say
   His money is but lost or thrown away."

2.  But the great lesson of Valiant's so impressive life lies in the
tremendous fight he had with three ruffians who all set upon him at once
and well-nigh made an end of him.  For, when we put by the curtains here
again, and turn up the metaphors, what do we find?  What, but a lesson of
first-rate importance for many men among ourselves; for many public men,
many ministers, and many other much-in-earnest men.  For Valiant, as his
name tells us, was set to contend for the truth.  He had the truth.  The
truth was put into his keeping, and he was bound to defend it.  He was
thrown into a life of controversy, and thus into all the terrible
temptations--worse than the temptations to whoredom or wine--that
accompany a life of controversy.  The three scoundrels that fell upon
Valiant at the mouth of the lane were Wildhead, Inconsiderate, and
Pragmatic.  In other words, the besetting temptations of many men who are
set as defenders of the truth in religion, as well as in other matters,
is to be wild-headed, inconsiderate, self-conceited, and intolerably
arrogant.  The bloody battle that Valiant fought, you must know, was not
fought at the mouth of any dark lane in the midnight city, nor on the
side of any lonely road in the moonless country.  This terrible fight was
fought in Valiant's own heart.  For Valiant was none of your calculating
and cold-blooded friends of the truth.  He did not wait till he saw the
truth walking in silver slippers.  Let any man lay a finger on the truth,
or wag a tongue against the truth, and he will have to settle it with
Valiant.  His love for the truth was a passion.  There was a fierceness
in his love for the truth that frightened ordinary men even when they
were on his own side.  Valiant would have died for the truth without a
murmur.  But, with all that, Valiant had to learn a hard and a cruel
lesson.  He had to learn that he, the best friend of truth as he thought
he was, was at the same time, as a matter of fact, the greatest enemy
that the truth had.  He had to take home the terrible discovery that no
man had hurt the truth so much as he had done.  Save me from my friend!
the truth was heard to say, as often as she saw him taking up his weapons
in her behalf.  We see all that every day.  We see Wildhead at his
disservice of the truth every day.  Sometimes above his own name, and
sometimes with grace enough to be ashamed to give his name, in the
newspapers.  Sometimes on the platform; sometimes in the pulpit; and
sometimes at the dinner-table.  But always to the detriment of the truth.
In blind fury he rushes at the character and the good name of men who
were servants of the truth before he was born, and whose shield he is not
worthy to bear.  How shall Wildhead be got to see that he and the like of
him are really the worst friends the truth can possibly have?  Will he
never learn that in his wild-bull gorings at men and at movements, he is
both hurting himself and hurting the truth as no sworn enemy of his and
of the truth can do?  Will he never see what an insolent fool he is to go
on imputing bad motives to other men, when he ought to be prostrate
before God on account of his own?  More than one wild-headed student of
William Law has told me what a blessing they have got from that great
man's teaching on the subject of controversy.  Will the Wildheads here to-
night take a line or two out of that peace-making author and lay them to
heart?  "My dear L-, take notice of this, that no truths, however solid
and well-grounded, will help you to any divine life, but only so far as
they are taught, nourished, and strengthened by an unction from above;
and that nothing more dries and extinguishes this heavenly unction than a
talkative reasoning temper that is always catching at every opportunity
of hearing or telling some religious matters.  Stop your ears and shut
your eyes to all religious tales . . . I would no more bring a false
charge against a deist than I would bear false witness against an
apostle.  And if I knew how to do the deists more justice in debate I
would gladly do it . . . And as the gospel requires me to be as glad to
see piety, equity, strict sobriety, and extensive charity in a Jew or a
Gentile as in a Christian; as it obliges me to look with pleasure upon
their virtues, and to be thankful to God that such persons have so much
of true and sound Christianity in them; so it cannot be an unchristian
spirit to be as glad to see truths in one party of Christians as in
another, and to look with pleasure upon any good doctrines that are held
by any sect of Christian people, and to be thankful to God that they have
so much of the genuine saving truths of the gospel among them . . .
Selfishness and partiality are very inhuman and base qualities even in
the things of this world, but in the doctrines of religion they are of a
far baser nature.  In the present divided state of the Church, truth
itself is torn and divided asunder; and, therefore, he is the only true
Catholic who has more of truth and less of error than is hedged in by any
divided part.  To see this will enable us to live in a divided part
unhurt by its division, and keep us in a true liberty and fitness to be
edified and assisted by all the good that we hear or see in any other
part of the Church.  And thus, uniting in heart and spirit with all that
is holy and good in all Churches, we enter into the true communion of
saints, and become real members of the Holy Catholic Church, though we
are confined to the outward worship of only one particular part of it.
And thus we will like no truth the less because Ignatius Loyola or John
Bunyan were very jealous for it, nor have the less aversion to any error
because Dr. Trapp or George Fox had brought it forth."  If Wildhead would
take a winter of William Law, it would sweeten his temper, and civilise
his manners, and renew his heart.

3.  Inconsiderate, again, is the shallow creature he is, and does the
endless mischief that he does, largely for lack of imagination.  He never
thinks--neither before he speaks nor after he has spoken.  He never put
himself in another man's place all his days.  He is incapable of doing
that.  He has neither the head nor the heart to do that.  He never once
said, How would I like that said about me? or, How would I like that done
to me? or, How would that look and taste and feel to me if I were in So-
and-so's place?  It needs genius to change places with other men; it
needs a grace beyond all genius; and this poor headless and heartless
creature does not know what genius is.  It needs imagination, the noblest
gift of the mind, and it needs love, the noblest grace of the heart, to
consider the case of other people, and to see, as Butler says, that we
differ as much from other people as they differ from us.  And it is by
far the noblest use of the imagination, far nobler than carving a
Laocoon, or painting a Last Judgment, or writing a "Paradiso" or a
"Paradise Lost," to put ourselves into the places of other men so as to
see with their eyes, and feel with their hearts, and sympathise with
their principles, and even with their prejudices.  Now, the inconsiderate
man has so little imagination and so little love that he is sitting here
and does not know what I am saying; and what suspicion he has of what I
am saying is just enough to make him dislike both me and what I am saying
too.  But his dull suspicion and his blind dislike are more than made up
for by the love and appreciation of those lovers and defenders of the
truth who painfully feel how wild and inconsiderate, how hot-headed, how
thoughtless, and how reckless their past service even of God's truth has
been.

   "The King is full of grace and fair regard.
   Consideration, like an angel, came
   And whipp'd the offending Adam out of him."

4.  And as to Pragmatic, I would not call you a stupid person even though
you confided to me that you had never heard this footpad's name till to-
night.  John Bunyan has been borrowing Latin again, and not to the
improvement of his style, or to the advantage of his readers.  It would
be insufferably pragmatic in me to begin to set John Bunyan right in his
English; but I had rather offend the shades of a hundred John Bunyans
than leave my most unlettered hearer without his full and proper Sabbath-
night lesson.  The third armed thief, then, that fell upon Valiant was,
under other names, Impertinence, Meddlesomeness, Officiousness,
Over-Interference.  Pragmatic,--by whatever name he calls himself, there
is no mistaking him.  He is never satisfied.  He is never pleased.  He is
never thankful.  He is always setting his superiors right.  He is like
the Psalmist in one thing, he has more understanding than all his
teachers.  And he enjoys nothing more than in letting them know that.
There is nothing he will not correct you in--from cutting for the stone
to commanding the Channel Fleet.  Now, if all that has put any visual
image of Pragmatic into your mind, you will see at once what an enemy he
too is fitted to be to the truth.  For the truth does not stand in
points, but in principles.  The truth does not dwell in the letter but in
the spirit.  The truth is not served by setting other people right, but
by seeing every day and in every thing how far wrong we are ourselves.
The truth is like charity in this, that it begins at home.  It is like
charity in this also, that it never behaves itself unseemly.  A
pragmatical man, taken along with an inconsiderate man, and then a wild-
headed man added on to them, are three about as fatal hands as any truth
could fall into.  The worst enemy of the truth must pity the truth, and
feel his hatred at the truth relenting, when he sees her under the
championship of Wildhead, Inconsiderate, and Pragmatic.

5.  The first time we see Valiant-for-truth he is standing at the mouth
of Dead-man's-lane with his sword in his hand and with his face all
bloody.  "They have left upon me, as you see," said the bleeding man,
"some of the marks of their valour, and have also carried away with them
some of mine."  And, in like manner, we see Paul with the blood of
Barnabas still upon him when he is writing the thirteenth of First
Corinthians; and John with the blood of the Samaritans still upon him
down to his old age when he is writing his First Epistle; and John Bunyan
with the blood of the Quakers upon him when he is covertly writing this
page of his autobiography under the veil of Valiant-for-truth; and
William Law with the blood of Bishop Hoadly and John Wesley dropping on
the paper as he pens that golden passage which ends with Dr. Trapp and
George Fox.  Where did you think Paul got that splendid passage about
charity?  Where did you think William Law got that companion passage
about Church divisions, and about the Church Catholic?  Where are such
passages ever got by inspired apostles, or by any other men, but out of
their own bloody battles with their own wild-headedness, intolerance,
dislike, and resentment?  Where do you suppose I got the true key to the
veiled metaphor of Valiant-for-truth?  It does not exactly hang on the
doorpost of his history.  Where, then, could I get it but off the inside
wall of my own place of repentance?  Just as you understand what I am now
labouring to say, not from my success in saying it, but from your own
trespasses against humility and love, your unadvised speeches, and your
wild and whirling words.  Without shame and remorse, without
self-condemnation and self-contempt, none of those great passages of
Paul, or John, or Bunyan, or Law were ever written; and without a like
shame, remorse, self-condemnation, and self-contempt they are not rightly
read.

   "Oh! who shall dare in this frail scene
   On holiest, happiest thoughts to lean,
   On Friendship, Kindred, or on Love?
   Since not Apostles' hands can clasp
   Each other in so firm a grasp,
   But they shall change and variance prove.

   "But sometimes even beneath the moon
   The Saviour gives a gracious boon,
   When reconciled Christians meet,
   And face to face, and heart to heart,
   High thoughts of Holy love impart
   In silence meek, or converse sweet.

   "Oh then the glory and the bliss
   When all that pained or seemed amiss
   Shall melt with earth and sin away!
   When saints beneath their Saviour's eye,
   Filled with each other's company,
   Shall spend in love the eternal day!"

6.  Then said Greatheart to Mr. Valiant-for-truth, "Thou hast worthily
behaved thyself; let me see thy sword."  So he showed it him.  When he
had taken it in his hand and had looked thereon a while, the guide said:
"Ha! it is a right Jerusalem blade!"  "It is so," replied its owner.  "Let
a man have one of these blades with a hand to wield it, and skill to use
it, and he may venture upon an angel with it.  Its edges will never
blunt.  It will cut flesh, and bones, and soul, and spirit, and all."
Both Damascus and Toledo blades were famous in former days for their
tenacity and flexibility, and for the beauty and the edge of their steel.
But even a Damascus blade would be worthless in a weak, cowardly, or
unskilled hand; while even a poor sword in the hand of a good swordsman
will do excellent execution.  And much more so when you have both a first-
rate sword and a first-rate swordsman, such as both Valiant and his
Jerusalem blade were.  Ha! yes.  This is a right wonderful blade we have
now in our hand.  For this sword was forged in no earthly fire; and it
was whetted to its unapproachable sharpness on no earthly whetstone.  But,
best of all for us, when a good soldier of Jesus Christ has this sword
girt on his thigh he is able then to go forth against himself with it;
against his own only and worst enemy--that is, against himself.  As here,
against his own wildness of head and pride of heart.  Against his own
want of consideration also.  "My people do not consider."  As also
against himself as a lawless invader of other men's freedom of judgment,
following of truth, public honour, and good name.  As the Arabian
warriors see themselves and dress themselves in their swords as in a
glass, so did Valiant-for-truth see the thoughts and intents, the joints
and the marrow of his own disordered soul in his Jerusalem blade.  In the
sheen of it he could see himself even when the darkness covered him; and
with its two edges all his after-life he slew both all real error in
other men and all real evil in himself.  "Thou hast done well," said
Greatheart the guide.  "Thou hast resisted unto blood, striving against
sin.  Thou shalt abide by us, come in and go out with us, for we are thy
companions."

7.  "Sir," said the widow indeed to Valiant-for-truth, "sir, you have in
all places shown yourself true-hearted."  The first time she ever saw
this man that she is now seeing for the last time on this side the river,
his own mother would not have known him, he was so hacked to pieces with
the swords of his three assailants.  But as she washed the blood off the
mangled man's head and face and hands, she soon saw beneath all his
bloody wounds a true, a brave, and a generous-hearted soldier of the
Cross.  The heart is always the man.  And this woman had lived long
enough with men to have discovered that.  And with all his sears she saw
that it was at bottom the truth of his heart that had cast him into so
many bloody encounters.  There were men in that company, and men near the
river too, with far fewer marks of battle, and even of defeat, upon them,
who did not get this noble certificate and its accompanying charge and
trust from this clear-eyed widow.  And, then, she had never forgot--how
could she?--his exclamation, and almost embrace of her as of his own
mother, when he burst out with his eyes full of blood, "Why, is this
Christian's wife?  What! and going on pilgrimage too?  It glads my heart!
Good man!  How joyful will he be when he shall see her and her children
enter after him in at the gates into the city!"  He would have been
hacked a hundred times worse than he was before the widow of Christian,
and the mother of his children, would have seen anything but the manliest
beauty in a young soldier who could salute an old woman in that way.  It
gladdened her heart to hear him, you may be sure, as much as it gladdened
his heart to see her.  And that was the reason that she actually set
Greatheart himself aside, and left her children under this young man's
sword and shield.  "I would also entreat you to have an eye to my
children," she said.  Young men, has any dying mother committed her
children, if you at any time see them faint, to you?  Have you ever
spoken so comfortably to any poor widow about her sainted husband that
she has passed by some of our foremost citizens, and has astonished and
offended her lawyers by putting a stripling like you into the
trusteeship?  Did ever any dying mother say to you that she had seen you
to be so true-hearted at all times that she entreated you to have an eye
to her children?  Speaking at this point for myself, I would rather see
my son so trusted at such an hour by such a woman than I would see him
the Chancellor of Her Majesty's Exchequer, or the Governor of the Bank of
England.  And so to-night would you.




STANDFAST


   "So stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved."--_Paul_.

In his supplementary picture of Standfast John Bunyan is seen at his very
best, both as a religious teacher and as an English author.  On the
Enchanted Ground Standfast is set before us with extraordinary insight,
sagacity, and wisdom; and then in the terrible river he is set before us
with an equally extraordinary rapture and transport; while, in all that,
Bunyan composes in English of a strength and a beauty and a music in
which he positively surpasses himself.  Just before he closes his great
book John Bunyan rises up and once more puts forth his very fullest
strength, both as a minister of religion and as a classical writer, when
he takes Standfast down into that river which that pilgrim tells us has
been such a terror to so many, and the thought of which has so often
affrighted himself.

When Greatheart and his charge were almost at the end of the Enchanted
Ground, so we read, they perceived that a little before them was a solemn
noise as of one that was much concerned.  So they went on and looked
before them.  And behold, they saw, as they thought, a man upon his
knees, with hands and eyes lift up, and speaking, as they thought,
earnestly to one that was above.  They drew nigh, but could not tell what
he said; so they went softly till he had done.  When he had done, he got
up and began to run towards the Celestial City.  "So-ho, friend, let us
have your company," called out the guide.  At that the man stopped, and
they came up to him.  "I know this man," said Mr. Honest; "his name, I
know, is Standfast, and he is certainly a right good pilgrim."  Then
follows a conversation between Mr. Honest and Mr. Standfast, in which
some compliments and courtesies are exchanged, such as are worthy of such
men, met at such a time and in such a place.  "Well, but, brother," said
Valiant-for-truth, "tell us, I pray thee, what was it that was the cause
of thy being upon thy knees even now?  Was it for that some special mercy
laid obligations upon thee, or how?"  And then Standfast tells how as he
was coming along musing with himself, Madam Bubble presented herself to
him and offered him three things.  "I was both aweary and sleepy and also
as poor as a howlet, and all that the wicked witch knew.  And still she
followed me with her enticements.  Then I betook me, as you saw, to my
knees, and with hands lift up and cries, I prayed to Him who had said
that He would help.  So just as you came up the gentlewoman went her way.
Then I continued to give thanks for my great deliverance; for I verify
believe she intended me no good, but rather sought to make stop of me in
my journey.  What a mercy is it that I did resist her, for whither might
she not have drawn me?"  And then, after all this discourse, there was a
mixture of joy and trembling among the pilgrims, but at last they broke
out and sang:

   "What danger is the pilgrim in,
   How many are his foes,
   How many ways there are to sin,
   No living mortal knows!"

1.  "Well, as I was coming along I was musing with myself," said
Standfast.  You understand what it is to come along musing with yourself,
do you not, my brethren?  "I will muse on the work of Thy hands," says
the Psalmist.  And again, "While I was musing the fire burned."  Well,
Standfast was much given to musing, just as David was.  Each several
pilgrim has his own way of occupying himself on the road; but Standfast
could never get his fill just of musing.  Standfast loved solitude.
Standfast liked nothing better than to walk long stretches at a time all
by himself alone.  Standfast was like the apostle when he preferred to
take the twenty miles from Troas to Assos on foot and alone, rather than
to round the cape on shipboard in a crowd.  "Minding himself to go
afoot," says the apostle's companion.  It would have made a precious
chapter in the Acts of the Apostles had the author of that book been able
to give his readers some of Paul's musings as he crossed the Troad on
foot that day.  But in the absence of Paul's musings we have here the
musings of a man whom Paul would not have shaken off had he foregathered
with him on that lonely road.  For Standfast was in a deep and serious
muse mile after mile, when, who should step into the middle of his path
right before him but Madam Bubble with her body and her purse and her
bed?  Now, had this hungry howlet of a pilgrim been at that moment in any
other but a musing mood of mind, he had to a certainty sold himself, soul
and body, Celestial City and all, to that impudent slut.  But, as He
would have it who overrules Madam Bubble's descents, and all things,
Standfast was at that moment in one of his most musing moods, and all her
smiles and all her offers fell flat and poor upon him.  Cultivate
Standfast's mood of mind, my brethren.  Walk a good deal alone.  Strike
across country from time to time alone and have good long walks and talks
with yourself.  And when you know that you are passing places of
temptation see that your thoughts, and even your imaginations, are well
occupied with solemn considerations about the certain issue of such and
such temptations; and then, to you, as to Standfast,

   "The arrow seen beforehand slacks its flight."

2.  But, musing alone, the arrow seen beforehand, and all, Standfast
would have been a lost man on that lonely road that day had he not
instantly betaken himself to his knees.  And it was while Standfast was
still on his knees that the ascending pilgrims heard that concerned and
solemn noise a little ahead of them.  Did you ever suddenly come across a
man on his knees?  Did you ever surprise a man at prayer as Greatheart
and his companions surprised Standfast?  I do not ask, Did you ever enter
a room and find a family around their morning or evening altar?  We have
all done that.  And it left its own impression upon us.  But did you ever
spring a surprise upon a man on his knees alone and in broad daylight?  I
did the other day.  It was between eleven and twelve o'clock in the
forenoon when I asked a clerk if his master was in.  Yes, he said, and
opened his master's door.  When, before I was aware, I had almost fallen
over a man on his knees and with his face in his hands.  "I pray thee,"
said Valiant-for-truth, "tell us what it was that drew thee to thy knees
even now.  Was it that some special mercy laid its obligations on thee,
or how?"  I did not say that exactly to my kneeling friend, though it was
on the point of my tongue to say it.  My dear friend, I knew, had his own
difficulties, though he was not exactly as poor as a howlet.  And it
might have been about some of his investments that had gone out of joint
that he went that forenoon to Him who had said that He would help.  Or,
like the author of the _Christian Perfection_ and _The Spirit of Prayer_,
it was the sixth hour of the day, and he may have gone to his knees for
his clerks, or for his boys at school, or for himself and for the man in
the same business with himself right across the street.  I knew that my
friend had the charming book at home in which such counsels as these
occur: "If masters were thus to remember their servants, beseeching God
to bless them, letting no day pass without a full performance of this
devotion, the benefit would be as great to themselves as to their
servants."  And perhaps my friend, after setting his clerks their several
tasks for the day, was now asking grace of God for each one of them that
they might not be eye-servants and men-pleasers, but the servants of
Christ doing the will of God from the heart.  Or, again, he may have read
in that noble book this passage: "If a father were daily to make some
particular prayer to God that He would please to inspire his children
with true piety, great humility, and strict temperance, what could be
more likely to make the father himself become exemplary in these
virtues?"  Now, my friend (who can tell?) may just that morning have lost
his temper with his son; or he may last night have indulged himself too
much in eating, or in drinking, or in debate, or in detraction; and that
may have made it impossible for him to fix his whole mind on his office
work that morning.  Or, just to make another guess, when he opened the
book I had asked him to buy and read, he may have lighted on this
heavenly passage: "Lastly, if all people when they feel the first
approaches of resentment or envy or contempt towards others; or if in all
little disagreements and misunderstandings whatever they should have
recourse at such times to a more particular and extraordinary
intercession with God for such persons as had roused their envy,
resentment, or discontent--this would be a certain way to prevent the
growth of all uncharitable tempers."  You may think that I am taking a
roundabout way of accounting for my friend's so concerned attitude at
twelve o'clock that business day; but the whole thing seemed to me so
unusual at such a time and in such a place that I was led to such guesses
as these to account for it.  In so guessing I see now that I was
intruding myself into matters I had no business with; but all that day I
could not keep my mind off my blushing friend.  For, like Mr. Standfast,
my dear friend blushed as he stood up and offered me the chair he had
been kneeling at.  "But, why, did you see me?" said Mr. Standfast.  "Yes,
I did," quoth the other, "and with all my heart I was glad at the sight."
"And what did you think?" said Mr. Standfast.

3.  "Was it," asked Valiant-for-truth, in a holy curiosity, "was it some
special mercy that brought thee to thy knees even now?"  Yes; Valiant-for-
truth had exactly hit it.  Gracious wits, like great wits, jump together.
"Yes," confessed Standfast, "I continue to give thanks for my great
deliverance."  My brethren, you all pray importunately in your time of
sore trouble.  Everybody does that.  But do you feel an obligation, like
Standfast, to abide still on your knees long after your trouble is past?
Nature herself will teach us to pray; but it needs grace, and great grace
continually renewed, to teach us to praise, and to continue all our days
to praise.  How we once prayed, ay, as earnestly, and as concernedly, and
as careless as to who should see or hear us as Standfast himself!  How
some of us here to-night used to walk across a whole country all the time
praying!  How we hoodwinked people in order to get away from them to pray
for twenty miles at a time all by ourselves!  Under that bush--it still
stands to mark the spot; in that wood, long since cut down into ploughed
land--we could show our children the spot to this day where we prayed,
till a miracle was wrought in our behalf.  Yes, till God sent from above
and took us as He never took a psalmist, and set our feet upon a still
more wonderful rock.  How He, yes, HE, with His own hand cut the cords,
broke the net, and set us free!  Come, all ye that fear God! we then
said, and said it with all sincerity too.  And yet, how have we forgotten
what He did for our soul?  We start like a guilty thing surprised when we
think how long it is since we had a spell of thanksgiving.  Shame on us!
What treacherous hearts we have!  What short memories we have!  How soon
we forgive ourselves, and so forget the forgiveness of our God!  Brethren,
let us still lay plans for praise as we used to do for prayer.  If our
friends will go out with us, let us at least insist on walking home
alone.  Let us say with Paul that we get sick at sea; and, besides, that
we have some calls to make and some small accounts to settle before we
leave the country.  Tell them not to wait dinner for us.  And then let us
take plenty of time.  Let us stop at all our old stations and call back
all our old terrors; let us repeat aloud our old psalms--the
twenty-fifth, the fifty-first, the hundred and third, and the hundred and
thirtieth.  We used to terrify people with our prayers as Standfast
terrified the young pilgrims that day; let us surprise and delight them
now with our psalms of thanksgiving.  For, with all our disgraceful
ingratitude in the past, if William Law is right, we are even yet not far
from being great saints, if he is not wrong when he asks: "Would you know
who is the greatest saint in the world?  It is not he who prays most or
fasts most; it is not he who gives most alms, or is most eminent for
temperance, chastity, or justice.  But it is he who is most thankful to
God, and who has a heart always ready to praise God.  This is the
perfection of all virtues.  Joy in God and thankfulness to God is the
highest perfection of a divine and holy life."  Well, then, what an
endless cause of joy and thankfulness have we!  Let us acknowledge it,
and henceforth employ it; and we shall, please God, even yet be counted
as not low down but high up among the saints and the servants of God.

4.  Christiana said many kind and wise and beautiful things to all the
other pilgrims before she entered the river, but it was observed that
though she sent for Mr. Standfast, she said not one word to him when he
came; she just gave him her ring.  "The touch is human and affecting,"
says Mr. Louis Stevenson, in his delightful paper on Bagster's "Bunyan,"
in the _Magazine of Art_.  By the way, do you who are lovers of Bunyan
literature know that remarkable and delicious paper?  The Messrs. Bagster
should secure that paper and should issue an _edition de luxe_ of their
neglected "Bunyan," with Mr. Stevenson's paper for a preface and
introduction.  Bagster's "Illustrated Bunyan," with an introduction on
the illustrations by Mr. Louis Stevenson, if I am not much mistaken,
would sell by the thousand.

5.  Lord Rosebery knows books and loves books, and he has called
attention to the surpassing beauty of the English in the deathbed scenes
of the _Pilgrim's Progress_.  And every lover of pure, tender, and noble
English must, like the Foreign Secretary, have all those precious pages
by heart.  Were it not that we all have a cowardly fear at death
ourselves, and think it wicked and cruel even to hint at his approaching
death even to a fast-dying man, we would never let any of our friends lie
down on his sick-bed without having a reassuring and victorious page of
the _Pilgrim_ read to him every day.  If the doctors would allow me, I
would have these heavenly pages reprinted in sick-bed type for all my
people.  But I am afraid at the doctors.  And thus one after another of
my people passes away without the fortification and the foretaste that
the deathbeds of Christian, and Christiana, and Hopeful, and Mr. Fearing,
and Mr. Feeble-mind, and Mr. Honest, and Mr. Standfast would most surely
have given to them.  Especially the deathbed, if I must so call it, of
Mr. Standfast.  But as Christiana said nothing that could be heard to Mr.
Standfast about his or her latter end, but just looked into his eyes and
gave him her ring, so I may not be able to say all that is in my heart
when your doctor is standing close by.  But you will understand what I
would fain say, will you not?  You will remember, and will have this
heavenly book read to you alternately with your Bible, will you not?  Even
the most godless doctor will give way to you when you tell him that you
know as well as he does just how it is with you, and that you are to have
your own way for the last time.  I know a doctor who first forbade her
minister and her family to tell his patient that she was dying, and at
the same time told them to take away from her bedside all such alarming
books as the _Pilgrim's Progress_ and the _Saint's Rest_, and to read to
her a reassuring chapter out of _Old Mortality_ and _Pickwick_.

It will, no doubt, put the best-prepared of us into a deep muse, as it
put Standfast, when we are first told that we must at once prepare
ourselves for a change of life.  But I for one would not for worlds miss
that solemn warning, and that last musing-time.  It will all be just as
my Master pleases; but if it is within His will I shall till then
continue to petition Him that I may have a passage over the river like
the passage of Standfast.  Or, if that may not now be, then, at least, a
musing-time like his.  The post from the Celestial City brought Mr.
Standfast's summons "open" in his hand.  And thus it was that Standfast's
translation did not take him by surprise.  Standfast was not plunged
suddenly and without warning into the terrible river.  He took the open
summons into big own hand and read it out like a man.  After which he
went, as his manner was, for a good while into a deep and undisturbed
muse.  As soon as he came out of his muse he would have Greatheart to be
sent for.  And then their last conversation together proceeded.  And no
one interfered with the two brave-hearted men.  No one interposed, or
said that Greatheart would exhaust or alarm Standfast, or would
injuriously hasten his end.  Not only so, but all the way till he was
half over the river, Standfast kept up his own side of the noble
conversation.  And it is his side of that half-earthly, whole-heavenly
conversation that I would like to have put into suitable type and
scattered broadcast over all our sick-beds.

6.  "Tell me," says Valdes to Julia in his _Christian Alphabet_, "have
you ever crossed a deep river by a ford?"  "Yes," says Julia, "I have,
many times."  "And have you remarked how that by looking upon the water
it seemed as though your head swam, so that, if you had not assisted
yourself, either by closing your eyes, or by fixing them on the opposite
shore, you would have fallen into the water in great danger of drowning?"
"Yes, I have noticed that."  "And have you seen how by keeping always for
your object the view of the land that lies on the other side, you have
not felt that swimming of the head, and so have suffered no danger of
drowning?"  "I have noticed that too," replied Julia.  Now, it was
exactly this same way of looking, not at the black and swirling river,
but at the angelic conduct waiting for him at the further bank, and then
at the open gate of the Celestial City,--it was this that kept
Standfast's head so steady and his heart like a glowing coal while he
stood and talked in the middle of the giddy stream.  You would have
thought it was Paul himself talking to himself on the road to Assos.  For
I defy even the apostle himself to have talked better or more boldly to
himself even on the solid midday road than Standfast talked to himself in
the bridgeless river.  "I see myself," he said, "at the end of my journey
now.  My toilsome days are all ended.  I am going now to see that head
that was crowned with thorns, and that face that was spat upon for me.  I
loved to hear my Lord spoken of, and wherever I have seen the print of
His shoe in the earth I have coveted to set my foot also.  His name has
been to me as a civet-box; yea, sweeter than all perfumes.  His word I
did use to gather for my food, and for antidotes against my faintings.  He
has held me, and I have kept me from my iniquities.  Yea, my steps He has
strengthened in my way."  Now, while Standfast was thus in discourse his
countenance changed, his strong man bowed down under him, and after he
had said "Take me!" he ceased to be seen of them.  But how glorious it
was to see how the open region was now filled with horses and chariots,
with trumpeters and pipers, and with singers and players on stringed
instruments, all to welcome the pilgrims as they went up and followed one
another in at the beautiful gate of the city!




MADAM BUBBLE


   "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity."--_Solomon_.

   "I have overcome the world."--_Our Lord_.

   "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world.  For
   all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
   and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.  And
   the world passeth away, and the lust thereof."--_John_.

   "This bubble world."--_Quarles_.

Madam Bubble's portrait was first painted by the Preacher.  And he
painted her portrait with extraordinary insight, boldness, and
truthfulness.  There is that in the Preacher's portrait of Madam Bubble
which only comes of the artist having mixed his colours, as Milman says
that Tacitus mixed his ink, with resentment and with remorse.  Out of His
reading of Solomon and Moses and the Prophets on this same subject, as
well as out of His own observation and experience, conflict and conquest,
our Lord added some strong and deep and inward touches of His own to that
well-known picture, and then named it by the New Testament name of the
World.  And then, after Him, His longest-lived disciple set forth the
same mother and her three daughters under the three names that still
stick to them to this day,--the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life.  But it was reserved for John Bunyan to fill up
and to finish those outlines of Scripture and to pour over the whole work
his own depth and strength of colour, till, altogether, Madam Bubble
stands out as yet another masterpiece of our dreamer's astonishing
genius.  Let us take our stand before this heaving canvas, then, till we
have taken attentive note of some of John Bunyan's inimitable touches and
strokes and triumphs of truth and art.  "One in very pleasant attire, but
old . . . This woman is a witch . . . I am the mistress of the world, she
said, and men are made happy by me . . . A tall, comely dame, something
of a swarthy complexion."  In the newly discovered portrait of a woman,
by Albert Durer, one of the marks of its genuineness is the way that the
great artist's initials A. D. are pencilled in on the embroidery of the
lady's bodice.  And you will note in this gentlewoman's open dress also
how J. B. is inextricably woven in.  "She wears a great purse by her side
also, and her hand is often in her purse fingering her money.  Yea, this
is she that has bought off many a man from a pilgrim's life after he had
fairly begun it.  She is a bold and an impudent slut also, for she will
talk with any man.  If there be one cunning to make money in any place,
she will speak well of him from house to house . . . She has given it out
in some places also that she is a goddess, and therefore some do actually
worship her . . . She has her times and open places of cheating, and she
will say and avow it that none can show a good comparable to hers.  And
thus she has brought many to the halter, and ten thousand times more to
hell.  None can tell of the mischief that she does.  She makes variance
betwixt rulers and subjects, betwixt parents and children, 'twixt
neighbour and neighbour, 'twixt a man and his wife, 'twixt a man and
himself, 'twixt the flesh and the heart."  And so on in the great
original.  "Had she stood by all this while," said Standfast, whose eyes
were still full of her, "you could not have set Madam Bubble more amply
before me, nor have better described her features."  "He that drew her
picture was a good limner," said Mr. Honest, "and he that so wrote of her
said true".

1.  "I am the mistress of this world," says Madam Bubble.  And though all
the time she is a bold and impudent slut, yet it is the simple truth that
she does sit as a queen over this world and over the men of this world.
For Madam Bubble has a royal family like all other sovereigns.  She has a
court of her own, too, with its ball-room presentations and its birthday
honours.  She has a cabinet council also, and a bar and a bench with
their pleadings and their decisions.  Far more than all that, she has a
church which she has established and of which she is the head; and a
faith also of which she is the defender.  She has a standing army also
for the extension and the protection of her dominions.  She levies taxes,
too, and sends out ambassadors, and makes treaties, and forms offensive
and defensive alliances.  But what a bubble all this World is to him
whose eyes have at last been opened to see the hollowness and the
heartlessness of it all!  For all its pursuits and all its possessions,
from a child's rattle to a king's sceptre, all is one great bubble.
Wealth, fame, place, power; art, science, letters; politics, churches,
sacraments, and scriptures--all are so many bubbles in Madam Bubble's
World.  This wicked enchantress, if she does not find all these things
bubbles already, by one touch of her evil wand she makes them so.  She
turns gold into dross, God into an idle name, and His Word into words
only; unless when in her malice she turns it into a fruitful ground of
debate and contention; a ground of malice and hatred and ill-will.  Vanity
of vanities; all is vanity and vexation of spirit.  Still, she sits a
queen and a goddess to a great multitude: to all men, to begin with.  And,
like a goddess, she sheds abroad her spirit in her people's hearts and
lifts up upon them for a time the light of her countenance.

2.  "I am the mistress of the world," she says, "and men are made happy
by me."--I would like to see one of them.  I have seen many men to whom
Madam Bubble had said that if they would be ruled by her she would make
them great and happy.  But though I have seen not a few who have believed
her and let themselves be ruled by her, I have never yet seen one happy
man among them.--The truth is, Madam Bubble is not able to make men happy
even if she wished to do it.  She is not happy herself, and she cannot
dispense to others what she does not possess.  And, yet, such are her
sorceries that, while her old dupes die in thousands every day, new dupes
are born to her every day in still greater numbers.  New dupes who run to
the same excess of folly with her that their fathers ran; new dupes led
in the same mad dance after Madam Bubble and her three daughters.  But,
always, and to all men, what a bubble both the mother and all her
daughters are!  How they all make promises like their lying mother, and
how, like her, they all lead men, if not to the halter and to hell, as
Greatheart said, yet to a life of vanity and to a death of disappointment
and despair!  What bubbles of empty hopes both she and her three children
blow up in the brains of men!  What pictures of untold happiness they
paint in the imaginations of men!  What pleasures, what successes in
life, what honours and what rewards she pledges herself to see bestowed!
"She has her times and open places of cheating," said one who knew her
and all her ways well.  And when men and women are still young and
inexperienced, that is one of her great cheating times.  At some seasons
of the year, and in some waters, to the fisherman's surprise and
confusion, the fish will sometimes take his bare hook; a bit of a red rag
is a deadly bait.  And Madam Bubble's poorest and most perfunctory
busking is quite enough for the foolish fish she angles for.  And not in
our salad days only, when we are still green in judgment, but even to
grey hairs, this wicked witch continues to entrap us to our ruin.  Love,
in all its phases and in all its mixtures, first deludes the very young;
and then place, and power, and fame, and money are the bait she busks for
the middle-aged and the old; and always with the same bubble end.  The
whole truth is that without God, the living and ever-present God, in all
ages of it and in all parts and experiences of it, our human life is one
huge bubble.  A far-shining, high-soaring bubble; but sooner or later
seen and tasted to be a bubble--a deceit-filled, poison-filled
bubble.--Happy by her!  All men happy by her!  The impudent slut!

3.  Another thing about this slut is this, that "she will talk with any
man."  She makes up to us and makes eyes at us just as if we were free to
accept and return her three offers.  And still she talks to us and offers
us the same things she offered to Standfast till, to escape her and her
offers, he betook himself to his knees.  Nay, truth to tell, after she
had deceived us and ensnared us till we lay in her net cursing both her
and ourselves, so bold and so impudent and so persistent is this
temptress slut, and such fools and idiots are we, that we soon lay our
eyes on her painted beauty again and our heads in her loathsome lap; our
heads on that block over which the axe hangs by an angry hair.  "She will
talk with any man."  No doubt; but, then, it takes two to make a talk,
and the sad thing is that there are few men among us so wise, so
steadfast, and so experienced in her ways that they will not on occasion
let Madam Bubble talk her talk to them, and talk back again to her.  The
oldest saint, the oftenest sold and most dearly redeemed sinner, needs to
suspect himself to the end, till he is clear out of Madam Bubble's
enchanted ground and for ever over that river of deliverance which shall
sweep Madam Bubble and all her daughters into the dead sea for ever.

   "The grey-haired saint may fail at last,
      The surest guide a wanderer prove;
   Death only binds us fast
      To the bright shore of love."

4.  "She highly commends the rich," the guide goes on about Madam Bubble,
"and if there be one cunning to get money in any place she will speak
well of him from house to house."  "The world," says Faber, "is not
altogether matter, nor yet altogether spirit.  It is not man only, nor
Satan only, nor is it exactly sin.  It is an infection, an inspiration,
an atmosphere, a life, a colouring matter, a pageantry, a fashion, a
taste, a witchery.  None of all these names suit it, and all of them suit
it.  Meanwhile its power over the human creation is terrific, its
presence ubiquitous, its deceitfulness incredible.  It can find a home
under every heart beneath the poles.  It is wider than the catholic
church, and it is masterful, lawless, and intrusive within it.  We are
all living in it, breathing it, acting under its influence, being cheated
by its appearances, and unwarily admitting its principles."  Let young
ministers who wish to preach to their people on the World--after studying
what the Preacher, and the Saviour, and John, and John Bunyan say about
the World,--still read Faber's powerful chapter in his _Creator and
Creature_.  Yes; Madam Bubble finds a home for herself in every heart
beneath the poles.  The truth is Madam Bubble has no home, as she has no
existence, but in human hearts.  And all that Solomon, and our Saviour,
and John, and John Bunyan, and Frederick Faber say about the world and
about Madam Bubble they really say about the heart of man.  It is we, you
and I, my brethren, who so highly commend the rich.  It is we ourselves
here who speak well from house to house of him whose father or whose self
has been cunning to get money.  We either speak well or ill of them.  We
either are sick with envy at them, or we fawn upon them and fall down
before them.  How men rise in our esteem in the degree that their money
increases!  With what reverence and holy awe we look up at them as if
they were gods and the sons of gods!  They become more than mortal men to
our reverent imaginations.  How happy, how all but blessed they must be!
we say to ourselves.  Within those park gates, under those high towers,
in that silver-mounted carriage, surrounded with all those liveried
servants, and loved and honoured by all those arriving and leaving
guests--what happiness that rich man must have!  We are either eaten up
of lean-eyed envy of this and that rich man, or we positively worship
them as other men worship God and His saints.  Yes; Madam Bubble is our
very mother.  She conceived us and she suckled us.  We were brought up in
her nurture and admonition.  We learned her Catechism, and her shrine is
in our heart to-night.  Like her, if only a pilgrim is poor, we scorn
him.  We will not know him.  But if there be any one, pilgrim or no,
cunning to get money, we honour him, and we claim him as our kindred and
relation, our acquaintance and our friend.  We will speak often of him as
such from house to house.  Just see if we will not.  There is room in our
hearts, Madam Bubble, there is room in our hearts for thee!

5.  "She loves them most that think best of her."  But, surely, surely,
the guide goes quite too far in blaming and being hard upon poor Madam
Bubble for that?  For, to give her fair play, she is not at all alone in
that.  Is the guide himself wholly above that?  Do we not all do that?  Is
there one in ten, is there one in a thousand, who hates and humiliates
himself because his love of men and women goes up or down just as they
think of him?  Yes; Greatheart is true to his great name in his whole
portrait of Madam Bubble also, and nowhere more true than in this present
feature.  For when any man comes to have any true greatness in his
heart--how he despises and detests himself as he finds himself out in not
only claiming kindred and acquaintance with the rich and despising and
denying the poor; but, still more, in loving or hating other men just as
they love or hate him!  The world loves her own.  Yes; but he who has
been taken out of the world, and who has had the world taken out of him,
he loves--he strives to love, he goes to his knees every day he lives to
love--those who not only do not think well of him, but who both think ill
of him and speak ill of him.  "Humility," says William Law, "does not
consist in having a worse opinion of ourselves than we deserve, or in
abasing ourselves lower than we really are.  But as all virtue is founded
in truth, so humility is founded in a true and just sense of our
weakness, misery, and sin.  He who rightly feels and lives in this sense
of his condition lives in humility.  And, it may be added, when our
hearts are wholly clothed with humility we shall be prompt to approve the
judgment and to endorse the sentence of those who think and speak the
least good of us and the most evil."

6.  "'Twas she," so the guide at last wound up, "that set Absalom against
his father, and Jeroboam against his master.  'Twas she that persuaded
Judas to sell his Lord, and that prevailed with Demas to forsake the
godly pilgrim's life.  None can tell all the mischief that Madam Bubble
does.  She makes variance between rulers and subjects, between parents
and children, 'twixt neighbour and neighbour, 'twixt a man and his wife,
'twixt a man and himself, 'twixt the flesh and the heart."  Now, I shall
leave that last indictment and its lessons and its applications to
yourselves, my brethren.  You will get far more good out of this
accumulated count against Madam Bubble if you explain it, and open it up,
and prove it, and illustrate it to yourselves.  Explain, then, in what
way this sorceress set Absalom against his father and Jeroboam against
his master.  Point out in what way she makes variance between a ruler and
his subjects, and give illustrations.  Put your finger on a parent and on
a child between whom there is variance at this moment on her account.
And, if you are that parent or that child, what have you done to remove
that variance?  Name two neighbours that to your knowledge Madam Bubble
has come between; and say what you have done to be a peacemaker there.
Set down what you would say to a man and his wife so as to put them on
their guard against Madam Bubble ever coming in between them.  And, last
and best of all, point out to yourself at what times and in what ways
this wicked witch tries to make variance between God's Holy Spirit
striving within you and your own evil heart still strong within you.  When
you are weary and sleepy and hungry as a howlet, and, Madam Bubble and
her three daughters make a ring round you, what do you do?  Do you ever
take to your knees?  Really and honestly, do you?  When you find yourself
out looking with holy fear on a rich and lofty relation, and with
insufferable contempt on a poor and intrusive relation, by what name do
you call yourself?  Write it down.  And when she would fain put variance
between you and those who do not think well of you, what steps do you
take to foil her?  Where and how do you get strength at that supreme
moment to think of others as you would have them think of you?  "Oh,"
said Standfast, "what a mercy it is that I did resist her! for to what
might she not have drawn me?"




GAIUS


   "Gaius, mine host."--_Paul_.

Goodman Gaius was the head of a hostel that stood on the side of the
highway well on to the Celestial City.  The hostess of the hostel was no
more, and the old hostel-keeper did all her once well-done work and his
own proper work into the bargain.  Every day he inspected the whole house
with his own eyes, down even to the kitchen and the scullery.  The good
woman had left our host an only daughter; but, "Keep her as much out of
sight as is possible," she said, and so fell asleep.  And Gaius
remembered his wife's last testament every day, till none of the hostel
customers knew that there was so much as a young hostess in all the
house.  "Yes, gentlemen," replied the old innkeeper.  "Yes, come in.  It
is late, but I take you for true men, for you must know that my house is
kept open only for such."  So he took the large pilgrim party to their
several apartments with his own eyes, and then set about a supper for
those so late arrivals.  Stamping with his foot, he brought up the cook
with the euphonious and eupeptic name, and that quick-witted domestic
soon had a supper on the table that would have made a full man's mouth
water.  "The sight of all this," said Matthew, as the under-cook laid the
cloth and the trenchers, and set the salt and the bread in order--"the
sight of this cloth and of this forerunner of a supper begetteth in me a
greater appetite to my food than I thought I had before."  So supper came
up; and first a heave-shoulder and a wave-breast were set on the table
before them, in order to show that they must begin their meal with prayer
and praise to God.  These two dishes were very fresh and good, and all
the travellers did eat heartily well thereof.  The next was a bottle of
wine red as blood.  So Gaius said to them, "Drink freely; this is the
juice of the true vine that makes glad the heart of God and man."  And
they did drink and were very merry.  The next was a dish of milk well
crumbed.  At the sight of which Gaius said, "Let the boys have that, that
they may grow thereby."  And so on, dish after dish, till the nuts came
with the recitations and the riddles and the saws and the stories over
the nuts.  Thus the happy party sat talking till the break of day.

1.  Now, it is natural to remark that the first thing about a host is his
hospitality.  And that, too, whether our host is but the head of a hostel
like Goodman Gaius, or the head of a well-appointed private house like
Gaius's neighbour, Mr. Mnason.  The first and the last thing about a host
is his hospitality.  "Say little and do much" is the example and the
injunction to all our housekeepers that Rabban Shammai draws out of the
eighteenth of Genesis.  "Be like your father Abraham," he says, "on the
plains of Mamre, who only promised bread and water, but straightway set
Sarah to knead three measures of her finest meal, while he ran to the
herd and fetched a calf tender and good, and stood by the three men while
they did eat butter and milk under the tree.  Make thy Thorah an
ordinance: say little and do much: and receive every man with a pleasant
expression of countenance."  Now, this was exactly what Gaius our goodman
did that night, with one exception, which we shall be constrained to
attend to afterwards.  "It is late," he said, "so we cannot conveniently
go out to seek food; but such as we have you shall be welcome to, if that
will content."  At the same time Taste-that-which-is-good soon had a
supper sent up to the table fit for a prince: a supper of six courses at
that time in the morning, so that the sun was already in the sky when Old
Honest closed his casement.

"Dining in company is a divine institution," says Mr. Edward White, in
his delightful _Minor Moralities of Life_.  "Let Soyer's art be honoured
among all men," he goes on.  "Cookery distinguishes mankind from the
beasts that perish.  Happy is the woman whose daily table is the result
of forethought.  Her husband shall rise up and call her blessed.  It is
piteous when the culinary art is neglected in our young women's
education.  Let them, as St. Peter says, imitate Sarah.  Let them see how
that venerable princess went quickly to her kneading-trough and oven and
prepared an extempore collation of cakes and pilau for the angels.  How
few ladies, whether Gentiles or Jewesses, could do the like in the
present day!"

2.  The wistful and punctilious attention that Goodman Gaius paid to each
individual guest of his was a fine feature in his munificent hospitality.
He made every one who crossed his doorstep, down even to Mr. Fearing,
feel at once at home, such was his exquisite as well as his munificent
hospitality.  "Come, sir," he said, clapping that white-faced and
trembling pilgrim on the shoulder, "come, sir, be of good cheer, you are
welcome to me and to my house; and what thou hast a mind to, that call
for freely: for what thou wouldst have my servants will do for thee, and
they will do it for thee with a ready mind."  All the same, for a long
time Mr. Fearing was mortally afraid of the servants.  He would as soon
have thought of stamping his foot for a duchess to come up as for any of
Gaius's serving-maids.  He was afraid to make any noise in his room lest
all the house should hear it.  He was afraid to touch anything in the
room lest it should fall and be broken.  We ourselves, with all our
assumed ease and elaborate abandon, are often afraid to ring our bell
even in an inn.  Mr. Fearing would as soon have pulled the tail of a
rattlesnake.  But before their sojourn was over, the Guide was amazed at
Mr. Fearing, for that hare-hearted pilgrim would be doing things in the
house that he himself would scarcely do who had been in the house a
thousand times.  It was Gaius's exuberant heartiness that had demoralised
Mr. Fearing and made him almost too forward even for a wayside inn.  In
little things also Gaius, mine host, showed his sensitive and solicitous
hospitality.  We all know housekeepers, not to say innkeepers, and not
otherwise ungenerous housekeepers either who will grudge us a
sixpennyworth of sticks and coals in a cold night, and that, too, in a
room furnished to overflowing by Morton Brothers or the Messrs. Maple.  We
take a candlestick and a dozen candles with us in the boot of the
carriage when we wish to read or write late into the night in that great
house.  Another housekeeper, who would give you her only daughter with
her wealthy dowry, will sometimes be seen by all in her house to grudge
you a fresh cup of afternoon tea when you drop in to see her and her
daughter.  She says to herself that it is to spare the servants the
stairs; but, all the time, under the stairs, the servants are blushing
for the sometimes unaccountable stinginess of their unusually munificent
mistress.  I shall give you "line upon line, precept upon precept, here a
little and there a little" of Aristotle upon munificence in little things
till you come up to his pagan standard.  "There is a real greatness," he
says, "even in the way that some men will buy a toy to a child.  Even in
the smallest matters the munificent man will act munificently!"  As
Gaius, mine host, munificently did.

3.  Speaking of children, what a night of entertainment good old Gaius
gave the children of the pilgrim party!  "Let the boys have the crumbed
milk," he gave orders.  "Butter and honey shall they eat," he exclaimed
over them as that brimming dish came up.  "This was our Lord's dish when
He was a child," he said to the mother of the boys, "that He might know
to refuse the evil and to choose the good."  Then they brought up a dish
of apples, and they were very good-tasted fruit.  Then said Matthew, "May
we eat apples, since they were such by and with which the serpent
beguiled our first mother?"  Then said Gaius,

   "Apples were they by which we were beguiled,
   Yet sin, not apples, hath our souls defiled.
   Apples forbid, if eat, corrupt the blood.
   To eat such, when commanded, does us good.
   Drink of His flagons then, thou Church, His Dove,
   And eat His apples who are sick of love."

Then said Matthew, "I make the scruple because I awhile since was sick
with eating of fruit."  "Forbidden fruit," said the host, "will make you
sick, but not what our Lord hath tolerated."  While they were thus
talking they were presented with another dish, and it was a dish of nuts.
Then said some at the table, "Nuts spoil tender teeth, especially the
teeth of children," which when Gaius heard, he said,

   "Hard texts are nuts (I will not call them cheaters)
   Whose shells do keep their kernels from the eaters;
   Ope then the shells and you shall have the meat;
   They here are brought for you to crack and eat."

Then Samuel whispered to his mother and said, "Mother, this is a very
good man's house; let us stay here a good while before we go any
farther."  The which Gaius the host overhearing, said, "With a very good
will, my child."

4.  Widower as old Gaius was, and never for a single hour forgot that he
was, there was a certain sweet and stately gallantry awakened in his
withered old heart at the sight of Christiana and Mercy, and especially
at the sight of Matthew and Mercy when they were seen together.  He seems
to have fallen almost in love with that aged matron, as he called her,
and the days of his youth came back to him as he studied the young
damsel, who was to her as a daughter.  And this set the loquacious old
innkeeper upon that famous oration about women which every man who has a
mother, or a wife, or a sister, or a daughter has by heart.  And from
that he went on to discourse on the great advantages of an early
marriage.  He was not the man, nor was he speaking to a mother who was
the woman, ever to become a vulgar and coarse-minded matchmaker; at the
same time, he liked to see Matthew and Mercy sent out on a message
together, leaving it to nature and to grace to do the rest.  The pros and
cons of early marriage were often up at his hearty table, but he always
debated, and Gaius was a great debater, that true hospitality largely
consisted in throwing open the family circle to let young people get well
acquainted with one another in its peace and sweetness.  And Gaius both
practised what he preached, and at the same time endorsed his watchful
wife's last testament, when he gave his daughter Phebe to James,
Christiana's second son, and thus was left alone, poor old Gaius, when
the happy honeymoon party started upward from his hostel door.

5.  Their next host was one Mr. Mnason, a Cyprusian by nation, and an old
disciple.  "How far have you come to-day?" he asked.  "From the house of
Gaius our friend," they said.  "I promise you," said he, "you have gone a
good stitch; you may well be weary; sit down."  So they sat down.  "Our
great want a while since," said Old Honest, "was harbour and good
company, and now I hope we have both."  "For harbour," said the host,
"you see what it is, but for good company that will appear in the trial."
After they were a little rested Old Honest again asked his host if there
were any store of good people in that town; and, "How," he said, "shall
we do to see some of them?  For the sight of good men to them that are
going on pilgrimage is like to the appearing of the moon and stars to
them that are sailing upon the seas."  Then Mr. Mnason stamped with his
foot and his daughter Grace came up, when he sent her out for five of his
friends in the town, saying that he had a guest or two in his house at
present to whom he would like to introduce them.

Now, this is another of the good qualities of a good host, to know the
best and the most suitable people in the town, and to be on such terms
with them that on short notice they will step across to help to entertain
such travellers as had come to Mr. Mnason's table.  And it is an
excellent thing to be sure that when we are so invited we shall not only
get a good dinner, but also, as good "kitchen" with our dinner, good
company and good conversation.  It is nothing short of a fine art to
gather together and to seat suitably beside one another good and suitable
people as Mr. and Miss Mnason did in their hospitable house that
afternoon.  And then, as to the talk: let the host and the hostess
introduce the guests, and then let the guests introduce their own topics.
And as far as possible, in a city and a day like this, let our topics be
books rather than people.  And let the books be the books that the guests
have read rather than those that the host and the hostess have read.
Books are a fine subject for a talk at table.  Only, let great readers
order their learned and literary talk so as not to lead the less learned
into temptation.  There is no finer exercise of fine feeling than to be
able to carry on a conversation about matters that other people present
are ignorant of, and at the same time to interest them, to set them at
ease, and to make them forget both you and themselves.  I had a letter
the other day from an English Church clergyman, in which he tells me that
his bishop is coming this month to his vicarage for a kind of visitation
and retreat, and that they are to have William Law's _Characters and
Characteristics_ read aloud to them when the bishop and the assembled
clergy are at their meals.  For my part, I would rather hear a good all-
round talk on that book by the bishop and his clergy after they had all
read the book over and over again at home.  But such readings at
assembled meals have all along been a feature of the best fraternal life
in the Church of England and in some of the sister churches.

6.  Now, after dining and supping repeatedly with garrulous old Gaius,
and with the all-but-silent Mr. Mnason, I have come home ruminating again
and again on this--that a good host, the best host, lets his guests talk
while he attends to the table.  If the truth may even be whispered to
one's-self about a table that one has just left, Gaius did his best to
spoil his good supper by his own over-garrulity.  It was good talk that
he entertained his waiting guests with, but we may have too much of a
good thing.  His oration in praise of women was an excellent oration, had
it been delivered in another house than his own; and, say, when he was
asked to give the health of Christiana, or of Matthew the bridegroom and
Mercy the bride, it would then have been perfect; but not in his own
house, and not when his guests were waiting for their supper.  On the
other hand, you should have seen that perfect gentleman, Mr. Mnason.  For
that true old Christian and old English gentleman never once opened his
mouth after he had set his guests a-talking.  He was too busy watching
when any man's dish was again empty.  He was too much delighted to see
that every one of his guests was having his punctual share of the supper,
and at the same time his full share of the talk.  Mr. Fearing's small
voice was far more pleasant to Mr. Mnason than his own voice was in his
own best story.  As I opened my own door the other night after supping
with Mr. and Miss Mnason, I said to myself--One thing I have again seen
and learned to-night, and that is, that a host, and still more a hostess,
should talk less at their own table than their most silent, most bashful,
and most backward guest.  "Make this an ordinance for thee," said Rabban
Shammai to his sons in the law; "receive all thy guests with a pleasant
expression of countenance, and then say little and do much."




CHRISTIAN


   "The disciples were called Christians first at Antioch."--_Luke_.

   "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian."--_King Agrippa_.

   "Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from
   iniquity."--_Paul_.

All the other personages in the Pilgrim's Progress come and go; they all
ascend the stage for a longer or shorter time, and then pass off the
stage and so pass out of our sight; but Christian in the First Part, and
Christiana in the Second Part, are never for a single moment out of our
sight.  And, accordingly, we have had repeated occasion and opportunity
to learn many excellent lessons from the chief pilgrim's upward walk and
heavenly conversation.  But so full and so rich are his life and his
character, that some very important things still remain to be collected
before we finally close his history.  "Gather up the fragments that
nothing be lost," said our Lord, after His miraculous meal of multiplied
loaves and fishes with His disciples.  And in like manner I shall now
proceed to gather up some of the remaining fragments of Christian's life
and character and experience.  And I shall collect these fragments into
the three baskets of his book, his burden, and his sealed roll and
certificate.

1.  And first, a few things as to his book.  "As I slept I dreamed, and
behold I saw a man clothed in rags standing in a certain place, with his
face from his own house, a book in his hand, and a great burden upon his
back.  I looked and saw him open the book and read therein; and as he
read he wept and trembled; and not being able longer to contain he broke
out with a lamentable cry, saying, What shall I do?"  We hear a great
deal in these advertising days, and not one word too much, about the
books that have influenced and gone largely to the making of our great
men; but Graceless, like John Bunyan, his biographer, was a man of but
one book.  But, then, that book was the most influential of all books; it
was the Book of books; it was God's very own and peculiar Book.  And
those of us who, like this man, have passed out of a graceless into a
gracious state will for ever remember how that same Book at that time
influenced us till it made us what we are and shall yet be.  We read many
other good books at that epoch in our life, but it was the pure Bible
that we read and prayed over out of sight the most.  We needed no
commentators or exegetes on our simple Bible in those days.  The great
texts stood out to our eyes in those days as if they had been written
with a sunbeam; while all other books (and we read nothing but the best
books in those days) looked like twilight and rushlight beside our Bible.
In those immediate, direct, and intense days we would have satisfied
Wordsworth and Matthew Arnold themselves in the way we read our Bible
with our eye never off the object.  The Four Last Things were ever before
us--death and judgment, heaven and hell.  "O my dear wife," said
Graceless, "and you the children of my bowels, I your dear friend am in
myself undone by reason of a burden that lieth hard upon me; moreover, I
am for certain informed that this our city will be burned with fire from
heaven, in which fearful overthrow both myself, with thee my wife, and
you my sweet babes, shall miserably come to ruin, except (the which yet I
see not) some way of escape can be found whereby we may be delivered."  He
would walk also solitarily in the fields, sometimes reading and sometimes
praying; and thus for some days he spent his time.  Graceless at that
time and at that stage would have satisfied the exigent author of the
_Practical Treatise upon Christian Perfection_ where he says that "we are
too apt also to think that we have sufficiently read a book when we have
so read it as to know what it contains.  This reading may be quite
sufficient as to many books; but as to the Bible we are not to think that
we have read it enough because we have often read and heard what it
teaches.  We must read our Bible, not to know what it contains, but to
fill our hearts with the spirit of it."  And, again, and on this same
point, "There is this unerring key to the right use of the Bible.  The
Bible has only one intent, and that is to make a man know, resist, and
abhor the working of his fallen earthly nature, and to turn the faith,
hope, and longing desire of his heart to God; and therefore we are only
to read our Bibles with this view and to learn this one lesson from it .
. . The critic looks into his books to see how Latin and Greek authors
have used the words 'stranger' and 'pilgrim,' but the Christian, who
knows that man lives in labour and toil, in sickness and pain, in hunger
and thirst, in heat and cold among the beasts of the field, where evil
spirits like roaring lions seek to devour him--he only knows in what
truth and reality man is a poor stranger and a distressed pilgrim upon
the earth."  John Bunyan read neither Plato nor Aristotle, but he read
David and Paul till he was the chief of sinners, and till he was first
the Graceless and then the Christian of his own next-to-the-Bible book.

2.  In the second place, and as to his burden.  We are supplied with no
particulars as to the first beginnings, the gradual make-up, and at last
the terrible size of Christian's burden.  What this pilgrim's youthful
life must have been in such a city as his native city was, and while he
was still a young man of such a name and such a character in such a city,
we are left to ourselves to think and consider.  Graceless was his name
by nature, and his life was as his name and his nature were.  Still, as I
have said, we have no detailed and particular account of his early life
when his burden was still day and night in the making up.  How long into
your life were you graceless, my brother?  And what kind of life did you
lead day and night before you were persuaded or alarmed, as the case may
have been with you, into being a Christian?  What burdens do you carry on
your broken back to this day that were made up in the daylight or in the
darkness by your own hands in your early days?  Were you early or were
you too late in your conversion?  Or are you truly converted to God and
to salvation even yet?  And are you at this moment still binding a burden
on your back that you shall never lay down on this side your grave--it
may be, not on this side your burning bed in hell?  Ask yourselves all
that before God and before your own conscience, and make yourselves
absolutely sure that God at any rate is not mocked; and, therefore that
you, too, shall in the end reap exactly as you from the beginning have
sown.  "How camest thou by thy burden at first?" asked Mr.
Worldly-Wiseman at the trembling pilgrim.  "By reading this book in my
hand," he answered.  And, in the long run, it is always the Bible that
best creates a sinner's burden, binds it on his back, and makes it so
terribly heavy to bear.  Fear of death and judgment will sometimes make
up and bind on a sinner's burden; and sometimes the fear of man's
judgment on this side of death will do it.  Fear of being found out in
some cases will make a man's secret sin far too heavy for him to bear.
The throne of public opinion is not a very white throne; at the same
time, it is a coarse forecast and a rough foretaste of the last judgment;
and the fear of it not seldom makes a man's burden simply intolerable to
him.  Sometimes a great sinner's burden leads him to flight and outlawry;
sometimes to madness and self-murder; and sometimes, by the timeous and
sufficient grace of God, to the way of escape that our pilgrim took.
Tenderness of conscience, also, simple softness of heart and conscience,
will sometimes make a terrible burden out of what other men would call a
very light matter.  Bind a burden on that iron pillar standing there, and
it will feel nothing and say nothing.  But, bind the same burden on that
man in whose seat that dead pillar takes up a sitter's room, and he will
make all that are in the house hear his sighs and his groans.  And lay an
act of sin--an evil word or evil work or evil thought--on one man among
us, and he will walk about the streets with as erect a head and as
smiling a countenance and as light a step as if he were an innocent
child; while, lay half as much on his neighbour, and it will so bruise
him to the earth that all men will take knowledge of him that he is a
miserable man.  Our Lord could no doubt have carried His cross from the
hall of judgment to the hill-top without help had His back not been wet
with blood.  What with a whole and an unwealed body, a well-rested and
well-nourished body, He could easily have carried, with His broken body
and broken heart He quite sank under.  And so it is with His people.  One
of His heart-broken, heart-bleeding people will sink down to death and
hell under a burden of sin and corruption that another of them will
scarcely feel or know or believe that it is there.  Some sins again in
themselves, and by reason of several aggravations, are far more heavy to
bear than others, and by some sinners than others.  I was reading Bishop
Andrewes to myself last night and came upon this pertinent passage.  "Sin:
its measure, its harm, its scandal.  Its quality: how often--how long.
The person by whom: his age, condition, state, enlightenment.  Its
manner, motive, time, and place.  The folly of it, the ingratitude of it,
the hardness of it, the presumptuousness of it.  By heart, by mouth, by
deed.  Against God, my neighbours, my own body.  By knowledge, by
ignorance.  Willingly and unwillingly.  Of old and of late.  In boyhood
and youth, in mature and old age.  Things done once, repeated often,
hidden and open.  Things done in anger, and from the lust of the flesh
and of the world.  Before and after my call.  Asleep by night and awake
by day.  Things remembered and things forgotten.  Through the fiery darts
of the enemy, through the unclean desires of the flesh--I have sinned
against Thee.  Have mercy on me, O God, and forgive me!"  That is the way
some men's burdens are made up to such gigantic proportions and then
bound on by such acute cords.  That is the way that Lancelot Andrewes and
John Bunyan walked solitarily in the fields, sometimes reading and
sometimes praying, till the one of them put himself into his immortal
_Devotions_, and the other into his immortal _Grace Abounding_ and
_Pilgrim's Progress_.

"Then I saw in my dream that Christian asked the Gatekeeper further if he
could not help him off with his burden that was upon his back, for as yet
he had not got rid of it, nor could he by any means get it off without
help.  He told him, 'As to thy burden, be content to bear it until thou
comest to the place of deliverance, for there it will fall from off thy
back itself.'  Now I saw in my dream that the highway up which Christian
was to go was fenced on either side with a wall, and that wall is
Salvation.  Up this way, therefore, did burdened Christian run, but not
without great difficulty, because of the load on his back.  He ran thus
till he came to a place somewhat ascending, and upon that place stood a
cross, and a little below in the bottom a sepulchre.  So I saw in my
dream that just as Christian came up with the cross his burden loosed
from off his back, and began to tumble and so continued to do till it
came to the mouth of the sepulchre, where it fell in and I saw it no
more.  Then was Christian glad and lightsome, and said with a merry
heart, 'He hath given me rest by His sorrow, and life by His death!'"

   "Blest Cross! blest Sepulchre!  Blest rather be
   The Man that there was put to shame for me."

But, then, how it could be that this so happy man was scarcely a stone-
cast past the cross when he had begun again to burden himself with fresh
sin, and thus to disinter all his former sin?  How a true pilgrim comes
to have so many burdens to bear, and that till he ceases to be any longer
a pilgrim,--a burden of guilt, a burden of corruption, and a burden of
bare creaturehood,--I must leave all that, and all the questions
connected with all that, for you all to think out and work out for
yourselves; and you will not say any morning on this earth, like Mrs.
Timorous, that you have little to do.

3.  The third of the three Shining Ones who saluted Christian at the
cross set a mark on his forehead, and put a roll with a seal set upon it
into his hand.  A roll and a seal which he bid him look on as he ran, and
that he should give that roll in at the Celestial Gate.  Bunyan does not
in all places come up to his usual clearness in what he says about the
sealed roll.  We must believe that he understood his own meaning and
intention in all that he says, first and last, about the roll, but he has
not always made his meaning clear, at least to one of his readers.
Theological students, and, indeed, all thoughtful Christian men, are
invited to read Dr. Cunningham's powerful paper on Assurance in his
_Reformers_.  The whole literature of Assurance is there taken up and
weighed and sifted with all that great writer's incomparable learning and
power and judgment.  Our Larger Catechism, also, is excellent on this
subject; and this subject is a favourite commonplace with all our best
Calvinistic, Puritan, and Evangelical authors.  Let us take two or three
passages out of those authors just as a specimen, and so close.

"Can true believers"--Larger Catechism, Question 80--"Can true believers
be infallibly assured that they are in an estate of grace, and that they
shall persevere therein to the end?  _Answer_: Such as truly believe in
Christ, and endeavour to walk in all good conscience before Him may,
without extraordinary revelation, by faith grounded upon the truth of
God's promise, and by the Spirit enabling them to discern in themselves
those graces to which the promises of eternal life are made, and bearing
witness with their spirits that they are the children of God, they may be
infallibly assured that they are in the estate of grace, and shall
persevere therein unto salvation."  Question 81: "Are all true believers
at all times assured of their present being in a state of grace, and that
they shall be saved?  _Answer_: Assurance of grace and salvation not
being of the essence of faith, true believers may wait long before they
obtain it, and, after the enjoyment thereof, may have it weakened and
intermitted through manifold distempers, sins, temptations, and
desertions; yet are they never left without such a presence and support
of the Spirit of God as keeps them from sinking into utter despair."  "A
Christian's assurance," says Fraser of Brea, "though it does not firstly
flow from his holiness, yet is ever after proportionable to his holy
walking.  Faith is kept in a pure conscience.  Sin is like a blot of ink
fallen upon our evidence.  This I found to be a truth."  "It was the
speech of one to me," says Thomas Shepard of New England, "next to the
donation of Christ, no mercy like this, to deny assurance long; and why?
For if the Lord had not, I should have given way to a loose heart and
life.  And this is a rule I have long held--long denial of assurance is
like fire to burn out some sin and then the Lord will speak peace."
"Serve your God day and night faithfully," says Dr. Goodwin.  "Walk
humbly; and there is a promise of the Holy Ghost to come and fill your
hearts with joy unspeakable and glorious to rear you up to the day of
redemption.  Sue this promise out, wait for it, rest not in believing
only, rest not in assurance by graces only; there is a further assurance
to be had."  "I would not give a straw for that assurance," says John
Newton, "which sin will not damp.  If David had come from his adultery
and still have talked of his assurance, I should have despised his
speech."  "When we want the faith of assurance," says Matthew Henry, "let
us live by the faith of adherence."  And then the whole truth is in a
nutshell in Isaiah and in John: "The effect of righteousness shall be
quietness and assurance for ever," and "My little children, let us not
love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth.  And hereby we
shall know that we are of the truth, and so shall assure our hearts
before Him."




CHRISTIANA


   "Honour widows that are widows indeed."--_Paul_.

We know next to nothing of Christiana till after she is a widow indeed.
The names of her parents, and what kind of parents they were, the schools
and the boarding-schools to which they sent their daughter, her school
companions, the books she read, if she ever read any books at all, the
amusements she was indulged in and indulged herself in--on all that her
otherwise full and minute biographer is wholly silent.  He does not go
back beyond her married life; he does not even go back to the beginning
of that.  The only thing we are sure of about Christiana's early days is
that she was an utterly ungodly woman and that she married an utterly
ungodly man.  "Have you a family?  Are you a married man?" asked Charity
of Christian in the House Beautiful.  "I have a wife and four small
children," he replied.  "And why did you not bring them along with you?"
Then Christian wept, and said: "Oh, how willingly would I have done it;
but they were all utterly averse to my going on pilgrimage."  "But you
should have talked to them," said Charity, "and have endeavoured to have
shown them the danger of being behind."  "So I did," answered Christian.
"And did you pray to God that He would bless your counsel to them?"  "Yes,
and with much affection; for you must think that my wife and poor
children were very dear unto me."  "But what could they say for
themselves why they came not?"  "Why, my wife was afraid of losing the
world, and my children were given over to the foolish delights of youth;
so what with one thing and what with another, they left me to wander in
this manner alone."

But what her husband's conversion, good example, and most earnest
entreaties could not all do for his worldly wife, that his sudden death
speedily did.  And thus it is that both Christiana's best life, all our
interest in her, and all our information about her, dates, sad to say,
not from her espousal, nor from her marriage day, nor from any part of
her married life, but from her husband's death.  Her maidenhood has no
interest for us; all our interest is fixed on her widowhood.  This work
of fiction now in our hands begins where all other works of fiction end;
for in the life of religion, you must know, our best is always before us.
Well, scarcely was her husband dead when Christiana began to accuse
herself of having killed him.  To take her own bitter words for it, the
most agonising and remorseful thoughts about her conduct to her husband
stung her heart like so many wasps.  Ah yes!  A wasp's sting is but a
blade of innocent grass compared with the thoughts that have stung us all
as we recalled what we said and did to those who are now no more.  There
are graves in the churchyard we dare not go near.  "I have sinned away
your father!" she cried, as she threw herself on the earth at the feet of
her astounded children.  "I have sinned away your father and he is gone!"
And yet there was no mark of a bullet and no gash of a knife on his dead
body, and no chemistry could have extracted one grain of arsenic or of
strychnine out of his blood.  But there are many ways of taking a man's
life besides those of poison or a knife or a gunshot.  Constant fault-
finding, constant correction and studied contempt before strangers, total
want of sympathy and encouragement, gloomy looks, rough remarks, all
blame and never a word of praise, things like these between man and wife
will kill as silently and as surely as poison or suffocation.  Look at
home, my brethren, and ask yourselves what you will think of much of your
present conduct when it has borne its proper fruit.  "Upon this came into
her mind by swarms all her unkind, unnatural, and ungodly carriages to
her dear friend, which also clogged her conscience and did load her with
guilt.  It all returned upon her like a flash of lightning, and rent the
caul of her heart asunder."  "That which troubleth me most," she would
cry out, "is my churlish carriages to him when he was under distress.  I
am that woman," she would cry out and would not be appeased--"I am that
woman that was so hardhearted as to slight my husband's troubles, and
that left him to go on his journey alone.  How like a churl I carried
myself to him in all that!  And so guilt took hold of my mind," she said
to the Interpreter, "and would have drawn me to the pond!"

A minister's widow once told me that she had gone home after hearing a
sermon of mine on the text, "What profit is there in my blood?" and had
destroyed a paper of poison she had purchased in her despair on the
previous Saturday night.  It was not a sermon from her unconscious
minister, but it was far better; it was a conversation that Christiana
held with her four boys that fairly and for ever put all thought of the
pond out of their mother's remorseful mind.  "So Christiana," as we read
in the opening of her history--"so Christiana called her sons together
and began thus to address herself unto them: My sons, I have, as you may
perceive, been of late under much exercise in my soul about the death of
your father.  My carriages to your father in his distress are a great
load on my conscience.  Come, my children, let us pack up and be gone to
the gate, that we may see your father and be with him, according to the
laws of that land."  I like that passage, I think, the best in all
Christiana's delightful history--that passage which begins with these
words: "So she called her children together."  For when she called her
children together she opened to them both her heart and her conscience;
and from that day there was but one heart and one conscience in all that
happy house.  I was walking alone on a country road the other day, and as
I was walking I was thinking about my pastoral work and about my people
and their children, when all at once I met one of my people.  My second
sentence to him was: "This very moment I was thinking about your sons.
How are they getting on?"  He quite well understood me.  He knew that I
was not indifferent as to how they were getting on in business, but he
knew that I was alluding more to the life of godliness and virtue in
their hearts and in their characters.  "O sir," he said, "you may give
your sons the skin off your back, but they will not give you their
confidence!"  So had it been with Christian and his sons.  He had never
managed, even in his religion, to get into the confidence of his sons;
but when their mother took them into her agonised confidence, from that
day she was in all their confidences, good and bad.  You who are in your
children's confidences will pray in secret for my lonely friend with the
skin off his back, will you not? that he may soon be able to call his
sons together so as to start together on a new life of family love, and
family trust, and family religion.  That was a fine sight.  Who will make
a picture of it?  This widow indeed at the head of her family council-
table, and Matthew at the foot, and James and Joseph and Samuel all in
their places.  "Come, my children, let us pack up that we may see your
father!"  Then did her children burst into tears for joy that the heart
of their mother was so inclined.

From that first family council let us pass on to Christiana's last
interview with her family and her other friends.  Her biographer
introduces her triumphant translation with this happy comment on the
margin: "How welcome is death to them that have nothing to do but die!"
Well, that was exactly Christiana's case.  She had so packed up at the
beginning of her journey; she had so got and had so kept the confidences
of all her sons; she had seen them all so married in the Lord, and thus
so settled in a life of godliness and virtue; she had, in short, lived
the life of a widow indeed, till, when the post came for her, she had
nothing left to do but just to rise up and follow him.  His token to her
was an arrow with a point sharpened with love, let easily into her heart,
which by degrees wrought so effectually with her that at the time
appointed she must be gone.  We have read of arrows of death sharpened
sometimes with steel and sometimes with poison; but this arrow, shot from
heaven, was sharpened to a point with love.  Indeed, that arrow, or the
very fellow of it, had been shot into Christiana's heart long ago when
she stood at that spot somewhat ascending where was a cross and a
sepulchre; and, especially, ever since the close of Greatheart's great
discourse on pardon by deed.  For the hearing of that famous discourse
had made her exclaim: "Oh!  Thou loving One, it makes my heart bleed to
think that Thou shouldest bleed for me!  Oh!  Thou blessed One, Thou
deservest to have me, for Thou hast bought me!  Thou deservest to have me
all, for Thou hast paid for me ten thousand times more than I am worth!"
Now it was with all that love working effectually in her heart that
Christiana called for her children to give them her blessing.  And what a
comfort it was to her to see them all around her with the mark of the
kingdom on their foreheads, and with their garments white.  "My sons and
my daughters," she said, "be you all ready against the time His post
calls for you."  Then she called for Mr. Valiant-for-truth, and entreated
him to have an eye on her children, and to speak comfortably to them if
at any time he saw them faint.  And then she gave Mr. Standfast her ring.
"Behold," she said, as Mr. Honest came in--"Behold an Israelite indeed,
in whom is no guile!"  Then Mr. Ready-to-halt came in, and then Mr.
Despondency and his daughter Much-afraid, and then Mr. Feeble-mind.  Now
the day drew on that Christiana must be gone.  So the road was full of
people to see her take her journey.  But, behold! all the banks beyond
the river were full of horses and chariots which were come down from
above to accompany her to the City gates, so she came forth and entered
the river with a beckon of farewell to those that followed her to the
river-side.  The last word she was heard to say here was, "I come, Lord,
to be with Thee, and to bless Thee."

But with all this, you must not suppose that this good woman, this mother
in Israel, had forgotten her grandchildren.  She would sooner have
forgotten her own children.  But she was too good a woman to forget
either.  For long ago, away back at the river on this side the Delectable
Mountains, she had said to her four daughters--I must tell you exactly
what she has said: "Here," she said, "in this meadow there are cotes and
folds for sheep, and an house is built here also for the nourishing and
bringing up of those lambs, even the babes of those women that go on
pilgrimage.  Also there is One here who can have compassion and that can
gather these lambs with His arm and carry them in His bosom.  This Man,
she said, will house and harbour and succour the little ones, so that
none of them shall be lacking in time to come.  This Man, if any of them
go astray or be lost, He will bring them again, He will bind up that
which was broken, and will strengthen them that are sick.  So they were
content to commit their little ones to that Man, and all this was to be
at the charge of the King, and so it was as a hospital to young children
and orphans."

And now I shall sum up my chief impressions of Christiana under the three
heads of her mind, her heart, and her widowhood indeed.

1.  The mother of Christian's four sons was a woman of real mind, as so
many of the maidens, and wives, and widows of Puritan England and
Covenanting Scotland were.  You gradually gather that impression just
from being beside her as the journey goes on.  She does not speak much;
but, then, there is always something individual, remarkable, and
memorable in what she says.  I have a notion of my own that Christiana
must have been a reader of that princely Puritan, John Milton.  And if
that was so, that of itself would be certificate enough as to her
possession of mind.  There is always a dignity and a strength about her
utterances that make us feel sure that she had always had a mind far
above her neighbours, Mrs. Bat's-eyes, Mrs. Light-mind, and Mrs. Know-
nothing.  The first time she opens her mouth in our hearing she lets fall
an expression that Milton had just made famous in his _Samson_--

   "Ease to the body some, none to the mind
   From restless thoughts, that like a deadly swarm
   Of hornets armed no sooner found alone,
   But rush upon me thronging, and present
   Times past, what once I was, and what am now."

Nor can I leave this point without asserting it to you that no church and
no school of theology has ever developed the mind as well as sanctified
the heart of the common people like the preaching of the Puritan pulpit.
Matthew Arnold was not likely to over-estimate the good that Puritanism
had done to England.  Indeed, in his earlier writings he sometimes went
out of his way to lament the hurt that the Puritan spirit had done to
liberality of life and mind in his native land.  But in his riper years
we find him saying: "Certainly," he says, "I am not blind to the faults
of the Puritan discipline, but it has been an invaluable discipline for
that poor, inattentive, and immoral creature, man.  And the more I read
history and the more I see of mankind, the more I recognise the value of
the Puritan discipline."  And in that same Address he "founded his best
hopes for that so enviable and unbounded country in which he was
speaking, America, on the fact that so many of its millions had passed
through the Puritan discipline."  John Milton was a product of that
discipline on the one hand, as John Bunyan was on the other.  Christiana
was another of its products in the sphere of the family, just as Matthew
Arnold himself had some of his best qualities out of the same fruitful
school.

2.  Her heart, her deep, strong, tender heart, is present on every page
of Christiana's noble history.  Her heart keeps her often silent when the
water in her eyes becomes all the more eloquent.  When she does let her
heart utter itself in words, her words are fine and memorable.  As, for
one instance, after Greatheart's discourse on redemption.  "O Mercy, that
thy father and mother were here; yea, and Mrs. Timorous also.  Nay, I
wish with all my heart now that here was Madam Wanton, too.  Surely,
surely, their hearts would be affected, nor could the fear of the one,
nor the powerful lusts of the other, prevail with them to go home again,
and to refuse to become good pilgrims."  But it was not so much what she
said herself that brought out the depth and tenderness of Christiana's
heart, it was rather the way her heart loosened other people's tongues.
You must all have felt how some people's presence straitens your heart
and sews up your mouth.  While there are other people, again, whose
simple presence unseals your heart and makes you eloquent.  We ministers
keenly feel that both in our public and in our private ministrations.
There are people in whose hard and chilling presence we cannot even say
grace as we should say it.  Whereas, we all know other people, people of
a heart, that is, whose presence somehow so touches our lips that we
always when near them rise far above ourselves.  Christiana did not speak
much to her guides and instructors and companions, but they always spoke
their best to her, and it was her heart that did it.

3.  And then a widow indeed is just a true and genuine widow; a widow not
in her name and in her weeds only, but still more in her deep heart, in
her whole life, and in her garnered experience.  "Honour widows that are
widows indeed.  Now, she that is a widow indeed and desolate, trusteth in
God, and continueth in supplications and in prayers night and day.  Well
reported of for good works; if she have brought up children, if she have
lodged strangers, if she have washed the saints' feet, if she have
relieved the afflicted, if she have diligently followed every good work."
These are the true marks and seals and occupations of a widow indeed.  And
if she has had unparalleled trials and irreparable losses, she has her
corresponding consolations and compensations.  For she has a freedom to
go about and do good, a liberty and an experience that neither the
unmarried maiden nor the married wife can possibly have.  She can do
multitudes of things that in the nature of things neither of them can
attempt to do.  Things that would be both unseemly and impossible for
other women to say or to do are both perfectly seemly and wholly open for
her to say and to do.  Her widowhood is a sacred shield to her.  Her
sorrow is a crown of honour and a sceptre of authority to her.  She is
consulted by the young and the inexperienced, by the forsaken and by the
forlorn, as no other human being ever is.  She has come through this
life, and by a long experience she knows this world and the hearts that
fill it and make it what it is.  A widow indeed can show a sympathy, and
give a counsel, and speak with a weight of wisdom that one's own mother
cannot always do.  All you who by God's sad dispensation are now clothed
in the "white and wimpled folds" of widowhood, let your prayer and your
endeavour day and night be that God would guide and enable you to be
widows indeed.  And, if you do, you shall want neither your occupation
nor your honour.




THE ENCHANTED GROUND


   "Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
   divination against Israel."--_Balaam_.

"I saw then in my dream that they went till they came into a certain
country whose air naturally tended to make one drowsy if he came a
stranger to it.  And here Hopeful began to be very dull and heavy of
sleep, wherefore he said unto Christian, I do now begin to grow so drowsy
that I can scarcely hold up mine eyes; let us lie down here and take one
nap."  And then when we turn to the same place in the Second Part we read
thus: "By this time they were got to the Enchanted Ground, where the air
naturally tended to make one drowsy.  And that place was all grown over
with briars and thorns, excepting here and there, where was an enchanted
arbour, upon which, if a man sits, or in which if a man sleeps, 'tis a
question, say some, whether they shall ever rise or wake again in this
world.  Now, they had not gone far, but a great mist and darkness fell
upon them all, so that they could scarce, for a great while, see the one
the other.  Wherefore they were forced for some time to feel for one
another by words, for they walked not by sight.  Nor was there on all
this ground so much as one inn or victualling-house wherein to refresh
the feebler sort.  Then they came to an arbour, warm, and promising much
refreshing to the pilgrims, for it was finely wrought above head,
beautified with greens, and furnished with couches and settles.  It also
had a soft couch on which the weary might lean.  This arbour was called
The Slothful Man's Friend, on purpose to allure, if it might be, some of
the pilgrims there to take up their rest when weary.  This, you must
think, all things considered, was tempting.  I saw in my dream also that
they went on in this their solitary way till they came to a place at
which a man is very apt to lose his way.  Now, though when it was light,
their guide could well enough tell how to miss those ways that led wrong,
yet in the dark he was put to a stand.  But he had in his pocket a map of
all ways leading to or from the Celestial City, wherefore he struck a
light (for he never goes also without his tinder-box), and takes a view
of his book or map, which bids him be careful in that place to turn to
the right-hand way.  Then I thought with myself, who that goeth on
pilgrimage but would have one of those maps about him, that he may look
when he is at a stand, which is the way to take?"

1.  "But what is the meaning of all this?" asked Christiana of the guide.
"This Enchanted Ground,"--her able and experienced friend answered her,
"this is one of the last refuges that the enemy to pilgrims has;
wherefore it is, as you see, placed almost at the end of the way, and so
it standeth against us with the more advantage.  For when, thinks the
enemy, will these fools be so desirous to sit down as when they are
weary, and when so like to be weary as when almost at their journey's
end?  Therefore it is, I say, that the Enchanted Ground is placed so nigh
to the land Beulah and so near the end of their race; wherefore let
pilgrims look to themselves lest they fall asleep till none can waken
them."  "That masterpiece of Bunyan's insight into life, the Enchanted
Ground," says Mr. Louis Stevenson, "where his allegory cuts so deep to
people looking seriously on life."  Yes, indeed, Bunyan's insight into
life!  And his allegory that cuts so deep!  For a neophyte, and one with
little insight into life, or into himself, would go to look for this land
of darkness and thorns and pitfalls, alternated with arbours and settles
and soft couches--one new to life and to himself, I say, would naturally
expect to see all that confined to the region between the City of
Destruction and the Slough of Despond; or, at the worst, long before, and
never after, the House Beautiful.  But Bunyan looked too straight at life
and too unflinchingly into his own heart to lay down his sub-Celestial
lands in that way; and when we begin to look with a like seriousness on
the religious life, and especially when we begin to look bold enough and
deep enough into our own heart, then we too shall freely acknowledge the
splendid master-stroke of Bunyan in the Enchanted Ground.  That this so
terrible experience is laid down almost at the end of the Celestial
way--the blaze of light that pours upon our heads fairly startles us,
while at the same time it comforts us and assures us.  That this
Enchanted Ground, which has proved so fatal to so many false pilgrims,
and so all but fatal to so many true pilgrims, should lie around the very
borders of Beulah, and should be within all but eye-shot of the Celestial
City itself,--that is something to be thankful for, and something to lay
up in the deepest and the most secret place in our heart.  That these
pilgrims, after all their feastings and entertainments--after the
Delectable Mountains and the House Beautiful--should all be plunged upon
a land where there was not so much as a roadside inn, where the ways were
so dark and so long that the pilgrims had to shout aloud in order to keep
together, where, instead of moon or stars, they had to walk in the spark
of a small tinder-box--what an encouragement and assurance to us is all
that!  That is no strange thing, then, that is now happening to us, when,
after our fine communion season, we have suddenly fallen back into this
deep darkness, and are cast into these terrible temptations, and feel as
if all our past experiences and attainments and enjoyments had been but a
self-delusion and a snare.  That we should all but have fallen fast
asleep, and all but have ceased both from watching against sin and from
waiting upon God--well, that is nothing more than Hopeful himself would
have done had he not had a wary old companion to watch over him, and to
hold his eyes open.  Let all God's people present who feel that they are
nothing better of all they have enjoyed of Scriptures and sacraments, but
rather worse; let all those who feel sure that they have wandered into a
castaway land, so dark, so thorny, so miry, and so lonely is their
life--let them read this masterpiece of John Bunyan again and again and
take heart of hope.

   "When Saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither
   And hear how these two pilgrims talk together;
   Yea, let them hear of them, in any wise,
   Thus to keep ope their drowsy slumb'ring eyes;
   Saints' fellowship, if it be managed well,
   Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell."

2.  But far worse than all its briars and thorns, far more fatal than all
its ditches and pitfalls, were the enchanted arbours they came on here
and there planted up and down that evil land.  For those arbours are all
of this fatal nature, that if a man falls asleep in any of them it arises
a question whether he shall ever come to himself again in this world.
Now, where there are no inns nor victualling-houses, no Gaius and no Mr.
Mnason, what a danger all those ill-intended arbours scattered all up and
down that country become!  Well, then, the first enchanted arbour that
the pilgrims came to was built just inside the borders of the land, and
it was called The Stranger's Arbour--so many new-comers had lain down in
it never to rise again.  The young and the inexperienced, with those who
were naturally of a believing, buoyant, easy mind, lay down in hundreds
here.  Hopeful's mind was naturally a mind of a soft and easy and self-
indulgent cast; and had he been alone that day, or had he had for a
companion a man of a less wary, less anxious, and less urgent mind than
Christian was, Hopeful had taken a nap, as he so confidingly called it--a
fatal nap in that arbour built by the enemy of pilgrims, just on purpose
for the young and the ignorant, the inexperienced and the self-indulgent.

3.  The Slothful Man's Arbour has been already described.  It was a warm
arbour, and it promised much refreshing to the pilgrims.  It also had in
it a soft couch on which the weary might lean.  "Let us lie down here and
take just one nap; we shall be refreshed if we take a nap!"  "Do you not
remember," said the other, "that one of the shepherds bid us beware of
the Enchanted Ground?  And he meant by that that we should beware of
sleeping; wherefore let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch and
be sober."  Now, what is a nap?  And what is it to take a nap in our
religion?  The New Testament is full of warnings to those who read it and
go by it--most solemn and most fearful warnings--against _sleep_.  Now,
have you any clear idea in your minds as to what this divinely denounced
sleep is?  Sleep is good and necessary in our bodily life.  We would not
live long if we did not sleep; we would soon go out of our mind; we would
soon lose our senses if we did not sleep.  Insomnia is one of the worst
symptoms of our eager, restless, over-worked age.  "He giveth His beloved
sleep"; and while they sleep their corn grows they know not how.  But
sleep in the great exhortation-passages of the Holy Scriptures does not
mean rest and restoration; it means in all those passages insensibility,
stupidity, danger, and death.  In our nightly sleep, and in the measure
of its soundness, we are utterly dead to the world around us.  Men may
come into our house and rob us of our most precious possessions; they may
even come up to our bed and murder us; our whole house may be in a blaze
about us; we may only awaken to leap out of sleep into eternity.  Now, we
are all in a sleep like that in our souls.  There is above us, and around
us, and beneath us, and within us the eternal world, and we are all sound
asleep; we are all stone-dead in the midst of it.  Devils and wicked men
are stealing our treasures for eternity, and we are sound asleep; hell is
already kindling our bed beneath us, but we smell not its flames, or we
only catch the first gasp of them before we make our everlasting bed
among them.  Therefore let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch
and be sober.  What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise and call upon thy God!
When the guide shook Heedless and Too-bold off their settles in that
slothful arbour, the one of them said with his eyes still shut, "I will
pay you when I take my money," and the other said, "I will fight so long
as I can hold my sword in my hand."  At that one of the children laughed.
"What is the meaning of that?" asked Christiana.  The guide said: "They
talk in their sleep."  So they did, and so do all men.  For this whole
world is full of settles on which men sleep and talk in their sleep.  The
newspapers to-morrow morning will all be full to overflowing of what men
have said and written to-day and yesterday in their sleep.  The shops and
the banks and the exchanges will all be full of men making promises and
settling accounts in their sleep.  They will finger their purses, and
grasp their swords, and all in their sleep.  And not children but devils
will laugh as they hear the folly that falls from men's lips who are
besotted with spiritual sleep and drugged with spiritual and fleshly sin.
A dream cometh through the multitude of business.  I had just got this
length in this lecture the other night when I went to sleep.  And in my
sleep one of my people came to me and asked me if I could make it quite
clear and plain to him what it would be for a man like him after a
communion-time to begin to walk with God.  And I just wish I could make
the things of the Enchanted Ground as plain to myself and to you to-night
as I was able to make a walk with God plain to myself and to my visitor
that night in my ministerial dream.  I often wish that my business mind
worked as well in my study chair and in my pulpit as it sometimes does in
my bed and in my sleep.  "Now, I beheld in my dream that they talked more
in their sleep at this time than ever they did in all their journey.  And
being in a muse thereabout, the gardener said even to me: Wherefore
musest thou at the matter?  It is the nature of the fruit of the grapes
of those vineyards to go down so sweetly as to cause the lips of them
that are asleep to speak."  The reason my poor lips spake so sweetly
about a walk with God that night most have been because I spent all the
summer evening before walking with God and with you in the vineyards of
Beulah.

4.  Listen to Samson, shorn of his locks, as he shakes himself off a soft
and sweetly-worked couch in The Sensual Man's Arbour:

         "No, no;
   It fits not; thou and I long since are twain;
   Nor think me so unwary or accurst
   To bring my feet again into the snare
   Where once I have been caught; I know thy trains,
   Though dearly to my cost, thy gins, and toils;
   Thy fair enchanted cup and warbling charms
   No more on me have power, their force is null'd;
   So much of adder's wisdom have I learnt
   To fence my ear against thy sorceries.
   If in my flower of youth and strength, when all men
   Loved, honour'd, fear'd me, thou alone couldst hate me,
   Thy husband, slight me, sell me, and forego me;
   How wouldst thou use me now, blind, and thereby
   Deceivable, in most things as a child,
   Helpless, thence easily contemn'd, and scorn'd,
   And last neglected?  How wouldst thou insult,
   When I must live uxorious to thy will
   In perfect thraldom!  How again betray me,
   Bearing my words and doings to the lords
   To gloss upon, and censuring, frown or smile!
   This jail I count the house of liberty
   To thine, whose doors my feet shall never enter."

5.  The love of money to some men is the root of all evil.  There came
once a youth to St. Philip Neri and, flushed with joy, told him that his
parents after much entreaty had at length allowed him to study law.  St.
Philip was not a man of many words.  "What then?" the saint simply asked
the shining youth.  "Then I shall become a lawyer!"  "And then?" pursued
Philip.  "Then," said the young man, "I shall earn a nice sum of money,
and I shall purchase a fine country house, procure a carriage and horses,
marry a handsome and rich wife, and lead a delightful life!"  "And then?"
"Then,"--the youth reflected as death and eternity arose before his eyes,
and from that day he began to take care of his immortal soul.  Philip
with one word snatched that young man's soul off The Rich Man's Settle.

6.  The Vain Man's Settle draws down many men to shame and everlasting
contempt.  Praise a vain man or a vain woman aright and enough and you
will get them to do anything you like.  Give a vain man sufficient
publicity in your paper or on your platform and he will become a spy, a
traitor, and cut-throat in your service.  The sorcerer's cup of
praise--keep it full enough in a vain man's hand, and he will sleep in
the arbour of vanity till he wakens in hell.  Madam Bubble, the
arch-enchantress, knows her own, and she has, with her purse, her
promotion, and her praise, bought off many a promising pilgrim.

7.  And then she, by virtue of whose sorceries this whole land is drugged
and enchanted, is such a bold slut that she will build a Sacred Arbour
even, and will fill it full of religious enchantment for you rather than
lose hold of you.  She will consecrate places and persons and periods for
you if your taste lies that way; she will build costly and stately
churches for you; she will weave rich vestments and carve rich vessels;
she will employ all the arts; she will even sanctify and set apart and
seat aloft her holy men--what will she not do to please you, to take you,
to intoxicate and enchant you?  She will juggle for your soul equally
well whether you are a country clown in a feeing-market or a fine lady of
aesthetic tastes and religious sensibilities in the capital and the
court.  But I shall let Father Faber speak, who can speak on this subject
both with authority and with attraction.  "She can open churches, and
light candles on the altar, and intone _Te Deums_ to the Majesty on high.
She can pass into the beauty of art, into the splendour of dress, and
into the magnificence of furniture.  She can sit with high principles on
her lips discussing a religious vocation and praising God and sanctity.
On the benches of bishops and in the pages of good books you will find
her, and yet she is all the while the same huge evil creature."  Yes; she
is all the time the same Madam Bubble who offered to Standfast her body,
her purse, and her bed.

Now, would you know for yourself, like the communicant who came to me in
my sleep, how you are ever to get past all those arbours, and settles,
and seats, and couches, with all their sweet sorceries and intoxicating
enchantments--would you in earnest know that?  Then study well the case
of one Standfast.  Especially the time when she who enchants this whole
ground hereabouts set so upon that pilgrim.  In one word, it was this: he
remembered his Lord; and, like his Lord, he fell on his face; and as his
Lord would have it, His servant's lips as they touched the ground touched
also the healing plant harmony and he was saved.

         "A small unsightly root,
   But of divine effect.
   Unknown, and like esteem'd, and the dull swain
   Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon;
   And yet more med'cinal is it than that moly
   That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
   He call'd it haemony, and gave it me,
   And bade me keep it as of sovran use
   'Gainst all enchantments, mildew, blast, or damp,
   Or ghastly furies' apparition.
   And now I find it true; for by this means
   I knew the foul enchantress, though disguised,
   Enter'd the very lime-twigs of her spells,
   And yet came off.  If you have this about you
   (As I will give you when you go) you may
   Boldly assault the necromancer's hall:
   Where if she be, with dauntless hardihood,
   And brandished blade, rush on her, break her glass,
   And shed her luscious liquor on the ground,
   And seize her wand."

Prayer, my sin-beset brethren, standfast prayer, is the otherwise
unidentified haemony whose best habitat was the Garden of Gethsemane; and
with that holy root in your heart and in your mouth, there is "no
enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any divination against
Israel."




THE LAND OF BEULAH


   "Thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah."--_Isaiah_.

The first thing that John Bunyan tells us about the land of Beulah is
this--that the shortest and the best way to the Celestial City lies
directly through that land.  The land of Beulah has its own indigenous
inhabitants indeed.  Old men dwell in the streets of Beulah, and every
man with his staff in his hand for very age.  The streets of the city
also are full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof.  The land
of Beulah has its frequent visitors also, and its welcome guests from the
regions above.  Some of the shining ones come down from time to time and
make a short sojourn in Beulah.  The angels in heaven have such a desire
to see the lands from which God's saints come up that at certain seasons
all the suburbs of the Celestial City are full of those shining servants
of God and of the Lamb.

But what made the dreamer to smile and to talk so in his sleep was when
he saw that all the upward ways to the Celestial City ran through the
land of Beulah.  He saw also in his dream how all the pilgrims blamed
themselves so bitterly now because they had misspent so much of their
time and strength in the ways below, and so had not come sooner to see
and to taste this blessed land.  But, at the same time, as it was, they
all rejoiced with a great joy because that, after all their delays and
all their wanderings, their way still led them through the borders of
Beulah.  Now, my dear fellow-communicants, how shall we find our way at
once, and without any more wanderings, into that so desirable land?  How
shall we attain to walk its streets all the rest of our days with our
staff in our hand?  How shall we hope to see our boys and our girls
playing in the streets of Beulah, and eating all their days of its sweet
and its healing fruits?  How shall we and our children with us henceforth
escape the Slough of Despond, and Giant Despair's dungeon, and the Valley
of the Shadow of Death?  The word, my brethren, the answer to all that,
is nigh unto us, even in our mouth and in our heart.  For faith, simple
faith, will do all that both for us and for our children beside us.  A
heart-feeding faith in God, in the word of God, and in the Son of God,
will do it.  Faith, and then obedience.  For obedience, my brethren, is
Beulah.  All obedience is already Beulah.  Holy obedience will bring the
whole of Beulah into your heart and into mine at any moment.  It is
disobedience that makes so many of those who otherwise are true pilgrims
to miss so much of the land of Beulah.  Ask any affable old man with his
staff in his hand for very age, and he will tell you that it was his
disobedience that kept him so long out of the land of Beulah.  While, let
any man, and above all, let any young man, begin early to live a life of
believing obedience, and he will grow up and grow old and see his
children's children playing around his staff in the streets of Beulah.
Let any young man make the experiment for himself upon obedience and upon
Beulah.  Let him not too easily believe any dreamer or even any seer
about obedience and about the land of Beulah.  It is his own matter and
not theirs; and let him make experiment upon it all for his own
satisfaction and assurance.  Let any young man, then, try prayer as his
first step into obedience, and especially secret prayer.  Let him shut
his door to-night, and let him see if he is not already inside one of the
gates of Beulah.  Let him deny himself every day also, if it is only in a
very little thing.  Let him say sternly to his own heart every hour of
temptation, No! never! and on the spot a sweet waft of Beulah's finest
spices will fall upon his face.  "The ineffable joy of renouncing joy"
will every day make the lonely wilderness of this world a constant Beulah
to such a man.  For, to live at all times, in all places, and in all
things for other men, and never and in nothing for yourself--that is the
deepest secret of Beulah.  To say it, if need be, three times to-night on
your face and in a sweat of blood, "Not my will, but Thine be done!"--that
will to-night turn the garden of Gethsemane itself into the very garden
of Glory.  Do you doubt it?  Are you not yet able to believe it?  Then
hear about it from One who has Himself come through it.  Hear His word
upon the whole matter who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life.  "Come
unto Me," says the King of Beulah, "all ye that labour and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.  Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
For My yoke is easy and My burden is light."  So after He had washed
their feet, and had taken His garments and was set down again, He said
unto them, "Know ye what I have done to you?  For I have given you an
example, that ye should do as I have done to you.  If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them.  If ye love Me, keep My commandments.
And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that
He may abide with you for ever.  If a man love Me, he will keep My words;
and My Father will love him, and We will come unto him and will make Our
abode with him.  Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: not as
the world giveth, give I unto you.  These things have I spoken unto you
that My joy might remain in you, and that your joy might be full.
Hitherto ye have asked nothing in My name; ask, and ye shall receive,
that your joy may be full.  Father, I will that they also, whom Thou hast
given Me, be with Me where I am."  And thus I saw in my dream that their
way lay right through the land of Beulah, in which land they solaced
themselves for a season.

2.  "They solaced themselves."  Now, solace is just the Latin _solatium_,
which, again, is just a soothing, an assuaging, a compensation, an
indemnification.  Well, that land into which the pilgrims had now come
was very soothing to their ruffled spirits and to their weary hearts.  It
assuaged their many and sore griefs also.  It more than compensated them
for all their labours and all their afflictions.  And it was a full
indemnification to them for all that they had forsaken and lost both in
beginning to be pilgrims and in enduring to the end.  The children of
Israel had their first solace in their pilgrimage at Elim, where there
were twelve wells of water and threescore and ten palm-trees; and they
encamped there by the waters.  And then they had their last and crowning
solace when the spies came back from Eshcol with a cluster of grapes that
they bare between two upon a staff, with pomegranates and figs.  And
Moses kept solacing his charge all the way through the weary wilderness
with such strong consolations as these: "For the Lord thy God bringeth
thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths
that spring out of valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and
vines, and fig-trees; a land of oil-olive and honey; a land wherein thou
shalt eat bread without scarceness, thou shalt not lack anything in it; a
land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayest dig
brass."  Our Lord spake solace to His doubting and fainting disciples
also in many such words as these: "Verily, I say unto you, there is no
man that hath left house, or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children
for the kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive manifold more in
this present time, and in the world to come life everlasting."  The Mount
of Transfiguration also was His own Beulah-solace; and the Last Supper
and the prayer with which it wound up were given to our Lord and to His
disciples as a very Eshcol-cluster from the Paradise above.  Now, I saw
in my dream that they solaced themselves in the land of Beulah for a
season.  Yea, here they heard continually the singing of birds.  (The
Latin poets called the birds _solatia ruris_, because they refreshed and
cheered the rustic labourers with their sweet singing.)  And every day
the flowers appeared in the earth, and the voice of the turtle was heard
in the land.  In this country the sun shineth night and day, for there is
no night there.

3.  "In this country the sun shineth night and day."  How much Standfast
must have enjoyed that land of light you may guess when you recollect
that he came from Darkland, which lies in the hemisphere right opposite
to the land of Beulah.  In Darkland the sun never shines to be called
sunshine at all.  All the days of his youth, Standfast told his
companions, he had sat beside his father and his mother in that obscure
land where to his sorrow his father and his mother still sat.  But in
Beulah "the rose of evening becomes silently and suddenly the rose of
dawn."  This land lies beyond the Valley of the Shadow of Death, neither
could they from this place so much as see Doubting Castle.  Now, Doubting
Castle is a dismal place for any soul of man to be shut up into.  And in
that dark hold there are dungeons dug for all kinds of doubting souls.
There are dungeons dug for the souls of men whose doubts are in their
intellects, as well as for those also whose doubts arise out of their
hearts.  Some men read themselves into Doubting Castle, and some men sin
and sell themselves to its giant.  God casts some of His own children all
their days into those dungeons as a punishment for their life of
disobedience; He casts others down into chains of darkness because of
their idleness and unfruitfulness.  But Beulah is far away from Doubting
Castle.  Beulah is a splendid spot for a studious man to lodge in.  For
what a clear light shines night and day in Beulah!  To what far horizons
a man's eye will carry him in Beulah!  What large speculations rise
before him who walks abroad in Beulah!  How clear the air is in Beulah,
how clean the heart and how unclouded the eye of its inhabitants!  The
King's walks are in Beulah, and the arbours where He delighteth to be.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall be admitted to see God in
the land of Beulah.  In the land of Beulah the sun shall no more be thy
light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee;
but the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God thy glory!

4.  "In this land also the contract between the bride and the bridegroom
is renewed."  Now, there is no other day so bitter in any man's life as
that day is on which his bridal contract is broken off.  And it is the
very perfection and last extremity of bitterness when his contract is
broken off because of his own past life.  Let all those, then, who would
fain enter into that sweet contract think well about it beforehand.  Let
them look back into all their past life.  For all their past life will be
sure to find them out on the day of their espousals.  If they have their
enemies--as all espoused men have--this is the hour and the power of
their enemies.  The day on which any man's espousals are published is a
small and local judgment-day to him.  For all the men, and, especially,
all the women, who have ever been injured by him, or who have injured
themselves upon him; all the men and all the women who for any reason,
and for no reason, hate both him and his happiness,--their tongues and
their pens will take no sleep till they have got his contract if they
can, broken off.  And even when the bridegroom is too innocent, or the
bride too true, or God too good to let the contract continue long to be
broken off, that great goodness of God and that great trust of his
contracted bride will only make the bridegroom walk henceforth more
softly and rejoice with more trembling.  And that is a most excellent
mind.  I know no better mind in which any man, guilty or innocent, can
enter on a married life.  I sometimes tell the bridegrooms that I can
take a liberty with to keep saying to themselves all the way up to the
marriage altar the tenth verse of the 103rd psalm; as well as when they
come up afterwards to the baptismal font: "He hath not dealt with us
after our sins nor rewarded us after our iniquities."  And it is surely
Beulah itself, at its very best, it is surely Beulah above itself, when a
happy bridegroom is full of that humble and happy mind, and when he is in
one and the same moment reconciled both to his bride on earth and to his
God and Father in heaven.  In this land, therefore, in the land of
Beulah, the contract between the bride and the bridegroom is renewed;
yea, as the bridegroom rejoiceth over his bride, so shall thy God rejoice
over thee.

5.  The salaams and salutations also that they were met with as often as
they went out to walk in the streets thereof were a constant surprise,
satisfaction, and sweetness to the fearful pilgrims.  No passer-by ever
once frowned or scowled upon them because their faces were Zionward, as
they do in our cities.  No one ever treated them with scorn or contempt
because they were poor or unlettered.  No man's face either turned dark
at them or was turned away from them as they passed up the street.  They
never, all the time they abode in Beulah, took to the lanes of the city
to escape the unkind looks of any of its citizens.  Greatheart's hand was
never away from his helmet.  His helmet was never well on his head.  His
always bare and unhelmeted head said to all the men of Beulah, I love and
honour and trust you.  You would not hurt a hair of my head.  And so on,
till all the streets of Beulah were one buzz of salutation,
congratulation, and benediction.  Here they heard voices from out of the
city, loud voices, saying, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy
salvation cometh; behold, his reward is with him.  Here all the
inhabitants of the country called them the holy people, the redeemed of
the Lord, sought out, a city not forsaken.

6.  Now, as they walked in this land they had more rejoicing than in
parts more remote from the kingdom to which they were bound.  And still
drawing nigh to that city they had yet a more perfect view thereof.  It
was builded of pearls and precious stones, also the street thereof was
paved with gold, so that by reason of the natural glory of the city and
the reflection of the sunbeams upon it, Christian with desire fell sick.
Hopeful also had a fit or two of the same disease.  Wherefore here they
lay by it awhile, crying out because of their pangs, If you see my
beloved, tell him that I am sick of love.  There are in all good cases of
recovery three successive stages of soul-sickness.  True, soul-sickness
always runs its own course, and it always runs its own course in its own
order.  This special sickness first shows itself when the soul becomes
sick with sin.  We have that sickness set forth in many a psalm, notably
in the thirty-eighth psalm; and in a multitude of other scriptures, both
old and new, this evil disease is dealt with if we had only the eyes and
the heart to read such scriptures.  The second stage of this sickness is
when a sinner is not so much sick with the sin that dwelleth in him as
sick of himself.  Sinfulness in its second stage becomes so incorporate
with the sinner's whole life--sin so becomes the sinner's very nature,
and, indeed, himself,--that all his former loathing of sin passes over
henceforth into loathing of himself.  This is the most desperate stage in
any man's sickness; but, bad as it is, incurable as it is, it must be
passed into before the third stage of the healing process can either be
experienced or understood.  In the case in hand, by the time the pilgrims
had come to Beulah they had all had their full share of sin and of
themselves till they here entered on an altogether new experience.
"Christian with desire fell sick," we read, "and Hopeful also had a fit
or two of the same disease.  Wherefore here they lay by it a while,
crying out because of their pangs, If you see my beloved, tell him that I
am sick of love."  David, Paul, Bernard, Bunyan himself, Rutherford,
Brainerd, M'Cheyne, and many others crowd in upon the mind.  I shall but
instance John Flavel and Mrs. Jonathan Edwards, and so close.  John
Flavel being once on a journey set himself to improve the time by
meditation, when his mind grew intent, till at length he had such
ravishing tastes of heavenly joys, and such a full assurance of his
interest therein, that he utterly lost the sight and sense of this world
and all its concerns, so that for hours he knew not where he was.  At
last, perceiving himself to be faint, he sat down at a spring, where he
refreshed himself, earnestly desiring, if it were the will of God, that
he might there leave the world.  His spirit reviving, he finished his
journey in the same delightful frame, and all that night the joy of the
Lord still overflowed him so that he seemed an inhabitant of the other
world.  The only other case of love-sickness I shall touch on to-night I
take from under the pen of a sin-sick and love-sick author, who has been
truthfully described as "one of the first, if not the very first, of the
masters of human reason," and, again, as "one of the greatest of the sons
of men."  "There is a young lady in New-haven," says Edwards, "who is so
loved of that Great Being who made and rules the world, that there are
certain seasons in which this Great Being in some way or other invisible
comes to her and fills her mind with exceeding sweet delight, so that she
hardly cares for anything but to meditate upon Him.  She looks soon to
dwell wholly with Him, and to be ravished with His love and delight for
ever.  Therefore, if you present all this world before her, with the
richest of its treasures, she disregards it and cares not for it, and is
unmindful of any pain or affliction.  She has a strange sweetness in her
mind, and a singular piety in her affections; is most just and
conscientious in all her conduct; and you could not persuade her to do
anything wrong or sinful, if you would give her the whole world.  She
loves to be alone, walking in the fields and groves, and seems to have
some one invisible always communing with her."  And so on, all through
her seraphic history.  "Now, if such things are too enthusiastic," says
the author of _A Careful and a Strict Enquiry into the Freedom of the
Will_, "if such things are the offspring of a distempered brain, let my
brain be possessed evermore of that blessed distemper!  If this be
distraction, I pray God that the whole world of mankind may all be seized
with this benign, meek, beneficent, beatific, glorious distraction!  The
peace of God that passeth all understanding; rejoicing with joy
unspeakable and full of glory; God shining in our hearts, to give the
light of the knowledge of God in the face of Jesus Christ; with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of God, and being changed into the same
image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord; being
called out of darkness into marvellous light, and having the day-star
arise in our hearts!  What a sweet distraction is that!  And out of what
a heavenly distemper and out of what a sane enthusiasm has all that come
to us!"

   "More I would speak: but all my words are faint;
   Celestial Love, what eloquence can paint?
   No more, by mortal words, can be expressed,
   But all Eternity shall tell the rest."




THE SWELLING OF JORDAN


   "The swelling of Jordan."--_Jeremiah_.

"Fore-fancy your deathbed," says Samuel Rutherford.  "Take an essay," he
says in his greatest book, that perfect mine of gold and jewels, _Christ
Dying and Drawing Sinners to Himself_--"Take an essay and a lift at your
death, and look at it before it actually comes to your door."  And so we
shall.  Since it is appointed to all men once to die, and after death the
judgment; and since our death and our judgment are the only two things
that we are absolutely sure about in our whole future, we shall
henceforth fore-fancy those two events much more than we have done in the
past.  And to assist us in that; to quicken our fancy, to kindle it, to
captivate it, and to turn our fancy wholly to our salvation, we have all
the entrancing river-scenes in the _Pilgrim's Progress_ set before us; a
succession of scenes in which Bunyan positively revels in his exquisite
fancies, clothing them as he does, all the time, in language of the
utmost beauty, tenderness, pathos, power, and dignity.  Let us take our
stand, then, on the bank of the river and watch how pilgrim after pilgrim
behaves himself in those terrible waters.  We are all voluntary
spectators to-night, but we shall all be compulsory performers before we
know where we are.

1.  On entering the river even Christian suddenly began to sink.  Fore-
fancy that.  All the words he spake still tended to discover that he had
great horror of mind and hearty fears that he would die in that river;
here also he was much in the troublesome thoughts of the sins he had
committed both since and before he began to be a pilgrim.  Fore-fancy
that also, all you converted young men.  Hopeful, therefore, had much to
do to keep his brother's head above water; yea, sometimes he would be
quite gone down, and then in a while he would rise up again half-dead.
Then I saw in my dream that Christian was in a muse a while; to whom also
Hopeful added this word, "Be of good cheer; Jesus Christ maketh thee
whole."  And with that Christian broke out with a loud voice, "When thou
passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers
they shall not overflow thee."  Then they both took courage and the enemy
was after that as still as a stone till they were gone over.  Fore-fancy
that also.  There is one other thing out of that crossing that I hope I
shall remember when I am in the river: "Be of good cheer," said Hopeful
to his sinking fellow--"Be of good cheer, my brother, I feel the bottom,
and it is good."  "Hold His hand fast," wrote Samuel Rutherford to Lady
Kenmure.  "He knows all the fords.  You may be ducked in His company but
never drowned.  Put in your foot, then, and wade after Him.  And be sure
you set your feet always upon the stepping-stones."  Yes; fore-fancy
those stepping-stones, and often practise your feet upon them before the
time.

2.  "Good woman," said the post to Christiana, the wife of Christian the
pilgrim; "Hail, good woman, I bring thee tidings that the Master calleth
for thee, and expecteth thee to stand in His presence in clothes of
immortality within this ten days."  Fore-fancy that also.  Now the day
was come that she must be gone.  And so the road was full of people to
see her take her journey.  But, behold, all the banks beyond the river
were full of horses and chariots which were come down from above to
accompany her to the city gate.  So she came forth and entered the river
with a beckon of farewell to those that followed her to the river-side.
And thus she went and entered in at the gate with all the ceremonies of
joy that her husband had done before her.  Fore-fancy, if you can, some
of those ceremonies of joy.

3.  When Mr. Fearing came to the river where was no bridge, there again
he was in a heavy case.  Now, he said, he should be drowned for ever and
never see that Face with comfort he had come so many miles to behold.  And
here also I took notice of what was very remarkable; the water of that
river was lower at this time than ever I saw it in all my life.  So he
went over at last not much above wet-shod.  Fore-fancy and fore-arrange,
if it be possible, for a passage like that.  When he was going tip to the
gate Mr. Greatheart began to take his leave of him, and to wish him a
good reception above.  "I shall," he said, "I shall."  Be fore-assured,
also, of a reception like that.

4.  In process of time there came a post to the town again, and his
business was this time with Mr. Ready-to-halt.  So he inquired him out
and said to him, "I am come to thee in the name of Him whom thou hast
loved and followed, though upon crutches.  And my message is to tell thee
that He expects thee at His table to sup with Him in His kingdom the next
day after Easter."  After this Mr. Ready-to-halt called for his fellow-
pilgrims and told them, saying, "I am sent for, and God shall surely
visit you also.  These crutches," he said, "I bequeath to my son that he
may tread in my steps, with a hundred warm wishes that he may prove
better than I have done."  When he came to the brink of the river, he
said, "Now I shall have no more need of these crutches, since yonder are
horses and chariots for me to ride on."  The last words he was heard to
say were, "Welcome life!"  Let all ready-to-halt hearts fore-fancy all
that.

5.  Then Mr. Feeble-mind called for his friends and told them what errand
had been brought to him, and what token he had received of the truth of
the message.  "As for my feeble mind," he said, "that I shall leave
behind me, for I shall have no need of that in the place whither I go.
When I am gone, Mr. Valiant, I desire that you would bury it in a dung-
hill."  This done, and the day being come in which he was to depart, he
entered the river as the rest.  His last words were, "Hold out faith and
patience."  Fore-fancy such an end as that to your feeble mind also.

6.  Did you ever know a family, or, rather, the relics of a family, where
there was just a decrepit old father and a lone daughter left to nurse
him through his second childhood?  All his other children are either
married or dead; but both marriage and death have spared Miss Much-afraid
to watch over the dotage-days of Mr. Despondency; till one summer
afternoon the old man fell asleep in his chair to waken where old men are
for ever young.  And in a day or two there were two new graves side by
side in the old churchyard.  Even death could not divide this old father
and his trusty child.  And so when the time was come for them to depart,
they went down together to the brink of the river.  The last words of Mr.
Despondency were, "Farewell night and welcome day."  His daughter went
through the river singing, but none could understand what it was she
said.  Fore-fancy that, all you godly old men, with a daughter who has
made a husband and children to herself of her old father.

7.  As I hear Old Honest shouting "Grace reigns!" I always remember what
a lady told me about a saying of her poor Irish scullery-girl.  The
mistress and the servant were reading George Eliot's Life together in the
kitchen, and when they came to her deathbed, on the pillow of which
Thomas A'Kempis lay open, "Mem," said the girl, "I used to read that old
book in the convent; but it is a better book to live upon than to die
upon."  Now, that was exactly Old Honest's mind.  He lived upon one book,
and then he died upon another.  He lived according to the commandments of
God, but he died according to the comforts of the Gospel.  Now, we read
in his history how that the river at that time overflowed its banks in
some places.  But Mr. Honest had in his lifetime spoken to one
Good-conscience to meet him at the river, the which he also did, and lent
him his hand, and so helped him over.  All the same, the last words of
Mr. Honest still were, "Grace reigns!"  And so he left the world.  Fore-
fancy whether or no you are making, as one has said, "an assignation with
terror" at that same river-side.

8.  Standfast was the last of the pilgrims to go over the river.
Standfast was left longest on this side the river because his Master
could best trust him here.  His Master had to take away many of His other
servants from the evil to come, but He could trust Standfast.  You can
safely trust a man who takes to his knees in every hour of temptation, as
Standfast was wont to do.  "This river," he said, "has been a terror to
many.  Yea, the thoughts of it have often frighted me also.  The waters,
indeed, are to the palate bitter, and to the stomach cold; yet the
thoughts of what I am going to, and of the conduct that awaits me on the
other side, doth lie as a glowing coal at my heart.  I see myself now at
the end of my journey, and my toilsome days are all ended.  I am going
now to see that head that was crowned with thorns, and that face that was
spit upon for me.  His name has been to me as a civet-box, yea, sweeter
than all perfumes.  His word I did use to gather for my food, and for
antidotes against my faintings.  He has held me up, and I have kept
myself from mine iniquities.  Yea, my steps hath He strengthened in the
way."  Now, while he was thus in discourse his countenance changed, his
strong man bowed down under him, and after he had said, "Take me, for I
come to Thee," he ceased to be seen of them.  Fore-fancy, if you have the
face, an end like that for yourself.

This, then, is how Christian and Hopeful and Christiana and Old Honest
and all the rest did in the swelling river.  But the important point is,
HOW WILL YOU DO?  Have you ever fore-fancied how you will do?  Have you
ever, among all your many imaginings, imagined yourself on your deathbed?
Have you ever thought you heard the doctor whisper, "To-night"?  Have you
ever lain low in your bed and listened to the death-rattle in your own
throat?  And have you still listened to the awful silence in the house
after all was over?  Have you ever shot in imagination the dreadful gulf
that stands fixed between life and death, and between time and eternity?
Have you ever tried to get a glimpse beforehand of your own place where
you will be an hour after your death, when they are putting the grave-
clothes on your still warm body, and when they are measuring your corpse
for your coffin?  Where will you be by that time?  Have you any idea?  Can
you fancy it?  Did you ever try?  And if not, why not?  "My lord," wrote
Jeremy Taylor to the Earl of Carbery, when sending him the first copy of
the _Holy Dying_,--"My lord, it is a great art to die well, and that art
is to be learnt by men in health; for he that prepares not for death
before his last sickness is like him that begins to study philosophy when
he is going to dispute publicly in the faculty.  The precepts of dying
well must be part of the studies of them that live in health, because in
other notices an imperfect study may be supplied by a frequent exercise
and a renewed experience; but here, if we practise imperfectly once, we
shall never recover the error, for we die but once; and therefore it is
necessary that our skill be more exact since it cannot be mended by
another trial."  How wise, then, how far-seeing, how practical, and how
urgent is the prophet's challenge and demand.  "How wilt thou do in the
swelling of Jordan?"

1.  Well, then, let us be practical before we close, and let us descend
to particulars.  Let us take the prophet's question and run it through
some parts and some practices of our daily life as already dying men.
And, to begin with, I have such a great faith in good books, whether we
are to live or die, that I am impelled to ask you all at this point, and
under shelter of this plain-spoken prophet, What books have you laid in
for your deathbed, and for the weeks and months and even years before
your death bed?  What do you look forward to be reading when Jordan is
beginning to swell and roll for you and to leap up toward your doorstep?
If you get good from good books--everybody does not--but supposing you
are one of those who do, what books can you absolutely count upon,
without fail, to put you in the best possible frame for the river, and
for the convoy across, and for the ceremonies of joy on the other side?
What special Scriptures will you have read every day to you?  "Read,"
said John Knox to his weeping wife, "read where I first cast my anchor."
An old lady I once knew used to say to me at every visit, "The
Fifty-first Psalm."  She was the daughter of a Highland minister, and the
wife of a Highland minister, and the mother of a Highland minister, and
of an elder to boot.  "The Fifty-first Psalm," she said, and sometimes,
"One of Hart's hymns also."  What is your favourite psalm and hymn?  Mr.
James Taylor of Castle Street has several large-type libraries in his
catalogue.  Mr. Taylor might start a much worse paying speculation than a
large-type library for the river-side; or, some select booklets for
deathbeds.  The series might well open with "The Ninetieth Psalm" in
letters an inch deep.  Scholars die as well as illiterates, and there
might be provided for them, among other things, _The Phaedo_ in two
languages, Plato's and Jowett's.  Then _The Seven Sayings from the
Cross_.  Bellarmine's _Art of Dying Well_ would stand well beside John
Bunyan's _Dying Sayings_.  And, were I the editor, I would put in Bishop
Andrewes' _Private Devotions_, if only for my own last use.  Then Richard
Baxter's _Saint's Rest_, and John Howe's Platonico-Puritan book,
_Blessedness of the Righteous_.  Then Bernard's "New Jerusalem," "The
Sands of Time are sinking," "Rock of Ages," and such like.  These are
some of the little books I have within reach of my bed against the hour
when the post blows his first horn for me.  You might tell me some of
your deathbed favourites.

2.  Who will be your most welcome minister during your last days on
earth?  For whom would you send to-night if the post were suddenly to
sound his horn at your side on your way home from church?  I can well
believe it would not be your own minister.  I have known fathers and
mothers in this congregation to send for other ministers than their own
minister when terrible trouble came upon them, and both my conscience and
my common sense absolutely approved of the step they took.  Five students
were once sitting and talking together in a city in which there was to be
an execution to-morrow morning.  They were talking about the murderer who
was to be executed in the morning, and about the minister he had sent for
to come to see him.  And, like students, they began to put it to one
another--Suppose you were to be executed to-morrow, for what minister in
the city, or even in the whole land, would you send?  And, like students
again, they said--Let each one write down on a piece of paper the name of
the minister he would choose to be beside him at the last, and we shall
see each man's last choice.  They did so, when to their astonishment it
was discovered that they had all written the same minister's name!  I do
not know that they all went to his church every Sabbath while they were
young and, well, and not yet under sentence of death.  I do not think
they did.  For when I was in his church there was only a handful of old
and decayed-looking people in it.  The chief part of the congregation
seemed to me to be a charity school.  And I gathered from all that a
lesson--several lessons, and this among the rest--that crowded passages
do not always wait upon the best pastors; and this also, that a waft of
death soon discovers to us a true minister from an incompetent and a
counterfeit minister.

3.  Writing to one of his correspondents about his correspondent's long-
drawn-out deathbed, Samuel Rutherford said to him, "It is long-drawn-out
that you may have ample time to go over all your old letters and all your
still unsettled accounts before you take ship."  Have you any such old
letters lying still unanswered?  Have you any such old accounts lying
still unsettled?  Have you made full reparation and restitution for all
that you and yours have done amiss?  Fore-fancy that you will soon be
summoned into His presence who has said: "herefore, if thou bring thy
gift before the altar, and there rememberest that thy brother hath aught
against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way;
first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with him."
You know all about Zacchaeus.  I need not tell his story over again.  But
as I write these lines I take up a London newspaper and my eyes light on
these lines: "William Avary was a man of remarkable gifts, both of mind
and character.  He dedicated the residue of his strength wholly to works
of piety.  In middle age he failed in business, and in his old age, when
better days came, he looked up such of his old creditors as could be
found and divided among them a sum of several thousand pounds."  Look up
such of your old creditors as you can find, and that not in matters of
money alone.  And, be sure you begin to do it now, before the horn blows.
For, as sure as you take your keys and open your old repositories, you
will come on things you had completely forgotten that will take more time
and more strength, ay, and more resources, than will then be at your
disposal.  Even after you have begun at once and done all that you can
do, you will have to do at last as Samuel Rutherford told George
Gillespie to do: "Hand over all your bills, paid and unpaid, to your
Surety.  Give Him the keys of the drawer, and let Him clear it out for
Himself after you are gone."

4.  And then, pray often to God for a clear mind between Him and you, and
for a quick, warm, and heaven-hungry heart at the last.  And take a
promise from those who watch beside your bed that they will not drug and
stupefy you even though you should ask for it.  Whatever your pain, and
it is all in God's hand, make up your mind, if it be possible, to bear
it.  It cannot be greater than the pain of the cross, and your Saviour
would not touch their drugs, however well-intended.  He determined to
face the swelling of Jordan and to enter His Father's house with an
unclouded mind.  Try your very uttermost to do the same.  I cannot
believe that the thief even would have let the gall so much as touch his
lips after Christ had said to him, "To-day thou shalt be with Me in
Paradise!"  Well, if your mind was ever clear and keen, let it be at its
clearest and its keenest at the last.  Let your mind and your heart be
full of repentance, and faith, and love, and hope, and all such saying
graces, and let them all be at their fullest and brightest exercise, at
that moment.  Be on the very tip-toe of expectation as the end draws
near.  Another pang, another gasp, one more unutterable sinking of heart
and flesh as if you were going down into the dreadful pit--and then the
abundant entrance, and the beatific vision!  What wilt thou do then?  What
wilt thou say then?  Hast thou thy salutation and thy song ready?  And
what will it be?




FOOTNOTES


{1}  Delivered November 27th, 1892.

{2}  January 1st, 1893.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1893 Oliphant Anderson and Ferrier edition by David
Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





BUNYAN CHARACTERS: FIRST SERIES
BEING LECTURES DELIVERED IN ST. GEORGE'S FREE CHURCH EDINBURGH
BY ALEXANDER WHYTE, D.D.


INTRODUCTORY


   'The express image' [Gr. 'the character'].--Heb. 1. 3.

The word 'character' occurs only once in the New Testament, and that is
in the passage in the prologue of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where the
original word is translated 'express image' in our version.  Our Lord is
the Express Image of the Invisible Father.  No man hath seen God at any
time.  The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He hath
declared Him.  The Father hath sealed His divine image upon His Son, so
that he that hath seen the Son hath seen the Father.  The Son is thus the
Father's character stamped upon and set forth in human nature.  The Word
was made flesh.  This is the highest and best use to which our so
expressive word 'character' has ever been put, and the use to which it is
put when we speak of Bunyan's Characters partakes of the same high sense
and usage.  For it is of the outstanding good or evil in a man that we
think when we speak of his character.  It is really either of his
likeness or unlikeness to Jesus Christ we speak, and then, through Him,
his likeness or unlikeness to God Himself.  And thus it is that the
adjective 'moral' usually accompanies our word 'character'--moral or
immoral.  A man's character does not have its seat or source in his body;
character is not a physical thing: not even in his mind; it is not an
intellectual thing.  Character comes up out of the will and out of the
heart.  There are more good minds, as we say, in the world than there are
good hearts.  There are more clever people than good people;
character,--high, spotless, saintly character,--is a far rarer thing in
this world than talent or even genius.  Character is an infinitely better
thing than either of these, and it is of corresponding rarity.  And yet
so true is it that the world loves its own, that all men worship talent,
and even bodily strength and bodily beauty, while only one here and one
there either understands or values or pursues moral character, though it
is the strength and the beauty and the sweetness of the soul.

We naturally turn to Bishop Butler when we think of moral character.
Butler is an author who has drawn no characters of his own.  Butler's
genius was not creative like Shakespeare's or Bunyan's.  Butler had not
that splendid imagination which those two masters in character-painting
possessed, but he had very great gifts of his own, and he has done us
very great service by means of his gifts.  Bishop Butler has helped many
men in the intelligent formation of their character, and what higher
praise could be given to any author?  Butler will lie on our table all
winter beside Bunyan; the bishop beside the tinker, the philosopher
beside the poet, the moralist beside the evangelical minister.

In seeking a solid bottom for our subject, then, we naturally turn to
Butler.  Bunyan will people the house for us once it is built, but Butler
lays bare for us the naked rock on which men like Bunyan build and
beautify and people the dwelling-place of God and man.  What exactly is
this thing, character, we hear so much about? we ask the sagacious
bishop.  And how shall we understand our own character so as to form it
well till it stands firm and endures?  'Character,' answers Butler, in
his bald, dry, deep way, 'by character is meant that temper, taste,
disposition, whole frame of mind from whence we act in one way rather
than another . . . those principles from which a man acts, when they
become fixed and habitual in him we call his character . . . And
consequently there is a far greater variety in men's characters than
there is in the features of their faces.'  Open Bunyan now, with Butler's
keywords in your mind, and see the various tempers, tastes, dispositions,
frames of mind from which his various characters act, and which, at
bottom, really make them the characters, good or bad, which they are.  See
the principles which Bunyan has with such inimitable felicity embodied
and exhibited in their names, the principles within them from which they
have acted till they have become a habit and then a character, that
character which they themselves are and will remain.  See the variety of
John Bunyan's characters, a richer and a more endless variety than are
the features of their faces.  Christian and Christiana, Obstinate and
Pliable, Mr. Fearing and Mr. Feeblemind, Temporary and Talkative, Mr. By-
ends and Mr. Facing-both-ways, Simple, Sloth, Presumption, that brisk lad
Ignorance, and the genuine Mr. Brisk himself.  And then Captain Boasting,
Mr. High-mind, Mr. Wet-Eyes, and so on, through a less known (but equally
well worth knowing) company of municipal and military characters in the
_Holy War_.

We shall see, as we proceed, how this and that character in Bunyan was
formed and deformed.  But let us ask in this introductory lecture if we
can find out any law or principle upon which all our own characters, good
or bad, are formed.  Do our characters come to be what they are by
chance, or have we anything to do in the formation of our own characters,
and if so, in what way?  And here, again, Butler steps forward at our
call with his key to our own and to all Bunyan's characters in his hand,
and in three familiar and fruitful words he answers our question and
gives us food for thought and solemn reflection for a lifetime.  There
are but three steps, says Butler, from earth to heaven, or, if you will,
from earth to hell--acts, habits, character.  All Butler's prophetic
burden is bound up in these three great words--acts, habits, character.
Remember and ponder these three words, and you will in due time become a
moral philosopher.  Ponder and practise them, and you will become what is
infinitely better--a moral man.  For acts, often repeated, gradually
become habits, and habits, long enough continued, settle and harden and
solidify into character.  And thus it is that the severe and laconic
bishop has so often made us shudder as he demonstrated it to us that we
are all with our own hands shaping our character not only for this world,
but much more for the world to come, by every act we perform, by every
word we speak, almost by every breath we draw.  Butler is one of the most
terrible authors in the world.  He stands on our nearest shelf with Dante
on one side of him and Pascal on the other.  He is indeed terrible, but
it is with a terror that purifies the heart and keeps the life in the
hour of temptation.  Paul sometimes arms himself with the same terror;
only he composes in another style than that of Butler, and, with all his
vivid intensity, he calls it the terror of the Lord.  Paul and Bunyan are
of the same school of moralists and stylists; Butler went to school to
the Stoics, to Aristotle, and to Plato.

Our Lord Himself came to be the express image He was and is by living and
acting under this same universal law of human life--acts, habits,
character.  He was made perfect on this same principle.  He learned
obedience both by the things that He did, and the things that He
suffered.  Butler says in one deep place, that benevolence and justice
and veracity are the basis of all good character in God and in man, and
thus also in the God-man.  And those three foundation stones of our
Lord's character settled deeper and grew stronger to bear and to suffer
as He went on practising acts and speaking words of justice, goodness,
and truth.  And so of all the other elements of His moral character.  Our
Lord left Gethsemane a much more submissive and a much more surrendered
man than He entered it.  His forgiveness of injuries, and thus His
splendid benevolence, had not yet come to its climax and crown till He
said on the cross, 'Father, forgive them'.  And, as He was, so are we in
this world.  This world's evil and ill-desert made it but the better
arena and theatre for the development and the display of His moral
character; and the same instruments that fashioned Him into the perfect
and express image He was and is, are still, happily, in full operation.
Take that divinest and noblest of all instruments for the carving out and
refining of moral character, the will of God.  How our Lord made His own
unselfish and unsinful will to bow to silence and to praise before the
holy will of His Father, till that gave the finishing touch to His always
sanctified will and heart!  And, happily, that awful and blessed
instrument for the formation of moral character is still active and
available to those whose ambition rises to moral character, and who are
aiming at heaven in all they do and all they suffer upon the earth.
Gethsemane has gone out till it has covered all the earth.  Its cup, if
not in all the depth and strength of its first mixture, still in quite
sufficient bitterness, is put many times in life into every man's hand.
There is not a day, there is not an hour of the day, that the disciple of
the submissive and all-surrendered Son has not the opportunity to say
with his Master, If it be possible, let this cup pass: nevertheless, not
as I will, but as Thou wilt.

It is not in the great tragedies of life only that character is tested
and strengthened and consolidated.  No man who is not himself under God's
moral and spiritual instruments could believe how often in the quietest,
clearest, and least tempestuous day he has the chance and the call to
say, Yea, Lord, Thy will be done.  And, then, when the confessedly tragic
days and nights come, when all men admit that this is Gethsemane indeed,
the practised soul is able, with a calmness and a peace that confound and
offend the bystanders, to say, to act so that he does not need to say,
Not my will, but Thine.  And so of all the other forms and features of
moral character; so of humility and meekness, so of purity and
temperance, so of magnanimity and munificence, so of all self-suppression
and self-extinction, and all corresponding exalting and magnifying and
benefiting of other men.  Whatever other passing uses this present world,
so full of trial and temptation and suffering, may have, this surely is
the supreme and final use of it--to be a furnace, a graving-house, a
refining place for human character.  Literally all things in this life
and in this world--I challenge you to point out a single exception--work
together for this supreme and only good, the purification, the refining,
the testing, and the approval of human character.  Not only so, but we
are all in the very heat of the furnace, and under the very graving iron
and in the very refining fire that our prefigured and predestinated
character needs.  Your life and its trials would not suit the necessities
of my moral character, and you would lose your soul beyond redemption if
you exchanged lots with me.  You do not put a pearl under the potter's
wheel; you do not cast clay into a refining fire.  Abraham's character
was not like David's, nor David's like Christ's, nor Christ's like
Paul's.  As Butler says, there is 'a providential disposition of things'
around every one of us, and it is as exactly suited to the flaws and
excrescences, the faults and corruptions of our character as if
Providence had had no other life to make a disposition of things for but
one, and that one our own.  Have you discovered that in your life, or any
measure of that?  Have you acknowledged to God that you have at last
discovered the true key of your life?  Have you given Him the
satisfaction to know that He is not making His providential dispositions
around a stock or a stone, but that He has one under His hand who
understands His hand, and responds to it, and rises up to meet and salute
it?

And we cease to wonder so much at the care God takes of human character,
and the cost He lays out upon it, when we think that it is the only work
of His hands that shall last for ever.  It is fit, surely, that the
ephemeral should minister to the eternal, and time to eternity, and all
else in this world to the only thing in this world that shall endure and
survive this world.  All else we possess and pursue shall fade and
perish, our moral character shall alone survive.  Riches, honours,
possessions, pleasures of all kinds: death, with one stroke of his
desolating hand, shall one day strip us bare to a winding-sheet and a
coffin of all the things we are so mad to possess.  But the last enemy,
with all his malice and all his resistless power, cannot touch our moral
character--unless it be in some way utterly mysterious to us that he is
made under God to refine and perfect it.  The Express Image carried up to
His Father's House, not only the divine life He had brought hither with
Him when He came to obey and submit and suffer among us; He carried back
more than He brought, for He carried back a human heart, a human life, a
human character, which was and is a new wonder in heaven.  He carried up
to heaven all the love to God and angels and men He had learned and
practised on earth, with all the earthly fruits of it.  He carried back
His humility, His meekness, His humanity, His approachableness, and His
sympathy.  And we see to our salvation some of the uses to which those
parts of His moral character are at this moment being put in His Father's
House; and what we see not now of all the ends and uses and employments
of our Lord's glorified humanity we shall, mayhap, see hereafter.  And we
also shall carry our moral character to heaven; it is the only thing we
have worth carrying so far.  But, then, moral character is well worth
achieving here and then carrying there, for it is nothing else and
nothing less than the divine nature itself; it is the divine nature
incarnate, incorporate, and made manifest in man.  And it is, therefore,
immortal with the immortality of God, and blessed for ever with the
blessedness of God.




EVANGELIST


   'Do the work of an evangelist.'--Paul to Timothy.

On the 1st of June 1648 a very bitter fight was fought at Maidstone, in
Kent, between the Parliamentary forces under Fairfax and the Royalists.
Till Cromwell rose to all his military and administrative greatness,
Fairfax was generalissimo of the Puritan army, and that able soldier
never executed a more brilliant exploit than he did that memorable night
at Maidstone.  In one night the Royalist insurrection was stamped out and
extinguished in its own blood.  Hundreds of dead bodies filled the
streets of the town, hundreds of the enemy were taken prisoners, while
hundreds more, who were hiding in the hop-fields and forests around the
town, fell into Fairfax's hands next morning.

Among the prisoners so taken was a Royalist major who had had a deep hand
in the Maidstone insurrection, named John Gifford, a man who was destined
in the time to come to run a remarkable career.  Only, to-day, the day
after the battle, he has no prospect before him but the gallows.  On the
night before his execution, by the courtesy of Fairfax, Gifford's sister
was permitted to visit her brother in his prison.  The soldiers were
overcome with weariness and sleep after the engagement, and Gifford's
sister so managed it that her brother got past the sentries and escaped
out of the town.  He lay hid for some days in the ditches and thickets
around the town till he was able to escape to London, and thence to the
shelter of some friends of his at Bedford.  Gifford had studied medicine
before he entered the army, and as soon as he thought it safe he began to
practise his old art in the town of Bedford.  Gifford had been a
dissolute man as a soldier, and he became, if possible, a still more
scandalously dissolute man as a civilian.  Gifford's life in Bedford was
a public disgrace, and his hatred and persecution of the Puritans in that
town made his very name an infamy and a fear.  He reduced himself to
beggary with gambling and drink, but, when near suicide, he came under
the power of the truth, till we see him clothed with rags and with a
great burden on his back, crying out, 'What must I do to be saved?'  'But
at last'--I quote from the session records of his future church at
Bedford--'God did so plentifully discover to him the forgiveness of sins
for the sake of Christ, that all his life after he lost not the light of
God's countenance, no, not for an hour, save only about two days before
he died.'  Gifford's conversion had been so conspicuous and notorious
that both town and country soon heard of it: and instead of being ashamed
of it, and seeking to hide it, Gifford at once, and openly, threw in his
lot with the extremest Puritans in the Puritan town of Bedford.  Nor
could Gifford's talents be hid; till from one thing to another, we find
the former Royalist and dissolute Cavalier actually the parish minister
of Bedford in Cromwell's so evangelical but otherwise so elastic
establishment.

At this point we open John Bunyan's _Grace Abounding to the Chief of
Sinners_, and we read this classical passage:--'Upon a day the good
providence of God did cast me to Bedford to work in my calling: and in
one of the streets of that town I came where there were three or four
poor women sitting at the door in the sun and talking about the things of
God.  But I may say I heard, but I understood not, for they were far
above and out of my reach . . . About this time I began to break my mind
to those poor people in Bedford, and to tell them of my condition, which,
when they had heard, they told Mr. Gifford of me, who himself also took
occasion to talk with me, and was willing to be well persuaded of me
though I think on too little grounds.  But he invited me to his house,
where I should hear him confer with others about the dealings of God with
their souls, from all which I still received more conviction, and from
that time began to see something of the vanity and inner wretchedness of
my own heart, for as yet I knew no great matter therein . . . At that
time also I sat under the ministry of holy Mr. Gifford, whose doctrine,
by the grace of God, was much for my stability.'  And so on in that
inimitable narrative.

The first minister whose words were truly blessed of God for our
awakening and conversion has always a place of his own in our hearts.  We
all have some minister, some revivalist, some faithful friend, or some
good book in a warm place in our heart.  It may be a great city preacher;
it may be a humble American or Irish revivalist; it may be _The Pilgrim's
Progress_, or _The Cardiphonia_, or the _Serious Call_--whoever or
whatever it was that first arrested and awakened and turned us into the
way of life, they all our days stand in a place by themselves in our
grateful heart.  And John Gifford has been immortalised by John Bunyan,
both in his _Grace Abounding_ and in his _Pilgrim's Progress_.  In his
_Grace Abounding_, as we have just seen, and in _The Pilgrim_, Gifford
has his portrait painted in holy oil on the wall of the Interpreter's
house, and again in eloquent pen and ink in the person of Evangelist.

John Gifford had himself made a narrow escape out of the City of
Destruction, and John Bunyan had, by Gifford's assistance, made the same
escape also.  The scene, therefore, both within that city and outside the
gate of it, was so fixed in Bunyan's mind and memory that no part of his
memorable book is more memorably put than just its opening page.  Bunyan
himself is the man in rags, and Gifford is the evangelist who comes to
console and to conduct him.  Bunyan's portraits are all taken from the
life.  Brilliant and well-furnished as Bunyan's imagination was, Bedford
was still better furnished with all kinds of men and women, and with all
kinds of saints and sinners.  And thus, instead of drawing upon his
imagination in writing his books, Bunyan drew from life.  And thus it is
that we see first John Gifford, and then John Bunyan himself at the gate
of the city; and then, over the page, Gifford becomes the evangelist who
is sent by the four poor women to speak to the awakened tinker.

'Wherefore dost thou so cry?' asks Evangelist.  'Because,' replied the
man, 'I am condemned to die.'  'But why are you so unwilling to die,
since this life is so full of evils?'  And I suppose we must all hear
Evangelist putting the same pungent question to ourselves every day, at
whatever point of the celestial journey we at present are.  Yes; why are
we all so unwilling to die?  Why do we number our days to put off our
death to the last possible period?  Why do we so refuse to think of the
only thing we are sure soon to come to?  We are absolutely sure of
nothing else in the future but death.  We may not see to-morrow, but we
shall certainly see the day of our death.  And yet we have all our plans
laid for to-morrow, and only one here and one there has any plan laid for
the day of his death.  And can it be for the same reason that made the
man in rags unwilling to die?  Is it because of the burden on our back?
Is it because we are not fit to go to judgment?  And yet the trumpet may
sound summoning us hence before the midnight clock strikes.  If this be
thy condition, why standest thou still?  Dost thou see yonder shining
light?  Keep that light in thine eye.  Go up straight to it, knock at the
gate, and it shall be told thee there what thou shalt do next.  Burdened
sinner, son of man in rags and terror: What has burdened thee so?  What
has torn thy garments into such shameful rags?  What is it in thy burden
that makes it so heavy?  And how long has it lain so heavy upon thee?  'I
cannot run,' said the man, 'because of the burden on my back.'  And it
has been noticed of you that you do not laugh, or run, or dress, or
dance, or walk, or eat, or drink as once you did.  All men see that there
is some burden on your back; some sore burden on your heart and your
mind.  Do you see yonder wicket gate?  Do you see yonder shining light?
There is no light in all the horizon for you but yonder light over the
gate.  Keep it in your eye; make straight, and make at once for it, and
He who keeps the gate and keeps the light burning over it, He will tell
you what to do with your burden.  He told John Gifford, and He told John
Bunyan, till both their burdens rolled off their backs, and they saw them
no more.  What would you not give to-night to be released like them?  Do
you not see yonder shining light?

Having set Christian fairly on the way to the wicket gate, Evangelist
leaves him in order to seek out and assist some other seeker.  But
yesterday he had set Faithful's face to the celestial city, and he is off
now to look for another pilgrim.  We know some of Christian's adventures
and episodes after Evangelist left him, but we do not take up these at
present.  We pass on to the next time that Evangelist finds Christian,
and he finds him in a sorry plight.  He has listened to bad advice.  He
has gone off the right road, he has lost sight of the gate, and all the
thunders and lightnings of Sinai are rolling and flashing out against
him.  What doest thou here of all men in the world? asked Evangelist,
with a severe and dreadful countenance.  Did I not direct thee to His
gate, and why art thou here?  Christian told him that a fair-spoken man
had met him, and had persuaded him to take an easier and shorter way of
getting rid of his burden.  Read the whole place for yourselves.  The end
of it was that Evangelist set Christian right again, and gave him two
counsels which would be his salvation if he attended to them: Strive to
enter in at the strait gate, and, Take up thy cross daily.  He would need
more counsel afterwards than that; but, meantime, that was enough.  Let
Christian follow that, and he would before long be rid of his burden.

In the introductory lecture Bishop Butler has been commended and praised
as a moralist, and certainly not one word beyond his deserts; but an
evangelical preacher cannot send any man with the burden of a bad past
upon him to Butler for advice and direction about that.  While lecturing
on and praising the sound philosophical and ethical spirit of the great
bishop, Dr. Chalmers complains that he so much lacks the _sal
evangelicum_, the strength and the health and the sweetness of the
doctrines of grace.  Legality and Civility and Morality are all good and
necessary in their own places; but he is a cheat who would send a guilt-
burdened and sick-at-heart sinner to any or all of them.  The wicket gate
first, and then He who keeps that gate will tell us what to do, and where
next to go; but any other way out of the City of Destruction but by the
wicket gate is sure to land us where it landed Evangelist's quaking and
sweating charge.  When Bishop Butler lay on his deathbed he called for
his chaplain, and said, 'Though I have endeavoured to avoid sin, and to
please God to the utmost of my power, yet from the consciousness of my
perpetual infirmities I am still afraid to die.'  'My lord,' said his
happily evangelical chaplain, 'have you forgotten that Jesus Christ is a
Saviour?'  'True,' said the dying philosopher, 'but how shall I know that
He is a Saviour for me?'  'My lord, it is written, "Him that cometh to
Me, I will in no wise cast out."'  'True,' said Butler, 'and I am
surprised that though I have read that Scripture a thousand times, I
never felt its virtue till this moment, and now I die in peace.'

The third and the last time on which the pilgrims meet with their old
friend and helper, Evangelist, is when they are just at the gates of the
town of Vanity.  They have come through many wonderful experiences since
last they saw and spoke with him.  They have had the gate opened to them
by Goodwill.  They have been received and entertained in the
Interpreter's House, and in the House Beautiful.  The burden has fallen
off their backs at the cross, and they have had their rags removed and
have received change of raiment.  They have climbed the Hill Difficulty,
and they have fought their way through the Valley of the Shadow of Death.
More than the half of their adventures and sufferings are past; but they
are not yet out of gunshot of the devil, and the bones of many a
promising pilgrim lie whitening the way between this and the city.  Many
of our young communicants have made a fair and a promising start for
salvation.  They have got over the initial difficulties that lay in their
way to the Lord's table, and we have entered their names with honest
pride in our communion roll.  But a year or two passes over, and the
critical season arrives when our young communicant 'comes out,' as the
word is.  Up till now she has been a child, a little maid, a Bible-class
student, a young communicant, a Sabbath-school teacher.  But she is now a
young lady, and she comes out into the world.  We soon see that she has
so come out, as we begin to miss her from places and from employments her
presence used to brighten; and, very unwillingly, we overhear men and
women with her name on their lips in a way that makes us fear for her
soul, till many, oh, in a single ministry, how many, who promised well at
the gate and ran safely past many snares, at last sell all--body and soul
and Saviour--in Vanity Fair.

Well, Evangelist remains Evangelist still.  Only, without losing any of
his sweetness and freeness and fulness of promise, he adds to that some
solemn warnings and counsels suitable now, as never before, to these two
pilgrims.  If one may say so, he would add now such moral treatises as
Butler's _Sermons_ and _Serious Call_ to such evangelical books as _Grace
Abounding_ and _A Jerusalem Sinner Saved_.

To-morrow the two pilgrims will come out of the wilderness and will be
plunged into a city where they will be offered all kinds of
merchandise,--houses, lands, places, honours, preferments, titles,
pleasures, delights, wives, children, bodies, souls, and what not.  An
altogether new world from anything they have yet come through, and a
world where many who once began well have gone no further.  Such counsels
as these, then, Evangelist gave Christian and Faithful as they left the
lonely wilderness behind them and came out towards the gate of the
seductive city--'Let the Kingdom of Heaven be always before your eyes,
and believe steadfastly concerning things that are invisible.'  Visible,
tangible, sweet, and desirable things will immediately be offered to
them, and unless they have a faith in their hearts that is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen, it will soon be
all over with them and their pilgrimage.  'Let no man take your crown,'
he said also, as he foresaw at how many booths and counters, houses,
lands, places, preferments, wives, husbands, and what not, would be
offered them and pressed upon them in exchange for their heavenly crown.
'Above all, look well to your own hearts,' he said.  Canon Venables
laments over the teaching that Bunyan received from John Gifford.  'Its
principle,' he says, 'was constant introspection and scrupulous weighing
of every word and deed, and even of every thought, instead of leading the
mind off from self to the Saviour.'  The canon seems to think that it was
specially unfortunate for Bunyan to be told to keep his heart and to
weigh well every thought of it; but I must point out to you that
Evangelist puts as above all other things the most important for the
pilgrims the looking well to their own hearts; and our plain-spoken
author has used a very severe word about any minister who should whisper
anything to any pilgrim that could be construed or misunderstood into
putting Christ in the place of thought and word and deed, and the
scrupulous weighing of every one of them.  'Let nothing that is on this
side the other world get within you; and above all, look well to your own
hearts, and to the lusts thereof.'

'Set your faces like a flint,' Evangelist proceeds.  How little like all
that you hear in the counsels of the pulpit to young women coming out and
to young men entering into business life.  I am convinced that if we
ministers were more direct and plain-spoken to such persons at such
times; if we, like Bunyan, told them plainly what kind of a world it is
they are coming out to buy and sell in, and what its merchandise and its
prices are; if our people would let us so preach to their sons and
daughters, I feel sure far fewer young communicants would make shipwreck,
and far fewer grey heads would go down with sorrow to the grave.  'Be not
afraid,' said Robert Hall in his charge to a young minister, 'of devoting
whole sermons to particular parts of moral conduct and religious duty.  It
is impossible to give right views of them unless you dissect characters
and describe particular virtues and vices.  The works of the flesh and
the fruits of the Spirit must be distinctly pointed out.  To preach
against sin in general without descending to particulars may lead many to
complain of the evil of their hearts, while at the same time they are
awfully inattentive to the evil of their conduct.'  Take Evangelist's
noble counsels at the gate of Vanity Fair, and then take John Bunyan's
masterly description of the Fair itself, with all that is bought and sold
in it, and you will have a lesson in evangelical preaching that the
evangelical pulpit needed in Bunyan's day, in Robert Hall's day, and not
less in our own.

'My sons, you have heard the truth of the gospel, that you must through
many tribulations enter the Kingdom of God.  When, therefore, you are
come to the Fair and shall find fulfilled what I have here related, then
remember your friend; quit yourselves like men, and commit the keeping of
your souls to your God in well-doing as unto a faithful Creator.'




OBSTINATE


   'Be ye not as the mule.'--David.

Little Obstinate was born and brought up in the City of Destruction.  His
father was old Spare-the-Rod, and his mother's name was Spoil-the-Child.
Little Obstinate was the only child of his parents; he was born when they
were no longer young, and they doted on their only child, and gave him
his own way in everything.  Everything he asked for he got, and if he did
not immediately get it you would have heard his screams and his kicks
three doors off.  His parents were not in themselves bad people, but, if
Solomon speaks true, they hated their child, for they gave him all his
own way in everything, and nothing would ever make them say no to him, or
lift up the rod when he said no to them.  When the Scriptures, in their
pedagogical parts, speak so often about the rod, they do not necessarily
mean a rod of iron or even of wood.  There are other ways of teaching an
obstinate child than the way that Gideon took with the men of Succoth
when he taught them with the thorns of the wilderness and with the briars
thereof.  George Offor, John Bunyan's somewhat quaint editor, gives the
readers of his edition this personal testimony:--'After bringing up a
very large family, who are a blessing to their parents, I have yet to
learn what part of the human body was created to be beaten.'  At the same
time the rod must mean something in the word of God; it certainly means
something in God's hand when His obstinate children are under it, and it
ought to mean something in a godly parent's hand also.  Little
Obstinate's two parents were far from ungodly people, though they lived
in such a city; but they were daily destroying their only son by letting
him always have his own way, and by never saying no to his greed, and his
lies, and his anger, and his noisy and disorderly ways.  Eli in the Old
Testament was not a bad man, but he destroyed both the ark of the Lord
and himself and his sons also, because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not.  God's children are never so soft, and sweet, and
good, and happy as just after He restrains them, and has again laid the
rod of correction upon them.  They then kiss both the rod and Him who
appointed it.  And earthly fathers learn their craft from God.  The
meekness, the sweetness, the docility, and the love of a chastised child
has gone to all our hearts in a way we can never forget.  There is
something sometimes almost past description or belief in the way a
chastised child clings to and kisses the hand that chastised it.  But
poor old Spare-the-Rod never had experiences like that.  And young
Obstinate, having been born like Job's wild ass's colt, grew up to be a
man like David's unbitted and unbridled mule, till in after life he
became the author of all the evil and mischief that is associated in our
minds with his evil name.

In old Spare-the-Rod's child also this true proverb was fulfilled, that
the child is the father of the man.  For all that little Obstinate had
been in the nursery, in the schoolroom, and in the playground--all that,
only in an aggravated way--he was as a youth and as a grown-up man.  For
one thing, Obstinate all his days was a densely ignorant man.  He had not
got into the way of learning his lessons when he was a child; he had not
been made to learn his lessons when he was a child; and the dislike and
contempt he had for his books as a boy accompanied him through an
ignorant and a narrow-minded life.  It was reason enough to this so
unreasonable man not to buy and read a book that you had asked him to buy
and read it.  And so many of the books about him were either written, or
printed, or published, or sold, or read, or praised by people he did not
like, that there was little left for this unhappy man to read, even if
otherwise he would have read it.  And thus, as his mulish obstinacy kept
him so ignorant, so his ignorance in turn increased his obstinacy.  And
then when he came, as life went on, to have anything to do with other
men's affairs, either in public or in private life, either in the church,
or in the nation, or in the city, or in the family, this unhappy man
could only be a drag on all kinds of progress, and in obstacle to every
good work.  Use and wont, a very good rule on occasion, was a rigid and a
universal rule with Obstinate.  And to be told that the wont in this case
and in that had ceased to be the useful, only made him rail at you as
only an ignorant and an obstinate man can rail.  He could only rail; he
had not knowledge enough, or good temper enough, or good manners enough
to reason out a matter; he was too hot-tempered for an argument, and he
hated those who had an acquaintance with the subject in hand, and a self-
command in connection with it that he had not.  'The obstinate man's
understanding is like Pharaoh's heart, and it is proof against all sorts
of arguments whatsoever.'  Like the demented king of Egypt, the obstinate
man has glimpses sometimes both of his bounden duty and of his true
interest, but the sinew of iron that is in his neck will not let him
perform the one or pursue the other.  'Nothing,' says a penetrating
writer, 'is more like firm conviction than simple obstinacy.  Plots and
parties in the state, and heresies and divisions in the church alike
proceed from it.'  Let any honest man take that sentence and carry it
like a candle down into his own heart and back into his own life, and
then with the insight and honesty there learned carry the same candle
back through some of the plots and parties, the heresies and schisms of
the past as well as of the present day, and he will have learned a lesson
that will surely help to cure himself, at any rate, of his own remaining
obstinacy.  All our firm convictions, as we too easily and too fondly
call them, must continually be examined and searched out in the light of
more reading of the best authors, in the light of more experience of
ourselves and of the world we live in, and in that best of all light,
that increasing purity, simplicity, and sincerity of heart alone can
kindle.  And in not a few instances we shall to a certainty find that
what has hitherto been clothing itself with the honourable name and
character of a conviction was all the time only an ignorant prejudice, a
distaste or a dislike, a too great fondness for ourselves and for our own
opinion and our own interest.  Many of our firmest convictions, as we now
call them, when we shall have let light enough fall upon them, we shall
be compelled and enabled to confess to be at bottom mere mulishness and
pride of heart.  The mulish, obstinate, and proud man never says, I don't
know.  He never asks anything to be explained to him.  He never admits
that he has got any new light.  He never admits having spoken or acted
wrongly.  He never takes back what he has said.  He was never heard to
say, You are right in that line of action, and I have all along been
wrong.  Had he ever said that, the day he said it would have been a white-
stone day both for his mind and his heart.  Only, the spoiled son of
Spare-the-Rod never said that, or anything like that.

But, most unfortunately, it is in the very best things of life that the
true mulishness of the obstinate man most comes out.  He shows worst in
his home life and in the matters of religion.  When our Obstinate was in
love he was as sweet as honey and as soft as butter.  His old friends
that he used so to trample upon scarcely recognised him.  They had
sometimes seen men converted, but they had never seen such an immediate
and such a complete conversion as this.  He actually invited correction,
and reproof, and advice, and assistance, who had often struck at you with
his hands and his feet when you even hinted at such a thing to him.  The
best upbringing, the best books, the best preaching, the best and most
obedient life, taken all together, had not done for other men what a
woman's smile and the touch of her hand had in a moment done for this
once so obstinate man.  He would read anything now, and especially the
best books.  He would hear and enjoy any preacher now, and especially the
best and most earnest in preaching.  His old likes and dislikes,
prejudices and prepossessions, self-opinionativeness and
self-assertiveness all miraculously melted off him, and he became in a
day an open-minded, intelligent, good-mannered, devout-minded gentleman.
He who was once such a mule to everybody was now led about by a child in
a silken bridle.  All old things had passed away, and all things had
become new.  For a time; for a time.  But time passes, and there passes
away with it all the humility, meekness, pliability, softness, and
sweetness of the obstinate man.  Till when long enough time has elapsed
you find him all the obstinate and mulish man he ever was.  It is not
that he has ceased to love his wife and his children.  It is not that.
But there is this in all genuine and inbred obstinacy, that after a time
it often comes out worst beside those we love best.  A man will be
affable, accessible, entertaining, the best of company, and the soul of
it abroad, and, then, instantly he turns the latch-key in his own door he
will relapse into silence, and sink back into utter boorishness and
bearishness, mulishness and doggedness.  He swallows his evening meal at
the foot of the table in silence, and then he sits all night at the
fireside with a cloud out of nothing on his brow.  His sunshine, his
smile, and his universal urbanity is all gone now; he is discourteous to
nobody but to his own wife.  Nothing pleases him; he finds nothing at
home to his mind.  The furniture, the hours, the habits of the house are
all disposed so as to please him; but he was never yet heard to say to
wife, or child, or servant that he was pleased.  He never says that a
meal is to his taste or a seat set so as to shelter and repose him.  The
obstinate man makes his house a very prison and treadmill to himself and
to all those who are condemned to suffer with him.  And all the time it
is not that he does not love and honour his household; but by an evil law
of the obstinate heart its worst obstinacy and mulishness comes out among
those it loves best.

But, my brethren, worse than all that, we have all what good Bishop Hall
calls 'a stone of obstination' in our hearts against God.  With all his
own depth and clearness and plain-spokenness, Paul tells us that our
hearts are by nature enmity against God.  Were we proud and obstinate and
malicious against men only it would be bad enough, and it would be
difficult enough to cure, but our case is dreadful beyond all description
or belief when our obstinacy strikes out against God.  We know as well as
we know anything, that in doing this and in not doing that we are going
every day right in the teeth both of God's law and God's grace; and yet
in the sheer obstinacy and perversity of our heart we still go on in what
we know quite well to be the suicide of our souls.  We are told by our
minister to do this and not to do that; to begin to do this at this new
year and to break off from doing that; but, partly through obstinacy
towards him, reinforced by a deeper and subtler and deadlier obstinacy
against God, and against all the deepest and most godly of the things of
God, we neither do the one nor cease from doing the other.  There is a
sullenness in some men's minds, a gloom and a bitter air that rises up
from the unploughed, undrained, unweeded, uncultivated fens of their
hearts that chills and blasts all the feeble beginnings of a better life.
The natural and constitutional obstinacy of the obstinate heart is
exasperated when it comes to deal with the things of God.  For it is then
reinforced with all the guilt and all the fear, all the suspicion and all
the aversion of the corrupt and self-condemned heart.  There is an
obdurateness of obstinacy against all the men, and the books, and the
doctrines, and the precepts, and the practices that are in any way
connected with spiritual religion that does not come out even in the
obstinate man's family life.

John Bunyan's Obstinate, both by his conduct as well as by the etymology
of his name, not only stands in the way of his own salvation, but he does
all he can to stand in the way of other men setting out to salvation
also.  Obstinate set out after Christian to fetch him back by force, and
if it had not been that he met his match in Christian, _The Pilgrim's
Progress_ would never have been written.  'That can by no means be,' said
Christian to his pursuer, and he is first called Christian when he shows
that one man can be as obstinate in good as another man can be in evil.
'I never now can go back to my former life.'  And then the two obstinate
men parted company for ever, Christian in holy obstinacy being determined
to have eternal life at any cost, and Obstinate as determined against it.
The opening pages of _The Pilgrim's Progress_ set the two men very
graphically and very impressively before us.

As to the cure of obstinacy, the rod in a firm, watchful, wise, and
loving hand will cure it.  And in later life a long enough and close
enough succession of humble, yielding, docile, submissive,
self-chastening and thanksgiving acts will cure it.  Reading and obeying
the best books on the subjugation and the regulation of the heart will
cure it.  Descending with Dante to where the obstinate, and the
embittered, and the gloomy, and the sullen have made their beds in hell
will cure it.  And much and most agonising prayer will above all cure it.

   'O Lord, if thus so obstinate I,
   Choose Thou, before my spirit die,
   A piercing pain, a killing sin,
   And to my proud heart run them in.




PLIABLE


   'He hath not root in himself.'--Our Lord.

With one stroke of His pencil our Lord gives us this Flaxman-like outline
of one of his well-known hearers.  And then John Bunyan takes up that so
expressive profile, and puts flesh and blood into it, till it becomes the
well-known Pliable of _The Pilgrim's Progress_.  We call the text a
parable, but our Lord's parables are all portraits--portraits and groups
of portraits, rather than ordinary parables.  Our Lord knew this man
quite well who had no root in himself.  Our Lord had crowds of such men
always running after Him, and He threw off this rapid portrait from
hundreds of men and women who caused discredit to fall on His name and
His work, and burdened His heart continually.  And John Bunyan, with all
his genius, could never have given us such speaking likenesses as that of
Pliable and Temporary and Talkative, unless he had had scores of them in
his own congregation.

Our Lord's short preliminary description of Pliable goes, like all His
descriptions, to the very bottom of the whole matter.  Our Lord in this
passage is like one of those masterly artists who begin their portrait-
painting with the study of anatomy.  All the great artists in this walk
build up their best portraits from the inside of their subjects.  He hath
not root in himself, says our Lord, and we need no more than that to be
told us to foresee how all his outside religion will end.  'Without self-
knowledge,' says one of the greatest students of the human heart that
ever lived, 'you have no real root in yourselves.  Real self-knowledge is
the root of all real religious knowledge.  It is a deceit and a mischief
to think that the Christian doctrines can either be understood or aright
accepted by any outward means.  It is just in proportion as we search our
own hearts and understand our own nature that we shall ever feel what a
blessing the removal of sin will be; redemption, pardon, sanctification,
are all otherwise mere words without meaning or power to us.  God speaks
to us first in our own hearts.'  Happily for us our Lord has annotated
His own text and has told us that an honest heart is the alone root of
all true religion.  Honest, that is, with itself, and with God and man
about itself.  As David says in his so honest psalm, 'Behold, Thou
desirest truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part Thou shalt
make me to know wisdom.'  And, indeed, all the preachers and writers in
Scripture, and all Scriptural preachers and writers outside of Scripture,
are at one in this: that all true wisdom begins at home, and that it all
begins at the heart.  And they all teach us that he is the wisest of men
who has the worst opinion of his own heart, as he is the foolishest of
men who does not know his own heart to be the worst heart that ever any
man was cursed with in this world.  'Here is wisdom': not to know the
number of the beast, but to know his mark, and to read it written so
indelibly in our own heart.

And where this first and best of all wisdom is not, there, in our Lord's
words, there is no deepness of earth, no root, and no fruit.  And any
religion that most men have is of this outside, shallow, rootless
description.  This was all the religion that poor Pliable ever had.  This
poor creature had a certain slight root of something that looked like
religion for a short season, but even that slight root was all outside of
himself.  His root, what he had of a root, was all in Christian's
companionship and impassioned appeals, and then in those impressive
passages of Scripture that Christian read to him.  At your first
attention to these things you would think that no possible root could be
better planted than in the Bible and in earnest preaching.  But even the
Bible, and, much more, the best preaching, is all really outside of a man
till true religion once gets its piercing roots down into himself.  We
have perhaps all heard of men, and men of no small eminence, who were
brought up to believe the teaching of the Bible and the pulpit, but who,
when some of their inherited and external ideas about some things
connected with the Bible began to be shaken, straightway felt as if all
the grounds of their faith were shaken, and all the roots of their faith
pulled up.  But where that happened, all that was because such men's
religion was all rooted outside of themselves; in the best things outside
of themselves, indeed, but because, in our Lord's words, their religion
was rooted in something outside of themselves and not inside, they were
by and by offended, and threw off their faith.  There is another well-
known class of men all whose religion is rooted in their church, and in
their church not as a member of the body of Christ, but as a social
institution set up in this world.  They believe in their church.  They
worship their church.  They suffer and make sacrifices for their church.
They are proud of the size and the income of their church; her past
contendings and sufferings, and present dangers, all endear their church
to their heart.  But if tribulation and persecution arise, that is to
say, if anything arises to vex or thwart or disappoint them with their
church, they incontinently pull up their roots and their religion with
it, and transplant both to any other church that for the time better
pleases them, or to no church at all.  Others, again, have all their
religiosity rooted in their family life.  Their religion is all made up
of domestic sentiment.  They love their earthly home with that supreme
satisfaction and that all-absorbing affection that truly religious men
entertain for their heavenly home.  And thus it is that when anything
happens to disturb or break up their earthly home their rootless
religiosity goes with it.  Other men's religion, again, and all their
interest in it, is rooted in their shop; you can make them anything or
nothing in religion, according as you do or do not do business in their
shop.  Companionship, also, accounts for the fluctuations of many men's,
and almost all women's, religious lives.  If they happen to fall in with
godly lovers and friends, they are sincerely godly with them; but if
their companions are indifferent or hostile to true religion, they
gradually fall into the same temper and attitude.  We sometimes see
students destined for the Christian ministry also with all their religion
so without root in themselves that a session in an unsympathetic class, a
sceptical book, sometimes just a sneer or a scoff, will wither all the
promise of their coming service.  And so on through the whole of human
life.  He that hath not the root of the matter in himself dureth for a
while, but by and by, for one reason or another, he is sure to be
offended.

So much, then,--not enough, nor good enough--for our Lord's swift stroke
at the heart of His hearers.  But let us now pass on to Pliable, as he so
soon and so completely discovers himself to us under John Bunyan's so
skilful hand.  Look well at our author's speaking portrait of a
well-known man in Bedford who had no root in himself, and who, as a
consequence, was pliable to any influence, good or bad, that happened to
come across him.  'Don't revile,' are the first words that come from
Pliable's lips, and they are not unpromising words.  Pliable is hurt with
Obstinate's coarse abuse of the Christian life, till he is downright
ashamed to be seen in his company.  Pliable, at least, is a gentleman
compared with Obstinate, and his gentlemanly feelings and his good
manners make him at once take sides with Christian.  Obstinate's foul
tongue has almost made Pliable a Christian.  And this finely-conceived
scene on the plain outside the city gate is enacted over again every day
among ourselves.  Where men are in dead earnest about religion it always
arouses the bad passions of bad men; and where earnest preachers and
devoted workers are assailed with violence or with bad language, there is
always enough love of fair play in the bystanders to compel them to take
sides, for the time at least, with those who suffer for the truth.  And
we are sometimes too apt to count all that love of common fairness, and
that hatred of foul play, as a sure sign of some sympathy with the hated
truth itself.  When an onlooker says 'Don't revile,' we are too ready to
set down that expression of civility as at least the first beginning of
true religion.  But the religion of Jesus Christ cuts far deeper into the
heart of man than to the dividing asunder of justice and injustice,
civility and incivility, ribaldry and good manners.  And it is always
found in the long-run that the cross of Christ and its crucifixion of the
human heart goes quite as hard with the gentlemanly-mannered man, the
civil and urbane man, as it does with the man of bad behaviour and of
brutish manners.  'Civil men,' says Thomas Goodwin, 'are this world's
saints.'  And poor Pliable was one of them.  'My heart really inclines to
go with my neighbour,' said Pliable next.  'Yes,' he said, 'I begin to
come to a point.  I really think I will go along with this good man.  Yes,
I will cast in my lot with him.  Come, good neighbour, let us be going.'

The apocalyptic side of some men's imaginations is very easily worked
upon.  No kind of book sells better among those of our people who have no
root in themselves than just picture-books about heaven.  Our
missionaries make use of lantern-slides to bring home the scenes in the
Gospels to the dull minds of their village hearers, and with good
success.  And at home a magic-lantern filled with the splendours of the
New Jerusalem would carry multitudes of rootless hearts quite captive for
a time.  'Well said; and what else?  This is excellent; and what else?'
Christian could not tell Pliable fast enough about the glories of heaven.
'There we shall be with seraphim and cherubim, creatures that will dazzle
your eyes to look on them.  There also you shall meet with thousands and
ten thousands who have gone before us to that place.  Elders with golden
crowns, and holy virgins with golden harps, and all clothed with
immortality as with a garment.'  'The hearing of all this,' cried
Pliable, 'is enough to ravish one's heart.'  'An overly faith,' says old
Thomas Shepard, 'is easily wrought.'

As if the text itself was not graphic enough, Bunyan's racy, humorous,
pathetic style overflows the text and enriches the very margins of his
pages, as every possessor of a good edition of _The Pilgrim_ knows.
'Christian and Obstinate pull for Pliable's soul' is the eloquent summary
set down on the side of the sufficiently eloquent page.  As the picture
of a man's soul being pulled for rises before my mind, I can think of no
better companion picture to that of Pliable than that of poor, hard-beset
Brodie of Brodie, as he lets us see the pull for his soul in the honest
pages of his inward diary.  Under the head of 'Pliable' in my Bunyan note-
book I find a crowd of references to Brodie; and if only to illustrate
our author's marginal note, I shall transcribe one or two of them.  'The
writer of this diary desires to be cast down under the facileness and
plausibleness of his nature, by which he labours to please men more than
God, and whence it comes that the wicked speak good of him . . . The Lord
pity the proneness of his heart to comply with the men who have the power
. . . Lord, he is unsound and double in his heart, politically crafty,
selfish, not savouring nor discerning the things of God . . . Let not
self-love, wit, craft, and timorousness corrupt his mind, but indue him
with fortitude, patience, steadfastness, tenderness, mortification . . .
Shall I expose myself and my family to danger at this time?  A grain of
sound faith would solve all my questions.'  'Die Dom.  I stayed at home,
partly to decline the ill-will and rage of men and to decline
observation.'  Or, take another Sabbath-day entry: 'Die Dom.  I stayed at
home, because of the time, and the observation, and the Earl of Moray . .
. Came to Cuttiehillock.  I am neither cold nor hot.  I am not rightly
principled as to the time.  I suspect that it is not all conscience that
makes me conform, but wit, and to avoid suffering; Lord, deliver me from
all this unsoundness of heart.'  And after this miserable fashion do
heaven and earth, duty and self-interest, the covenant and the crown pull
for Lord Brodie's soul through 422 quarto pages.  Brodie's diary is one
of the most humiliating, heart-searching, and heart-instructing books I
ever read.  Let all public men tempted and afflicted with a facile,
pliable, time-serving heart have honest Brodie at their elbow.

'Glad I am, my good companion,' said Pliable, after the passage about the
cherubim and the seraphim, and the golden crowns and the golden harps,
'it ravishes my very heart to hear all this.  Come on, let us mend our
pace.'  This is delightful, this is perfect.  How often have we ourselves
heard these very words of challenge and reproof from the pliable
frequenters of emotional meetings, and from the emotional members of an
emotional but rootless ministry.  Come on, let us mend our pace!  'I am
sorry to say,' replied the man with the burden on his back, 'that I
cannot go so fast as I would.'  'Christian,' says Mr. Kerr Bain, 'has
more to carry than Pliable has, as, indeed, he would still have if he
were carrying nothing but himself; and he does have about him, besides, a
few sobering thoughts as to the length and labour and some of the
unforeseen chances of the way.'  And as Dean Paget says in his profound
and powerful sermon on 'The Disasters of Shallowness': 'Yes, but there is
something else first; something else without which that inexpensive
brightness, that easy hopefulness, is apt to be a frail resourceless
growth, withering away when the sun is up and the hot winds of trial are
sweeping over it.  We must open our hearts to our religion; we must have
the inward soil broken up, freely and deeply its roots must penetrate our
inner being.  We must take to ourselves in silence and in sincerity its
words of judgment with its words of hope, its sternness with its
encouragement, its denunciations with its promises, its requirements,
with its offers, its absolute intolerance of sin with its inconceivable
and divine long-suffering towards sinners.'  But preaching like this
would have frightened away poor Pliable.  He would not have understood
it, and what he did understand of it he would have hated with all his
shallow heart.

'Where are we now?' called Pliable to his companion, as they both went
over head and ears into the Slough of Despond.  'Truly,' said Christian,
'I do not know.'--No work of man is perfect, not even the all-but-perfect
_Pilgrim's Progress_.  Christian was bound to fall sooner or later into a
slough filled with his own despondency about himself, his past guilt, his
present sinfulness, and his anxious future.  But Pliable had not
knowledge enough of himself to make him ever despond.  He was always
ready and able to mend his pace.  He had no burden on his back, and
therefore no doubt in his heart.  But Christian had enough of both for
any ten men, and it was Christian's overflowing despondency and doubt at
this point of the road that suddenly filled his own slough, and, I
suppose, overflowed into a slough for Pliable also.  Had Pliable only had
a genuine and original slough of his own to so sink and be bedaubed in,
he would have got out of it at the right side of it, and been a tender-
stepping pilgrim all his days.--'Is this the happiness you have told me
all this while of?  May I get out of this with my life, you may possess
the brave country alone for me.'  And with that he gave a desperate
struggle or two, and got out of the mire on that side of the slough which
was next his own house; so he went away, and Christian saw him no more.
'The side of the slough which was next his own house.'  Let us close with
that.  Let us go home thinking about that.  And in this trial of faith
and patience, and in that, in this temptation to sin, and in that, in
this actual transgression, and in that, let us always ask ourselves which
is the side of the slough that is farthest away from our own house, and
let us still struggle to that side of the slough, and it will all be well
with us at the last.




HELP


   'I was brought low, and He helped me.'--David.

The Slough of Despond is one of John Bunyan's masterpieces.  In his
description of the slough, Bunyan touches his highest water-mark for
humour, and pathos, and power, and beauty of language.  If we did not
have the English Bible in our own hands we would have to ask, as Lord
Jeffrey asked Lord Macaulay, where the brazier of Bedford got his
inimitable style.  Bunyan confesses to us that he got all his Latin from
the prescription papers of his doctors, and we know that he got all his
perfect English from his English Bible.  And then he got his humour and
his pathos out of his own deep and tender heart.  The God of all grace
gave a great gift to the English-speaking world and to the Church of
Christ in all lands when He created and converted John Bunyan, and put it
into his head and his heart to compose _The Pilgrim's Progress_.  His
heart-affecting page on the slough has been wetted with the tears of
thousands of its readers, and their tears have been mingled with smiles
as they read their own sin and misery, and the never-to-be-forgotten time
and place where their sin and misery first found them out, all told so
recognisably, so pathetically, and so amusingly almost to laughableness
in the passage upon the slough.  We see the ocean of scum and filth
pouring down into the slough through the subterranean sewers of the City
of Destruction and of the Town of Stupidity, which lies four degrees
beyond the City of Destruction, and from many other of the houses and
haunts of men.  We see His Majesty's sappers and miners at their wits'
end how to cope with the deluges of pollution that pour into this slough
that they have been ordained to drain and dry up.  For ages and ages the
royal surveyors have been laying out all their skill on this slough.  More
cartloads than you could count of the best material for filling up a
slough have been shot into it, and yet you would never know that so much
as a single labourer had emptied his barrow here.  True, excellent
stepping-stones have been laid across the slough by skilful engineers,
but they are always so slippery with the scum and slime of the slough,
that it is only now and then that a traveller can keep his feet upon
them.  Altogether, our author's picture of the Slough of Despond is such
a picture that no one who has seen it can ever forget it.  But better
than reading the best description of the slough is to see certain well-
known pilgrims trying to cross it.  Mr. Fearing at the Slough of Despond
was a tale often told at the tavern suppers of that country.  Never
pilgrim attempted the perilous journey with such a chicken-heart in his
bosom as this Mr. Fearing.  He lay above a month on the bank of the
slough, and would not even attempt the steps.  Some kind Pilgrims, though
they had enough to do to keep the steps themselves, offered him a hand;
but no.  And after they were safely over it made them almost weep to hear
the man still roaring in his horror at the other side.  Some bade him go
home if he would not take the steps, but he said that he would rather
make his grave in the slough than go back one hairsbreadth.  Till, one
sunshiny morning,--no one knew how, and he never knew how himself--the
steps were so high and dry, and the scum and slime were so low, that this
hare-hearted man made a venture, and so got over.  But, then, as an
unkind friend of his said, this pitiful pilgrim had a slough of despond
in his own mind which he carried always and everywhere about with him,
and made him the proverb of despondency that he was and is.  Only, that
sunshiny morning he got over both the slough inside of him and outside of
him, and was heard by Help and his family singing this song on the hither
side of the slough: 'He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of
the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.'

Our pilgrim did not have such a good crossing as Mr. Fearing.  Whether it
was that the discharge from the city was deeper and fouler, or that the
day was darker, or what, we are not told, but both Christian and Pliable
were in a moment out of sight in the slough.  They both wallowed, says
their plain-spoken historian, in the slough, only the one of the two who
had the burden on his back at every wallow went deeper into the mire;
when his neighbour, who had no such burden, instead of coming to his
assistance, got out of the slough at the same side as he had entered it,
and made with all his might for his own house.  But the man called
Christian made what way he could, and still tumbled on to the side of the
slough that was farthest from his own house, till a man called Help gave
him his hand and set him upon sound ground.  Christiana, again, and Mercy
and the boys found the slough in a far worse condition than it had ever
been found before.  And the reason was not that the country that drained
into the slough was worse, but that those who had the mending of the
slough and the keeping in repair of the steps had so bungled their work
that they had marred the way instead of mending it.  At the same time, by
the tact and good sense of Mercy, the whole party got over, Mercy
remarking to the mother of the boys, that if she had as good ground to
hope for a loving reception at the gate as Christiana had, no slough of
despond would discourage her, she said.  To which the older woman made
the characteristic reply: 'You know your sore and I know mine, and we
shall both have enough evil to face before we come to our journey's end.'

Now, I do not for a moment suppose that there is any one here who can
need to be told what the Slough of Despond in reality is.  Indeed, its
very name sufficiently declares it.  But if any one should still be at a
loss to understand this terrible experience of all the pilgrims, the
explanation offered by the good man who gave Christian his hand may here
be repeated.  'This miry slough,' he said, 'is such a place as cannot be
mended.  This slough is the descent whither the scum and filth that
attends conviction of sin doth continually run, and therefore it is
called by the name of Despond, for still as the sinner is awakened about
his lost condition there ariseth in his soul many fears and doubts and
discouraging apprehensions, which all of them get together, and settle in
this place, and this is the reason of the badness of the ground.'  That
is the parable, with its interpretation; but there is a passage in _Grace
Abounding_ which is no parable, and which may even better than this so
pictorial slough describe some men's condition here.  'My original and
inward pollution,' says Bunyan himself in his autobiography, 'that, that
was my plague and my affliction; that, I say, at a dreadful rate was
always putting itself forth within me; that I had the guilt of to
amazement; by reason of that I was more loathsome in my own eyes than a
toad; and I thought I was so in God's eyes also.  Sin and corruption
would bubble up out of my heart as naturally as water bubbles up out of a
fountain.  I thought now that every one had a better heart than I had.  I
could have changed heart with anybody.  I thought none but the devil
himself could equalise me for inward wickedness and pollution of mind.  I
fell, therefore, at the sight of my own vileness, deeply into despair,
for I concluded that this condition in which I was in could not stand
with a life of grace.  Sure, thought I, I am forsaken of God; sure I am
given up to the devil, and to a reprobate mind.'

   'Let no man, then, count me a fable maker,
   Nor made my name and credit a partaker
   Of their derision: what is here in view,
   Of mine own knowledge I dare say is true.'

Sometimes, as with Christian at the slough, a man's way in life is all
slashed up into sudden ditches and pitfalls out of the sins of his youth.
His sins, by God's grace, find him out, and under their arrest and
overthrow he begins to seek his way to a better life and a better world;
and then both the burden and the slough have their explanation and
fulfilment in his own life every day.  But it is even more dreadful than
a slough in a man's way to have a slough in his mind, as both Bunyan
himself and Mr. Fearing, his exquisite creation, had.  After the awful-
enough slough, filled with the guilt and fear of actual sin, had been
bridged and crossed and left behind, a still worse slough of inward
corruption and pollution rose up in John Bunyan's soul and threatened to
engulf him altogether.  So terrible to Bunyan was this experience, that
he has not thought it possible to make a parable of it, and so put it
into the _Pilgrim_; he has kept it rather for the plain, direct,
unpictured, personal testimony of the _Grace Abounding_.  I do not know
another passage anywhere to compare with the eighty-fourth paragraph of
_Grace Abounding_ for hope and encouragement to a great inward sinner
under a great inward sanctification.  I commend that powerful passage to
the appropriation of any man here who may have stuck fast in the Slough
of Despond to-day, and who could not on that account come to the Lord's
Table.  Let him still struggle out at the side of the slough farthest
from his own house, and to-night, who can tell, Help may come and give
that man his hand.  When the Slough of Despond is drained, and its bottom
laid bare, what a find of all kinds of precious treasures shall be laid
bare!  Will you be able to lay claim to any of it when the long-lost
treasure-trove is distributed by command of the King to its rightful
owners?

'What are you doing there?' the man whose name was Help demanded of
Christian, as he still wallowed and plunged to the hither side of the
slough, 'and why did you not look for the steps?'  And so saying he set
Christian's feet upon sound ground again, and showed him the nearest way
to the gate.  Help is one of the King's officers who are planted all
along the way to the Celestial City, in order to assist and counsel all
pilgrims.  Evangelist was one of those officers; this Help is another;
Goodwill will be another, unless, indeed, he is more than a mere officer;
Interpreter will be another, and Greatheart, and so on.  All these are
preachers and pastors and evangelists who correspond to all those names
and all their offices.  Only some unhappy preachers are better at pushing
poor pilgrims into the slough, and pushing them down to the bottom of it,
than they are at helping a sinking pilgrim out; while some other more
happy preachers and pastors have their manses built at the hither side of
the slough and do nothing else all their days but help pilgrims out of
their slough and direct them to the gate.  And then there are multitudes
of so-called ministers who eat the King's bread who can neither push a
proud sinner into the slough nor help a prostrate sinner out of it; no,
nor point him the way when he has himself wallowed out.  And then, there
are men called ministers, too, who also eat the King's bread, whose voice
you never hear in connection with such matters, unless it be to revile
both the pilgrims and their helpers, and all who run with fear and
trembling up the heavenly road.  But our pilgrim was happy enough to meet
with a minister to whom he could look back all his remaining pilgrimage
and say: 'He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.  And he
hath put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God.'

Now, as might have been expected, there is a great deal said about all
kinds of help in the Bible.  After the help of God, of which the Bible
and especially the more experimental Psalms are full, this fine name is
then applied to many Scriptural persons, and on many Scriptural
occasions.  The first woman whom God Almighty made bore from her Maker to
her husband this noble name.  Her Father, so to speak, gave her away
under this noble name.  And of all the sweet and noble names that a woman
bears, there is none so rich, so sweet, so lasting, and so fruitful as
just her first Divine name of a helpmeet.  And how favoured of God is
that man to be accounted whose life still continues to draw meet help out
of his wife's fulness of help, till all her and his days together he is
able to say, I have of God a helpmeet indeed!  For in how many sloughs do
many men lie till this daughter of Help gives them her hand, and out of
how many more sloughs are they all their days by her delivered and kept!
Sweet, maidenly, and most sensible Mercy was a great help to widow
Christiana at the slough, and to her and her sons all the way up to the
river--a very present help in many a need to her future mother-in-law and
her pilgrim sons.  Let every young man seek his future wife of God, and
let him seek her of her Divine Father under that fine, homely, divine
name.  For God, who knoweth what we have need of before we ask Him, likes
nothing better than to make a helpmeet for those who so ask Him, and
still to bring the woman to the man under that so spouse-like name.

   'What next I bring shall please thee, be assured,
   Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self,
   Thy wish exactly to thy heart's desire.'

And then when the apostle is making an enumeration of the various offices
and agencies in the New Testament church of his day, after apostles and
teachers and gifts of healing, he says, 'helps,'--assistants, that is,
succourers, especially of the sick and the aged and the poor.  And we do
not read that either election or ordination was needed to make any given
member of the apostolic church a helper.  But we do read of helpers being
found by the apostle among all classes and conditions of that rich and
living church; both sexes, all ages, and all descriptions of church
members bore this fine apostolic name.  'Salute Urbane, our helper in
Christ . . . Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my helpers in Christ.'  And both
Paul and John and all the apostles were forward to confess in their
epistles how much they owed of their apostolic success, as well as of
their personal comfort and joy, to the helpers, both men and women, their
Lord had blessed them with.

Now, the most part of us here to-night have been at the Lord's Table to-
day.  We kept our feet firm on the steps as we skirted or crossed the
slough that self-examination always fills and defiles for us before every
new communion.  And before our Lord let us rise from His Table this
morning.  He again said to us: 'Ye call Me Master and Lord, and ye say
well, for so I am.  If I then have given you My hand, and have helped
you, ye ought also to help one another.'  Who, then, any more will
withhold such help as it is in his power to give to a sinking brother?
And you do not need to go far afield seeking the slough of desponding,
despairing, drowning men.  This whole world is full of such sloughs.
There is scarce sound ground enough in this world on which to build a
slough-watcher's tower.  And after it is built, the very tower itself is
soon stained and blinded with the scudding slime.  Where are your eyes,
and full of what?  Do you not see sloughs full of sinking men at your
very door; ay, and inside of your best built and best kept house?  Your
very next neighbour; nay, your own flesh and blood, if they have nothing
else of Greatheart's most troublesome pilgrim about them, have at least
this, that they carry about a slough with them in their own mind and in
their own heart.  Have you only henceforth a heart and a hand to help,
and see if hundreds of sinking hearts do not cry out your name, and
hundreds of slimy hands grasp at your stretched-out arm.  Sloughs of all
kinds of vice, open and secret; sloughs of poverty, sloughs of youthful
ignorance, temptation, and transgression; sloughs of inward gloom, family
disquiet and dispute; lonely grief; all manner of sloughs, deep and miry,
where no man would suspect them.  And how good, how like Christ Himself,
and how well-pleasing to Him to lay down steps for such sliding feet, and
to lift out another and another human soul upon sound and solid ground.
'Know ye what I have done to you?  For I have given you an example, that
ye should do as I have done to you.  If ye know these things, happy are
ye if ye do them.'




MR. WORLDLY-WISEMAN


   'Wise in this world.'--Paul.

Mr. Worldly-Wiseman has a long history behind him on which we cannot now
enter at any length.  As a child, the little worldling, it was observed,
took much after his secular father, but much more after his scheming
mother.  He was already a self-seeking, self-satisfied youth; and when he
became a man and began business for himself, no man's business flourished
like his.  'Nothing of news,' says his biographer in another place,
'nothing of doctrine, nothing of alteration or talk of alteration could
at any time be set on foot in the town but be sure Mr. Worldly-Wiseman
would be at the head or tail of it.  But, to be sure, he would always
decline those he deemed to be the weakest, and stood always with those,
in his way of thinking, that he supposed were the strongest side.'  He
was a man, it was often remarked, of but one book also.  Sunday and
Saturday he was to be found deep in _The Architect of Fortune_; _or_,
_Advancement in Life_, a book written by its author so as to 'come home
to all men's business and bosoms.'  He drove over scrupulously once a
Sunday to the State church, of which he was one of the most determined
pillars.  He had set his mind on being Lord Mayor of the town before
long, and he was determined that his eldest son should be called Sir
Worldly-Wiseman after him, and he chose his church accordingly.  Another
of his biographers in this connection wrote of him thus: 'Our Lord Mayor
parted his religion betwixt his conscience and his purse, and he went to
church not to serve God, but to please the king.  The face of the law
made him wear the mask of the Gospel, which he used not as a means to
save his soul, but his charges.'  Such, in a short word, was this
'sottish man' who crossed over the field to meet with our pilgrim when he
was walking solitary by himself after his escape from the slough.

'How now, good fellow?  Whither away after this burdened manner?'  What a
contrast those two men were to one another in the midst of that plain
that day!  Our pilgrim was full of the most laborious going; sighs and
groans rose out of his heart at every step; and then his burden on his
back, and his filthy, slimy rags all made him a picture such that it was
to any man's credit and praise that he should stop to speak to him.  And
then, when our pilgrim looked up, he saw a gentleman standing beside him
to whom he was ashamed to speak.  For the gentleman had no burden on his
back, and he did not go over the plain laboriously.  There was not a spot
or a speck, a rent or a wrinkle on all his fine raiment.  He could not
have been better appointed if he had just stepped out of the gate at the
head of the way; they can wear no cleaner garments than his in the
Celestial City itself.  'How now, good fellow?  Whither away after this
burdened manner?'  'A burdened manner, indeed, as ever I think poor
creature had.  And whereas you ask me whither away, I tell you, sir, I am
going to yonder wicket gate before me; for there, as I am informed, I
shall be put into a way to be rid of my heavy burden.'  'Hast thou a wife
and children?'  Yes; he is ashamed to say that he has.  But he confesses
that he cannot to-day take the pleasure in them that he used to do.  Since
his sin so came upon him, he is sometimes as if he had neither wife nor
child nor a house over his head.  John Bunyan was of Samuel Rutherford's
terrible experience,--that our sins and our sinfulness poison all our
best enjoyments.  We do not hear much of Rutherford's wife and children,
and that, no doubt, for the sufficient reason that he gives us in his so
open-minded letter.  But Bunyan laments over his blind child with a
lament worthy to stand beside the lament of David over Absalom, and again
over Saul and Jonathan at Mount Gilboa.  At the same time, John Bunyan
often felt sore and sad at heart that he could not love and give all his
heart to his wife and children as they deserved to be loved and to have
all his heart.  He often felt guilty as he looked on them and knew in
himself that they did not have in him such a father as, God knew, he
wished he was, or ever in this world could hope to be.  'Yes,' he said,
'but I cannot take the pleasure in them that I would.  I am sometimes as
if I had none.  My sin sometimes drives me like a man bereft of his
reason and clean demented.'  'Who bid thee go this way to be rid of thy
burden?  I beshrew him for his counsel.  There is not a more troublesome
and dangerous way in the world than this is to which he hath directed
thee.  And besides, though I used to have some of the same burden when I
was young, not since I settled in that town,' pointing to the town of
Carnal-Policy over the plain, 'have I been at any time troubled in that
way.'  And then he went on to describe and denounce the way to the
Celestial City, and he did it like a man who had been all over it, and
had come back again.  His alarming description of the upward way reads to
us like a page out of Job, or Jeremiah, or David, or Paul.  'Hear me,' he
says, 'for I am older than thou.  Thou art like to meet with in the way
which thou goest wearisomeness, painfulness, hunger, perils, nakedness,
sword, lions, dragons, darkness, and in a word, death, and what not.'  You
would think that you were reading the eighth of the Romans at the thirty-
fifth verse; only Mr. Worldly-Wiseman does not go on to finish the
chapter.  He does not go on to add, 'I am persuaded that neither death,
nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ our
Lord.'  No; Worldly-Wiseman never reads the Romans, and he never hears a
sermon on that chapter when he goes to church.

Mr. Worldly-Wiseman became positively eloquent and impressive and all but
convincing as he went so graphically and cumulatively over all the
sorrows that attended on the way to which this pilgrim was now setting
his face.  But, staggering as it all was, the man in rags and slime only
smiled a sad and sobbing smile in answer, and said: 'Why, sir, this
burden upon my back is far more terrible to me than all the things which
you have mentioned; nay, methinks I care not what I meet with in the way,
so be I can also meet with deliverance from my burden.'  This is what our
Lord calls a pilgrim having the root of the matter in himself.  This poor
soul had by this time so much wearisomeness, painfulness, hunger, perils,
nakedness, sword, lions, dragons, darkness, death, and what not in
himself, that all these threatened things outside of himself were but so
many bugbears and hobgoblins wherewith to terrify children; they were but
things to be laughed at by every man who is in ernest in the way.  'I
care not what else I meet with if only I also meet with deliverance.'
There speaks the true pilgrim.  There speaks the man who drew down the
Son of God to the cross for that man's deliverance.  There speaks the
man, who, mire, and rags, and burdens and all, will yet be found in the
heaven of heavens where the chief of sinners shall see their Deliverer
face to face, and shall at last and for ever be like Him.  Peter examined
Dante in heaven on faith, James examined him on hope, and John took him
through his catechism on love, and the seer came out of the tent with a
laurel crown on his brow.  I do not know who the examiner on sin will be,
but, speaking for myself on this matter, I would rather take my degree in
that subject than in all the other subjects set for a sinner's
examination on earth or in heaven.  For to know myself, and especially,
as the wise man says, to know the plague of my own heart, is the true and
the only key to all other true knowledge: God and man; the Redeemer and
the devil; heaven and hell; faith, hope, and charity; unbelief, despair,
and malignity, and all things of that kind else, all knowledge will come
to that man who knows himself, and to that man alone, and to that man in
the exact measure in which he does really know himself.  Listen again to
this slough-stained, sin-burdened, sighing and sobbing pilgrim, who, in
spite of all these things--nay, in virtue of all these things--is as sure
of heaven and of the far end of heaven as if he were already enthroned
there.  'Wearisomeness,' he protests, 'painfulness, hunger, perils,
nakedness, sword, lions, dragons, darkness, death, and what not--why,
sir, this burden on my back is far more terrible to me than all these
things which you have mentioned; nay, methinks I care not what I meet
with in the way, so be I can also meet with deliverance from my burden.'
O God! let this same mind be found in me and in all the men and women for
whose souls I shall have to answer at the day of judgment, and I shall be
content and safe before Thee.

That strong outburst from this so forfoughten man for a moment quite
overawed Worldly-Wiseman.  He could not reply to an earnestness like
this.  He did not understand it, and could not account for it.  The only
thing he ever was in such earnestness as that about was his success in
business and his title that he and his wife were scheming for.  But
still, though silenced by this unaccountable outburst of our pilgrim,
Worldly-Wiseman's enmity against the upward way, and especially against
all the men and all the books that made pilgrims take to that way, was
not silenced.  'How camest thou by thy burden at first?'  By reading this
Book in my hand.'  Worldly-Wiseman did not fall foul of the Book indeed,
but he fell all the more foul of those who meddled with matters they had
not a head for.  'Leave these high and deep things for the ministers who
are paid to understand and explain them, and attend to matters more
within thy scope.'  And then he went on to tell of a far better way to
get rid of the burden that meddlesome men brought on themselves by
reading that book too much--a far better and swifter way than attempting
the wicket-gate.  'Thou wilt never be settled in thy mind till thou art
rid of that burden, nor canst thou enjoy the blessings of wife and child
as long as that burden lies so heavy upon thee.'  That was so true that
it made the pilgrim look up.  A gentleman who can speak in that true
style must know more than he says about such burdens as this of mine;
and, after all, he may be able, who knows, to give me some good advice in
my great straits.  'Pray, sir, open this secret to me, for I sorely stand
in need of good counsel.'  Let him here who has no such burden as this
poor pilgrim had cast the first stone at Christian; I cannot.  If one who
looked like a gentleman came to me to-night and told me how I would on
the spot get to a peace of conscience never to be lost again, and how I
would get a heart to-night that would never any more plague and pollute
me, I would be mightily tempted to forget what all my former teachers had
told me and try this new Gospel.  And especially if the gentleman said
that the remedy was just at hand.  'Pray, sir,' said the breathless and
spiritless man, 'wilt thou, then, open this secret to me?'

The wit and the humour and the satire of the rest of the scene must be
fully enjoyed over the great book itself.  The village named Morality,
hard by the hill; that judicious man Legality, who dwells in the first
house you come at after you have turned the hill; Civility, the pretty
young man that Legality hath to his son; the hospitality of the village;
the low rents and the cheap provisions, and all the charities and
amenities of the place,--all together make up such a picture as you
cannot get anywhere out of John Bunyan.  And then the pilgrim's stark
folly in entering into Worldly-Wiseman's secret; his horror as the hill
began to thunder and lighten and threaten to fall upon him; the sudden
descent of Evangelist; and then the plain-spoken words that passed
between the preacher and the pilgrim,--don't say again that the poorest
of the Puritans were without letters, or that they had not their own
esoteric writings full of fun and frolic; don't say that again till you
are a pilgrim yourself, and have our John Bunyan for one of your classics
by heart.

We are near an end, but before you depart, stand still a little, as
Evangelist said to Christian, that I may show you the words of God.  And
first, watch yourselves well, for you all have a large piece of this
worldly-wise man in yourselves.  You all take something of some ancestor,
remote or immediate, who was wise only for this world.  Yes, to be sure,
for you still decline as they did, and desert as they did, those you deem
to be the weakest, and stand with those that you suppose to be the
strongest side.  _The Architect of Fortune_ is perhaps too strong meat
for your stomach; but still, if you ever light upon its powerful pages,
you will surely blush in secret to see yourself turned so completely
inside out.  You may not have chosen your church wholly with an eye to
your shop; but you must admit that you see as good and better men than
you are doing that every day.  And it is a sure sign to you that you do
not yet know the plague of your own heart, unless you know yourself to be
a man more set upon the position and the praise that this world gives
than you yet are on the position and the praise that come from God only.
Set a watch on your own worldly heart.  Watch and pray, lest you also
enter into all Worldly-Wiseman's temptation.  This is one of the words of
God to you.

Another word of God is this.  The way of the cross, said severe
Evangelist, is odious to every worldly-wise man; while, all the time, it
is the only way there is, and there never will be any other way to
eternal life.  The only way to life is the way of the cross.  There are
two crosses, indeed, on the way to the Celestial City; there is, first,
the Cross of Christ, once for you, and then there is your cross daily for
Christ, and it takes both crosses to secure and to assure any man that he
is on the right road, and that he will come at last to the right end.
'The Christian's great conquest over the world,' says William Law, 'is
all contained in the mystery of Christ upon the cross.  And true
Christianity is nothing else but an entire and absolute conformity to
that spirit which Christ showed in the mysterious sacrifice of Himself
upon the cross.  Every man is only so far a Christian as he partakes of
this same spirit of Christ--the same suffering spirit, the same sacrifice
of himself, the same renunciation of the world, the same humility and
meekness, the same patient bearing of injuries, reproaches, and
contempts, the same dying to all the greatness, honours, and happiness of
this world that Christ showed on the cross.  We also are to suffer, to be
crucified, to die, to rise with Christ, or else His crucifixion, His
death, and His resurrection will profit us nothing.  'This is the second
word of God unto thee.  And the third thing to-night is this, that though
thy sin be very great, though thou hast a past life round thy neck enough
to sink thee for ever out of the sight of God and all good men; a youth
of sensuality now long and closely cloaked over with an after life of
worldly prosperity, worldly decency, and worldly religion, all which only
makes thee that whited sepulchre that Christ has in His eye when He
speaks of thee with such a severe and dreadful countenance; yet if thou
confess thyself to be all the whited sepulchre He sees thee to be, and
yet knock at His gate in all thy rags and slime, He will immediately lay
aside that severe countenance and will show thee all His goodwill.
Notwithstanding all that thou hast done, and all thou still art, He will
not deny His own words, or do otherwise than at once fulfil them all to
thee.  Ask, then, and it shall be given thee; seek, and thou shalt find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto thee.  And with a great goodwill, He
will say to those that stand by Him, Take away the filthy garments from
him.  And to thee He will say, Behold, I have caused all thine iniquity
to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment.




GOODWILL, THE GATEKEEPER


   'Goodwill.'--Luke 2. 14.

'So in process of time Christian got up to the gate.  Now there was
written over the gate, _Knock_, _and it shall be opened unto you_.  He
knocked, therefore, more than once or twice, saying, May I now enter
here? when at last there came a grave person to the gate, named Goodwill,
who asked him who was there?'  The gravity of the gatekeeper was the
first thing that struck the pilgrim.  And it was the same thing that so
struck some of the men who saw most of our Lord that they handed down to
their children the true tradition that He was often seen in tears, but
that no one had ever seen or heard Him laugh.  The prophecy in the
prophet concerning our Lord was fulfilled to the letter.  He was indeed a
man of sorrows, and He early and all His life long had a close
acquaintance with grief.  Our Lord had come into this world on a very sad
errand.  We are so stupefied and besotted with sin, that we have no
conception how sad an errand our Lord had been sent on, and how sad a
task He soon discovered it to be.  To be a man without sin, a man hating
sin, and hating nothing else but sin, and yet to have to spend all His
days in a world lying in sin, and in the end to have all that world of
sin laid upon Him till He was Himself made sin,--how sad a task was that!
Great, no doubt, as was the joy that was set before our Lord, and sure as
He was of one day entering on that joy, yet the daily sight of so much
sin in all men around Him, and the cross and the shame that lay right
before Him, made Him, in spite of the future joy, all the Man of Sorrow
Isaiah had said He would be, and made light-mindedness and laughter
impossible to our Lord,--as it is, indeed, to all men among ourselves who
have anything of His mind about this present world and the sin of this
world, they also are men of sorrow, and of His sorrow.  They, too, are
acquainted with grief.  Their tears, like His, will never be wiped off in
this world.  They will not laugh with all their heart till they laugh
where He now laughs.  Then it will be said of them, too, that they began
to be merry.  'What was the matter with you that you did laugh in your
sleep last night? asked Christiana of Mercy in the morning.  I suppose
you were in a dream.  So I was, said Mercy, but are you sure that I
laughed?  Yes, you laughed heartily; but, prithee, Mercy, tell me thy
dream.  Well, I dreamed that I was in a solitary place and all alone, and
was there bemoaning the hardness of my heart, when methought I saw one
coming with wings towards me.  So he came directly to me, and said,
Mercy, what aileth thee?  Now, when he heard my complaint, he said, Peace
be to thee.  He also wiped mine eyes with his handkerchief, and clad me
in silver and gold; he put a chain about my neck also, and earrings in
mine ears, and a beautiful crown upon my head.  So he went up.  I
followed him till we came to a golden gate; and I thought I saw your
husband there.  But did I laugh?  Laugh! ay, and well you might, to see
yourself so well.'

But to return and begin again.  Goodwill, who opened the gate, was, as we
saw, a person of a very grave and commanding aspect; so much so, that in
his sudden joy our pilgrim was a good deal overawed as he looked on the
countenance of the man who stood in the gate, and it was some time
afterwards before he understood why he wore such a grave and almost sad
aspect.  But afterwards, as he went up the way, and sometimes returned in
thought to the wicket-gate, he came to see very good reason why the
keeper of that gate looked as he did look.  The site and situation of the
gate, for one thing, was of itself enough to banish all light-mindedness
from the man who was stationed there.  For the gatehouse stood just above
the Slough of Despond, and that itself filled the air of the place with a
dampness and a depression that could be felt.  And then out of the
downward windows of the gate, the watcher's eye always fell on the City
of Destruction in the distance, and on her sister cities sitting like her
daughters round about her.  And that also made mirth and hilarity
impossible at that gate.  And then the kind of characters who came
knocking all hours of the day and the night at that gate.  Goodwill never
saw a happy face or heard a cheerful voice from one year's end to the
other.  And when any one so far forgot himself as to put on an untimely
confidence and self-satisfaction, the gatekeeper would soon put him
through such questions as quickly sobered him if he had anything at all
of the root of the matter in him.  Terror, horror, despair, remorse,
chased men and women up to that gate.  They would often fall before his
threshold more dead than alive.  And then, after the gate was opened and
the pilgrims pulled in, the gate had only opened on a path of such
painfulness, toil, and terrible risk, that at whatever window Goodwill
looked out, he always saw enough to make him and keep him a grave, if not
a sad, man.  It was, as he sometimes said, his meat and his drink to keep
the gate open for pilgrims; but the class of men who came calling
themselves pilgrims; the condition they came in; the past, that in spite
of all both he and they could do, still came in through his gate after
them, and went up all the way with them; their ignorance of the way, on
which he could only start them; the multitudes who started, and the
handfuls who held on; the many who for a time ran well, but afterwards
left their bones to bleach by the wayside; and all the impossible-to-be-
told troubles, dangers, sorrows, shipwrecks that certainly lay before the
most steadfast and single-hearted pilgrim--all that was more than enough
to give the man at the gate his grave and anxious aspect.

Not that his great gravity, with all the causes of it, ever made him a
melancholy, a morose, a despairing, or even a desponding man.  Far from
that.  The man of sorrows Himself sometimes rejoiced in spirit.  Not
sometimes only, but often He lifted up His heart and thanked His Father
for the work His Father had given Him to do, and for the success that had
been granted to Him in the doing of it.  And as often as He looked
forward to the time when he should finish His work and receive His
discharge, and return to His Father's house, at the thought of that He
straightway forgot all His present sorrows.  And somewhat so was it with
Goodwill at his gate.  No man could be but at bottom happy, and even
joyful, who had a post like his to occupy, a gate like his to keep, and,
altogether, a work like his to do.  No man with his name and his nature
can ever in any circumstances be really unhappy.  'Happiness is the bloom
that always lies on a life of true goodness,' and this gatehouse was full
of the happiness that follows on and always dwells with true goodness.
Goodwill cannot have more happiness till he shuts in his last pilgrim
into the Celestial City, and then himself enters in after him as a
shepherd after a lost sheep.

The happy, heavenly, divine disposition of the gatekeeper was such, that
it overflowed from the pilgrim who stood beside him and descended upon
his wife and children who remained behind him in the doomed city.  So
full of love was the gatekeeper's heart, that it ran out upon Obstinate
and Pliable also.  His heart was so large and so hospitable, that he was
not satisfied with one pilgrim received and assisted that day.  How is
it, he asked, that you have come here alone?  Did any of your neighbours
know of your coming?  And why did he who came so far not come through?
Alas, poor man, said Goodwill, is the celestial glory of so little esteem
with him that he counteth it not worth running the hazards of a few
difficulties to obtain it?  Our pilgrim got a lifelong lesson in goodwill
to all men at that gate that day.  The gatekeeper showed such deep and
patient and genuine interest in all the pilgrim's past history, and in
all his family and personal affairs, that Christian all his days could
never show impatience, or haste, or lack of interest in the most long-
winded and egotistical pilgrim he ever met.  He always remembered, when
he was becoming impatient, how much of his precious time and of his
loving attention his old friend Goodwill had given to him.  Our pilgrim
got tired of talking about himself long before Goodwill had ceased to ask
questions and to listen to the answers.  So much was Christian taken with
the courtesy and the kindness of Goodwill, that had it not been for his
crushing burden, he would have offered to remain in Goodwill's house to
run his errands, to light his fires, and to sweep his floors.  So much
was he taken captive with Goodwill's extraordinary kindness and unwearied
attention.  And since he could not remain at the gate, but must go on to
the city of all goodwill itself, our pilgrim set himself all his days to
copy this gatekeeper when he met with any fellow-pilgrim who had any
story that he wished to tell.  And many were the lonely and forgotten
souls that Christian cheered and helped on, not by his gold or his
silver, nor by anything else, but just by his open ear.  To listen with
patience and with attention to a fellow-pilgrim's wrongs and sorrows, and
even his smallest interests, said this Christian to himself, is just what
Goodwill so winningly did to me.

With all his goodwill the grave gatekeeper could not say that the way to
the Celestial City was other than a narrow, a stringent, and a
heart-searching way.  'Come,' he said, 'and I will tell thee the way thou
must go.'  There are many wide ways to hell, and many there be who crowd
them, but there is only one way to heaven, and you will sometimes think
you must have gone off it, there are so few companions; sometimes there
will be only one footprint, with here and there a stream of blood, and
always as you proceed, it becomes more and more narrow, till it strips a
man bare, and sometimes threatens to close upon him and crush him to the
earth altogether.  Our Lord in as many words tells us all that.  Strive,
He says, strive every day.  For many shall seek to enter into the way of
salvation, but because they do not early enough, and long enough, and
painfully enough strive, they come short, and are shut out.  Have you,
then, anything in your religious life that Christ will at last accept as
the striving He intended and demanded?  Does your religion cause you any
real effort--Christ calls it _agony_?  Have you ever had, do you ever
have, anything that He would so describe?  What cross do you every day
take up?  In what thing do you every day deny yourself?  Name it.  Put
your finger on it.  Write it in cipher on the margin of your Bible.  Would
the most liberal judgment be able to say of you that you have any fear
and trembling in the work of your salvation?  If not, I am afraid there
must be some mistake somewhere.  There must be great guilt somewhere.  At
your parents' door, or at your minister's, or, if their hands are clean,
then at your own.  Christ has made it plain to a proverb, and John Bunyan
has made it a nursery and a schoolboy story, that the way to heaven is
steep and narrow and lonely and perilous.  And that, remember, not a few
of the first miles of the way, but all the way, and even through the dark
valley itself.  'Almost all that is said in the New Testament of men's
watching, giving earnest heed to themselves, running the race that is set
before them, striving and agonising, fighting, putting on the whole
armour of God, pressing forward, reaching forth, crying to God day and
night; I say, almost all that we have in the New Testament on these
subjects is spoken and directed to the saints.  Where those things are
applied to sinners seeking salvation once, they are spoken of the saints'
prosecution of their salvation ten times' (Jonathan Edwards).  If you
have a life at all like that, you will be sorely tempted to think that
such suffering and struggle, increasing rather than diminishing as life
goes on, is a sign that you are so bad as not to be a true Christian at
all.  You will be tempted to think and say so.  But all the time the
truth is, that he who has not that labouring, striving, agonising,
fearing, and trembling in himself, knows nothing at all about the
religion of Christ and the way to heaven; and if he thinks he does, then
that but proves him a hypocrite, a self-deceived, self-satisfied
hypocrite; there is not an ounce of a true Christian in him.  Says Samuel
Rutherford on this matter: 'Christ commandeth His hearers to a strict and
narrow way, in mortifying heart-lusts, in loving our enemy, in feeding
him when he is hungry, in suffering for Christ's sake and the gospel's,
in bearing His cross, in denying ourselves, in becoming humble as
children, in being to all men and at all times meek and lowly in heart.'
Let any man lay all that intelligently and imaginatively alongside of his
own daily life.  Let him name some such heart-lust.  Let him name also
some enemy, and ask himself what it is to love that man, and to feed him
in his hunger; what it is in which he is called to suffer for Christ's
sake and the gospel's, in his reputation, in his property, in his
business, in his feelings.  Let him put his finger on something in which
he is every day to deny himself, and to be humble and teachable, and to
keep himself out of sight like a little child; and if that man does not
find out how narrow and heart-searching the way to heaven is, he will be
the first who has so found his way thither.  No, no; be not deceived.
Deceive not yourself, and let no man deceive you.  God is not mocked,
neither are His true saints.  'Would to God I were back in my pulpit but
for one Sabbath,' said a dying minister in Aberdeen.  'What would you
do?' asked a brother minister at his bedside.  'I would preach to the
people the difficulty of salvation,' he said.  All which things are told,
not for purposes of debate or defiance, but to comfort and instruct God's
true people who are finding salvation far more difficult than anybody had
ever told them it would be.  Comfort My people, saith your God.  Speak
comfortably to My people.  Come, said Goodwill, and I will teach thee
about the way thou must go.  Look before thee, dost thou see that narrow
way?  That is the way thou must go.  And then thou mayest always
distinguish the right way from the wrong.  The wrong is crooked and wide,
and the right is straight as a rule can make it,--straight and narrow.

Goodwill said all that in order to direct and to comfort the pilgrim; but
that was not all that this good man said with that end.  For, when
Christian asked him if he could not help him off with his burden that was
upon his back, he told him: 'As to thy burden, be content to bear it
until thou comest to the place of deliverance, for there it will fall
from thy back of itself.'  Get you into the straight and narrow way, says
Goodwill, with his much experience of the ways and fortunes of true
pilgrims; get you sure into the right way, and leave your burden to God.
He appoints the place of deliverance, and it lies before thee.  The place
of thy deliverance cannot be behind thee, and it is not in my house, else
thy burden would have been already off.  But it is before thee.  Be
earnest, therefore, in the way.  Look not behind thee.  Go not into any
crooked way; and one day, before you know, and when you are not pulling
at it, your burden will fall off of itself.  Be content to bear it till
then, says bold and honest Goodwill, speaking so true to pilgrim
experience.  Yes; be content, O ye people of God, crying with this
pilgrim for release from your burden of guilt, and no less those of you
who are calling with Paul for release from the still more bitter and
crushing burden made up of combined guilt and corruption.  Be content
till the place and the time of deliverance; nay, even under your burden
and your bonds be glad, as Paul was, and go up the narrow way, still
chanting to yourself, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.  It is
only becoming that a great sinner should tarry the Lord's leisure; all
the more that the greatest sinner may be sure the Lord will come, and
will not tarry.  The time is long, but the thing is sure.

And now two lessons from Goodwill's gate:--

1.  The gate was shut when Christian came up to it, and no one was
visible anywhere about it.  The only thing visible was the writing over
the gate which told all pilgrims to knock.  Now, when we come up to the
same gate we are disappointed and discouraged that the gatekeeper is not
standing already upon his doorstep and his arms round our neck.  We knelt
to-day in secret prayer, and there was only our bed or our chair visible
before us.  There was no human being, much less to all appearance any
Divine Presence, in the place.  And we prayed a short, indeed, but a not
unearnest prayer, and then we rose up and came away disappointed because
no one appeared.  But look at him who is now inheriting the promises.  He
knocked, says his history, more than once or twice.  That is to say, he
did not content himself with praying one or two seconds and then giving
over, but he continued in prayer till the gatekeeper came.  And as he
knocked, he said, so loud and so impatient that all those in the
gatehouse could hear him,

   'May I now enter here?  Will he within
   Open to sorry me, though I have been
   A wandering rebel?  Then shall I
   Not fail to sing his lasting praise on high.'

2.  'We make no objections against any,' said Goodwill; 'notwithstanding
all that they have done before they come hither, they are in no wise cast
out.'  He told me all things that ever I did, said the woman of Samaria,
telling her neighbours about our Lord's conversation with her.  And,
somehow, there was something in the gatekeeper's words that called back
to Christian, if not all the things he had ever done, yet from among them
the worst things he had ever done.  They all rose up black as hell before
his eyes as the gatekeeper did not name them at all, but only said
'notwithstanding all that thou hast done.'  Christian never felt his past
life so black, or his burden so heavy, or his heart so broken, as when
Goodwill just said that one word 'notwithstanding.'  'We make no
objections against any; notwithstanding all that they have done before
they come hither, they are in no wise cast out.'




THE INTERPRETER


   'An interpreter, one among a thousand.'--Elihu.

We come to-night to the Interpreter's House.  And since every minister of
the gospel is an interpreter, and every evangelical church is an
interpreter's house, let us gather up some of the precious lessons to
ministers and to people with which this passage of the _Pilgrim's
Progress_ so much abounds.

1.  In the first place, then, I observe that the House of the Interpreter
stands just beyond the Wicket Gate.  In the whole topography of the
_Pilgrim's Progress_ there lies many a deep lesson.  The church that Mr.
Worldly-Wiseman supported, and on the communion roll of which he was so
determined to have our pilgrim's so unprepared name, stood far down on
the other side of Goodwill's gate.  It was a fine building, and it had an
eloquent man for its minister, and the whole service was an attraction
and an enjoyment to all the people of the place; but our Interpreter was
never asked to show any of his significant things there; and, indeed,
neither minister nor people would have understood him had he ever done
so.  And had any of the parishioners from below the gate ever by any
chance stumbled into the Interpreter's house, his most significant rooms
would have had no significance to them.  Both he and his house would have
been a mystery and an offence to Worldly-Wiseman, his minister, and his
fellow-worshippers.  John Bunyan has the clear warrant both of Jesus
Christ and the Apostle Paul for the place on which he has planted the
Interpreter's house.  'It is given to you,' said our Lord to His
disciples, 'to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them
it is not given.'  And Paul tells us that 'the natural man receiveth not
the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him:
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.'  And,
accordingly, no reader of the _Pilgrim's Progress_ will really understand
what he sees in the Interpreter's House, unless he is already a man of a
spiritual mind.  Intelligent children enjoy the pictures and the people
that are set before them in this illustrated house, but they must become
the children of God, and must be well on in the life of God, before they
will be able to say that the house next the gate has been a profitable
and a helpful house to them.  All that is displayed here--all the
furniture and all the vessels, all the ornaments and all the employments
and all the people of the Interpreter's House--is fitted and intended to
be profitable as well as interesting to pilgrims only.  No man has any
real interest in the things of this house, or will take any abiding
profit out of it, till he is fairly started on the upward road.  In his
former life, and while still on the other side of the gate, our pilgrim
had no interest in such things as he is now to see and hear; and if he
had seen and heard them in his former life, he would not, with all the
Interpreter's explanation, have understood them.  As here among ourselves
to-night, they who will understand and delight in the things they hear in
this house to-night are those only who have really begun to live a
religious life.  The realities of true religion are now the most real
things in life--to them; they love divine things now; and since they
began to love divine things, you cannot entertain them better than by
exhibiting and explaining divine things to them.  There is no house in
all the earth, after the gate itself, that is more dear to the true
pilgrim heart than just the Interpreter's House.  'I was glad when it was
said to me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.  Peace be within thy
walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.'

2.  And besides being built on the very best spot in all the land for its
owner's purposes, every several room in that great house was furnished
and fitted up for the entertainment and instruction of pilgrims.  Every
inch of that capacious and many-chambered house was given up to the
delectation of pilgrims.  The public rooms were thrown open for their
convenience and use at all hours of the day and night, and the private
rooms were kept retired and secluded for such as sought retirement and
seclusion.  There were dark rooms also with iron cages in them, till
Christian and his companions came out of those terrible places, bringing
with them an everlasting caution to watchfulness and a sober mind.  There
were rooms also given up to vile and sordid uses.  One room there was
full of straws and sticks and dust, with an old man who did nothing else
day nor night but wade about among the straws and sticks and dust, and
rake it all into little heaps, and then sit watching lest any one should
overturn them.  And then, strange to tell it, and not easy to get to the
full significance of it, the bravest room in all the house had absolutely
nothing in it but a huge, ugly, poisonous spider hanging to the wall with
her hands.  'Is there but one spider in all this spacious room?' asked
the Interpreter.  And the water stood in Christiana's eyes; she had come
by this time thus far on her journey also.  She was a woman of a quick
apprehension, and the water stood in her eyes at the Interpreter's
question, and she said: 'Yes, Lord, there is here more than one.  Yea,
and spiders whose venom is far more destructive than that which is in
her.'  The Interpreter then looked pleasantly on her, and said: 'Thou
hast said the truth.'  This made Mercy blush, and the boys to cover their
faces, for they all began now to understand the riddle.  'This is to show
you,' said the Interpreter, 'that however full of the venom of sin you
may be, yet you may, by the hand of faith, lay hold of, and dwell in the
best room that belongs to the King's House above.'  Then they all seemed
to be glad, but the water stood in their eyes.  A wall also stood apart
on the grounds of the house with an always dying fire on one side of it,
while a man on the other side of the wall continually fed the fire
through hidden openings in the wall.  A whole palace stood also on the
grounds, the inspection of which so kindled our pilgrim's heart, that he
refused to stay here any longer, or to see any more sights--so much had
he already seen of the evil of sin and of the blessedness of salvation.
Not that he had seen as yet the half of what that house held for the
instruction of pilgrims.  Only, time would fail us to visit the hen and
her chickens; the butcher killing a sheep and pulling her skin over her
ears, and she lying still under his hands and taking her death patiently;
also the garden with the flowers all diverse in stature, and quality, and
colour, and smell, and virtue, and some better than some, and all where
the gardener had set them, there they stand, and quarrel not with one
another.  The robin-red-breast also, so pretty of note and colour and
carriage, but instead of bread and crumbs, and such like harmless matter,
with a great spider in his mouth.  A tree also, whose inside was rotten,
and yet it grew and had leaves.  So they went on their way and sang:

   'This place hath been our second stage,
   Here have we heard and seen
   Those good things that from age to age
   To others hid have been.
   The butcher, garden, and the field,
   The robin and his bait,
   Also the rotten tree, doth yield
   Me argument of weight;
   To move me for to watch and pray,
   To strive to be sincere,
   To take my cross up day by day,
   And serve the Lord with few.'

The significant rooms of that divine house instruct us also that all the
lessons requisite for our salvation are not to be found in any one
scripture or in any one sermon, but that all that is required by any
pilgrim or any company of pilgrims should all be found in every
minister's ministry as he leads his flock on from one Sabbath-day to
another, rightly dividing the word of truth.  Our ministers should have
something in their successive sermons for everybody.  Something for the
children, something for the slow-witted and the dull of understanding,
and something specially suited for those who are of a quick apprehension;
something at one time to make the people smile, at another time to make
them blush, and at another time to make the water stand in their eyes.

3.  And, then, the Interpreter's life was as full of work as his house
was of entertainment and instruction.  Not only so, but his life, it was
well known, had been quite as full of work before he had a house to work
for as ever it had been since.  The Interpreter did nothing else but
continually preside over his house and all that was in it and around it,
and it was all gone over and seen to with his own eyes and hands every
day.  He had been present at the laying of every stone and beam of that
solid and spacious house of his.  There was not a pin nor a loop of its
furniture, there was not a picture on its walls, nor a bird nor a beast
in its woods and gardens, that he did not know all about and could not
hold discourse about.  And then, after he had taken you all over his
house, with its significant rooms and woods and gardens, he was full all
supper-time of all wise saws and witty proverbs.  'One leak will sink a
ship,' he said that night, 'and one sin will destroy a sinner.'  And all
their days the pilgrims remembered that word from the Interpreter's lips,
and they often said it to themselves as they thought of their own
besetting sin.  Now, if it is indeed so, that every gospel minister is an
interpreter, and every evangelical church an interpreter's house, what an
important passage this is for all those who are proposing and preparing
to be ministers.  Let them reflect upon it: what a house this is that the
Interpreter dwells in; how early and how long ago he began to lay out his
grounds and to build his house upon them; how complete in all its parts
it is, and how he still watches and labours to have it more complete.
Understandest thou what thou here readest? it is asked of all ministers,
young and old, as they turn over John Bunyan's pungent pages.  And every
new room, every new bird, and beast, and herb, and flower makes us blush
for shame as we contrast our own insignificant and ill-furnished house
with the noble house of the Interpreter.  Let all our students who have
not yet fatally destroyed themselves and lost their opportunity lay the
Interpreter's House well to heart.  Let them be students not in idle name
only, as so many are, but in intense reality, as so few are.  Let them
read everything that bears upon the Bible, and let them read nothing that
does not.  They have not the time nor the permission.  Let them be
content to be men of one book.  Let them give themselves wholly to the
interpretation of divine truth as its riddles are set in nature and in
man, in scripture, in providence, and in spiritual experience.  Let them
store their memories at college with all sacred truth, and with all
secular truth that can be made sacred.  And if their memories are weak
and treacherous, let them be quiet under God's will in that, and all the
more labour to make up in other ways for that defect, so that they may
have always something to say to the purpose when their future people come
up to church hungry for instruction and comfort and encouragement.  Let
them look around and see the sin that sinks the ship of so many
ministers; and let them begin while yet their ship is in the yard and see
that she is fitted up and furnished, stored and stocked, so that she
shall in spite of sure storms and sunken rocks deliver her freight in the
appointed haven.  When they are lying in bed of a Sabbath morning, let
them forecast the day when they shall have to give a strict account of
their eight years of golden opportunity among the churches, and the
classes, and the societies, and the libraries of our university seats.
Let them be able to name some great book, ay, more than one great book,
they mastered, for every year of their priceless and irredeemable student
life.  Let them all their days have old treasure-houses that they filled
full with scholarship and with literature and with all that will minister
to a congregation's many desires and necessities, collected and kept
ready from their student days.  'Meditate upon these things; give thyself
wholly up to them, that thy profiting may appear unto all.'

4.  And then with a sly stroke at us old ministers, our significant
author points out to us how much better furnished the Interpreter's House
was by the time Christiana and the boys visited it compared with that
early time when Christian was entertained in it.  Our pilgrim got far
more in the Interpreter's House of delight and instruction than he could
carry out of it, but that did not tempt the Interpreter to sit down and
content himself with taking all his future pilgrims into the same room,
and showing them the same pictures, and repeating to them the same
explanations.  No, for he reflected that each coming pilgrim would need
some new significant room to himself, and therefore, as soon as he got
one pilgrim off his hands, he straightway set about building and
furnishing new rooms, putting up new pictures, and replenishing his woods
and his waters with new beasts and birds and fishes.  I am ashamed, he
said, that I had so little to show when I first opened my gates to
receive pilgrims, and I do not know why they came to me as they did.  I
was only a beginner in these things when my first visitor came to my
gates.  Let every long-settled, middle-aged, and even grey-headed
minister read the life of the Interpreter at this point and take courage
and have hope.  Let it teach us all to break some new ground in the field
of divine truth with every new year.  Let it teach us all to be students
all our days.  Let us buy, somehow, the poorest and the oldest of us,
some new and first-rate book every year.  Let us not indeed shut up
altogether our old rooms if they ever had anything significant in them,
but let us add now a new wing to our spiritual house, now a new picture
to its walls, and now a new herb to its gardens.  'Resolved,' wrote
Jonathan Edwards, 'that as old men have seldom any advantage of new
discoveries, because these are beside a way of thinking they have been
long used to; resolved, therefore, if ever I live to years, that I will
be impartial to hear the reasons of all pretended discoveries, and
receive them, if rational, how long soever I have been used to another
way of thinking.'

5.  The fickle, frivolous, volatile character of so many divinity
students is excellently hit off by Bunyan in our pilgrim's impatience to
be out of the Interpreter's House.  No sooner had he seen one or two of
the significant rooms than this easily satisfied student was as eager to
get out of that house as he had been to get in.  Twice over the wise and
learned Interpreter had to beg and beseech this ignorant and impulsive
pilgrim to stop and get another lesson in the religious life before he
left the great school-house.  All our professors of divinity and all our
ministers understand the parable at this point only too well.  Their
students are eager to get into their classes; like our pilgrim, they have
heard the fame of this and that teacher, and there is not standing-room
in the class for the first weeks of the session.  But before Christmas
there is room enough for strangers, and long before the session closes,
half the students are counting the weeks and plotting to petition the
Assembly against the length and labour of the curriculum.  Was there ever
a class that was as full and attentive at the end of the session as it
was at the beginning?  Never since our poor human nature was so stricken
with laziness and shallowness and self-sufficiency.  But what is the
chaff to the wheat?  It is the wheat that deserves and repays the
husbandman's love and labour.  When Plato looked up from his desk in the
Academy, after reading and expounding one of his greatest Dialogues, he
found only one student left in the class-room, but then, that student was
Aristotle.  'Now let me go,' said Christian.  'Nay, stay,' said the
Interpreter, 'till I have showed thee a little more.'  'Sir, is it not
time for me to go?'  'Do tarry till I show thee just one thing more.'

6.  'Here have I seen things rare and profitable,

. . . Then let me be

Thankful, O good Interpreter, to thee.'

Sydney Smith, with his usual sagacity, says that the last vice of the
pulpit is to be uninteresting.  Now, the Interpreter's House had this
prime virtue in it, that it was all interesting.  Do not our children beg
of us on Sabbath nights to let them see the Interpreter's show once more;
it is so inexhaustibly and unfailingly interesting?  It is only stupid
men and women who ever weary of it.  But, 'profitable' was the one and
universal word with which all the pilgrims left the Interpreter's House.
'Rare and pleasant,' they said, and sometimes 'dreadful;' but it was
always 'profitable.'  Now, how seldom do we hear our people at the church
door step down into the street saying, 'profitable'?  If they said that
oftener their ministers would study profit more than they do.  The people
say 'able,' or 'not at all able'; 'eloquent,' or 'stammering and
stumbling'; 'excellent' in style and manner and accent, or the opposite
of all that; and their ministers, to please the people and to earn their
approval, labour after these approved things.  But if the people only
said that the prayers and the preaching were profitable and helpful, even
when they too seldom are, then our preachers would set the profit of the
people far more before them both in selecting and treating and delivering
their Sabbath-day subjects.  A lady on one occasion said to her minister,
'Sir, your preaching does my soul good.'  And her minister never forgot
the grave and loving look with which that was said.  Not only did he
never forget it, but often when selecting his subject, and treating it,
and delivering it, the question would rise in his heart and conscience,
Will that do my friend's soul any good?  'Rare and profitable,' said the
pilgrim as he left the gate; and hearing that sent the Interpreter back
with new spirit and new invention to fill his house of still more
significant, rare, and profitable things than ever before.  'Meditate on
these things,' said Paul to Timothy his son in the gospel, 'that thy
profiting may appear unto all.'  'Thou art a minister of the word,' wrote
the learned William Perkins beside his name on all his books, 'mind thy
business.'




PASSION


   'A man subject to like passions as we are.'--James 5. 17.

That was a very significant room in the Interpreter's House where our
pilgrim saw Passion and Patience sitting each one in his chair.  Passion
was a young lad who seemed to our pilgrim to be much discontented.  He
was never satisfied.  He would have all his good things now.  His
governor would have him wait for his best things till the beginning of
next year; but no, he will have them all now.  And then, when he had got
all his good things, he soon lavished and wasted them all till he had
nothing left but rags.  Then said Christian to the Interpreter, 'Expound
this matter more fully to me.'  So he said, 'Those two lads are figures;
Passion, of the men of this world; and Patience of the men of that which
is to come.'  'Then I perceive,' said Christian, ''tis not best to covet
things that are now, but to wait for things to come.'  'You say truth,'
replied the Interpreter, 'for the things that are seen are temporal, but
the things that are not seen are eternal.'

Now from the texts that I have taken out of James and out of this so
significant room in the Interpreter's House, let me try to tell you
something profitable, if so it may be, about passion; the nature of it,
the place it holds, and the part it performs both in human nature and in
the life and the character of a Christian man.

The name of Passion has already told us his nature, his past life, and
his present character.  The whole nomenclature of _The Pilgrim's
Progress_ and of _The Holy War_ is composed on the divine, original, and
natural principle of embodying the nature of a man in his name.  God
takes His own names to Himself on that principle.  The Creator gave Adam
his name also on that same principle; and then Adam gave their names to
all cattle, to the fowls of the air, and to every beast of the field on
the same principle on which he had got his own name.  And so it was at
first with all the Bible names of men and of nations of men.  Their name
contained their nature.  And John Bunyan was such a student of the Bible,
and of no other book but the Bible, that all his best books are all full,
like the Bible, of the most descriptive and suggestive names.  As soon as
Bunyan tells us the name of some new acquaintance or fellow-traveller, we
already know him, so exactly is his nature put into his name.  And thus
it is that when we stop for a moment at the door of this little
significant room in the Interpreter's House and ask ourselves the meaning
of the name Passion, we see at once where we are and what we have here
before us.  For a 'passion' is just some excitement or agitation of the
mind caused by some outward thing acting on the mind.  The inward world
of the mind and heart of man, and this outward world down into which God
has placed man, instantly and continually respond to one another.  And
what are called, with so much correctness and propriety, our passions,
are just those inward responses, excitements, and agitations that the
outward world causes in the inward world when those two worlds meet
together.  'Passion' and 'perturbation' are the old classical names that
the ancient philosophers and moralists gave to what they felt in
themselves as their minds and their hearts were affected by the world of
men and things around them.  And they used to illustrate their teaching
on the subject of the passions by the figure of a storm at sea.  They
said that it was because God had made the sea sensitive and responsive to
the winds that blew over it that a storm at sea ever arose.  The storm
did not arise and the ships were not wrecked by anything from within the
sea itself; it was the outward world of the winds striking against the
quiet and inward world of the waters that roused the storms and sank the
ships.  And with that illustration well printed in the minds and
imaginations of their scholars the old moralists felt their work among
their scholars was already all but done.  For, so full of adaptation and
appeal is the whole outward world to the mind and heart of man, and so
sensitive and instantly responsive is the mind and heart of man to all
the approaches of the outward world, that the mind and heart of man are
constantly full of all kinds of passions, both bad and good.  And, then,
this is our present life of probation and opportunity, that all our
passions are placed within us and are committed and entrusted to us as so
many first elements and so much unformed material out of which we are
summoned to build up our life and to shape and complete our character.
The springs of all our actions are in our passions.  All our activities
in life, trace them all up to their source, and they will all be found to
run up into the wellhead of our passions.  All our virtues are cut as
with a chisel out of our passions, and all our vices are just the
disorders and rebellions of our passions.  Our several passions, as they
lie still asleep in our hearts, have as yet no moral character; they are
only the raw material so to speak, of moral character.  Our passions are
the life and the riches and the ornaments of human nature, and it is only
because human nature in its present estate is so corrupt and disordered
and degraded, that the otherwise so honourable name of passion has such a
sinister sound to us.  And the full regeneration and restitution of human
nature will be accomplished when every several passion is in its right
place, and when reason and conscience and the Spirit of God shall inspire
and rule and regulate all that is within us.

   'On life's vast ocean diversely we sail,
   Reason the card, but passion is the gale.'

And not Elijah only, as James says, and not Paul and Barnabas only, as
they themselves said, were men of like passions with ourselves, but our
Lord Himself was a man of like passions with us also.  He took to Himself
a true body, full of all the appetites of the body, and a reasonable
soul, full of all the affections, passions, and emotions of the soul.
Only, in Him reason and conscience and the law and the Spirit of God were
the card and the compass according to which He steered His life.  We have
all our ruling passion, and our Lord also had His.  As His disciples saw
His ruling passion kindled in His heart and coming out in His life, they
remembered that it was written of Him in an old Messianic psalm: 'The
zeal of Thine house hath eaten me up.'  They were all eaten up of their
ruling passions also.  One of ambition, one of emulation, one of avarice,
and so on,--each several disciple was eaten up of his own besetting sin.
But they all saw that it was not so with their Master.  He was eaten up
always and wholly of the zeal of His Father's house, and of absolute
surrender and devotion to His Father's service, till His ruling passion
was seen to be as strong in His death as it had been in His life.  The
Laird of Brodie's Diary has repeatedly been of great use to us in these
inward matters, and his words on this subject are well worth repeating.
'We poor creatures,' he says, 'are commanded by our affections and
passions.  They are not at our command.  But the Holy One doth exercise
all His attributes at His own will; they are at His command; they are not
passions nor perturbations in His mind, though they transport us.  When I
would hate, I cannot.  When I would love, I cannot.  When I would grieve,
I cannot.  When I would desire, I cannot.  But it is the better for us
that all is as He wills it to be.'

And now, to come still closer home, let us look for a moment or two at
some of our own ruling and tyrannising passions.  And let us look first
at self-love--that master-passion in every human heart.  Let us give self-
love the first place in the inventory and catalogue of our passions,
because it has the largest place in all our hearts and lives.  Nay, not
only has self-love the largest place of any of the passions of our
hearts, but it is out of self-love that all our other evil passions
spring.  It is out of this parent passion that all the poisonous brood of
our other evil passions are born.  The whole fall and ruin and misery of
our present human nature lies in this, that in every human being self-
love has taken, in addition to its own place, the place of the love of
God and of the love of man also.  We naturally now love nothing and no
one but ourselves.  And as long as self-love is in the ascendant in our
hearts, all the passions that are awakened in us by our self-love will be
selfish with its selfishness, inhumane with its inhumanity, and ungodly
with its ungodliness.  And it is to kill and extirpate our so passionate
self-love that is the end and aim of all God's dealings with us in this
world.  All that God is doing with us and for us in providence and in
grace, in the world and in the church,--it is all to cure us of this
deadly disease of self-love.  We may never have had that told us before,
and we may not like it, and we may not believe it; but there can be no
better proof of the truth of what is now said than just this, that we do
not like it and will not have it.  Self-love will not let us listen to
the truth about ourselves; it puts us in a passion both against the truth
and against him who tells the truth, as the history of the truth
abundantly testifies.  Yes, your indignant protest is quite true.  Self-
love has her divine rights,--no doubt she has.  But you are not commanded
to attend to them.  Your self-love will look after herself.  She will
manage to have her full share of what is right and proper for any passion
to possess even after she cries out that she is trampled upon and
despoiled.  My brethren, till you begin to crucify yourselves and to
pluck up your self-love by the roots, you will never know what a cruel
and hopeless task the Christian life is--I do not say the Christian
profession.  Nor, on the other hand, will you ever discover what a noble
task it is--what a divine task and how divinely assisted and divinely
recompensed.  You will not know what a kennel of hell-hounds your own
heart is till you have long sought to enter it and cleanse it out.  And
after you have done your utmost, and your best, death will hurry you away
from your but half-accomplished task.  Only, in that case you will be
able to die in the hope that what is impossible with man is possible with
God, as promised by Him, and that He will not leave your soul in hell,
but will perfect that good thing which alone concerneth you, even your
everlasting deliverance from all sinful self-love.

And if self-love is the fruitful mother of all our passions, then
sensuality is surely her eldest son.  Indeed, so shallow are we, and so
shallow are our words, that when we speak of sinful passion most men
instantly think of sensuality.  There are so many seductive things that
appeal to our appetites, and our appetites are so easily awakened, and
are so imperious when they are awakened, that when passion is spoken
about, few men think of the soul, all men think instantly of the body.
And no wonder.  For, stupid and besotted as we are, we must all at some
time of our life have felt the bondage and degradation of the senses.
Passion in the Interpreter's House had soon nothing left but rags.  And
in this house to-night there are many men whose consciences and hearts
and characters are all in such rags from sensual sin, that when the
Scriptures speak of uncleanness, or rags, or corruption, their thoughts
flee at once to sensual sin and its conscience-rending results.  Cease
from sensuality, said Cicero, for if once you give your minds up to
sensuality, you will never be able to think of anything else.

Ambition, emulation, and envy are the leading members of a whole prolific
family of satanic passions in the human heart.  Indeed, these passions,
taken along with their kindred passions of hatred and ill-will, are, in
our Lord's words, the very lusts of the devil himself.  The Jews hated
our Lord the more for what He said about these detestable passions, but
His own disciples love Him only the more that He so well knows the evil
affections of their hearts, and so well describes and denounces them.
Anybody can denounce sensual sin, and everybody will understand and
approve.  But spiritual sin,--ambition and emulation and envy and ill-
will--these things are more easy to denounce than they are to detect and
describe, and more easy to detect and describe than they are to cast out.
These sins seem rather to multiply and to strike a deeper root when you
begin to cast them out.  What an utterly and abominably evil passion is
envy which is awakened not by bad things but by the best things!  That
another man's talents, attainments, praises, rewards should kindle it,
and that the blame, the depreciation, the hurt that another man suffers
should satisfy it,--what a piece of very hell must that be in the human
heart!  What more do we need than just a little envy in our hearts to
make us prostrate penitents before God and man all our days?  What more
doctrine, argument, proof, authority, persuasion should a sane man need
beyond a little envy in his heart at his best friend to make him an
evangelical believer and an evangelical preacher?  How, in the name of
wonder, is it that men can be so ignorant of the plague of their own
hearts as to remain indifferent, and, much more, hostile, to the gospel
of love and holiness?  Pride, also,--what a hateful and intolerable
passion is that!  How stone-blind to his own state must that sinner be
whose heart is filled with pride, and how impossible it is for that man
to make any real progress in any kind of truth or goodness!  And
resentment,--what a deep-seated, long-lived, and suicidal passion is
that!  How it hunts down him it hates, and how surely it shuts the door
of salvation against him who harbours it!  Forgive us our debts, the
resentful man says in his prayer, as we forgive our debtors.  And
detraction,--how some men's ink-horns are filled with detraction for ink,
and how it drops from their tongue like poison!  At their every word a
reputation dies.  Life and all its opportunities of doing good and having
good done to us is laid like a bag of treasure at our feet, but, like the
prodigal son in the Interpreter's House, with all those passions raging
in our own hearts at other men, and in other men's hearts at us, we have
soon nothing left us but rags.  God be thanked for every man here who
sees and feels that he has nothing left him but rags; and, still more,
thanks for all those who see and feel how, by their bad passions, sensual
and spiritual, they have left on other people nothing but rags.

Now, from all this let us lay it to heart that our sanctification and
salvation lie in our mastery over all these and over many other passions
that have not even been named.  He is an accepted saint of God, who,
taking his and other people's rags to God's mercy every day, every day
also in God's strength grapples with, bridles, and tames his own wild and
ungodly passions.  Be not deceived, my friends; he alone is a saint of
God who is a sanctified man; and his passions,--as they are the spring of
his actions, so they are the sphere and seat of his sanctification.  Be
not deceived; that man, and no other manner of man, is, or ever will be,
a partaker of God's salvation.  You often hear me recommending those
students who have first to subdue their own passions and then the
passions of those who hear them to study Jonathan Edwards' ethical and
spiritual writings.  Well, just at this present point, to show you how
well that great man practised what he preached, let me read to you a few
lines from his biographer: 'Few men,' says Henry Rogers, 'ever attained a
more complete mastery over their passions than Jonathan Edwards did.  This
was partly owing to the ascendency of his intellect; partly, and in a
still greater degree, to the elevation of his piety.  For the subjugation
of his passions he was no doubt very greatly indebted to the prodigious
superiority of his reason.  Such was the commanding attitude his reason
assumed, and such the tremendous power with which it controlled the whole
man, that any insurrection among his senses was hopeless; they had their
tenure only by doing fealty and homage to his intellect.  Those other and
more dangerous enemies, because more subtle and more spiritual, such as
pride, vanity, wrath, and envy, which lurk in the inmost recesses of our
nature, and some of which have such affinities for a genius like that of
Edwards, yield not to such exorcism.  Such more powerful kind of demons
go not forth but by prayer and fasting; to their complete mortification,
therefore, Edwards brought incessant watchfulness and devotion; and
seldom, assuredly, have they been more nearly expelled from the bosom of
a depraved intelligence.'  We shall be in the best company, both
intellectually and spiritually, if we work out our own salvation among
the sinful passions of our depraved hearts.  And then, as life goes on,
and we continue in well-doing, we shall be able to measure and register
our growth in grace best by watching the effect of outward temptations
upon our still sinful and but half-sanctified hearts.  And among much to
be humbled for, and much to make us fear and tremble for the issue, we
shall, from time to time, have a good conscience and a holy and humble
joy that this passion and that is at last showing some signs of
crucifixion and mortification.  And thus that death to sin shall
gradually set in which shall issue at last in an everlasting life unto
holiness.

'Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from
all your filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you.  A new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you . . .
Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe
thee with change of raiment.  In that day there shall be a fountain
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for
sin and for uncleanness . . . Bring forth the best robe and put it upon
him, for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is
found . . . What are these that are arrayed in white robes, and whence
came they?  These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.'




PATIENCE


   'In your patience possess ye your souls.'  (Revised Version: 'In your
   patience ye shall win your souls.')--Our Lord.

'I saw moreover in my dream that the Interpreter took the pilgrim by the
hand, and had him into a little room, where sate two little children,
each one in his chair.  The name of the eldest was Passion and of the
other Patience.  Passion seemed to be much discontent, but Patience was
very quiet.  Then Christian asked, What is the reason of the discontent
of Passion?  The interpreter answered, The governor of them would have
him stay for his best things till the beginning of the next year; but he
will have all now.  But Patience is willing to wait.'

Passion and Patience, like Esau and Jacob, are twin-brothers.  And their
names, like their natures, spring up from the same root.  'Patience,'
says Crabb in his _English Synonyms_, 'comes from the active participle
to suffer; while passion comes from the passive participle of the same
verb; and hence the difference between the two names.  Patience signifies
suffering from an active principle, a determination to suffer; while
passion signifies what is suffered from want of power to prevent the
suffering.  Patience, therefore, is always taken in a good sense, and
Passion always in a bad sense.'  So far this excellent etymologist.  This
is, therefore, another case of blessing and cursing proceeding out of the
same mouth, and of the same fountain sending forth at the same place both
sweet water and bitter.

Our Lord tells us in this striking text that our very souls by reason of
sin are not our own.  He tells us that we have lost hold of our souls
before we have as yet come to know that we have souls.  We only discover
that we have souls after we have lost them.  And our Lord,--our best,
indeed our only, authority in the things of the soul,--here tells us that
it is only by patience that we shall ever win back our lost souls.  More,
far more, is needed to the winning back of a lost soul than its owner's
patience, and our Lord knew that to His cost.  But that is not His point
with us to-night.  His sole point with each one of us to-night is our
personal part in the conquest and redemption of our sin-enslaved souls.
He who has redeemed our souls with His own blood tells us with all
plainness of speech, that His blood will be shed in vain, as far as we
are concerned, unless we add to His atoning death our own patient life.
Every human life, as our Lord looks at it, and would have us look at it,
is a vast field of battle in which a soul is lost or won; little as we
think of it or will believe it, in His sight every trial, temptation,
provocation, insult, injury, and all kinds and all degrees of pain and
suffering, are all so many divinely appointed opportunities afforded us
for the reconquest and recovery of our souls.  Sometimes faith is
summoned into the battle-field, sometimes hope, sometimes self-denial,
sometimes prayer, sometimes one grace and sometimes another; but as with
the sound of a trumpet the Captain of our salvation here summons Patience
to the forefront of the fight.

1.  To begin with, how much impatience we are all from time to time
guilty of in our family life.  Among the very foundations of our family
life how much impatience the husband often exhibits toward the wife, and
the wife toward her husband.  Patience is the very last grace they look
forward to having any need of when they are still dreaming about their
married life; but, in too many cases, they have not well entered on that
life, when they find that they need no grace of God so much as just
patience, if the yoke of their new life is not to gall them beyond
endurance.  However many good qualities of mind and heart and character
any husband or wife may have, no human being is perfect, and most of us
are very far from being perfect.  When therefore, we are closely and
indissolubly joined to another life and another will, it is no wonder
that sometimes the ill-fitting yoke eats into a lifelong sore.  We have
all many defects in our manners, in our habits, and in our constitutional
ways of thinking and speaking and acting,--defects that tempt those who
live nearest us to fall into annoyances with us that sometimes deepen
into dislike, and even positive disgust, till it has been seen, in some
extreme cases, that home-life has become a very prison-house, in which
the impatient prisoner chafes and jibs and strikes out as he does nowhere
else.  Now, when any unhappy man or woman wakens up to discover how
different life is now to be from what it once promised to become, let
them know that all their past blindness, and precipitancy, and all the
painful results of all that, may yet be made to work together for good.
In your patience with one another, says our Lord, you will make a
conquest of your adverse lot, and of your souls to the bargain.  Say to
yourselves, therefore, that perfection, faultlessness, and absolute
satisfaction are not to be found in this world.  And say also that since
you have not brought perfection to your side of the house any more than
your partner has to his side, you are not so foolish as to expect
perfection in return for such imperfection.  You have your own share of
what causes fireside silence, aversion, disappointment, and dislike; and,
with God's help, say that you will patiently submit to what may not now
be mended.  And then, the sterner the battle the nobler will the victory
be; and the lonelier the fight, the more honour to him who flinches not
from it.  In your patience possess ye your souls.

What a beautiful, instructive, and even impressive sight it is to see a
nurse patiently cherishing her children!  How she has her eye and her
heart at all their times upon them, till she never has any need to lay
her hand upon them!  Passion has no place in her little household,
because patience fills all its own place and the place of passion too.
What a genius she displays in her talks to her children!  How she cheats
their little hours of temptation, and tides them over the rough places
that her eye sees lying like sunken rocks before her little ship!  How
skilfully she stills and heals their impulsive little passions by her
sudden and absorbing surprise at some miracle in a picture-book, or some
astonishing sight under her window!  She has a thousand occupations also
for her children, and each of them with a touch of enterprise and
adventure and benevolence in it.  She is so full of patience herself,
that the little gusts of passion are soon over in her presence, and the
sunshine is soon back brighter than ever in her little paradise.  And,
over and above her children rising up and calling her blessed, what
wounds she escapes in her own heart and memory by keeping her patient
hands from ever wounding her children!  What peace she keeps in the
house, just by having peace always within herself!  Paul can find no
better figure wherewith to set forth God's marvellous patience with
Israel during her fretful childhood in the wilderness, than just that of
such a nurse among her provoking children.  And we see the deep hold that
same touching and instructive sight had taken of the apostle's heart as
he returns to it again to the Thessalonians: 'We were gentle among you,
even as a nurse cherisheth her children.  So, being affectionately
desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not the
gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us.'  What a school of divine patience is every man's own family at home
if he only were teachable, observant, and obedient!

2.  Clever, quick-witted, and, themselves, much-gifted men, are terribly
intolerant of slow and stupid men, as they call them.  But the
many-talented man makes a great mistake here, and falls into a great sin.
In his fulness of all kinds of intellectual gifts, he quite forgets from
Whom he has his many gifts, and why it is that his despised neighbour has
so few gifts.  If you have ten or twenty talents, and I have only two,
who is to be praised and who is to be blamed for that allotment?  Your
cleverness has misled you and has hitherto done you far more evil than
good.  You bear yourself among ordinary men, among less men than
yourself, as if you had added all these cubits to your own stature.  You
ride over us as if you had already given in your account, and had heard
it said, Take the one talent from them and give it to this my
ten-talented servant.  You seem to have set it down to your side of the
great account, that you had such a good start in talent, and that your
fine mind had so many tutors and governors all devoting themselves to
your advancement.  And you conduct yourself to us as if the Righteous
Judge had cast us away from His presence, because we were not found among
the wise and mighty of this world.  The truth is, that the whole world is
on a wholly wrong tack in its praise and in its blame.  We praise the man
of great gifts, and we blame the man of small gifts, completely forgetful
that in so doing we give men the praise that belongs to God, and lay on
men the blame, which, if there is any blame in the matter, ought to be
laid elsewhere.  Learn and lay to heart, my richly-gifted brethren, to be
patient with all men, but especially to be patient with all stupid, slow-
witted, ungifted, God-impoverished men.  Do not add your insults and your
ill-usage to the low estate of those on whom, in the meantime, God's hand
lies so cold and so straitened.  For who maketh thee to differ from
another? and what hast thou that thou didst not receive?  Now, if thou
didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not received it?
Call that to mind the next time you are tempted to cry out that you have
no patience with your slow-witted servant.

3.  'Is patient with the bad' is one of the tributes of praise that is
paid in the fine paraphrase to that heart that is full of the same love
that is in God.  A patient love to the unjust and the evil is one of the
attributes and manifestations of the divine nature, as that nature is
seen both in God and in all genuinely godly men.  And, indeed, in no
other thing is the divine nature so surely seen in any man as just in his
love to and his patience with bad men.  He schools and exercises himself
every day to be patient and good to other men as God has been to him.  He
remembers when tempted to resentment how God did not resent his evil,
but, while he was yet an enemy to God and to godliness, reconciled him to
Himself by the death of His Son.  And ever since the godly man saw that,
he has tried to reconcile his worst enemies to himself by the death of
his impatience and passion toward them, and has more pitied than blamed
them, even when their evil was done against himself.  Let God judge, and
if it must be, condemn that bad man.  But I am too bad myself to cast a
stone at the worst and most injurious of men.  If we so much pity
ourselves for our sinful lot, if we have so much compassion on ourselves
because of our inherited and unavoidable estate of sin and misery, why do
we not share our pity and our compassion with those miserable men who are
in an even worse estate than our own?  At any rate, I must not judge them
lest I be judged.  I must take care when I say, Forgive me my trespasses,
as I forgive them that trespass against me.  Not to seven times must I
grudgingly forgive, but ungrudgingly to seventy times seven.  For with
what judgment I judge, I shall be judged; and with what measure I mete,
it shall be measured to me again.

   'Love harbours no suspicious thought,
   Is patient to the bad:
   Grieved when she hears of sins and crimes,
   And in the truth is glad.'

4.  And then, most difficult and most dangerous, but most necessary of
all patience, we must learn how to be patient with ourselves.  Every day
we hear of miserable men rushing upon death because they can no longer
endure themselves and the things they have brought on themselves.  And
there are moral suicides who cast off the faith and the hope and the
endurance of a Christian man because they are so evil and have lived such
an evil life.  We speak of patience with bad men, but there is no man so
bad, there is no man among all our enemies who has at all hurt us like
that man who is within ourselves.  And to bear patiently what we have
brought upon ourselves,--to endure the inward shame, the self-reproof,
the self-contempt bitterer to drink than blood, the lifelong injuries,
impoverishment, and disgrace,--to bear all these patiently and
uncomplainingly,--to acquiesce humbly in the discovery that all this was
always in our hearts, and still is in our hearts--what humility, what
patience, what compassion and pity for ourselves must all that call
forth!  The wise nurse is patient with her passionate, greedy, untidy,
disobedient child.  She does not cast it out of doors, she does not run
and leave it, she does not kill it because all these things have been and
still are in its sad little heart.  Her power for good with such a child
lies just in her pity, in her compassion, and in her patience with her
child.  And the child that is in all of us is to be treated in the same
patient, hopeful, believing, forgiving, divine way.  We should all be
with ourselves as God is with us.  He knoweth our frame.  He remembereth
that we are dust.  He shows all patience toward us.  He does not look for
great things from us.  He does not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax.  He shall not fail nor be discouraged till He have set
judgment in the earth.  And so shall not we.

5.  And, then,--it is a sufficiently startling thing to say, but--we must
learn to be patient with God also.  All our patience, and all the
exercises of it, if we think aright about it, all run up in the long-run
into patience with God.  But there are some exercises of patience that
have to do directly and immediately with God and with God alone.  When
any man's heart has become fully alive to God and to the things of God;
when he begins to see and feel that he lives and moves and has his being
in God; then everything that in any way affects him is looked on by him
as come to him from God.  Absolutely, all things.  The very weather that
everybody is so atheistic about, the climate, the soil he labours, the
rain, the winter's cold and the summer's heat,--true piety sees all these
things as God's things, and sees God's immediate will in the disposition
and dispensation of them all.  He feels the untameableness of his tongue
in the indecent talk that goes on everlastingly about the weather.  All
these things may be without God to other men, as they once were to him
also, but you will find that the truly and the intelligently devout man
no longer allows himself in such unbecoming speech.  For, though he
cannot trace God's hand in all the changes of the seasons, in heat and
cold, in sunshine and snow, yet he is as sure that God's wisdom and will
are there as that Scripture is true and the Scripture-taught heart.
'Great is our Lord, and His understanding is infinite.  Who covereth the
heavens with clouds, and prepareth rain for the earth, and maketh the
grass to grow upon the mountains.  He giveth snow like wool; He
scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes; He casteth forth His ice like
morsels.  Who can stand before his cold?'  Here is the patience and the
faith of the saints.  Here are they that keep the commandments of God and
the faith of Jesus Christ.

And, then, when through rain or frost or fire, when out of any terror by
night or arrow that flieth by day, any calamity comes on the man who is
thus pointed and practised in his patience, he is able with Job to say,
'This is the Lord.  What, shall we receive good at the hand of God and
not also receive evil?'  By far the best thing I have ever read on this
subject, and I have read it a thousand times since I first read it as a
student, is Dr. Thomas Goodwin's _Patience and its Perfect Work_.  That
noble treatise had its origin in the great fire of London in 1666.  The
learned President of Magdalen College lost the half of his library, five
hundred pounds worth of the best books, in that terrible fire.  And his
son tells us he had often heard his father say that in the loss of his
not-to-be-replaced books, God had struck him in a very sensible place.  To
lose his Augustine, and his Calvin, and his Musculus, and his Zanchius,
and his Amesius, and his Suarez, and his Estius was a sore stroke to such
a man.  I loved my books too well, said the great preacher, and God
rebuked me by this affliction.  Let the students here read Goodwin's
costly treatise, and they will be the better prepared to meet such
calamities as the burning of their manse and their library, as also to
counsel and comfort their people when they shall lose their shops or
their stockyards by fire.

   'Blind unbelief is sure to err,
   And scan His work in vain;
   God is His own interpreter,
   And He will make it plain.'

And, then, in a multitude of New Testament scriptures, we are summoned to
great exercise of patience with the God of our salvation, because it is
His purpose and plan that we shall have to wait long for our salvation.
God has not seen it good to carry us to heaven on the day of our
conversion.  He does not glorify us on the same day that He justifies us.
We are appointed to salvation indeed, but it is also appointed us to wait
long for it.  This is not our rest.  We are called to be pilgrims and
strangers for a season with God upon the earth.  We are told to endure to
the end.  It is to be through faith and patience that we, with our
fathers, shall at last inherit the promises.  Holiness is not a Jonah's
gourd.  It does not come up in a night, and it does not perish in a
night.  Holiness is the Divine nature, and it takes a lifetime to make us
partakers of it.  But, then, if the time is long the thing is sure.  Let
us, then, with a holy and a submissive patience wait for it.

'I saw moreover in my dream that Passion seemed to be much discontent,
but Patience was very quiet.  Then Christian asked, What is the reason of
the discontent of Passion?  The Interpreter answered, The governor of
them would have him stay for his best things till the beginning of the
next year; but he will have them all now.  But Patience is willing to
wait.'




SIMPLE, SLOTH, AND PRESUMPTION


   'Ye did run well, who did hinder you?'--Paul.

It startles us not a little to come suddenly upon three pilgrims fast
asleep with fetters on their heels on the upward side of the
Interpreter's House, and even on the upward side of the cross and the
sepulchre.  We would have looked for those three miserable men somewhere
in the City of Destruction or in the Town of Stupidity, or, at best,
somewhere still outside of the wicket-gate.  But John Bunyan did not lay
down his _Pilgrim's Progress_ on any abstract theory, or on any easy and
pleasant presupposition, of the Christian life.  He constructed his so
lifelike book out of his own experiences as a Christian man, as well as
out of all he had learned as a Christian minister.  And in nothing is
Bunyan's power of observation, deep insight, and firm hold of fact better
seen than just in the way he names and places the various people of the
pilgrimage.  Long after he had been at the Cross of Christ himself, and
had seen with his own eyes all the significant rooms in the Interpreter's
House, Bunyan had often to confess that the fetters of evil habit, unholy
affection, and a hard heart were still firmly riveted on his own heels.
And his pastoral work had led him to see only too well that he was not
alone in the temptations and the dangers and the still-abiding bondage to
sin that had so surprised himself after he was so far on in the Christian
life.  It was the greatest sorrow of his heart, he tells us in a powerful
passage in his _Grace Abounding_, that so many of his spiritual children
broke down and came short in the arduous and perilous way in which he had
so hopefully started them.  'If any of those who were awakened by my
ministry did after that fall back, as sometimes too many did, I can truly
say that their loss hath been more to me than if one of my own children,
begotten of my body, had been going to its grave.  I think, verily, I may
speak it without an offence to the Lord, nothing hath gone so near me as
that, unless it was the fear of the salvation of my own soul.  I have
counted as if I had goodly buildings and lordships in those places where
my children were born; my heart has been so wrapped up in this excellent
work that I counted myself more blessed and honoured of God by this than
if He had made me the emperor of the Christian world, or the lord of all
the glory of the earth without it.'  And I have no doubt that we have
here the three things that above everything else bereft Bunyan of so many
of his spiritual children personified and then laid down by the heels in
Simple, Sloth, and Presumption.




SIMPLE


Let us shake up Simple first and ask him what it was that laid him so
soon and in such a plight and in such company in this bottom.  It was not
that which from his name we might at first think it was.  It was not the
weakness of his intellects, nor his youth, nor his inexperience.  There
is danger enough, no doubt, in all these things if they are not carefully
attended to, but none of all these things in themselves, nor all of them
taken together, will lay any pilgrim by the heels.  There must be more
than mere and pure simplicity.  No blame attaches to a simple mind, much
less to an artless and an open heart.  We do not blame such a man even
when we pity him.  We take him, if he will let us, under our care, or we
put him under better care, but we do not anticipate any immediate ill to
him so long as he remains simple in mind, untainted in heart, and willing
to learn.  But, then, unless he is better watched over than any young man
or young woman can well be in this world, that simplicity and
child-likeness and inexperience of his may soon become a fatal snare to
him.  There is so much that is not simple and sincere in this world;
there is so much falsehood and duplicity; there are so many men abroad
whose endeavour is to waylay, mislead, entrap, and corrupt the simple-
minded and the inexperienced, that it is next to impossible that any
youth or maiden shall long remain in this world both simple and safe
also.  My son, says the Wise Man, keep my words, and lay up my
commandments with thee.  For at the window of my house I looked through
my casement, and beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the
youths, a young man void of understanding;--and so on,--till a dart
strike through his liver, and he goeth as an ox to the slaughter.  And
so, too often in our own land, the maiden in her simplicity also opens
her ear to the promises and vows and oaths of the flatterer, till she
loses both her simplicity and her soul, and lies buried in that same
bottom beside Sloth and Presumption.

It is not so much his small mind and his weak understanding that is the
fatal danger of their possessor, it is his imbecile way of treating his
small mind.  In our experience of him we cannot get him, all we can do,
to read an instructive book.  We cannot get him to attend our young men's
class with all the baits and traps we can set for him.  Where does he
spend his Sabbath-day and week-day evenings?  We cannot find out until we
hear some distressing thing about him, that, ten to one, he would have
escaped had he been a reader of good books, or a student with us, say, of
Dante and Bunyan and Rutherford, and a companion of those young men and
young women who talk about and follow such intellectual tastes and
pursuits.  Now, if you are such a young man or young woman as that, or
such an old man or old woman, you will not be able to understand what in
the world Bunyan can mean by saying that he saw you in his dream fast
asleep in a bottom with irons on your heels.  No; for to understand the
_Pilgrim's Progress_, beyond a nursery and five-year-old understanding of
it, you must have worked and studied and suffered your way out of your
mental and spiritual imbecility.  You must have for years attended to
what is taught from the pulpit and the desk, and, alongside of that, you
must have made a sobering and solemnising application of it all to your
own heart.  And then you would have seen and felt that the heels of your
mind and of your heart are only too firmly fettered with the irons of
ignorance and inexperience and self-complacency.  But as it is, if you
would tell the truth, you would say to us what Simple said to Christian,
I see no danger.  The next time that John Bunyan passed that bottom, the
chains had been taken off the heels of this sleeping fool and had been
put round his neck.




SLOTH


Sloth had a far better head than Simple had; but what of that when he
made no better use of it?  There are many able men who lie all their days
in a sad bottom with the irons of indolence and inefficiency on their
heels.  We often envy them their abilities, and say about them, What
might they not have done for themselves and for us had they only worked
hard?  Just as we are surprised to see other men away above us on the
mountain top, not because they have better abilities than we have, but
because they tore the fetters of sloth out of their soft flesh and set
themselves down doggedly to their work.  And the same sloth that starves
and fetters the mind at the same time casts the conscience and the heart
into a deep sleep.  I often wonder as I go on working among you, if you
ever attach any meaning or make any application to yourselves of all
those commands and counsels of which the Scriptures are full,--to be up
and doing, to watch and pray, to watch and be sober, to fight the good
fight of faith, to hold the fort, to rise early, and even by night, and
to endure unto death, and never for one moment to be found off your
guard.  Do you attach any real meaning to these examples of the
psalmists, to these continual commands and examples of Christ, and to
these urgent counsels of his apostles?  Do you?  Against whom and against
what do you thus campaign and fight?  For fear of whom or of what do you
thus watch?  What fort do you hold?  What occupies your thoughts in night-
watches, and what inspires and compels your early prayers?  It is your
stupefying life of spiritual sloth that makes it impossible for you to
answer these simple and superficial questions.  Sloth is not the word for
it.  Let them give the right word to insanity like that who sleep and
soak in sinful sloth no longer.

We have all enemies in our own souls that never sleep, whatever we may
do.  There are no irons on their heels.  They never procrastinate.  They
never say to their master, A little more slumber.  Now, could you name
any hateful enemy entrenched in your own heart, of which you have of
yourself said far more than that?  And, if so, what have you done, what
are you at this moment doing, to cast that enemy out?  Have you any
armour on, any weapons of offence and precision, against that enemy?  And
what success and what defeat have you had in unearthing and casting out
that enemy?  What fort do you hold?  On what virtue, on what grace are
you posted by your Lord to keep for yourself and for Him?  And with what
cost of meat and drink and sleep and amusement do you lose it or keep it
for Him?  Alexander used to leave his tent at midnight and go round the
camp, and spear to his post the sentinel he found sleeping.

There is nothing we are all so slothful in as secret, particular,
importunate prayer.  We have an almighty instrument in our hand in secret
and exact prayer if we would only importunately and perseveringly employ
it.  But there is an utterly unaccountable restraint of secret and
particularising prayer in all of us.  There is a soaking, stupefying
sloth, that so fills our hearts that we forget and neglect the immense
concession and privilege we have afforded us in secret prayer.  Our sloth
and stupidity in prayer is surely the last proof of our fall and of the
misery of our fallen state.  Our sloth with a gold mine open at our feet;
a little more sleep on the top of a mast with a gulf under us that hath
no bottom,--no language of this life can adequately describe the
besottedness of that man who lies with irons on his heels between Simple
and Presumption.




PRESUMPTION


The greatest theologian of the Roman Catholic Church has made an
induction and classification of sins that has often been borrowed by our
Protestant and Puritan divines.  His classification is made, as will be
seen, on an ascending scale of guilt and aggravation.  In the world of
sin, he says, there are, first, sins of ignorance; next, there are sins
of infirmity; and then, at the top, there are sins of presumption.  And
this, it will be remembered, was the Psalmist's inventory and estimate of
sins also.  His last and his most earnest prayer was, that he might be
kept back from all presumptuous sin.  Now you know quite well, without
any explanation, what presumption is.  Don't presume, you say, with
rising and scarce controlled anger.  Don't presume too far.  Take care,
you say, with your heart beating so high that you can scarcely command
it, take care lest you go too far.  And the word of God feels and speaks
about presumptuous sin very much as you do yourself.  Now, what gave this
third man who lay in fetters a little beyond the cross the name of
Presumption was just this, that he had been at the cross with his past
sin, and had left the cross to commit the same sin at the first
opportunity.  Presumption presumed upon his pardon.  He presumed upon the
abounding grace of God.  He presumed upon the blood of Christ.  He was so
high on the Atonement, that he held that the gospel was not sufficiently
preached to him, unless not past sin only and present, but also all
future sin was atoned for on the tree before it was committed.  There is
a reprobate in Dante, who, all the time he was repenting, had his eye on
his next opportunity.  Now, our Presumption was like that.  He presumed
on his youth, on his temptations, on his opportunities, and especially on
his future reformation and the permanence and the freeness of the gospel
offer.  When he was in the Interpreter's House he did not hear what the
Interpreter was saying, the blood was roaring so through his veins.  His
eyes were so full of other images that he did not see the man in the iron
cage, nor the spider on the wall, nor the fire fed secretly.  He had no
more intention of keeping always to the way that was as straight as a
rule could make it, than he had of cutting off both his hands and
plucking out both his eyes.  When the three shining ones stripped him of
his rags and clothed him with change of raiment, he had no more intention
of keeping his garments clean than he had of flying straight up to heaven
on the spot.  Now, let each man name to himself what that is in which he
intentionally, deliberately, and by foresight and forethought sins.  Have
you named it?  Well, it was for that that this reprobate was laid by the
heels on the immediately hither side of the cross and the sepulchre.  Not
that the iron might not have been taken off his heels again on certain
conditions, even after it was on; but, even so, he would never have been
the same man again that he was before his presumptuous sin.  You will
easily know a man who has committed much presumptuous sin,--that is to
say, if you have any eye for a sinner.  I think I would find him out if I
heard him pray once, or preach once, or even select a psalm for public or
for family worship; even if I heard him say grace at a dinner-table, or
reprove his son, or scold his servant.  Presumptuous sin has so much of
the venom and essence of sin in it that, forgiven or unforgiven, even a
little of it never leaves the sinner as it found him.  Even if his
fetters are knocked off, there is always a piece of the poisonous iron
left in his flesh; there is always a fang of his fetters left in the
broken bone.  The presumptuous saint will always be detected by the way
he halts on his heels all his after days.  Keep back Thy servant, O God,
from presumptuous sin.  Let him be innocent of the great transgression.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin says somewhere that the worm that dieth not only comes
to its sharpest sting and to its deadliest venom when it is hatched up
under gospel light.  The very light of nature itself greatly aggravates
some of our sins.  The light of our early education greatly aggravates
others of our sins.  But nothing wounds our conscience and then
exasperates the wound like a past experience of the same sin, and,
especially, an experience of the grace of God in forgiving that sin.  Had
we found young Presumption in his irons before his conversion, we would
have been afraid enough at the sight.  Had we found him laid by the heels
after his first uncleanness, it would have made us shudder for ourselves.
But we are horrified and speechless as we see him apprehended and laid in
irons on the very night of his first communion, and with the wine
scarcely dry on his unclean lips.  Augustine postponed his baptism till
he should have his fill of sin, and till he should no longer return to
sin like a dog to his vomit.  Now, next Sabbath is our communion day in
this congregation.  Let us therefore this week examine ourselves.  And if
we must sin as long as we are in this world, let it henceforth be the sin
of ignorance and of infirmity.

So the three reprobates lay down to sleep again, and Christian as he left
that bottom went on in the narrow way singing:

   'O to grace how great a debtor
   Daily I'm constrained to be
   Let that grace, Lord, like a fetter,
   Bind my wandering heart to Thee.'




THE THREE SHINING ONES AT THE CROSS


   'Salvation shall God appoint for walls.'--Isaiah.

John Bunyan's autobiography, _Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners_,
is the best of all our commentaries on _The Pilgrim's Progress_, and
again to-night I shall have to fall back on that incomparable book.  'Now,
I saw in my dream that the highway up which Christian was to go was
fenced on either side with a wall, and that wall is called Salvation.  Up
this way, therefore, did burdened Christian run, but not without great
difficulty, because of the load on his back.'  In the corresponding
paragraph in _Grace Abounding_, our author says, speaking about himself:
'But forasmuch as the passage was wonderful narrow, even so narrow that I
could not but with great difficulty enter in thereat, it showed me that
none could enter into life but those that were in downright earnest, and
unless also they left this wicked world behind them; for here was only
room for body and soul, but not for body and soul and sin.'  'He ran thus
till he came to a place somewhat ascending, and upon that place stood a
cross, and a little below in the bottom a sepulchre.  So I saw in my
dream, that just as Christian came up with this cross, his burden loosed
from off his shoulders and fell from off his back, and began to tumble,
and so continued to do till it came to the mouth of the sepulchre, where
it fell in, and I saw it no more.'  Turning again to the _Grace
Abounding_, we read in the 115th paragraph: 'I remember that one day as I
was travelling into the country and musing on the wickedness and
blasphemy of my heart, and considering of the enmity that was in me to
God, that scripture came into my mind, He hath made peace by the blood of
His Cross.  By which I was made to see both again and again and again
that day that God and my soul were friends by that blood: yea, I saw that
the justice of God and my sinful soul could embrace and kiss each other
through that blood.  That was a good day to me; I hope I shall not forget
it.  I thought I could have spoken of His love and of His mercy to me
that day to the very crows that sat upon the ploughed lands before me had
they been capable to have understood me.  Wherefore I said in my soul
with much gladness, Well, I would I had a pen and ink here and I would
write this down before I go any farther, for surely I will not forget
this forty years hence.'

From all this we learn that the way to the Celestial City lies within
high and close fencing walls.  There is not room for many pilgrims to
walk abreast in that way; indeed, there is seldom room for two.  There
are some parts of the way where two or even three pilgrims can for a time
walk and converse together, but for the most part the path is
distressingly lonely.  The way is so fenced up also that a pilgrim cannot
so much as look either to the right hand or the left.  Indeed, it is one
of the laws of that road that no man is to attempt to look except
straight on before him.  But then there is this compensation for the
solitude and stringency of the way that the wall that so encloses it is
Salvation.  And Salvation is such a wall that it is companionship and
prospect enough of itself.  Dante saw a long reach of this same wall
running round the bottom of the mount that cleanses him who climbs it,--a
long stretch of such sculptured beauty, that it arrested him and
instructed him and delighted him beyond his power sufficiently to praise
it.  And thus, that being so, burdened and bowed down to the earth as our
pilgrim was, he was on the sure way, sooner or later, to deliverance.
Somewhere and sometime and somehow on that steep and high fenced way
deliverance was sure to come.  And, then, as to the burdened man himself.
His name was once Graceless, but his name is Graceless no longer.  No
graceless man runs long between these close and cramping-up walls; and,
especially, no graceless man has that burden long on his back.  That is
not Graceless any longer who is leaving the Interpreter's House for the
fenced way; that is Christian, and as long as he remains Christian, the
closeness of the fence and the weight of his burden are a small matter.
But long-looked-for comes at last.  And so, still carrying his burden and
keeping close within the fenced-up way, our pilgrim came at last to a
cross.  And a perfect miracle immediately took place in that somewhat
ascending ground.  For scarcely had Christian set his eyes on the cross,
when, without his pulling at it, or pushing it, or even at that moment
thinking of it, ere ever he was aware, he saw his burden begin to tumble,
and so it continued to do till it fell fairly out of his sight into an
open sepulchre.

The application of all that is surely self-evident.  For our way in a
holy life is always closely fenced up.  It is far oftener a lonely way
than otherwise.  And the steepness, sternness, and loneliness of our way
are all aggravated by the remembrance of our past sins and follies.  They
still, and more and more, lie upon our hearts a heart-crushing burden.
But if we, like Christian, know how to keep our back to our former house
and our face to heaven, sooner or later we too shall surely come to the
cross.  And then, either suddenly, or after a long agony, our burden also
shall be taken off our back and shut down into Christ's sepulchre.  And I
saw it no more, says the dreamer.  He does not say that its owner saw it
no more.  He was too wise and too true a dreamer to say that.

It will be remembered that the first time we saw this man, with whose
progress to the Celestial City we are at present occupied, he was
standing in a certain place clothed with rags and with a burden on his
back.  After a long journey with him, we have just seen his burden taken
off his back, and it is only after his burden is off and a Shining One
has said to him, Thy sins be forgiven, that a second Shining One comes
and strips him of his rags and clothes him with change of raiment.  Now,
why, it may be asked, has Christian had to carry his burden so long, and
why is he still kept so ragged and so miserable and he so far on in the
pilgrim's path?  Surely, it will be said, John Bunyan was dreaming indeed
when he kept a truly converted man, a confessedly true and sincere
Christian, so long in bonds and in rags.  Well, as to his rags: filthy
rags are only once spoken of in the Bible, and it is the prophet Isaiah,
whose experience and whose language John Bunyan had so entirely by heart,
who puts them on.  And that evangelist among the prophets not only calls
his own and Israel's sins filthy rags, but Isaiah is very bold, and calls
their very righteousnesses by that opprobrious name.  Had that bold
prophet said that all his and all his people's _un_righteousnesses were
filthy rags, all Israel would have subscribed to that.  There was no man
so brutish as not to admit that.  But as long as they had any sense of
truth and any self-respect, multitudes of Isaiah's first hearers and
readers would resent what he so rudely said of their righteousnesses.  On
the other hand, the prophet's terrible discovery and comparison, just
like our dreamer's dramatic distribution of Christian experience, was, to
a certainty, an immense consolation to many men in Israel in his day.
They gathered round Isaiah because, but for him and his evangelical
ministry, they would have been alone in their despair.  To them Isaiah's
ministry was a house of refuge, and the prophet himself a veritable tower
of strength.  They felt they were not alone so long as Isaiah dwelt in
the same city with them.  And thus, whatever he might be to others, he
was God's very prophet to them as his daily prayers in the temple both
cast them down and lifted them up.  'Oh that Thou wouldst rend the
heavens and come down . . . But we are all as an unclean thing, and all
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, and our iniquities like the wind
have taken us away.'  Thousands in Israel found in these terrible words a
door of hope, a sense of fellowship, and a call to trust and
thanksgiving.  And tens of thousands have found the same help and
consolation out of what have seemed to others the very darkest and most
perplexing pages of the _Pilgrim's Progress_ and the _Grace Abounding_.
'It made me greatly ashamed,' says Hopeful, 'of the vileness of my former
life, and confounded me with the sense of mine own ignorance, for there
never came into mine heart before now that showed me so by contrast the
beauty of the Lord Jesus.  My own vileness and nakedness made me love a
holy life.  Yea, I thought that had I now a thousand gallons of blood in
my body, I could spill it all for the sake of the Lord Jesus.'  And if
you, my brother, far on in the way of Salvation, still think sometimes
that, after all, you must be a reprobate because of your filthy rags,
read what David Brainerd wrote with his half-dead hand on the last page
of his seraphic journal: 'How sweet it is to love God and to have a heart
all for God!  Yes; but a voice answered me, You are not all for God, you
are not an angel.  To which my whole soul replied, I as sincerely desire
to love and glorify God as any angel in heaven.  But you are filthy, and
not fit for heaven.  When hereupon there instantly appeared above me and
spread over me the blessed robes of Christ's righteousness which I could
not but exult and triumph in.  And then I knew that I should be as active
as an angel in heaven, and should then be for ever stripped of my filthy
garments and clothed with spotless raiment.'  Let me die the death of
David Brainerd, and let my latter end be like his!

The third Shining One then came forward and set a mark on the forehead of
this happy man.  And it was a most ancient and a most honourable mark.
For it was the same redeeming mark that was set by Moses upon the
foreheads of the children of Israel when the Lord took them into covenant
with Himself at the Passover in the wilderness.  It was the same
distinguishing mark also that the man with the slaughter-weapon in his
hand first set upon the foreheads of the men who sighed and cried for the
abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem.  And it was the
same glorious mark that John saw in the foreheads of the hundred and
forty and four thousand who stood upon Mount Zion and sang a song that no
man knew but those men who had been redeemed from the earth by the blood
of the Lamb.  The mark was set for propriety and for ornament and for
beauty.  It was set upon his forehead so that all who looked on him ever
after might thus know to what company and what country he belonged, and
that this was not his rest, but that he had been called and chosen to a
heavenly inheritance.  And, besides, it was no sooner set upon his
forehead than it greatly added to his dignity and his comeliness.  He had
now the gravity and beauty of an angel; nay, the beauty in his measure
and the gravity of Goodwill at the gate himself.  And, then, as if that
were not enough, the third Shining One also gave him a roll with a seal
upon it, which he was bidden look on as he ran, and which he was to give
in when he arrived at the Celestial Gate.  Now, what was that sealed roll
but just the inward memory and record of all this pilgrim's experiences
of the grace of God from the day he set out on pilgrimage down to that
day when he stood unburdened of his guilt, unclothed of his rags, and
clothed upon with change of raiment?  The roll contained his own secret
life, all sealed and shone in upon by the light of God's countenance.  The
secret of the Lord with this pilgrim was written within that roll, a
secret that no man could read but he himself alone.  It was the same roll
that this same Shining One gave to Abraham, the first pilgrim and the
father of all true pilgrims, after Melchizedek, the priest of the Most
High God, had brought forth bread and wine and had blessed that great
believer.  'Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward.'  And, again, after Abram had lost his roll, like our pilgrim in
the arbour, when he recovered it he read thus in it: 'I am the Almighty
God: walk before Me, and be thou perfect.  And I will make My covenant
between Me and thee.'  And Abram fell on his face for joy.  It was the
same roll out of which the Psalmist proposed to read a passage to all
those in his day who feared God.  'Come and hear, all ye that fear God,
and I will declare what He hath done for my soul.'  It was the same roll
also that God sent to Israel in his sore captivity.  'Fear not, O Israel,
for I have redeemed thee; I have called thee by thy name, thou art Mine.
When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee.'  The high
priest Joshua also had the same roll put into his hand, and that not only
for his own comfort, but to make him the comforter of God's afflicted
people.  For after the Lord had plucked Joshua as a brand out of the
fire, and had made his iniquity to pass from him, and had clothed him
with change of raiment, and had set a fair mitre on his head, the Lord
gave to Joshua a sealed roll, the contents of which may be read to this
day in the book of the prophet Zechariah.  Nay, more: 'Will you have me
to speak plainly?' says great Goodwin on this matter.  'Then, though our
Lord had the assurance of faith that He was the Son of God, for He knew
it out of the Scriptures by reading all the prophets, yet, to have it
sealed to Him with joy unspeakable and glorious,--this was deferred to
the time of His baptism.  He was then anointed with the oil of assurance
and gladness in a more peculiar and transcendent manner.'  'In His
baptism,' says Bengel, 'our Lord was magnificently enlightened.  He was
previously the Son of God, and yet the power of the Divine testimony to
His Sonship at His baptism long affected Him in a lively manner.'  And we
see our Lord reading His roll to assure and sustain His heart when all
outward acceptance and sustenance failed Him.  'There is One who beareth
witness of Me, and His witness is true.  I receive not witness from men.
I have a greater witness than even that of John.  For the Father Himself
that hath sent Me, He beareth witness of Me.'  No wonder that our heavy-
laden pilgrim of yesterday gave three leaps for joy and went on singing
with such a roll as that in his bosom.  For, at that supreme moment he
had that inward illumination and assurance sealed on his heart that had
so gladdened and sustained so many prophets and psalmists and apostles
and saints before his day.  And though, like Abraham and all the other
saints who ever had that noble roll put into their keeping, except Jesus
Christ, he often lost it, yet as often as he again recovered it, it
brought back again with it all his first joy and gladness.

But, as was said at the beginning, the _Grace Abounding_ is the best of
all our commentaries on _The Pilgrim's Progress_.  As thus here also:
'Now had I an evidence, as I thought, of my salvation from heaven, with
many golden seals thereon, all hanging in my sight.  Now could I remember
this manifestation and that other discovery of grace with comfort, and
should often long and desire that the last day were come, that I might be
for ever inflamed with the sight and joy of Him and communion with Him
whose head was crowned with thorns, whose face was spit on, and body
broken, and soul made an offering for my sins.  For whereas, before, I
lay continually trembling at the mouth of hell, now, methought, I was got
so far therefrom that I could not, when I looked back, scarce discern it.
And oh! thought I, that I were fourscore years old now, that I might die
quickly, that my soul might be gone to rest.'

Then Christian gave three leaps for joy and went on singing:

   'Thus far did I come laden with my sin,
   Nor could ought ease the grief that I was in
   Till I came hither: . . .
   Blest Cross! blest Sepulchre! blest rather be
   The Man that there was put to shame for me.'




FORMALIST AND HYPOCRISY


   'A form of godliness.'--Paul.

We all began our religious life by being formalists.  And we were not
altogether to blame for that.  Our parents were first to blame for that,
and then our teachers, and then our ministers.  They made us say our
psalm and our catechism to them, and if we only said our sacred lesson
without stumbling, we were straightway rewarded with their highest
praise.  They seldom took the trouble to make us understand the things we
said to them.  They were more than content with our correct repetition of
the words.  We were never taught either to read or repeat with our eyes
on the object.  And we had come to our manhood before we knew how to seek
for the visual image that lies at the root of all our words.  And thus
the ill-taught schoolboy became in us the father of the confirmed
formalist.  The mischief of this neglect still spreads through the whole
of our life, but it is absolutely disastrous in our religious life.  Look
at the religious formalist at family worship with his household gathered
round him all in his own image.  He would not on any account let his
family break up any night without the habitual duty.  He has a severe
method in his religious duties that nothing is ever allowed to disarrange
or in any way to interfere with.  As the hour strikes, the big Bible is
brought out.  He opens where he left off last night, he reads the
regulation chapter, he leads the singing in the regulation psalm, and
then, as from a book, he repeats his regulation prayer.  But he never
says a word to show that he either sees or feels what he reads, and his
household break up without an idea in their heads or an affection in
their hearts.  He comes to church and goes through public worship in the
same wooden way, and he sits through the Lord's Table in the same formal
and ceremonious manner.  He has eyes of glass and hands of wood, and a
heart without either blood or motion in it.  His mind and his heart were
destroyed in his youth, and all his religion is a religion of rites and
ceremonies without sense or substance.  'Because I knew no better,' says
Bunyan, 'I fell in very eagerly with the religion of the times: to wit,
to go to church twice a day, and that, too, with the foremost.  And there
should I sing and say as others did.  Withal, I was so overrun with the
spirit of superstition that I adored, and that with great devotion, even
all things, both the high place, priest, clerk, vestment, service, and
what else belonged to the church: counting all things holy that were
therein contained.  But all this time I was not sensible of the danger
and evil of sin.  I was kept from considering that sin would damn me,
what religion soever I followed, unless I was found in Christ.  Nay, I
never thought of Christ, nor whether there was one or no.'

A formalist is not yet a hypocrite exactly, but he is ready now and well
on the way at any moment to become a hypocrite.  As soon now as some
temptation shall come to him to make appear another and a better man than
he really is: when in some way it becomes his advantage to seem to other
people to be a spiritual man: when he thinks he sees his way to some
profit or praise by saying things and doing things that are not true and
natural to him,--then he will pass on from being a bare and simple
formalist, and will henceforth become a hypocrite.  He has never had any
real possession or experience of spiritual things amid all his formal
observances of religious duties, and he has little or no difficulty,
therefore, in adding another formality or two to his former life of
unreality.  And thus the transition is easily made from a comparatively
innocent and unconscious formalist to a conscious and studied hypocrite.
'An hypocrite,' says Samuel Rutherford, 'is he who on the stage
represents a king when he is none, a beggar, an old man, a husband, when
he is really no such thing.  To the Hebrews, they were _faciales_, face-
men; _colorati_, dyed men, red men, birds of many colours.  You may paint
a man, you may paint a rose, you may paint a fire burning, but you cannot
paint a soul, or the smell of a rose, or the heat of a fire.  And it is
hard to counterfeit spiritual graces, such as love to Christ, sincere
intending of the glory of God, and such like spiritual things.'  Yes,
indeed; it is hard to put on and to go through with a truly spiritual
grace even to the best and most spiritually-minded of men; and as for the
true hypocrite, he never honestly attempts it.  If he ever did honestly
and resolutely attempt it, he would at once in that pass out of the ranks
of the hypocrites altogether and pass over into a very different
category.  Bunyan lets us see how a formalist and a hypocrite and a
Christian all respectively do when they come to a real difficulty.  The
three pilgrims were all walking in the same path, and with their faces
for the time in the same direction.  They had not held much conference
together since their first conversation, and as time goes on, Christian
has no more talk but with himself, and that sometimes sighingly, and
sometimes more comfortably.  When, all at once, the three men come on the
hill Difficulty.  A severe act of self-denial has to be done at this
point of their pilgrimage.  A proud heart has to be humbled to the dust.
A second, a third, a tenth place has to be taken in the praise of men.  An
outbreak of anger and wrath has to be kept under for hours and days.  A
great injury, a scandalous case of ingratitude, has to be forgiven and
forgotten; in short, as Rutherford says, an
impossible-to-be-counterfeited spiritual grace has to be put into its
severest and sorest exercise; and the result was--what we know.  Our
pilgrim went and drank of the spring that always runs at the bottom of
the hill Difficulty, and thus refreshed himself against that hill; while
Formalist took the one low road, and Hypocrisy the other, which led him
into a wide field full of dark mountains, where he stumbled and fell and
rose no more.  When, after his visit to the spring, Christian began to go
up the hill, saying:

   'This hill, though high, I covet to ascend;
   The difficulty will not me offend;
   For I perceive the way to life lies here;
   Come, pluck up heart; let's neither faint nor fear;
   Better, though difficult, the right way to go,
   Than wrong, though easy, where the end is woe.'

Now, all this brings us to the last step in the evolution of a perfect
hypocrite out of a simple formalist.  The perfect and finished hypocrite
is not your commonplace and vulgar scoundrel of the playwright and the
penny-novelist type; the finest hypocrite is a character their art cannot
touch.  'The worst of hypocrites,' Rutherford goes on to say, 'is he who
whitens himself till he deceives himself.  It is strange that a man hath
such power over himself.  But a man's heart may deceive his heart, and he
may persuade himself that he is godly and righteous when he knows nothing
about it.'  'Preaching in a certain place,' says Boston, 'after supper
the mistress of the house told me how I had terrified God's people.  This
was by my doctrine of self-love, self-righteousness, self-ends, and such
like.  She restricted hypocrites to that sort that do all things to be
seen of men, and harped much on this--how can one be a hypocrite who
hates hypocrisy in other people? how can one be a hypocrite and not know
it?  All this led me to see the need of such doctrine.'  And if only to
show you that this is not the dismal doctrine of antediluvian
Presbyterians only, Canon Mozley says: 'The Pharisee did not know that he
was a Pharisee; if he had known it he would not have been a Pharisee.  He
does not know that he is a hypocrite.  The vulgar hypocrite knows that he
is a hypocrite because he deceives others, but the true Scripture
hypocrite deceives himself.'  And the most subtle teacher of our century,
or of any century, has said: 'What is a hypocrite?  We are apt to
understand by a hypocrite one who makes a profession of religion for
secret ends without practising what he professes; who is malevolent,
covetous, or profligate, while he assumes an outward sanctity in his
words and conduct, and who does so deliberately, deceiving others, and
not at all self-deceived.  But this is not what our Saviour seems to have
meant by a hypocrite; nor were the Pharisees such.  The Pharisees
deceived themselves as well as others.  Indeed, it is not in human nature
to deceive others for any long time without in a measure deceiving
ourselves also.  When they began, each in his turn, to deceive the
people, they were not at the moment self-deceived.  But by degrees they
forgot that outward ceremonies avail nothing without inward purity.  They
did not know themselves, and they unawares deceived themselves as well as
the people.'  What a terrible light, as of the last day itself, does all
that cast upon the formalisms and the hypocrisies of which our own
religious life is full!  And what a terrible light it casts on those
miserable men who are complete and finished in their self-deception!  For
the complete and finished hypocrite is not he who thinks that he is
better than all other men; that is hopeless enough; but the paragon of
hypocrisy is he who does not know that he is worse than all other men.
And in his stone-blindness to himself, and consequently to all reality
and inwardness and spirituality in religion, you see him intensely
interested in, and day and night occupied with, the outside things of
religion, till nothing short of a miracle will open his eyes.  See him in
the ministry, for instance, sweating at his sermons and in his visiting,
till you would almost think that he is the minister of whom Paul
prophesied, who should spend and be spent for the salvation of men's
souls.  But all the time, such is the hypocrisy that haunts the
ministerial calling, he is really and at bottom animated with ambition
for the praise of men only, and for the increase of his congregation.  See
him, again, now assailing or now defending a church's secular privileges,
and he knowing no more, all the time, what a church has been set up for
on earth than the man in the moon.  What a penalty his defence is and his
support to a church of Christ, and what an incubus his membership must
be!  Or, see him, again, making long speeches and many prayers for the
extension of the kingdom of Christ, and all the time spending ten times
more on wine or whisky or tobacco, or on books or pictures or foreign
travel, than he gives to the cause of home or foreign missions.  And so
on, all through our hypocritical and self-blinded life.  Through such
stages, and to such a finish, does the formalist pass from his
thoughtless and neglected youth to his hardened, blinded, self-seeking
life, spent in the ostensible service of the church of Christ.  If the
light that is in such men be darkness, how great is that darkness!  We
may all well shudder as we hear our Lord saying to ministers and members
and church defenders and church supporters, like ourselves: 'Now ye say,
We see; therefore your sin remaineth.'

Now, the first step to the cure of all such hypocrisy, and to the
salvation of our souls, is to know that we are hypocrites, and to know
also what that is in which we are most hypocritical.  Well, there are two
absolutely infallible tests of a true hypocrite,--tests warranted to
unmask, expose, and condemn the most finished, refined, and even
evangelical hypocrite in this house to-night, or in all the world.  By
far and away the best and swiftest is prayer.  True prayer, that is.  For
here again our inexpugnable hypocrisy comes in and leads us down to
perdition even in our prayers.  There is nothing our Lord more bitterly
and more contemptuously assails the Pharisees for than just the length,
the loudness, the number, and the publicity of their prayers.  The truth
is, public prayer, for the most part, is no true prayer at all.  It is at
best an open homage paid to secret prayer.  We make such shipwrecks of
devotion in public prayer, that if we have a shred of true religion about
us, we are glad to get home and to shut our door.  We preach in our
public prayers.  We make speeches on public men and on public events in
our public prayers.  We see the reporters all the time in our public
prayers.  We do everything but pray in our public prayers.  And to get
away alone,--what an escape that is from the temptations and defeats of
public prayer!  No; public prayer is no test whatever of a hypocrite.  A
hypocrite revels in public prayer.  It is secret prayer that finds him
out.  And even secret prayer will sometimes deceive us.  We are crushed
down on our secret knees sometimes, by sheer shame and the strength of
conscience.  Fear of exposure, fear of death and hell, will sometimes
make us shut our door.  A flood of passing feeling will sometimes make us
pray for a season in secret.  Job had all that before him when he said,
'Will the hypocrite delight himself in the Almighty? will he always call
upon God?'  No, he will not.  And it is just here that the hypocrite and
the true Christian best discover themselves both to God and to
themselves.  The true Christian will, as Job again says, pray in secret
till God slays him.  He will pray in his dreams; he will pray till death;
he will pray after he is dead.  Are you in earnest, then, not to be any
more a hypocrite and to know the infallible marks of such?  Ask the key
of your closet door.  Ask the chair at your bedside.  Ask the watchman
what you were doing and why your light was in so long.  Ask the birds of
the air and the beasts of the field and the crows on the ploughed lands
after your solitary walk.

Almost a better test of true and false religion than even secret prayer,
but a test that is far more difficult to handle, is our opinion of
ourselves.  In His last analysis of the truly justified man and the truly
reprobate, our Lord made the deepest test to be their opinion of
themselves.  'God, I thank Thee that I am not as this publican,' said the
hypocrite.  'God be merciful to me a sinner,' said the true penitent.  And
then this fine principle comes in here--not only to speed the sure
sanctification of a true Christian, but also, if he has skill and courage
to use it, for his assurance and comfort,--that the saintlier he becomes
and the riper for glory, the more he will beat his breast over what yet
abides within his breast.  Yes; a man's secret opinion of himself is
almost a better test of his true spiritual state than even secret prayer.
But, then, these two are not competing and exclusive tests; they always
go together and are never found apart.  And at the mouth of these two
witnesses every true hypocrite shall be condemned and every true
Christian justified.

Dr. Pusey says somewhere that the perfect hypocrite is the man who has
the truth of God in his mind, but is without the love of God in his
heart.  'Truth without love,' says that saintly scholar, 'makes a
finished Pharisee.'  Now we Scottish and Free Church people believe we
have the truth, if any people on the face of the earth have it; and if we
have not love mixed with it, you see where and what we are.  We are
called to display a banner because of the truth, but let love always be
our flag-staff.  Let us be jealous for the truth, but let it be a godly,
that is to say, a loving jealousy.  When we contend for purity of
doctrine and for purity of worship, when we protest against popery and
priestcraft, when we resist rationalism and infidelity, when we do battle
now for national religion, as we call it, and now for the freedom of the
church, let us do it all in love to all men, else we had better not do it
at all.  If we cannot do it with clean and all-men-loving hearts, let us
leave all debate and contention to stronger and better men than we are.
The truth will never be advanced or guarded by us, nor will the Lord of
truth and love accept our service or bless our souls, till we put on the
divine nature, and have our hearts and our mouths still more full of love
than our minds and our mouths are full of truth.  Let us watch ourselves,
lest with all our so-called love of truth we be found reprobates at last
because we loved the truth for some selfish or party end, and hated and
despised our brother, and believed all evil and disbelieved all good
concerning our brother.  Truth without love makes a hypocrite, says Dr.
Pusey; and evangelical truth without evangelical love makes an
evangelical hypocrite, says Thomas Shepard.  Only where the whole truth
is united to a heart full of love have we the perfect New Testament
Christian.




TIMOROUS AND MISTRUST


   'There is a lion in the way.'--The Slothful Man.

   'I must venture.'--Christian.

'I at any rate must venture,' said Christian to Timorous and Mistrust.
'Whatever you may do I must venture, even if the lions you speak of
should pull me to pieces.  I, for one, shall never go back.  To go back
is nothing but death; to go forward is fear of death and everlasting life
beyond it.  I will yet go forward.'  So Mistrust and Timorous ran down
the hill, and Christian went on his way.  George Offor says, in his notes
on this passage, that civil despotism and ecclesiastical tyranny so
terrified many young converts in John Bunyan's day, that multitudes
turned back like Mistrust and Timorous; while at the same time, many like
Bunyan himself went forward and for a time fell into the lion's mouth.
Civil despotism and ecclesiastical tyranny do not stand in our way as
they stood in Bunyan's way--at least, not in the same shape: but every
age has its own lions, and every Christian man has his own lions that
neither civil despots nor ecclesiastical tyrants know anything about.

Now, who or what is the lion in your way?  Who or what is it that fills
you with such timorousness and mistrust, that you are almost turning back
from the way to life altogether?  The fiercest of all our lions is our
own sin.  When a man's own sin not only finds him out and comes roaring
after him, but when it dashes past him and gets into the woods and
thickets before him, and stands pawing and foaming on the side of his
way, that is a trial of faith and love and trust indeed.  Sometimes a
man's past sins will fill all his future life with sleepless
apprehensions.  He is never sure at what turn in his upward way he may
not suddenly run against some of them standing ready to rush out upon
him.  And it needs no little quiet trust and humble-minded resignation to
carry a man through this slough and that bottom, up this hill and down
that valley, all the time with his life in his hand; and yet at every
turn, at every rumour that there are lions in the way, to say, Come lion,
come lamb, come death, come life, I must venture, I will yet go forward.
As Job also, that wonderful saint of God, said, 'Hold your peace, let me
alone that I may speak, and let come on me what will.  Wherefore do I
take my flesh in my teeth and put my life in my hand?  Though He slay me,
yet will I trust in Him.  He also shall be my salvation; for an hypocrite
shall not come before Him.'

One false step, one stumble in life, one error in judgment, one outbreak
of an unbridled temperament, one small sin, if it is even so much as a
sin, of ignorance or of infirmity, will sometimes not only greatly injure
us at the time, but, in some cases, will fill all our future life with
trials and difficulties and dangers.  Many of us shall have all our days
to face a future of defeat, humiliation, impoverishment, and many
hardships, that has not come on us on account of any presumptuous
transgression of God's law so much as simply out of some combination of
unfortunate circumstances in which we may have only done our duty, but
have not done it in the most serpent-like way.  And when we are made to
suffer unjustly or disproportionately all our days for our error of
judgment or our want of the wisdom of this world, or what not, we are
sorely tempted to be bitter and proud and resentful and unforgiving, and
to go back from duty and endurance and danger altogether.  But we must
not.  We must rather say to ourselves, Now and here, if not in the past,
I must play the man, and, by God's help, the wise man.  I must pluck
safety henceforth out of the heart of the nettle danger.  Yes, I made a
mistake.  I did what I would not do now, and I must not be too proud to
say so.  I acted, I see now, precipitately, inconsiderately, imprudently.
And I must not gloom and rebel and run away from the cross and the lion.
I must not insist or expect that the always wise and prudent man's reward
is to come to me.  The lion in my way is a lion of my own rearing; and I
must not turn my back on him, even if he should be let loose to leap on
me and rend me.  I must pass under his paw and through his teeth, if need
be, to a life with him and beyond him of humility and duty and
quiet-hearted submission to his God and mine.

Then, again, our salvation itself sometimes, our true sanctification,
puts on a lion's skin and not unsuccessfully imitates an angry lion's
roar.  Some saving grace that up till now we have been fatally lacking in
lies under the very lip of that lion we see standing straight in our way.
God in His wisdom so orders our salvation, that we must work out the best
part of it with fear and trembling.  Right before us, just beside us,
standing over us with his heavy paw upon us, is a lion, from under whose
paw and from between whose teeth we must pluck and put on that grace in
which our salvation lies.  Repentance and reformation lie in the way of
that lion; resignation also and humility; the crucifixion of our own
will; the sacrifice of our own heart; in short, everything that is still
lacking but is indispensable to our salvation lies through that den of
lions.  One man here is homeless and loveless; another is childless;
another has a home and children, and much envies the man who has neither;
one has talents there is no scope for; another has the scope, but not the
sufficient talent; another must now spend all his remaining life in a
place where he sees that anger and envy and jealousy and malevolence will
be his roaring lions daily seeking to devour his soul.  There is not a
Christian man or woman in this house whose salvation, worth being called
a salvation, does not lie through such a lion's thicket as that.  Our
Lord Himself was a roaring lion to John the Baptist.  For the Baptist's
salvation lay not in his powerful preaching, but in his being laid aside
from all preaching; not in his crowds increasing, but in his Successor's
crowds increasing and his decreasing.  The Baptist was the greatest born
of woman in that day, not because he was a thundering preacher--any
ordinary mother in Israel might have been his mother in that: but to
decrease sweetly and to steal down quietly to perfect humility and self-
oblivion,--that salvation was reserved for the son of Elisabeth alone.  I
would not like to say Who that is champing and pawing for your blood
right in your present way.  Reverence will not let me say Who it is.
Only, you venture on Him.

'Yes, I shall venture!' said Christian to the two terrified and
retreating men.  Now, every true venture is made against risk and
uncertainty, against anxiety and danger and fear.  And it is just this
that constitutes the nobleness and blessedness of faith.  Faith sells all
for Christ.  Faith risks all for eternal life.  Faith faces all for
salvation.  When it is at the worst, faith still says, Very well; even if
there is no Celestial City anywhere in the world, it is better to die
still seeking it than to live on in the City of Destruction.  Even if
there is no Jesus Christ,--I have read about Him and heard about Him and
pictured Him to myself, till, say what you will, I shall die kissing and
embracing that Divine Image I have in my heart.  Even if there is neither
mercy-seat nor intercession in heaven, I shall henceforth pray without
ceasing.  Far far better for me all the rest of my sinful life to be
clothed with sackcloth and ashes, even if there is no fountain opened in
Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness, and no change of raiment.  Christian
protested that, as for him, lions and all, he had no choice left.  And no
more have we.  He must away somewhere, anywhere, from his past life.  And
so must we.  If all the lions that ever drank blood are to collect upon
his way, let them do so; they shall not all make him turn back.  Why
should they?  What is a whole forest full of lions to a heart and a life
full of sin?  Lions are like lambs compared with sin.  'Good morning!  I
for one must venture.  I shall yet go forward.'  So Mistrust and Timorous
ran down the hill, and Christian went on his way.

So I saw in my dream that he made haste and went forward, that if
possible he might get lodging in the house called Beautiful that stood by
the highway side.  Now, before he had gone far he entered into a very
narrow passage which was about a furlong off from the porter's lodge, and
looking very narrowly before him as he went, he espied two lions in the
way.  Then was he afraid, and thought also to go back, for he thought
that nothing but death was before him.  But the porter at the lodge,
whose name was Watchful, perceiving that Christian made a halt, as if he
would go back, cried unto him, saying, 'Is thy strength so small?  Fear
not the lions, for they are chained, and are only placed there for the
trial of faith where it is, and for the discovery of those who have none.
Keep the midst of the path and no hurt shall come to thee.'  Yes, that is
all we have to do.  Whatever our past life may have been, whatever our
past sins, past errors of judgment, past mistakes and mishaps, whatever
of punishment or chastisement or correction or instruction or
sanctification and growth in grace may be under those lions' skins and
between their teeth for us, all we have got to do at present is to leave
the lions to Him who set them there, and to go on, up to them and past
them, keeping always to the midst of the path.  The lions may roar at us
till they have roared us deaf and blind, but we are far safer in the
midst of that path than we would be in our own bed.  Only let us keep in
the midst of the path.  When their breath is hot and full of blood on our
cheek; when they paw up the blinding earth; when we feel as if their
teeth had closed round our heart,--still, all the more, let us keep in
the midst of the path.  We must sometimes walk on a razor-edge of fear
and straightforwardness; that is the only way left for us now.  But,
then, we have the Divine assurance that on that perilous edge no hurt
shall come to us.  'Temptations,' says our author in another place, 'when
we meet them at first, are as the lion that roared upon Samson; but if we
overcome them, the next time we see them we shall find a nest of honey in
them.'  O God, for grace and sense and imagination to see and understand
and apply all that to our own daily life!  O to be able to take all that
home to-night and see it all there; lions and runaways, venturesome
souls, narrow paths, palaces of beauty, everlasting life and all!  Open
Thou our eyes that we may see the wonderful things that await us in our
own house at home!

   'Things out of hope are compassed oft with venturing.'

So they are; and so they were that day with our terrified pilgrim.  He
made a venture at the supreme moment of his danger, and things that were
quite out of all hope but an hour before were then compassed and ever
after possessed by him.  Make the same venture, then, yourselves
to-night.  Naught venture, naught have.  Your lost soul is not much to
venture, but it is all that Christ at this moment asks of you--that you
leave your lost soul in His hand, and then go straight on from this
moment in the middle of the path: the path, that is, as your case may be,
of purity, humility, submission, resignation, and self-denial.  Keep your
mind and your heart, your eyes and your feet, in the very middle of that
path, and you shall have compassed the House Beautiful before you know.
The lions shall soon be behind you, and the grave and graceful damsels of
the House--Discretion and Prudence and Piety and Charity--shall all be
waiting upon you.




PRUDENCE {1}


   'Let a man examine himself.'--Paul.

Let a man examine himself, says the apostle to the Corinthians, and so
let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.  And thus it was, that
before the pilgrim was invited to sit down at the supper table in the
House Beautiful, quite a number of most pointed and penetrating questions
were put to him by those who had charge of that house and its supper
table.  And thus the time was excellently improved till the table was
spread, while the short delay and the successive exercises whetted to an
extraordinary sharpness the pilgrim's hunger for the supper.  Piety and
Charity, who had joint charge of the house from the Master of the house,
held each a characteristic conversation with Christian, but it was left
to Prudence to hold the most particular discourse with him until supper
was ready, and it is to that so particular discourse that I much wish to
turn your attention to-night.

With great tenderness, but at the same time with the greatest possible
gravity, Prudence asked the pilgrim whether he did not still think
sometimes of the country from whence he had come out.  Yes, he replied;
how could I help thinking continually of that unhappy country and of my
sad and miserable life in it; but, believe me,--or, rather, you cannot
believe me,--with what shame and detestation I always think of my past
life.  My face burns as I now speak of my past life to you, and as I
think what my old companions know and must often say about me.  I detest,
as you cannot possibly understand, every remembrance of my past life, and
I hate and never can forgive myself, who, with mine own hands, so filled
all my past life with shame and self-contempt.  Gently stopping the
remorseful pilgrim's self-accusations about his past life, Prudence asked
him if he had not still with him, and, indeed, within him, some of the
very things that had so destroyed both him and all his past life.  'Yes,'
he honestly and humbly said.  'Yes, but greatly against my will:
especially my inward and sinful cogitations.'  At this Prudence looked on
him with all her deep and soft eyes, for it was to this that she had been
leading the conversation up all the time.  Prudence had a great look of
satisfaction, mingled with love and pity, at the way the pilgrim said
'especially my inward and sinful cogitations.'  Those who stood by and
observed Prudence wondered at her delight in the sad discourse on which
the pilgrim now entered.  But she had her own reasons for her delight in
this particular kind of discourse, and it was seldom that she lighted on
a pilgrim who both understood her questions and responded to them as did
this man now sitting beside her.  Now, my brethren, all parable apart, is
that your religious experience?  Are you full of shame and detestation at
your inward cogitations?  Are you tormented, enslaved, and downright
cursed with your own evil thoughts?  I do not ask whether or no you have
such thoughts always within you.  I do not ask, because I know.  But I
ask, because I would like to make sure that you know what, and the true
nature of what, goes on incessantly in your mind and in your heart.  Do
you, or do you not, spit out your most inward thoughts ten times a day
like poison?  If you do, you are a truly religious man, and if you do
not, you do not yet know the very ABC of true religion, and your dog has
a better errand at the Lord's table than you have.  And if your minister
lets you sit down at the Lord's table without holding from time to time
some particular discourse with you about your sinful thoughts, he is
deceiving and misleading you, besides laying up for himself an awakening
at last to shame and everlasting contempt.  What a mill-stone his
communion roll will be round such a minister's neck!  And how his
congregation will gnash their teeth at him when they see to what his
miserable ministry has brought them!

Let a man examine himself, said Paul.  What about your inward and sinful
cogitations? asked Prudence.  How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee? demanded the bold prophet.  Now, my brethren, what have you
to say to that particular accusation? Do you know what vain thoughts are?
Are you at all aware what multitudes of such thoughts lodge within you?
Do they drive you every day to your knees, and do you blush with shame
when you are alone before God at the fountain of folly that fills your
mind and your heart continually?  The Apostle speaks of vain hopes that
make us ashamed that we ever entertained them.  You have been often so
ashamed, and yet do not such hopes still too easily arise in your heart?
What castles of idiotic folly you still build!  Were a sane man or a
modest woman even to dream such dreams of folly overnight, they would
blush and hide their heads all day at the thought.  Out of a word, out of
a look, out of what was neither a word nor a look intended for you, what
a world of vanity will you build out of it!  The question of Prudence is
not whether or no you are still a born fool at heart, she does not put
unnecessary questions: hers to you is the more pertinent and particular
question, whether, since you left your former life and became a
Christian, you feel every day increasing shame and detestation at
yourself, on account of the vanity of your inward cogitations.  My
brethren, can you satisfy her who is set by her Master to hold particular
discourse with all true Christians before supper?  Can you say with the
Psalmist,--could you tell Prudence where the Psalmist says,--I hate vain
thoughts, but Thy law do I love?  And can you silence her by telling her
that her Master alone knows with what shame you think that He has such a
fool as you are among His people?

Anger, also, sudden and even long-entertained anger, was one of the 'many
failings' of which Christian was so conscious to himself.  His outbursts
of anger at home, he bitterly felt, might well be one of the causes why
his wife and children did not accompany him on his pilgrimage.  And
though he knew his failing in this respect, and was very wary of it, yet
he often failed even when he was most wary.  Now, while anger is largely
a result of our blood and temperament, yet few of us are so well-balanced
and equable in our temperament and so pure and cool in our blood, as
altogether to escape frequent outbursts of anger.  The most happily
constituted and the best governed of us have too much cause to be ashamed
and penitent both before God and our neighbours for our outbursts of
angry passion.  But Prudence is so particular in her discourse before
supper, that she goes far deeper into our anger than our wives and our
children, our servants and our neighbours, can go.  She not only asks if
we stamp out the rising anger of our heart as we would stamp out sparks
of fire in a house full of gunpowder; but she insists on being told what
we think of ourselves when the house of our heart is still so full of
such fire and such gunpowder.  Any man, to call a man, would be humbled
in his own eyes and in his walk before his house at home after an
explosion of anger among them; but he who would satisfy Prudence and sit
beside her at supper, must not only never let his anger kindle, but the
simple secret heat of it, that fire of hell that is hid from all men but
himself in the flint of his own hard and proud heart,--what, asks
Prudence, do you think of that, and of yourself on account of that?  Does
that keep you not only watchful and prayerful, but, what is the best
ground in you of all true watchfulness and prayerfulness, full of secret
shame, self-fear, and self-detestation?  One forenoon table would easily
hold all our communicants if Prudence had the distribution of the tokens.

And, then, we who are true pilgrims, are of all men the most miserable,
on account of that 'failing,' that rankling sting in our hearts, when any
of our friends has more of this world's possessions, honours, and praises
than we have, that pain at our neighbour's pleasure, that sickness at his
health, that hunger for what we see him eat, that thirst for what we see
him drink, that imprisonment of our spirits when we see him set at
liberty, that depression at his exaltation, that sorrow at his joy, and
joy at his sorrow, that evil heart that would have all things to itself.
Yes, said Christian, I am only too conversant with all these sinful
cogitations, but they are all greatly against my will, and might I but
choose mine own thoughts, do you suppose that I would ever think these
things any more?  'The cause is in my will,' said Caesar, on a great
occasion.  But the true Christian, unhappily, cannot say that.  If he
could say that, he would soon say also that the snare is broken and that
his soul has escaped.  And then the cause of all his evil cogitations,
his vain thoughts, his angry feelings, his envious feelings, his
ineradicable covetousness, his hell-rooted and heaven-towering pride, and
his whole evil heart of unbelief would soon be at an end.  'I cannot be
free of sin,' said Thomas Boston, 'but God knows that He would be welcome
to make havoc of my lusts to-night and to make me henceforth a holy man.
I know no lust that I would not be content to part with.  My will bound
hand and foot I desire to lay at His feet.'  Yes: such is the mystery and
depth of sin in the hearts of all God's saints, that far deeper than
their will, far back behind their will, the whole substance and very core
of their hearts is wholly corrupt and enslaved to sin.  And thus it is
that while their renewed and delivered will works out, so far, their
salvation in their walk and conversation among men, the helplessness of
their will in the cleansing and the keeping of their hearts is to the end
the sorrow and the mystery of their sanctification.  To will was present
with Paul, and with Bunyan, and with Boston; but their heart--they could
not with all their keeping keep their heart.  No man can; no man who has
at all tried it can.  'Might I but choose mine own thoughts, I would
choose never to think of these things more: but when I would be doing of
that which is best, that which is worst is with me.'  We can choose
almost all things.  Our will and choice have almost all things at their
disposal.  We can choose our God.  We can choose life or death.  We can
choose heaven or hell.  We can choose our church, our minister, our
books, our companions, our words, our works, and, to some extent, our
inward thoughts, but only to some extent.  We can encourage this or that
thought; we can entertain it and dwell upon it; or we can detect it,
detest it, and cast it out.  But that secret place in our heart where our
thoughts hide and harbour, and out of which they spring so suddenly upon
the mind and the heart, the imagination and the conscience,--of that
secretest of all secret places, God alone is able to say, I search the
heart.  'As for secret thoughts,' says our author, speaking of his own
former religious life, 'I took no notice of them, neither did I
understand what Satan's temptations were, nor how they were to be
withstood and resisted.'  But now all these things are his deepest grief,
as they are ours,--as many of us as have been truly turned in our deepest
hearts to God.

'But,' replied Prudence, 'do you not find sometimes as if those things
were vanquished which at other times are your perplexity?'  'Yes, but
that is but seldom; but they are to me golden hours in which such things
happen to me.'  'Can you remember by what means you find your annoyances
at times as if they were vanquished?'  'Yes, when I think what I saw at
the cross, that will do it; and when I look upon my broidered coat, that
will do it; also, when I look into the roll that I carry in my bosom,
that will do it; and when my thoughts wax warm about whither I am going,
that will do it.'  Yes; and these same things have many a time done it to
ourselves also.  We also, my brethren--let me tell you your own
undeniable experience--we also have such golden hours sometimes, when we
feel as if we should never again have such an evil heart within us.  The
Cross of Christ to us also has done it.  It is of such golden hours that
Isaac Watts sings in his noble hymn:

   'When I survey the wondrous Cross;'

and as often as we sing that hymn with our eyes upon the object, that
will for a time vanquish our worst cogitations.  Also, when we read the
roll that we too carry in our bosom--that is to say, when we go back into
our past life till we see it and feel it all, and till we can think and
speak of nothing else but the sin that abounded in it and the grace that
much more abounded, that has a thousand times given us also golden hours,
even rest from our own evil hearts.  And we also have often made our
hearts too hot for sin to show itself, when we read our hearts deep into
such books as _The Paradiso_, _The Pilgrim's Progress_, _The Saint's
Rest_, _The Serious Call_, _The Religious Affections_, and such like.
These books have often vanquished our annoyances, and given us golden
hours on the earth.  Yes, but that is but seldom.

'Now, what is it,' asked Prudence, as she wound up this so particular
colloquy, 'that makes you so desirous to go to Mount Zion?'

'Why,' replied the pilgrim, and the water stood in his eyes, 'why, there
I hope to see Him alive that did hang dead on the cross; and there I hope
to be rid of all those things that to this day are an annoyance to me;
there they say is no death, and there shall I dwell with such company as
I love best.  For, to tell you truth, I love Him, because by Him I was
eased of my burden, and I am weary of my inward sickness; and I would
fain be where I shall die no more, and for ever with that company that
shall continually cry, Holy, holy, holy.'




CHARITY


   'I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.'--David.

There can be nobody here to-night so stark stupid as to suppose that the
pilgrim had run away from home and left his wife and children to the work-
house.  There have been wiseacres who have found severe fault with John
Bunyan because he made his Puritan pilgrim such a bad husband and such an
unnatural father.  But nobody possessed of a spark of common sense, not
to say religion or literature, would ever commit himself to such an utter
imbecility as that.  John Bunyan's pilgrim, whatever he may have been
before he became a pilgrim, all the time he was a pilgrim, was the most
faithful, affectionate, and solicitous husband in all the country round
about, and the tenderest, the most watchful, and the wisest of fathers.
This pilgrim stayed all the more at home that he went so far away from
home; he accomplished his whole wonderful pilgrimage beside his own forge
and at his own fireside; and he entered the Celestial City amid trumpets
and bells and harps and psalms, while all the time sleeping in his own
humble bed.  The House Beautiful, therefore, to which we have now come in
his company, is not some remote and romantic mansion away up among the
mountains a great many days' journey distant from this poor man's
everyday home.  The House Beautiful was nothing else,--what else better,
what else so good could it be?--than just this Christian man's first
communion Sabbath and his first communion table (first, that is, after
his true conversion from sin to God and his confessed entrance into a new
life), while the country from whence he had come out, and concerning
which both Piety and Prudence catechised him so closely, was just his
former life of open ungodliness and all his evil walk and conversation
while he was as yet living without God and without hope in the world.  The
country on which he confessed that he now looked back with so much shame
and detestation was not England or Bedfordshire, but the wicked life he
had lived in that land and in that shire.  And when Charity asked him as
to whether he was a married man and had a family, she knew quite well
that he was, only she made a pretence of asking him those domestic
questions in order thereby to start the touching conversation.

Beginning, then, at home, as she always began, Charity said to Christian,
'Have you a family?  Are you a married man?'  'I have a wife and four
small children,' answered Christian.  'And why did you not bring them
with you?'  Then Christian wept and said, 'Oh, how willingly would I have
done so, but they were all of them utterly averse to my going on
pilgrimage.'  'But you should have talked to them and have shown them
their danger.'  'So I did,' he replied, 'but I seemed to them as one that
mocked.'  Now, this of talking, and, especially, of talking about
religious things to children, is one of the most difficult things in the
world,--that is, to do it well.  Some people have the happy knack of
talking to their own and to other people's children so as always to
interest and impress them.  But such happy people are few.  Most people
talk at their children whenever they begin to talk to them, and thus,
without knowing it, they nauseate their children with their conversation
altogether.  To respect a little child, to stand in some awe of a little
child, to choose your topics, your opportunities, your neighbourhood,
your moods and his as well as all your words, and always to speak your
sincerest, simplest, most straightforward and absolutely wisest is
indispensable with a child.  Take your mannerisms, your condescensions,
your affectations, your moralisings, and all your insincerities to your
debauched equals, but bring your truest and your best to your child.
Unless you do so, you will be sure to lay yourself open to a look that
will suddenly go through you, and that will swiftly convey to you that
your child sees through you and despises you and your conversation too.
'You should not only have talked to your children of their danger,' said
Charity, 'but you should have shown them their danger.'  Yes, Charity;
but a man must himself see his own and his children's danger too, before
he can show it to them, as well as see it clearly at the time he is
trying to show it to them.  And how many fathers, do you suppose, have
the eyes to see such danger, and how then can they shew such danger to
their children, of all people?  Once get fathers to see dangers or
anything else aright, and then you will not need to tell them how they
are to instruct and impress their children.  Nature herself will then
tell them how to talk to their children, and when Nature teaches, all our
children will immediately and unweariedly listen.

But, especially, said Charity, as your boys grew up--I think you said
that you had four boys and no girls?--well, then, all the more, as they
grew up, you should have taken occasion to talk to them about yourself.
Did your little boy never petition you for a story about yourself; and as
he grew up did you never confide to him what you have never confided to
his mother?  Something, as I was saying, that made you sad when you were
a boy and a rising man, with a sadness your son can still see in you as
you talk to him.  In conversations like that a boy finds out what a
friend he has in his father, and his father from that day has his best
friend in his son.  And then as Matthew grew up and began to out-grow his
brothers and to form friendships out of doors, did you study to talk at
the proper time to him, and on subjects on which you never venture to
talk about to any other boy or man?  You men, Charity went on to say,
live in a world of your own, and though we women are well out of it, yet
we cannot be wholly ignorant that it is there.  And, we may well be
wrong, but we cannot but think that fathers, if not mothers, might safely
tell their men-children at least more than they do tell them of the sure
dangers that lie straight in their way, of the sorrow that men and women
bring on one another, and of what is the destruction of so many cities.
We may well be wrong, for we are only women, but I have told you what we
all think who keep this house and hear the reports and repentances of
pilgrims, both Piety and Prudence and I myself.  And I, for one, largely
agree with the three women.  It is easier said than done.  But the simple
saying of it may perhaps lead some fathers and mothers to think about it,
and to ask whether or no it is desirable and advisable to do it, which of
them is to attempt it, on what occasion, and to what extent.  Christian
by this time had the Slough of Despond with all its history and all that
it contained to tell his eldest son about; he had the wicket gate also
just above the slough, the hill Difficulty, the Interpreter's House, the
place somewhat ascending with a cross standing upon it, and a little
below, in the bottom, a sepulchre, not to speak of her who assaulted
Faithful, whose name was Wanton, and who at one time was like to have
done even that trusty pilgrim a lifelong mischief.  Christian rather
boasted to Charity of his wariness, especially in the matter of his
children's amusements, but Charity seemed to think that he had carried
his wariness into other matters besides amusements, without the best
possible results there either.  I have sometimes thought with her that
among our multitude of congresses and conferences of all kinds of people
and upon all manner of subjects, room and membership might have been
found for a conference of fathers and mothers.  Fathers to give and take
counsel about how to talk to their sons, and mothers to their daughters.
I am much of Charity's mind, that, if more were done at home, and done
with some frankness, for our sons and daughters, there would be fewer
fathers and mothers found sitting at the Lord's table alone.  'You should
have talked to them,' said Charity, with some severity in her tones,
'and, especially, you should have told them of your own sorrow.'

And then, coming still closer up to Christian, Charity asked him whether
he prayed, both before and after he so spoke to his children, that God
would bless what he said to them.  Charity believeth all things, hopeth
all things, but when she saw this man about to sit down all alone at the
supper table, it took Charity all her might to believe that he had both
spoken to his children and at the same time prayed to God for them as he
ought to have done.  Our old ministers used to lay this vow on all
fathers and mothers at the time of baptism, that they were to pray both
with and for their children.  Now, that is a fine formula; it is a most
comprehensive, and, indeed, exhaustive formula.  Both with and for.  And
especially with.  With, at such and such times, on such and such
occasions, and in such and such places.  At those times, say, when your
boy has told a lie, or struck his little brother, or stolen something, or
destroyed something.  To pray with him at such times, and to pray with
him properly, and, if you feel able to do it, and are led to do it, to
tell him something after the prayer about yourself, and your own not-yet-
forgotten boyhood, and your father; it makes a fine time to mix talk and
prayer together in that way.  Charity is not easily provoked, but the
longer she lives and keeps the table in the House Beautiful the more she
is provoked to think that there is far too little prayer among pilgrims;
far too little of all kinds of prayer, but especially prayer with and for
their children.  But hard as it was to tell all the truth at that moment
about Christian's past walk in his house at home, yet he was able with
the simple truth to say that he had indeed prayed both with and for his
children, and that, as they knew and could not but remember, not seldom.
Yes, he said, I did sometimes so pray with my boys, and that too, as you
may believe, with much affection, for you must think that my four boys
were all very dear to me.  And it is my firm belief that all that good
man's boys will come right yet: Matthew and Joseph and James and Samuel
and all.  'With much affection.'  I like that.  I have unbounded faith in
those prayers, both for and with, in which there is much affection.  It
is want of affection, and want of imagination, that shipwrecks so many of
our prayers.  But this man's prayers had both these elements of sure
success in them, and they must come at last to harbour.  At that one word
'with much affection,' this man's closet door flies open and I see the
old pilgrim first alone, and then with his arms round his eldest son's
neck, and both father and son weeping together till they are ashamed to
appear at supper till they have washed their faces and got their most
smiling and everyday looks put on again.  You just wait and see if
Matthew and all the four boys down to the last do not escape into the
Celestial City before the gate is shut.  And when it is asked, Who are
these and whence came they? listen to their song and you will hear those
four happy children saying that their father, when they were yet boys,
both talked with them and prayed for and with them with so much affection
that therefore they are before the throne.

Why, then, with such a father and with such makable boys, why was this
household brought so near everlasting shipwreck?  It was the mother that
did it.  In one word, it was the wife and the mother that did it.  It was
the mistress of the house who wrought the mischief here.  She was a poor
woman, she was a poor man's wife, and one would have thought that she had
little enough temptation to harm upon this present world.  But there it
was, she did hang upon it as much as if she had been the mother of the
finest daughters and the most promising boys in all the town.  Things
like this were from time to time reported to her by her neighbours.  One
fine lady had been heard to say that she would never have for her
tradesman any man who frequented conventicles, who was not content with
the religion of his betters, and who must needs scorn the parish church
and do despite to the saints' days.  Another gossip asked her what she
expected to make of her great family of boys when it was well known that
all the gentry in the neighbourhood but two or three had sworn that they
would never have a hulking Puritan to brush their boots or run their
errands.  And it almost made her husband burn his book and swear that he
would never be seen at another prayer-meeting when his wife so often said
to him that he should never have had children, that he should never have
made her his wife, and that he was not like this when they were first man
and wife.  And in her bitterness she would name this wife or that maid,
and would say, You should have married her.  She would have gone to the
meeting-house with you as often as you wished.  Her sons are far enough
from good service to please you.  'My wife,' he softly said, 'was afraid
of losing the world.  And then, after that, my growing sons were soon
given over, all I could do, to the foolish delights of youth, so that,
what by one thing and what by another, they left me to wander in this
manner alone.'  And I suppose there is scarcely a household among
ourselves where there have not been serious and damaging
misunderstandings between old-fashioned fathers and their young people
about what the old people called the 'foolish delights' of their sons and
daughters.  And in thinking this matter over, I have often been struck
with how Job did when his sons and his daughters were bent upon feasting
and dancing in their eldest brother's house.  The old man did not lay an
interdict upon the entertainment.  He did not take part in it, but
neither did he absolutely forbid it.  If it must be it must be, said the
wise patriarch.  And since I do not know whom they may meet there, or
what they may be tempted to do, I will sanctify them all.  I will not go
up into my bed till I have prayed for all my seven sons and three
daughters, each one of them by their names; and till they come home
safely I will rise every morning and offer burnt-offerings according to
the number of them all.  And do you think that those burnt-offerings and
accompanying intercessions would go for nothing when the great wind came
from the wilderness and smote the four corners of the banqueting-house?
If you cannot banish the love of foolish delights out the hearts of your
sons and daughters, then do not quarrel with them over such things; a
family quarrel in a Christian man's house is surely far worse than a
feast or a dance.  Only, if they must feast and dance and such like, be
you all the more diligent in your exercises at home on their behalf till
they are back again, where, after all, they like best to be, in their
good, kind, liberal, and loving father's house.

Have you a family?  Are you a married man?  Or, if not, do you hope one
day to be?  Then attend betimes to what Charity says to Christian in the
House Beautiful, and not less to what he says back again to her.




SHAME


   'Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me, and of My words, of him shall the
   Son of Man be ashamed, when He shall come in His own glory, and in His
   Father's, and of the holy angels.'--Our Lord.

Shame has not got the attention that it deserves either from our moral
philosophers or from our practical and experimental divines.  And yet it
would well repay both classes of students to attend far more to shame.
For, what really is shame?  Shame is an original instinct planted in our
souls by our Maker, and intended by Him to act as a powerful and pungent
check to our doing of any act that is mean or dishonourable in the eyes
of our fellow-men.  Shame is a kind of social conscience.  Shame is a
secondary sense of sin.  In shame, our imagination becomes a kind of
moral sense.  Shame sets up in our bosom a not undivine tribunal, which
judges us and sentences us in the absence or the silence of nobler and
more awful sanctions and sentences.  But then, as things now are with us,
like all the rest of the machinery of the soul, shame has gone sadly
astray both in its objects and in its operations, till it demands a long,
a severe, and a very noble discipline over himself before any man can
keep shame in its proper place and directed in upon its proper objects.
In the present disorder of our souls, we are all acutely ashamed of many
things that are not the proper objects of shame at all; while, on the
other hand, we feel no shame at all at multitudes of things that are
really most blameworthy, dishonourable, and contemptible.  We are ashamed
of things in our lot and in our circumstances that, if we only knew it,
are our opportunity and our honour; we are ashamed of things that are the
clear will and the immediate dispensation of Almighty God.  And, then, we
feel no shame at all at the most dishonourable things, and that simply
because the men around us are too coarse in their morals and too dull in
their sensibilities to see any shame in such things.  And thus it comes
about that, in the very best of men, their still perverted sense of shame
remains in them a constant snare and a source of temptation.  A man of a
fine nature feels keenly the temptation to shrink from those paths of
truth and duty that expose him to the cruel judgments and the coarse and
scandalising attacks of public and private enemies.  It was in the Valley
of Humiliation that Shame set upon Faithful, and it is a real humiliation
to any man of anything of this pilgrim's fine character and feeling to be
attacked, scoffed at, and held up to blame and opprobrium.  And the finer
and the more affectionate any man's heart and character are, the more he
feels and shrinks from the coarse treatment this world gives to those
whom it has its own reasons to hate and assail.  They had the stocks and
the pillory and the shears in Bunyan's rude and uncivilised day, by means
of which many of the best men of that day were exposed to the insults and
brutalities of the mob.  The newspapers would be the pillory of our day,
were it not that, on the whole, the newspaper press is conducted with
such scrupulous fairness and with a love of truth and justice such that
no man need shrink from the path of duty through fear of insult and
injury.

But it is time to come to the encounter between Shame and Faithful in the
Valley of Humiliation.  Shame, properly speaking, is not one of our
Bunyan gallery of portraits at all.  Shame, at best, is but a kind of
secondary character in this dramatic book.  We do not meet with Shame
directly; we only hear about him through the report of Faithful.  That
first-class pilgrim was almost overcome of Shame, so hot was their
encounter; and it is the extraordinarily feeling, graphic, and realistic
account of their encounter that Faithful gives us that has led me to take
up Shame for our reproof and correction to-night.

Religion altogether, but especially all personal religion, said Shame to
Faithful, is an unmanly business.  There is a certain touch of smallness
and pitifulness, he said, in all religion, but especially in experimental
religion.  It brings a man into junctures and into companionships, and it
puts offices and endurances upon one such as try a man if he has any
greatness of spirit about him at all.  This life on which you are
entering, said Shame, will cost you many a blush before you are done with
it.  You will lay yourself open to many a scoff.  The Puritan religion,
and all the ways of that religious fraternity, are peculiarly open to the
shafts of ridicule.  Now, all that was quite true.  There was no denying
the truth of what Shame said.  And Faithful felt the truth of it all, and
felt it most keenly, as he confessed to Christian.  The blood came into
my face as the fellow spake, and what he said for a time almost beat me
out of the upward way altogether.  But in this dilemma also all true
Christians can fall back, as Faithful fell back, upon the example of
their Master.  In this as in every other experience of temptation and
endurance, our Lord is the forerunner and the example of His people.  Our
Lord was in all points tempted like as we are, and among all His other
temptations He was tempted to be ashamed of His work on earth and of the
life and the death His work led Him into.  He must have often felt
ashamed at the treatment He received during His life of humiliation, as
it is well called; and He must often have felt ashamed of His disciples:
but all that is blotted out by the crowning shame of the cross.  We hang
our worst criminals rather than behead or shoot them, in order to heap up
the utmost possible shame and disgrace upon them, as well as to execute
justice upon them.  And what the hangman's rope is in our day, all that
the cross was in our Lord's day.  And, then, as if the cross itself was
not shame enough, all the circumstances connected with His cross were
planned and carried out so as to heap the utmost possible shame and
humiliation upon His head.  Our prison warders have to watch the
murderers in their cells night and day, lest they should take their own
life in order to escape the hangman's rope; but our Lord, keenly as He
felt His coming shame, said to His horrified disciples, Behold, we go up
to Jerusalem, when the Son of Man shall be mocked, and spitefully
entreated, and spitted on; and they shall scourge Him and put Him to
death.  Do you ever think of your Lord in His shame?  How they made a
fool of Him, as we say.  How they took off His own clothes and put on Him
now a red cloak and now a white; how they put a sword of lath in His
hand, and a crown of thorns on His head; how they bowed the knee before
Him, and asked royal favours from Him; and then how they spat in His
face, and struck Him on the cheek, while the whole house rang with shouts
of laughter.  And, then, the last indignity of man, how they stripped Him
naked and lashed His naked and bleeding body to a whipping-post.  And how
they wagged their heads and put out their tongues at Him when He was on
the tree, and invited Him to come down and preach to them now, and they
would all become His disciples.  Did not Shame say the simple truth when
he warned Faithful that religion had always and from the beginning made
its followers the ridicule of their times?

If you are really going to be a religious man, Shame went on, you will
have to carry about with you a very tender conscience, and a more unmanly
and miserable thing than a tender conscience I cannot conceive.  A tender
conscience will cost you something, let me tell you, to keep it.  If
nothing else, a tender conscience will all your life long expose you to
the mockery and the contempt of all the brave spirits of the time.  That
also is true.  At any rate, a tender conscience will undoubtedly compel
its possessor to face the brave spirits of the time.  There is a good
story told to this present point about Sir Robert Peel, a Prime Minister
of our Queen.  When a young man, Peel was one of the guests at a select
dinner-party in the West-end of London.  And after the ladies had left
the table the conversation of the gentlemen took a turn such that it
could not have taken as long as the ladies were present.  Peel took no
share in the stories or the merriment that went on, and, at last, he rose
up and ordered his carriage, and, with a burning face, left the room.
When he was challenged as to why he had broken up the pleasant party so
soon, he could only reply that his conscience would not let him stay any
longer.  No doubt Peel felt the mocking laughter that he left behind him,
but, as Shame said to Faithful, the tenderness of the young statesman's
conscience compelled him to do as he did.  But we are not all Peels.  And
there are plenty of workshops and offices and dinner-tables in our own
city, where young men who would walk up to the cannon's mouth without
flinching have not had Peel's courage to protest against indecency or to
confess that they belonged to an evangelical church.  If a church is only
sufficiently unevangelical there is no trial of conscience or of courage
in confessing that you belong to it.  But as Shame so ably and honestly
said, that type of religion that creates a tender conscience in its
followers, and sets them to watch their words and their ways, and makes
them tie themselves up from all hectoring liberty--to choose that
religion, and to cleave to it to the end, will make a young man the
ridicule still of all the brave spirits round about him.  Ambitious young
men get promotion and reward every day among us for desertions and
apostasies in religion, for which, if they had been guilty of the like in
war, they would have been shot.  'And so you are a Free Churchman, I am
told.'  That was all that was said.  But the sharp youth understood
without any more words, and he made his choice accordingly; till it is
becoming a positive surprise to find the rising members of certain
professions in certain churches.  The Quakers have a proverb in England
that a family carriage never drives for two generations past the parish
church door.  Of which state of matters Shame showed himself a shrewd
prophet two hundred years ago when he said that but few of the rich and
the mighty and the wise remained long of Faithful's Puritan opinion
unless they were first persuaded to be fools, and to be of a voluntary
fondness to venture the loss of all.

And I will tell you two other things, said sharp-sighted and plain-spoken
Shame, that your present religion will compel you to do if you adhere to
it.  It will compel you from time to time to ask your neighbour's
forgiveness even for petty faults, and it will insist with you that you
make restitution when you have done the weak and the friendless any hurt
or any wrong.  And every manly mind will tell you that life is not worth
having on such humbling terms as those are.  Whatever may be thought
about Shame in other respects, it cannot be denied that he had a sharp
eye for the facts of life, and a shrewd tongue in setting those facts
forth.  He has hit the blot exactly in the matter of our first duty to
our neighbour; he has put his finger on one of the matters where so many
of us, through a false shame, come short.  It costs us a tremendous
struggle with our pride to go to our neighbour and to ask his forgiveness
for a fault, petty fault or other.  Did you ever do it?  When did you do
it last, to whom, and for what?  One Sabbath morning, now many years ago,
I had occasion to urge this elementary evangelical duty on my people
here, and I did it as plainly as I could.  Next day one of my young men,
who is now a devoted and honoured elder, came to me and told me that he
had done that morning what his conscience yesterday told him in the
church to do.  He had gone to a neighbour's place of business, had asked
for an interview, and had begged his neighbour's pardon.  I am sure
neither of those two men have forgotten that moment, and the thought of
it has often since nerved me to speak plainly about some of their most
unwelcome duties to my people.  Shame, no doubt, pulled back my noble
friend's hand when it was on the office bell, but, like Faithful in the
text, he shook him out of his company and went in.  I spoke of the
remarkable justice of the newspaper press in the opening of these
remarks.  And it so happens that, as I lay down my pen to rest my hand
after writing this sentence and lift a London evening paper, I read this
editorial note, set within the well-known brackets at the end of an
indignant and expostulatory letter: ['Our correspondent's complaint is
just.  The paragraph imputing bad motives should not have been
admitted.']  I have no doubt that editor felt some shame as he handed
that apologetic note to the printer.  But not to speak of any other
recognition and recompense, he has the recompense of the recognition of
all honourable-minded men who have read that honourable admission and
apology.

Shame was quite right in his scoff about restitution also.  For
restitution rings like a trumpet tone through the whole of the law of
Moses, and then the New Testament republishes that law if only in the
exquisite story of Zaccheus.  And, indeed, take it altogether, I do not
know where to find in the same space a finer vindication of Puritan
pulpit ethics than just in this taunting and terrifying attack on
Faithful.  There is no better test of true religion both as it is
preached and practised than just to ask for and to grant forgiveness, and
to offer and accept restitution.  Now, does your public and private life
defend and adorn your minister's pulpit in these two so practical
matters?  Could your minister point to you as a proof of the ethics of
evangelical teaching?  Can any one in this city speak up in defence of
your church and thus protest: 'Say what you like about that church and
its ministers, all I can say is, that its members know how to make an
apology; as, also, how to pay back with interest what they at one time
damaged or defrauded'?  Can any old creditor's widow or orphan stand up
for our doctrine and defend our discipline pointing to you?  If you go on
to be a Puritan, said Shame to Faithful, you will have to ask your
neighbour's forgiveness even for petty faults, and you will have to make
restitution with usury where you have taken anything from any one, and
how will you like that?

And what did you say to all this, my brother?  Say?  I could not tell
what to say at the first.  I felt my blood coming up into my face at some
of the things that Shame said and threatened.  But, at last, I began to
consider that that which is highly esteemed among men is often had in
abomination with God.  And I said to myself again, Shame tells me what
men do and what men think, but he has told me nothing about what He
thinks with Whom I shall soon have alone to do.  Therefore, thought I,
what God thinks and says is wisest and best, let all the men of the world
say what they will.  Let all false shame, then, depart from my heart, for
how else shall I look upon my Lord, and how shall He look upon me at His
coming?




TALKATIVE


   'A man full of talk.'--Zophar.

   'Let thy words be few.'--The Preacher.

   'The soul of religion is the practick part.'--Christian.

Since we all have a tongue, and since so much of our time is taken up
with talk, a simple catalogue of the sins of the tongue is enough to
terrify us.  The sins of the tongue take up a much larger space in the
Bible than we would believe till we have begun to suffer from other men's
tongues and especially from our own.  The Bible speaks a great deal more
and a great deal plainer about the sins of the tongue than any of our
pulpits dare to do.  In the Psalms alone you would think that the
psalmists scarcely suffer from anything else worth speaking about but the
evil tongues of their friends and of their enemies.  The Book of Proverbs
also is full of the same lashing scourge.  And James the Just, in a
passage of terrible truth and power, tells us that we are already as good
as perfect men if we can bridle our tongue; and that, on the other hand,
if we do not bridle our tongue, all our seeming to be religious is a sham
and a self-deception,--that man's religion is vain.

With many men and many women great talkativeness is a matter of simple
temperament and mental constitution.  And a talkative habit would be a
childlike and an innocent habit if the heart of talker and the hearts of
those to whom he talks so much were only full of truth and love.  But our
hearts and our neighbours' hearts being what they are, in the multitude
of words there wanteth not sin.  So much of our talk is about our absent
neighbours, and there are so many misunderstandings, prejudices,
ambitions, competitions, oppositions, and all kinds of cross-interests
between us and our absent neighbours, that we cannot long talk about them
till our hearts have run our tongues into all manner of trespass.  Bishop
Butler discourses on the great dangers that beset a talkative temperament
with almost more than all his usual sagacity, seriousness, and depth.  And
those who care to see how the greatest of our modern moralists deals with
their besetting sin should lose no time in possessing and mastering
Butler's great discourse.  It is a truly golden discourse, and it ought
to be read at least once a month by all the men and all the women who
have tongues in their heads.  Bishop Butler points out to his offending
readers, in a way they can never forget, the certain mischief they do to
themselves and to other people just by talking too much.  But there are
far worse sins that our tongues fall into than the bad enough sins that
spring out of impertinent and unrestrained loquacity.  There are many
times when our talk, long or short, is already simple and downright evil.
It is ten to one, it is a hundred to one, that you do not know and would
not believe how much you fall every day and in every conversation into
one or other of the sins of the tongue.  If you would only begin to see
and accept this, that every time you speak or hear about your absent
neighbour what you would not like him to speak or hear about you, you are
in that a talebearer, a slanderer, a backbiter, or a liar,--when you
begin to see and admit that about yourself, you will not wonder at what
the Bible says with such bitter indignation about the diabolical sins of
the tongue.  If you would just begin to-night to watch yourselves--on the
way home from church, at home after the day is over, to-morrow morning
when the letters and the papers are opened, and so on,--how
instinctively, incessantly, irrepressibly you speak about the absent in a
way you would be astounded and horrified to be told they were at that
moment speaking about you, then you would soon be wiser than all your
teachers in the sins and in the government of the tongue.  And you would
seven times every day pluck out your tongue before God till He gives it
back to you clean and kind in that land where all men shall love their
neighbours, present and absent, as themselves.

Take detraction for an example, one of the commonest, and, surely, one of
the most detestable of the sins of the tongue.  And the etymology here,
as in this whole region, is most instructive and most impressive.  In
detraction you _draw away_ something from your neighbour that is most
precious and most dear to him.  In detraction you are a thief, and a
thief of the falsest and wickedest kind.  For your neighbour's purse is
trash, while his good name is far more precious to him than all his gold.
Some one praises your neighbour in your hearing, his talents, his
performances, his character, his motives, or something else that belongs
to your neighbour.  Some one does that in your hearing who either does
not know you, or who wishes to torture and expose you, and you fall
straight into the snare thus set for you, and begin at once to belittle,
depreciate, detract from, and run down your neighbour, who has been too
much praised for your peace of mind and your self-control.  You insinuate
something to his disadvantage and dishonour.  You quote some authority
you have heard to his hurt.  And so on past all our power to picture you.
For detraction has a thousand devices taught to it by the master of all
such devices, wherewith to drag down and defile the great and the good.
But with all you can say or do, you cannot for many days get out of your
mind the heart-poisoning praise you heard spoken of your envied
neighbour.  Never praise any potter's pots in the hearing of another
potter, said the author of the _Nicomachean Ethics_.  Aristotle said
potter's pots, but he really all the time was thinking of a philosopher's
books; only he said potter's pots to draw off his readers' attention from
himself.  Now, always remember that ancient and wise advice.  Take care
how you praise a potter's pots, a philosopher's books, a woman's beauty,
a speaker's speech, a preacher's sermon to another potter, philosopher,
woman, speaker, or preacher; unless, indeed, you maliciously wish
secretly to torture them, or publicly to expose them, or, if their
sanctification is begun, to sanctify them to their most inward and
spiritual sanctification.

Backbiting, again, would seem at first sight to be a sin of the teeth
rather than of the tongue, only, no sharpest tooth can tear you when your
back is turned like your neighbour's evil tongue.  Pascal has many
dreadful things about the corruption and misery of man, but he has
nothing that strikes its terrible barb deeper into all our consciences
than this, that if all our friends only knew what we have said about them
behind their back, we would not have four friends in all the world.
Neither we would.  I know I would not have one.  How many would you have?
And who would they be?  You cannot name them.  I defy you to name them.
They do not exist.  The tongue can no man tame.

'Giving of characters' also takes up a large part of our everyday
conversation.  We cannot well help characterising, describing, and
estimating one another.  But, as far as possible, when we see the
conversation again approaching that dangerous subject, we should call to
mind our past remorse; we should suppose our absent neighbour present; we
should imagine him in our place and ourselves in his place, and so turn
the rising talk into another channel.  For, the truth is, few of us are
able to do justice to our neighbour when we begin to discuss and describe
him.  Generosity in our talk is far easier for us than justice.  It was
this incessant giving of characters that our Lord had in His eye when He
said in His Sermon on the Mount, Judge not.  But our Lord might as well
never have uttered that warning word for all the attention we give it.
For we go on judging one another and sentencing one another as if we were
entirely and in all things blameless ourselves, and as if God had set us
up in our blamelessness in His seat of judgment over all our fellows.  How
seldom do we hear any one say in a public debate or in a private
conversation, I don't know; or, It is no matter of mine; or, I feel that
I am not in possession of all the facts; or, It may be so, but I must not
judge.  We never hear such things as these said.  No one pays the least
attention to the Preacher on the Mount.  And if any one says to us, I
must not judge, we never forgive him, because his humility and his
obedience so condemn all our ill-formed, prejudiced, rash, and
ill-natured judgments of our neighbour.  Since, therefore, so Butler sums
up, it is so hard for us to enter on our neighbour's character without
offending the law of Christ, we should learn to decline that kind of
conversation altogether, and determine to get over that strong
inclination most of us have, to be continually talking about the
concerns, the behaviour, and the deserts of our neighbours.

Now, it was all those vices of the tongue in full outbreak in the day of
James the Just that made that apostle, half in sorrow, half in anger,
demand of all his readers that they should henceforth begin to bridle
their tongues.  And, like all that most practical apostle's counsels,
that is a most impressive and memorable commandment.  For, it is well
known that all sane men who either ride on or drive unruly horses, take
good care to bridle their horses well before they bring them out of their
stable door.  And then they keep their bridle-hand firm closed on the
bridle-rein till their horses are back in the stable again.  Especially
and particularly they keep a close eye and a firm hand on their horse's
bridle on all steep inclines and at all sharp angles and sudden turns in
the road; when sudden trains are passing and when stray dogs are barking.
If the rider or the driver of a horse did not look at nothing else but
the bridle of his horse, both he and his horse under him would soon be in
the ditch,--as so many of us are at the present moment because we have an
untamed tongue in our mouth on which we have not yet begun to put the
bridle of truth and justice and brotherly love.  Indeed, such woe and
misery has an untamed tongue wrought in other churches and in other and
more serious ages than ours, that special religious brotherhoods have
been banded together just on the special and strict engagement that they
would above all things put a bridle on their tongues.  'What are the
chief cares of a young convert?' asked such a convert at an aged
Carthusian.  'I said I will take heed to my ways that I trespass not with
my tongue,' replied the saintly father.  'Say no more for the present,'
interrupted the youthful beginner; 'I will go home and practise that, and
will come again when I have performed it.'

Now, whatever faults that tall man had who took up so much of Faithful's
time and attention, he was a saint compared with the men and the women
who have just passed before us.  Talkative, as John Bunyan so scornfully
names that tall man, though he undoubtedly takes up too much time and too
much space in Bunyan's book, was not a busybody in other men's matters at
any rate.  Nobody could call him a detractor or a backbiter or a
talebearer or a liar.  Christian knew him well, and had known him long,
but Christian was not afraid to leave him alone with Faithful.  We all
know men we feel it unsafe to leave long alone with our friends.  We feel
sure that they will be talking about us, and that to our hurt, as soon as
our backs are about.  But to give that tall man his due, he was not given
with all his talk to tale-bearing or scandal or detraction.  Had he been
guilty of any of these things, Faithful would soon have found him out,
and would have left him to go to the Celestial City by himself.  But,
after talking for half a day with Talkative, instead of finding out
anything wrong in the tall man's talk, Faithful was so taken and so
struck with it, that he stepped across to Christian and said, 'What a
brave companion we have got!  Surely this man will make a most excellent
pilgrim!'  'So I once thought too,' said Christian, 'till I went to live
beside him, and have to do with him in the business of daily life.'  Yes,
it is near neighbourhood and the business of everyday life that try a
talking man.  If you go to a meeting for prayer, and hear some men
praying and speaking on religious subjects, you would say to yourself,
What a good man that is, and how happy must his wife and children and
servants and neighbours be with such an example always before them, and
with such an intercessor for them always with God!  But if you were to go
home with that so devotional man, and try to do business with him, and
were compelled to cross him and go against him, you would find out why
Christian smiled so when Faithful was so full of Talkative's praises.

But of all the religiously-loquacious men of our day, your ministers are
the chief.  For your ministers must talk in public, and that often and at
great length, whether they are truly religious men at home or no.  It is
their calling to talk to you unceasingly about religious matters.  You
chose them to be your ministers because they could talk well.  You would
not put up with a minister who could not talk well on religious things.
You estimate them by their talk.  You praise and pay them by their talk.
And if they are to live, talk incessantly to you about religion they
must, and they do.  If any other man among us is not a religious man,
well, then, he can at least hold his tongue.  There is no necessity laid
on him to speak in public about things that he does not practise at home.
But we hard-bested ministers must go on speaking continually about the
most solemn things.  And if we are not extraordinarily watchful over
ourselves, and extraordinarily and increasingly conscientious, if we are
not steadily growing in inwardness and insight and depth and real
spirituality of mind and life ourselves, we cannot escape,--our calling
in life will not let us escape,--becoming as sounding brass.  There is an
awful sentence in Butler that should be written in letters of fire in
every minister's conscience, to the effect that continually going over
religion in talk and making fine pictures of it in the pulpit, creates a
professional insensibility to personal religion that is the everlasting
ruin of multitudes of eloquent ministers.  That is true.  We ministers
all feel that to be true.  Our miserable experience tells us that is only
too true of ourselves.  What a flood of demoralising talk has been poured
out from the pulpits of this one city to-day!--demoralising to preachers
and to hearers both, because not intended to be put in practice.  How few
of those who have talked and heard talk all this day about divine truth
and human duty, have made the least beginning or the least resolve to
live as they have spoken and heard!  And, yet, all will in words again
admit that the soul of religion is the practick part, and that the tongue
without the heart and the life is but death and corruption.

Let us, then, this very night begin to do something practical after all
this talk about talk.  And let us all begin to do something in the direct
line of our present talk.  What a noble congregation of evangelical
Carthusians that would make us if we all put a bridle on our tongue to-
night before we left this house.  For we all have neighbours, friends,
enemies, against whom we every day sin with our unbridled tongue.  We all
have acquaintances we are ashamed to meet, we have been so unkind and so
unjust to them with our tongue.  We hang down our head when they shake
our hand.  Yes, we know the men quite well of whom Pascal speaks.  We
know many men who would never speak to us again if they only knew how,
and how often, we have spoken about them behind their back.  Well, let us
sin against them, and against ourselves, and against our Master's command
and example no more.  Let this night and this lecture on Talkative and
his kindred see the last of our sin against our ill-used neighbour.  Let
us promise God and our own consciences to-night, that we shall all this
week put on a bridle about that man, and about that subject, and in that
place, and in that company.  Let us say, God helping me, I shall for all
this week not speak about that man at all, anything either good or bad,
nor on that subject, nor will I let the conversation turn into that
channel at all if I can help it.  And God will surely help us, till,
after weeks and years of such prayer and such practice, we shall by slow
degrees, and after many defeats, be able to say with the Psalmist, 'I
will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue.  I will keep my
mouth with a bridle.  I will be dumb with silence.  I will hold my peace
even from good.'




JUDGE HATE-GOOD


   'Hear, O heads of Jacob, and ye princes of the house of Israel . . .
   who hate the good and love the evil.'--Micah.

The portrait of Judge Hate-good in _The Pilgrim's Progress_ is but a poor
replica, as our artists say, of the portrait of Judge Jeffreys in our
English history books.  I am sure you have often read, with astonishment
at Bunyan's literary power, his wonderful account of the trial of
Faithful, when, as Bunyan says, he was brought forth to his trial in
order to his condemnation.  We have the whole ecclesiastical
jurisprudence of Charles and James Stuart put before us in that single
satirical sentence.  But, powerful as Bunyan's whole picture of Judge
Hate-good's court is, it is a tame and a poor picture compared with what
all the historians tell us of the injustice and cruelty of the court of
Judge Jeffreys.  Macaulay's portrait of the Lord Chief Justice of England
for ferocity and fiendishness beats out of sight Bunyan's picture of that
judge who keeps Satan's own seal in Bunyan's Book.  Jeffreys was bred for
his future work at the bar of the Old Bailey, a bar already proverbial
for the licence of its tongue and for the coarseness of its cases.
Jeffreys served his apprenticeship for the service that our two last
Stuarts had in reserve for him so well, that he soon became, so his
beggared biographer describes him, the most consummate bully that ever
disgraced an English bench.  The boldest impudence when he was a young
advocate, and the most brutal ferocity when he was an old judge, sat
equally secure on the brazen forehead of George Jeffreys.  The real and
undoubted ability and scholarship of Jeffreys only made his wickedness
the more awful, and his whole career the greater curse both to those
whose tool he was, and to those whose blood he drank daily.  Jeffreys
drank brandy and sang lewd songs all night, and he drank blood and cursed
and swore on the bench all day.  Just imagine the state of our English
courts when a judge could thus assail a poor wretch of a woman after
passing a cruel sentence upon her.  'Hangman,' shouted the ermined brute,
'Hangman, pay particular attention to this lady.  Scourge her soundly,
man.  Scourge her till the blood runs.  It is the Christmas season; a
cold season for madam to strip in.  See, therefore, man, that you warm
her shoulders thoroughly.'  And you all know who Richard Baxter was.  You
have all read his seraphic book, _The Saints' Rest_.  Well, besides being
the Richard Baxter so well known to our saintly fathers and mothers, he
was also, and he was emphatically, the peace-maker of the Puritan party.
Baxter's political principles were of the most temperate and
conciliatory, and indeed, almost royalist kind.  He was a man of strong
passions, indeed, but all the strength and heat of his passions ran out
into his hatred of sin and his love of holiness, and an unsparing and
consuming care for the souls of his people.  Very Faithful himself stood
before the bar of Judge Jeffreys in the person of Richard Baxter.  It
took all the barefaced falsehood and scandalous injustice of the crown
prosecutors to draw out the sham indictment that was read out in court
against inoffensive Richard Baxter.  But what was lacking in the charge
of the crown was soon made up by the abominable scurrility of the judge.
'You are a schismatical knave,' roared out Jeffreys, as soon as Baxter
was brought into court.  'You are an old hypocritical villain.'  And
then, clasping his hands and turning up his eyes, he sang through his
nose: 'O Lord, we are Thy peculiar people: we are Thy dear and only
people.'  'You old blockhead,' he again roared out, 'I will have you
whipped through the city at the tail of the cart.  By the grace of God I
will look after you, Richard.'  And the tiger would have been as good as
his word had not an overpowering sense of shame compelled the other
judges to protest and get Baxter's inhuman sentence commuted to fine and
imprisonment.  And so on, and so on.  But it was Jeffreys' 'Western
Circuit,' as it was called, that filled up the cup of his infamy--an
infamy, say the historians, that will last as long as the language and
the history of England last.  The only parallel to it is the infamy of a
royal house and a royal court that could welcome home and promote to
honour such a detestable miscreant as Jeffreys was.  But the slaughter in
Somerset was only over in order that a similar slaughter in London might
begin.  Let those who have a stomach for more blood and tears follow out
the hell upon earth that James Stuart and George Jeffreys together let
loose on the best life of England in their now fast-shortening day.  Was
Judge Jeffreys, some of you will ask me, born and bred in hell?  Was the
devil his father, and original sin his mother?  Or, was he not the very
devil himself come to earth for a season in English flesh?  No, my
brethren, not so.  Judge Jeffreys was one of ourselves.  Little George
Jeffreys was born and brought up in a happy English home.  He was
baptised and confirmed in an English church.  He took honours in an
English university.  He ate dinners, was called to the bar, conducted
cases, and took silk in an English court of justice.  And in the ripeness
of his years and of his services, he wore the honourable ermine and sat
upon the envied wool-sack of an English sovereign.  It would have been
far less awful and far less alarming to think of, had Judge Jeffreys
been, as you supposed, a pure devil let loose on the Church of Christ and
the awakening liberty of England.  But some innocent soul will ask me
next whether there has ever been any other monster on the face of the
earth like Judge Jeffreys; and whether by any possibility there are any
such monsters anywhere in our own day.  Yes, truth compels me to reply.
Yes, there are, plenty, too many.  Only their environment, nowadays, as
our naturalists say, does not permit them to grow to such strength and
dimensions as those of James Stuart, and George Jeffreys, his favourite
judge.  At the same time, be not deceived by your own deceitful heart,
nor by any other deceiver's smooth speeches.  Judge Jeffreys is in
yourself, only circumstances have not yet let him fully show himself in
you.  Still, if you look close enough and deep enough into your own
hearts, you will see the same wicked light glancing sometimes there that
used so to terrify Judge Jeffreys' prisoners when they saw it in his
wicked eyes.  If you lay your ear close enough to your own heart, you
will sometimes hear something of that same hiss with which that human
serpent sentenced to torture and to death the men and the women who would
not submit to his command.  The same savage laughter also will sometimes
all but escape your lips as you think of how your enemy has been made to
suffer in body and in estate.  O yes, the very same hell-broth that ran
for blood in Judge Jeffreys' heart is in all our hearts also; and those
who have the least of its poison left in their hearts will be the
foremost to confess its presence, and to hate and condemn and bewail
themselves on account of its terrible dregs.

HATE-GOOD is an awful enough name for any human being to bear.  Those who
really know what goodness is, and then, what hatred is,--they will feel
how awful a thing it is for any man to hate goodness.  But there is
something among us sinful men far more awful than even that, and that is
to hate God.  The carnal mind, writes the apostle Paul to the Romans--and
it is surely the most terrible sentence that often terrible enough
apostle ever wrote--the carnal mind is enmity against God.  And Dr. John
Owen annotating on that sentence is equally terrible.  The carnal mind,
he says, has 'chosen a great enemy indeed.'  And having mentioned John
Owen, will you let me once more beseech all students of divinity, that
is, all students, amongst other things, of the desperate depravity of the
human heart, to read John Owen's sixth volume till they have it by
heart,--by a broken, believing heart.  Owen _On Indwelling Sin_ is one of
the greatest works of the great Puritan period.  It is a really great,
and as we nowadays say, a truly scientific work to the bargain.  But all
that by the way.  Yes, this carnal heart that is still left in every one
of us has chosen a great enemy, and it would need both strong and
faithful allies in order to fight him.  The hatred that His Son also met
with when He was in this world is one of the most hateful pages of this
hateful world's hateful history.  He knew His own heart towards His
enemies, and thus He was able to say to the Searcher of Hearts with His
dying breath, They hated Me without a cause.  Truly our hatred is hottest
when it is most unjust.

'Look to yourselves,' wrote the apostle John to the elect lady and her
children.  Yes; let us all look sharply and suspiciously to ourselves in
this matter now in hand, and we shall not need John Owen nor anybody else
to discover to us the hatred and the hatefulness of our own hearts.  Look
to yourselves, and the work of the law will soon be fulfilled in you.
_Homo homini lupus_, taught an old philosopher who had studied moral
philosophy not in books so much as in his own heart.  'Is no man
naturally good?' asked innocent Lady Macleod of Dunvegan Castle at her
guest, Dr. Samuel Johnson.  'No, madam, no more than a wolf.'  That is
quite past all question with all those who either in natural morals or in
revealed religion look to and know and characterise themselves.  We have
all an inborn propensity to dislike one another, and a very small
provocation will suddenly blow that banked-up furnace into a flame.  It
is ever present with me, says self-examining Paul, and hence its so
sudden and so destructive outbreaks.  So the written or the printed name
of our enemy, his image in our mind, his passing step, his figure out of
the window; his wife, his child, his carriage, his cart in the street,
anything, everything will stir up our heart at the man we do not like.
And the whole of our so honest Bible, our present text, and the
illustrations of our text in Judge Jeffreys' and Judge Hate-good's
courts, all go to show that the better a man is the more sometimes will
we hate him.  Good men, better men than we are, men who in public life
and in private life pursue great and good ends, of necessity cross and go
counter to us in our pursuit of small, selfish, evil ends, and of
necessity we hate them.  For, cross a selfish sinner sufficiently and you
have a very devil--as many good men, if they knew it, have in us.  Again,
good men who come into contact with us cannot help seeing our bad lives,
our tempers, our selfishness, our public and private vices; and we see
that they see us, and we cannot love those whose averted eye so goes to
our conscience.  And not only in the hatred of good men, but if you know
of God how to watch yourselves, you will find yourselves out every day
also in the hatred of good movements, good causes, good institutions, and
good works.  There are doctors who would far rather hear of their rival's
patient expiring in his hands than hear their rival's success trumpeted
through all the town.  There are ministers, also, who would rather that
the masses of the city and the country sank yet deeper into improvidence
and drink and neglect of ordinances than that they were rescued by any
other church than their own.  They hate to hear of the successes of
another church.  There are party politicians who would rather that the
ship of the state ran on the rocks both in her home and her foreign
policy than that the opposite party should steer her amid a nation's
cheers into harbour.  And so of good news.  I will stake the divine truth
of this evening's Scriptures, and of their historical and imaginative
illustrations, on the feelings, if you know how to observe, detect,
characterise, and confess them,--the feelings, I say, that will rise in
your heart to-morrow morning when you read what is good news to other
men, even to good men, and to the families and family interests of good
men.  It does not matter one atom into what profession, office,
occupation, interest you track the corrupt heart of man, as sure as a
substance casts a shadow, so sure will you find your own selfish heart
hating goodness when the goodness does not serve or flatter you.

Now, though they will never be many, yet there must be some men among us,
one here and another there, who have so looked at and found out
themselves.  I can well believe that some men here came up to this house
to-night trembling in their heart all the way.  They felt the very
advertisement go through them like a knife: they felt that they were
summoned up hither almost by name as to judgment.  For they feel every
day, though they have never told their feelings to any, that they have
this horrible heart deep-seated within them to love evil and to hate
good.  They gnash their teeth at themselves as they catch themselves
rejoicing in iniquity.  They feel their hearts expanding, and they know
that their faces shine, when you tell them evil tidings.  They sicken and
lose heart and sit solitary when you carry to them a good report.  They
feel as John Bunyan felt, that no one but the devil can equal them in
pollution of heart.  And their wonder sometimes is that the Searcher of
Hearts does not drive them down where devils dwell and hate God and man
and one another.  They look around them when the penitential psalm is
being sung, and they smile bitterly to themselves.  O people of God, they
say, you do not know what you are saying.  Leave that psalm to me.  I can
sing it.  I can tell to God what He knows about sin, and about sin in the
heart.  Stand away back from me, that man says, for I am a leper.  The
chief of sinners is beside you.  A whited sepulchre stands open beside
you.--Stop now, O hating and hateful man, and let me speak for a single
moment before we separate.  Before you say any more about yourself, and
before you leave the house of God, lift up your broken heart and with all
your might bless God that He has opened your eyes and taught you how to
look at yourself and how to hate yourself.  There are hundreds of honest
Christian men and women in this house at this moment to whom God has not
done as, in His free grace, He has done to you.  For He has not only
begun a good work in you, but He has begun that special and peculiar work
which, when it goes on to perfection, makes a great and an eminent saint
of God.  To know your own heart as you evidently know it, and to hate it
as you say you hate it, and to hunger after a clean heart as, with every
breath, you hunger,--all that, if you would only believe it, sets you, or
will yet set you, high up among the people of God.  Be comforted; it is
your bounden duty to be comforted.  God deserves it at your hands that
you be more than comforted amid such unmistakable signs of His eminent
grace to you.  And be patient under your exceptional sanctification.  Rome
was not built in a day.  You cannot reverse the awful law of your
sanctification.  You cannot be saved by Jesus Christ and His Holy Spirit
without seeing yourself, and you cannot see yourself without hating
yourself, and you cannot begin to hate yourself without all your hatred
henceforth turning against yourself.  You are deep in the red-hot bosom
of the refiner's fire.  And when you are once sufficiently tried by the
Divine Refiner of Souls, He will in His own good time and way bring you
out as gold.  Be patient, therefore, till the coming of the Lord.  And
say continually amid all your increasing knowledge of yourself, and amid
all your increasing hatred of yourself, 'As for me, I will behold Thy
face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I awake with Thy
likeness.'




FAITHFUL IN VANITY FAIR {2}


   'Be thou faithful.'--Rev. 2. 10.

The breadth of John Bunyan's mind, the largeness of his heart, and the
tolerance of his temper all come excellently out in his fine portrait of
Faithful.  New beginners in personal religion, when they first take up
_The Pilgrim's Progress_ in earnest, always try to find out something in
themselves that shall somewhat correspond to the recorded experience of
Christian, the chief pilgrim.  And they are afraid that all is not right
with them unless they, like him, have had, to begin with, a heavy burden
on their back.  They look for something in their religious life that
shall answer to the Slough of Despond also, to the Hill Difficulty, to
the House Beautiful, and, especially and indispensably, to the place
somewhat ascending with a cross upon it and an open sepulchre beneath it.
And because they cannot always find all these things in themselves in the
exact order and in the full power in which they are told of Christian in
Bunyan's book, they begin to have doubts about themselves as to whether
they are true pilgrims at all.  But here is Faithful, with whom Christian
held such sweet and confidential discourse, and yet he had come through
not a single one of all these things.  The two pilgrims had come from the
same City of Destruction indeed, and they had met at the gate of Vanity
and passed through Vanity Fair together, but, till they embraced one
another again in the Celestial City, that was absolutely all the
experience they had in common.  Faithful had never had any such burden on
his back as that was which had for so long crushed Christian to the
earth.  And the all but complete absence of such a burden may have helped
to let Faithful get over the Slough of Despond dry shod.  He had the good
lot to escape Sinai also and the Hill Difficulty, and his passing by the
House Beautiful and not making the acquaintance of Discretion and
Prudence and Charity may have had something to do with the fact that one
named Wanton had like to have done him such a mischief.  His remarkable
experiences, however, with Adam the First, with Moses, and then with the
Man with holes in His hands, all that makes up a page in Faithful's
autobiography we could ill have spared.  His encounter with Shame also,
and soon afterwards with Talkative, are classical passages in his so
individual history.  Altogether, it would be almost impossible for us to
imagine two pilgrims talking so heartily together, and yet so completely
unlike one another.  A very important lesson surely as to how we should
abstain from measuring other men by ourselves, as well as ourselves by
other men; an excellent lesson also as to how we should learn to allow
for all possible varieties among good men, both in their opinions, their
experiences, and their attainments.  True Puritan as the author of _The
Pilgrim's Progress_ is, he is no Procrustes.  He does not cut down all
his pilgrims to one size, nor does he clip them all into one pattern.
They are all thinking men, but they are not all men of one way of
thinking.  John Bunyan is as fresh as Nature herself, and as free and
full as Holy Scripture herself in the variety, in the individuality, and
even in the idiosyncrasy of his spiritual portrait gallery.

Vanity Fair is one of John Bunyan's universally-admitted masterpieces.
The very name of the fair is one of his happiest strokes.  Thackeray's
famous book owes half its popularity to the happy name he borrowed from
John Bunyan.  Thackeray's author's heart must have leaped in his bosom
when Vanity Fair struck him as a title for his great satire.  'Then I saw
in my dream that when they were got out of the wilderness they presently
saw a town before them, and the name of that town is Vanity, and at that
town there is a fair kept called Vanity Fair.  The fair is kept all the
year long, and it beareth the name of Vanity Fair, because the town where
it is kept is lighter than Vanity.  And, also, because all that is sold
there is vanity.  As is the saying of the wise, All that cometh is
vanity.  The fair is no new erected business, but a thing of ancient
standing: I will show you the original of it.  About five thousand years
ago there were pilgrims walking to the Celestial City, as these two
honest persons now are, and Beelzebub, Apollyon, and Legion, with their
companions, perceiving that by the path that the pilgrims made, that
their way to the city lay through this town of Vanity, they contrived
there to set up a fair: a fair wherein should be sold all sorts of
vanity, and that it should last all the year long.  Therefore at this
fair are all such merchandise sold as houses, lands, trades, places,
honours, preferments, titles, countries, kingdoms, pleasures, and
delights of all sorts, as wives, husbands, children, masters, servants,
lives, blood, bodies, souls, silver, gold, precious stones, and what not.
And, moreover, at this fair at all times there is to be seen juggling,
cheats, games, plays, fools, apes, knaves, and rogues, and that of every
kind.'  And then our author goes on to tell us the names of the various
streets and rows where such and such wares are vended.  And from that
again he goes on to tell how the Prince of princes Himself went at one
time through this same fair, and that upon a fair day too, and how the
lord of the fair himself came and took Him from street to street to try
to get Him induced to cheapen and buy some of the vain merchandise.  But
as it turned out He had no mind to the merchandise in question, and He
therefore passed through the town without laying out so much as one
farthing upon its vanities.  The fair, therefore, you will see, is of
long standing and a very great fair.  Now, our two pilgrims had heard of
all that, they remembered also what Evangelist had told them about the
fair, and so they buttoned up their pockets and pushed through the booths
in the hope of getting out at the upper gate before any one had time to
speak to them.  But that was not possible, for they were soon set upon by
the men of the fair, who cried after them: 'Hail, strangers, look here,
what will you buy?'  'We buy the truth only,' said Faithful, 'and we do
not see any of that article of merchandise set out on any of your
stalls.'  And from that began a hubbub that ended in a riot, and the riot
in the apprehension and shutting up in a public cage of the two innocent
pilgrims.  Lord Hate-good was the judge on the bench of Vanity in the day
of their trial, and the three witnesses who appeared in the witness-box
against the two prisoners were Envy, Superstition, and Pickthank.  The
twelve jurymen who sat on their case were Mr. Blindman, Mr. No-good, Mr.
Malice, Mr. Love-lust, Mr. Live-loose, Mr. Heady, Mr. High-mind, Mr.
Enmity, Mr. Liar, Mr. Cruelty, Mr. Hate-light, and Mr. Implacable,--Mr.
Blindman to be the foreman.  And it was before these men that Faithful
was brought forth to his trial in order to his condemnation.  And very
soon after his trial Faithful came to his end.  'Now I saw that there
stood behind the multitude a chariot and a couple of horses waiting for
Faithful, who (so soon as his adversaries had despatched him) was taken
up into it, and straightway was carried up through the clouds, with sound
of trumpet, the nearest way to the Celestial gate.'

Now, I cannot tell you how it was, I cannot account for it to myself, but
it is nevertheless absolutely true that as I was reading my author last
week and was meditating my present exposition, it came somehow into my
mind, and I could not get it out of my mind, that there is a great and a
close similarity between John Bunyan's Vanity Fair and a general
election.  And, all I could do to keep the whole thing out of my mind,
one similarity after another would leap up into my mind and would not be
put out of it.  I protest that I did not go out to seek for such
similarities, but the more I frowned on them the thicker they came.  And
then the further question arose as to whether I should write them down or
no; and then much more, as to whether I should set them out before my
people or no.  As you will easily believe, I was immediately in a real
strait as to what I should do.  I saw on the one side what would be sure
to be said by ill-natured people and people of a hasty judgment.  And I
saw with much more anxiety what would be felt even when they restrained
themselves from saying it by timid and cautious and scrupulous people.  I
had the full fear of all such judges before my eyes; but, somehow,
something kept this before my eyes also, that, as Evangelist met the two
pilgrims just as they were entering the fair, so, for anything I knew to
the contrary, it might be of God, that I also, in my own way, should warn
my people of the real and special danger that their souls will be in for
the next fortnight.  And as I thought of it a procession of people passed
before me all bearing to this day the stains and scars they had taken on
their hearts and their lives and their characters at former general
elections.  And, like Evangelist, I felt a divine desire taking
possession of me to do all I could to pull my people out of gunshot of
the devil at this election.  And, then, when I read again how both the
pilgrims thanked Evangelist for his exhortation, and told him withal that
they would have him speak further to them about the dangers of the way, I
said at last to myself, that the thanks of one true Christian saved in
anything and in any measure from the gun of the devil are far more to be
attended to by a minister than the blame and the neglect of a hundred who
do not know their hour of temptation and will not be told it.  And so I
took my pen and set down some similarities between Vanity Fair and the
approaching election, with some lessons to those who are not altogether
beyond being taught.

Well, then, in the first place, the only way to the Celestial City ran
through Vanity Fair; by no possibility could the advancing pilgrims
escape the temptations and the dangers of the fatal fair.  He that will
go to the Celestial City and yet not go through Vanity Fair must needs go
out of the world.  And so it is with the temptations and trials of the
next ten days.  We cannot get past them.  They are laid down right across
our way.  And to many men now in this house the next ten days will be a
time of simply terrible temptation.  If I had been quite sure that all my
people saw that and felt that, I would not have introduced here to-night
what some of them, judging too hastily, will certainly call this so
secular and unseemly subject.  But I am so afraid that many not untrue,
and in other things most earnest men amongst us, do not yet know
sufficiently the weakness and the evil of their own hearts, that I wish
much, if they will allow me, to put them on their guard.  ''Tis hard,'
said Contrite, who was a householder and had a vote in the town of
Vanity, ''tis hard keeping our hearts and our spirits in any good order
when we are in a cumbered condition.  And you may be sure that we are
full of hurry at fair-time.  He that lives in such a place as this is,
and that has to do with such as we have to do with, has need of an item
to caution him to take heed every hour of the day.'  Now, if all my
people, and all this day's communicants, were only contrite enough, I
would leave them to the hurry of the approaching election with much more
comfort.  But as it is, I wish to give them such an item as I am able to
caution them for the next ten days.  Let them know, then, that their way
for the next fortnight lies, I will not say through a fair of jugglings
and cheatings, carried on by apes and knaves, but, to speak without
figure, their way certainly lies through what will be to many of them a
season of the greatest temptation to the very worst of all possible
sins--to anger and bitterness and ill-will; to no end of evil-thinking
and evil-speaking; to the breaking up of lifelong friendships; and to
widespread and lasting damage to the cause of Christ, which is the cause
of truth and love, meekness and a heavenly mind.  Now, amid all that, as
Evangelist said to the two pilgrims, look well to your own hearts.  Let
none of all these evil things enter your heart from the outside, and let
none of all these evil things come out of your hearts from the inside.
Set your faces like a flint from the beginning against all evil-speaking
and evil-thinking.  Let your own election to the kingdom of heaven be
always before you, and walk worthy of it; and amid all the hurry of
things seen and temporal, believe steadfastly concerning the things that
are eternal, and walk worthy of them.

'We buy the truth and we sell it not again for anything,' was the reply
of the two pilgrims to every stall-keeper as they passed up the fair, and
this it was that made them to be so hated and hunted down by the men of
the fair.  And, in like manner, there is nothing more difficult to get
hold of at an election time than just the very truth.  All the truth on
any question is not very likely to be found put forward in the programme
of any man or any party, and, even if it were, a general election is not
the best time for you to find it out.  'I design the search after truth
to be the one business of my life,' wrote the future Bishop Butler at the
age of twenty-one.  And whether you are to be a member of Parliament or a
silent voter for a member of Parliament, you, too, must love truth and
search for her as for hid treasure from your youth up.  You must search
for all kinds of truth,--historical, political, scientific, and
religious,--with much reading, much observation, and much reflection.  And
those who have searched longest and dug deepest will always be found to
be the most temperate, patient, and forbearing with those who have not
yet found the truth.  I do not know who first said it, but he was a true
disciple of Socrates and Plato who first said it.  'Plato,' he said, 'is
my friend, and Socrates is my friend, but the truth is much more my
friend.'  There is a thrill of enthusiasm, admiration and hope that goes
through the whole country and comes down out of history as often as we
hear or read of some public man parting with all his own past, as well as
with all his leaders and patrons and allies and colleagues in the
present, and taking his solitary way out after the truth.  Many may call
that man Quixotic, visionary, unpractical, imprudent, and he may be all
that and more, but to follow conscience and the love of truth even when
they are for the time leading him wrong is noble, and is every way far
better both for himself and for the cause he serves, than if he were
always found following his leaders loyally and even walking in the way of
righteousness with the love of self and the love of party at bottom
ruling his heart.  How healthful and how refreshing at an election time
it is to hear a speech replete with the love of the truth, full knowledge
of the subject, and with the dignity, the good temper, the respect for
opponents, and the love of fair play that full knowledge of the whole
subject is so well fitted to bring with it!  And next to hearing such a
speaker is the pleasure of meeting such a hearer or such a reader at such
a time.  Now, I want such readers and such hearers, if not such speakers,
to be found all the next fortnight among my office-bearers and my people.
Be sure you say to some of your political opponents something like
this:--'I do not profess to read all the speeches that fill the papers at
present.  I do not read all the utterances made even on my own side, and
much less all the utterances made on your side.  But there is one of your
speakers I always read, and I almost always find him instructive and
impressive, a gentleman, if not a Christian.  He is fair, temperate,
frank, bold, and independent; and, to my mind at least, he always throws
light on these so perplexing questions.'  Now, if you have the
intelligence and the integrity and the fair-mindedness to say something
like that to a member of the opposite party you have poured oil on the
waters of party; nay, you are in that a wily politician, for you have
almost, just in saying that, won over your friend to your own side.  So
noble is the love of truth, and so potent is the high-principled pursuit
and the fearless proclamation of the truth.

A general election is a trying time to all kinds of public men, but it is
perhaps most trying of all to Christian ministers.  Unless they are to
disfranchise themselves and are to detach and shut themselves in from all
interest in public affairs altogether, an election time is to our
ministers, beyond any other class of citizens perhaps, a peculiarly
trying time.  How they are to escape the Scylla of cowardice and the
contempt of all free and true men on the one hand, and the Charybdis of
pride and self-will and scorn of other men's opinions and wishes on the
other, is no easy dilemma to our ministers.  Some happily constituted and
happily circumstanced ministers manage to get through life, and even
through political life, without taking or giving a wound in all their
way.  They are so wise and so watchful; they are so inoffensive,
unprovoking, and conciliatory; and even where they are not always all
that, they have around them sometimes a people who are so patient and
tolerant and full of the old-fashioned respect for their minister that
they do not attempt to interfere with him.  Then, again, some ministers
preach so well, and perform all their pastoral work so well, that they
make it unsafe and impossible for the most censorious and intolerant of
their people to find fault with them.  But all our ministers are not like
that.  And all our congregations are not like that.  And those of our
ministers who are not like that must just be left to bear that which
their past unwisdom or misfortune has brought upon them.  Only, if they
have profited by their past mistakes or misfortunes, a means of grace,
and an opportunity of better playing the man is again at their doors.  I
am sure you will all join with me in the prayer that all our ministers,
as well as all their people, may come well out of the approaching
election.

There is yet one other class of public men, if I may call them so, many
of whom come almost worse out of an election time than even our
ministers, and that class is composed of those, who, to continue the
language of Vanity Fair, keep the cages of the fair.  I wish I had to-
night, what I have not, the ear of the conductors of our public journals.
For, what an omnipotence in God's providence to this generation for good
or evil is theirs!  If they would only all consider well at election
times, and at all times, who they put into their cages and for what
reason; if they would only all ask what can that man's motives be for
throwing such dirt at his neighbour; if they would only all set aside all
the letters they will get during the next fortnight that are avowedly
composed on the old principle of calumniating boldly in the certainty
that some of it will stick, what a service they would do to the cause of
love and truth and justice, which is, surely, after all, their own cause
also!  The very best papers sin sadly in this respect when their
conductors are full for the time of party passion.  And it is
inexpressibly sad when a reader sees great journals to which he owes a
lifelong debt of gratitude absolutely poisoned under his very eyes with
the malignant spirit of untruthful partisanship.  But so long as our
public cages are so kept, let those who are exposed in them resolve to
imitate Christian and Faithful, who behaved themselves amid all their ill-
usage yet more wisely, and received all the ignominy and shame that was
cast upon them with so much meekness and patience that it actually won to
their side several of the men of the fair.

My brethren, this is the last time this season that I shall be able to
speak to you from this pulpit; and, perhaps, the last time altogether.
But, if it so turns out, I shall not repent that the last time I spoke to
you, and that, too, immediately after the communion table, the burden of
my message was the burden of my Master's message after the first
communion table.  'If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.  A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another.  By this shall
all men know that ye are My disciples, if ye have love one to another.
Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be My
disciples.  These things have I spoken unto you that in Me ye might have
peace.  In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I
have overcome the world.  Know ye what I have done unto you?  Ye call Me
Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am.'




BY-ENDS


   'Ye seek Me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat
   of the loaves.'--Our Lord.

In no part of John Bunyan's ingenious book is his strong sense and his
sarcastic and humorous vein better displayed than just in his description
of By-ends, and in the full and particular account he gives of the
kinsfolk and affinity of By-ends.  Is there another single stroke in all
sacred literature better fitted at once to teach the gayest and to make
the gravest smile than just John Bunyan's sketch of By-ends'
great-grandfather, the founder of the egoistical family of Fairspeech,
who was, to begin with, but a waterman who always looked one way and
rowed another?  By-ends' wife also is a true helpmate to her husband.  She
was my Lady Feigning's favourite daughter, under whose nurture and
example the young lady had early come to a quite extraordinary pitch of
good breeding; and now that she was a married woman, she and her husband
had, so their biographer tells us, two firm points of family religion in
which they were always agreed and according to which they brought up all
their children, namely, never to strive too much against wind and tide,
and always to watch when Religion was walking on the sunny side of the
street in his silver slippers, and then at once to cross over and take
his arm.  But abundantly amusing and entertaining as John Bunyan is at
the expense of By-ends and his family and friends, he has far other aims
in view than the amusement and entertainment of his readers.  Bunyan uses
all his great gifts of insight and sense and humour and scorn so as to
mark unmistakably the road and to guide the progress of his reader's soul
to God, his chiefest end and his everlasting portion.

It was no small part of our Lord's life of humiliation on the earth,--much
more so than His being born in a low condition and being made under the
law,--to have to go about all His days among men, knowing in every case
and on every occasion what was in man.  It was a real humiliation to our
Lord to see those watermen of the sea of Tiberias sweating at their oars
as they rowed round and round the lake after Him; and His humiliation
came still more home to Him as often as He saw His own disciples
disputing and pressing who should get closest to Him while for a short
season He walked in the sunshine; just as it was His estate of exaltation
already begun, when He could enter into Himself and see to the bottom of
His own heart, till He was able to say that it was His very meat and
drink to do His father's will, and to finish the work His Father had
given Him to do.  The men of Capernaum went out after our Lord in their
boats because they had eaten of the multiplied loaves and hoped to do so
again.  Zebedee's children had forsaken all and followed our Lord,
because they counted to sit the one on His right hand and the other on
His left hand in His soon-coming kingdom.  The pain and the shame all
that cost our Lord, we can only remotely imagine.  But as for Himself,
our Lord never once had to blush in secret at His own motives.  He never
once had to hang down His head at the discovery of His own selfish aims
and by-ends.  Happy man!  The thought of what He should eat or what He
should drink or wherewithal He should be clothed never troubled His head.
The thought of success, as His poor-spirited disciples counted success,
the thought of honour and power and praise, never once rose in His heart.
All these things, and all things like them, had no attraction for Him;
they awoke nothing but indifference and contempt in him.  But to please
His Father and to hear from time to time His Father's voice saying that
He was well pleased with His beloved Son,--that was better than life to
our Lord.  To find out and follow every new day His Father's mind and
will, and to finish every night another part of His Father's appointed
work,--that was more than His necessary food to our Lord.  The great
schoolmen, as they meditated on these deep matters, had a saying to the
effect that all created things take their true goodness or their true
evil from the end they aim at.  And thus it was that our Lord, aiming
only at His Father's ends and never at His own, both manifested and
attained to a Divine goodness, just as the greedy crowds of Galilee and
the disputatious disciples, as long and as far as they made their belly
or their honour their end and aim, to that extent fell short of all true
goodness, all true satisfaction, and all true acceptance.

By-ends was so called because he was full of low, mean, selfish motives,
and of nothing else.  All that this wretched creature did, he did with a
single eye to himself.  The best things that he did became bad things in
his self-seeking hands.  His very religion stank in those men's nostrils
who knew what was in his heart.  By-ends was one of our Lord's whited
sepulchres.  And so deep, so pervading, and so abiding is this corrupt
taint in human nature, that long after a man has had his attention called
to it, and is far on to a clean escape from it, he still--nay, he all the
more--languishes and faints and is ready to die under it.  Just hear what
two great servants of God have said on this humiliating and degrading
matter.  Writing on this subject with all his wonted depth and solemnity,
Hooker says, 'Even in the good things that we do, how many defects are
there intermingled!  For God in that which is done, respecteth especially
the mind and intention of the doer.  Cut off, then, all those things
wherein we have regarded our own glory, those things which we do to
please men, or to satisfy our own liking, those things which we do with
any by-respect, and not sincerely and purely for the love of God, and a
small score will serve for the number of our righteous deeds.  Let the
holiest and best things we do be considered.  We are never better
affected to God than when we pray; yet, when we pray, how are our
affections many times distracted!  How little reverence do we show to
that God unto whom we speak!  How little remorse of our own miseries!  How
little taste of the sweet influence of His tender mercy do we feel!  The
little fruit we have in holiness, it is, God knoweth, corrupt and
unsound; we put no confidence at all in it, we challenge nothing in the
world for it, we dare not call God to a reckoning as if we had Him in our
debt-books; our continued suit to Him is, and must be, to bear with our
infirmities, and to pardon our offences.'  And Thomas Shepard, a divine
of a very different school, as we say, but a saint and a scholar equal to
the best, and indeed with few to equal him, thus writes in his _Spiritual
Experiences_:--'On Sabbath morning I saw that I had a secret eye to my
own name in all that I did, for which I judged myself worthy of death.  On
another Sabbath, when I came home, I saw the deep hypocrisy of my heart,
that in my ministry I sought to comfort and quicken others, that the
glory might reflect on me as well as on God.  On the evening before the
sacrament I saw that mine own ends were to procure honour, pleasure, gain
to myself, and not to the Lord, and I saw how impossible it was for me to
seek the Lord for Himself, and to lay up all my honour and all my
pleasures in Him.  On Sabbath-day, when the Lord had given me some
comfortable enlargements, I searched my heart and found my sin.  I saw
that though I did to some extent seek Christ's glory, yet I sought it not
alone, but my own glory too.  After my Wednesday sermon I saw the pride
of my heart acting thus, that presently my heart would look out and ask
whether I had done well or ill.  Hereupon I saw my vileness to make men's
opinions my rule.  The Lord thus gave me some glimpse of myself and a
good day that was to me.'  One would think that this was By-ends himself
climbed up into the ministry.  And so it was.  And yet David Brainerd
could write on his deathbed about Thomas Shepard in this way.  'He valued
nothing in religion that was not done to the glory of God, and, oh! that
others would lay the stress of religion here also.  His method of
examining his ends and aims and the temper of his mind both before and
after preaching, is an excellent example for all who bear the sacred
character.  By this means they are like to gain a large acquaintance with
their own hearts, as it is evident he had with his.'

But it is not those who bear the sacred character of the ministry alone
who are full of by-ends.  We all are.  You all are.  And there is not one
all-reaching, all-exposing, and all-humbling way of salvation appointed
for ministers, and another, a more external, superficial, easy, and self-
satisfied way for their people.  No.  Not only must the ambitious and
disputing disciples enter into themselves and become witnesses and judges
and executioners within themselves before they can be saved or be of any
use in the salvation of others--not only they, but the fishermen of the
Lake of Tiberias, they also must open their hearts to these stabbing
words of Christ, and see how true it is that they had followed Him for
loaves and fishes, and not for His grace and His truth.  And only when
they had seen and submitted to that humiliating self-discovery would
their true acquaintance with Christ and their true search after Him
begin.  Come, then, all my brethren, and not ministers only, waken up to
the tremendous importance of that which you have utterly neglected, it
may be ostentatiously neglected, up to this hour,--the true nature, the
true character, of your motives and your ends.  Enter into yourselves.  Be
not strangers and foreigners to yourselves.  Let not the day of judgment
be any surprise to you.  Witness against, judge, and execute yourselves,
and that especially because of your by-aims and by-ends.  Take up the
touchstone of truth and lay it upon your most secret heart.  Do not be
afraid to discover how double-minded and deceitful your heart is.  Hunt
your heart down.  Track it to its most secret lair.  Put its true name,
and continue to put its true name, upon the main motive of your life.
Extort an answer by boot and by wheel, only extort an answer from the
inner man of the heart, to the torturing question as to what is his
treasure, his hope, his deepest wish, his daily dream.  Watch not against
any outward enemy, keep all your eyes and all your ears to your own
thoughts.  God keeps His awful eye on your thoughts.  His eye goes at
every glance to that great depth in you.  Even His all-seeing eye can go
no deeper into you than to your secret thoughts.  Go you as deep as God
goes, and you will be a wise man; go as deep and as often as He does, and
then you will soon come to see eye to eye with God, not only about your
own thoughts, but about His thoughts too, and about everything else.  Till
you begin to watch your own thoughts, and to watch them especially in
their aims and their ends, you will have no idea what that moral and
spiritual life is that all God's saints live; that life that Christ
lived, and which He this night summons you all to enter henceforth upon.

It is such a happy fact that it cannot be too often told, that in the
things of the soul really and truly to know and feel the disease is to
have already entered on the remedy.  You will not feel, indeed, that you
have entered on the remedy; but that does not much matter so long as you
really have.  And there is nothing more certain among all the certainties
of divine things than that he who feels himself to be in death and hell
with his heart so full of by-ends is all the time as far from death and
hell as any one can be who is still on this side of heaven.  When a man's
whole will and desire is set on God, as is now and then the case, that
man is perilously near a sudden and an abundant entrance into that life
and that presence where his heart has for so long been.  When a man is
half mad with his own heart, as Thomas Shepard for one was, that stranger
on the earth is at last within a step of that happy coast where all
wishes end.  Watch that man.  Take a last look at that man.  He will soon
be taken out of your sight.  Ere ever he is himself aware, he will be
rapt up into that life where saints and angels seek not their own will,
labour not for their own profit or promotion, listen not for their own
praises, but find their blessedness, the half of which had not here been
told them, in glorifying God and in enjoying Him for ever.

You must all have heard the name of a book that has helped many a saint
now in glory to the examination and the keeping of his own heart.  I
refer to Jeremy Taylor's _Holy Living and Dying_.  Take two or three of
Taylor's excellent rules with you as you go down from God's house
to-night.  'If you would really live a holy life and die a holy death,'
says Taylor, 'learn to reflect in your every action on your secret end in
it; consider with yourself why you do it, and what you propound to
yourself for your reward.  Pray importunately that all your purposes and
all your motives may be sanctified.  Renew and rekindle your purest
purposes by such ejaculations as these: "Not unto us, O God, not unto us,
but to Thy name be all the praise.  I am in this Thy servant; let all the
gain be Thine."  In great and eminent actions let there be a special and
peculiar act of resignation or oblation made to God; and in smaller and
more frequent actions fail not to secure a pious habitual intention.'  And
so on.  And above all, I will add, labour and pray till you feel in your
heart that you love God with a supreme and an ever-growing love.  And,
far as that may be above you as yet, impress your heart with the
assurance that such a love is possible to you also, and that you can
never be safe or happy till you attain to that love.  Other men once as
far from the supreme love of God as you are have afterwards attained to
it; and so will you if you continue to set it before yourself.  Think
often on God; read the best books about God; call continually upon God;
hold an intimate communion with God, till you feel that you also actually
and certainly love God.  And though you begin with loving God because He
first loved you, you will, beginning with that, rise far above that till
you come to love Him for what He is in Himself as well as for what He has
done for you.  'I have done this in order to have a seat in the Academy,'
said a young man, handing the solution of a problem to an old
philosopher.  'Sir,' was the reply, 'with such dispositions you will
never earn a seat there.  Science must be loved for its own sake, and not
for any advantage to be derived from it.'  And much more is that true of
the highest of all the sciences, the knowledge and the love of God.  Love
Him, then, till you arrive at loving Him for Himself, and then you shall
be for ever delivered from all self-love and by-ends, and shall both
glorify and enjoy God for ever.  As all they now do who engaged their
hearts on earth to the service and the love and the enjoyment of God is
such psalms and prayers as these: 'Whom have I in heaven but Thee? and
there is no one on earth that I desire beside Thee.  How excellent is Thy
loving-kindness, O God!  The children of men shall put their trust under
the shadow of Thy wings.  For with Thee is the fountain of life, and in
Thy light shall we see light.  As for me, I will behold Thy face in
righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I awake with Thy likeness.  Thou
wilt show me the path of life; in Thy presence is fullness of joy, and at
Thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.'




GIANT DESPAIR


   'A wounded spirit who can bear?'--Solomon.

Every schoolboy has Giant Despair by heart.  The rough road after the
meadow of lilies, the stile into By-Path-Meadow, the night coming on, the
thunder and the lightning and the waters rising amain, Giant Despair's
apprehension of Christian and Hopeful, their dreadful bed in his dungeon
from Wednesday morning till Saturday night, how they were famished with
hunger and beaten with a grievous crab-tree cudgel till they were not
able to turn, with many other sufferings too many and too terrible to be
told which they endured till Saturday about midnight, when they began to
pray, and continued in prayer till almost break of day;--John Bunyan is
surely the best story-teller in all the world.  And, then, over and above
that, as often as a boy reads Giant Despair and his dungeon to his father
and mother, the two hearers are like Christian and Hopeful when the
Delectable shepherds showed them what had happened to some who once went
in at By-Path stile: the two pilgrims looked one upon another with tears
gushing out, but yet said nothing to the shepherds.

John Bunyan's own experience enters deeply into these terrible pages.  In
composing these terrible pages, Bunyan writes straight and bold out of
his own heart and conscience.  The black and bitter essence of a whole
black and bitter volume is crushed into these four or five bitter pages.
Last week I went over _Grace Abounding_ again, and marked the passages in
which its author describes his own experiences of doubt, diffidence, and
despair, till I gave over counting the passages, they are so many.  I had
intended to illustrate the passage before us to-night out of the kindred
materials that I knew were so abundant in Bunyan's terrible
autobiography, but I had to give up that idea.  It would have taken two
or three lectures to itself to tell all that Bunyan suffered all his life
long from an easily-wounded spirit.  The whole book is just Giant Despair
and his dungeon, with a gleam here and there of that sunshiny weather
that threw the giant into one of his fits, in which he always lost for
the time the use of his limbs.  Return often, my brethren, to that
masterpiece, _Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners_.  I have read it a
hundred times, but last week it was as fresh and powerful and consoling
as ever to my sin-wounded spirit.

Let me select some of the incidents that offer occasion for a comment or
two.

1.  And, in the first place, take notice, and lay well to heart, how
sudden, and almost instantaneous, is the fall of Christian and Hopeful
from the very gate of heaven to the very gate of hell.  All the Sabbath
and the Monday and the Tuesday before that fatal Wednesday, the two
pilgrims had walked with great delight on the banks of a very pleasant
river; that river, in fact, which David the King called the river of God,
and John, the river of the water of life.  They drank also of the water
of the river, which was pleasant and enlivening to their weary spirits.
On either side of the river was there a meadow curiously beautified with
lilies, and it was green all the year long.  In this meadow they lay down
and slept, for here they might lie down and sleep safely.  When they
awoke they gathered again of the fruits of the trees, and drank again of
the water of the river, and then lay down again to sleep.  Thus they did
several days and nights.  Now, could you have believed it that two such
men as our pilgrims were could be in the enjoyment of all that the first
half of the week, and then by their own doing should be in Giant
Despair's deepest dungeon before the end of the same week?  And yet so it
was.  And all that is written for the solemn warning of those who are at
any time in great enlargement and refreshment and joy in their spiritual
life.  It is intended for all those who are at any time revelling in a
season of revival: those, for example, who are just come home from
Keswick or Dunblane, as well as for all those who at home have just made
the discovery of some great master of the spiritual life, and who are
almost beside themselves with their delight in their divine author.  If
they are new beginners they will not take this warning well, nor will
even all old pilgrims lay it aright to heart; but there it is as plain as
the plainest, simplest, and most practical writer in our language could
put it.

   Behold ye how these crystal streams do glide
   To comfort pilgrims by the highway side;
   The meadows green, besides their fragrant smell,
   Yield dainties for them: And he that can tell
   What pleasant fruits, yea leaves, these trees do yield,
   Will soon sell all that he may buy this field.

Thus the two pilgrims sang: only, adds our author in a parenthesis, they
were not, as yet, at their journey's end.

2.  'Now, I beheld in my dream that they had not journeyed far when the
river and the way for a time parted.  At which the two pilgrims were not
a little sorry.'  The two pilgrims could not perhaps be expected to break
forth into dancing and singing at the parting of the river and the way,
even though they had recollected at that moment what the brother of the
Lord says about our counting it all joy when we fall into divers
temptations.  But it would not have been too much to expect from such
experienced pilgrims as they by this time were, that they should have
suspected and checked and commanded their sorrow.  They should have said
something like this to one another: Well, it would have been very
pleasant had it been our King's will and way with us that we should have
finished the rest of our pilgrimage among the apples and the lilies and
on the soft and fragrant bank of the river; but we believe that it must
in some as yet hidden way be better for us that the river and our road
should part from one another at least for a season.  Come, brother, and
let us go on till we find out our Master's deep and loving mind.  But,
instead of saying that, Christian and Hopeful soon became like the
children of Israel as they journeyed from Mount Hor, their soul was much
discouraged because of the way.  And always as they went on they wished
for a softer and a better way.  And it was so that they very soon came to
the very thing they so much wished for.  For, what is that on the left
hand of the hard road but a stile, and over the stile a meadow as soft to
the feet as the meadow of lilies itself?  ''Tis just according to my
wish,' said Christian; 'here is the easiest going.  Come, good Hopeful,
and let us go over.'  Hopeful: 'But how if the path should lead us out of
the way?'  'That's not like,' said the other; 'look, doth it not go along
by the wayside?'  So Hopeful, being persuaded by his fellow, went after
him over the stile.

Call to mind, all you who are delivered and restored pilgrims, that same
stile that once seduced you.  To keep that stile ever before you is at
once a safe and a seemly occupation of mind for any one who has made your
mistakes and come through your chastisements.  Christian's eyes all his
after-days filled with tears, and he turned away his face and blushed
scarlet, as often as he suddenly came upon any opening in a wall at all
like that opening he here persuaded Hopeful to climb through.  It is too
much to expect that those who are just mounting the stile, and have just
caught sight of the smooth path beyond it, will let themselves be pulled
back into the hard and narrow way by any persuasion of ours.  Christian
put down Hopeful's objection till Hopeful broke out bitterly when the
thunder was roaring over his head and he was wading about among the dark
waters: 'Oh that I had kept myself in my way!'  Are you a little sorry to-
night that the river and the way are parting in your life?  Is your soul
discouraged in you because of the soreness of the way?  And as you go do
you still wish for some better way than the strait way?  And have you
just espied a stile on the left hand of your narrow and flinty path, and
on looking over it is there a pleasant meadow?  And does your companion
point out to your satisfaction, and, almost to your good conscience, that
the soft road runs right along the hard road, only over the stile and
outside the fence?  Then, good-bye.  For it is all over with you.  We
shall meet you again, please God; but when we meet you again, your mind
and memory will be full of shame and remorse and suffering enough to keep
you in songs of repentance for all the rest of your life on earth.
Farewell!

   The Pilgrims now, to gratify the flesh,
   Will seek its ease; but oh! how they afresh
   Do thereby plunge themselves new grieves into:
   Who seek to please the flesh themselves undo.

3.  The two transgressors had not gone far on their own way when night
came on and with the night a very great darkness.  But what soon added to
the horror of their condition was that they heard a man fall into a deep
pit right before them, and it sounded to them as if he was dashed to
pieces by his fall.  So they called to know the matter, but there was
none to answer, only they heard a groaning.  Then said Hopeful: Where are
we now?  Then was his fellow silent, as mistrusting that he had led
Hopeful out of the way.  Now, all that also is true to the very life, and
has been taken down by Bunyan from the very life.  We have all heard men
falling and heard them groaning just a little before us after we had left
the strait road.  They had just gone a little farther wrong than we had
as yet gone,--just a very little farther; in some cases, indeed, not so
far, when they fell and were dashed to pieces with their fall.  It was
well for us at that dreadful moment that we heard the same voice saying
to us for our encouragement as said to the two trembling transgressors:
'Let thine heart be toward the highway, even the way that thou wentest;
turn again.'  Now, what is it in which you are at this moment going off
the right road?  What is that life of disobedience or self-indulgence
that you are just entering on?  Keep your ears open and you will hear
hundreds of men and women falling and being dashed to pieces before you
and all around you.  Are you falling of late too much under the power of
your bodily appetites?  It is not one man, nor two, well known to you,
who have fallen never to rise again out of that horrible pit.  Are you
well enough aware that you are being led into bad company?  Or, is your
companion, who is not a bad man in anything else, leading you, in this
and in that, into what at any rate is bad for you?  You will soon, unless
you cut off your companion like a right hand, be found saying with
misguided and overruled Hopeful: Oh that I had kept me to my right way!
And so on in all manner of sin and trespass.  Those who have ears to hear
such things hear every day one man after another falling through lust or
pride or malice or idleness or infidelity, till there is none to answer.

4.  'All hope abandon' was the writing that Dante read over the door of
hell.  And the two prisoners all but abandoned all hope when they found
themselves in Giant Despair's dungeon.  Only, Christian, the elder man,
had the most distress because their being where they now were lay mostly
at his door.  All this part of the history also is written in Bunyan's
very heart's blood.  'I found it hard work,' he tells us of himself, 'to
pray to God because despair was swallowing me up.  I thought I was as
with a tempest driven away from God.  About this time I did light on that
dreadful story of that miserable mortal, Francis Spira, a book that was
to my troubled spirit as salt when rubbed into a fresh wound; every groan
of that man with all the rest of his actions in his dolours, as his
tears, his prayers, his gnashing of teeth, his wringing of hands, was as
knives and daggers in my soul, especially that sentence of his was
frightful to me: "Man knows the beginning of sin, but who bounds the
issues thereof?"'  We never read anything like Spira's experience and
_Grace Abounding_ and Giant Despair's dungeon in the books of our day.
And why not, do you think?  Is there less sin among us modern men, or did
such writers as John Bunyan overdraw and exaggerate the sinfulness of
sin?  Were they wrong in holding so fast as they did hold that death and
hell are the sure wages of sin?  Has divine justice become less fearful
than it used to be to those who rush against it, or is it that we are so
much better men?  Is our faith stronger and more victorious over doubt
and fear?  Is it that our hope is better anchored?  Whatever the reason
is, there can be no question but that we walk in a liberty that our
fathers did not always walk in.  Whether or no our liberty is not
recklessness and licentiousness is another matter.  Whether or no it
would be a better sign of us if we were better acquainted with doubt and
dejection and diffidence, and even despair, is a question it would only
do us good to put to ourselves.  When we properly attend to these matters
we shall find out that, the holier a man is, the more liable he is to the
assaults of doubt and fear and even despair.  We have whole psalms of
despair, so deep was David's sense of sin, so high were his views of
God's holiness and justice, and so full of diffidence was his wounded
heart.  And David's Son, when our sin was laid upon Him, felt the curse
and the horror of His state so much that His sweat was in drops of blood,
and His cry in the darkness was that His God had forsaken Him.  And when
our spirits are wounded with our sins, as the spirits of all God's great
saints have always been wounded, we too shall feel ourselves more at home
with David and with Asaph, with Spira even, and with Bunyan.  Despair is
not good, but it is infinitely better than indifference.  'It is a common
saying,' says South, 'and an observation in divinity, that where despair
has slain its thousands, presumption has slain its ten thousands.  The
agonies of the former are indeed more terrible, but the securities of the
latter are far more fatal.'

5.  'I will,' says Paul to Timothy, 'that men pray everywhere, lifting up
holy hands without doubting.' And, just as Paul would have it, Christian
and Hopeful began to lift up their hands even in the dungeon of Doubting
Castle.  'Well,' we read, 'on Saturday night about midnight they began to
pray, and continued in prayer till almost break of day.  Now, before it
was day, good Christian, as one half amazed, broke out in this passionate
speech: "What a fool," quoth he, "am I thus to lie in a stinking dungeon
when I may as well walk at liberty; I have a key in my bosom, called
Promise, that will, I am persuaded, open any lock in all Doubting
Castle."  Then said Hopeful: "That's good news, good brother; pluck it
out of thy bosom and try."'  Then Christian pulled the key out of his
bosom and the bolt gave back, and Christian and Hopeful both came out,
and you may be sure they were soon out of the giant's jurisdiction.

Now, I do not know that I can do better at this point, and in closing,
than just to tell you about some of that bunch of keys that John Bunyan
found from time to time in his own bosom, and which made all his prison
doors one after another fly open at their touch.  'About ten o'clock one
day, as I was walking under a hedge, full of sorrow and guilt, God knows,
and bemoaning myself for my hard hap, suddenly this sentence bolted in
upon me: The blood of Christ remits all guilt.  Again, when I was fleeing
from the face of God, for I did flee from His face, that is, my mind and
spirit fled before Him; for by reason of His highness I could not endure;
then would the text cry: Return unto Me; it would cry with a very great
voice: Return unto me, for I have redeemed thee.  And this would make me
look over my shoulder behind me to see if I could discern that this God
of grace did follow me with a pardon in His hand.  Again, the next day,
at evening, being under many fears, I went to seek the Lord, and as I
prayed, I cried, with strong cries: O Lord, I beseech Thee, show me that
Thou hast loved me with an everlasting love.  I had no sooner said it
but, with sweetness, this returned upon me as an echo or sounding-again,
I have loved thee with an everlasting love.  Now, I went to bed at quiet;
also, when I awaked the next morning it was fresh upon my soul and I
believed it . . . Again, as I was then before the Lord, that Scripture
fastened on my heart: O man, great is thy faith, even as if one had
clapped me on the back as I was on my knees before God . . . At another
time I remember I was again much under this question: Whether the blood
of Christ was sufficient to save my soul?  In which doubt I continued
from morning till about seven or eight at night, and at last, when I was,
as it were, quite worn out with fear, these words did sound suddenly
within my heart: He is able.  Methought this word _able_ was spoke so
loud unto me and gave such a justle to my fear and doubt as I never had
all my life either before that or after . . . Again, one morning, when I
was at prayer and trembling under fear, that piece of a sentence dashed
in upon me: My grace is sufficient.  At this, methought: Oh, how good a
thing it is for God to send His word! . . . Again, one day as I was in a
meeting of God's people, full of sadness and terror, for my fears were
again strong upon me, and as I was thinking that my soul was never the
better, these words did with great power suddenly break in upon me: My
grace is sufficient for thee, My grace is sufficient for thee, three
times together; and, oh! methought that every word was a mighty word unto
me; as _My_, and _grace_, and _sufficient_, and _for thee_.  These words
were then, and sometimes still are, far bigger words than others are.
Again, one day as I was passing in the field, and that, too, with some
dashes in my conscience, suddenly this sentence fell upon my soul: Thy
righteousness is in heaven.  And methought withal I saw, with the eyes of
my soul, Jesus Christ at God's right hand.  I saw also, moreover, that it
was not my good frame of heart that made my righteousness better, nor my
bad frame that made my righteousness worse, for my righteousness was
Jesus Christ Himself, the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever . . .
Again, oh, what did I see in that blessed sixth of John: Him that cometh
to Me I will in nowise cast out.  I should in those days often flounce
toward that promise as horses do toward sound ground that yet stick in
the mire.  Oh! many a pull hath my heart had with Satan for this blessed
sixth of John . . . And, again, as I was thus in a muse, that Scripture
also came with great power upon my spirit: Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us.  Now was I
got on high: I saw my self within the arms of Grace and Mercy, and though
I was before afraid to think of a dying hour, yet now I cried: Let me
die.  Now death was lovely and beautiful in my sight; for I saw that we
shall never live indeed till we be gone to the other world.  Heirs of
God, methought, heirs of God!  God himself is the portion of His saints.
This did sweetly revive my spirit, and help me to hope in God; which when
I had with comfort mused on a while, that word fell with great weight
upon my mind: Oh Death, where is thy sting?  Oh Grave, where is thy
victory?  At this I became both well in body and mind at once, for my
sickness did presently vanish, and I walked comfortably in my work for
God again.'

Such were some of the many keys by the use of which God let John Bunyan
so often out of despair into full assurance and out of darkness into
light.  Which of the promises have been of such help to you?  Over what
Scriptures have you ever cried out: Oh, how good a thing it is for God to
send me His word!  Which are the biggest words in all the Bible to you?
To what promise did you ever flounce as a horse flounces when he is
sticking in the mire?  And has any word of God so made God your God that
even death itself, since it alone separates you from His presence, is
lovely and beautiful in your eyes?  Have you a cluster of such keys in
your bosom?  If you have, take them all out to-night and go over them
again with thanksgiving before you sleep.




KNOWLEDGE


   'I will give you pastors after Mine own heart, which shall feed you
   with knowledge and understanding.'

The Delectable Mountains rise out of the heart of Immanuel's Land.  This
fine range of far-rolling hills falls away on the one side toward the
plain of Destruction, and on the other side toward the land of Beulah and
the Celestial City, and the way to the Celestial City runs like a bee-
line over these well-watered pastures.  Standing on a clear day on the
highest peak of the Delectable Mountains, if you have good eyes you can
see the hill Difficulty in the far-back distance with a perpetual mist
clinging to its base and climbing up its sides, which mist the shepherds
say to you rises all the year round off the Slough of Despond, while,
beyond that again the heavy smoke of the city of Destruction and the town
of Stupidity shuts in the whole horizon.  And then, when you turn your
back on all that, in favourable states of the weather you can see here
and there the shimmer of that river over which there is no bridge; and,
then again, so high above the river that it seems to be a city standing
in heaven rather than upon the earth, you will see the high towers and
shining palace roofs and broad battlements of the New Jerusalem itself.
The two travellers should have spent the past three days among the sights
of the Delectable Mountains; and they would have done so had not the
elder traveller misled the younger.  But now that they were set free and
fairly on the right road again, the way they had spent the past three
days and three nights made the gardens and the orchards and the pastures
that ran round the bottom and climbed up the sides of the Delectable
Mountains delectable beyond all description to them.

Now, there were on the tops of those mountains certain shepherds feeding
their flocks, and they stood by the highway side.  The two travellers
therefore went up to the shepherds, and leaning upon their staves (as is
common with weary travellers when they stand to talk with any by the
way), they asked: Whose delectable mountains are these? and whose be the
sheep that feed upon them?  These mountains, replied the shepherds, are
Immanuel's Land, and they are within sight of the city; the sheep also
are His, and He laid down His life for them.  After some more talk like
this by the wayside, the shepherds, being pleased with the pilgrims,
looked very lovingly upon them and said: Welcome to the Delectable
Mountains.  The shepherds then, whose names were Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere, took them by the hand to lead them to their tents,
and made them partake of what was ready at present.  They said, moreover:
We would that you should stay with us a while to be acquainted with us,
and yet more to solace yourselves with the cheer of these Delectable
Mountains.  Then the travellers told them they were content to stay; and
so they went to rest that night because it was now very late.  The four
shepherds lived all summer-time in a lodge of tents well up among their
sheep, while their wives and families had their homes all the year round
in the land of Beulah.  The four men formed a happy fraternity, and they
worked among and watched over their Master's sheep with one united mind.
What one of those shepherds could not so well do in the tent or in the
fold or out on the hillside, some of the others better did.  And what one
of them could do to any perfection all the others by one consent left
that to him to do.  You would have thought that they were made by a
perfect miracle to fit into one another, so harmoniously did they live
and work together, and such was the bond of brotherly love that held them
together.  At the same time, there was one of the happy quaternity who,
from his years on the hills, and his services in times of trial and
danger, and one thing and another, fell always, and with the finest
humility too, into the foremost place, and his name, as you have already
heard, was Knowledge.  Old Mr. Know-all the children in the villages
below ran after him and named him as they clustered round his staff and
hid in the great folds of his shepherd's coat.

Now, in all this John Bunyan speaks as a child to children; but, of such
children as John Bunyan and his readers is the kingdom of heaven.  My
very youngest hearer here to-night knows quite well, or, at any rate,
shrewdly suspects, that Knowledge was not a shepherd going about with his
staff among woolly sheep; nor would the simplest-minded reader of John
Bunyan's book go to seek the Delectable Mountains and Immanuel's Land in
any geographer's atlas, or on any schoolroom map.  Oh, no.  I do not need
to stop to tell the most guileless of my hearers that old Knowledge was
not a shepherd whose sheep were four-footed creatures, but a minister of
the gospel, whose sheep are men, women, and children.  Nor are the
Delectable Mountains any range of hills and valleys of grass and herbs in
England or Scotland.  The prophet Ezekiel calls them the mountains of
Israel; but by that you all know that he had in his mind something far
better than any earthly mountain.  That prophet of Israel had in his mind
the church of God with its synagogues and its sacraments, with all the
grace and truth that all these things conveyed from God to the children
of Israel.  As David also sang in the twenty-third Psalm: 'The Lord is my
Shepherd, I shall not want.  He maketh me to lie down in green pastures;
He leadeth me beside the still waters.'

Knowledge, then, is a minister; but every congregation has not such a
minister set over it as Knowledge is.  All our college-bred and ordained
men are not ministers like Knowledge.  This excellent minister takes his
excellent name from his great talents and his great attainments.  And
while all his great talents are his Master's gift to him, his great
attainments are all his own to lay out in his Master's service.  To begin
with, his Master had given His highly-favoured servant a good
understanding and a good memory, and many good and suitable
opportunities.  Now, a good understanding is a grand endowment for a
minister, and his ministerial office will all his days afford him
opportunity for the best understanding he can bring to it.  The Christian
ministry, first and last, has had a noble roll of men of a strong
understanding.  The author of the book now open before us was a man of a
strong understanding.  John Bunyan had a fine imagination, with great
gifts of eloquent, tender, and most heart-winning utterance, but in his
case also all that was bottomed in a strong English understanding.  Then,
again, a good memory is indispensable to a minister of knowledge.  You
must be content to take a second, a third, or even a lower place still if
your Master has withheld from you a good memory.  Dr. Goodwin has a
passage on this point that I have often turned up when I had again
forgotten it.  'Thou mayest have a weak memory, perhaps, yet if it can
and doth remember good things as well and better than other things, then
it is a sanctified memory, and the defilement of thy memory is healed
though the imperfection of it is not; and, though thou art to be humbled
for it as a misery, yet thou art not to be discouraged; for God doth not
hate thee for it, but pities thee; and the like holds good and may be
said as to the want of other like gifts.'  You cannot be a man of a
commanding knowledge anywhere, and you must be content to take a very
subordinate and second place, even in the ministry, unless you have both
a good understanding and a good memory; but then, at the last day your
Master will not call you and your congregation to an account for what He
has not committed to your stewardship.  And on that day that will be
something.  But not only must ministers of knowledge have a good mind and
a good memory; they must also be the most industrious of men.  Other men
may squander and kill their time as they please, but a minister had as
good kill himself at once out of the way of better men unless he is to
hoard his hours like gold and jewels.  He must read only the best books,
and he must read them with the 'pain of attention.'  He must read nothing
that is not the best.  He has not the time.  And if he is poor and remote
and has not many books, he will have Butler, and let him read Butler's
Preface to his Sermons till he has it by heart.  The best books are
always few, and they must be read over and over again when other men are
reading the 'great number of books and papers of amusement that come
daily in their way, and which most perfectly fall in with their idle way
of reading and considering things.'  And, then, such a minister must
store up what he reads, if not in a good memory, then in some other
pigeon-hole that he has made for himself outside of himself, since his
Master has not seen fit to furnish him with such a repository within
himself.  And, then, after all that,--for a good minister is not made
yet,--understanding and memory and industry must all be sanctified by
secret prayer many times every day, and then laid out every day in the
instruction, impression, and comfort of his people.  And, then, that
privileged people will be as happy in possessing that man for their
minister as the sheep of Immanuel's Land were in having Knowledge set
over them for their shepherd.  They will never look up without being fed.
They will every Sabbath-day be led by green pastures and still waters.
And when they sing of the mercies of the Lord to them and to their
children, and forget not all His benefits, among the best of their
benefits they will not forget to hold up and bless their minister.

But, then, there is, nowadays, so much sound knowledge to be gained, not
to speak of so many books and papers of mere pastime and amusement, that
it may well be asked by a young man who is to be a minister whether he is
indeed called to be like that great student who took all knowledge for
his province.  Yes, indeed, he is.  For, if the minister and interpreter
of nature is to lay all possible knowledge under contribution, what must
not the minister of Jesus Christ and the interpreter of Scripture and
providence and experience and the human heart be able to make the
sanctified use of?  Yes, all kinds and all degrees of knowledge, to be
called knowledge, belong by right and obligation to his office who is the
minister and interpreter of Him Who made all things, Who is the Heir of
all things, and by Whom all things consist.  At the same time, since the
human mind has its limits, and since human life has its limits, a
minister of all men must make up his mind to limit himself to the best
knowledge; the knowledge, that is, that chiefly concerns him,--the
knowledge of God so far as God has made Himself known, and the knowledge
of Christ.  He must be a student of his Bible night and day and all his
days.  If he has not the strength of understanding and memory to read his
Bible easily in the original Hebrew and Greek, let him all the more make
up for that by reading it the oftener and the deeper in English.  Let him
not only read his Bible deeply for his sermons and prayers, lectures and
addresses, let him do that all day every day of the week, and then read
it all night, and every night of the week, for his own soul.  Let every
minister know his Bible down to the bottom, and with his Bible his own
heart.  He who so knows his Bible and with it his own heart has almost
books enough.  All else is but ostentatious apparatus.  When a minister
has neither understanding nor memory wherewith to feed his flock, let him
look deep enough into his Bible and into his own heart, and then begin
out of them to write and speak.  And, then, for the outside knowledge of
the passing day he will read the newspapers, and though he gives up all
the morning to the newspapers, and returns to them again in the evening,
his conscience will not upbraid him if he reads as Jonathan Edwards read
the newsletters of his day,--to see how the kingdom of heaven is
prospering in the earth, and to pray for its prosperity.  And, then, by
that time, and when he has got that length, all other kinds of knowledge
will have fallen into its own place, and will have taken its own proper
proportion of his time and his thought.  He was a man of a great
understanding and a great memory and great industry who said that he had
taken all knowledge for his province.  But he was a far wiser man who
said that knowledge is not our proper happiness.  Our province, he went
on to say, is virtue and religion, life and manners: the science of
improving the temper and making the heart better.  This is the field
assigned us to cultivate: how much it has lain neglected is indeed
astonishing.

Now, my brethren, two dangers, two simply terrible dangers, arise to
every one of you out of all this matter of your ministers and their
knowledge.  1. The first danger is,--to be frank with you on this
subject,--that you are yourselves so ignorant on all the matters that a
minister has to do with, that you do not know one minister from another,
a good minister from one who is really no minister at all.  Now, I will
put it to you, on what principle and for what reason did you choose your
present minister, if, indeed, you did choose him?  Was it because you
were assured by people you could trust that he was a minister of
knowledge and knew his own business?  Or was it that when you went to
worship with him for yourself you have not been able ever since to tear
yourself away from him, nor has any one else been able to tear you away,
though some have tried?  When you first came to the city, did you give,
can you remember, some real anxiety, rising sometimes into prayer, as to
who your minister among so many ministers was to be?  Or did you choose
him and your present seat in his church because of some real or supposed
worldly interest of yours you thought you could further by taking your
letter of introduction to him?  Had you heard while yet at home, had your
father and mother talked of such things to you, that rich men, and men of
place and power, political men and men high in society, sat in that
church and took notice of who attended it and who did not?  Do you, down
to this day, know one church from another so far as spiritual and soul-
saving knowledge is concerned?  Do you know that two big buildings,
called churches, may stand in the same street, and have men, called
ministers, carrying on certain services in them from week to week, and
yet, for all the purposes for which Christ came and died and rose again
and gave ministers to His church, these two churches and their ministers
are farther asunder than the two poles?  Do you understand what I am
saying?  Do you understand what I have been saying all night, or are you
one of those of whom the prophet speaks in blame and in pity as being
destroyed for lack of knowledge?  Well, that is your first danger, that
you are so ignorant, and as a consequence, so careless, as not to know
one minister from another.

2.  And your second danger in connection with your minister is, that you
have, and may have long had, a good minister, but that you still remain
yourself a bad man.  My brethren, be you all sure of it, there is a
special and a fearful danger in having a specially good minister.  Think
twice, and make up your mind well, before you call a specially good
minister, or become a communicant, or even an adherent under a specially
good minister.  If two bad men go down together to the pit, and the one
has had a good minister, as, God have mercy on us, sometimes happens, and
the other has only had one who had the name of a minister, the
evangelised reprobate will lie in a deeper bed in hell, and will spend a
more remorseful eternity on it than will the other.  No man among you,
minister or no minister, good minister or bad, will be able to sin with
impunity.  But he who sins on and on after good preaching will be beaten
with many stripes.  'Woe unto thee, Chorazin!  Woe unto thee, Bethsaida!
For if the mighty works which were done in you had been done in Tyre and
Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.  But I
say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the day of
judgment than for you.'  'Thou that hast knowledge,' says a powerful old
preacher, 'canst not sin so cheap as another that is ignorant.  Places of
much knowledge'--he was preaching in the university pulpit of Oxford--'and
plentiful in the means of grace are dear places for a man to sin in.  To
be drunken or unclean after a powerful sermon, and after the Holy Ghost
has enlightened thee, is more than to have so sinned twenty times before.
Thou mightest have sinned ten times more and been damned less.  For does
not Jesus Christ the Judge say to thee, This is thy condemnation, that so
much light has come to thee?'  And, taking the then way of execution as a
sufficiently awful illustration, the old Oxford Puritan goes on to say
that to sin against light is the highest step of the ladder before
turning off.  And, again, that if there are worms in hell that die not,
it is surely gospel light that breeds them.




EXPERIENCE


   'My heart had great experience.'--The Preacher.

   'I will give them pastors after Mine own heart.'

Experience, the excellent shepherd of the Delectable Mountains, had a
brother in the army, and he was an equally excellent soldier.  The two
brothers--they were twin-brothers--had been brought up together till they
were grown-up men in the same town of Mansoul.  All the Experience
family, indeed, had from time immemorial hailed from that populous and
important town, and their family tree ran away back beyond the oldest
extant history.  The two brothers, while in all other things as like as
two twin-brothers could be, at the same time very early in life began to
exhibit very different talents and tastes and dispositions; till, when we
meet with them in their full manhood, the one is a soldier in the army
and the other a shepherd on the Delectable Mountains.  The
soldier-brother is thus described in one of the military histories of his
day: 'A man of conduct and of valour, and a person prudent in matters.  A
comely person, moreover, well-spoken in negotiations, and very successful
in undertakings.  His colours were the white colours of Mansoul and his
scutcheon was the dead lion and the dead bear.'

The shepherd-brother, on the other hand, is thus pictured out to us by
one who has seen him.  A traveller who has visited the Delectable
Mountains, and has met and talked with the shepherds, thus describes
Experience in his excellent itinerary: 'Knowledge,' he says, 'I found to
be the sage of the company, spare in build, high of forehead, worn in
age, and his tranquil gait touched with abstractedness.  While Experience
was more firmly knit in form and face, with a shrewd kindly eye and a
happy readiness in his bearing, and all his hard-earned wisdom evidently
on foot within him as a capability for work and for control.'  This,
then, was the second of the four shepherds, who fed Immanuel's sheep on
the Delectable Mountains.

But here again to-night, and in the case of Experience, just as last
Sabbath night and in the case of Knowledge, in all this John Bunyan
speaks to children,--only the children here are the children of the
kingdom of heaven.  The veriest child who reads the Delectable Mountains
begins to suspect before he is done that Knowledge and Experience are not
after all two real and true shepherds going their rounds with their
staves and their wallets and their wheeling dogs.  Yes, though the little
fellow cannot put his suspicions into proper words for you, all the same
he has his suspicions that he is being deceived by you and your Sabbath
book; and, ten to one, from that sceptical day he will not read much more
of John Bunyan till in after-life he takes up John Bunyan never for a
single Sabbath again to lay him down.  Yes, let the truth be told at
once, Experience is simply a minister, and not a real shepherd at all; a
minister of the gospel, a preacher, and a pastor; but, then, he is a
preacher and a pastor of no ordinary kind, but of the selectest and very
best kind.

1.  Now, my brethren, to plunge at once out of the parable and into the
interpretation, I observe, in the first place, that pastors who are
indeed to be pastors after God's own heart have all to pass into their
pastorate through the school of experience.  Preaching after God's own
heart, and pastoral work of the same divine pattern, cannot be taught in
any other school than the school of experience.  Poets may be born and
not made, but not pastors nor preachers.  Nay, do not all our best poets
first learn in their sufferings what afterwards they teach us in their
songs?  At any rate, that is certainly the case with preachers and
pastors.  As my own old minister once said to me in a conversation on
this very subject, 'Even God Himself cannot inspire an experience.'  No.
For if He could He would surely have done so in the case of His own Son,
to Whom in the gift of the Holy Ghost He gave all that He could give and
all that His Son could receive.  But an experience cannot in the very
nature of things be either bestowed on the one hand or received and
appropriated on the other.  An experience in the unalterable nature of
the thing itself must be undergone.  The Holy Ghost Himself after He has
been bestowed and received has to be experimented upon, and taken into
this and that need, trial, cross, and care of life.  He is not sent to
spare us our experiences, but to carry us through them.  And thus it is
(to keep for a moment in sight of the highest illustration we have of
this law of experience), thus it is, I say, that the apostle has it in
his Epistle to the Hebrews that though Christ Himself were a Son, yet
learned He obedience by the things that He suffered.  And being by
experience made perfect He then went on to do such and such things for
us.  Why, for instance, for one thing, why do you think was our Lord able
to speak with such extraordinary point, impressiveness, and assurance
about prayer; about the absolute necessity and certainty of secret,
importunate, persevering prayer having, sooner or later, in one shape or
other, and in the best possible shape, its answer?  Why but because of
His own experience?  Why but because His own closet, hilltop, all-night,
and up-before-the-day prayers had all been at last heard and better heard
than He had been able to ask?  We can quite well read between the lines
in all our Lord's parables and in all the passages of His sermons about
prayer.  The unmistakable traces of otherwise untold enterprises and
successes, agonies and victories of prayer, are to be seen in every such
sermon of His.  And so, in like manner, in all that He says to His
disciples about the sweetness of submission, resignation, and
self-denial, as also about the nourishment for His soul that He got out
of every hard act of obedience,--and so on.  There is running through all
our Lord's doctrinal and homiletical teaching that note of reality and of
certitude that can only come to any teaching out of the long and deep and
intense experience of the teacher.  And as the Master was, so are all His
ministers.  When I read, for instance, what William Law says about the
heart-searching and heart-cleansing efficacy of intercessory prayer in
the case of him who continues all his life so to pray, and carries such
prayer through all the experiences and all the relationships of life, I
do not need you to tell me where that great man of God made that great
discovery.  I know that he made it in his own closet, and on his own
knees, and in his own evil heart.  And so, also, when I come nearer home.
Whenever I hear a single unconventional, immediate, penetrating,
overawing petition or confession in a minister's pulpit prayer or in his
family worship, I do not need to be told out of what prayer-book he took
that.  I know without his telling me that my minister has been, all
unknown to me till now, at that same school of prayer to which his Master
was put in the days of His flesh, and out of which He brought the
experiences that He afterwards put into the Friend at midnight, and the
Importunate widow, as also into the Egg and the scorpion, the Bread and
the stone, the Knocking and the opening, the Seeking and the finding.

   His children thus most dear to Him,
   Their heavenly Father trains,
   Through all the hard experience led
   Of sorrows and of pains.

And if His children, then ten times more the tutors and governors of His
children,--the pastors and the preachers He prepares for His people.

2.  Again, though I will not put those two collegiate shepherds against
one another, yet, in order to bring out the whole truth on this matter, I
will risk so far as to say that where we cannot have both Knowledge and
Experience, by all means let us have Experience.  Yes, I declare to you
that if I were choosing a minister for myself, and could not have both
the book-knowledge and the experience of the Christian life in one and
the same man; and could not have two ministers, one with all the talents
and another with all the experiences; I would say that, much as I like an
able and learned sermon from an able and learned man, I would rather have
less learning and more experience.  And, then, no wonder that such
pastors and preachers are few.  For how costly must a thoroughly good
minister's experience be to him!  What a quantity and what a quality of
experience is needed to take a raw, light-minded, ignorant, and
self-satisfied youth and transform him into the pastor, the tried and
trusted friend of the tempted, the sorrow-laden, and the shipwrecked
hearts and lives in his congregation!  What years and years of the
selectest experiences are needed to teach the average divinity student to
know himself, to track out and run to earth his own heart, and thus to
lay open and read other men's hearts to their self-deceived owners in the
light of his own.  A matter, moreover, that he gets not one word of help
toward in all his college curriculum.  David was able to say in his old
age that he fed the flock of God in Israel according to the integrity of
his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands.  But what
years and years of shortcoming and failure in private and in public life
lie behind that fine word 'integrity'! as also what stumbles and what
blunders behind that other fine word 'skilfulness'!  But, then, how a
lightest touch of a preacher's own dear-bought experience skilfully let
fall brightens up an obscure scripture!  How it sends a thrill through a
prayer!  How it wings an arrow to the conscience!  How it sheds abroad
balm upon the heart!  Let no minister, then, lose heart when he is sent
back to the school of experience.  He knows in theory that tribulation
worketh patience, and patience experience, but it is not theory, but
experience, that makes a minister after God's own heart.  I sometimes
wish that I may live to see a chair of Experimental Religion set up in
all our colleges.  I fear it is a dream, and that it must have been
pronounced impracticable long ago by our wisest heads.  Still, all the
same, that does not prevent me from again and again indulging my dream.  I
indulge my fond dream again as often as I look back on my own tremendous
mistakes in the management of my own personal and ministerial life, as
well as sometimes see some signs of the same mistakes in some other
ministers.  In my dream for the Church of the future I see the programme
of lectures in the Experimental Class and the accompanying examinations.
I see the class library, and I envy the students.  I am present at the
weekly book-day, and at the periodical addresses delivered to the class
by those town and country ministers who have been most skilful in their
pastorate and most successful in the conversion and in the character of
their people.  And, unless I wholly deceive myself, I see, not all the
class--that will never be till the millennium--but here and there twos
and threes, and more men than that, who will throw their whole hearts
into the work of such a class till they come out of the hall in
experimental religion like Sir Proteus in the play:

   Their years but young, but their experience old,
   Their heads unmellowed, but their judgment ripe.

It is quite true, that, as my old minister shrewdly said to me, even the
Holy Ghost cannot inspire an experience.  No.  But a class of genuine
experimental divinity would surely help to foster and develop an
experience.  And, till the class is established, any student who has the
heart for it may lay in the best of the class library for a few
shillings.  Mr. Thin will tell you that there is no literature that is
such a drug in the market as the best books of Experimental Divinity.  No
wonder, then, that we make such slow and short way in the skilfulness,
success, and acceptance of our preaching and our pastorate.

3.  But, at the same time, my brethren, all your ministers' experience of
personal religion will be lost upon you unless you are yourselves
attending the same school.  The salvation of the soul, you must
understand, is not offered to ministers only.  Ministers are not the only
men who are, to begin with, dead in trespasses and sins.  The Son of God
did not die for ministers only.  The Holy Ghost is not offered to
ministers only.  A clean, humble, holy heart is not to be the pursuit of
ministers only.  It is not to His ministers only that our Lord says, Take
up My yoke and learn of Me.  The daily cross is not the opportunity of
ministers only.  It is not to ministers only that tribulation worketh
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope.  It was to all
who had obtained like precious faith with their ministers that Peter
issued this exhortation that they were to give all diligence to add to
their faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance,
and to temperance patience,--and so on.  Now, my brethren, unless all
that is on foot in yourselves, as well as in your ministers, then their
progress in Christian experience will only every new Sabbath-day separate
you and your ministers further and further away from one another.  When a
minister is really making progress himself in the life of religion that
progress must come out, and ought to come out, both in his preaching and
in his prayers.  And, then, two results of all that will immediately
begin to manifest themselves among his people.  Some of his people will
visibly, and still more will invisibly, make corresponding progress with
their minister; while some others, alas! will fall off in interest, in
understanding, and in sympathy till at last they drop off from his
ministry altogether.  That is an old law in the Church of God: 'like
people like priest,' and 'like priest like people.'  And while there are
various influences at work retarding and perplexing the immediate
operation of that law, at the same time, he who has eyes to see such
things in a congregation and in a community will easily see Hosea's great
law of congregational selection in operation every day.  Like people
gradually gravitate to like preachers.  You will see, if you have the
eyes, congregations gradually dissolving and gradually being consolidated
again under that great law.  You will see friendships and families even
breaking up and flying into pieces; and, again, new families and new
friendships being built up on that very same law.  If you were to study
the session books of our city congregations in the light of that law, you
would get instruction.  If you just studied who lifted their lines, and
why; and, again, what other people came and left their lines, and why,
you would get instruction.  The shepherds in Israel did not need to hunt
up and herd their flocks like the shepherds in Scotland.  A shepherd on
the mountains of Israel had nothing more to do than himself pass up into
the pasture lands and then begin to sing a psalm or offer a prayer, when,
in an instant, his proper sheep were all round about him.  The sheep knew
their own shepherd's voice, and they fled from the voice of a stranger.
And so it is with a true preacher,--a preacher of experience, that is.
His own people know no voice like his voice.  He does not need to bribe
and flatter and run after his people.  He may have, he usually has, but
few people as people go in our day, and the better the preacher sometimes
the smaller the flock.  It was so in our Master's case.  The multitude
followed after the loaves but they fled from the feeding doctrines, till
He first tasted that dejection and that sense of defeat which so many of
His best servants are fed on in this world.  Still, as our Lord did not
tune His pulpit to the taste of the loungers of Galilee, no more will a
minister worth the name do anything else but press deeper and deeper into
the depths of truth and life, till, as was the case with his Master, his
followers, though few, will be all the more worth having.  The Delectable
Mountains are wide and roomy.  They roll far away both before and behind.
Immanuel's Land is a large place, and there are many other shepherds
among those hills and valleys besides Knowledge and Experience and
Watchful and Sincere.  And each several shepherd has, on the whole, his
own sheep.  Knowledge has his; Experience has his; Watchful has his; and
Sincere has his; and all the other here unnamed shepherds have all theirs
also.  For, always, like shepherd like sheep.  Yes.  Hosea must have been
something in Israel somewhat analogous to a session-clerk among
ourselves.  'Like priest like people' is certainly a digest of some such
experience.  Let some inquisitive beginner in Hebrew this winter search
out the prophet upon that matter, consulting Mr. Hutcheson and Dr. Pusey,
and he will let me hear the result.

4.  Now, my brethren, in closing, we must all keep it clearly before our
minds, and that too every day we live, that God orders and overrules this
whole world, and, indeed, keeps it going very much just that He may by
means of it make unceasing experiment upon His people.  Experiment, you
know, results in experience.  There is no other way by which any man can
attain to a religious experience but by undergoing temptation, trial,
tribulation:--experiment.  And it gives a divine dignity to all things,
great and small, good and bad, when we see them all taken up into God's
hand, in order that by means of them He may make for Himself an
experienced people.  Human life on this earth, when viewed under this
aspect, is one vast workshop.  And all the shafts and wheels and pulleys;
all the crushing hammers, and all the whirling knives; all the furnaces
and smelting-pots; all the graving tools and smoothing irons, are all so
many divinely-designed and divinely-worked instruments all directed in
upon this one result,--our being deeply experienced in the ways of God
till we are for ever fashioned into His nature and likeness.  Our faith
in the unseen world and in our unseen God and Saviour is at one time put
to the experiment.  At another time it is our love to Him; the reality of
it, and the strength of it.  At another time it is our submission and our
resignation to His will.  At another time it is our humility, or our
meekness, or our capacity for self-denial, or our will and ability to
forgive an injury, or our perseverance in still unanswered prayer; and so
on the ever-shifting but never-ceasing experiment goes.  I do beseech
you, my brethren, take that true view of life home with you again this
night.  This true view of life, namely, that experience in the divine
life can only come to you through your being much experimented upon.  Meet
all your trials and tribulations and temptations, then, under this
assurance, that all things will work together for good to you also if you
are only rightly exercised by means of them.  Nothing else but this
growing experience and this settling assurance will be able to support
you under the sudden ills of life; but this will do it.  This, when you
begin by experience to see that all this life, and all the good and all
the ill of this life, are all under this splendid divine law,--that your
tribulations also are indeed working within you a patience, and your
patience an experience, and your experience a hope that maketh not
ashamed.




WATCHFUL


   'Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of
   Israel.'--The word of the Lord to Ezekiel.

   'They watch for your souls.'--The Apostle to the Hebrews.

There were four shepherds who had the care of Immanuel's sheep on the
Delectable Mountains, and their names were Knowledge, Experience,
Watchful, and Sincere.  Now, in that very beautiful episode of his great
allegory, John Bunyan is doing his very utmost to impress upon all his
ministerial readers how much there is that goes to the making of a good
minister, and how much every good minister has to do.  Each several
minister must do all that in him lies, from the day of his ordination to
the day of his death, to be all to his people that those four shepherds
were to Immanuel's sheep.  He is to labour, in season and out of season,
to be a minister of the ripest possible knowledge, the deepest and widest
possible experience, the most sleepless watchfulness, and the most
absolute and scrupulous sincerity.  Now, enough has perhaps been said
already about a minister's knowledge and his experience; enough,
certainly, and more than enough for some of us to hope half to carry out;
and, therefore, I shall at once go on to take up Watchful, and to supply,
so far as I am able, the plainest possible interpretation of this part of
Bunyan's parable.

1.  Every true minister, then, watches, in the words of the apostle, for
the souls of his people.  An ordinary minister's everyday work embraces
many duties and offers many opportunities, but through all his duties and
through all his opportunities there runs this high and distinctive duty
of watching for the souls of his people.  A minister may be a great
scholar, he may have taken all sacred learning for his province, he may
be a profound and a scientific theologian, he may be an able church
leader, he may be a universally consulted authority on ecclesiastical
law, he may be a skilful and successful debater in church courts, he may
even be a great pulpit orator, holding thousands entranced by his
impassioned eloquence; but a true successor of the prophets of the Old
Testament and of the apostles of the New Testament he is not, unless he
watches for the souls of men.  All these endowments, and all these
occupations, right and necessary as, in their own places, they all
are,--great talents, great learning, great publicity, great
popularity,--all tend, unless they are taken great care of, to lead their
possessors away from all time for, and from all sympathy with, the
watchfulness of the New Testament minister.  Watching over a flock brings
to you none of the exhilaration of authority and influence, none of the
intoxication of publicity and applause.  Your experiences are the quite
opposite of all these things when you are watching over your flock.  Your
work among your flock is all done in distant and lonely places, on
hillsides, among woods and thickets, and in cloudy and dark days.  You
spend your strength among sick and dying and wandering sheep, among
wolves and weasels, and what not, of that verminous kind.  At the same
time, all good pastors are not so obscure and forgotten as all that.  Some
exceptionally able and exceptionally devoted and self-forgetful men
manage to combine both extremes of a minister's duties and opportunities
in themselves.  Our own Sir Henry Moncreiff was a pattern pastor.  There
was no better pastor in Edinburgh in his day than dear Sir Henry was; and
yet, at the same time, everybody knows what an incomparable
ecclesiastical casuist Sir Henry was.  Mr. Moody, again, is a great
preacher, preaching to tens of thousands of hearers at a time; but, at
the same time, Mr. Moody is one of the most skilful and attentive pastors
that ever took individual souls in hand and kept them over many years in
mind.  But these are completely exceptional men, and what I want to say
to commonplace and limited and everyday men like myself is this, that
watching for the souls of our people, one by one, day in and day
out,--that, above everything else, that, and nothing else,--makes any man
a pastor of the apostolic type.  An able man may know all about the
history, the habitat, the various species, the breeds, the diseases, and
the prices of sheep, and yet be nothing at all of a true shepherd.  And
so may a minister.

2.  Pastoral visitation, combined with personal dealing, is by far the
best way of watching for souls.  I well remember when I first began my
ministry in this congregation, how much I was impressed with what one of
the ablest and best of our then ministers was reported to have testified
on his deathbed.  Calling back to his bedside a young minister who had
come to see him, the dying man said: 'Prepare for the pulpit; above
everything else you do, prepare for the pulpit.  Let me again repeat it,
should it at any time stand with you between visiting a deathbed and
preparing for the pulpit, prepare for the pulpit.'  I was immensely
impressed with that dying injunction when it was repeated to me, but I
have lived,--I do not say to put my preparation for the pulpit, such as
it is, second to my more pastoral work in my week's thoughts, but--to put
my visiting in the very front rank and beside my pulpit.  'We never were
accustomed to much visiting,' said my elders to me in their solicitude
for their young minister when he was first left alone with this whole
charge; 'only appear in your own pulpit twice on Sabbath: keep as much at
home as possible: we were never used to much visiting, and we do not look
for it.'  Well, that was most kindly intended; but it was much more kind
than wise.  For I have lived to learn that no congregation will continue
to prosper, or, if other more consolidated and less exacting
congregations, at any rate not this congregation, without constant
pastoral attention.  And remember, I do not complain of that.  Far, far
from that.  For I am as sure as I am of anything connected with a
minister's life, that a minister's own soul will prosper largely in the
measure that the souls of his people prosper through his pastoral work.
No preaching, even if it were as good preaching as the apostle's itself,
can be left to make up for the neglect of pastoral visitation and
personal intercourse.  'I taught you from house to house,' says Paul
himself, when he was resigning the charge of the church of Ephesus into
the hands of the elders of Ephesus.  What would we ministers not give for
a descriptive report of an afternoon's house-to-house visitation by the
Apostle Paul!  Now in a workshop, now at a sickbed, now with a Greek, now
with a Jew, and, in every case, not discussing politics and cursing the
weather, not living his holidays over again and hearing of all the
approaching marriages, but testifying to all men in his own incomparably
winning and commanding way repentance toward God and faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ.  We city ministers call out and complain that we have
no time to visit our people in their own houses; but that is all
subterfuge.  If the whole truth were told about the busiest of us, it is
not so much want of time as want of intention; it is want of set and
indomitable purpose to do it; it is want of method and of regularity such
as all business men must have; and it is want, above all, of laying out
every hour of every day under the Great Taskmaster's eye.  Many country
ministers again,--we, miserable men that we are, are never happy or well
placed,--complain continually that their people are so few, and so
scattered, and so ignorant, and so uninteresting, and so unresponsive,
that it is not worth their toil to go up and down in remote places
seeking after them.  It takes a whole day among bad roads and wet bogs to
visit a shepherd's wife and children, and two or three bothies and
pauper's hovels on the way home.  'On the morrow,' so runs many an entry
in Thomas Boston's _Memoirs_, 'I visited the sick, and spent the
afternoon in visiting others, and found gross ignorance prevailing.
Nothing but stupidity prevailed; till I saw that I had enough to do among
my handful.  I had another diet of catechising on Wednesday afternoon,
and the discovery I made of the ignorance of God and of themselves made
me the more satisfied with the smallness of my charge . . . Twice a year
I catechised the parish, and once a year I visited their families.  My
method of visitation was this.  I made a particular application of my
doctrine in the pulpit to the family, exhorted them all to lay all these
things to heart, exhorted them also to secret prayer, supposing they kept
family worship, urged their relative duties upon them,' etc. etc.  And
then at his leaving Ettrick, he writes: 'Thus I parted with a people
whose hearts were knit to me and mine to them.  The last three or four
years had been much blessed, and had been made very comfortable to me,
not in respect of my own handful only, but others of the countryside
also.'  Jonathan Edwards called Thomas Boston 'that truly great divine.'
I am not such a judge of divinity as Jonathan Edwards was, but I always
call Boston to myself that truly great pastor.  But my lazy and deceitful
heart says to me: No praise to Boston, for he lived and did his work in
the quiet Forest of Ettrick.  True, so he did.  Well, then, look at the
populous and busy town of Kidderminster.  And let me keep continually
before my abashed conscience that hard-working corpse Richard Baxter.
Absolutely on the same page on which that dying man enters diseases and
medicines enough to fill a doctor's diary after a whole day in an
incurable hospital, that noble soul goes on to say: 'I preached before
the wars twice each Lord's Day, but after the wars but once, and once
every Thursday, besides occasional sermons.  Every Thursday evening my
neighbours that were most desirous, and had opportunity, met at my house.
Two days every week my assistant and I myself took fourteen families
between us for private catechising and conference; he going through the
parish, and the town coming to me.  I first heard them recite the words
of the Catechism, and then examined them about the sense, and lastly
urged them, with all possible engaging reason and vehemency, to
answerable affection and practice.  If any of them were stalled through
ignorance or bashfulness, I forbore to press them, but made them hearers,
and turned all into instruction and exhortation.  I spent about an hour
with a family, and admitted no others to be present, lest bashfulness
should make it burdensome, or any should talk of the weakness of others.'
And then he tells how his people's necessity made him practise physic
among them, till he would have twenty at his door at once.  'All these my
employments were but my recreations, and, as it were, the work of my
spare hours.  For my writings were my chiefest daily labour.  And blessed
be the God of mercies that brought me from the grave and gave me, after
wars and sickness, fourteen years' liberty in such sweet employment!'  Let
all ministers who would sit at home over a pipe and a newspaper with a
quiet conscience keep Boston's _Memoirs_ and Baxter's _Reliquiae_ at
arm's-length.

3.  Our young communicants' classes, and still more, those private
interviews that precede and finish up our young communicants' classes,
are by far our best opportunities as pastors.  I remember Dr. Moody
Stuart telling me long ago that he had found his young communicants'
classes to be the most fruitful opportunities of all his ministry; as,
also, next to them, times of baptism in families.  And every minister who
tries to be a minister at all after Dr. Moody Stuart's pattern, will tell
you something of the same thing.  They get at the opening history of
their young people's hearts before their first communion.  They make
shorthand entries and secret memoranda at such a season like this: 'A. a
rebuke to me.  He had for long been astonished at me that I did not speak
to him about his soul.  B. traced his conversion to the singing of 'The
sands of time are sinking' in this church last summer.  C. was spoken to
by a room-mate.  D. was to be married, and she died.  Of E. I have great
hope.  F., were she anywhere but at home, I would have great hopes of
her,'--and so on.  But, then, when a minister takes boldness to turn over
the pages of his young communicants' roll for half a lifetime--ah me, ah
me!  What was I doing to let that so promising communicant go so far
astray, and I never to go after him?  And that other.  And that other.
And that other.  Till we can read no more.  O God of mercy, when Thou
inquirest after blood, let me be hidden in the cleft of that Rock so
deeply cleft for unwatchful ministers!

4.  And then, as Dr. Joseph Parker says, who says everything so plainly
and so powerfully: 'There is pastoral preaching as well as pastoral
visitation.  There is pastoral preaching; rich revelation of divine
truth; high, elevating treatment of the Christian mysteries; and he is
the pastor to me who does not come to my house to drink and smoke and
gossip and show his littleness, but who, out of a rich experience, meets
me with God's word at every turn of my life, and speaks the something to
me that I just at that moment want.'  Let us not have less pastoral
visitation in the time to come, but let us have more and more of such
pastoral preaching.

5.  But, my brethren, it is time for you, as John said to the elect lady
and her children, to look to yourselves.  The salvation of your soul is
precious, and its salvation is such a task, such a battle, such a danger,
and such a risk, that it will take all that your most watchful minister
can do, and all that you can do yourself, and all that God can do for
you, and yet your soul will scarcely be saved after all.  You do not know
what salvation is nor what it costs.  You will not be saved in your
sleep.  You will not waken up at the last day and find yourself saved by
the grace of God and you not know it.  You will know it to your bitter
cost before your soul is saved from sin and death.  You and your minister
too.  And therefore it is that He Who is to judge your soul at last says
to you, as much as He says it to any of His ministers, Watch!  What I say
unto one I say unto all, Watch.  Watch and pray, lest you enter into
temptation.  Look to yourself, then, sinner.  In Christ's name, look to
yourself and watch yourself.  You have no enemy to fear but yourself.  No
one can hurt a hair of your head but yourself.  Have you found that out?
Have you found yourself out?  Do you ever look in the direction of your
own heart?  Have you begun to watch what goes on in your own heart?  What
is it to you what goes on in the world around you compared with what goes
on in the world within you?  Look, then, to yourself.  Watch, above all
watching, yourself.  Watch what it is that moves you to do this or that.
Stop sometimes and ask yourself why you do such and such a thing.  Did
you ever hear of such a thing as a motive in a human heart?  And did your
minister, watching for your soul, ever tell you that your soul will be
lost or saved, condemned or justified at the last day according to your
motives?  You never knew that!  You were never told that by your
minister!  Miserable pair!  What does he take up his Sabbaths with?  And
what leads you to waste your Sabbaths and your soul on such a stupid
minister?  But, shepherd or no shepherd, minister or no minister, look to
yourself.  Look to yourself when you lie down and when you rise up; when
you go out and when you come in; when you are in the society of men and
when you are alone with your own heart.  Look to yourself when men praise
you, and look to yourself when men blame you.  Look to yourself when you
sit down to eat and drink, and still more when you sit and speak about
your absent brother.  Look to yourself when you meet your enemy or your
rival in the street, when you pass his house, or hear or read his name.
Yes, you may well say so.  At that rate a man's life would be all
watching.  So it would.  And so it must.  And more than that, so it is
with some men not far from you who never told you how much you have made
them watch.  Did you never know all that till now?  Were you never told
that every Christian man, I do not mean every communicant, but every
truly and sincerely and genuinely Christian man watches himself in that
way?  For as the one essential and distinguishing mark of a New Testament
minister is not that he is an able man, or a studious man, or an eloquent
man, but that he is a pastor and watches for souls, so it is the chiefest
and the best mark, and to himself the only safe and infallible mark, that
any man is a sincere and true Christian man, that he watches himself
always and in all things looks first and last to himself.




SINCERE


   'In all things showing sincerity.'--Paul to Titus.

Charles Bennett has a delightful drawing of Sincere in Charles Kingsley's
beautiful edition of _The Pilgrim's Progress_.  You feel that you could
look all day into those clear eyes.  Your eyes would begin to quail
before you had looked long into the fourth shepherd's deep eyes; but
those eyes of his have no cause to quail under yours.  This man has
nothing to hide from you.  He never had.  He loves you, and his love to
you is wholly without dissimulation.  He absolutely and unreservedly
means and intends by you and yours all that he has ever said to you and
yours, and much more than he has ever been able to say.  The owner of
those deep blue eyes is as true to you when he is among your enemies as
he is true to the truth itself when he is among your friends.  Mark also
the unobtrusive strength of his mouth, all suffused over as it is with a
most winning and reassuring sweetness.  The fourth shepherd of the
Delectable Mountains is one of the very best of Bennett's excellent
portraits.  But Mr. Kerr Bain's pen-and-ink portrait of Sincere in his
_People of the Pilgrimage_ is even better than Bennett's excellent
drawing.  'Sincere is softer in outline and feature than Watchful.  His
eye is full-open and lucid, with a face of mingled expressiveness and
strength--a lovable, lowly, pure-spirited man--candid, considerate,
willing, cheerful--not speaking many words, and never any but true
words.'  Happy sheep that have such a shepherd!  Happy people! if only
any people in the Church of Christ could have such a pastor.

It is surely too late, too late or too early, to begin to put tests to a
minister's sincerity after he has been licensed and called and is now
standing in the presence of his presbytery and surrounded with his
congregation.  It is a tremendous enough question to put to any man at
any time: 'Are not zeal for the honour of God, love to Jesus Christ, and
desire of saving souls your great motives and chief inducement to enter
into the function of the holy ministry?'  A man who does not understand
what it is you are saying to him will just make the same bow to these
awful words that he makes to all your other conventional questions.  But
the older he grows in his ministry, and the more he comes to discover the
incurable plague of his own heart, and with that the whole meaning and
full weight of your overwhelming words, the more will he shrink back from
having such questions addressed to him.  Fools will rush in where Moses
and Isaiah and Jeremiah and Peter and Paul feared to set their foot.  Paul
was to be satisfied if only he was let do the work of a minister all his
days and then was not at the end made a castaway.  And yet, writing to
the same church, Paul says that his sincerity among them had been such
that he could hold up his ministerial life like spotless linen between
the eye of his conscience and the sun.  But all that was written and is
to be read and understood as Paul's ideal that he had honestly laboured
after, rather than as an actual attainment he had arrived at.  Great as
Paul's attainments were in humility, in purity of intention, and in
simplicity and sincerity of heart, yet the mind of Christ was not so
given even to His most gifted apostle, that he could seriously say that
he had attained to such utter ingenuity, simplicity, disengagement from
himself, and surrender to Christ, as to be able to face the sun with a
spotless ministry.  All he ever says at his boldest and best on that
great matter is to be read in the light of his universal law of personal
and apostolic imperfection--Not that I have attained, either am already
perfect; but I follow after.  And blessed be God that this is all that He
looks for in any of His ministers, that they follow all their days after
a more and more godly sincerity.  It was the apostle's love of absolute
sincerity,--and, especially, it was his bitter hatred of all the
remaining dregs of insincerity that he from time to time detected in his
own heart,--it was this that gave him his good conscience before a God of
pity and compassion, truth and grace.  And with something of the same
love of perfect sincerity, accompanied with something of the same hatred
of insincerity and of ourselves on account of it, we, too, toward this
same God of pity and compassion, will hold up a conscience that would
fain be a good conscience.  And till it is a good conscience we shall
hold up with it a broken heart.  And that genuine love of all sincerity,
and that equally genuine hatred of all remaining insincerity, will make
all our ministerial work, as it made all Paul's apostolic work, not only
acceptable, but will also make its very defects and defeats both
acceptable and fruitful in the estimation and result of God.  It so
happens that I am reading for my own private purposes at this moment an
old book of 1641, Drexilius _On a Right Intention_, and I cannot do
better at this point than share with you the page I am just reading.  'Not
to be too much troubled or daunted at any cross event,' he says, 'is the
happy state of his mind who has entered on any enterprise with a pure and
pious intention.  That great apostle James gained no more than eight
persons in all Spain when he was called to lay down his head under
Herod's sword.  And was not God ready to give the same reward to James as
to those who converted kings and whole kingdoms?  Surely He was.  For God
does not give His ministers a charge as to what they shall effect, but
only as to what they shall intend to effect.  Wherefore, when his art
faileth a servant of God, when nothing goes forward, when everything
turneth to his ruin, even when his hope is utterly void, he is scarce one
whit troubled; for this, saith he to himself, is not in my power, but in
God's power alone.  I have done what I could.  I have done what was fit
for me to do.  Fair and foul is all of God's disposing.'

And, then, this simplicity and purity of intention gives a minister that
fine combination of candour and considerateness which we saw to exist
together so harmoniously in the character of Sincere.  Such a minister is
not tongue-tied with sinister and selfish intentions.  His sincerity
toward God gives him a masterful position among his people.  His words of
rebuke and warning go straight to his people's consciences because they
come straight out of his own conscience.  His words are their own witness
that he is neither fearing his people nor fawning upon his people in
speaking to them.  And, then, such candour prepares the way for the
utmost considerateness when the proper time comes for considerateness.
Such a minister is patient with the stupid, and even with the wicked and
the injurious, because in all their stupidity and wickedness and
injuriousness they have only injured and impoverished themselves.  And if
God is full of patience and pity for the ignorant and the evil and the
out of the way, then His sincere-hearted minister is of all men the very
man to carry the divine message of forgiveness and instruction to such
sinners.  Yes, Mr. Bain must have seen Sincere closely and in a clear
light when he took down this fine feature of his character, that he is at
once candid and considerate--with a whole face of mingled expressiveness
and strength.

Writing about sincerity and a right intention in young ministers, old
Drexilius says: 'When I turn to clergymen, I would have sighs and groans
to speak for me.  For, alas! I am afraid that there be found some which
come into the ministry, not that they may obtain a holy office in which
to spend their life, but for worse ends.  To enter the ministry with a
naughty intention is to come straight to destruction.  Let no minister
think at any time of a better living, but only at all times of a holier
life.  Wherefore, O ministers and spiritual men, consider and take heed.
There can be no safe guide to your office but a right, sincere, pure
intention.  Whosoever cometh to it with any other conduct or companion
must either return to his former state of life, or here he shall
certainly perish . . . What is more commendable in a religious man than
to be always in action and to be exercised one while in teaching the
ignorant, another while in comforting such as are troubled in mind,
sometimes in making sermons, and sometimes in admonishing the sick?  But
with what secret malignity doth a wrong intention insinuate itself into
these very actions that are the most religious!  For ofttimes we desire
nothing else but to be doing.  We desire to become public, not that we
may profit many, but because we have not learned how to be private.  We
seek for divers employments, not that we may avoid idleness, but that we
may come into people's knowledge.  We despise a small number of hearers,
and such as are poor, simple, and rustical, and let fly our endeavours at
more eminent chairs, though not in apparent pursuit; all which is the
plain argument of a corrupt intention.  O ye that wait upon religion, O
ministers of God, this is to sell most transcendent wares at a very low
rate--nay, this is to cast them, and yourselves too, into the fire.'

There are some outstanding temptations to insincerity in some ministers
that must be pointed out here.  (1) Ministers with a warm rhetorical
temperament are beset continually with the temptation to pile up false
fire on the altar; to dilate, that is, both in their prayers and in their
sermons, upon certain topics in a style that is full of insincerity.
Ministers who have no real hold of divine things in themselves will yet
fill their pulpit hour with the most florid and affecting pictures of
sacred and even of evangelical things.  This is what our shrewd and
satirical people mean when they say of us that So-and-so has a great
_sough_ of the gospel in his preaching, but the _sough_ only.  (2)
Another kindred temptation to even the best and truest of ministers is to
make pulpit appeals about the evil of sin and the necessity of a holy
life that they themselves do not feel and do not attempt to live up to.
Butler has a terrible passage on the heart-hardening effects of making
pictures of virtue and never trying to put those pictures into practice.
And readers of Newman will remember his powerful application of this same
temptation to literary men in his fine sermon on Unreal Words.  (3)
Another temptation is to affect an interest in our people and a sympathy
with them that we do not in reality feel.  All human life is full of this
temptation to double-dealing and hypocrisy; but, then, it is large part
of a minister's office to feel with and for his people, and to give the
tenderest and the most sacred expression to that feeling.  And, unless he
is a man of a scrupulously sincere, true, and tender heart, his daily
duties will soon develop him into a solemn hypocrite.  And if he feels
only for his own people, and for them only when they become and as long
as they remain his own people, then his insincerity and imposture is only
the more abominable in the sight of God.  (4) Archbishop Whately, with
that strong English common sense and that cultivated clear-headedness
that almost make him a writer of genius, points out a view of sincerity
that it behoves ministers especially to cultivate in themselves.  He
tells us not only to act always according to our convictions, but also to
see that our convictions are true and unbiassed convictions.  It is a
very superficial sincerity even when we actually believe what we profess
to believe.  But that is a far deeper and a far nobler sincerity which
watches with a strict and severe jealousy over the formation of our
beliefs and convictions.  Ministers must, first for themselves and then
for their people, live far deeper down than other men.  They must be at
home among the roots, not of actions only, but much more of convictions.
We may act honestly enough out of our present convictions and principles,
while, all the time, our convictions and our principles are vitiated at
bottom by the selfish ground they ultimately stand in.  Let ministers,
then, to begin with, live deep down among the roots of their opinions and
their beliefs.  Let them not only flee from being consciously insincere
and hypocritical men; let them keep their eye like the eye of God
continually on that deep ground of the soul where so many men unknown to
themselves deceive themselves.  And, thus exercised, they shall be able
out of a deep and clean heart to rise far above that trimming and hedging
and self-seeking and self-sheltering in disputed and unpopular questions
which is such a temptation to all men, and is such a shame and scandal in
a minister.

Now, my good friends, we have kept all this time to the fourth shepherd
and to his noble name, but let us look in closing at some of his
sheep,--that is to say, at ourselves.  For is it not said in the prophet:
Ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, saith
the Lord God.  All, therefore, that has been said about the sincerity and
insincerity of ministers is to be said equally of their people also in
all their special and peculiar walks of life.  Sincerity is as noble a
virtue, and insincerity is as detestable a vice, in a doctor, or a
lawyer, or a schoolmaster, or a merchant,--almost, if not altogether, as
much so as in a minister.  Your insincerity and hypocrisy in your daily
intercourse with your friends and neighbours is a miserable enough state
of mind, but at the root of all that there lies your radical insincerity
toward God and your own soul.  In his _Christian Perfection_ William Law
introduces his readers to a character called Julius, who goes regularly
to prayers, and there confesses himself to be a miserable sinner who has
no health in him; and yet that same Julius cannot bear to be informed of
any imperfection or suspected to be wanting in any kind or degree of
virtue.  Now, Law asks, can there be a stronger proof that Julius is
wanting in the sincerity of his devotions?  Is it not as plain as
anything can be that that man's confessions of sin are only words of
course, a certain civility of sacred speech in which his heart has not a
single atom of share?  Julius confesses himself to be in great weakness,
corruption, disorder, and infirmity, and yet he is mortally angry with
you if at any time you remotely and tenderly hint that he may be just a
shade wrong in his opinions, or one hair's-breadth off what is square and
correct in his actions.  Look to yourself, Julius, and to your insincere
heart.  Look to yourself at all times, but above all other times at the
times and in the places of your devotions.  Ten to one, my hearer of to-
night, you may never have thought of that before.  And what would you
think if you were told that this Sincere shepherd was appointed us for
this evening's discourse, and that you were led up to this house, just
that you might have your attention turned to your many miserable
insincerities of all kinds, but especially to your so Julius-like
devotions?  'And Nathan said unto David, Thou art the man.  And David
said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord.'

What, then, my truly miserable fellow-sinner and fellow-worshipper, what
are we to do?  Am I to give up preaching altogether because I am
continually carried on under the impulse of the pulpit far beyond both my
attainments and my intentions?  Am I to cease from public prayer
altogether because when engaged in it I am compelled to utter words of
contrition and confession and supplication that little agree with the
everyday temper and sensibility of my soul?  And am I wholly to eschew
pastoral work because my heart is not so absolutely clean and simple and
sincere toward all my own people and toward other ministers' people as it
ought to be?  No!  Never!  Never!  Let me rather keep my heart of such
earth and slag in the hottest place of temptation, and then, such
humiliating discoveries as are there continually being made to me of
myself will surely at last empty me of all self-righteousness and self-
sufficiency, and make me at the end of my ministry, if not till then, the
penitent pastor of a penitent people.  And when thus penitent, then
surely, also somewhat more sincere in my designs and intentions, if not
even then in my attainments and performances.

'O Eternal God, Who hast made all things for man, and man for Thy glory,
sanctify my body and my soul, my thoughts and my intentions, my words and
my actions, that whatsoever I shall think or speak or do may be by me
designed to the glory of Thy name.  O God, turn my necessities into
virtue, and the works of nature into the works of grace, by making them
orderly, regular, temperate, subordinate, and profitable to ends beyond
their own proper efficacy.  And let no pride or self-seeking, no
covetousness or revenge, no impure mixtures or unhandsome purposes, no
little ends and low imaginations, pollute my spirit or unhallow any of my
words or actions.  But let my body be the servant of my spirit, and both
soul and body servants of my Lord, that, doing all things for Thy glory
here, I may be made a partaker of Thy glory hereafter; through Jesus
Christ, my Lord.  Amen.'




FOOTNOTES


{1}  Delivered on the Sabbath before Communion.

{2}  Delivered June 26th, 1892, on the eve of a general election.

========================================
