========================================

THE LURE OF THE DIM TRAILS

By B. M. Bower




CHAPTER I. IN SEARCH OF THE WESTERN TONE

"What do you care, anyway?" asked Reeve-Howard philosophically. "It
isn't as if you depended on the work for a living. Why worry over the
fact that a mere pastime fails to be financially a success. You don't
need to write--"

"Neither do you need to slave over those dry-point things," Thurston
retorted, in none the best humor with his comforter "You've an income
bigger than mine; yet you toil over Grecian-nosed women with untidy hair
as if each one meant a meal and a bed."

"A meal and a bed--that's good; you must think I live like a king."

"And I notice you hate like the mischief to fail, even though."

"Only I never have failed," put in Reeve-Howard, with the amused
complacency born of much adulation.

Thurston kicked a foot-rest out of his way. "Well, I have. The fashion
now is for swashbuckling tales with a haze of powder smoke rising
to high heaven. The public taste runs to gore and more gore, and
kidnappings of beautiful maidens-bah!"

"Follow the fashion then--if you must write. Get out of your pink tea
and orchid atmosphere, and take your heroines out West--away out, beyond
the Mississippi, and let them be kidnapped. Or New Mexico would do."

"New Mexico is also beyond the Mississippi, I believe," Thurston hinted.

"Perhaps it is. What I mean is, write what the public wants, since you
don't relish failure. Why don't you do things about the plains? It
ought to be easy, and you were born out there somewhere. It should come
natural."

"I have," Thurston sighed. "My last rejection states that the local
color is weak and unconvincing. Hang the local color!" The foot-rest
suffered again.

Reeve-Howard was getting into his topcoat languidly, as he did
everything else. "The thing to do, then," he drawled, "is to go out and
study up on it. Get in touch with that country, and your local color
will convince. Personally though, I like those little society skits you
do--"

"Skits!" exploded Thurston. "My last was a four-part serial. I never did
a skit in my life."

"Beg pardon-which is more than you did after accusing my studies of
having untidy hair. Don't look so glum, Phil. Go out and learn your
West; a month or so will put you up to date--and by Jove! I half envy
you the trip."

That is what put the idea into Thurston's head; and as Thurston's ideas
generally bore fruit of one sort or another, he went out that very day
and ordered from his tailor a complete riding outfit, and because he
was a good customer the tailor consented to rush the work. It seemed to
Thurston, looking over cuts of the very latest styles in riding clothes,
that already he was breathing the atmosphere of the plains.

That night he stayed at home and dreamed, of the West. His memory,
coupled with what he had heard and idealized by his imagination,
conjured dim visions of what he had once known had known and forgotten;
of a land here men and conditions harked back to the raw foundations
of civilization; where wide plains flecked with sage-brush and ribboned
with faint, brown trails, spread away and away to a far sky-line. For
Phil Thurston was range-born, if not range-bred, His father had chosen
always to live out on the edge of things--out where the trails of men
are dim and far apart-and the silent prairie bequeaths a heritage of
distance-hunger to her sons.

While he brooded grew a keen longing to see again the little town
huddled under the bare, brown hills that shut out the world; to see the
gay-blanketed Indians who stole like painted shadows about the place,
and the broad river always hurrying away to the sunrise. He had been
afraid of the river and of the bare hills and the Indians. He felt that
his mother, also, had been afraid. He pictured again--and he picture was
blurred and indistinct-the day when strange men had brought his father
mysteriously home; men who were silent save for the shuffling of their
feet, and who carried their big hats awkwardly in their hands.

There had been a day of hushed voices and much weeping and gloom, and
he had been afraid to play. Then they had carried his father as
mysteriously away again, and his mother had hugged him close and cried
bitterly and long. The rest was blank. When one is only five, the
present quickly blurs what is past, and he wondered that, after
all these years, he should feel the grip of something very like
homesickness--and for something more than half forgotten. But though
he did not realize it, in his veins flowed the adventurous blood of his
father, and to it the dim trails were calling.

In four days he set his face eagerly toward the dun deserts and the
sage-brush gray.

At Chicago a man took the upper berth in Thurston's section, and settled
into the seat with a deep sigh--presumably of thankfulness. Thurston,
with the quick eye of those who write, observed the whiteness of his
ungloved hands, the coppery tan of cheeks and throat, the clear keenness
of his eyes, and the four dimples in the crown of his soft, gray hat,
and recognized him as a fine specimen of the Western type of farmer,
returning home from the stockman's Mecca. After that he went calmly back
to his magazine and forgot all about him.

Twenty miles out, the stranger leaned forward and tapped him lightly on
the knee. "Say, I hate to interrupt yuh," he began in a whimsical drawl,
evidently characteristic of the man, "but I'd like to know where it is
I've seen yuh before."

Thurston glanced up impersonally, hesitated between annoyance and a
natural desire to, be courteous, and replied that he had no memory of
any previous meeting.

"Mebby not," admitted the other, and searched the face of Thurston with
his keen eyes. It came to Phil that they were also a bit wistful, but he
went unsympathetically back to his reading.

Five miles more and be touched Thurston again, apologetically yet
insistently. "Say," he drawled, "ain't your name Thurston? I'll bet
a carload uh steers it is--Bud Thurston. And your home range is Fort
Benton."

Phil stared and confessed to all but the "Bud."

"That's what me and your dad always called yuh," the man asserted.
"Well, I'll be hanged! But I knew it. I knew I'd run acrost yuh
somewheres. You're the dead image uh your dad, Bill Thurston. And me and
Bill freighted together from Whoop-up to Benton along in the seventies.
Before yuh was born we was chums. I don't reckon you'd remember me? Hank
Graves, that used to pack yuh around on his back, and fill yuh up on
dried prunes--when dried prunes was worth money? Yuh used to call 'em
'frumes,' and--Why, it was me with your dad when the Indians pot-shot
him at Chimney Rock; and it was me helped your mother straighten things
up so she could pull out, back where she come from. She never took to
the West much. How is she? Dead? Too bad; she was a mighty fine woman,
your mother was.

"Well, I'll-be-hanged! Bud Thurston little, tow-headed Bud that used to
holler for 'frumes' if he seen me coming a mile off. Doggone your measly
hide, where's all them pink apurns yuh used to wear?" He leaned back and
laughed--a silent, inner convulsion of pure gladness.

Philip Thurston was, generally speaking, a conservative young man
and one slow to make friends; slower still to discard them. He was
astonished to feel a choky sensation in his throat and a stinging of
eyelids, and a leap in his blood. To be thus taken possession of by
a blunt-speaking stranger not at all in his class; to be addressed
as "Bud," and informed that he once devoured dried prunes; to be told
"Doggone your measly hide" should have affronted him much. Instead, he
seemed to be swept mysteriously back into the primitive past, and to
feel akin to this stranger with the drawl and the keen eyes. It was the
blood of his father coming to its own.

From that hour the two were friends. Hank Graves, in his whimsical
drawl, told Phil things about his father that made his blood tingle
with pride; his father, whom he had almost forgotten, yet who had lived
bravely his life, daring where other men quailed, going steadfastly upon
his way when other men hesitated.

So, borne swiftly into the West they talked, and the time seemed short.
The train had long since been racing noisily over the silent prairies
spread invitingly with tender green--great, lonely, inscrutable, luring
men with a spell as sure and as strong as is the spell of the sea.

The train reeled across a trestle that spanned a deep, dry gash in the
earth. In the green bottom huddled a cluster of pygmy cattle and mounted
men; farther down were two white flakes of tents, like huge snowflakes
left unmelted in the green canyon.

"That's the Lazy Eight--my outfit," Graves informed Thurston with the
unconscious pride of possession, pointing a forefinger as they whirled
on. "I've got to get off, next station. Yuh want to remember, Bud, the
Lazy Eight's your home from now on. We'll make a cow-puncher of yuh in
no time; you've got it in yuh, or yuh wouldn't look so much like your
dad. And you can write stories about us all yuh want--we won't kick.
The way I've got the summer planned out, you'll waller chin-deep in
material; all yuh got to do is foller the Lazy Eight through till
shipping time."

Thurston had not intended learning to be a cow-puncher, or following
the Lazy Eight or any other hieroglyphic through 'till shipping
time--whenever that was.

But facing Hank Graves, he had not the heart to tell him so, or that he
had planned to spend only a month--or six weeks at most--in the West,
gathering local color and perhaps a plot or two? and a few types.
Thurston was great on types.

The train slowed at a little station with a dismal red section house in
the immediate background and a red-fronted saloon close beside. "Here
we are," cried Graves, "and I ain't sorry; only I wisht you was going
to stop right now. But I'll look for yuh in three or four days at the
outside. So-long, Bud. Remember, the Lazy Eight's your hang-out."



CHAPTER II. LOCAL COLOR IN THE RAW

For the rest of the way Thurston watched the green hills slide by--and
the greener hollows--and gave himself up to visions of Fort Benton;
visions of creaking bull-trains crawling slowly, like giant brown worms,
up and down the long hill; of many high-piled bales of buffalo hides
upon the river bank, and clamorous little steamers churning up against
the current; the Fort Benton that had, for many rushing miles, filled
and colored the speech of Hank Graves and stimulated his childish
half-memory.

But when he reached the place and wandered aimlessly about the streets,
the vision faded into half-resentful realization that these things were
no more forever. For the bull-trains, a roundup outfit clattered
noisily out of town and disappeared in an elusive dust-cloud; for the
gay-blanketed Indians slipping like painted shadows from view, stray
cow-boys galloped into town, slid from their saddles and clanked with
dragging rowels into the nearest saloon, or the post-office. Between
whiles the town cuddled luxuriously down in the deep little valley
and slept while the river, undisturbed by pompous steamers, murmured a
lullaby.

It was not the Fort Benton he had come far to see, so that on the second
day he went away up the long hill that shut out the world and, until the
east-bound train came from over the prairies, paced the depot platform
impatiently with never a vision to keep him company.

For a long time the gaze of Thurston clung fascinated to the wide
prairie land, feeling again the stir in his blood. Then, when a deep cut
shut from him the sight of the wilderness, he chanced to turn his head,
and looked straight into the clear, blue-gray eyes of a girl across
the aisle. Thurston considered himself immune from blue-gray--or any
other-eyes, so that he permitted himself to regard her calmly and
judicially, his mind reverting to the fact that he would need a heroine
to be kidnapped, and wondering if she would do. She was a Western girl,
he could tell that by the tan and by her various little departures from
the Eastern styles--such as doing her hair low rather than high. Where
he had been used to seeing the hair of woman piled high and skewered
with many pins, hers was brushed smoothly back-smoothly save for little,
irresponsible waves here and there. Thurston decided that the style was
becoming to her. He wondered if the fellow beside her were her brother;
and then reminded himself sagely that brothers do not, as a rule, devote
their time quite so assiduously to the entertainment of their sisters.
He could not stare at her forever, and so he gave over his speculations
and went back to the prairies.

Another hour, and Thurston was stiffing a yawn when the coaches bumped
sharply together and, with wheels screeching protest as the brakes
clutched them, the train, grinding protest in every joint, came, with a
final heavy jar, to a dead stop. Thurston thought it was a wreck, until
out ahead came the sharp crackling of rifles. A passenger behind him
leaned out of the window and a bullet shattered the glass above his
head; he drew back hastily.

Some one hurried through the front vestibule, the door was pushed
unceremoniously open and a man--a giant, he seemed to Thurston--stopped
just inside, glared down the length of the coach through slits in the
black cloth over his face and bawled, "Hands up!"

Thurston was so utterly surprised that his hands jerked themselves
involuntarily above his head, though he did not feel particularly
frightened; he was filled with a stupefied sort of curiosity to know
what would come next. The coach, so far as he could see, seemed filled
with uplifted, trembling hands, so that he did not feel ashamed of his
own. The man behind him put up his hands with the other--but one of them
held a revolver that barked savagely and unexpectedly close against the
car of Thurston. Thurston ducked. There was an echo from the front, and
the man behind, who risked so much on one shot, lurched into the aisle,
swaying uncertainly between the seats. He of the mask fired again,
viciously, and the other collapsed into a still, awkwardly huddled heap
on the floor. The revolver dropped from his fingers and struck against
Thurston's foot, making him wince.

Thurston had never before seen death come to a man, and the very
suddenness of it unnerved him. All his faculties were numbed before that
terrible, pitiless form in the door, and the limp, dead body at his feet
in the aisle. He did not even remember that here was the savage
local color he had come far a-seeking. He quite forgot to improve the
opportunity by making mental note of all the little, convincing details,
as was his wont.

Presently he awoke to the realization of certain words spoken
insistently close beside him. He turned his eyes and saw that the girl,
her eyes staring straight before her, her slim, brown hands uplifted,
was yet commanding him imperiously, her voice holding to that murmuring
monotone more discreet than a whisper.

"The gun--drop down--and get it. He can't see to shoot for the seat in
front. Get the gun. Get the gun!" was what she was saying.

Thurston looked at her helplessly, imploringly. In truth, he had never
fired a gun in all his peaceful life.

"The gun--get it--and shoot!" Her eyes moved quickly in a cautious,
side-long glance that commanded impatiently. Her straight eyebrows drew
together imperiously. Then, when he met her eyes with that same helpless
look, she said another word that hurt. It was "Coward!"

Thurston looked down at the gun, and at the huddled form. A tiny river
of blood was creeping toward him. Already it had reached his foot, and
his shoe was red along the sole. He moved his foot quickly away from it,
and shuddered.

"Coward!" murmured the girl contemptuously again, and a splotch of anger
showed under the tan of her cheek.

Thurston caught his breath and wondered if he could do it; he looked
toward the door and thought how far it was to send a bullet straight
when a man has never, in all his life, fired a gun. And without looking
he could see that horrible, red stream creeping toward him like some
monster in a nightmare. His flesh crimpled with physical repulsion, but
he meant to try; perhaps he could shoot the man in the mask, so that
there would be another huddled, lifeless Thing on the floor, and another
creeping red stream.

At that instant the tawny-haired young fellow beside the girl gathered
himself for a spring, flung himself headlong before her and into the
aisle; caught the dead man's pistol from the floor and fired, seemingly
with one movement. Then he sprang up, still firing as fast as the
trigger could move. From the door came answer, shot for shot, and the
car was filled with the stifling odor of burnt powder. A woman screamed
hysterically.

Then a puff of cool, prairie breeze came in through the shattered window
behind Thurston, and the smoke-cloud lifted like a curtain blown upward
in the wind. The tawny-haired young fellow was walking coolly down the
aisle, the smoking revolver pointing like an accusing finger toward the
outlaw who lay stretched upon his face, his fingers twitching.

Outside, rifles were crackling like corn in a giant popper. Presently
it slackened to an occasional shot. A brakeman, followed by two coatless
mail-clerks with Winchesters, ran down the length of the train calling
out that there was no danger. The thud of their running feet, and the
wholesome mingling of their shouting struck sharply in the silence after
the shooting. One of the men swung up on the steps of the day coach and
came in.

"Hello, Park," he cried to the tawny haired boy. "Got one, did yuh?
That's good. We did, too got him alive. Think uh the nerve uh that
Wagner bunch! to go up against a train in broad daylight. Made an easy
getaway, too, except the feller we gloomed in the express car. How's
this one? Dead?"

"No. I reckon he'll get well enough to stretch a rope; he killed a man,
in here." He motioned toward the huddled figure in the aisle. They came
together, lifted the dead man and carried him away to the baggage car.
A brakeman came with a cloth and wiped up the red pool, and Thurston
pressed his lips tightly together and turned away his head; he could not
remember when the sight of anything had made him so deathly sick. Once
he glanced slyly at the girl opposite, and saw that she was very white
under her tan, and that the hands in her lap were clasped tightly and
yet shook. But she met his eyes squarely, and Thurston did not look at
her again; he did not like the expression of her mouth.

News of the holdup had been telegraphed ahead, and all Shellanne--which
was not much of a crowd--gathered at the station to meet the train and
congratulate the heroes. Thurston alighted almost shamefacedly into the
midst of the loud-voiced commotion. While he was looking uncertainly
about him, wondering where to go and what to do, a voice he knew hailed
him with drawling welcome.

"Hello, Bud. Got back quicker than you expected, didn't yuh? It's lucky
I happened to be in town--yuh can ride out with me. Say, yuh got quite
a bunch uh local color for a story, didn't yuh? You'll be writing
blood-and-thunder for a month on the strength of this little episode, I
reckon." his twinkling eyes teased, though his face was quite serious,
as was his voice.

She of the blue-gray eyes turned and measured Thurston with a
deliberate, leisurely glance, and her mouth still had that unpleasant
expression. Thurston colored guiltily, but Hank Graves lifted his hat
and called her Mona, and asked her if she wasn't scared stiff, and if
she were home to stay. Then he beckoned to the tawny-haired fellow with
his finger, and winked at Mona--a proceeding which shocked Thurston
considerably.

"Mona--here, hold on a minute, can't yuh? Mona, this is a friend uh
mine; Bud Thurston's his name. He's come out to study us up and round up
a hunch uh real Western atmosphere. He's a story-writer. I used to whack
bulls all over the country with his father. Bud, this is Mona Stevens;
she ranges down close to the Lazy Eight, so the sooner yuh git
acquainted, the quicker." He did not explain what would be the quicker,
and Thurston's embarrassment was only aggravated by the introduction.

Miss Stevens gave him a chilly smile, the kind that is worse than none
at all and turned her back, thinly pretending that she heard her brother
calling her, which she did not. Her brother was loudly explaining what
would have happened if he had been on that train and had got a whack at
the robbers, and his sister was far from his mind.

Graves slapped the shoulder of the fellow they had called Park.
"You young devil, next time I leave the place for a week--yes, or
overnight--I'll lock yuh up in the blacksmith shop. Have yuh got to be
Mona's special escort, these days?"

"Wish I was," Park retorted, unmoved.

"Different here--yuh ain't much account, as it is. Bud, this here's my
wagon-boss, Park Holloway; one of 'em, that is. I'm going to turn yuh
over to him and let him wise yuh up. Say, you young bucks ought to get
along together pretty smooth. Your dads run buffalo together before
either of yuh was born. Well, let's be moving--we ain't home yet. Got a
war-bag, Bud?"

Late that night Thurston lay upon a home-made bed and listened to the
frogs croaking monotonously in the hollow behind the house, and to
the lone coyote which harped upon the subject of his wrongs away on a
distant hillside, and to the subdued snoring of Hank Graves in the room
beyond. He was trying to adjust himself to this new condition of things,
and the new condition refused utterly to be measured by his accepted
standard.

According to that standard, he should feel repulsed and annoyed by the
familiarity of strangers who persisted in calling him "Bud" without
taking the trouble to find out whether or not he liked it. And what
puzzled Thurston and put him all at sea was the consciousness that he
did like it, and that it struck familiarly upon his ears as something to
which he had been accustomed in the past.

Also, according to his well-ordered past, he should hate this raw life
and rawer country where could occur such brutal things as he had that
day witnessed. He should dislike a man like Park Holloway who, having
wounded a man unto death, had calmly dismissed the subject with the
regret that his aim had not been better, so that he could have saved the
county the expense of trying and hanging the fellow. Thurston was amazed
to find that, down in the inner man of him, he admired Park Holloway
exceedingly, and privately resolved to perfect himself in the use of
fire-arms, he who had been wont to deplore the thinly veneered savagery
of men who liked such things.

After much speculation he decided that Mona Stevens would not do for a
kidnapped heroine. He could not seem to "see" her in such a position,
and, besides, he told himself that such a type of girl did not attract
him at all. She had called him a coward--and why? simply because he,
straight from the trammels of civilization, had not been prepared to
meet the situation thrust upon him-which she had thrust upon him. She
had demanded of him something he had not the power to accomplish, and
she had called him a coward. And in his heart Thurston knew that it was
unjust, and that he was not a coward.



CHAPTER III. FIRST IMPRESSIONS

Thurston, dressed immaculately in riding clothes of the latest English
cut, went airily down the stairs and discovered that he was not early,
as he had imagined. Seven o'clock, he had told himself proudly, was not
bad for a beginner; and he had smiled in anticipation of Hank Graves'
surprise which was fortunate, since he would otherwise have been cheated
of smiling at all. For Hank Graves, he learned from the cook, had eaten
breakfast at five and had left the ranch more than an hour before; the
men also were scattered to their work.

Properly humbled in spirit, he sat down to the kitchen table and ate his
belated breakfast, while the cook kneaded bread at the other end of the
same table and eyed Thurston with frank amusement. Thurston had never
before been conscious of feeling ill at ease in the presence of a
servant, and hurried through the meal so that he could escape into the
clear sunshine, feeling a bit foolish in the unaccustomed bagginess of
his riding breeches and the snugness of his leggings; for he had never
taken to outdoor sports, except as an onlooker from the shade of a grand
stand or piazza.

While he was debating the wisdom of writing a detailed description of
yesterday's tragedy while it was still fresh in his mind and stowing it
away for future "color," Park Holloway rode into the yard and on to the
stables. He nodded at Thurston and grinned without apparent cause, as
the cook had done. Thurston followed him to the corral and watched him
pull the saddle off his horse, and throw it carelessly to one side. It
looked cumbersome, that saddle; quite unlike the ones he had inspected
in the New York shops. He grasped the horn, lifted upon it and said,
"Jove!"

"Heavy, ain't it?" Park laughed, and slipped the bridle down over the
ears of his horse and dismissed him with a slap on the rump. "Don't yuh
like the looks of it?" he added indulgently.

Thurston, engaged in wondering what all those little strings were for,
felt the indulgence and straightened. "How should I know?" he retorted.
"Anyone can see that my ignorance is absolute. I expect you to laugh at
me, Mr. Holloway."

"Call me Park," said he of the tawny hair, and leaned against the fence
looking extremely boyish and utterly incapable of walking calmly down
upon a barking revolver and shooting as he went. "You're bound to learn
all about saddles and what they're made for," he went on. "So long as
yuh don't get swell-headed the first time yuh stick on a horse that
side-steps a little, or back down from a few hard knocks, you'll be all
right."

Thurston had not intended getting out and actually living the life he
had come to observe, but something got in his nerves and his blood and
bred an impulse to which he yielded without reserve. "Park, see
here," he said eagerly. "Graves said he'd turn me over to you, so you
could--er--teach me wisdom. It's deuced rough on you, but I hope you
won't refuse to be bothered with me. I want to learn--everything. And I
want you to find fault like the mischief, and--er--knock me into shape,
if it's possible." He was very modest over his ignorance, and his voice
rang true.

Park studied him gravely. "Bud," he said at last, "you'll do. You're
greener right now than a blue-joint meadow in June, but yuh got the
right stuff in yuh, and it's a go with me. You come along with us after
that trail-herd, and you'll get knocked into shape fast enough. Smoke?"

Thurston shook his head. "Not those."

"I dunno I'm afraid yuh can't be the real thing unless yuh fan your
lungs with cigarette smoke regular." The twinkle belied him, though.
"Say, where did you pick them bloomers?"

"They were made in New York." Thurston smiled in sickly fashion. He had
all along been uncomfortably aware of the sharp contrast between his own
modish attire and the somewhat disreputable leathern chaps of his host's
foreman.

"Well," commented Park, "you told me to find fault like the mischief,
and I'm going to call your bluff. This here's Montana, recollect, and I
raise the long howl over them habiliments. The best thing you can do is
pace along to the house and discard before the boys get sight of yuh.
They'd queer yuh with the whole outfit, sure. Uh course," he went on
soothingly when he saw the resentment in Thurston's eyes, "I expect
they're real stylish--back East--but the boys ain't educated to stand
for anything like that; they'd likely tell yuh they set like the hide
on the hind legs of an elephant--which is a fact. I hate to say it, Kid,
but they sure do look like the devil."

"So would you, in New York," Thurston flung back at him.

"Why, sure. But this ain't New York; this here's the Lazy Eight corral,
and I'm doing yuh a favor. You wouldn't like to have the boys shooting
holes through the slack, would yuh? You amble right along and get some
pants on--and when you've wised up some you'll thank me a lot. I'm going
on a little jaunt down the creek, before dinner, and you might go along;
you'll need to get hardened to the saddle anyway, before we start for
Billings, or you'll do most uh riding on the mess-wagon."

Thurston, albeit in resentful mood, went meekly and did as he was
commanded to do; and no man save Park and the cook ever glimpsed those
smart riding clothes of English cut.

"Now yuh look a heap more human," was the way Park signified his
approval of the change. "Here's a little horse that's easy to ride and
dead gentle if yuh don't spur him in the neck, which you ain't liable
to do at present; and Hank says you can have this saddle for keeps. Hank
used to ride it, but he out-growed it and got one longer in the seat.
When we start for Billings to trail up them cattle, of course you'll get
a string of your own to ride."

"A string? I'm afraid I don't quite understand."

"Yuh don't savvy riding a string? A string, m'son, is ten or a dozen
saddle-horses that yuh ride turn about, and nobody else has got any
right to top one; every fellow has got his own string, yuh see."

Thurston eyed his horse distrustfully. "I think," he ventured, "one will
be enough for me. I'll scarcely need a dozen." The truth was that he
thought Park was laughing at him.

Park slid sidewise in the saddle and proceeded to roll another
cigarette. "I'd be willing to bet that by fall you'll have a good-sized
string rode down to a whisper. You wait; wait till it gets in your
blood. Why, I'd die if you took me off the range. Wait till yuh set out
in the dark, on your horse, and count the stars and watch the big dipper
swing around towards morning, and listen to the cattle breathing close
by--sleeping while you ride around 'em playing guardian angel over their
dreams. Wait till yuh get up at daybreak and are in the saddle with
the pink uh sunrise, and know you'll sleep fifteen or twenty miles from
there that night; and yuh lay down at night with the smell of new grass
in your nostrils where your bed had bruised it.

"Why, Bud, if you're a man, you'll be plumb spoiled for your little
old East." Then he swung back his feet and the horses broke into a lope
which jarred the unaccustomed frame of Thurston mightily, though he kept
the pace doggedly.

"I've got to go down to the Stevens place," Park informed him. "You
met Mona yesterday--it was her come down on the train with me, yuh
remember." Thurston did remember very distinctly. "Hank says yuh compose
stories. Is that right?"

Thurston's mind came back from wondering how Mona Stevens' mouth looked
when she was pleased with one, and he nodded.

"Well, there's a lot in this country that ain't ever been wrote about, I
guess; at least if it was I never read it, and I read considerable. But
the trouble is, them that know ain't in the writing business, and them
that write don't know. The way I've figured it, they set back East
somewhere and write it like they think maybe it is; and it's a hell of a
job they make of it."

Thurston, remembering the time when he, too, "set back East" and wrote
it like he thought maybe it was, blushed guiltily. He was thankful that
his stories of the West had, without exception, been rejected as of
little worth. He shuddered to think of one of them falling into the
hands of Park Holloway.

"I came out to learn, and I want to learn it thoroughly," he said, in
the face of much physical discomfort. Just then the horses slowed for a
climb, and he breathed thanks. "In the first place," he began again when
he had readjusted himself carefully in the saddle, "I wish you'd tell me
just where you are going with the wagons, and what you mean by trailing
a herd."

"Why, I thought I said we were going to Billings," Park answered,
surprised. "What we're going to do when we get there is to receive a
shipment of cattle young steer that's coming up from the Panhandle which
is a part uh Texas. And we trail 'em up here and turn 'em loose this
side the river. After that we'll start the calf roundup. The Lazy Eight
runs two wagons, yuh know. I run one, and Deacon Smith runs the other;
we work together, though, most of the time. It makes quite a crew,
twenty-five or thirty men."

"I didn't know," said Thurston dubiously, "that you ever shipped cattle
into this country. I supposed you shipped them out. Is Mr. Graves buying
some?"

"Hank? I guess yes! six thousand head uh yearlings and two year-olds,
this spring; some seasons it's more. We get in young stock every year
and turn 'em loose on the range till they're ready to ship. It's cheaper
than raising calves, yuh know. When yuh get to Billings, Bud, you'll see
some cattle! Why, our bunch alone will make seven trains, and that ain't
a commencement. Cattle's cheap down South, this year, and seems like
everybody's buying. Hank didn't buy as much as some, because he runs
quite a bunch uh cows; we'll brand six or seven thousand calves this
spring. Hank sure knows how to rake in the coin."

Thurston agreed as politely as he could for the jolting. They had
again struck the level and seven miles, at Park's usual pace, was
heartbreaking to a man not accustomed to the saddle. Thurston had
written, just before leaving home, a musical bit of verse born of his
luring dreams, about "the joy of speeding fleetly where the grassland
meets the sky," and he was gritting his teeth now over the idiotic
lines.

When they reached the ranch and Mona's mother came to the door and
invited them in, he declined almost rudely, for he had a feeling that
once out of the saddle he would have difficulty in getting into it
again. Besides, Mona was not at home, according to her mother.

So they did not tarry, and Thurston reached the Lazy Eight alive, but
with the glamour quite gone from his West. If he had not been the son of
his father, he would have taken the first train which pointed its
nose to the East, and he would never again have essayed the writing
of Western stories or musical verse which sung the joys of galloping
blithely off to the sky-line. He had just been galloping off to a
sky-line that was always just before and he had not been blithe; nor did
the memory of it charm. Of a truth, the very thought of things Western
made him swear mild, city-bred oaths.

He choked back his awe of the cook and asked him, quite humbly, what
was good to take the soreness from one's muscles; afterward he had crept
painfully up the stairs, clasping to his bosom a beer bottle filled with
pungent, home-made liniment which the cook had gravely declared "out uh
sight for saddle-galls."

Hank Graves, when he heard the story, with artistic touches from the
cook, slapped his thigh and laughed one of his soundless chuckles. "The
son-of-a-gun! He's the right stuff. Never whined, eh? I knew it. He's
his dad over again, from the ground up." And loved him the better.



CHAPTER IV. THE TRAIL-HERD

Thurston tucked the bulb of his camera down beside the bellows and
closed the box with a snap. "I wonder what old Reeve would say to that
view," he mused aloud.

"Old who?"

"Oh, a fellow back in New York. Jove! he'd throw up his dry-point heads
and take to oils and landscapes if he could see this."

The "this" was a panoramic view of the town and surrounding valley of
Billings. The day was sunlit and still, and far objects stood up with
sharp outlines in the clear atmosphere. Here and there the white tents
of waiting trail-outfits splotched the bright green of the prairie.
Horsemen galloped to and from the town at top speed, and a long, grimy
red stock train had just snorted out on a siding by the stockyards where
the bellowing of thirsty cattle came faintly like the roar of pounding
surf in the distance.

Thurston--quite a different Thurston from the trim, pale young man who
had followed the lure of the West two weeks before--drew a long breath
and looked out over the hurrying waters of the Yellowstone. It was good
to be alive and young, and to live the tented life of the plains; it
was good even to be "speeding fleetly where the grassland meets the sky
"--for two weeks in the saddle had changed considerably his view-point.
He turned again to the dust and roar of the stockyards a mile or so
away.

"Perhaps," he remarked hopefully, "the next train will be ours." Strange
how soon a man may identify himself with new conditions and new aims. He
had come West to look upon the life from the outside, and now his chief
thought was of the coming steers, which he referred to unblushingly as
"our cattle." Such is the spell of the range.

"Let's ride on over, Bud," Park proposed. "That's likely the Circle Bar
shipment. Their bunch comes from the same place ours does, and I want to
see how they stack up."

Thurston agreed and went to saddle up. He had mastered the art of
saddling and could, on lucky days and when he was in what he called
"form," rope the horse he wanted; to say nothing of the times when his
loop settled unexpectedly over the wrong victim. Park Holloway, for
instance, who once got it neatly under his chin, much to his disgust and
the astonishment of Thurston.

"I'm going to take my Kodak," said he. "I like to watch them unload, and
I can get some good pictures, with this sunlight."

"When you've hollered 'em up and down the chutes as many times as I
have," Park told him, "yuh won't need no pictures to help yuh remember
what it's like."

It was an old story with Park, and Thurston's enthusiasm struck him as
a bit funny. He perched upon a corner of the fence out of the way, and
smoked cigarettes while he watched the cattle and shouted pleasantries
to the men who prodded and swore and gesticulated at the wild-eyed
huddle in the pens. Soon his turn would come, but just now he was
content to look on and take his ease.

"For the life of me," cried Thurston, sidling gingerly over to him, "I
can't see where they all come from. For two days these yards have never
been empty. The country will soon be one vast herd."

"Two days--huh! this thing'll go on for weeks, m'son. And after all is
over, you'll wonder where the dickens they all went to. Montana is some
bigger than you realize, I guess. And next fall, when shipping starts,
you'll think you're seeing raw porterhouse steaks for the whole world.
Let's drift out uh this dust; you'll have time to get a carload uh
pictures before our bunch rolls in."

As a matter of fact, it was two weeks before the Lazy Eight consignment
arrived. Thurston haunted the stockyards with his Kodak, but after the
first two or three days he took no pictures. For every day was but a
repetition of those that had gone before: a great, grimy engine shunting
cars back and forth on the siding; an endless stream of weary, young
cattle flowing down the steep chutes into the pens, from the pens to the
branding chutes, where they were burned deep with the mark of their new
owners; then out through the great gate, crowding, pushing, wild to flee
from restraint, yet held in and guided by mounted cowboys; out upon the
green prairie where they could feast once more upon sweet grasses and
drink their fill from the river of clear, mountain water; out upon the
weary march of the trail, on and on for long days until some boundary
which their drivers hailed with joy was passed, and they were free at
last to roam at will over the wind-brushed range land; to lie down in
some cool, sweet-scented swale and chew their cuds in peace.

Two weeks, and then came a telegram for Park. In the reading of it he
shuffled off his attitude of boyish irresponsibility and became in a
breath the cool, business-like leader of men. Holding the envelope still
in his hand he sought out Thurston, who was practicing with a rope. As
Park approached him he whirled the noose and cast it neatly over the
peak of the night-hawk's teepee.

"Good shot," Park encouraged, "but I'd advise yuh to take another
target. You'll have the tent down over Scotty's ears, and then you'll
think yuh stirred up a mess uh hornets.

"Say, Bud, our cattle are coming, and I'm going to be short uh men. If
you'd like a job I'll take yuh on, and take chances on licking yuh into
shape. Maybe the wages won't appeal to yuh, but I'm willing to throw in
heaps uh valuable experience that won't cost yuh a cent." He lowered an
eyelid toward the cook-tent, although no one was visible.

Thurston studied the matter while he coiled his rope, and no longer.
Secretly he had wanted all along to be a part of the life instead of an
onlooker. "I'll take the job, Park--if you think I can hold it down."
The speech would doubtless have astonished Reeve-Howard in more ways
than one; but Reeve-Howard was already a part of the past in Thurston's
mind. He was for living the present.

"Well," Park retorted, "it'll be your own funeral if yuh get fired.
Better stake yourself to a pair uh chaps; you'll need 'em on the trip."

"Also a large, rainbow-hued silk handkerchief if I want to look the
part," Thurston bantered.

"If yuh don't want your darned neck blistered, yuh mean," Park flung
over his shoulders. "Your wages and schooling start in to-morrow at
sunup."

It was early in the morning when the first train arrived, hungry,
thirsty, tired, bawling a general protest against fate and man's mode
of travel. Thurston, with a long pole in his hand, stood on the narrow
plank near the top of a chute wall and prodded vaguely at an endless,
moving incline of backs. Incidentally he took his cue from his
neighbors, and shouted till his voice was a croak-though he could
not see that he accomplished anything either by his prodding or his
shouting.

Below him surged the sea of hide and horns which was barely suggestive
of the animals as individuals. Out in the corrals the dust-cloud hung
low, just as it had hovered every day for more than two weeks; just as
it would hover every day for two weeks longer. Across the yards near the
big, outer gate Deacon Smith's crew was already beginning to brand. The
first train was barely unloaded when the second trailed in and out
on the siding; and so the third came also. Then came a lull, for the
consignment had been split in two and the second section was several
hours behind the first.

Thurston rode out to camp, aching with the strain and ravenously hungry,
after toiling with his muscles for the first time in his life; for his
had been days of physical ease. He had yet to learn the art of working
so that every movement counted something accomplished, as did the
others; besides, he had been in constant fear of losing his hold on the
fence and plunging headlong amongst the trampling hoofs below, a fate
that he shuddered to contemplate. He did not, however, mention that
fear, or his muscle ache, to any man; he might be green, but he was not
the man to whine.

When he went back into the dust and roar, Park ordered him curtly to
tend the branding fire, since both crews would brand that afternoon and
get the corrals cleared for the next shipment. Thurston thanked Park
mentally; tending branding-fire sounded very much like child's play.

Soon the gray dust-cloud took on a shade of blue in places where the
smoke from the fires cut through; a new tang smote the nostrils: the
rank odor of burning hair and searing hides; a new note crept into the
clamoring roar: the low-keyed blat of pain and fright.

Thurston turned away his head from the sight and the smell, and piled
on wood until Park stopped him with. "Say, Bud, we ain't celebrating any
election! It ain't a bonfire we want, it's heat; just keep her going and
save wood all yuh can." After an hour of fire-tending Thurston decided
that there were things more wearisome than "hollering 'em down the
chutes." His eyes were smarting intolerably with smoke and heat, and the
smell of the branding was not nice; but through the long afternoon he
stuck to the work, shrewdly guessing that the others were not having any
fun either. Park and "the Deacon" worked as hard as any, branding the
steers as they were squeezed, one by one, fast in the little branding
chutes. The setting sun shone redly through the smoke before Thurston
was free to kick the half-burnt sticks apart and pour water upon them as
directed by Park.

"Think yuh earned your little old dollar and thirty three cents, Bud?"
Park asked him. And Thurston smiled a tired, sooty smile that seemed all
teeth.

"I hope so; at any rate, I have a deep, inner knowledge of the joys of
branding cattle."

"Wait 'till yuh burn Lazy Eights on wriggling, blatting calves for two
or three hours at a stretch before yuh talk about the joys uh branding."
Park rubbed eloquently his aching biceps.

At dusk Thurston crept into his blankets, feeling that he would like the
night to be at least thirty six hours long. He was just settling into
a luxurious, leather-upholstered dream chair preparatory to telling
Reeve-Howard his Western experiences when Park's voice bellowed into the
tent:

"Roll out, boys--we got a train pulling in!"

There was hurried dressing in the dark of the bed-tent, hasty mounting,
and a hastier ride through the cool night air. There were long hours at
the chutes, prodding down at a wavering line of moving shadows, while
the "big dipper" hung bright in the sky and lighted lanterns bobbed back
and forth along the train waving signals to one another. At intervals
Park's voice cut crisply through the turmoil, giving orders to men whom
he could not see.

The east was lightening to a pale yellow when the men climbed at last
into their saddles and galloped out to camp for a hurried breakfast.
Thurston had been comforting his aching body with the promise of rest
and sleep; but three thousand cattle were milling impatiently in the
stockyards, so presently he found himself fanning a sickly little blaze
with his hat while he endeavored to keep the smoke from his tired eyes.
Of a truth, Reeve-Howard would have stared mightily at sight of him.

Once Park, passing by, smiled down upon him grimly. "Here's where yuh
get the real thing in local color," he taunted, but Thurston was
too busy to answer. The stress of living had dimmed his eye for the
picturesque.

That night, one Philip Thurston slept as sleeps the dead. But he awoke
with the others and thanked the Lord there were no more cattle to unload
and brand.

When he went out on day-herd that afternoon he fancied that he was
getting into the midst of things and taking his place with the veterans.
He would have been filled with resentment had he suspected the truth:
that Park carefully eased those first days of his novitiate. That was
why none of the night-guarding fell to him until they had left Billings
many miles behind them.



CHAPTER V. THE STORM

The third night he was detailed to stand with Bob MacGregor on the
middle guard, which lasts from eleven o'clock until two. The outfit had
camped near the head of a long, shallow basin that had a creek running
through; down the winding banks of it lay the white-tented camps of
seven other trail-herds, the cattle making great brown blotches against
the green at sundown. Thurston hoped they would all be there in the
morning when the sun came up, so that he could get a picture.

"Aw, they'll be miles away by then," Bob assured him unfeelingly. "By
the signs, you can take snap-shots by lightning in another hour. Got
your slicker, Bud?"

Thurston said he hadn't, and Bob shook his head prophetically. "You'll
sure wish yuh had it before yuh hit camp again; when yuh get wise,
you'll ride with your slicker behind the cantle, rain or shine. They'll
need singing to, to-night."

Thurston prudently kept silent, since he knew nothing whatever about it,
and Bob gave him minute directions about riding his rounds, and how to
turn a stray animal back into the herd without disturbing the others.

The man they relieved met them silently and rode away to camp. Off
to the right an animal coughed, and a black shape moved out from the
shadows.

Bob swung towards it, and the shape melted again into the splotch of
shade which was the sleeping herd. He motioned to the left. "Yuh can go
that way; and yuh want to sing something, or whistle, so they'll know
what yuh are." His tone was subdued, as it had not been before. He
seemed to drift away into the darkness, and soon his voice rose, away
across the herd, singing. As he drew nearer Thurston caught the words,
at first disjointed and indistinct, then plainer as they met. It was a
song he had never heard before, because its first popularity had swept
far below his social plane.

     "She's o-only a bird in a gil-ded cage,
     A beautiful sight to see-e-e;
     You may think she seems ha-a-aappy and free from ca-a-re.."

The singer passed on and away, and only the high notes floated across to
Thurston, who whistled softly under his breath while he listened. Then,
as they neared again on the second round, the words came pensively:

     "Her beauty was so-o-old
     For an old man's go-o-old, She's a bird in a gilded ca-a-age."

Thurston rode slowly like one in a dream, and the lure of the range-land
was strong upon him. The deep breathing of three thousand sleeping
cattle; the strong, animal odor; the black night which grew each moment
blacker, and the rhythmic ebb and flow of the clear, untrained voice
of a cowboy singing to his charge. If he could put it into words; if
he could but picture the broody stillness, with frogs cr-ekk, er-ekking
along the reedy creek-bank and a coyote yapping weirdly upon a distant
hilltop! From the southwest came mutterings half-defiant and ominous.
A breeze whispered something to the grasses as it crept away down the
valley.

     "I stood in a church-yard just at ee-eve,
     While the sunset adorned the west."

It was Bob, drawing close out of the night. "You're doing fine, Kid;
keep her a-going," he commended, in an undertone as he passed, and
Thurston moistened his unaccustomed lips and began industriously
whistling "The Heart Bowed Down," and from that jumped to Faust. Fifteen
minutes exhausted his memory of the whistleable parts, and he was not
given to tiresome repetitions. He stopped for a moment, and Bob's voice
chanted admonishingly from somewhere, "Keep her a-go-o-ing, Bud, old
boy!" So Thurston took breath and began on "The Holy City," and came
near laughing at the incongruity of the song; only he remembered that he
must not frighten the cattle, and checked the impulse.

"Say," Bob began when he came near enough, "do yuh know the words uh
that piece? It's a peach; I wisht you'd sing it." He rode on, still
humming the woes of the lady who married for gold.

Thurston obeyed while the high-piled thunder-heads rumbled deep
accompaniment, like the resonant lower tones of a bass viol.

     "Last night I lay a-sleeping, there came a dream so fair;
     I stood in old Jerusalem, beside the temple there."

A steer stepped restlessly out of the herd, and Thurston's horse,
trained to the work, of his own accord turned him gently back.

     "I heard the children singing; and ever as they sang,
     Me thought the voice of angels from heaven in answer rang."

From the west the thunder boomed, drowning the words in its
deep-throated growl.

     "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, lift up your gates and sing."

"Hit her up a little faster, Bud, or we'll lose some. They're getting on
their feet with that thunder."

Sunfish, in answer to Thurston's touch on the reins, quickened to a
trot. The joggling was not conducive to the best vocal expression, but
the singer persevered:

     "Hosanna in the highest,
     Hosanna to your King!"

Flash! the lightning cut through the storm-clouds, and Bob, who had
contented himself with a subdued whistling while he listened, took up
the refrain:

     "Jerusalem, Jerusalem."

It was as if a battery of heavy field pieces boomed overhead. The entire
herd was on its feet and stood close-huddled, their tails to the coming
storm. Now the horses were loping steadily in their endless circling--a
pace they could hold for hours if need be. For one blinding instant
Thurston saw far down the valley; then the black curtain dropped as
suddenly as it had lifted.

"Keep a-hollering, Bud!" came the command, and after it Bob's voice
trilled high above the thunder-growl:

     "Hosanna in the high-est.
     Hosanna to your King!"

A strange thrill of excitement came to Thurston. It was all new to him;
for his life had been sheltered from the rages of nature. He had never
before been out under the night sky when it was threatening as now. He
flinched when came an ear-splitting crash that once again lifted the
black curtain and showed him, white-lighted, the plain. In the dark that
followed came a rhythmic thud of hoofs far up the creek, and the rattle
of living castanets. Sunfish threw up his head and listened, muscles
a-quiver.

"There's a bunch a-running," called Bob from across the frightened herd.
"If they hit us, give Sunfish his head, he's been there before--and keep
on the outside!"

Thurston yelled "All right!" but the pounding roar of the stampede
drowned his voice. A whirlwind of frenzied steers bore down upon
him--twenty-five hundred Panhandle two-year-olds, though he did not know
it then, his mind was all a daze, with one sentence zigzagging through
it like the lightning over his head, "Give Sunfish his head, and keep on
the outside!"

That was what saved him, for he had the sense to obey. After a few
minutes of breathless racing, with a roar as of breakers in his ears and
the crackle of clashing horns and the gleaming of rolling eyeballs close
upon his horse's heels, he found himself washed high and dry, as it
were, while the tumult swept by. Presently he was galloping along behind
and wondering dully how he got there, though perhaps Sunfish knew well
enough.

In his story of the West--the one that had failed to be convincing--he
had in his ignorance described a stampede, and it had not been in the
least like this one. He blushed at the memory, and wondered if he should
ever again feel qualified to write of these things.

Great drops of rain pounded him on the back as he rode--chill drops,
that went to the skin. He thought of his new canary-colored slicker in
the bed-tent, and before he knew it swore just as any of the other
men would have done under similar provocation; it was the first real,
able-bodied oath he had ever uttered. He was becoming assimilated with
the raw conditions of life.

He heard a man's voice calling to him, and distinguished the dim shape
of a rider close by. He shouted that password of the range, "Hello!"

"What outfit is this?" the man cried again.

"The Lazy Eight!" snapped Thurston, sure that the other had come with
the stampede. Then, feeling the anger of temporary authority, "What in
hell are you up to, letting your cattle run?" If Park could have heard
him say that for Reeve-Howard!

Down the long length of the valley they swept, gathering to themselves
other herds and other riders as incensed as were themselves. It is not
pretty work, nor amusing, to gallop madly in the wake of a stampede at
night, keeping up the stragglers and taking the chance of a broken neck
with the rain to make matters worse.

Bob MacGregor sought Thurston with much shouting, and having found him
they rode side by side. And always the thunder boomed overhead, and by
the lightning flashes they glimpsed the turbulent sea of cattle fleeing,
they knew not where or why, with blind fear crowding their heels.

The noise of it roused the camps as they thundered by; men rose up,
peered out from bed-tents as the stampede swept past, cursed the delay
it would probably make, hoped none of the boys got hurt, and thanked the
Lord the tents were pitched close to the creek and out of the track of
the maddened herds.

Then they went back to bed to wait philosophically for daylight.

When Sunfish, between flashes, stumbled into a shallow washout, and sent
Thurston sailing unbeautifully over his head, Bob pulled up and slid off
his horse in a hurry.

"Yuh hurt, Bud?" he cried anxiously, bending over him. For Thurston,
from the very frankness of his verdant ignorance, had won for himself
the indulgent protectiveness of the whole outfit; not a man but watched
unobtrusively over his welfare--and Bob MacGregor went farther and
loved him whole-heartedly. His voice, when he spoke, was unequivocally
frightened.

Thurston sat up and wiped a handful of mud off his face; if it had not
been so dark Bob would have shouted at the spectacle. "I'm 'kinda sorter
shuck up like,"' he quoted ruefully. "And my nose is skinned, thank you.
Where's that devil of a horse?"

Bob stood over him and grinned. "My, I'm surprised at yuh, Bud! What
would your Sunday-school teacher say if she heard yuh? Anyway, yuh ain't
got any call to cuss Sunfish; he ain't to blame. He's used to fellows
that can ride."

"Shut up!" Thurston commanded inelegantly. "I'd like to see you ride a
horse when he's upside down!"

"Aw, come on," urged Bob, giving up the argument. "We'll be plumb lost
from the herd if we don't hustle."

They got into their saddles again and went on, riding by sound and the
rare glimpses the lightning gave them as it flared through the storm
away to the east.

"Wet?" Bob sung out sympathetically from the streaming shelter of his
slicker. Thurston, wriggling away from his soaked clothing, grunted a
sarcastic negative.

The cattle were drifting now before the storm which had settled to a
monotonous downpour. The riders--two or three men for every herd that
had joined in the panic--circled, a veritable picket line without the
password. There would be no relief ride out to them that night, and they
knew it and settled to the long wait for morning.

Thurston took up his station next to Bob; rode until he met the next
man, and then retraced his steps till he faced Bob again; rode until the
world seemed unreal and far away, with nothing left but the night and
the riding back and forth on his beat, and the rain that oozed through
his clothes and trickled uncomfortably down inside his collar. He lost
all count of time, and was startled when at last came gray dawn.

As the light grew brighter his eyes widened and forgot their
sleep-hunger; he had not thought it would be like this. He was riding
part way across one end of a herd larger than his imagination had ever
pictured; three thousand cattle had seemed to him a multitude--yet
here were more than twenty thousand, wet, draggled, their backs humped
miserably from the rain which but a half hour since had ceased. He was
still gazing and wondering when Park rode up to him.

"Lord! Bud, you're a sight! Did the bunch walk over yuh?" he greeted.

"No, only Sunfish," snapped Thurston crossly. Time was when Philip
Thurston would not have answered any man abruptly, however great the
provocation. He was only lately getting down to the real, elemental man
of him; to the son of Bill Thurston, bull-whacker, prospector,
follower of dim trails. He rode silently back to camp with Bob, ate
his breakfast, got into dry clothes and went out and tied his slicker
deliberately and securely behind the cantle of his saddle, though the
sun was shining straight into his eyes and the sky fairly twinkled, it
was so clean of clouds.

Bob watched him with eyes that laughed. "My, you're an ambitious
son-of-a-gun," he chuckled. "And you've got the slicker question settled
in your mind, I see; yuh learn easy; it takes two or three soakings to
learn some folks."

"We've got to go back and help with the herd, haven't we?" Thurston
asked. "The horses are all out."

"Yep. They'll stay out, too, till noon, m'son. We hike to bed, if
anybody should ask yuh."

So it was not till after dinner that he rode back to the great
herd--with his Kodak in his pocket--to find the cattle split up
into several bunches. The riders at once went to work separating the
different brands. He was too green a hand to do anything but help hold
the "cut," and that was so much like ordinary herd-ing that his interest
flagged. He wanted, more than anything, to ride into the bunch and
single out a Lazy Eight steer, skillfully hazing him down the slope to
the cut, as he saw the others do.

Bob told him it was the biggest mix-up he had ever seen, and Bob had
ridden the range in every State where beef grows wild. He was in the
thickest of the huddle, was Bob, working as if he did not know the
meaning of fatigue. Thurston, watching him thread his way in and out of
the restless, milling herd, only to reappear unexpectedly at the edge
with a steer just before the nose of his horse, rush it out from among
the others--wheeling, darting this way and that, as it tried to dodge
back, and always coming off victor, wondered if he could ever learn to
do it.

Being in pessimistic mood, he told himself that he would probably always
remain a greenhorn, to be borne with and coached and given boy's work to
do; all because he had been cheated of his legacy of the dim trails and
forced to grow up in a city, hedged about all his life by artificial
conditions, his conscience wedded to convention.



CHAPTER VI. THE BIG DIVIDE

The long drive was nearly over. Even Thurston's eyes brightened when
he saw, away upon the sky-line, the hills that squatted behind the home
ranch of the Lazy Eight. The past month had been one of rapid living
under new conditions, and at sight of them it seemed only a few days
since he had first glimpsed that broken line of hills and the bachelor
household in the coulee below.

As the travel-weary herd swung down the long hill into the valley of the
Milk River, stepping out briskly as they sighted the cool water in the
near distance, the past month dropped away from Thurston, and what had
gone just before came back fresh as the happenings of the morning.
There was the Stevens ranch, a scant half mile away from where the tents
already gleamed on their last camp of the long trail; the smoke from
the cook-tent telling of savory meats and puddings, the bare thought of
which made one hurry his horse.

His eyes dwelt longest, however, upon the Stevens house half hidden
among the giant cottonwoods, and he wondered if Mona would still smile
at him with that unpleasant uplift at the corner of her red mouth. He
would take care that she did not get the chance to smile at him in any
fashion, he told himself with decision.

He wondered if those train-robbers had been captured, and if the one
Park wounded was still alive. He shivered when he thought of the dead
man in the aisle, and hoped he would never witness another death;
involuntarily he glanced down at his right stirrup, half expecting to
see his boot red with human blood. It was not nice to remember that
scene, and he gave his shoulders an impatient hitch and tried to think
of something else.

Mindful of his vow, he had bought a gun in Billings, but he had not yet
learned to hit anything he aimed at; for firearms are hushed in roundup
camps, except when dire necessity breeds a law of its own. Range cattle
do not take kindly to the popping of pistols. So Thurston's revolver was
yet unstained with powder grime, and was packed away inside his bed.
He was promising his pride that he would go up on the hill, back of the
Lazy Eight corrals, and shoot until even Mona Stevens must respect his
marksmanship, when Park galloped back to him--"The world has moved some
while we was gone," he announced in the tone of one who has news to tell
and enjoys thoroughly the telling. "Yuh mind the fellow I laid out in
the hold-up? He got all right again, and they stuck him in jail along
with another one old Lauman, the sheriff, glommed a week ago. Well, they
didn't do a thing last night but knock a deputy in the head, annex his
gun, swipe a Winchester and a box uh shells out uh the office and hit
the high places. Old Lauman is hot on their trail, but he ain't met
up with 'em yet, that anybody's heard. When he does, there'll sure be
something doing! They say the deputy's about all in; they smashed his
skull with a big iron poker."

"I wish I could handle a gun," Thurston said between his teeth. "I'd
go after them myself. I wish I'd been left to grow up out here where I
belong. I'm all West but the training--and I never knew it till a month
ago! I ought to ride and rope and shoot with the best of you, and I
can't do a thing. All I know is books. I can criticize an opera and a
new play, and I'm considered something of an authority on clothes, but I
can't shoot."

"Aw, go easy," Park laughed at him. "What if yuh can't do the
double-roll? Riding and shooting and roping's all right--we couldn't
very well get along without them accomplishments. But that's all they
are; just accomplishments. We know a man when we see him, and it don't
matter whether he can ride a bronk straight up, or don't know which way
a saddle sets on a horse. If he's a man he gets as square a deal as we
can give him." Park reached for his cigarette book. "And as for hunting
outlaws," he finished, "we've got old Lauman paid to do that. And he's
dead onto his job, you bet; when he goes out after a man he comes pretty
near getting him, m'son. But I sure do wish I'd killed that jasper while
I was about it; it would have saved Lauman a lot uh hard riding."

Thurston could scarcely explain to Park that his desire to hunt
train-robbers was born of a half-defiant wish to vindicate to Mona
Stevens his courage, and so he said nothing at all. He wondered if Park
had heard her whisper, that day, and knew how he had failed to obey
her commands; and if he had heard her call him a coward. He had often
wondered that, but Park had a way of keeping things to himself, and
Thurston could never quite bring himself to open the subject boldly. At
any rate, if Park had heard, he hoped that he understood how it was and
did not secretly despise him for it. Women, he told himself bitterly,
are never quite just.

After the four o'clock supper he and Bob MacGregor went up the valley
to relieve the men on herd. There was one nice thing about Park as a
foreman: he tried to pair off his crew according to their congeniality.
That was why Thurston usually stood guard with Bob, whom he liked better
than any of the others-always excepting Park himself.

"I brought my gun along," Bob told him apologetically when they were
left to themselves. "It's a habit I've got when I know there's bad men
rampaging around the country. The boys kinda gave me the laugh when
they seen me haul it out uh my war bag, but I just told 'em to go to
thunder."

"Do you think those--"

"Naw. Uh course not. I just pack it on general principles, same as an
old woman packs her umbrella."

"Say, this is dead easy! The bunch is pretty well broke, ain't it? I'm
sure glad to see old Milk River again; this here trailing cattle gets
plumb monotonous." He got down and settled his back comfortably against
a rock. Below them spread the herd, feeding quietly. "Yes, sir, this is
sure a snap," he repeated, after he had made himself a smoke. "They's
only two ways a bunch could drift if they wanted to which they don't-up
the river, or down. This hill's a little too steep for 'em to tackle
unless they was crowded hard. Good feed here, too.

"Too bad yuh don't smoke, Bud. There's nothing like a good, smooth rock
to your back and a cigarette in your face, on a nice, lazy day like
this. It's the only kind uh day-herding I got any use for."

"I'll take the rock to my back, if you'll just slide along and make
room," Thurston laughed. "I don't hanker for a cigarette, but I do wish
I had my Kodak."

"Aw, t'ell with your Kodak!" Bob snorted. "Can't yuh carry this layout
in your head? I've got a picture gallery in mine that I wouldn't trade
for a farm; I don't need no Kodak in mine, thankye. You just let this
here view soak into your system, Bud, where yuh can't lose it."

Thurston did. Long after he could close his eyes and see it in every
detail; the long, green slope with hundreds of cattle loitering in the
rank grass-growth; the winding sweep of the river and the green, rolling
hills beyond; and Bob leaning against the rock beside him, smoking
luxuriously with half-closed eyes, while their horses dozed with
drooping heads a rein-length away.

"Say, Bud," Bob's voice drawled sleepily, "I wisht you'd sing that
Jerusalem song. I want to learn the words to it; I'm plumb stuck on that
piece. It's different from the general run uh songs, don't yuh think?
Most of 'em's about your old home that yuh left in boyhood's happy days,
and go back to find your girl dead and sleeping in a little church-yard
or else it's your mother; or your girl marries the other man and you get
it handed to yuh right along--and they make a fellow kinda sick to his
stomach when he's got to sing 'em two or three hours at a stretch on
night-guard, just because he's plumb ignorant of anything better. This
here Jerusalem one sounds kinda grand, and--the cattle seems to like it,
too, for a change."

"The composer would feel flattered if he heard that," Thurston laughed.
He wanted to be left alone to day-dream and watch the clouds trail
lazily across to meet the hills; and there was an embryonic poem
forming, phrase by phrase, in his mind. But he couldn't refuse Bob
anything, so he sat a bit straighter and cleared his throat. He sang
well--well enough indeed to be sought after at informal affairs among
his set at home. When he came to the refrain Bob took his cigarette from
between his lips and held it in his fingers while he joined his voice
lustily to Thurston's:

     "Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
     Lift up your gates and sing
     Hosanna in the high-est.
     Hosanna to your King!"

The near cattle lifted their heads to stare stupidly a moment, then
moved a few steps slowly, nosing for the sweetest grass-tufts. The
horses shifted their weight, resting one leg with the hoof barely
touching the earth, twitched their ears at the flies and slept again.

     "And then me thought my dream was changed,
     The streets no longer rang,
     Hushed were the glad Hosannas
     The little children sang--"

Tamale lifted his head and gazed inquiringly up the hill; but Bob was
not observant of signs just then. He was Striving with his recreant
memory for the words that came after:

     "The sun grew dark with mystery,
     The morn was cold and still,
     As the shadow of a cross arose
     Upon a lonely hill."

Tamale stirred restlessly with head uplifted and ears pointed straight
before up the steep bluff. Old Ironsides, Thurston's mount, was not the
sort to worry about anything but his feed, and paid no attention. Bob
turned and glanced the way Tamale was looking; saw nothing, and settled
down again on the small of his back.

"He sees a badger or something," he Said. "Go on, Bud, with the chorus."

     "Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
     Lift up your gates and sing."

"Lift up your hands damn quick!" mimicked a voice just behind. "If yuh
ain't got anything to do but lay in the shade of a rock and yawp, we'll
borrow your cayuses. You ain't needin' 'em, by the looks!"

They squirmed around until they could stare into two black
gun-barrels--and then their hands went up; their faces held a
particularly foolish expression that must have been amusing to the men
behind the guns.

One of the gun-barrels lowered and a hand reached out and quietly took
possession of Tamale's reins; the owner of the hand got calmly into
Bob's saddle. Bob gritted his teeth. It was evident their movements had
been planned minutely in advance, for, once settled to his liking, the
fellow tested the stirrups to make sure they were the right length, and
raising his gun pointed it at the two in a business-like manner that
left no doubt of his meaning. Whereupon the man behind them came forward
and appropriated Old Ironsides to his own use.

"Too bad we had to interrupt Sunday-school," he remarked ironically.
"You can go ahead with the meetin' now--the collection has been took
up." He laughed without any real mirth in his voice and gathered up the
reins. "If yuh want our horses, they're up on the bench. I don't
reckon they'll ever turn another cow, but such as they are you're quite
welcome. Better set still, boys, till we get out uh sight; one of us'll
keep an eye peeled for yuh. So long, and much obliged." They turned and
rode warily down the slope.

"Now, wouldn't that jar yuh?" asked Bob in deep disgust His hands
dropped to his sides; in another second he was up and shooting savagely.
"Get behind the rock, Bud," he commanded.

Just then a rifle cracked, and Bob toppled drunkenly and went limply to
the grass.

"My God!" cried Thurston, and didn't know that he spoke. He snatched up
Bob's revolver and fired shot after shot at the galloping figures. Not
one seemed to do any good; the first shot hit a two-year-old square in
the ribs. After that there were no cattle within rifle range.

One of the outlaws stopped, took deliberate aim with the stolen
Winchester and fired, meaning to kill; but he miscalculated the range a
bit and Thurston crumpled down with a bullet in his thigh. The revolver
was empty now and fell smoking at his feet. So he lay and cursed
impotently while he watched the marauders ride out of sight up the
valley.

When the rank timber-growth hid their flying figures he crawled over to
where Bob lay and tried to lift him.

"Art you hurt?" was the idiotic question he asked.

Bob opened his eyes and waited a breath, as if to steady his thought.
"Did I get one, Bud?"

"I'm afraid not," Thurston confessed, and immediately after wished that
he had lied and said yes. "Are you hurt?" he repeated senselessly.

"Who, me?" Bob's eyes wavered in their directness. "Don't yuh bother
none about me," evasively.

"But you've got to tell me. You--they--" He choked over the words.

"Well--I guess they got me, all right. But don't let that worry yuh; it
don't me." He tried to speak carelessly and convincingly, but it was
a miserable failure. He did not want to die, did Bob, however much he
might try to hide the fact.

Thurston was not in the least imposed upon. He turned away his head,
pretending to look after the outlaws, and set his teeth together tight.
He did not want to act a fool. All at once he grew dizzy and sick, and
lay down heavily till the faintness passed.

Bob tried to lift himself to his elbow; failing that, he put out a hand
and laid it on Thurston's shoulder. "Did they--get you--too?" he queried
anxiously.

"The damn coyotes!"

"It's nothing; just a leg put out of business," Thurston hurried to
assure him. "Where are you hurt, Bob?"

"Aw, I ain't any X-ray," Bob retorted weakly but gamely. "Somewheres
inside uh me. It went in my side but the Lord knows where it wound
up. It hurts, like the devil." He lay quiet a minute. "I wish--do yuh
feel--like finishing--that song, Bud?"

Thurston gulped down a lump that was making his throat ache. When he
answered, his voice was very gentle:

"I'll try a verse, old man."

"The last one--we'd just come to the last. It's most like church. I--I
never went--much on religion, Bud; but when a fellow's--going out over
the Big Divide."

"You're not!" Thurston contradicted fiercely, as if that could make it
different. He thought he could not bear those jerky sentences.

"All right--Bud. We won't fight over it. Go ahead. The last verse."

Thurston eased his leg to a better position, drew himself up till his
shoulders rested against the rock and began, with an occasional, odd
break in his voice:

     "I saw the holy city
     Beside the tideless Sea;
     The light of God was on its street
     The gates were open wide.
     And all who would might enter
     And no one was denied."

"Wonder if that there--applies--to bone-headed--cowpunchers," Bob
muttered drowsily. "'And all--who would--" Thurston glanced quickly at
his face; caught his breath sharply at what he saw there written, and
dropped his head upon his arms.

And so Park and his men, hurrying to the sound of the shooting, found
them in the shadow of the rock.



CHAPTER VII. AT THE STEVENS PLACE

When the excitement of the outrage had been pushed aside by the
insistent routine of everyday living, Thurston found himself thrust from
the fascination of range life and into the monotony of invalidism, and
he was anything but resigned. To be sure, he was well cared for at the
Stevens ranch, where Park and the boys had taken him that day, and Mrs.
Stevens mothered him as he could not remember being mothered before.

Hank Graves rode over nearly every day to sit beside the bed and curse
the Wagner gang back to their great-great-grandfathers and down to more
than the third generation yet unborn, and to tell him the news. On the
second visit he started to give him the details of Bob's funeral; but
Thurston would not listen, and told him so plainly.

"All right then, Bud, I won't talk about it. But we sure done the right
thing by the boy; had the best preacher in Shellanne out, and flowers
till further notice: a cross uh carnations, and the boys sent up to
Minot and had a spur made uh--oh, well, all right; I'll shut up about
it, I know how yuh feel, Bud; it broke us all up to have him go that
way. He sure was a white boy, if ever there was one, and--ahem!"

"I'd give a thousand dollars, hard coin, to get my hands on them
Wagners. It would uh been all off with them, sure, if the boys had run
acrost 'em. I'd uh let 'em stay out and hunt a while longer, only old
Lauman'll get 'em, all right, and we're late as it is with the calf
roundup. Lauman'll run 'em down--and by the Lord! I'll hire Bowman
myself and ship him out from Helena to help prosecute 'em. They're dead
men if he takes the case against 'em, Bud, and I'll get him, sure--and
to hell with the cost of it! They'll swing for what they done to you and
Bob, if it takes every hoof I own."

Thurston told him he hoped they would be caught and--yes, hanged; though
he had never before advocated capital punishment.

But when he thought of Bob, the care-naught, whole-souled fellow.

He tried not to think of him, for thinking unmanned him. He had the
softest of hearts where his friends were concerned, and there were
times when he felt that he could with relish officiate at the Wagners'
execution.

He fought against remembrance of that day; and for sake of diversion he
took to studying a large, pastel portrait of Mona which hung against the
wall opposite his bed. It was rather badly; done, and at first, when he
saw it, he laughed at the thought that even the great, still plains of
the range land cannot protect one against the ubiquitous picture
agent. In the parlor, he supposed there would be crayon pictures of
grandmothers and aunts-further evidence of the agent's glibness.

He was glad that it was Mona who smiled down at him instead of a
grand-mother or an aunt. For Mona did smile, and in spite of the cheap
crudity the smile was roguish, with little dimply creases at the corners
of the mouth, and not at all unpleasant. If the girl would only look
like that in real life, he told himself, a fellow would probably get to
liking her. He supposed she thought him a greater coward than ever now,
just because he hadn't got killed. If he had, he would be a hero now,
like Bob. Well, Bob was a hero; the way he had jumped up and begun
shooting required courage of the suicidal sort. He had stood up and
shot, also and had succeeded only in being ridiculous; he hoped nobody
had told Mona about his hitting that steer. When he could walk again he
would learn to shoot, so that the range stock wouldn't suffer from his
marksmanship.

After a week of seeing only Mrs. Stevens or sympathetic men
acquaintances, he began to wonder why Mona stayed so persistently away.
Then one morning she came in to take his breakfast things out. She did
not, however, stay a second longer than was absolutely necessary, and
she was perfectly composed and said good morning in her most impersonal
tone. At least Thurston hoped she had no tone more impersonal than that.
He decided that she had really beautiful eyes and hair; after she had
gone he looked up at the picture, told himself that it did not begin
to do her justice, and sighed a bit. He was very dull, and even her
companionship, he thought, would be pleasant if only she would come down
off her pedestal and be humanly sociable.

When he wrote a story about a fellow being laid up in the same house
with a girl--a girl with big, blue-gray eyes and ripply brown hair--he
would have the girl treat the fellow at least decently. She would read
poetry to him and bring him flowers, and do ever so many nice things
that would make him hate to get well. He decided that he would write
just that kind of story; he would idealize it, of course, and have the
fellow in love with the girl; you have to, in stories. In real life it
doesn't necessarily follow that, because a fellow admires a girl's hair
and eyes, and wants to be on friendly terms, he is in love with her.
For example, he emphatically was not in love with Mona Stevens. He only
wanted her to be decently civil and to stop holding a foolish grudge
against him for not standing up and letting himself be shot full of
holes because she commanded it.

In the afternoons, Mrs. Stevens would sit beside him and knit things
and talk to him in a pleasantly garrulous fashion, and he would lie and
listen to her--and to Mona, singing somewhere. Mona sang very well, he
thought; he wondered if she had ever had any training. Also, he wished
he dared ask her not to sing that song about "She's only a bird in a
gilded cage." It brought back too vividly the nights when he and Bob
stood guard under the quiet stars.

And then one day he hobbled out into the dining-room and ate dinner with
the family. Since he sat opposite Mona she was obliged to look at
him occasionally, whether she would or no. Thurston had a strain of
obstinacy in his nature, and when he decided that Mona should not only
look at him, but should talk to him as well, he set himself diligently
to attain that end. He was not the man to sit down supinely and let a
girl calmly ignore him; so Mona presently found herself talking to him
with some degree of cordiality; and what is more to the point, listening
to him when he talked. It is probable that Thurston never had tried so
hard in his life to win a girl's attention.

It was while he was still hobbling with a cane and taxing his
imagination daily to invent excuses for remaining, that Lauman, the
sheriff, rode up to the door with a deputy and asked shelter for
themselves and the two Wagners, who glowered sullenly down from their
weary horses. When they had been safely disposed in Thurston's bedroom,
with one of the ranch hands detailed to guard them, Lauman and his man
gave themselves up to the joy of a good meal. Their own cooking, they
said, got mighty tame especially when they hadn't much to cook and dared
not have a fire.

They had come upon the outlaws by mere accident, and it is hard telling
which was the most surprised. But Lauman was, perhaps, the quickest man
with a gun in Valley County, else he would not have been serving his
fourth term as sheriff. He got the drop and kept it while his deputy
did the rest. It had been a hard chase, he said, and a long one if you
counted time instead of miles. But he had them now, harmless as rattlers
with their fangs fresh drawn. He wanted to get them to Glasgow before
people got to hear of their capture; he thought they wouldn't be any too
safe if the boys knew he had them.

If he had known that the Lazy Eight roundup had just pulled in to the
home ranch that afternoon, and that Dick Farney, one of the Stevens
men, had slipped out to the corral and saddled his swiftest horse, it
is quite possible that Lauman would not have lingered so long over his
supper, or drank his third cup of coffee--with real cream in it--with so
great a relish. And if he had known that the Circle Bar boys were camped
just three miles away within hailing distance of the Lazy Eight trail,
he would doubtless have postponed his after-supper smoke.

He was sitting, revolver in hand, watching the Wagners give a practical
demonstration of the extent of their appetites, when Thurston limped in
from the porch, his eyes darker than usual. "There are a lot of riders
coming, Mr. Lauman," he announced quietly. "It sounds like a whole
roundup. I thought you ought to know."

The prisoners went white, and put down knife and fork. If they had never
feared before, plainly they were afraid then.

Lauman's face did not in the least change. "Put the hand-cuffs on,
Waller," he said. "If you've got a room that ain't easy to get at from
the outside, Mrs. Stevens, I guess I'll have to ask yuh for the use of
it."

Mrs. Stevens had lived long in Valley County, and had learned how to
meet emergencies. "Put 'em right down cellar," she invited briskly.
"There's just the trap-door into it, and the windows ain't big enough
for a cat to go through. Mona, get a candle for Mr. Lauman." She turned
to hurry the girl, and found Mona at her elbow with a light.

"That's the kind uh woman I like to have around," Lauman chuckled. "Come
on, boys; hustle down there if yuh want to see Glasgow again."

Trembling, all their dare-devil courage sapped from them by the menace
of Thurston's words, they stumbled down the steep stairs, and the
darkness swallowed them. Lauman beckoned to his deputy.

"You go with 'em, Waller," he ordered. "If anybody but me offers to lift
this trap, shoot. Don't yuh take any chances. Blow out that candle soon
as you're located."

It was then that fifty riders clattered into the yard and up to the
front door, grouping in a way that left no exit unseen. Thurston,
standing in the doorway, knew them almost to a man. Lazy Eight boys,
they were; men who night after night had spread their blankets under the
tent-roof with him and with Bob MacGregor; Bob, who lay silently out
on the hill back of the home ranch-house, waiting for the last, great
round-up. They glanced at him in mute greeting and dismounted without a
word. With them mingled the Circle Bar boys, as silent and grim as their
fellows. Lauman came up and peered into the dusk; Thurston observed that
he carried his Winchester unobtrusively in one hand.

"Why, hello, boys," he greeted cheerfully. But for the rifle you never
would have guessed he knew their errand.

"Hello, Lauman," answered Park, matching him for cheerfulness. Then:

"We rode over to hang them Wagners." Lauman grinned. "I hate to
disappoint yuh, Park, but I've kinda set my heart on doing that little
job myself. I'm the one that caught 'em, and if you'd followed my trail
the last month you'd say I earned the privilege."

"Maybe so," Park admitted pleasantly, "but we've got a little personal
matter to settle up with those jaspers. Bob MacGregor was one of us, yuh
remember."

"I'll hang 'em just as dead as you can," Lauman argued.

"But yuh won't do it so quick," Park lashed back. "They're spoiling the
air every breath they draw. We want 'em, and I guess that pretty near
settles it."

"Not by a damn sight it don't! I've never had a man took away from me
yet, boys, and I've been your sheriff a good many years. You hike right
back to camp; yuh can't have 'em."

Thurston could scarcely realize the deadliness of their purpose. He knew
them for kind-hearted, laughter-loving young fellows, who would give
their last dollar to a friend. He could not believe that they would
resort to violence now. Besides, this was not his idea of a mob; he
had fancied they would howl threats and wave bludgeons, as they did in
stories. Mobs always "howled and seethed with passion" at one's doors;
they did not stand about and talk quietly as though the subject was
trivial and did not greatly concern them.

But the men were pressing closer, and their very calmness, had he known
it, was ominous. Lauman shifted his rifle ready for instant aim.

"Boys, look here," he began more gravely, "I can't say I blame yuh,
looking at it from your view-point. If you'd caught these men when yuh
was out hunting 'em, you could uh strung 'em up--and I'd likely uh had
business somewhere else about that time. But yuh didn't catch 'em; yuh
give up the chase and left 'em to me. And yuh got to remember that I'm
the one that brought 'em in. They're in my care. I'm sworn to protect
'em and turn 'em over to the law--and it ain't a question uh whether
they deserve it or not. That's what I'm paid for, and I expect to go
right ahead according to orders and hang 'em by law. You can't have
'em--unless yuh lay me out first, and I don't reckon any of yuh would go
that far."

"There's never been a man hung by law in this county yet," a voice cried
angrily and impatiently.

"That ain't saying there never will be," Lauman flung back. "Don't yuh
worry, they'll get all that's coming to them, all right."

"How about the time yuh had 'em in your rotten old jail, and let 'em get
out and run loose around the country, killing off white men?" drawled
another-a Circle-Bar man.

"Now boys."

A hand--the hand of him who had stood guard over the Wagners in the
bedroom during supper--reached out through the doorway and caught his
rifle arm. Taken unawares from behind, he whirled and then went down
under the weight of men used to "wrassling" calves. Even old Lauman was
no match for them, and presently he found himself stretched upon the
porch with three Lazy Eight boys sitting on his person; which, being
inclined to portliness, he found very uncomfortable.

Moved by an impulse he had no name for, Thurston snatched the sheriff's
revolver from its scabbard. As the heap squirmed pantingly upon the
porch he stepped into the doorway to avoid being tripped, which was the
wisest move he could have made, for it put him in the shadow--and
there were men of the Circle Bar whose trigger-finger would not have
hesitated, just then, had he been in plain sight and had they known his
purpose.

"Just hold on there, boys," he called, and they could see the glimmer of
the gun-barrel. Those of the Lazy Eight laughed at him.

"Aw, put it down, Bud," Park admonished. "That's too dangerous a toy for
you to be playing with--and yuh know damn well yuh can't hit anything."

"I killed a steer once," Thurston reminded him meekly, whereat the laugh
hushed; for they remembered.

"I know I can't shoot straight," he went on frankly, "but you're taking
that much the greater chance. If I have to, I'll cut loose--and there's
no telling where the bullets may strike."

"That's right," Park admitted. "Stand still, boys; he's more dangerous
than a gun that isn't loaded. What d'yuh want, m'son?"

"I want to talk to you for about five minutes. I've got a game leg, so
that I can neither run nor fight, but I hope you'll listen to me. The
Wagners can't get away--they're locked up, with a deputy standing over
them with a gun; and on top of that they're handcuffed. They're as
helpless, boys, as two trapped coyotes." He looked down over the crowd,
which shifted uneasily; no one spoke.

"That's what struck me most," he continued. "You know what I thought of
Bob, don't you? And I didn't thank them for boring a hole in my leg; it
wasn't any kindness of theirs that it didn't land higher--they weren't
shooting at me for fun. And I'd have killed them both with a clear
conscience, if I could. I tried hard enough. But it was different then;
out in the open, where a man had an even break. I don't believe if I
had shot as straight as I wanted to that I'd ever have felt a moment's
compunction. But now, when they're disarmed and shackled and altogether
helpless, I couldn't walk up to them deliberately and kill them could
you?

"It could be done, and done easily. You have Lauman where he can't do
anything, and I'm not of much account in a fight; so you've really only
one deputy sheriff and two women to get the best of. You could drag
these men out and hang them in the cottonwoods, and they couldn't raise
a hand to defend themselves. We could do it easily--but when it was done
and the excitement had passed I'd have a picture in my memory that I'd
hate to look at. I'd have an hour in my life that would haunt me. And
so would you. You'd hate to look back and think that one time you helped
kill a couple of men who couldn't fight back.

"Let the law do it, boys. You don't want them to live, and I don't;
nobody does, for they deserve to die. But it isn't for us to play judge
and jury and hangman here to-night. Let them get what's coming to them
at the hands of the officers you've elected for that purpose. They won't
get off. Hank Graves says they will hang if it takes every hoof he owns.
He said he would bring Bowman down here to help prosecute them. I don't
know Bowman--"

"I do," a voice spoke, somewhere in the darkness. "Lawyer from Helena.
Never lost a case."

"I'm glad to hear it, for he's the man that will prosecute. They haven't
a ghost of a show to get out of it. Lauman here is responsible for their
safe keeping and I guess, now that he knows them better, we needn't be
afraid they'll escape again. And it's as Lauman said; he'll hang them
quite as dead as you can. He's drawing a salary to do these things, make
him earn it. It's a nasty job, boys, and you wouldn't get anything out
of it but a nasty memory."

A hand that did not feel like the hand of a man rested for an instant on
his arm. Mona brushed by him and stepped out where the rising moon shone
on her hair and into her big, blue-gray eyes.

"I wish you all would please go away," she said. "You are making mamma
sick. She's got it in her head that you are going to do something awful,
and I can't convince her you're not. I told her you wouldn't do anything
so sneaking, but she's awfully nervous about it. Won't you please go,
right now?"

They looked sheepishly at one another; every man of them feared the
ridicule of his neighbor.

"Why, sure we'll go," cried Park, rallying. "We were going anyway in a
minute. Tell your mother we were just congratulating Lauman on rounding
up these Wagners. Come on, boys. And you, Bud, hurry up and get well
again; we miss yuh round the Lazy Eight."

The three who were sitting on Lauman got up, and he gave a sigh of
relief. "Say, yuh darned cowpunchers don't have no mercy on an old man's
carcass at all," he groaned, in exaggerated self-pity. "Next time yuh
want to congratulate me, I wish you'd put it in writing and send it by
mail."

A little ripple of laughter went through the crowd. Then they swung up
on their horses and galloped away in the moonlight.



CHAPTER VIII. A QUESTION OF NERVE

"That was your victory, Miss Stevens. Allow me to congratulate you." If
Thurston showed any ill grace in his tone it was without intent. But it
did seem unfortunate that just as he was waxing eloquent and felt sure
of himself and something of a hero, Mona should push him aside as though
he were of no account and disperse a bunch of angry cowboys with half a
dozen words.

She looked at him with her direct, blue-gray eyes, and smiled. And
her smile had no unpleasant uplift at the corners; it was the dimply,
roguish smile of the pastel portrait only several times nicer. Re could
hardly believe it; he just opened his eyes wide and stared. When he came
to a sense of his rudeness, Mona was back in the kitchen helping with
the supper dishes, just as though nothing had happened--unless one
observed the deep, apple-red of her cheeks--while her mother, who showed
not the faintest symptoms of collapse, flourished a dish towel made of
a bleached flour sack with the stamp showing a faint pink and blue XXXX
across the center.

"I knew all the time they wouldn't do anything when it came right
to the point," she declared. "Bless their hearts, they thought they
would--but they're too soft-hearted, even when they are mad. If yuh go
at 'em right yuh can talk 'em over easy. It done me good to hear yuh
talk right up to 'em, Bud." Mrs. Stevens had called hi Bud from
the first time she laid eyes on him. "That's all under the sun they
needed--just somebody to set 'em thinking about the other side. You're a
real good speaker; seems to me you ought to study to be a preacher."

Thurston's face turned red. But presently he forgot everything in his
amazement, for Mona the dignified, Mona of the scornful eyes and the
chilly smile, actually giggled--giggled like any ordinary girl, and shot
him a glance that had in it pure mirth and roguish teasing, and a dash
of coquetry. He sat down and giggled with her, feeling idiotically happy
and for no reason under the sun that he could name.

He had promised his conscience that he would go home to the Lazy Eight
in the morning, but he didn't; he somehow contrived, overnight, to
invent a brand new excuse for his conscience to swallow or not, as it
liked. Hank Graves had the same privilege; as for the Stevens trio, he
blessed their hospitable souls for not wanting any excuse whatever for
his staying. They were frankly glad to have him there; at least Mrs.
Stevens and Jack were. As for Mona, he was not so sure, but he hoped she
didn't mind.

This was the reason inspired by his great desire: he was going to write
a story, and Mona was unconsciously to furnish the material for his
heroine, and so, of course, he needed to be there so that he might study
his subject. That sounded very well, to himself, but to Hank Graves,
for some reason, it seemed very funny. When Thurston told him, Hank
was taken with a fit of strangling that turned his face a dark purple.
Afterward he explained brokenly that something had got down his Sunday
throat--and Thurston, who had never heard of a man's Sunday throat,
eyed him with suspicion. Hank blinked at him with tears still in
his quizzical eyes and slapped him on the back, after the way of the
West--and any other enlightened country where men are not too dignified
to be their real selves--and drawled, in a way peculiar to himself:

"That's all right, Bud. You stay right here as long as yuh want to. I
don't blame yuh--if I was you I'd want to spend a lot uh time studying
this particular brand uh female girl myself. She's out uh sight,
Bud--and I don't believe any uh the boys has got his loop on her so far;
though I could name a dozen or so that would be tickled to death if they
had. You just go right ahead and file your little, old claim--"

"You're getting things mixed," Thurston interrupted, rather testily.
"I'm not in love with her. I, well, it's like this: if you were going to
paint a picture of those mountains off there, you'd want to be where you
could look at them--wouldn't you? You wouldn't necessarily want to--to
own them, just because you felt they'd make a fine picture. Your
interest would be, er, entirely impersonal."

"Uh-huh," Hank agreed, his keen eyes searching Phil's face amusedly.

"Therefore, it doesn't follow that I'm getting foolish about a girl just
because I--hang it! what the Dickens makes you look at a fellow that
way? You make me?"

"Uh-huh," said Hank again, smoothing the lower half of his face with one
hand. "You're a mighty nice little boy, Bud. I'll bet Mona thinks so,
too and when yuh get growed up you'll know a whole lot more than yuh do
right now. Well, I guess I'll be moving. When yuh get that--er--story
done, you'll come back to the ranch, I reckon. Be good."

Thurston watched him ride away, and then flounced, oh, men do flounce at
times, in spirit, if not in deed; and there would be no lack of the deed
if only they wore skirts that could rustle indignantly in sympathy with
the wearer--to his room. Plainly, Hank did not swallow the excuse any
more readily than did his conscience.

To prove the sincerity of his assertion to himself, his conscience,
and to Hank Graves, he straightway got out a thick pad of paper and
sharpened three lead pencils to an exceeding fine point. Then he sat him
down by the window--where he could see the kitchen door, which was the
one most used by the family--and nibbled the tip off one of the pencils
like any school-girl. For ten minutes he bluffed himself into believing
that he was trying to think of a title; the plain truth is, he was
wondering if Mona would go for a ride that afternoon and if so, might he
venture to suggest going with her.

He thought of the crimply waves in Mona's hair, and pondered what
adjectives would best describe it without seeming commonplace.
"Rippling" was too old, though it did seem to hit the case all right.
He laid down the pad and nearly stood on his head trying to reach his
Dictionary of Synonyms and Antonyms without getting out of his chair.
While he was clawing after it--it lay on the floor, where he had thrown
it that morning because it refused to divulge some information he
wanted--he heard some one open and close the kitchen door, and came near
kinking his neck trying to get up in time to see who it was. He failed
to see anyone, and returned to the dictionary.

"'Ripple--to have waves--like running water.'" (That was just the way
her hair looked, especially over the temples and at the nape of her
neck--Jove, what a tempting white neck it was!) "Um-m. 'Ripple; wave;
undulate; uneven; irregular.'" (Lord, what fools are the men who write
dictionaries!) "'Antonym--hang the antonyms!"

The kitchen door slammed. He craned again. It was Jack--going to town
most likely. Thurston shrewdly guessed that Mrs. Stevens leaned far more
upon Mona than she did upon Jack, although he could hardly accuse her
of leaning on anyone. But he observed that the men looked to her for
orders.

He perceived that the point was gone from his pencil, and proceeded to
sharpen it. Then he heard Mona singing in the kitchen, and recollected
that Mrs. Stevens had promised him warm doughnuts for supper. Perhaps
Mona was frying them at that identical moment--and he had never seen
anyone frying doughnuts. He caught up his cane and limped out to
investigate. That is how much his heart just then was set upon writing a
story that would breathe of the plains.

One great hindrance to the progress of his story was the difficulty he
had in selecting a hero for his heroine. Hank Graves suggested that he
use Park, and even went so far as to supply Thurston with considerable
data which went to prove that Park would not be averse to figuring in
a love story with Mona. But Thurston was not what one might call
enthusiastic, and Hank laughed his deep, inner laugh when he was well
away from the house.

Thurston, on the contrary, glowered at the world for two hours after.
Park was a fine fellow, and Thurston liked him about as well as any man
he knew in the West, but--And thus it went. On each and every visit to
the Stevens ranch--and they were many--Hank, learning by direct inquiry
that the story still suffered for lack of a hero, suggested some fellow
whom he had at one time and another caught "shining" around Mona. And
with each suggestion Thurston would draw down his eyebrows till he came
near getting a permanent frown.

A love story without a hero, while it would no doubt be original and
all that, would hardly appeal to an editor. Phil tried heroes wholly
imaginary, but he had a trick of making his characters seem very real
to himself and sometimes to other people as well. So that, after a few
passages of more or less ardent love-making, he would in a sense grow
jealous and spoil the story by annihilating the hero thereof.

Heaven only knows how long the thing would have gone on if he hadn't,
one temptingly beautiful evening, reverted to the day of the hold-up and
apologized for not obeying her command. He explained as well as he could
just why he sat petrified with his hands in the air.

And then having brought the thing freshly to her mind, he somehow lost
control of his wits and told her he loved her. He told her a good deal
in the next two minutes that he might better have kept to himself just
then. But a man generally makes a glorious fool of himself once or twice
in his life and it seems the more sensible the man the more thorough a
job he makes of it.

Mona moved a little farther away from him, and when she answered she
did not choose her words. "Of all things," she said, evenly, "I admire
a brave man and despise a coward. You were chicken-hearted that day, and
you know it; you've just admitted it. Why, in another minute I'd have
had that gun myself, and I'd have shown you--but Park got it before
I really had a chance. I hated to seem spectacular, but it served you
right. If you'd had any nerve I wouldn't have had to sit there and tell
you what to do. If ever I marry anybody, Mr. Thurston, it will be a
man."

"Which means, I suppose, that I'm not one?" he asked angrily.

"I don't know yet." Mona smiled her unpleasant smile--the one that
did not belong in the story he was going to write. "You're new to the
country, you see. Maybe you've got nerve; you haven't shown much, so far
as I know--except when you talked to the boys that night. But you must
have known that they wouldn't hurt you anyway. A man must have a little
courage as much as I have; which isn't asking much--or I'd never marry
him in the world."

"Not even if you--liked him?" his smile was wistful.

"Not even if I loved him!" Mona declared, and fled into the house.

Thurston gathered himself together and went down to the stable and
borrowed a horse of Jack, who had just got back from town, and rode home
to the Lazy Eight.

When Hank heard that he was home to stay--at least until he could join
the roundup again--he didn't say a word for full five minutes. Then,
"Got your story done?" he drawled, and his eyes twinkled.

Thurston was going up the stairs to his old room, and Hank could not
swear positively to the reply he got. But he thought it sounded like,
"Oh, damn the story!"



CHAPTER IX. THE DRIFT OF THE HERDS

Weeks slipped by, and to Thurston they seemed but days. His
world-weariness and cynicism disappeared the first time he met Mona
after he had left there so unceremoniously; for Mona, not being aware of
his cynicism, received him on the old, friendly footing, and seemed to
have quite forgotten that she had ever called him a coward, or refused
to marry him. So Thurston forgot it also--so long as he was with her.

How he filled in the hours he could scarcely have told; certain it
is that he accomplished nothing at all so far as Western stories were
concerned. Reeve-Howard wrote in slightly shocked phrases to ask what
was keeping him so long; and assured him that he was missing much by
staying away. Thurston mentally agreed with him long enough to begin
packing his trunk; it was idiotic to keep staying on when he was clearly
receiving no benefit thereby. When, however, he picked up a book which
he had told Mona he would take over to her the next time he went, he
stopped and considered:

There was the Wagner trial coming off in a month or so; he couldn't get
out of attending it, for he had been subpoenaed as a witness for the
prosecution. And there was the beef roundup going to start before
long--he really ought to stay and take that in; there would be some fine
chances for pictures. And really he didn't care so much for the Barry
Wilson bunch and the long list of festivities which trailed ever in
its wake; at any rate, they weren't worth rushing two-thirds across the
continent for.

He sat down and wrote at length to Reeve-Howard, explaining very
carefully--and not altogether convincingly--just why he could not
possibly go home at present. After that he saddled and rode over to the
Stevens place with the book, leaving his trunk yawning emptily in the
middle of his badly jumbled belongings.

After that he spent three weeks on the beef roundup. At first he was
full of enthusiasm, and worked quite as if he had need of the wages, but
after two or three big drives the novelty wore off quite suddenly, and
nothing then remained but a lot of hard work. For instance, standing
guard on long, rainy nights when the cattle walked and walked might at
first seem picturesque and all that, but must at length, cease to be
amusing.

Likewise the long hours which he spent on day-herd, when the wind
was raw and penetrating and like to blow him out of the saddle; also
standing at the stockyard chutes and forcing an unwilling stream of
rollicky, wild-eyed steers up into the cars that would carry them to
Chicago.

After three weeks of it he awoke one particularly nasty morning and
thanked the Lord he was not obliged to earn his bread at all, to say
nothing of earning it in so distressful a fashion. There was a lull
in the shipping because cars were not then available. He promptly took
advantage of it and rode by the very shortest trail to the ranch--and
Mona. But Mona was visiting friends in Chinook, and there was no telling
when she would return. Thurston, in the next few days, owned to himself
that there was no good reason for his tarrying longer in the big,
un-peopled West, and that the proper thing for him to do was go back
home to New York.

He had come to stay a month, and he had stayed five. He could ride and
rope like an old-timer, and he was well qualified to put up a stiff
gun-fight had the necessity ever arisen--which it had not.

He had three hundred and seventy-one pictures of different phases of
range life, not counting as many that were over-exposed or under-exposed
or out of focus. He had six unfinished stories, in each of which the
heroine had big, blue-gray eyes and crimply hair, and the title and bare
skeleton of a seventh, in which the same sort of eyes and hair would
probably develop later. He had proposed to Mona three times, and had
been three times rebuffed--though not, it must be owned, with that tone
of finality which precludes hope.

He was tanned a fine brown, which became him well. His eyes had lost the
dreamy, introspective look of the student and author, and had grown keen
with the habit of studying objects at long range. He walked with that
peculiar, stiff-legged gait which betrays long hours spent in the
saddle, and he wore a silk handkerchief around his neck habitually and
had forgotten the feel of a dress-suit.

He answered to the name "Bud" more readily than to his own, and he made
practical use of the slang and colloquialisms of the plains without any
mental quotation marks.

By all these signs and tokens he had learned his West, and should have
taken himself back to civilization when came the frost. He had come to
get into touch with his chosen field of fiction, that he might write
as one knowing whereof he spoke. So far as he had gone, he was in touch
with it; he was steeped to the eyes in local color--and there was the
rub The lure of it was strong upon him, and he might not loosen its
hold. He was the son of his father; he had found himself, and knew that,
like him, he loved best to travel the dim trails.

Gene Wasson came in and slammed the door emphatically shut after him.
"She's sure coming," he complained, while he pulled the icicles from
his mustache and cast them into the fire. "She's going to be a real, old
howler by the signs. What yuh doing, Bud? Writing poetry?"

Thurston nodded assent with certain mental reservations; so far the
editors couldn't seem to make up their minds that it was poetry.

"Well, say, I wish you'd slap in a lot uh things about hazy, lazy, daisy
days in the spring--that jingles fine!--and green grass and the
sun shining and making the hills all goldy yellow, and prairie dogs
chip-chip-chipping on the 'dobe flats. (Prairie dogs would go all right
in poetry, wouldn't they? They're sassy little cusses, and I don't know
of anything that would rhyme with 'em, but maybe you do.) And read it
all out to me after supper. Maybe it'll make me kinda forget there's a
blizzard on."

"Another one?" Thurston got up to scratch a trench in the half-inch
layer of frost on the cabin window. "Why, it only cleared up this
morning after three days of it."

"Can't help that. This is just another chapter uh that same story. When
these here Klondike Chinooks gets to lapping over each other they never
know when to quit. Every darn one has got to be continued tacked onto
the tail of it the winter. All the difference is, you can't read the
writing; but I can."

"I've got some mail for yuh, Bud. And old Hank wanted me to ask yuh if
you'd like to go to Glasgow next Thursday and watch old Lauman start the
Wagner boys for wherever's hot enough. He can get yuh in, you being in
the writing business. He says to tell yuh it's a good chance to take
notes, so yuh can write a real stylish story, with lots uh murder and
sudden death in it. We don't hang folks out here very often, and yuh
might have to go back East after pointers, if yuh pass this up."

"Oh, go easy. It turns me sick when I think about it; how they looked
when they got their sentence, and all that. I certainly don't care to
see them hanged, though they do deserve it. Where are the letters?"
Thurston sprawled across the table for them. One was from Reeve-Howard;
he put it by. Another had a printed address in the corner--an address
that started his pulse a beat or two faster; for he had not yet reached
that blase stage where he could receive a personal letter from one of
the "Eight Leading" without the flicker of an eye-lash. He still gloated
over his successes, and was cast into the deeps by his failures.

He held the envelope to the light, shook it tentatively, like any woman,
guessed hastily and hopefully at the contents, and tore off an end
impatiently. From the great fireplace Gene watched him curiously and
half enviously. He wished he could get important-looking letters from
New York every few days. It must make a fellow feel that he amounted to
something.

"Gene, you remember that story I read to you one night--that yarn about
the fellow that lived alone in the hills, and how the wolves used to
come and sit on the ridge and howl o' nights--you know, the one you
said was 'out uh sight'? They took it, all right, and--here, what do you
think of that?" He tossed the letter over to Gene, who caught it just as
it was about to be swept into the flame with the draught in Thurston, in
the days which he spent one of the half-dozen Lazy Eight line-camps with
Gene, down by the river, had been writing of the West--writing in
fear and trembling, for now he knew how great was his subject and his
ignorance of it. In the long evenings, while the fire crackled and the
flames played a game they had invented, a game where they tried which
could leap highest up the great chimney; while the north wind whoo-ooed
around the eaves and fine, frozen snow meal swished against the one
little window; while shivering, drifting range cattle tramped restlessly
through the sparse willow-growth seeking comfort where was naught but
cold and snow and bitter, driving wind; while the gray wolves hunted in
packs and had not long to wait for their supper, Thurston had written
better than he knew. He had sent the cold of the blizzards and the howl
of the wolves; he had sent bits of the wind-swept plains back to New
York in long, white envelopes. And the editors were beginning to watch
for his white envelopes and to seize them eagerly when they came, greedy
for what was within. Not every day can they look upon a few typewritten
pages and see the range-land spread, now frowning, now smiling, before
them.

"Gee! they say here they want a lot the same brand, and at any old price
yuh might name. I wouldn't mind writing stories myself." Gene kicked
a log back into the flame where it would do the most good. His big,
square-shouldered figure stood out sharply against the glow.

Thurston, watching him meditatively, wanted to tell him that he was
the sort of whom good stories are made. But for men like Gene--strong,
purposeful, brave, the West would lose half its charm. He was like Bob
in many ways, and for that Thurston liked him and, stayed with him in
the line-camp when he might have been taking his ease at the home ranch.

It was wild and lonely down there between the bare hills and the frozen
river, but the wildness and the loneliness appealed to him. It was
primitive and at times uncomfortable. He slept in a bunk built against
the wall, with hard boards under him and a sod roof over his head. There
were times when the wind blew its fiercest and rattled dirt down into
his face unless he covered it with a blanket. And every other day he
had to wash the dishes and cook, and when it was Gene's turn to cook,
Thurston chopped great armloads of wood for the fireplace to eat o'
nights. Also he must fare forth, wrapped to the eyes, and help Gene
drive back the cattle which drifted into the river bottom, lest they
cross the river on the ice and range where they should not.

But in the evenings he could sit in the fire-glow and listen to the wind
and to the coyotes and the gray wolves, and weave stories that even the
most hyper-critical of editors could not fail to find convincing. By
day he could push the coffee-box that held his typewriter over by the
frosted window--when he had an hour or two to spare--and whang away at
a rate which filled Gene with wonder. Sometimes he rode over to the home
ranch for a day or two, but Mona was away studying music, so he found no
inducement to remain, and drifted back to the little, sod-roofed cabin
by the river, and to Gene.

The winter settled down with bared teeth like a bull-dog, and never
a chinook came to temper the cold and give respite to man or beast.
Blizzards that held them, in fear of their lives, close to shelter for
days, came down from the north; and with them came the drifting herds.
By hundreds they came, hurrying miserably before the storms. When the
wind lashed them without mercy even in the bottom-land, they pushed
reluctantly out upon the snow-covered ice of the Missouri. Then Gene and
Thurston watching from their cabin window would ride out and turn them
pitilessly back into the teeth of the storm.

They came by hundreds--thin, gaunt from cold and hunger. They came by
thousands, lowing their misery as they wandered aimlessly, seeking that
which none might find: food and shelter and warmth for their chilled
bodies. When the Canada herds pushed down upon them the boys gave over
trying to keep them north of the river; while they turned one bunch a
dozen others were straggling out from shore, the timid following
single file behind a leader more venturesome or more desperate than his
fellows.

So the march went on and on: big, Southern-bred steer grappling the
problem of his first Northern winter; thin-flanked cow with shivering,
rough-coated calf trailing at her heels; humpbacked yearling with little
nubs of horns telling that he was lately in his calfhood; red cattle,
spotted cattle, white cattle, black cattle; white-faced Herefords,
Short-horns, scrubs; Texas longhorns--of the sort invariably pictured
in stampedes--still they came drifting out of the cold wilderness and on
into wilderness as cold.

Through the shifting wall of the worst blizzard that season Thurston
watched the weary, fruitless, endless march of the range. "Where do they
all come from?" he exclaimed once when the snow-veil lifted and showed
the river black with cattle.

"Lord! I dunno," Gene answered, shrugging his shoulders against the
pity of it. "I seen some brands yesterday that I know belongs up in the
Cypress Hills country. If things don't loosen up pretty soon, the whole
darned range will be swept clean uh stock as far north as cattle run.
I'm looking for reindeer next."

"Something ought to be done," Thurston declared uneasily, turning away
from the sight. "I've had the bellowing of starving cattle in my ears
day and night for nearly a month. The thing's getting on my nerves."

"It's getting on the nerves uh them that own 'em a heap worse," Gene
told him grimly, and piled more wood on the fire; for the cold bit
through even the thick walls of the cabin when the flames in the
fireplace died, and the door hinges were crusted deep with ice. "There's
going to be the biggest loss this range has ever known."

"It's the owners' fault," snapped Thurston, whose nerves were in
that irritable state which calls loudly for a vent of some sort. Even
argument with Gene, fruitless though it perforce must be, would be a
relief. "It's their own fault. I don't pity them any--why don't they
take care of their stock? If I owned cattle, do you think I'd sit in the
house and watch them starve through the winter?"

"What if yuh owned more than yuh could feed? It'd be a case uh have-to
then. There's fifty thousand Lazy Eight cattle walking the range
somewhere today. How the dickens is old Hank going to feed them fifty
thousand? or five thousand? It takes every spear uh hay he's got to feed
his calves."

"He could buy hay," Thurston persisted.

"Buy hay for fifty thousand cattle? Where would he get it? Say, Bud, I
guess yuh don't realize that's some cattle. All ails you is, yuh don't
savvy the size uh the thing. I'll bet yuh there won't be less than three
hundred thousand head cross this river before spring."

"Some of them belong in Canada--you said so yourself."

"I know it, but look at all the country south of us: all the other cow
States. Why, Bud, when yuh talk about feeding every critter that runs
the range, you're plumb foolish."

"Anyway, it's a damnable pity!" Thurston asserted petulantly.

"Sure it is. The grass is there, but it's under fourteen inches uh snow
right now, and more coming; they say it's twelve feet deep up in the
mountains. You'll see some great old times in the spring, Bud, if yuh
stay. You will, won't yuh?"

Thurston laughed shortly. "I suppose it's safe to say I will," he
answered. "I ought to have gone last fall, but I didn't. It will
probably be the same thing over again; I ought to go in the spring, but
I won't."

"You bet you won't. Talk about big roundups! what yuh seen last spring
wasn't a commencement. Every hoof that crosses this river and lives till
spring will have to be rounded up and brought back again. They'll be
scattered clean down to the Yellowstone, and every Northern outfit has
got to go down and help work the range from there back. I tell yuh, Bud,
yuh want to lay in a car-load uh films and throw away all them little,
jerk-water snap-shots yuh got. There's going to be roundups like these
old Panhandle rannies tell about, when the green grass comes." Gene,
thinking blissfully of the tented life, sprawled his long legs toward
the snapping blaze and crooned dreamily, while without the blizzard
raged more fiercely, a verse from an old camp song:

     "Out on the roundup, boys, I tell yuh what yuh get
     Little chunk uh bread and a little chunk uh meat;
     Little black coffee, boys, chuck full uh alkali,
     Dust in your throat, boys, and gravel in your eye!
     So polish up your saddles, oil your slickers and your guns,
     For we're bound for Lonesome Prairie when the green grass comes."



CHAPTER X. THE CHINOOK

One night in late March a sullen, faraway roar awakened Thurston in
his bunk. He turned over and listened, wondering what on earth was the
matter. More than anything it sounded like a hurrying freight train only
the railroad lay many miles to the north, and trains do not run at large
over the prairie. Gene snored peacefully an arm's length away. Outside
the snow lay deep on the levels, while in the hollows were great, white
drifts that at bedtime had glittered frostily in the moonlight. On the
hill-tops the gray wolves howled across coulees to their neighbors, and
slinking coyotes yapped foolishly at the moon.

Thurston drew the blanket up over his ears, for the fire had died to a
heap of whitening embers and the cold of the cabin made the nose of
him tingle. The roar grew louder and nearer-then the cabin shivered and
creaked in the suddenness of the blast that struck it. A clod of dirt
plumbed down upon his shoulder, bringing with it a shower of finer
particles. "Another blizzard!" he groaned, "and the worst we've had yet,
by the sound."

The wind shrieked down the chimney and sought the places where the
chinking was loose. It howled up the coulees, putting the wolves
themselves to shame. Gene flopped over like a newly landed fish, grunted
some unintelligible words and slept again.

For an hour Thurston lay and listened to the blast and selfishly thanked
heaven it was his turn at the cooking. If the storm kept up like that,
he told himself, he was glad he did not have to chop the wood. He
lifted the blanket and sniffed tentatively, then cuddled back into cover
swearing that a thermometer would register zero at that very moment on
his pillow.

The storm came in gusts as the worst blizzards do at times. It made him
think of the nursery story about the fifth little pig who built a cabin
of rocks, and how the wolf threatened: "I'll huff and I'll puff, and
I'll blow your house down!" It was as if he himself were the fifth
little pig, and as if the wind were the wolf. The wolf-wind would stop
for whole minutes, gather his great lungs full of air and then without
warning would "huff and puff" his hardest. But though the cabin was
not built of rocks, it was nevertheless a staunch little shelter and
sturdily withstood the shocks.

He pitied the poor cattle still fighting famine and frost as only
range-bred stock can fight. He pictured them drifting miserably before
the fury of the wind or crowding for shelter under some friendly
cutback, their tails to the storm, waiting stolidly for the dawn that
would bring no relief. Then, with the roar and rattle in his ears, he
fell asleep.

In that particular line-camp on the Missouri the cook's duties began
with building a fire in the morning. Thurston waked reluctantly,
shivered in anticipation under the blankets, gathered together his
fortitude and crept out of his bunk. While he was dressing his teeth
chattered like castanets in a minstrel show. He lighted the fire
hurriedly and stood backed close before it, listening to the rage of the
wind. He was growing very tired of the monotony of winter; he could no
longer see any beauty in the high-turreted, snow-clad hills, nor the
bare, red faces of the cliffs frowning down upon him.

"I don't suppose you could see to the river bank," he mused, "and Gene
will certainly tear the third commandment to shreds before he gets the
water-hole open."

He went over to the window, meaning to scratch a peep-hole in the frost,
just as he had done every day for the past three months; lifted a hand,
then stopped bewildered. For instead of frost there was only steam with
ridges of ice yet clinging to the sash and dripping water in a tiny
rivulet. He wiped the steam hastily away with his palm and looked out.

"Good heavens, Gene!" he shouted in a voice to wake the Seven Sleepers.
"The world's gone mad overnight. Are you dead, man? Get up and look out.
The whole damn country is running water, and the hills are bare as this
floor!"

"Uh-huh!" Gene knuckled his eyes and sat up. "Chinook struck us in the
night. Didn't yuh hear it?"

Thurston pulled open the door and stood face to face with the miracle of
the West. He had seen Mother Nature in many a changeful mood, but never
like this. The wind blew warm from the southwest and carried hints of
green things growing and the song of birds; he breathed it gratefully
into his lungs and let it riot in his hair. The sky was purplish and
soft, with heavy, drifting clouds high-piled like a summer storm. It
looked like rain, he thought.

The bare hills were sodden with snow-water, and the drifts in the
coulees were dirt-grimed and forbidding. The great river lay, a gray
stretch of water-soaked snow over the ice, with little, clear pools
reflecting the drab clouds above. A crow flapped lazily across the
foreground and perched like a blot of fresh-spilled ink on the top of a
dead cottonwood and cawed raucous greeting to the spring.

The wonder of it dazed Thurston and made him do unusual things that
morning. All winter he had been puffed with pride over his cooking, but
now he scorched the oatmeal, let the coffee boil over, and blackened the
bacon, and committed divers other grievous sins against Gene's clamoring
appetite. Nor did he feel the shame that he should have felt. He simply
could not stay in the cabin five minutes at a time, and for it he had no
apology.

After breakfast he left the dishes un-washed upon the table and went out
and made merry with nature. He could scarce believe that yesterday he
had frosted his left ear while he brought a bucket of water up from the
river, and that it had made his lungs ache to breathe the chill air. Now
the path to the river was black and dry and steamed with warmth. Across
the water cattle were feeding greedily upon the brown grasses that only
a few hours before had been locked away under a crust of frozen snow.

"They won't starve now," he exulted, pointing them out to Gene.

"No, you bet not!" Gene answered. "If this don't freeze up on us the
wagons 'll be starting in a month or so. I guess we can be thinking
about hitting the trail for home pretty soon now. The river'll break up
if this keeps going a week. Say, this is out uh sight! It's warmer out
uh doors than it is in the house. Darn the old shack, anyway! I'm plumb
sick uh the sight of it. It looked all right to me in a blizzard, but
now--it's me for the range, m'son." He went off to the stable with long,
swinging strides that matched all nature for gladness, singing cheerily:

   "So polish up your saddles, oil your slickers and your guns,
   For we're hound for Lonesome Prairie when the green grass comes."



CHAPTER XI. FOLLOWING THE DIM TRAILS!

Thurston did not go on the horse roundup. He explained to the boys,
when they clamored against his staying, that he had a host of things to
write, and it would keep him busy till they were ready to start with
the wagons for the big rendezvous on the Yellowstone, the exact point of
which had yet to be decided upon by the Stock Association when it met.
The editors were after him, he said, and if he ever expected to get
anywhere, in a literary sense, it be-hooved him to keep on the smiley
side of the editors.

That sounded all right as far as it went, but unfortunately it did
not go far. The boys winked at one another gravely behind his back and
jerked their thumbs knowingly toward Milk River; by which pantomime they
reminded one another--quite unnecessarily that Mona Stevens had come
home. However, they kept their skepticism from becoming obtrusive, so
that Thurston believed his excuses passed on their face value. The boys,
it would seem, realized that it is against human nature for a man to
declare openly to his fellows his intention of laying last, desperate
siege to the heart of a girl who has already refused him three times,
and to ask her for the fourth time if she will reconsider her former
decisions and marry him.

That is really what kept Thurston at the Lazy Eight. His writing became
once more a mere incident in his life. During the winter, when he did
not see her, he could bring himself to think occasionally of other
things; and it is a fact that the stories he wrote with no heroine at
all hit the mark the straightest.

Now, when he was once again under the spell of big, clear, blue gray
eyes and crimply brown hair, his stories lost something of their
virility and verged upon the sentimental in tone. And since he was not a
fool he realized the falling off and chafed against it and wondered why
it was. Surely a man who is in love should be well qualified to write
convincingly of the obsession but Thurston did not. He came near going
to the other extreme and refusing to write at all.

The wagons were out two weeks--which is quite long enough for a crisis
to arise in the love affair of any man. By the time the horse roundup
was over, one Philip Thurston was in pessimistic mood and quite ready
to follow the wagons, the farther the better. Also, they could not start
too soon to please him. His thoughts still ran to blue-gray eyes and
ripply hair, but he made no attempt to put them into a story.

He packed his trunk carefully with everything he would not need on
the roundup, and his typewriter he put in the middle. He told himself
bitterly that he had done with crimply haired girls, and with every
other sort of girl. If he could figure in something heroic--only he
said melodramatic--he might possibly force her to think well of him.
But heroic situations and opportunities come not every day to a man, and
girls who demand that their knights shall be brave in face of death need
not complain if they are left knightless at the last.

He wrote to Reeve-Howard, the night before they were to start, and
apologized gracefully for having neglected him during the past three
weeks and told him he would certainly be home in another month. He said
that he was "in danger of being satiated with the Western tone" and
would be glad to shake the hand of civilized man once more. This was
distinctly unfair, because he had no quarrel with the masculine portion
of the West. If he had said civilized woman it would have been more just
and more illuminating to Reeve-Howard who wondered what scrape Phil had
gotten himself into with those savages.

For the first few days of the trip Thurston was in that frame of mind
which makes a man want to ride by himself, with shoulders hunched
moodily and eyes staring straight before the nose of his horse.

But the sky was soft and seemed to smile down at him, and the clouds
loitered in the blue of it and drifted aimlessly with no thought of
reaching harbor on the sky-line. From under his horse's feet the prairie
sod sent up sweet, earthy odors into his nostrils and the tinkle of the
bells in the saddle-bunch behind him made music in his ears--the sort of
music a true cowboy loves. Yellow-throated meadow larks perched swaying
in the top of gray sage bushes and sang to him that the world was good.
Sober gray curlews circled over his head, their long, funny bills thrust
out straight as if to point the way for their bodies to follow and
cried, "Kor-r-eck, kor-r-eck!"--which means just what the meadow larks
sang. So Thurston, hearing it all about him, seeing it and smelling it
and feeling the riot of Spring in his blood, straightened the hunch out
of his shoulders and admitted that it was all true: that the world was
good.

At Miles City he found himself in the midst of a small army, the
regulars of the range---which grew hourly larger as the outfits rolled
in. The rattle of mess-wagons, driven by the camp cook and followed by
the bed-wagon, was heard from all directions. Jingling cavvies (herds of
saddle horses they were, driven and watched over by the horse wrangler)
came out of the wilderness in the wake of the wagons. Thurston got out
his camera and took pictures of the scene. In the first, ten different
camps appeared; he mourned because two others were perforced omitted.
Two hours later he snapped the Kodak upon fifteen, and there were four
beyond range of the lens.

Park came along, saw what he was doing and laughed. "Yuh better wait
till they commence to come," he said. "When yuh can stand on this little
hill and count fifty or sixty outfits camped within two or three miles
uh here, yuh might begin taking pictures."

"I think you're loading me," Thurston retorted calmly, winding up the
roll for another exposure.

"All right--suit yourself about it." Park walked off and left him
peering into the view-finder.

Still they came. From Swift Current to the Cypress Hills the Canadian
cattlemen sent their wagons to join the big meet. From the Sweet Grass
Hills to the mouth of Milk River not a stock-grower but was represented.
From the upper Musselshell they came, and from out the Judith Basin;
from Shellanne east to Fort Buford. Truly it was a gathering of the
clans such as eastern Montana had never before seen.

For a day and a night the cowboys made merry in town while their foremen
consulted and the captains appointed by the Association mapped out the
different routes. At times like these, foremen such as Park and Deacon
Smith were shorn of their accustomed power, and worked under orders as
strict as those they gave their men.

Their future movements thoroughly understood, the army moved down upon
the range in companies of five and six crews, and the long summer's work
began; each rider a unit in the war against the chaos which the winter
had wrought; in the fight of the stockmen to wrest back their fortunes
from the wilderness, and to hold once more their sway over the
range-land.

Their method called for concerted action, although it was simple enough.
Two of the Lazy Eight wagons, under Park and Gene Wasson (for Hank that
spring was running four crews and had promoted Gene wagon-boss of one),
joined forces with the Circle-Bar, the Flying U, and a Yellowstone
outfit whose wagon-boss, knowing best the range, was captain of the five
crews; and drove north, gathering and holding all stock which properly
ranged beyond the Missouri.

That meant day after day of "riding circle"--which is, being
interpreted, riding out ten or twelve miles from camp, then turning and
driving everything before them to a point near the center of the circle
thus formed. When they met the cattle were bunched, and all stock which
belonged on that range was cut out, leaving only those which had crossed
the river during the storms of winter. These were driven on to the
next camping place and held, which meant constant day-herding and
night-guarding work which cowboys hate more than anything else.

There would be no calf roundup proper that spring, for all calves were
branded as they were gathered. Many there were among the she-stock that
would not cross the river again; their carcasses made unsightly blots in
the coulee-bottoms and on the wind-swept levels. Of the calves that had
followed their mothers on the long trail, hundreds had dropped out of
the march and been left behind for the wolves. But not all. Range-bred
cattle are blessed with rugged constitutions and can bear much of cold
and hunger. The cow that can turn tail to a biting wind the while she
ploughs to the eyes in snow and roots out a very satisfactory living
for herself breeds calves that will in time do likewise and grow fat and
strong in the doing. He is a sturdy, self-reliant little rascal, is the
range-bred calf.

When fifteen hundred head of mixed stock, bearing Northern brands, were
in the hands of the day-herders, Park and his crew were detailed to take
them on and turn them loose upon their own range north of Milk River.
Thurston felt that he had gleaned about all the experience he needed,
and more than enough hard riding and short sleeping and hurried eating.
He announced that he was ready to bid good-by to the range. He would
help take the herd home, he told Park, and then he intended to hit the
trail for little, old New York.

He still agreed with the meadow larks that the world was good, but he
had made himself believe that he really thought the civilized portion
of it was better, especially when the uncivilized part holds a girl who
persists in saying no when she should undoubtedly say yes, and insists
that a man must be a hero, else she will have none of him.



CHAPTER XII. HIGH WATER

It was nearing the middle of June, and it was getting to be a very hot
June at that. For two days the trail-herd had toiled wearily over the
hills and across the coulees between the Missouri and Milk River. Then
the sky threatened for a day, and after that they plodded in the rain.

"Thank the Lord that's done with," sighed Park when he saw the last
of the herd climb, all dripping, up the north bank of the Milk River.
"To-morrow we can turn 'em loose. And I tell yuh, Bud, we didn't get
across none too soon. Yuh notice how the river's coming up? A day later
and we'd have had to hold the herd on the other side, no telling how
long."

"It is higher than usual; I noticed that," Thurston agreed absently. He
was thinking more of Mona just then than of the river. He wondered if
she would be at home. He could easily ride down there and find out.
It wasn't far; not a quarter of a mile, but he assured himself that he
wasn't going, and that he was not quite a fool, he hoped Even if she
were at home, what good could that possibly do him? Just give him
several bad nights, when he would lie in his corner of the tent and
listen to the boys snoring with a different key for every man. Such
nights were not pleasant, nor were the thoughts that caused them.

From where they were camped upon a ridge which bounded a broad coulee
on the east, he could look down upon the Stevens ranch nestling in the
bottomland, the house half hidden among the cottonwoods. Through the
last hours of the afternoon he watched it hungrily. The big corral ran
down to the water's edge, and he noted idly that three panels of the
fence extended out into the river, and that the muddy water was creeping
steadily up until at sundown the posts of the first panel barely showed
above the water.

Park came up to him and looked down upon the little valley. "I never
did see any sense in Jack Stevens building where he did," he remarked.
"There ain't a June flood that don't put his corral under water, and
some uh these days it's going to get the house. He was too lazy to dig
a well back on high ground; he'd rather take chances on having the whole
business washed off the face uh the earth."

"There must be danger of it this year if ever," Thurston observed
uneasily. "The river is coming up pretty fast, it seems to me. It must
have raised three feet since we crossed this afternoon."

"I'll course there's danger, with all that snow coming out uh the
mountains. And like as not Jack's in Shellanne roosting on somebody's
pool table and telling it scary, instead uh staying at home looking
after his stuff. Where yuh going, Bud?"

"I'm going to ride down there," Thurston answered constrainedly. "The
women may be all alone."

"Well, I'll go along, if you'll hold on a minute. Jack ain't got a lick
uh sense. I don't care if he is Mona's brother."

"Half brother," corrected Thurston, as he swung up into the saddle. He
had a poor opinion of Jack and resented even that slight relation to
Mona.

The road was soggy with the rain which fell steadily; down in the
bottom, the low places in the road were already under water, and the
river, widening almost perceptibly in its headlong rush down the narrow
valley, crept inch by inch up its low banks. When they galloped into the
yard which sloped from the house gently down to the river fifty yards
away, Mona's face appeared for a moment in the window. Evidently she had
been watching for some one, and Thurston's heart flopped in his chest
as he wondered, fleetingly, if it could be himself. When she opened the
door her eyes greeted him with a certain wistful expression that he had
never seen in them before. He was guilty of wishing that Park had stayed
in camp.

"Oh, I'm glad you rode over," she welcomed--but she was careful, after
that first swift glance, to look at Park. "Jack wasn't at camp, was he?
He went to town this morning, and I looked for hi back long before now.
But it's a mistake ever to look for Jack until he's actually in sight."

Park smiled vaguely. He was afraid it would not be polite to agree with
her as emphatically as he would like to have done. But Thurston had no
smile ready, polite or otherwise. Instead he drew down his brows in a
way not complimentary to Jack.

"Where is your mother?" he asked, almost peremptorily.

"Mamma went to Great Falls last week," she told him primly, just
grazing him with one of her impersonal glances which nearly drove him to
desperation. "Aunt Mary has typhoid fever--there seems to be so much of
that this spring and they sent for mamma. She's such a splendid nurse,
you know."

Thurston did know, but he passed over the subject. "And you're alone?"
he demanded.

"Certainly not; aren't you two here?" Mona could be very pert when she
tried. "Jack and I are holding down the ranch just now; the boys are all
on roundup, of course. Jack went to town today to see some one.

"Um-m-yes, of course." It was Park, still trying to be polite and not
commit himself on the subject of Jack. The "some one" whom Jack went
oftenest to see was the bartender in the Palace saloon, but it was not
necessary to tell her that.

"The river's coming up pretty fast, Mona," he ventured. "Don't yuh think
yuh ought to pull out and go visiting?"

"No, I don't." Mona's tone was very decided. "I wouldn't drop down on a
neighbor without warning just because the river happens to be coming up.
It has 'come up' every June since we've been living here, and there have
been several of them. At the worst it never came inside the gate."

"You can never tell what it might do," Park argued. "Yuh know yourself
there's never been so much snow in the mountains. This hot weather we've
been having lately, and then the rain, will bring it a-whooping. Can't
yuh ride over to the Jonses? One of us'll go with yuh."

"No, I can't." Mona's chin went up perversely. "I'm no coward, I hope,
even if there was any danger which there isn't."

Thurston's chin went up also, and he sat a bit straighter. Whether she
meant it or not, he took her words as a covert stab at himself. Probably
she did not mean it; at any rate the blood flew consciously to her
cheeks after she had spoken, and she caught her under lip sharply
between her teeth. And that did not help matters or make her temper more
yielding.

"Anyway," she added hurriedly, "Jack will be here; he's likely to come
any minute now."

"Uh course, if Jack's got some new kind of half-hitch he can put on
the river and hold it back yuh'll be all right," fleered Park, with the
freedom of an old friend. He had known Mona when she wore dresses to her
shoe-tops and her hair in long, brown curls down her back.

She wrinkled her nose at him also with the freedom of an old friend and
Thurston stirred restlessly in his chair. He did not like even Park to
be too familiar with Mona, though he knew there was a girl in Shellanne
whose name Park sometimes spoke in his sleep.

She lifted the big glass lamp down from its place on the clock shelf
and lighted it with fingers not quite steady. "You men," she remarked,
"think women ought to be wrapped in pink cotton and put in a glass
cabinet. If, by any miracle, the river should come up around the house,
I flatter myself I should be able to cope with the situation. I'd just
saddle my horse and ride out to high ground!"

"Would yuh?" Park grinned skeptically. "The road from here to the hill
is half under water right now; the river's got over the bank above, and
is flooding down through the horse pasture. By the time the water got up
here the river'd be as wide and deep one side uh yuh as the other. Then
where'd yuh be at?"

"It won't get up here, though," Mona asserted coolly. "It never has."

"No, and the Lazy Eight never had to work the Yellowstone range on
spring roundup before either," Park told her meaningly.

Whereupon Mona got upon her pedestal and smiled her unpleasant smile,
against which even Park had no argument ready.

They lingered till long after all good cowpunchers are supposed to be
in their beds--unless they are standing night-guard--but Jack failed to
appear. The rain drummed upon the roof and the river swished and gurgled
against the crumbling banks, and grumbled audibly to itself because the
hills stood immovably in their places and set bounds which it could not
pass, however much it might rage against their base.

When the clock struck a wheezy nine Mona glanced at it significantly
and smothered a yawn more than half affected. It was a hint which no man
with an atom of self-respect could overlook. With mutual understanding
the two rose.

"I guess we'll have to be going," Park said with some ceremony. "I kept
think ing maybe Jack would show up; it ain't right to leave yuh here
alone like this."

"I don't see why not; I'm not the least bit afraid," Mona said. Her tone
was impersonal and had in it a note of dismissal.

So, there being nothing else that they could do, they said good-night
and took themselves off.

"This is sure fierce," Park grumbled when they struck the lower ground.
"Darn a man like Jack Stevens! He'll hang out there in town and bowl up
on other men's money till plumb daylight. It's a wonder Mona didn't go
with her mother. But no--it'd be awful if Jack had to cook his own grub
for a week. Say, the water has come up a lot, don't yuh think, Bud?
If it raises much more Mona'll sure have a chance to 'cope with the
situation. It'd just about serve her right, too."

Thurston did not think so, but he was in too dispirited a mood to argue
the point. It had not been good for his peace of mind to sit and
watch the color come and go in Mona's cheeks, and the laughter spring
unheralded into her dear, big eyes, and the light tangle itself in the
waves of her hair.

He guided his horse carefully through the deep places, and noted
uneasily how much deeper it was than when they had crossed before. He
cursed the conventions which forbade his staying and watching over the
girl back there in the house which already stood upon an island, cut off
from the safe, high land by a strip of backwater that was widening and
deepening every minute, and, when it rose high enough to flow into the
river below, would have a current that would make a nasty crossing.

On the first rise he stopped and looked back at the light which shone
out from among the dripping cottonwoods. Even then he was tempted to go
back and brave her anger that he might feel assured of her safety.

"Oh, come on," Park cried impatiently. "We can't do any good sitting
out here in the rain. I don't suppose the water will get clear up to
the house; it'll likely do things to the sheds and corrals, though, and
serve Jack right. Come on, Bud. Mona won't have us around, so the sooner
we get under cover the better for us. She's got lots uh nerve; I guess
she'll make out all right."

There was common sense in the argument, and Thurston recognized it and
rode on to camp. But instead of unsaddling, as he would naturally have
done, he tied Sunfish to the bed-wagon and threw his slicker over his
back to protect him from the rain. And though Park said nothing, he
followed Thurston's example.



CHAPTER XIII. "I'll STAY--ALWAYS"

For a long time Thurston lay with wide-open eyes staring up at nothing,
listening to the rain and thinking. By and by the rain ceased and he
could tell by the dim whiteness of the tent roof that the clouds must
have been swept away from before the moon, then just past the full.

He got up carefully so as not to disturb the others, and crept over two
or three sleeping forms on his way to the opening, untied the flap and
went out. The whole hilltop and the valley below were bathed in mellow
radiance. He studied critically the wide sweep of the river. He might
almost have thought it the Missouri itself, it stretched so far
from bank to bank; indeed, it seemed to know no banks but the hills
themselves. He turned toward where the light had shone among the
cottonwoods below; there was nothing but a great blot of shade that told
him nothing.

A step sounded just behind. A hand, the hand of Park, rested upon his
shoulder. "Looks kinda dubious, don't it, kid? Was yuh thinking about
riding down there?"

"Yes," Thurston answered simply. "Are you coming?"

"Sure," Park assented.

They got upon their horses and headed down the trail to the Stevens
place. Thurston would have put Sunfish to a run, but Park checked him.

"Go easy," he admonished. "If there's swimming to be done and it's a
cinch there will be, he's going to need all the wind he's got."

Down the hill they stopped at the edge of a raging torrent and strained
their eyes to see what lay on the other side. While they looked, a
light twinkled out from among the tree-tops. Thurston caught his breath
sharply.

"She's upstairs," he said, and his voice sounded strained and unnatural.
"It's just a loft where they store stuff." He started to ride into the
flood.

"Come on back here, yuh chump!" Park roared. "Get off and loosen the
cinch before yuh go in there, or yuh won't get far. Sunfish'll need
room to breathe, once he gets to bucking that current. He's a good water
horse, just give him his head and don't get rattled and interfere with
him. And we've got to go up a ways before we start in."

He led the way upstream, skirting under the bluff, and Thurston, chafing
against the delay, followed obediently. Trees were racing down, their
clean-washed roots reaching up in a tangle from the water, their
branches waving like imploring arms. A black, tar-papered shack went
scudding past, lodged upon a ridge where the water was shallower, and
sat there swaying drunkenly. Upon it a great yellow cat clung and yowled
his fear.

"That's old Dutch Henry's house," Park shouted above the roar. "I'll bet
he's cussing things blue on some pinnacle up there." He laughed at the
picture his imagination conjured, and rode out into the swirl.

Thurston kept close behind, mindful of Park's command to give Sunfish
his head. Sunfish had carried him safely out of the stampede and he had
no fear of him now.

His chief thought was a wish that he might do this thing quite alone.
He was jealous of Park's leading, and thought bitterly that Mona would
thank Park alone and pass him by with scant praise and he did so want
to vindicate himself. The next minute he was cursing his damnable
selfishness. A tree had swept down just before him, caught Park and his
horse in its branches and hurried on as if ashamed of what it had done.
Thurston, in that instant, came near jerking Sunfish around to follow;
but he checked the impulse as it was formed and left the reins alone
which was wise. He could not have helped Park, and he could very easily
have drowned himself. Though it was not thought of himself but of Mona
that stayed his hand.

They landed at the gate. Sunfish scrambled with his feet for secure
footing, found it and waded up to the front door. The water was a foot
deep on the porch. Thurston beat an imperative tattoo upon the door
with the butt of his quirt, and shouted. And Mona's voice, shorn of its
customary assurance, answered faintly from the loft.

He shouted again, giving directions in a tone of authority which must
have sounded strange to her, but which she did not seem to resent and
obeyed without protest. She had to wade from the stairs to the door and
when Thurston stooped and lifted her up in front of him, she looked as
if she were very glad to have him there.

"You didn't 'cope with the situation,' after all," he remarked while she
was settling herself firmly in the saddle.

"I went to sleep and didn't notice the water till it was coming in at
the door," she explained. "And then--" She stopped abruptly.

"Then what?" he demanded maliciously. "Were you afraid?"

"A little," she confessed reluctantly.

Thurston gloated over it in silence--until he remembered Park. After
that he could think of little else. As before, now Sunfish battled as
seemed to him best, for Thurston, astride behind the saddle, held Mona
somewhat tighter than he need to have done, and let the horse go.

So long as Sunfish had footing he braced himself against the mad rush of
waters and forged ahead. But out where the current ran swimming deep
he floundered desperately under his double burden. While his strength
lasted he kept his head above water, struggling gamely against the flood
that lapped over his back and bubbled in his nostrils. Thurston felt his
laboring and clutched Mona still tighter. Of a sudden the horse's head
went under; the black water came up around Thurston's throat with a
hungry swish, and Sunfish went out from under him like an eel.

There was a confused roaring in his ears, a horrid sense of suffocation
for a moment. But he had learned to swim when he was a boy at school,
and he freed one hand from its grip on Mona and set to paddling with
much vigor and considerably less skill. And though the under-current
clutched him and the weight of Mona taxed his strength, he managed to
keep them both afloat and to make a little headway until the deepest
part lay behind them.

How thankful he was when his feet touched bottom, no one but himself
ever knew! His ears hummed from the water in them, and the roar of
the river was to him as the roar of the sea; his eyes smarted from the
clammy touch of the dingy froth that went hurrying by in monster flakes;
his lungs ached and his heart pounded heavily against his ribs when he
stopped, gasping, beyond reach of the water-devils that lapped viciously
behind.

He stood a minute with his arm still around her, and coughed his voice
clear. "Park went down," he began, hardly knowing what it was he was
saying. "Park--" He stopped, then shouted the name aloud. "Park! Oh-h,
Park!"

And from somewhere down the river came a faint reassuring whoop.

"Thank the Lord!" gasped Thurston, and leaned against her for a second.
Then he straightened. "Are you all right?" he asked, and drew her toward
a rock near at hand--for in truth, the knees of him were shaking. They
sat down, and he looked more closely at her face and discovered that
it was wet with something more than river water. Mona the self-assured,
Mona the strong-hearted, was crying. And instinctively he knew that not
the chill alone made her shiver. He was keeping his arm around her waist
deliberately, and it pleased him that she let it stay. After a minute
she did something which surprised him mightily--and pleased him more:
she dropped her face down against the soaked lapels of his coat, and
left it there. He laid a hand tenderly against her cheek and wondered if
he dared feel so happy.

"Little girl--oh, little girl," he said softly, and stopped. For the
crowding emotions in his heart and brain the English language has no
words.

Mona lifted her face and looked into his eyes. Her own were soft and
shining in the moonlight, and she was smiling a little--the roguish
little smile of the imitation pastel portrait. "You--you'll unpack your
typewriter, won't you please, and--and stay?"

Thurston crushed her close. "Stay? The range-land will never get rid
of me now," he cried jubilantly. "Hank wanted to take me into the Lazy
Eight, so now I'll buy an interest, and stay--always."

"You dear!" Mona snuggled close and learned how it feels to be kissed,
if she had never known before.

Sunfish, having scrambled ashore a few yards farther down, came up to
them and stood waiting, as if to be forgiven for his failure to carry
them safe to land, but Thurston, after the first inattentive glance,
ungratefully took no heed of him.

There was a sound of scrambling foot-steps and Park came dripping up to
them. "Well, say!" he greeted. "Ain't yuh got anything to do but set here
and er--look at the moon? Break away and come up to camp. I'll rout out
the cook and make him boil us some coffee."

Thurston turned joyfully toward him. "Park, old fellow, I was afraid."

"Yuh better reform and quit being afraid," Park bantered. "I got out uh
the mix-up fine, but I guess my horse went on down--poor devil. I was
poking around below there looking for him."

"Well, Mona, I see yuh was able to 'cope with the situation,' all
right--but yuh needed Bud mighty bad, I reckon. The chances is yuh won't
have no house in the morning, so Bud'll have to get busy and rustle one
for yuh. I guess you'll own up, now, that the water can get through the
gate." He laughed in his teasing way.

Mona stood up, and her shining eyes were turned to Thurston. "I don't
care," she asserted with reddened cheeks. "I'm just glad it did get
through."

"Same here," said Thurston with much emphasis.

Then, with Mona once more in the saddle, and with Thurston leading
Sunfish by the bridle-rein, they trailed damply and happily up the long
ridge to where the white tents of the roundup gleamed sharply against
the sky-line.

========================================
========================================

GOOD INDIAN

by B. M. Bower

1912




Contents:

     I     PEACEFUL HART RANCH
     II    GOOD INDIAN
     III   OLD WIVES' TALES
     IV    THE CHRISTMAS ANGEL
     V     "I DON'T CARE MUCH ABOUT GIRLS"
     VI    THE CHRISTMAS ANGEL PLAYS GHOST
     VII   MISS GEORGIE HOWARD, OPERATOR
     VIII  THE AMIABLE ANGLER
     IX    PEPPAJEE JIM "HEAP SABES"
     X     MIDNIGHT PROWLERS
     XI    "YOU CAN'T PLAY WITH ME"
     XII   "THEM DAMN' SNAKE"
     XIII  CLOUD-SIGN VERSUS CUPID
     XIV   THE CLAIM-JUMPERS
     XV    SQUAW-TALK-FAR-OFF HEAP SMART
     XVI   "DON'T GET EXCITED!"
     XVII  A LITTLE TARGET PRACTICE
     XVIII A SHOT FROM THE RIM-ROCK
     XIX   EVADNA GOES CALLING
     XX    MISS GEORGIE ALSO MAKES A CALL
     XXI   SOMEBODY SHOT SAUNDERS
     XXII  A BIT OF PAPER
     XXIII THE MALICE OF A SQUAW
     XXIV  PEACEFUL RETURN
     XXV   "I'D JUST AS SOON HANG FOR NINE MEN AS FOR ONE"
     XXVI  "WHEN THE SUN GOES AWAY"
     XXVII LIFE ADJUSTS ITSELF AGAIN TO SMALL THINGS




GOOD INDIAN




CHAPTER I. PEACEFUL HART RANCH

It was somewhere in the seventies when old Peaceful Hart woke to a
realization that gold-hunting and lumbago do not take kindly to one
another, and the fact that his pipe and dim-eyed meditation appealed to
him more keenly than did his prospector's pick and shovel and pan seemed
to imply that he was growing old. He was a silent man, by occupation
and by nature, so he said nothing about it; but, like the wild things
of prairie and wood, instinctively began preparing for the winter of his
life. Where he had lately been washing tentatively the sand along Snake
River, he built a ranch. His prospector's tools he used in digging
ditches to irrigate his new-made meadows, and his mining days he lived
over again only in halting recital to his sons when they clamored for
details of the old days when Indians were not mere untidy neighbors to
be gossiped with and fed, but enemies to be fought, upon occasion.

They felt that fate had cheated them--did those five sons; for they had
been born a few years too late for the fun. Not one of them would ever
have earned the title of "Peaceful," as had his father. Nature had
played a joke upon old Peaceful Hart; for he, the mildest-mannered
man who ever helped to tame the West when it really needed taming, had
somehow fathered five riotous young males to whom fight meant fun--and
the fiercer, the funnier.

He used to suck at his old, straight-stemmed pipe and regard them with a
bewildered curiosity sometimes; but he never tried to put his puzzlement
into speech. The nearest he ever came to elucidation, perhaps, was when
he turned from them and let his pale-blue eyes dwell speculatively
upon the face of his wife, Phoebe. Clearly he considered that she was
responsible for their dispositions.

The house stood cuddled against a rocky bluff so high it dwarfed the
whole ranch to pygmy size when one gazed down from the rim, and so steep
that one wondered how the huge, gray bowlders managed to perch upon
its side instead of rolling down and crushing the buildings to dust and
fragments. Strangers used to keep a wary eye upon that bluff, as if
they never felt quite safe from its menace. Coyotes skulked there, and
tarantulas and "bobcats" and snakes. Once an outlaw hid there for days,
within sight and hearing of the house, and stole bread from Phoebe's
pantry at night--but that is a story in itself.

A great spring gurgled out from under a huge bowlder just behind the
house, and over it Peaceful had built a stone milk house, where Phoebe
spent long hours in cool retirement on churning day, and where one went
to beg good things to eat and to drink. There was fruit cake always
hidden away in stone jars, and cheese, and buttermilk, and cream.

Peaceful Hart must have had a streak of poetry somewhere hidden away in
his silent soul. He built a pond against the bluff; hollowed it out from
the sand he had once washed for traces of gold, and let the big spring
fill it full and seek an outlet at the far end, where it slid away under
a little stone bridge. He planted the pond with rainbow trout, and on
the margin a rampart of Lombardy poplars, which grew and grew until they
threatened to reach up and tear ragged holes in the drifting clouds.
Their slender shadows lay, like gigantic fingers, far up the bluff when
the sun sank low in the afternoon.

Behind them grew a small jungle of trees-catalpa and locust among
them--a jungle which surrounded the house, and in summer hid it from
sight entirely.

With the spring creek whispering through the grove and away to where it
was defiled by trampling hoofs in the corrals and pastures beyond, and
with the roses which Phoebe Hart kept abloom until the frosts came, and
the bees, and humming--birds which somehow found their way across the
parched sagebrush plains and foregathered there, Peaceful Hart's ranch
betrayed his secret longing for girls, as if he had unconsciously
planned it for the daughters he had been denied.

It was an ideal place for hammocks and romance--a place where dainty
maidens might dream their way to womanhood. And Peaceful Hart, when all
was done, grew old watching five full-blooded boys clicking their
heels unromantically together as they roosted upon the porch, and threw
cigarette stubs at the water lilies while they wrangled amiably over the
merits of their mounts; saw them drag their blankets out into the broody
dusk of the grove when the nights were hot, and heard their muffled
swearing under their "tarps" because of the mosquitoes which kept the
night air twanging like a stricken harp string with their song.

They liked the place well enough. There were plenty of shady places
to lie and smoke in when the mercury went sizzling up its tiny tube.
Sometimes, when there was a dance, they would choose the best of
Phoebe's roses to decorate their horses' bridles; and perhaps their
hatbands, also. Peaceful would then suck harder than ever at his pipe,
and his faded blue eyes would wander pathetically about the little
paradise of his making, as if he wondered whether, after all, it had
been worth while.

A tight picket fence, built in three unswerving lines from the post
planted solidly in a cairn of rocks against a bowlder on the eastern rim
of the pond, to the road which cut straight through the ranch, down that
to the farthest tree of the grove, then back to the bluff again, shut in
that tribute to the sentimental side of Peaceful's nature. Outside the
fence dwelt sturdier, Western realities.

Once the gate swung shut upon the grove one blinked in the garish
sunlight of the plains. There began the real ranch world. There was the
pile of sagebrush fuel, all twisted and gray, pungent as a bottle
of spilled liniment, where braided, blanketed bucks were sometimes
prevailed upon to labor desultorily with an ax in hope of being rewarded
with fruit new-gathered from the orchard or a place at Phoebe's long
table in the great kitchen.

There was the stone blacksmith shop, where the boys sweated over the
nice adjustment of shoes upon the feet of fighting, wild-eyed horses,
which afterward would furnish a spectacle of unseemly behavior under the
saddle.

Farther away were the long stable, the corrals where broncho-taming was
simply so much work to be performed, hayfields, an orchard or two, then
rocks and sand and sage which grayed the earth to the very skyline.

A glint of slithering green showed where the Snake hugged the bluff a
mile away, and a brown trail, ankle-deep in dust, stretched straight out
to the west, and then lost itself unexpectedly behind a sharp, jutting
point of rocks where the bluff had thrust out a rugged finger into the
valley.

By devious turnings and breath-taking climbs, the trail finally reached
the top at the only point for miles, where it was possible for a
horseman to pass up or down.

Then began the desert, a great stretch of unlovely sage and lava rock
and sand for mile upon mile, to where the distant mountain ridges
reached out and halted peremptorily the ugly sweep of it. The railroad
gashed it boldly, after the manner of the iron trail of modern industry;
but the trails of the desert dwellers wound through it diffidently,
avoiding the rough crest of lava rock where they might, dodging the
most aggressive sagebrush and dipping tentatively into hollows, seeking
always the easiest way to reach some remote settlement or ranch.

Of the men who followed those trails, not one of them but could have
ridden straight to the Peaceful Hart ranch in black darkness; and there
were few, indeed, white men or Indians, who could have ridden there at
midnight and not been sure of blankets and a welcome to sweeten their
sleep. Such was the Peaceful Hart Ranch, conjured from the sage and the
sand in the valley of the Snake.



CHAPTER II. GOOD INDIAN

There is a saying--and if it is not purely Western, it is at least
purely American--that the only good Indian is a dead Indian. In the very
teeth of that, and in spite of the fact that he was neither very good,
nor an Indian--nor in any sense "dead"--men called Grant Imsen "Good
Indian" to his face; and if he resented the title, his resentment was
never made manifest--perhaps because he had grown up with the name, he
rather liked it when he was a little fellow, and with custom had come to
take it as a matter of course.

Because his paternal ancestry went back, and back to no one knows
where among the race of blue eyes and fair skin, the Indians repudiated
relationship with him, and called him white man--though they also spoke
of him unthinkingly as "Good Injun."

Because old Wolfbelly himself would grudgingly admit under pressure
that the mother of Grant had been the half-caste daughter of Wolfbelly's
sister, white men remembered the taint when they were angry, and called
him Injun. And because he stood thus between the two races of men, his
exact social status a subject always open to argument, not even the fact
that he was looked upon by the Harts as one of the family, with his own
bed always ready for him in a corner of the big room set apart for the
boys, and with a certain place at the table which was called his--not
even his assured position there could keep him from sometimes feeling
quite alone, and perhaps a trifle bitter over his loneliness.

Phoebe Hart had mothered him from the time when his father had sickened
and died in her house, leaving Grant there with twelve years behind him,
in his hands a dirty canvas bag of gold coin so heavy he could scarce
lift it, which stood for the mining claim the old man had just sold, and
the command to invest every one of the gold coins in schooling.

Old John Imsen was steeped in knowledge of the open; nothing of the
great outdoors had ever slipped past him and remained mysterious. Put
when he sold his last claim--others he had which promised little and so
did not count--he had signed his name with an X. Another had written the
word John before that X, and the word Imsen after; above, a word which
he explained was "his," and below the word "mark." John Imsen had stared
down suspiciously at the words, and he had not felt quite easy in his
mind until the bag of gold coins was actually in his keeping. Also, he
had been ashamed of that X. It was a simple thing to make with a pen,
and yet he had only succeeded in making it look like two crooked sticks
thrown down carelessly, one upon the other. His face had gone darkly red
with the shame of it, and he had stood scowling down at the paper.

"That boy uh mine's goin' to do better 'n that, by God!" he had sworn,
and the words had sounded like a vow.

When, two months after that, he had faced--incredulously, as is the way
with strong men--the fact that for him life was over, with nothing
left to him save an hour or so of labored breath and a few muttered
sentences, he did not forget that vow. He called Phoebe close to the
bed, placed the bag of gold in Grant's trembling hands, and stared
intently from one face to the other.

"Mis' Hart, he ain't got--anybody--my folks--I lost track of 'em years
ago. You see to it--git some learnin' in his head. When a man knows
books--it's--like bein' heeled--good gun--plenty uh ca't'idges--in
a fight. When I got that gold--it was like fightin' with my bare
hands--against a gatlin' gun. They coulda cheated me--whole thing--on
paper--I wouldn't know--luck--just luck they didn't. So you take it--and
git the boy schoolin'. Costs money--I know that--git him all it'll
buy. Send him--where they keep--the best. Don't yuh let up--n'er let
him--whilst they's a dollar left. Put it all--into his head--then he
can't lose it, and he can--make it earn more. An'--I guess I needn't
ask yuh--be good to him. He ain't got anybody--not a soul--Injuns don't
count. You see to it--don't let up till--it's all gone."

Phoebe had taken him literally. And Grant, if he had little taste
for the task, had learned books and other things not mentioned in
the curriculums of the schools she sent him to--and when the bag was
reported by Phoebe to be empty, he had returned with inward relief to
the desultory life of the Hart ranch and its immediate vicinity.

His father would probably have been amazed to see how little difference
that schooling made in the boy. The money had lasted long enough to take
him through a preparatory school and into the second year of a college;
and the only result apparent was speech a shade less slipshod than that
of his fellows, and a vocabulary which permitted him to indulge in an
amazing number of epithets and in colorful vituperation when the fancy
seized him.

He rode, hot and thirsty and tired, from Sage Hill one day and found
Hartley empty of interest, hot as the trail he had just now left
thankfully behind him, and so absolutely sleepy that it seemed likely to
sink into the sage-clothed earth under the weight of its own dullness.
Even the whisky was so warm it burned like fire, and the beer he tried
left upon his outraged palate the unhappy memory of insipid warmth and
great bitterness.

He plumped the heavy glass down upon the grimy counter in the dusty far
corner of the little store and stared sourly at Pete Hamilton, who was
apathetically opening hatboxes for the inspection of an Indian in a red
blanket and frowsy braids.

"How much?" The braided one fingered indecisively the broad brim of a
gray sombrero.

"Nine dollars." Pete leaned heavily against the shelves behind him and
sighed with the weariness of mere living.

"Huh! All same buy one good hoss." The braided one dropped the hat,
hitched his blanket over his shoulder in stoical disregard of the heat,
and turned away.

Pete replaced the cover, seemed about to place the box upon the shelf
behind him, and then evidently decided that it was not worth the effort.
He sighed again.

"It is almighty hot," he mumbled languidly. "Want another drink, Good
Injun?"

"I do not. Hot toddy never did appeal to me, my friend. If you weren't
too lazy to give orders, Pete, you'd have cold beer for a day like this.
You'd give Saunders something to do beside lie in the shade and tell
what kind of a man he used to be before his lungs went to the bad. Put
him to work. Make him pack this stuff down cellar where it isn't two
hundred in the shade. Why don't you?"

"We was going to get ice t'day, but they didn't throw it off when the
train went through."

"That's comforting--to a man with a thirst like the great Sahara. Ice!
Pete, do you know what I'd like to do to a man that mentions ice after a
drink like that?"

Pete neither knew nor wanted to know, and he told Grant so. "If you're
going down to the ranch," he added, by way of changing the subject,
"there's some mail you might as well take along."

"Sure, I'm going--for a drink out of that spring, if nothing else.
You've lost a good customer to-day, Pete. I rode up here prepared to get
sinfully jagged--and here I've got to go on a still hunt for water with
a chill to it--or maybe buttermilk. Pete, do you know what I think of
you and your joint?"

"I told you I don't wanta know. Some folks ain't never satisfied. A
fellow that's rode thirty or forty miles to get here, on a day like
this, had oughta be glad to get anything that looks like beer."

"Is that so?" Grant walked purposefully down to the front of the store,
where Pete was fumbling behind the rampart of crude pigeonholes which
was the post-office. "Let me inform you, then, that--"

There was a swish of skirts upon the rough platform outside, and a young
woman entered with the manner of feeling perfectly at home there.
She was rather tall, rather strong and capable looking, and she was
bareheaded, and carried a door key suspended from a smooth-worn bit of
wood.

"Don't get into a perspiration making up the mail, Pete," she advised
calmly, quite ignoring both Grant and the Indian. "Fifteen is an hour
late--as usual. Jockey Bates always seems to be under the impression
he's an undertaker's assistant, and is headed for the graveyard when he
takes fifteen out. He'll get the can, first he knows--and he'll put in
a month or two wondering why. I could make better time than he does
myself." By then she was leaning with both elbows upon the counter
beside the post-office, bored beyond words with life as it must be
lived--to judge from her tone and her attitude.

"For Heaven's sake, Pete," she went on languidly, "can't you scare up a
novel, or chocolates, or gum, or--ANYTHING to kill time? I'd even enjoy
chewing gum right now--it would give my jaws something to think of,
anyway."

Pete, grinning indulgently, came out of retirement behind the
pigeonholes, and looked inquiringly around the store.

"I've got cards," he suggested. "What's the matter with a game of
solitary? I've known men to put in hull winters alone, up in the
mountains, jest eating and sleeping and playin' solitary."

The young woman made a grimace of disgust. "I've come from three solid
hours of it. What I really do want is something to read. Haven't you
even got an almanac?"

"Saunders is readin' 'The Brokenhearted Bride'--you can have it soon's
he's through. He says it's a peach."

"Fifteen is bringing up a bunch of magazines. I'll have reading in
plenty two hours from now; but my heavens above, those two hours!" She
struck both fists despairingly upon the counter.

"I've got gumdrops, and fancy mixed--"

"Forget it, then. A five-pound box of chocolates is due--on fifteen."
She sighed heavily. "I wish you weren't so old, and hadn't quite so many
chins, Pete," she complained. "I'd inveigle you into a flirtation. You
see how desperate I am for something to do!"

Pete smiled unhappily. He was sensitive about all those chins, and the
general bulk which accompanied them.

"Let me make you acquainted with my friend, Good In--er--Mr. Imsen."
Pete considered that he was behaving with great discernment and tact.
"This is Miss Georgie Howard, the new operator." He twinkled his little
eyes at her maliciously. "Say, he ain't got but one chin, and he's only
twenty-three years old." He felt that the inference was too plain to be
ignored.

She turned her head slowly and looked Grant over with an air of
disparagement, while she nodded negligently as an acknowledgment to
the introduction. "Pete thinks he's awfully witty," she remarked. "It's
really pathetic."

Pete bristled--as much as a fat man could bristle on so hot a day.
"Well, you said you wanted to flirt, and so I took it for granted you'd
like--"

Good Indian looked straight past the girl, and scowled at Pete.

"Pete, you're an idiot ordinarily, but when you try to be smart you're
absolutely insufferable. You're mentally incapable of recognizing the
line of demarcation between legitimate persiflage and objectionable
familiarity. An ignoramus of your particular class ought to confine
his repartee to unqualified affirmation or the negative monosyllable."
Whereupon he pulled his hat more firmly upon his head, hunched his
shoulders in disgust, remembered his manners, and bowed to Miss Georgie
Howard, and stalked out, as straight of back as the Indian whose blanket
he brushed, and who may have been, for all he knew, a blood relative of
his.

"I guess that ought to hold you for a while, Pete," Miss Georgie
approved under her breath, and stared after Grant curiously. "'You're
mentally incapable of recognizing the line of demarcation between
legitimate persiflage and objectionable familiarity.' I'll bet two bits
you don't know what that means, Pete; but it hits you off exactly. Who
is this Mr. Imsen?"

She got no reply to that. Indeed, she did not wait for a reply. Outside,
things were happening--and, since Miss Georgie was dying of dullness,
she hailed the disturbance as a Heaven-sent blessing, and ran to see
what was going on.

Briefly, Grant had inadvertently stepped on a sleeping dog's paw--a dog
of the mongrel breed which infests Indian camps, and which had attached
itself to the blanketed buck inside. The dog awoke with a yelp, saw
that it was a stranger who had perpetrated the outrage, and straightway
fastened its teeth in the leg of Grant's trousers. Grant kicked it
loose, and when it came at him again, he swore vengeance and mounted his
horse in haste.

He did not say a word. He even smiled while he uncoiled his rope,
widened the loop, and, while the dog was circling warily and watching
for another chance at him, dropped the loop neatly over its front
quarters, and drew it tight.

Saunders, a weak-lunged, bandy-legged individual, who was officially a
general chore man for Pete, but who did little except lie in the shade,
reading novels or gossiping, awoke then, and, having a reputation for
tender-heartedness, waved his arms and called aloud in the name of
peace.

"Turn him loose, I tell yuh! A helpless critter like that--you oughta be
ashamed--abusin' dumb animals that can't fight back!"

"Oh, can't he?" Grant laughed grimly.

"You turn that dog loose!" Saunders became vehement, and paid the
penalty of a paroxysm of coughing.

"You go to the devil. If you were an able-bodied man, I'd get you,
too--just to have a pair of you. Yelping, snapping curs, both of you."
He played the dog as a fisherman plays a trout.

"That dog, him Viney dog. Viney heap likum. You no killum, Good Injun."
The Indian, his arms folded in his blanket, stood upon the porch
watching calmly the fun. "Viney all time heap mad, you killum," he added
indifferently.

"Sure it isn't old Hagar's?"

"No b'long-um Hagar--b'long-um Viney. Viney heap likum."

Grant hesitated, circling erratically with his victim close to the
steps. "All right, no killum--teachum lesson, though. Viney heap bueno
squaw--heap likum Viney. No likum dog, though. Dog all time come along
me." He glanced up, passed over the fact that Miss Georgie Howard was
watching him and clapping her hands enthusiastically at the spectacle,
and settled an unfriendly stare upon Saunders.

"You shut up your yowling. You'll burst a blood vessel and go to heaven,
first thing you know. I've never contemplated hiring you as my guardian
angel, you blatting buck sheep. Go off and lie down somewhere." He
turned in the saddle and looked down at the dog, clawing and fighting
the rope which held him fast just back of the shoulder--blades. "Come
along, doggie--NICE doggie!" he grinned, and touched his horse with the
spurs. With one leap, it was off at a sharp gallop, up over the hill and
through the sagebrush to where he knew the Indian camp must be.

Old Wolfbelly had but that morning brought his thirty or forty followers
to camp in the hollow where was a spring of clear water--the hollow
which had for long been known locally as "the Indian Camp," because of
Wolfbelly's predilection for the spot. Without warning save for the beat
of hoofs in the sandy soil, Grant charged over the brow of the hill and
into camp, scattering dogs, papooses, and squaws alike as he rode.

Shrill clamor filled the sultry air. Sleeping bucks awoke, scowling at
the uproar; and the horse of Good Indian, hating always the smell and
the litter of an Indian camp, pitched furiously into the very wikiup of
old Hagar, who hated the rider of old. In the first breathing spell he
loosed the dog, which skulked, limping, into the first sheltered spot
he found, and laid him down to lick his outraged person and whimper to
himself at the memory of his plight. Grant pulled his horse to a restive
stand before a group of screeching squaws, and laughed outright at the
panic of them.

"Hello! Viney! I brought back your dog," he drawled. "He tried to bite
me--heap kay bueno* dog. Mebbyso you killum. Me no hurtum--all time
him Hartley, all time him try hard bite me. Sleeping Turtle tell me him
Viney dog. He likum Viney, me no kill Viney dog. You all time mebbyso
eat that dog--sabe? No keep--Kay bueno. All time try for bite. You
cookum, no can bite. Sabe?"

*AUTHOR'S NOTE.--The Indians of southern Idaho spoke a somewhat mixed
dialect. Bueno (wayno), their word for 'good,' undoubtedly being taken
from the Spanish language. I believe the word "kay" to be Indian.
It means "no", and thus the "Kay bueno" so often used by them means
literally "no good," and is a term of reproach On the other hand, "heap
bueno" is "very good," their enthusiasm being manifested merely by
drawing out the word "heap." In speaking English they appear to have no
other way of expressing, in a single phrase, their like or dislike of an
object or person.

Without waiting to see whether Viney approved of his method of
disciplining her dog, or intended to take his advice regarding its
disposal, he wheeled and started off in the direction of the trail which
led down the bluff to the Hart ranch. When he reached the first steep
descent, however, he remembered that Pete had spoken of some mail for
the Harts, and turned back to get it.

Once more in Hartley, he found that the belated train was making up
time, and would be there within an hour; and, since it carried mail from
the West, it seemed hardly worthwhile to ride away before its arrival.
Also, Pete intimated that there was a good chance of prevailing upon the
dining-car conductor to throw off a chunk of ice. Grant, therefore, led
his horse around into the shade, and made himself comfortable while he
waited.



CHAPTER III. OLD WIVES TALES

Down the winding trail of Snake River bluff straggled a blanketed half
dozen of old Wolfbelly's tribe, the braves stalking moodily in front and
kicking up a gray cloud of dust which enveloped the squaws behind them
but could not choke to silence their shrill chatter; for old Hagar was
there, and Viney, and the incident of the dog was fresh in their minds
and tickling their tongues.

The Hart boys were assembled at the corral, halter-breaking a
three-year-old for the pure fun of it. Wally caught sight of the
approaching blotch of color, and yelled a wordless greeting; him had
old Hagar carried lovingly upon her broad shoulders with her own papoose
when he was no longer than her arm; and she knew his voice even at that
distance, and grinned--grinned and hid her joy in a fold of her dingy
red blanket.

"Looks like old Wolfbelly's back," Clark observed needlessly. "Donny, if
they don't go to the house right away, you go and tell mum they're here.
Chances are the whole bunch'll hang around till supper."

"Say!" Gene giggled with fourteen-year-old irrepressibility. "Does
anybody know where Vadnie is? If we could spring 'em on her and make her
believe they're on the warpath--say, I'll gamble she'd run clear to the
Malad!"

"I told her, cross my heart, this morning that the Injuns are peaceful
now. I said Good Injun was the only one that's dangerous--oh, I sure did
throw a good stiff load, all right!" Clark grinned at the memory. "I've
got to see Grant first, when he gets back, and put him wise to the rep
he's got. Vad didn't hardly swallow it. She said: 'Why, Cousin Clark!
Aunt Phoebe says he's perfectly lovely!"' Clark mimicked the girl's
voice with relish.

"Aw--there's a lot of squaws tagging along behind!" Donny complained
disgustedly from his post of observation on the fence. "They'll go to
the house first thing to gabble--there's old Hagar waddling along like
a duck. You can't make that warpath business stick, Clark--not with all
them squaws."

"Well, say, you sneak up and hide somewhere till yuh see if Vadnie's
anywhere around. If they get settled down talking to mum, they're
good for an hour--she's churning, Don--you hide in the rocks by the
milk-house till they get settled. And I'll see if--Git! Pikeway, while
they're behind the stacks!"

Donny climbed down and scurried through the sand to the house as if his
very life depended upon reaching it unseen. The group of Indians came
up, huddled at the corral, and peered through the stout rails.

"How! How!" chorused the boys, and left the horse for a moment while
they shook hands ceremoniously with the three bucks. Three Indians,
Clark decided regretfully, would make a tame showing on the warpath,
however much they might lend themselves to the spirit of the joke. He
did not quite know how he was going to manage it, but he was hopeful
still. It was unthinkable that real live Indians should be permitted to
come and go upon the ranch without giving Evadna Ramsey, straight from
New Jersey, the scare of her life.

The three bucks, grunting monosyllabic greetings' climbed, in all the
dignity of their blankets, to the top rail of the corral, and roosted
there to watch the horse-breaking; and for the present Clark held his
peace.

The squaws hovered there for a moment longer, peeping through the rails.
Then Hagar--she of much flesh and more temper--grunted a word or two,
and they turned and plodded on to where the house stood hidden away
in its nest of cool green. For a space they stood outside the fence,
peering warily into the shade, instinctively cautious in their manner of
approaching a strange place, and detained also by the Indian etiquette
which demands that one wait until invited to enter a strange camp.

After a period of waiting which seemed to old Hagar sufficient, she
pulled her blanket tight across her broad hips, waddled to the
gate, pulled it open with self-conscious assurance, and led the way
soft-footedly around the house to where certain faint sounds betrayed
the presence of Phoebe Hart in her stone milk-house.

At the top of the short flight of wide stone steps they stopped and
huddled silently, until the black shadow of them warned Phoebe of their
presence. She had lived too long in the West to seem startled when she
suddenly discovered herself watched by three pair of beady black eyes,
so she merely nodded, and laid down her butter-ladle to shake hands all
around.

"How, Hagar? How, Viney? How, Lucy? Heap glad to see you. Bueno
buttermilk--mebbyso you drinkum?"

However diffident they might be when it came to announcing their
arrival, their bashfulness did not extend to accepting offers of food
or drink. Three brown hands were eagerly outstretched--though it was the
hand of Hagar which grasped first the big tin cup. They not only
drank, they guzzled, and afterward drew a fold of blanket across their
milk-white lips, and grinned in pure animal satisfaction.

"Bueno. He-e-ap bueno!" they chorused appreciatively, and squatted at
the top of the stone steps, watching Phoebe manipulate the great ball of
yellow butter in its wooden bowl.

After a brief silence, Hagar shook the tangle of unkempt, black hair
away from her moonlike face, and began talking in a soft monotone, her
voice now and then rising to a shrill singsong.

"Mebbyso Tom, mebbyso Sharlie, mebbyso Sleeping Turtle all time come
along," she announced. "Stop all time corral, talk yo' boys. Mebbyso
heap likum drink yo' butter water. Bueno."

When Phoebe nodded assent, Hagar went on to the news which had brought
her so soon to the ranch--the news which satisfied both an old grudge
and her love of gossip.

"Good Injun, him all time heap kay bueno," she stated emphatically, her
sloe black eyes fixed unwaveringly upon Phoebe's face to see if the stab
was effective. "Good Injun come Hartley, all time drunk likum pig.

"All time heap yell, heap shoot--kay bueno. Wantum fight
Man-that-coughs. Come all time camp, heap yell, heap shoot some more. I
fetchum dog--Viney dog--heap dragum through sagebrush--dog all time cry,
no can get away--me thinkum kill that dog. Squaws cry--Viney cry--Good
Injun"--Hagar paused here for greater effect--"makum horse all time
buck--ridum in wikiup--Hagar wikiup--all time breakum--no can fix that
wikiup. Good Injun, hee-e-ap kay bueno!" At the last her voice was high
and tremulous with anger.

"Good Indian mebbyso all same my boy Wally." Phoebe gave the butter a
vicious slap. "Me heap love Good Indian. You no call Good Indian, you
call Grant. Grant bueno. Heap bueno all time. No drunk, no yell, no
shoot, mebbyso"--she hesitated, knowing well the possibilities of her
foster son--"mebbyso catchum dog--me think no catchum. Grant all same my
boy. All time me likum--heap bueno."

Viney and Lucy nudged each other and tittered into their blankets,
for the argument was an old one between Hagar and Phoebe, though the
grievance of Hagar might be fresh. Hagar shifted her blanket and thrust
out a stubborn under lip.

"Wally boy, heap bueno," she said; and her malicious old face softened
as she spoke of him, dear as her own first-born. "Jack bueno, mebbyso
Gene bueno, mebbyso Clark, mebbyso Donny all time bueno." Doubt was in
her voice when she praised those last two, however, because of their
continual teasing. She stopped short to emphasize the damning contrast.
"Good Injun all same mebbyso yo' boy Grant, hee-ee-eap kay bueno. Good
Injun Grant all time DEBBIL!"

It was at this point that Donny slipped away to report that "Mamma and
old Hagar are scrappin' over Good Injun again," and told with glee the
tale of his misdeeds as recounted by the squaw.

Phoebe in her earnestness forgot to keep within the limitations of their
dialect.

"Grant's a good boy, and a smart boy. There isn't a better-hearted
fellow in the country, if I have got five boys of my own. You think
I like him better than I like Wally, is all ails you, Hagar. You're
jealous of Grant, and you always have been, ever since his father
left him with me. I hope my heart's big enough to hold them all." She
remembered then that they could not understand half she was saying, and
appealed to Viney. Viney liked Grant.

"Viney, you tell me. Grant no come Hartley, no drunk, no yell, no
catchum you dog, no ride in Hagar's wikiup? You tell me, Viney."

Viney and Lucy bobbed their heads rapidly up and down. Viney, with a
sidelong glance at Hagar, spoke softly.

"Good Injun Grant, mebbyso home Hartley," she admitted reluctantly, as
if she would have been pleased to prove Hagar a liar in all things.
"Me thinkum no drunk. Mebbyso ketchum dog--dog kay bueno, mebbyso me
killing. Good Injun Grant no heap yell, no shoot all time--mebbyso no
drunk. No breakum wikiup. Horse all time kay bueno, Hagar--"

"Shont-isham!" (big lie) Hagar interrupted shrilly then, and Viney
relapsed into silence, her thin face growing sullen under the upbraiding
she received in her native tongue. Phoebe, looking at her attentively,
despaired of getting any nearer the truth from any of them.

There was a sudden check to Hagar's shrewish clamor. The squaws
stiffened to immobility and listened stolidly, their eyes alone
betraying the curiosity they felt. Off somewhere at the head of the tiny
pond, hidden away in the jungle of green, a voice was singing; a girl's
voice, and a strange voice--for the squaws knew well the few women
voices along the Snake.

"That my girl," Phoebe explained, stopping the soft pat--pat of her
butter-ladle.

"Where ketchum yo' girl?" Hagar forgot her petulance, and became curious
as any white woman.

"Me ketchum 'way off, where sun come up. In time me have heap
boys--mebbyso want girl all time. My mother's sister's boy have one
girl, 'way off where sun come up. My mother's sister's boy die, his
wife all same die, that girl mebbyso heap sad; no got father, no got
mother--all time got nobody. Kay bueno. That girl send one letter, say
all time got nobody. Me want one girl. Me send one letter, tell that
girl come, be all time my girl. Five days ago, that girl come. Her heap
glad; boys all time heap glad, my man heap glad. Bueno. Mebbyso you glad
me have one girl." Not that their approval was necessary, or even of
much importance; but Phoebe was accustomed to treat them like spoiled
children.

Hagar's lip was out-thrust again. "Yo' ketchum one girl, mebbyso yo' no
more likum my boy Wally. Kay bueno."

"Heap like all my boys jus' same," Phoebe hastened to assure her, and
added with a hint of malice, "Heap like my boy Grant all same."

"Huh!" Hagar chose to remain unconvinced and antagonistic. "Good Injun
kay bueno. Yo' girl, mebbyso kay bueno."

"What name yo' girl?" Viney interposed hastily.

"Name Evadna Ramsey." In spite of herself, Phoebe felt a trifle chilled
by their lack of enthusiasm. She went back to her butter-making in
dignified silence.

The squaws blinked at her stolidly. Always they were inclined toward
suspicion of strangers, and perhaps to a measure of jealousy as well.
Not many whites received them with frank friendship as did the Hart
family, and they felt far more upon the subject than they might put into
words, even the words of their own language.

Many of the white race looked upon them as beggars, which was bad
enough, or as thieves, which was worse; and in a general way they could
not deny the truth of it. But they never stole from the Harts, and they
never openly begged from the Harts. The friends of the Harts, however,
must prove their friendship before they could hope for better than an
imperturbable neutrality. So they would not pretend to be glad. Hagar
was right--perhaps the girl was no good. They would wait until they
could pass judgment upon this girl who had come to live in the wikiup
of the Harts. Then Lucy, she who longed always for children and had been
denied by fate, stirred slightly, her nostrils aquiver.

"Mebbyso bueno yo' girl," she yielded, speaking softly. "Mebbyso see
yo' girl."

Phoebe's face cleared, and she called, in mellow crescendo: "Oh,
Va-ad-NIEE?" Immediately the singing stopped.

"Coming, Aunt Phoebe," answered the voice.

The squaws wrapped themselves afresh in their blankets, passed brown
palms smoothingly down their hair from the part in the middle, settled
their braids upon their bosoms with true feminine instinct, and waited.
They heard her feet crunching softly in the gravel that bordered the
pond, but not a head turned that way; for all the sign of life they
gave, the three might have been mere effigies of women. They heard a
faint scream when she caught sight of them sitting there, and their
faces settled into more stolid indifference, adding a hint of antagonism
even to the soft eyes of Lucy, the tender, childless one.

"Vadnie, here are some new neighbors I want you to get acquainted with."
Phoebe's eyes besought the girl to be calm. "They're all old friends of
mine. Come here and let me introduce you--and don't look so horrified,
honey!"

Those incorrigibles, her cousins, would have whooped with joy at her
unmistakable terror when she held out a trembling hand and gasped
faintly: "H-how do you--do?"

"This Hagar," Phoebe announced cheerfully; and the old squaw caught the
girl's hand and gripped it tightly for a moment in malicious enjoyment
of her too evident fear and repulsion.

"This Viney."

Viney, reading Evadna's face in one keen, upward glance, kept her hands
hidden in the folds of her blanket, and only nodded twice reassuringly.

"This Lucy."

Lucy read also the girl's face; but she reached up, pressed her hand
gently, and her glance was soft and friendly. So the ordeal was over.

"Bring some of that cake you baked to-day, honey--and do brace up!"
Phoebe patted her upon the shoulder.

Hagar forestalled the hospitable intent by getting slowly upon her fat
legs, shaking her hair out of her eyes, and grunting a command to the
others. With visible reluctance Lucy and Viney rose also, hitched their
blankets into place, and vanished, soft-footed as they had come.

"Oo-oo!" Evadna stared at the place where they were not. "Wild
Indians--I thought the boys were just teasing when they said so--and
it's really true, Aunt Phoebe?"

"They're no wilder than you are," Phoebe retorted impatiently.

"Oh, they ARE wild. They're exactly like in my history--and they don't
make a sound when they go--you just look, and they're gone! That old fat
one--did you see how she looked at me? As if she wanted to--SCALP me,
Aunt Phoebe! She looked right at my hair and--"

"Well, she didn't take it with her, did she? Don't be silly. I've known
old Hagar ever since Wally was a baby. She took him right to her own
wikiup and nursed him with her own papoose for two months when I was
sick, and Viney stayed with me day and night and pulled me through. Lucy
I've known since she was a papoose. Great grief, child! Didn't you hear
me say they're old friends? I wanted you to be nice to them, because
if they like you there's nothing they won't do for you. If they don't,
there's nothing they WILL do. You might as well get used to them--"

Out by the gate rose a clamor which swept nearer and nearer until the
noise broke at the corner of the house like a great wave, in a tumult of
red blanket, flying black hair, the squalling of a female voice, and
the harsh laughter of the man who carried the disturbance, kicking and
clawing, in his arms. Fighting his way to the milk-house, he dragged the
squaw along beside the porch, followed by the Indians and all the Hart
boys, a yelling, jeering audience.

"You tell her shont-isham! Ah-h--you can't break loose, you old
she-wildcat. Quit your biting, will you? By all the big and little
spirits of your tribe, you'll wish--"

Panting, laughing, swearing also in breathless exclamations, he forced
her to the top of the steps, backed recklessly down them, and came to
a stop in the corner by the door. Evadna had taken refuge there; and he
pressed her hard against the rough wall without in the least realizing
that anything was behind him save unsentient stone.

"Now, you sing your little song, and be quick about it!" he commanded
his captive sternly. "You tell Mother Hart you lied. I hear she's been
telling you I'm drunk, Mother Hart--didn't you, you old beldam? You say
you heap sorry you all time tellum lie. You say: 'Good Injun, him all
time heap bueno.' Say: 'Good Injun no drunk, no heap shoot, no heap
yell--all time bueno.' Quick, or I'll land you headforemost in that
pond, you infernal old hag!"

"Good Injun hee-eeap kay bueno! Heap debbil all time." Hagar might be
short of breath, but her spirit was unconquered, and her under lip bore
witness to her stubbornness.

Phoebe caught him by the arm then, thinking he meant to make good his
threat--and it would not have been unlike Grant Imsen to do so.

"Now, Grant, you let her go," she coaxed. "I know you aren't drunk--of
course, I knew it all the time. I told Hagar so. What do you care what
she says about you? You don't want to fight an old woman, Grant--a man
can't fight a woman--"

"You tell her you heap big liar!" Grant did not even look at Phoebe,
but his purpose seemed to waver in spite of himself. "You all time kay
bueno. You all time lie." He gripped her more firmly, and turned his
head slightly toward Phoebe. "You'd be tired of it yourself if she threw
it into you like she does into me, Mother Hart. It's got so I can't ride
past this old hag in the trail but she gives me the bad eye, and mumbles
into her blanket. And if I look sidewise, she yowls all over the country
that I'm drunk. I'm getting tired of it!" He shook the squaw as a puppy
shakes a shoe--shook her till her hair quite hid her ugly old face from
sight.

"All right--Mother Hart she tellum mebbyso let you go. This time I no
throw you in pond. You heap take care next time, mebbyso. You no tellum
big lie, me all time heap drunk. You kay bueno. All time me tellum
Mother Hart, tellum boys, tellum Viney, Lucy, tellum Charlie and Tom and
Sleeping Turtle you heap big liar. Me tell Wally shont-isham. Him all
time my friend--mebbyso him no likum you no more.

"Huh. Get out--pikeway before I forget you're a lady!"

He laughed ironically, and pushed her from him so suddenly that she
sprawled upon the steps. The Indians grinned unsympathetically at her,
for Hagar was not the most popular member of the tribe by any means.
Scrambling up, she shook her witch locks from her face, wrapped herself
in her dingy blanket, and scuttled away, muttering maledictions under
her breath. The watching group turned and followed her, and in a few
seconds the gate was heard to slam shut behind them. Grant stood where
he was, leaning against the milk-house wall; and when they were gone, he
gave a short, apologetic laugh.

"No need to lecture, Mother Hart. I know it was a fool thing to do; but
when Donny told me what the old devil said, I was so mad for a minute--"

Phoebe caught him again by the arm and pulled him forward. "Grant!
You're squeezing Vadnie to death, just about! Great grief, I forgot all
about the poor child being here! You poor little--"

"Squeezing who?" Grant whirled, and caught a brief glimpse of a crumpled
little figure behind him, evidently too scared to cry, and yet not quite
at the fainting point of terror. He backed, and began to stammer an
apology; but she did not wait to hear a word of it. For an instant
she stared into his face, and then, like a rabbit released from its
paralysis of dread, she darted past him and deaf up the stone steps into
the house. He heard the kitchen-door shut, and the click of the lock.
He heard other doors slam suggestively; and he laughed in spite of his
astonishment.

"And who the deuce might that be?" he asked, feeling in his pocket for
smoking material.

Phoebe seemed undecided between tears and laughter. "Oh, Grant, GRANT!
She'll think you're ready to murder everybody on the ranch--and you can
be such a nice boy when you want to be! I did hope--"

"I don't want to be nice," Grant objected, drawing a match along a
fairly smooth rock.

"Well, I wanted you to appear at your best; and, instead of that, here
you come, squabbling with old Hagar like--"

"Yes--sure. But who is the timid lady?"

"Timid! You nearly killed the poor girl, besides scaring her half to
death, and then you call her timid. I know she thought there was going
to be a real Indian massacre, right here, and she'd be scalped--"

Wally Hart came back, laughing to himself.

"Say, you've sure cooked your goose with old Hagar, Grant! She's right
on the warpath, and then some. She'd like to burn yuh alive--she said
so. She's headed for camp, and all the rest of the bunch at her heels.
She won't come here any more till you're kicked off the ranch, as near
as I could make out her jabbering. And she won't do your washing any
more, mum--she said so. You're kay bueno yourself, because you take Good
Indian's part. We're all kay bueno--all but me. She wanted me to quit
the bunch and go live in her wikiup. I'm the only decent one in the
outfit." He gave his mother an affectionate little hug as he went past,
and began an investigative tour of the stone jars on the cool rock floor
within. "What was it all about, Grant? What did yuh do to her, anyway?"

"Oh, it wasn't anything. Hand me up a cup of that buttermilk, will you?
They've got a dog up there in camp that I'm going to kill some of these
days--if they don't beat me to it. He was up at the store, and when I
went out to get my horse, he tried to take a leg off me. I kicked him
in the nose and he came at me again, so when I mounted I just dropped
my loop over Mr. Dog. Sleeping Turtle was there, and he said the dog
belonged to Viney, So I just led him gently to camp."

He grinned a little at the memory of his gentleness. "I told Viney I
thought he'd make a fine stew, and, they'd better use him up right away
before he spoiled. That's all there was to it. Well, Keno did sink his
head and pitch around camp a little, but not to amount to anything. He
just stuck his nose into old Hagar's wikiup--and one sniff seemed to be
about all he wanted. He didn't hurt anything."

He took a meditative bite of cake, finished the buttermilk in three
rapturous swallows, and bethought him of the feminine mystery.

"If you please, Mother Hart, who was that Christmas angel I squashed?"

"Vad? Was Vad in on it, mum? I never saw her." Wally straightened up
with a fresh chunk of cake in his hand. "Was she scared?"

"Yes," his mother admitted reluctantly, "I guess she was, all right.
First the squaws--and, poor girl, I made her shake hands all round--and
then Grant here, acting like a wild hyena--"

"Say, PLEASE don't tell me who she is, or where she belongs, or anything
like that," Grant interposed, with some sarcasm. "I smashed her flat
between me and the wall, and I scared the daylights out of her; and I'm
told I should have appeared at my best. But who she is, or where she
belongs--"

"She belongs right here." Phoebe's tone was a challenge, whether she
meant it to be so or not. "This is going to be her home from now on; and
I want you boys to treat her nicer than you've been doing. She's been
here a week almost; and there ain't one of you that's made friends with
her yet, or tried to, even. You've played jokes on her, and told her
things to scare her--and my grief! I was hoping she'd have a softening
influence on you, and make gentlemen of you. And far as I can make out,
just having her on the place seems to put the Old Harry into every one
of you! It isn't right. It isn't the way I expected my boys would act
toward a stranger--a girl especially. And I did hope Grant would behave
better."

"Sure, he ought to. Us boneheads don't know any better--but Grant's
EDUCATED." Wally grinned and winked elaborately at his mother's back.

"I'm not educated up to Christmas angels that look as if they'd been
stepped on," Grant defended himself.

"She's a real nice little thing. If you boys would quit teasing the life
out of her, I don't doubt but what, in six months or so, you wouldn't
know the girl," Phoebe argued, with some heat.

"I don't know the girl now." Grant spoke dryly. "I don't want to. If I'd
held a tomahawk in one hand and her flowing locks in the other, and
was just letting a war-whoop outa me, she'd look at me--the way she did
look." He snorted in contemptuous amusement, and gave a little, writhing
twist of his slim body into his trousers. "I never did like blondes," he
added, in a tone of finality, and started up the steps.

"You never liked anything that wore skirts," Phoebe flung after him
indignantly; and she came very close to the truth.



CHAPTER IV. THE CHRISTMAS ANGEL

Phoebe watched the two unhappily, sighed when they disappeared around
the corner of the house, and set her bowl of butter upon the broad, flat
rock which just missed being overflowed with water, and sighed again.

"I'm afraid it isn't going to work," she murmured aloud; for Phoebe,
having lived much of her life in the loneliness which the West means
to women, frequently talked to herself. "She's such a nice little
thing--but the boys don't take to her like I thought they would. I don't
see as she's having a mite of influence on their manners, unless it's to
make them act worse, just to shock her. Clark USED to take off his hat
when he come into the house most every time. And great grief! Now he'd
wear it and his chaps and spurs to the table, if I didn't make him take
them off. She's nice--she's most too nice. I've got to give that girl a
good talking to."

She mounted the steps to the back porch, tried the kitchen door, and
found it locked. She went around to the door on the west side, opposite
the gate, found that also secured upon the inside, and passed grimly to
the next.

"My grief! I didn't know any of these doors COULD be locked!" she
muttered angrily. "They never have been before that I ever heard of."
She stopped before Evadna's window, and saw, through a slit in the green
blind, that the old-fashioned bureau had been pulled close before it.
"My grief!" she whispered disgustedly, and retraced her steps to
the east side, which, being next to the pond, was more secluded.
She surveyed dryly a window left wide open there, gathered her
brown-and-white calico dress close about her plump person, and crawled
grimly through into the sitting-room, where, to the distress of Phoebe's
order-loving soul, the carpet was daily well-sanded with the tread of
boys' boots fresh from outdoors, and where cigarette stubs decorated
every window-sill, and the stale odor of Peaceful's pipe was never long
absent.

She went first to all the outer rooms, and unlocked every one of the
outraged doors which, unless in the uproar and excitement of racing,
laughing boys pursuing one another all over the place with much slamming
and good-natured threats of various sorts, had never before barred the
way of any man, be he red or white, came he at noon or at midnight.

Evadna's door was barricaded, as Phoebe discovered when she turned the
knob and attempted to walk in. She gave the door an indignant push, and
heard a muffled shriek within, as if Evadna's head was buried under her
pillow.

"My grief! A body'd think you expected to be killed and eaten," she
called out unsympathetically. "You open this door! Vadnie Ramsey.
This is a nice way to act with my own boys, in my own house! A body'd
think--"

There was the sound of something heavy being dragged laboriously away
from the barricaded door; and in a minute a vividly blue eye appeared at
a narrow crack.

"Oh, I don't see how you dare to L-LIVE in such a place, Aunt Phoebe!"
she cried tearfully, opening the door a bit wider. "Those Indians--and
that awful man--"

"That was only Grant, honey. Let me in. There's a few things I want
to say to you, Vadnie. You promised to help me teach my boys to be
gentle--it's all they lack, and it takes gentle women, honey--"

"I am gentle," Evadna protested grievedly. "I've never once forgotten
to be gentle and quiet, and I haven't done a thing to them--but they're
horrid and rough, anyway--"

"Let me in, honey, and we'll talk it over. Something's got to be done.
If you wouldn't be so timid, and would make friends with them, instead
of looking at them as if you expected them to murder you--I must say,
Vadnie, you're a real temptation; they can't help scaring you when you
go around acting as if you expected to be scared. You--you're TOO--" The
door opened still wider, and she went in. "Now, the idea of a great girl
like you hiding her head under a pillow just because Grant asked old
Hagar to apologize!"

Evadna sat down upon the edge of the bed and stared unwinkingly at her
aunt. "They don't apologize like that in New Jersey," she observed, with
some resentment in her voice, and dabbed at her unbelievably blue eyes
with a moist ball of handkerchief.

"I know they don't, honey." Phoebe patted her hand reassuringly. "That's
what I want you to help me teach my boys--to be real gentlemen. They're
pure gold, every one of them; but I can't deny they're pretty rough on
the outside sometimes. And I hope you will be--"

"Oh, I know. I understand perfectly. You just got me out here as a--a
sort of sandpaper for your boys' manners!" Evadna choked over a little
sob of self-pity. "I can just tell you one thing, Aunt Phoebe, that
fellow you call Grant ought to be smoothed with one of those funny axes
they hew logs with."

Phoebe bit her lips because she wanted to treat the subject very
seriously. "I want you to promise me, honey, that you will be
particularly nice to Grant; PARTICULARLY nice. He's so alone, and
he's very proud and sensitive, because he feels his loneliness. No one
understands him as I do--"

"I hate him!" gritted Evadna, in an emphatic whisper which her Aunt
Phoebe thought it wise not to seem to hear.

Phoebe settled herself comfortably for a long talk. The murmur of her
voice as she explained and comforted and advised came soothingly from
the room, with now and then an interruption while she waited for a tardy
answer to some question. Finally she rose and stood in the doorway,
looking back at a huddled figure on the bed.

"Now dry your eyes and be a good girl, and remember what you've
promised," she admonished kindly. "Aunt Phoebe didn't mean to scold you,
honey; she only wants you to feel that you belong here, and she wants
you to like her boys and have them like you. They've always wanted a
sister to pet; and Aunt Phoebe is hoping you'll not disappoint her.
You'll try; won't you, Vadnie?"

"Y--yes," murmured Vadnie meekly from the pillow. "I know you will."
Phoebe looked at her for a moment longer rather wistfully, and turned
away. "I do wish she had some spunk," she muttered complainingly, not
thinking that Evadna might hear her. "She don't take after the Ramseys
none--there wasn't anything mushy about them that I ever heard of."

"Mushy! MUSHY!" Evadna sat up and stared at nothing at all while she
repeated the word under her breath. "She wants me to be gentle--she
preached gentleness in her letters, and told how her boys need it, and
then--she calls it being MUSHY!"

She reached mechanically for her hair-brush, and fumbled in a tumbled
mass of shining, yellow hair quite as unbelievable in its way as were
her eyes--Grant had shown a faculty for observing keenly when he called
her a Christmas angel--and drew out a half-dozen hairpins, letting them
slide from her lap to the floor. "MUSHY!" she repeated, and shook down
her hair so that it framed her face and those eyes of hers. "I suppose
that's what they all say behind my back. And how can a girl be nice
WITHOUT being mushy?" She drew the brush meditatively through her
hair. "I am scared to death of Indians," she admitted, with analytical
frankness, "and tarantulas and snakes--but--MUSHY!"

Grant stood smoking in the doorway of the sitting-room, where he could
look out upon the smooth waters of the pond darkening under the shade of
the poplars and the bluff behind, when Evadna came out of her room. He
glanced across at her, saw her hesitate, as if she were meditating a
retreat, and gave his shoulders a twitch of tolerant amusement that she
should be afraid of him. Then he stared out over the pond again. Evadna
walked straight over to him.

"So you're that other savage whose manners I'm supposed to smooth, are
you?" she asked abruptly, coming to a stop within three feet of him, and
regarding him carefully, her hands clasped behind her.

"Please don't tease the animals," Grant returned, in the same impersonal
tone which she had seen fit to employ--but his eyes turned for a
sidelong glance at her, although he appeared to be watching the trout
rise lazily to the insects skimming over the surface of the water.

"I'm supposed to be nice to you--par-TIC-ularly nice--because you need
it most. I dare say you do, judging from what I've seen of you. At any
rate, I've promised. But I just want you to understand that I'm not
going to mean one single bit of it. I don't like you--I can't endure
you!--and if I'm nice, it will just be because I've promised Aunt
Phoebe. You're not to take my politeness at its face value, for back of
it I shall dislike you all the time."

Grant's lips twitched, and there was a covert twinkle in his eyes,
though he looked around him with elaborate surprise.

"It's early in the day for mosquitoes," he drawled; "but I was sure I
heard one buzzing somewhere close."

"Aunt Phoebe ought to get a street roller to smooth your manners,"
Evadna observed pointedly.

"Instead it's as if she hung her picture of a Christmas angel up before
the wolf's den, eh?" he suggested calmly, betraying his Indian blood
in the unconsciously symbolic form of expression. "No doubt the wolf's
nature will be greatly benefited--his teeth will be dulled for his
prey, his voice softened for the nightcry--if he should ever, by chance,
discover that the Christmas angel is there."

"I don't think he'll be long in making the discovery." The blue of
Evadna's eyes darkened and darkened until they were almost black.
"Christmas angel,--well, I like that! Much you know about angels."

Grant turned his head indolently and regarded her.

"If it isn't a Christmas angel--they're always very blue and very
golden, and pinky-whitey--if it isn't a Christmas angel, for the Lord's
sake what is it?" He gave his head a slight shake, as if the problem was
beyond his solving, and flicked the ashes from his cigarette.

"Oh, I could pinch you!" She gritted her teeth to prove she meant what
she said.

"It says it could pinch me." Grant lazily addressed the trout. "I wonder
why it didn't, then, when it was being squashed?"

"I just wish to goodness I had! Only I suppose Aunt Phoebe--"

"I do believe it's got a temper. I wonder, now, if it could be a LIVE
angel?" Grant spoke to the softly swaying poplars.

"Oh, you--there now!" She made a swift little rush at him, nipped his
biceps between a very small thumb and two fingers, and stood back,
breathing quickly and regarding him in a shamed defiance. "I'll show you
whether I'm alive!" she panted vindictively.

"It's alive, and it's a humming-bird. Angels don't pinch." Grant laid a
finger upon his arm and drawled his solution of a trivial mystery.
"It mistook me for a honeysuckle, and gave me a peck to make sure."
He smiled indulgently, and exhaled a long wreath of smoke from his
nostrils. "Dear little humming-birds--so simple and so harmless!"

"And I've promised to be nice to--THAT!" cried Evadna, in bitterness,
and rushed past him to the porch.

Being a house built to shelter a family of boys, and steps being a
superfluity scorned by their agile legs, there was a sheer drop of three
feet to the ground upon that side. Evadna made it in a jump, just as the
boys did, and landed lightly upon her slippered feet.

"I hate you--hate you--HATE YOU!" she cried, her eyes blazing up at his
amused face before she ran off among the trees.

"It sings a sweet little song," he taunted, and his laughter followed
her mockingly as she fled from him into the shadows.

"What's the joke, Good Injun? Tell us, so we can laugh too." Wally
and Jack hurried in from the kitchen and made for the doorway where he
stood.

From under his straight, black brows Grant sent a keen glance into the
shade of the grove, where, an instant before, had flickered the white
of Evadna's dress. The shadows lay there quietly now, undisturbed by so
much as a sleepy bird's fluttering wings.

"I was just thinking of the way I yanked that dog down into old
Wolfbelly's camp," he said, though there was no tangible reason for
lying to them. "Mister!" he added, his eyes still searching the shadows
out there in the grove, "we certainly did go some!"



CHAPTER V. "I DON'T CARE MUCH ABOUT GIRLS"

"There's no use asking the Injuns to go on the warpath," Gene announced
disgustedly, coming out upon the porch where the rest of the boys were
foregathered, waiting for the ringing tattoo upon the iron triangle just
outside the back door which would be the supper summons. "They're too
lazy to take the trouble--and, besides, they're scared of dad. I was
talking to Sleeping Turtle just now--met him down there past the Point
o' Rocks."

"What's the matter with us boys going on the warpath ourselves? We don't
need the Injuns. As long as she knows they're hanging around close, it's
all the same. If we could just get mum off the ranch--"

"If we could kidnap her--say, I wonder if we couldn't!" Clark looked at
the others tentatively.

"Good Injun might do the rescue act and square himself with her for what
happened at the milk-house," Wally suggested dryly.

"Oh, say, you'd scare her to death. There's no use in piling it on quite
so thick," Jack interposed mildly. "I kinda like the kid sometimes.
Yesterday, when I took her part way up the bluff, she acted almost
human. On the dead, she did!"

"Kill the traitor! Down with him! Curses on the man who betrays us!"
growled Wally, waving his cigarette threateningly.

Whereupon Gene and Clark seized the offender by heels and shoulders, and
with a brief, panting struggle heaved him bodily off the porch.

"Over the cliff he goes--so may all traitors perish!" Wally declaimed
approvingly, drawing up his legs hastily out of the way of Jack's
clutching fingers.

"Say, old Peppajee's down at the stable with papa," Donny informed them
breathlessly. "I told Marie to put him right next to Vadnie if he stays
to supper--and, uh course, he will. If mamma don't get next and change
his place, it'll be fun to watch her; watch Vad, I mean. She's scared
plum to death of anything that wears a blanket, and to have one right at
her elbow--wonder where she is--"

"That girl's got to be educated some if she's going to live in this
family," Wally observed meditatively. "There's a whole lot she's got to
learn, and the only way to learn her thorough is--"

"You forget," Grant interrupted him ironically, "that she's going to
make gentlemen of us all."

"Oh, yes--sure. Jack's coming down with it already. You oughta be
quarantined, old-timer; that's liable to be catching." Wally snorted his
disdain of the whole proceeding. "I'd rather go to jail myself."

Evadna by a circuitous route had reached the sitting-room without being
seen or heard; and it was at this point in the conversation that she
tiptoed out again, her hands doubled into tight little fists, and her
teeth set hard together. She did not look, at that moment, in the least
degree "mushy."

When the triangle clanged its supper call, however, she came slowly down
from her favorite nook at the head of the pond, her hands filled with
flowers hastily gathered in the dusk.

"Here she comes--let's get to our places first, so mamma can't change
Peppajee around," Donny implored, in a whisper; and the group on the
porch disappeared with some haste into the kitchen.

Evadna was leisurely in her movements that night. The tea had been
poured and handed around the table by the Portuguese girl, Marie, and
the sugar-bowl was going after, when she settled herself and her ruffles
daintily between Grant and a braided, green-blanketed, dignifiedly
loquacious Indian.

The boys signaled each another to attention by kicking surreptitiously
under the table, but nothing happened. Evadna bowed a demure
acknowledgment when her Aunt Phoebe introduced the two, accepted the
sugar-bowl from Grant and the butter from Peppajee, and went composedly
about the business of eating her supper. She seemed perfectly at
ease; too perfectly at ease, decided Grant, who had an instinct for
observation and was covertly watching her. It was unnatural that she
should rub elbows with Peppajee without betraying the faintest trace of
surprise that he should be sitting at the table with them.

"Long time ago," Peppajee was saying to Peaceful, taking up the
conversation where Evadna had evidently interrupted it, "many winters
ago, my people all time brave. All time hunt, all time fight, all time
heap strong. No drinkum whisky all same now." He flipped a braid back
over his shoulder, buttered generously a hot biscuit, and reached for
the honey. "No brave no more--kay bueno. All time ketchum whisky, get
drunk all same likum hog. Heap lazy. No hunt no more, no fight. Lay
all time in sun, sleep. No sun come, lay all time in wikiup. Agent, him
givum flour, givum meat, givum blanket, you thinkum bueno. He tellum
you, kay bueno. Makum Injun lazy. Makum all same wachee-typo" (tramp).
"All time eat, all time sleep, playum cards all time, drinkum whisky.
Kay bueno. Huh." The grunt stood for disgust of his tribe, always
something of an affectation with Peppajee.

"My brother, my brother's wife, my brother's wife's--ah--" He searched
his mind, frowning, for an English word, gave it up, and substituted a
phrase. "All the folks b'longum my brother's wife, heap lazy all time.
Me no likum. Agent one time givum plenty flour, plenty meat, plenty tea.
Huh. Them damn' folks no eatum. All time playum cards, drinkum whisky.
All time otha fella ketchum flour, ketchum meat, ketchum tea--ketchum
all them thing b'longum." In the rhetorical pause he made there, his
black eyes wandered inadvertently to Evadna's face. And Evadna, the
timid one, actually smiled back.

"Isn't it a shame they should do that," she murmured sympathetically.

"Huh." Peppajee turned his eyes and his attention to Peaceful, as if the
opinion and the sympathy of a mere female were not worthy his notice.
"Them grub all gone, them Injuns mebbyso ketchum hungry belly." Evadna
blushed, and looked studiously at her plate.

"Come my wikiup. Me got plenty flour, plenty meat, plenty tea. Stay all
time my wikiup. Sleepum my wikiup. Sun come up"--he pointed a brown,
sinewy hand toward the east--"eatum my grub. Sun up there"--his finger
indicated the zenith--"eatum some more. Sun go 'way, eatum some more.
Then sleepum all time my wikiup. Bimeby, mebbyso my flour all gone, my
meat mebbyso gone, mebbyso tea--them folks all time eatum grub, me no
ketchum. Me no playum cards, all same otha fella ketchum my grub. Kay
bueno. Better me playum cards mebbyso all time.

"Bimeby no ketchum mo' grub, no stopum my wikiup. Them folks pikeway. Me
tellum 'Yo' heap lazy, heap kay bueno. Yo' all time eatum my grub, yo'
no givum me money, no givum hoss, no givum notting. Me damn' mad all
time yo'. Yo' go damn' quick!'" Peppajee held out his cup for more tea.
"Me tellum my brother," he finished sonorously, his black eyes sweeping
lightly the faces of his audience, "yo' no come back, yo'--"

Evadna caught her breath, as if someone had dashed cold water in her
face. Never before in her life had she heard the epithet unprintable,
and she stared fixedly at the old-fashioned, silver castor which always
stood in the exact center of the table.

Old Peaceful Hart cleared his throat, glanced furtively at Phoebe, and
drew his hand down over his white beard. The boys puffed their cheeks
with the laughter they would, if possible, restrain, and eyed Evadna's
set face aslant. It was Good Indian who rebuked the offender.

"Peppajee, mebbyso you no more say them words," he said quietly. "Heap
kay bueno. White man no tellum where white woman hear. White woman no
likum hear; all time heap shame for her."

"Huh," grunted Peppajee doubtingly, his eyes turning to Phoebe. Times
before had he said them before Phoebe Hart, and she had passed them by
with no rebuke. Grant read the glance, and answered it.

"Mother Hart live long time in this place," he reminded him. "Hear bad
talk many times. This girl no hear; no likum hear. You sabe? You no
make shame for this girl." He glanced challengingly across the table at
Wally, whose grin was growing rather pronounced.

"Huh. Mebbyso you boss all same this ranch?" Peppajee retorted sourly.
"Mebbyso Peacefu' tellum, him no likum."

Peaceful, thus drawn into the discussion, cleared his throat again.

"Wel-l-l--WE don't cuss much before the women," he admitted
apologetically "We kinda consider that men's talk. I reckon Vadnie'll
overlook it this time." He looked across at her beseechingly. "You no
feelum bad, Peppajee."

"Huh. Me no makum squaw-talk." Peppajee laid down his knife, lifted a
corner of his blanket, and drew it slowly across his stern mouth. He
muttered a slighting sentence in Indian.

In the same tongue Grant answered him sharply, and after that was
silence broken only by the subdued table sounds. Evadna's eyes filled
slowly until she finally pushed back her chair and hurried out into the
yard and away from the dogged silence of that blanketed figure at her
elbow.

She was scarcely settled, in the hammock, ready for a comforting half
hour of tears, when someone came from the house, stood for a minute
while he rolled a cigarette, and then came straight toward her.

She sat up, and waited defensively. More baiting, without a doubt--and
she was not in the mood to remember any promises about being a nice,
gentle little thing. The figure came close, stooped, and took her by the
arm. In the half--light she knew him then. It was Grant.

"Come over by the pond," he said, in what was almost a command. "I want
to talk to you a little."

"Does it occur to you that I might not want to talk t to you?" Still,
she let him help her to her feet.

"Surely. You needn't open your lips if you don't want to. Just 'lend me
your ears, and be silent that ye may hear.' The boys will be boiling out
on the porch, as usual, in a minute; so hurry."

"I hope it's something very important," Evadna hinted ungraciously.
"Nothing else would excuse this high-handed proceeding."

When they had reached the great rock where the pond had its outlet,
and where was a rude seat hidden away in a clump of young willows just
across the bridge, he answered her.

"I don't know that it's of any importance at all," he said calmly. "I
got to feeling rather ashamed of myself, is all, and it seemed to me the
only decent thing was to tell you so. I'm not making any bid for your
favor--I don't know that I want it. I don't care much about girls,
one way or the other. But, for all I've got the name of being several
things--a savage among the rest--I don't like to feel such a brute as
to make war on a girl that seems to be getting it handed to her right
along."

He tardily lighted his cigarette and sat smoking beside her, the tiny
glow lighting his face briefly now and then.

"When I was joshing you there before supper," he went on, speaking low
that he might not be overheard--and ridiculed--from the house, "I didn't
know the whole outfit was making a practice of doing the same thing.
I hadn't heard about the dead tarantula on your pillow, or the rattler
coiled up on the porch, or any of those innocent little jokes. But if
the rest are making it their business to devil the life out of you,
why--common humanity forces me to apologize and tell you I'm out of it
from now on."

"Oh! Thank you very much." Evadna's tone might be considered ironical.
"I suppose I ought to say that your statement lessens my dislike of
you--"

"Not at all." Grant interrupted her. "Go right ahead and hate me, if you
feel that way. It won't matter to me--girls never did concern me much,
one way or the other. I never was susceptible to beauty, and that seems
to be a woman's trump card, always--"

"Well, upon my word!"

"Sounds queer, does it? But it's the truth, and so what's the use of
lying, just to be polite? I won't torment you any more; and if the boys
rig up too strong a josh, I'm liable to give you a hint beforehand. I'm
willing to do that--my sympathies are always with the under dog, anyway,
and they're five to one. But that needn't mean that I'm--that I--" He
groped for words that would not make his meaning too bald; not even
Grant could quite bring himself to warn a girl against believing him a
victim of her fascinations.

"You needn't stutter. I'm not really stupid. You don't like me any
better than I like you. I can see that. We're to be as decent as
possible to each other--you from 'common humanity,' and I because I
promised Aunt Phoebe."

"We-e-l!--that's about it, I guess." Grant eyed her sidelong." Only I
wouldn't go so far as to say I actually dislike you. I never did dislike
a girl, that I remember. I never thought enough about them, one way or
the other." He seemed rather fond of that statement, he repeated it so
often." The life I live doesn't call for girls. Put that's neither here
nor there. What I wanted to say was, that I won't bother you any more. I
wouldn't have said a word to you tonight, if you hadn't walked right up
to me and started to dig into me. Of course, I had to fight back--the
man who won't isn't a normal human being."

"Oh, I know." Evadna's tone was resentful. "From Adam down to you, it
has always been 'The woman, she tempted me.' You're perfectly horrid,
even if you have apologized. 'The woman, she tempted me,' and--"

"I beg your pardon; the woman didn't," he corrected blandly. "The woman
insisted on scrapping. That's different."

"Oh, it's different! I see. I have almost forgotten something I ought
to say, Mr. Imsen. I must thank you for--well, for defending me to that
Indian."

"I didn't. Nobody was attacking you, so I couldn't very well defend you,
could I? I had to take a fall out of old Peppajee, just on principle. I
don't get along very well with my noble red cousins. I wasn't doing it
on your account, in particular."

"Oh, I see." She rose rather suddenly from the bench. "It wasn't even
common humanity, then--"

"Not even common humanity," he echoed affirmatively. "Just a chance I
couldn't afford to pass up, of digging into Peppajee."

"That's different." She laughed shortly and left him, running swiftly
through the warm dusk to the murmur of voices at the house.

Grant sat where she left him, and smoked two cigarettes meditatively
before he thought of returning to the house. When he finally did get
upon his feet, he stretched his arms high above his head, and stared for
a moment up at the treetops swaying languidly just under the stars.

"Girls must play the very deuce with a man if he ever lets them get on
his mind," he mused. "I see right now where a fellow about my size and
complexion had better watch out." But he smiled afterward, as if he did
not consider the matter very serious, after all.



CHAPTER VI. THE CHRISTMAS ANGEL PLAYS GHOST

At midnight, the Peaceful Hart ranch lay broodily quiet under its
rock-rimmed bluff. Down in the stable the saddle-horses were but
formless blots upon the rumpled bedding in their stalls--except
Huckleberry, the friendly little pinto with the white eyelashes and the
blue eyes, and the great, liver-colored patches upon his sides, and the
appetite which demanded food at unseasonable hours, who was now munching
and nosing industriously in the depths of his manger, and making a good
deal of noise about it.

Outside, one of the milch cows drew a long, sighing breath of content
with life, lifted a cud in mysterious, bovine manner, and chewed
dreamily. Somewhere up the bluff a bobcat squalled among the rocks,
and the moon, in its dissipated season of late rising, lifted itself
indolently up to where it could peer down upon the silent ranch.

In the grove where the tiny creek gurgled under the little stone bridge,
someone was snoring rhythmically in his blankets, for the boys had
taken to sleeping in the open air before the earliest rose had opened
buds in the sunny shelter of the porch. Three feet away, a sleeper
stirred restlessly, lifted his head from the pillow, and slapped
half-heartedly at an early mosquito that was humming in his ear. He
reached out, and jogged the shoulder of him who snored.

"Say, Gene, if you've got to sleep at the top of your voice, you better
drag your bed down into the orchard," he growled. "Let up a little,
can't yuh?"

"Ah, shut up and let a fellow sleep!" mumbled Gene, snuggling the covers
up to his ears.

"Just what I want YOU to do. You snore like a sawmill. Darn it, you've
got to get out of the grove if yuh can't--"

"Ah-h-EE-EE!" wailed a voice somewhere among the trees, the sound rising
weirdly to a subdued crescendo, clinging there until one's flesh went
creepy, and then sliding mournfully down to silence.

"What's that?" The two jerked themselves to a sitting position, and
stared into the blackness of the grove.

"Bobcat," whispered Clark, in a tone which convinced not even himself.

"In a pig's ear," flouted Gene, under his breath. He leaned far over and
poked his finger into a muffled form. "D'yuh hear that noise, Grant?"

Grant sat up instantly. "What's the matter?" he demanded, rather
ill-naturedly, if the truth be told.

"Did you hear anything--a funny noise, like--"

The cry itself finished the sentence for him. It came from nowhere,
it would seem, since they could see nothing; rose slowly to a subdued
shriek, clung there nerve-wrackingly, and then wailed mournfully down to
silence. Afterward, while their ears were still strained to the sound,
the bobcat squalled an answer from among the rocks.

"Yes, I heard it," said Grant. "It's a spook. It's the wail of a lost
spirit, loosed temporarily from the horrors of purgatory. It's sent as a
warning to repent you of your sins, and it's howling because it hates to
go back. What you going to do about it?"

He made his own intention plain beyond any possibility of
misunderstanding. He lay down and pulled the blanket over his shoulders,
cuddled his pillow under his head, and disposed himself to sleep.

The moon climbed higher, and sent silvery splinters of light quivering
down among the trees. A frog crawled out upon a great lily--pad and
croaked dismally.

Again came the wailing cry, nearer than before, more subdued, and for
that reason more eerily mournful. Grant sat up, muttered to himself, and
hastily pulled on some clothes. The frog cut himself short in the middle
of a deep-throated ARR-RR-UMPH and dove headlong into the pond; and the
splash of his body cleaving the still surface of the water made Gene
shiver nervously. Grant reached under his pillow for something, and
freed himself stealthily from a blanketfold.

"If that spook don't talk Indian when it's at home, I'm very much
mistaken," he whispered to Clark, who was nearest. "You boys stay here."

Since they had no intention of doing anything else, they obeyed him
implicitly and without argument, especially as a flitting white
figure appeared briefly and indistinctly in a shadow-flecked patch of
moonlight. Crouching low in the shade of a clump of bushes, Grant stole
toward the spot.

When he reached the place, the thing was not there. Instead, he glimpsed
it farther on, and gave chase, taking what precautions he could against
betraying himself. Through the grove and the gate and across the road
he followed, in doubt half the time whether it was worth the trouble.
Still, if it was what he suspected, a lesson taught now would probably
insure against future disturbances of the sort, he thought, and kept
stubbornly on. Once more he heard the dismal cry, and fancied it held a
mocking note.

"I'll settle that mighty quick," he promised grimly, as he jumped a
ditch and ran toward the place.

Somewhere among the currant bushes was a sound of eery laughter. He
swerved toward the place, saw a white form rise suddenly from the very
ground, as it seemed, and lift an arm with a slow, beckoning gesture.
Without taking aim, he raised his gun and fired a shot at it. The arm
dropped rather suddenly, and the white form vanished. He hurried up to
where it had stood, knelt, and felt of the soft earth. Without a doubt
there were footprints there--he could feel them. But he hadn't a match
with him, and the place was in deep shade.

He stood up and listened, thought he heard a faint sound farther along,
and ran. There was no use now in going quietly; what counted most was
speed.

Once more he caught sight of the white form fleeing from him like the
very wraith it would have him believe it. Then he lost it again; and
when he reached the spot where it disappeared, he fell headlong, his
feet tangled in some white stuff. He swore audibly, picked himself up,
and held the cloth where the moon shone full upon it. It looked like a
sheet, or something of the sort, and near one edge was a moist patch of
red. He stared at it dismayed, crumpled the cloth into a compact bundle,
tucked it under his arm, and ran on, his ears strained to catch some
sound to guide him.

"Well, anyhow, I didn't kill him," he muttered uneasily as he crawled
through a fence into the orchard. "He's making a pretty swift get-away
for a fellow that's been shot."

In the orchard the patches of moonlight were larger, and across one
of them he glimpsed a dark object, running wearily. Grant repressed an
impulse to shout, and used the breath for an extra burst of speed. The
ghost was making for the fence again, as if it would double upon its
trail and reach some previously chosen refuge. Grant turned and ran also
toward the fence, guessing shrewdly that the fugitive would head for the
place where the wire could be spread about, and a beaten trail led from
there straight out to the road which passed the house. It was the short
cut from the peach orchard; and it occurred to him that this particular
spook seemed perfectly familiar with the byways of the ranch. Near the
fence he made a discovery that startled him a little.

"It's a squaw, by Jove!" he cried when he caught an unmistakable flicker
of skirts; and the next moment he could have laughed aloud if he had not
been winded from the chase. The figure reached the fence before him, and
in the dim light he could see it stoop to pass through. Then it seemed
as if the barbs had caught in its clothing and held it there. It
struggled to free itself; and in the next minute he rushed up and
clutched it fast.

"Why don't you float over the treetops?" he panted ironically.
"Ghosts have no business getting their spirit raiment tangled up in a
barbed-wire fence."

It answered with a little exclamation, with a sob following close upon
it. There was a sound of tearing cloth, and he held his captive upright,
and with a merciless hand turned her face so that the moonlight struck
it full. They stared at each other, breathing hard from more than the
race they had run.

"Well--I'll--be--" Grant began, in blank amazement.

She wriggled her chin in his palm, trying to free herself from his
pitiless staring. Failing that, she began to sob angrily without any
tears in her wide eyes.

"You--shot me, you brute!" she cried accusingly at last. "You--SHOT me!"
And she sobbed again.

Before he answered, he drew backward a step or two, sat down upon the
edge of a rock which had rolled out from a stone-heap, and pulled her
down beside him, still holding her fast, as if he half believed her
capable of soaring away over the treetops, after all.

"I guess I didn't murder you--from the chase you gave me. Did I hit you
at all?"

"Yes, you did! You nearly broke my arm--and you might have killed me,
you big brute! Look what you did--and I never harmed you at all!" She
pushed up a sleeve, and held out her arm accusingly in the moonlight,
disclosing a tiny, red furrow where the skin was broken and still
bleeding. "And you shot a big hole right through Aunt Phoebe's sheet!"
she added, with tearful severity.

He caught her arm, bent his head over it--and for a moment he was
perilously near to kissing it; an impulse which astonished him
considerably, and angered him more. He dropped the arm rather
precipitately; and she lifted it again, and regarded the wound with
mournful interest.

"I'd like to know what right you have to prowl around shooting at
people," she scolded, seeing how close she could come to touching the
place with her fingertips without producing any but a pleasurable pain.

"Just as much right as you have to get up in the middle of the night
and go ahowling all over the ranch wrapped up in a sheet," he retorted
ungallantly.

"Well, if I want to do it, I don't see why you need concern yourself
about it. I wasn't doing it for your benefit, anyway."

"Will you tell me what you DID do it for? Of all the silly tomfoolery--"

An impish smile quite obliterated the Christmas-angel look for an
instant, then vanished, and left her a pretty, abused maiden who is
grieved at harsh treatment.

"Well, I wanted to scare Gene," she confessed. "I did, too. I just know
he's a cowardy-cat, because he's always trying to scare ME. It's Gene's
fault--he told me the grove is haunted. He said a long time ago, before
Uncle Hart settled here, a lot of Indians waylaid a wagon-train here
and killed a girl, and he says that when the moon is just past the full,
something white walks through the grove and wails like a lost soul in
torment. He says sometimes it comes and moans at the corner of the house
where my room is. I just know he was going to do it himself; but I guess
he forgot. So I thought I'd see if he believed his own yarns. I was
going to do it every night till I scared him into sleeping in the house.
I had a perfectly lovely place to disappear into, where he couldn't
trace me if he took to hunting around--only he wouldn't dare." She
pulled down her sleeve very carefully, and then, just as carefully, she
pushed it up again, and took another look.

"My best friend TOLD me I'd get shot if I came to Idaho," she reminded
herself, with a melancholy satisfaction.

"You didn't get shot," Grant contradicted for the sake of drawing more
sparks of temper where temper seemed quaintly out of place, and stared
hard at her drooping profile. "You just got nicely missed; a bullet that
only scrapes off a little skin can't be said to hit. I'd hate to hit a
bear like that."

"I believe you're wishing you HAD killed me! You might at least have
some conscience in the matter, and be sorry you shot a lady. But you're
not. You just wish you had murdered me. You hate girls--you said so. And
I don't know what business it is of yours, if I want to play a joke on
my cousin, or why you had to be sleeping outside, anyway. I've a perfect
right to be a ghost if I choose--and I don't call it nice, or polite, or
gentlemanly for you to chase me all over the place with a gun, trying
to kill me! I'll never speak to you again as long as I live. When I say
that I mean it. I never liked you from the very start, when I first saw
you this afternoon. Now I hate and despise you. I suppose I oughtn't
to expect you to apologize or be sorry because you almost killed me. I
suppose that's just your real nature coming to the surface. Indians love
to hurt and torture people! I shouldn't have expected anything else of
you, I suppose. I made the mistake of treating you like a white man."

"Don't you think you're making another mistake right now?" Grant's whole
attitude changed, as well as his tone. "Aren't you afraid to push the
white man down into the dirt, and raise up--the INDIAN?"

She cast a swift, half-frightened glance up into his face and the eyes
that glowed ominously in the moonlight.

"When people make the blunder of calling up the Indian," he went on
steadily, "they usually find that they have to deal with--the Indian."

Evadna looked at him again, and turned slowly white before her temper
surged to the surface again.

"I didn't call up the Indian," she defended hotly; "but if the Indian
wants to deal with me according to his nature--why, let him! But you
don't ACT like other people! I don't know another man who wouldn't have
been horrified at shooting me, even such a tiny little bit; but you
don't care at all. You never even said you were sorry."

"I'm not in the habit of saying all I think and feel."

"You were quick enough to apologize, after supper there, when you hadn't
really done anything; and now, when one would expect you to be at least
decently sorry, you--you--well, you act like the savage you are! There,
now! It may not be nice to say it, but it's the truth."

Grant smiled bitterly. "All men are savages under the skin," he said.
"How do YOU know what I think and feel? If I fail to come through with
the conventional patter, I am called an Indian--because my mother was
a half-breed." He threw up his head proudly, let his eyes rest for a
moment upon the moon, swimming through a white river of clouds just over
the tall poplar hedge planted long ago to shelter the orchard from the
sweeping west winds; and, when he looked down at her again, he caught a
glimpse of repentant tears in her eyes, and softened.

"Oh, you're a girl, and you demand the usual amount of poor-pussy talk,"
he told her maliciously. "So I'm sorry. I'm heartbroken. If it will
help any, I'll even kiss the hurt to make it well--and I'm not a kissing
young man, either, let me tell you."

"I'd die before I'd let you touch me!" Her repentance, if it was that,
changed to pure rage. She snatched the torn sheet from him and turned
abruptly toward the fence. He followed her, apparently unmoved by her
attitude; placed his foot upon the lower wire and pressed it into the
soft earth, lifted the one next above it as high as it would go, and
thus made it easier for her to pass through. She seemed to hesitate
for a moment, as though tempted to reject even that slight favor, then
stooped, and went through.

As the wires snapped into place, she halted and looked back at him.

"Maybe I've been mean--but you're been meaner," she summed up, in
self-justification. "I suppose the next thing you will do will be to
tell the boys. Well, I don't care what you do, so long as you never
speak to me again. Go and tell them if you want to--tell. TELL, do you
hear? I don't want even the favor of your silence!" She dexterously
tucked the bundle of white under the uninjured arm, caught the loose
folds of her skirt up in her hands, and ran away up the path, not once
stopping to see whether he still followed her.

Grant did not follow. He stood leaning against the fence-post, and
watched her until her flying form grew indistinct in the shade of the
poplar hedge; watched it reappear in a broad strip of white moonlight,
still running; saw it turn, slacken speed to a walk, and then lose
itself in the darkness of the grove.

Five minutes, ten minutes, he stood there, staring across the level bit
of valley lying quiet at the foot of the jagged-rimmed bluff standing
boldly up against the star-flecked sky. Then he shook himself
impatiently, muttered something which had to do with a "doddering fool,"
and retraced his steps quickly through the orchard, the currant bushes,
and the strawberry patch, jumped the ditch, and so entered the grove and
returned to his blankets.

"We thought the spook had got yuh, sure." Gene lifted his head
turtlewise and laughed deprecatingly. "We was just about ready to start
out after the corpse, only we didn't know but what you might get excited
and take a shot at us in the dark. We heard yuh shoot--what was it? Did
you find out?"

"It wasn't anything," said Grant shortly, tugging at a boot.

"Ah--there was, too! What was it you shot at?" Clark joined in the
argument from the blackness under the locust tree.

"The moon," Grant told him sullenly. "There wasn't anything else that I
could see."

"And that's a lie," Gene amended, with the frankness of a
foster-brother. "Something yelled like--"

"You never heard a screech-owl before, did you, Gene?" Grant crept
between his blankets and snuggled down, as if his mind held nothing more
important than sleep.

"Screech-owl my granny! You bumped into something you couldn't
handle--if you want to know what _I_ think about it," Clark guessed
shrewdly. "I wish now I'd taken the trouble to hunt the thing down; it
didn't seem worth while getting up. But I leave it to Gene if you ain't
mad enough to murder whatever it was. What was it?"

He waited a moment without getting a reply.

"Well, keep your teeth shut down on it, then, darn yuh!" he growled.
"That's the Injun of it--I know YOU! Screech-owl--huh! You said when you
left it was an Indian--and that's why we didn't take after it ourselves.
We don't want to get the whole bunch down on us like they are on
you--and if there was one acting up around here, we knew blamed well it
was on your account for what happened to-day. I guess you found out, all
right. I knew the minute you heaved in sight that you was just about as
mad as you can get--and that's saying a whole lot. If it WAS an Indian,
and you killed him, you better let us--"

"Oh, for the lord's sake, WILL YOU SHUT UP!" Grant raised to an elbow,
glared a moment, and lay down again.

The result proved the sort of fellow he was. Clark shut up without even
trailing off into mumbling to himself, as was his habit when argument
brought him defeat.



CHAPTER VII. MISS GEORGIE HOWARD, OPERATOR

"Where is the delightful Mr. Good Indian off to?" Evadna stopped
drumming upon the gatepost and turned toward the person she heard coming
up behind her, who happened to be Gene. He stopped to light a match
upon the gate and put his cigarette to work before he answered her; and
Evadna touched tentatively the wide, blue ribbon wound round her arm and
tied in a bow at her elbow, and eyed him guardedly.

"Straight up, he told me," Gene answered sourly. "He's sore over
something that happened last night, and he didn't seem to have any talk
to give away this morning. He can go to the dickens, for all I care."

"WHAT--happened last night?" Evadna wore her Christmas-angel expression;
and her tone was the sweet, insipid tone of childlike innocence.

Gene hesitated. It seemed a sheer waste of opportunity to tell her the
truth when she would believe a falsehood just as readily; but, since the
truth happened to be quite as improbable as a lie, he decided to speak
it.

"There was a noise when the moon had just come up--didn't you hear it?
The ghost I told you about. Good Injun went after it with a gun, and I
guess they mixed, all right, and he got the worst of it. He was sure on
the fight when he came back, and he's pulled out this morning--"

"Do you mean to tell me--did you see it, really?"

"Well, you ask Clark, when you see him," Gene hinted darkly. "You just
ask him what was in the grove last night. Ask him what he HEARD." He
moved closer, and laid his hand impressively upon her arm. Evadna winced
perceptibly. "What yuh jumping for? You didn't see anything, did you?"

"No; but--was there REALLY something?" Evadna freed herself as
unobtrusively as possible, and looked at him with wide eyes.

"You ask Clark. He'll tell you--maybe. Good Injun's scared clean off the
ranch--you can see that for yourself. He said he couldn't be hired to
spend another night here. He thinks it's a bad sign. That's the Injun of
it. They believe in spirits and signs and things."

Evadna turned thoughtful. "And didn't he tell you what he--that is, if
he found out--you said he went after it--"

"He wouldn't say a blamed thing about it," Gene complained sincerely.
"He said there wasn't anything--he told us it was a screech-owl."

"Oh!" Evadna gave a sigh of relief. "Well, I'm going to ask Clark what
it was--I'm just crazy about ghost stories, only I never would DARE
leave the house after dark if there are funny noises and things,
really. I think you boys must be the bravest fellows, to sleep out
there--without even your mother with you!"

She smiled the credulous smile of ignorant innocence and pulled the gate
open.

"Jack promised to take me up to Hartley to-day," she explained over her
shoulder. "When I come back, you'll show me just where it was, won't
you, Gene? You don't suppose it would walk in the grove in the daytime,
do you? Because I'm awfully fond of the grove, and I do hope it will be
polite enough to confine its perambulations entirely to the conventional
midnight hour."

Gene did not make any reply. Indeed, he seemed wholly absorbed in
staring after her and wondering just how much or how little of it she
meant.

Evadna looked back, midway between the gate and the stable, and, when
she saw him standing exactly as she had left him, she waved her hand and
smiled. She was still smiling when she came up to where Jack was giving
those last, tentative twitches and pats which prove whether a saddle is
properly set and cinched; and she would not say what it was that amused
her. All the way up the grade, she smiled and grew thoughtful by turns;
and, when Jack mentioned the fact that Good Indian had gone off mad
about something, she contented herself with the simple, unqualified
statement that she was glad of it.

Grant's horse dozed before the store, and Grant himself sat upon a bench
in the narrow strip of shade on the porch. Evadna, therefore, refused
absolutely to dismount there, though her errand had been a post-office
money order. Jack was already on the ground when she made known her
decision; and she left him in the middle of his expostulations and rode
on to the depot. He followed disapprovingly afoot; and, when she brought
her horse to a stand, he helped her from the saddle, and took the bridle
reins with an air of weary tolerance.

"When you get ready to go home, you can come to the store," he said
bluntly. "Huckleberry wouldn't stand here if you hog-tied him. Just
remember that if you ever ride up here alone--it might save you a walk
back. And say," he added, with a return of his good-natured grin, "it
looks like you and Good Injun didn't get acquainted yesterday. I thought
I saw mum give him an introduction to you--but I guess I made a mistake.
When you come to the store, don't let me forget, and I'll do it myself."

"Oh, thank you, Jack--but it isn't necessary," chirped Evadna, and left
him with the smile which he had come to regard with vague suspicion of
what it might hide of her real feelings.

Two squaws sat cross-legged on the ground in the shade of the little
red depot; and them she passed by hastily, her eyes upon them watchfully
until she was well upon the platform and was being greeted joyfully
by Miss Georgie Howard, then in one of her daily periods of intense
boredom.

"My, my, but you're an angel of deliverance--and by rights you should
have a pair of gauze wings, just to complete the picture," she cried,
leading her inside and pushing her into a beribboned wicker rocker. "I
was just getting desperate enough to haul in those squaws out there
and see if I couldn't teach 'em whist or something." She sat down
and fingered her pompadour absently. "And that sure would have been
interesting," she added musingly.

"Don't let me interrupt you," Evadna began primly. "I only came for a
money order--Aunt Phoebe's sending for--"

"Never mind what you came for," Miss Georgie cut in decisively, and
laughed. "The express agent is out. You can't get your order till we've
had a good talk and got each other tagged mentally--only I've tagged you
long ago."

"I thought you were the express agent. Aunt Phoebe said--"

"Nice, truthful Aunt Phoebe! I am, but I'm out--officially. I'm several
things, my dear; but, for the sake of my own dignity and self-respect,
I refuse to be more than one of them at a time. When I sell a ticket
to Shoshone, I'm the ticket agent, and nothing else. Telegrams, I'm the
operator. At certain times I'm the express agent. I admit it. But this
isn't one of the times."

She stopped and regarded her visitor with whimsical appraisement.
"You'll wait till the agent returns, won't you?" And added, with a
grimace: "You won't be in the way--I'm not anything official right now.
I'm a neighbor, and this is my parlor--you see, I planted you on that
rug, with the books at your elbow, and that geranium also; and you're in
the rocker, so you're really and truly in my parlor. I'm over the line
myself, and you're calling on me. Sabe? That little desk by the safe is
the express office, and you can see for yourself that the agent is out."

"Well, upon my word!" Evadna permitted herself that much emotional
relief. Then she leaned her head against the cherry-colored head-rest
tied to the chair with huge, cherry-colored bows, and took a deliberate
survey of the room.

It was a small room, as rooms go. One corner was evidently the telegraph
office, for it held a crude table, with the instruments clicking
spasmodically, form pads, letter files, and mysterious things which
piqued her curiosity. Over it was a railroad map and a makeshift
bulletin board, which seemed to give the time of certain trains.
And small-paned windows gave one sitting before the instruments an
unobstructed view up and down the track. In the corner behind the door
was a small safe, with door ajar, and a desk quite as small, with,
"Express Office: Hours, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M." on a card above it.

Under a small window opening upon the platform was another little table,
with indications of occasional ticket-selling upon it. And in the end of
the room where she sat were various little adornments--"art" calendars,
a few books, fewer potted plants, a sewing-basket, and two rugs upon the
floor, with a rocker for each. Also there was a tiny, square table, with
a pack of cards scattered over it.

"Exactly. You have it sized up correctly, my dear." Miss Georgie Howard
nodded her--head three times, and her eyes were mirthful. "It's a game.
I made it a game. I had to, in self-defense. Otherwise--" She waved
a hand conspicuous for its white plumpness and its fingers tapering
beautifully to little, pink nails immaculately kept. "I took at the
job and the place just as it stands, without anything in the way of
mitigation. Can you see yourself holding it down for longer than a week?
I've been here a month."

"I think," Evadna ventured, "it must be fun."

"Oh, yes. It's fun--if you make fun OF it. However, before we settle
down for a real visit, I've a certain duty to perform, if you will
excuse my absence for a moment. Incidentally," she added, getting lazily
out of the chair, "it will illustrate just how I manage my system."

Her absence was purely theoretical. She stepped off the rug, went to the
"express office," and took a card from the desk. When she had stood it
upright behind the inkwell, Evadna read in large, irregular capitals:

"OUT. WILL BE BACK LATER."

Miss Georgie Howard paid no attention to the little giggle which went
with the reading, but stepped across to the ticket desk and to the
telegraph table, and put similar cards on display. Then she came back to
the rug, plumped down in her rocker with a sigh of relief, and reached
for a large, white box--the five pounds of chocolates which she had sent
for.

"I never eat candy when I'm in the office," she observed soberly. "I
consider it unprofessional. Help yourself as liberally as your digestion
will stand--and for Heaven's sake, gossip a little! Tell me all
about that bunch of nifty lads I see cavorting around the store
occasionally--and especially about the polysyllabic gentleman who seems
to hang out at the Peaceful Hart ranch. I'm terribly taken with him.
He--excuse me, chicken. There's a fellow down the line hollering his
head off. Wait till I see what he wants."

Again she left the rug, stepped to the telegraph instrument, and
fingered the key daintily until she had, with the other hand, turned
down the "out" card. Then she threw the switch, rattled an impatient
reply, and waited, listening to the rapid clicking of the sounder. Her
eyes and her mouth hardened as she read.

"Cad!" she gritted under her breath. Her fingers were spiteful as they
clicked the key in answer. She slammed the current off, set up the "out"
notice again, kicked the desk chair against the wall, and came back to
the "parlor" breathing quickly.

"I think it must be perfectly fascinating to talk that way to persons
miles off," said Evadna, eying the chittering sounder with something
approaching awe. "I watched your fingers, and tried to imagine what it
was they were saying--but I couldn't even guess."

Miss Georgie Howard laughed queerly. "No, I don't suppose you could,"
she murmured, and added, with a swift glance at the other: "They said,
'You go to the devil.'" She held up the offending hand and regarded it
intently. "You wouldn't think it of them, would you? But they have to
say things sometimes--in self-defense. There are two or three fresh
young men along the line that can't seem to take a hint unless you knock
them in the head with it."

She cast a malevolent look at the clicking instrument. "He's trying to
square himself," she observed carelessly. "But, unfortunately, I'm out.
He seems on the verge of tears, poor thing."

She poked investigatingly among the chocolates, and finally selected a
delectable morsel with epicurean care.

"You haven't told me about the polysyllabic young man," she reminded.
"He has held my heart in bondage since he said to Pete Hamilton
yesterday in the store--ah--" She leaned and barely reached a slip
of paper which was lying upon a row of books. "I wrote it down so I
wouldn't forget it," she explained parenthetically. "He said to Pete,
in the store, just after Pete had tried to say something funny with the
usual lamentable failure--um--'You are mentally incapable of recognizing
the line of demarcation between legitimate persiflage and objectionable
familiarity.' Now, I want to know what sort of a man, under fifty and
not a college professor, would--or could--say that without studying it
first. It sounded awfully impromptu and easy--and yet he looks--well,
cowboyish. What sort of a young man is he?"

"He's a perfectly horrid young man." Evadna leaned to help herself to
more chocolates. "He--well, just to show you how horrid, he calls me
a--a Christmas angel! And--"

"Did he!" Miss Georgie eyed her measuringly between bites. "Tag him
as being intelligent, a keen observer, with the ability to express
himself--" She broke off, and turned her head ungraciously toward the
sounder, which seemed to be repeating something over and over with a
good deal of insistence. "That's Shoshone calling," she said, frowning
attentively. "They've got an old crank up there in the office--I'd know
his touch among a million--and when he calls he means business. I'll
have to speak up, I suppose." She sighed, tucked a chocolate into her
cheek, and went scowling to the table. "Can't the idiot see I'm out?"
she complained whimsically. "What's that card for, I wonder?"

She threw the switch, rattled a reply, and then, as the sounder settled
down to a steady click-clickety-click-click, she drew a pad toward her,
pulled up the chair with her foot, sat down, and began to write the
message as it came chattering over the wire. When it was finished and
the sounder quiet, her hand awoke to life upon the key. She seemed to be
repeating the message, word for word. When she was done, she listened,
got her answer, threw off the switch with a sweep of her thumb, and
fumbled among the papers on the table until she found an envelope. She
addressed it with a hasty scrawl of her pencil, sealed it with a vicious
little spat of her hand, and then sat looking down upon it thoughtfully.

"I suppose I've got to deliver that immediately, at once, without
delay," she said. "There's supposed to be an answer. Chicken, some queer
things happen in this business. Here's that weak-eyed, hollow-chested
Saunders, that seems to have just life enough to put in about ten hours
a day reading 'The Duchess,' getting cipher messages like the hero of a
detective story. And sending them, too, by the way. We operators are not
supposed to think; but all the same--" She got her receipt-book, filled
rapidly a blank line, tucked it under her arm, and went up and tapped
Evadna lightly upon the head with the envelope. "Want to come along? Or
would you rather stay here? I won't be more than two minutes."

She was gone five; and she returned with a preoccupied air which lasted
until she had disposed of three chocolates and was carefully choosing a
fourth.

"Chicken," she said then, quietly, "do you know anything about your
uncle and his affairs?" And added immediately: "The chances are ten to
one you don't, and wouldn't if you lived there till you were gray?"

"I know he's perfectly lovely," Evadna asserted warmly. "And so is Aunt
Phoebe."

"To be sure." Miss Georgie smiled indulgently. "I quite agree with you.
And by the way, I met that polysyllabic cowboy again--and I discovered
that, on the whole, my estimate was incorrect. He's emphatically
monosyllabic. I said sixteen nice things to him while I was waiting for
Pete to wake up Saunders; and he answered in words of one syllable; one
word, of one syllable. I'm beginning to feel that I've simply got to
know that young man. There are deeps there which I am wild to explore.
I never met any male human in the least like him. Did you? So
absolutely--ah--inscrutable, let us say."

"That's just because he's part Indian," Evadna declared, with the
positiveness of youth and inexperience. "It isn't inscrutability, but
stupidity. I simply can't bear him. He's brutal, and rude. He told
me--told me, mind you--that he doesn't like women. He actually warned
me against thinking his politeness--if he ever is polite, which I
doubt--means more than just common humanity. He said he didn't want me
to misunderstand him and think he liked me, because he doesn't. He's a
perfect savage. I simply loathe him!"

"I'd certainly see that he repented, apologized, and vowed eternal
devotion," smiled Miss Georgie. "That should be my revenge."

"I don't want any revenge. I simply want nothing to do with him. I don't
want to speak to him, even."

"He's awfully good--looking," mused Miss Georgie.

"He looks to me just like an Indian. He ought to wear a blanket, like
the rest."

"Then you're no judge. His eyes are dark; but they aren't snaky, my
dear. His hair is real wavy, did you notice? And he has the dearest,
firm mouth. I noticed it particularly, because I admire a man who's
a man. He's one. He'd fight and never give up, once he started. And I
think"--she spoke hesitatingly--"I think he'd love--and never give up;
unless the loved one disappointed him in some way; and then he'd be
strong enough to go his way and not whine about it. I do hate a whiner!
Don't you?"

A shadow fell upon the platform outside the door, and Saunders appeared,
sidling deprecatingly into the room. He pulled off his black, slouched
hat and tucked it under his arm, smoothed his lank, black hair, ran his
palm down over his lank, unshaven face with a smoothing gesture, and
sidled over to the telegraph table.

"Here's the answer to that message," he said, in a limp tone, without
any especial emphasis or inflection. "If you ain't too busy, and could
send it right off--it's to go C.O.D. and make 'em repeat it, so as to be
sure--"

"Certainly, Mr. Saunders." Miss Georgie rose, the crisp, businesslike
operator, and went to the table. She took the sheet of paper from him
with her finger tips, as if he were some repulsive creature whose touch
would send her shuddering, and glanced at the message. "Write it on the
regular form," she said, and pushed a pad and pencil toward him. "I have
to place it on file." Whereupon she turned her back upon him, and stood
staring down the railroad track through the smoke-grimed window until a
movement warned her that he was through.

"Very well--that is all," she said, after she had counted the words
twice. "Oh--you want to wait for the repeat."

She laid her fingers on the key and sent the message in a whirl of
chittering little sounds, waited a moment while the sounder spoke,
paused, and then began a rapid clicking, which was the repeated message,
and wrote it down upon its form.

"There--if it's correct, that's all," she told him in a tone of
dismissal, and waited openly for him to go. Which he did, after a sly
glance at Evadna, a licking of pale lips, as if he would speak but
lacked the courage, and a leering grin at Miss Georgie.

He was no sooner over the threshold than she slammed the door shut,
in spite of the heat. She walked to the window, glanced down the track
again, turned to the table, and restlessly arranged the form pads,
sticking the message upon the file. She said something under her breath,
snapped the cover on the inkwell, sighed, patted her pompadour, and
finally laughed at her own uneasiness.

"Whenever that man comes in here," she observed impatiently, "I always
feel as if I ought to clean house after him. If ever there was a human
toad--or snake, or--ugh! And what does he mean--sending twenty-word
messages that don't make sense when you read them over, and getting
others that are just a lot of words jumbled together, hit or miss? I
wish--only it's unprofessional to talk about it--but, just the same,
there's some nasty business brewing, and I know it. I feel guilty,
almost, every time I send one of those cipher messages."

"Maybe he's a detective," Evadna hazarded.

"Maybe." Miss Georgie's tone, however, was extremely skeptical. "Only,
so far as I can discover, there's never been anything around here to
detect. Nobody has been murdered, or robbed, or kidnapped that I ever
heard of. Pete Hamilton says not. And--I wonder, now, if Saunders could
be watching somebody! Wouldn't it be funny, if old Pete himself turned
out to be a Jesse James brand of criminal? Can you imagine Pete doing
anything more brutal than lick a postage stamp?"

"He might want to," Evadna guessed shrewdly, "but it would be too much
trouble."

"Besides," Miss Georgie went on speculating, "Saunders never does
anything that anyone ever heard of. Sweeps out the store, they say--but
I'd hate to swear to that. _I_ never could catch it when it looked
swept--and brings the mail sack over here twice a day, and gets one
to take back. And reads novels. Of course, the man's half dead with
consumption; but no one would object to that, if these queer wires
hadn't commenced coming to him."

"Why don't you turn detective yourself and find out?" Plainly, Evadna
was secretly laughing at her perturbed interest in the matter.

"Thanks. I'm too many things already, and I haven't any false hair or
dark lantern. And, by the way, I'm going to have the day off,
Sunday. Charlie Green is coming up to relieve me. And--couldn't we do
something?" She glanced wearily around the little office. "Honest, I'd
go crazy if I stayed here much longer without a play spell. I want to
get clear out, away from the thing--where I can't even hear a train
whistle."

"Then you shall come down to the ranch the minute you can get away,
and we'll do something or go somewhere. The boys said they'd take me
fishing--but they only propose things so they can play jokes on me,
it seems to me. They'd make me fall in the river, or something, I just
know. But if you'd like to go along, there'd be two of us--"

"Chicken, we'll go. I ought to be ashamed to fish for an invitation the
way I did, but I'm not. I haven't been down to the Hart ranch yet; and
I've heard enough about it to drive me crazy with the desire to see it.
Your Aunt Phoebe I've met, and fallen in love with--that's a matter of
course. She told me to visit her just any time, without waiting to be
invited especially. Isn't she the dearest thing? Oh! that's a train
order, I suppose--sixteen is about due. Excuse me, chicken."

She was busy then until the train came screeching down upon the station,
paused there while the conductor rushed in, got a thin slip of paper for
himself and the engineer, and rushed out again. When the train grumbled
away from the platform and went its way, it left man standing there, a
fish-basket slung from one shoulder, a trout rod carefully wrapped in
its case in his hand, a box which looked suspiciously like a case of
some bottled joy at his feet, and a loose-lipped smile upon his face.

"Howdy, Miss Georgie?" he called unctuously through the open door.

Miss Georgie barely glanced at him from under her lashes, and her
shoulders indulged themselves in an almost imperceptible twitch.

"How do you do, Mr. Baumberger?" she responded coolly, and very, very
gently pushed the door shut just as he had made up his mind to enter.



CHAPTER VIII. THE AMIABLE ANGLER

Baumberger--Johannes was the name he answered to when any of his family
called, though to the rest of the world he was simply Baumberger--was
what he himself called a true sport. Women, he maintained, were very
much like trout; and so, when this particular woman calmly turned
her back upon the smile cast at her, he did not linger there angling
uselessly, but betook himself to the store, where his worldly position,
rather than his charming personality, might be counted upon to bring him
his meed of appreciation.

Good Indian and Jack, sitting side by side upon the porch and saying
very little, he passed by with a careless nod, as being not worth his
attention. Saunders, glancing up from the absorbing last chapter of
"The Brokenhearted Bride," also received a nod, and returned it
apathetically. Pete Hamilton, however, got a flabby handshake, a wheezy
laugh, and the announcement that he was down from Shoshone for a good,
gamy tussle with that four-pounder he had lost last time.

"And I don't go back till I get him--not if I stay here a week," he
declared, with jocular savagery. "Took half my leader and my pet fly--I
got him with a peacock-bodied gray hackle that I revised to suit my own
notions--and, by the great immortal Jehosaphat, he looked like a whale
when he jumped up clear of the riffle, turned over, and--" His flabby,
white hand made a soaring movement to indicate the manner in which the
four-pounder had vanished.

"Better take a day off and go with me, Pete," he suggested, getting an
unwieldy-looking pipe from the pocket of his canvas fishing-coat, and
opening his eyes at a trout-fly snagged in the mouthpiece. "Now, how
did that fly come there?" he asked aggrievedly, while he released it
daintily for all his fingers looked so fat and awkward. He stuck the
pipe in the corner of his mouth, and held up the fly with that interest
which seems fatuous to one who has no sporting blood in his veins.

"Last time I used that fly was when I was down here three weeks ago--the
day I lost the big one. Ain't it a beauty, eh? Tied it myself. And, by
the great immortal Jehosaphat, it fetches me the rainbows, too. Good
mind to try it on the big one. Don't see how I didn't miss it out of my
book--I must be getting absent-minded. Sign of old age, that. Failing
powers and the like." He shook his head reprovingly and grinned, as if
he considered the idea something of a joke. "Have to buck up--a lawyer
can't afford to grow absent-minded. He's liable to wake up some day and
find himself without his practice."

He got his fly-book from the basket swinging at his left hip, opened
it, turned the leaves with the caressing touch one gives to a cherished
thing, and very carefully placed the fly upon the page where it
belonged; gazed gloatingly down at the tiny, tufted hooks, with their
frail-looking five inches of gut leader, and then returned the book
fondly to the basket.

"Think I'll go on down to the Harts'," he said, "so as to be that much
closer to the stream. Daylight is going to find me whipping the riffles,
Peter. You won't come along? You better. Plenty of--ah--snake medicine,"
he hinted, chuckling so that the whole, deep chest of him vibrated. "No?
Well, you can let me have a horse, I suppose--that cow-backed sorrel
will do--he's gentle, I know. I think I'll go out and beg an invitation
from that Hart boy--never can remember those kids by name--Gene, is it,
or Jack?"

He went out upon the porch, laid a hand upon Jack's shoulder, and beamed
down upon him with what would have passed easily for real affection
while he announced that he was going to beg supper and a bed at the
ranch, and wanted to know, as a solicitous after-thought, if Jack's
mother had company, or anything that would make his presence a burden.

"Nobody's there--and, if there was, it wouldn't matter," Jack assured
him carelessly. "Go on down, if you want to. It'll be all right with
mother."

"One thing I like about fishing down here," chuckled Baumberger, his fat
fingers still resting lightly upon Jack's shoulder, "is the pleasure of
eating my fish at your house. There ain't another man, woman, or child
in all Idaho can fry trout like your mother. You needn't tell her I
said so--but it's a fact, just the same. She sure is a genius with the
frying-pan, my boy."

He turned and called in to Pete, to know if he might have the sorrel
saddled right away. Since Pete looked upon Baumberger with something of
the awed admiration which he would bestow upon the President, he felt
convinced that his horses were to be congratulated that any one of them
found favor in his eyes.

Pete, therefore, came as near to roaring at Saunders as his good nature
and his laziness would permit, and waited in the doorway until Saunders
had, with visible reluctance, laid down his book and started toward the
stable.

"Needn't bother to bring the horse down here, my man," Baumberger called
after him. "I'll get him at the stable and start from there. Well, wish
me luck, Pete--and say! I'll expect you to make a day of it with me
Sunday. No excuses, now. I'm going to stay over that long, anyhow.
Promised myself three good days--maybe more. A man's got to break away
from his work once in a while. If I didn't, life wouldn't be worth
living. I'm willing to grind--but I've got to have my playtime, too.
Say, I want you to try this rod of mine Sunday. You'll want one like it
yourself, if I'm any good at guessing. Just got it, you know--it's the
one I was talking to yuh about last time I was down.

"W-ell--I reckon my means of conveyance is ready for me--so long, Peter,
till Sunday. See you at supper, boys."

He hooked a thumb under the shoulder-strap of his basket, pulled it to a
more comfortable position, waved his hand in a farewell, which included
every living thing within sight of him, and went away up the narrow,
winding trail through the sagebrush to the stable, humming something
under his breath with the same impulse of satisfaction with life which
sets a cat purring.

Some time later, he appeared, in the same jovial mood, at the Hart
ranch, and found there the welcome which he had counted upon--the
welcome which all men received there upon demand.

When Evadna and Jack rode up, they found Mr. Baumberger taking his ease
in Peaceful's armchair on the porch, discussing, with animated gravity,
the ins and outs of county politics; his fishing-basket lying on its
flat side close to his chair, his rod leaning against the house at
his elbow, his heavy pipe dragging down one corner of his loose-lipped
mouth; his whole gross person surrounded by an atmosphere of prosperity
leading the simple life transiently and by choice, and of lazy enjoyment
in his own physical and mental well-being.



CHAPTER IX. PEPPAJEE JIM "HEAP SABES"

Peppajee Jim had meditated long in the shade of his wikiup, and now,
when the sun changed from a glaring ball of intense, yellow heat to a
sullen red disk hanging low over the bluffs of Snake River, he rose,
carefully knocked the ashes from his little stone pipe, with one
mechanical movement of his arms, gathered his blanket around him, pushed
a too-familiar dog from him with a shove of moccasined foot, and stalked
away through the sagebrush.

On the brow of the hill, just where the faint footpath dipped into a
narrow gully at the very edge, almost, of the bluff, he stopped, and
lifted his head for an unconsciously haughty stare at his surroundings.

Beneath him and half a mile or so up the river valley, the mellow green
of Peaceful's orchard was already taking to itself the vagueness of
evening shadows. Nearer, the meadow of alfalfa and clover lay like a
soft, green carpet of velvet, lined here and there with the irrigation
ditches which kept it so. And in the center of the meadow, a small
inclosure marked grimly the spot where lay the bones of old John Imsen.
All around the man-made oasis of orchards and meadows, the sage and the
sand, pushed from the river by the jumble of placer pits, emphasized by
sharp contrast what man may do with the most unpromising parts of the
earth's surface, once he sets himself heart and muscle to the task.

With the deliberation of his race, Peppajee stood long minutes
motionless, gazing into the valley before he turned with a true Indian
shrug and went down into the gully, up the steep slope beyond, and
then, after picking his way through a jumble of great bowlders, came
out eventually into the dust-ridden trail of the white man. Down that he
walked, erect, swift, purposeful, his moccasins falling always with the
precision of a wild animal upon the best footing among the loose
rocks, stubs of sage-roots, or patches of deep dust and sand beside the
wagon-road, his sharp, high-featured face set in the stony calm which
may hide a tumult of elemental passions beneath and give no sign.

Where the trail curved out sharply to round the Point o' Rocks, he left
it, and kept straight on through the sage, entered a rough pass through
the huge rock tongue, and came out presently to the trail again, a scant
two hundred yards from the Hart haystacks. When he reached the stable,
he stopped and looked warily about him, but there was no sight or sound
of any there save animals, and he went on silently to the house, his
shadow stretching long upon the ground before him until it merged into
the shade of the grove beyond the gate, and so was lost for that day.

"Hello, Peppajee," called Wally over his cigarette. "Just in time for
supper."

Peppajee grunted, stopped in the path two paces from the porch, folded
his arms inside his blanket, and stood so while his eyes traveled slowly
and keenly around the group lounging at ease above him. Upon the bulky
figure of Baumberger they dwelt longest, and while he looked his face
hardened until nothing seemed alive but his eyes.

"Peppajee, this my friend, Mr. Baumberger. You heap sabe
Baumberger--come all time from Shoshone, mebbyso catchum heap many
fish." Peaceful's mild, blue eyes twinkled over his old meerschaum.
He knew the ways of Indians, and more particularly he knew the ways of
Peppajee; Baumberger, he guessed shrewdly, had failed to find favor in
his eyes.

"Huh!" grunted Peppajee non-commitally, and made no motion to
shake hands, thereby confirming Peaceful's suspicion. "Me heap sabe
Man-that-catchum-fish." After which he stood as before, his arms folded
tightly in his blanket, his chin lifted haughtily, his mouth a straight,
stern line of bronze.

"Sit down, Peppajee. Bimeby eat supper," Peaceful invited pacifically,
while Baumberger chuckled at the Indian's attitude, which he attributed
to racial stupidity.

Peppajee did not even indicate that he heard or, hearing, understood.

"Bothered much with Injuns?" Baumberger asked carelessly, putting away
his pipe. "I see there's quite a camp of 'em up on the hill. Hope you've
got good watchdogs--they're a thieving lot. If they're a nuisance, Hart,
I'll see what can be done about slapping 'em back on their reservation,
where they belong. I happen to have some influence with the agent."

"I guess you needn't go to any trouble about it," Peaceful returned
dryly. "I've had worse neighbors."

"Oh--if you're stuck on their company!" laughed Baumberger wheezily.
"'Every fellow to his taste, as the old woman said when she kissed her
cow.' There may be good ones among the lot," he conceded politely when
he saw that his time-worn joke had met with disfavor, even by the boys,
who could--and usually did--laugh at almost anything. "They all look
alike to me, I must admit; I never had any truck with 'em."

"No, I guess not," Peaceful agreed in his slow way, holding his pipe
three inches from his face while he eyed Peppajee quizzically. "Don't
pay to have any truck with 'em while you feel that way about it."
He smoothed down his snow-white beard with his free hand, pushed the
pipe-stem between his teeth, and went on smoking.

"I never liked the breed, any way you look at 'em," Baumberger stated
calmly.

"Say, you'll queer yourself good and plenty, if you keep on," Wally
interrupted bluntly. "Peppajee's ears aren't plugged with cotton--are
they, Jim?"

Neither Peppajee nor Baumberger made reply of any sort, and Peaceful
turned his mild eyes reproachfully toward his untactful son. But the
supper summons clanged insistently from the iron triangle on the back
porch and saved the situation from becoming too awkward. Even Baumberger
let his tilted chair down upon its four legs with a haste for which his
appetite was not alone responsible, and followed the boys into the house
as if he were glad to escape from the steady, uncompromising stare of
the Indian.

"Better come and eat, Peppajee," Peaceful lingered upon the porch to
urge hospitably. "You no get mad. You come eat supper."

"No!" Peppajee jerked the word out with unmistakable finality. "No eat.
Bimeby mebbyso makum big talk yo'."

Peaceful studied his face, found it stern and unyielding, and nodded
assent. "All right. I eat, then I talk with you." He turned somewhat
reluctantly and followed the others inside, leaving Peppajee to pass the
time away as pleased him best.

Peppajee stood still for a moment listening to the clatter of dishes
from the kitchen, and then with dignity end deliberation seated himself
upon the lowest step of the porch, and, pulling his blanket tight around
him, resettled his disreputable old sombrero upon his head and stared
fixedly at the crimson glow which filled all the west and made even the
rugged bluff a wonderful thing of soft, rose tints and shadows of royal
purple. Peaceful, coming out half an hour after with Baumberger at his
heels, found him so and made a movement to sit down beside him. But
Peppajee rose and stalked majestically to the gate, then turned and
confronted the two.

"I talk yo'. Mebbyso no talk Man-with-big-belly." He waited impassively.

"All right, Jim." Peaceful turned apologetically toward his guest.
"Something he wants to tell me, Baumberger; kinda private, I guess. I'll
be back in a minute, anyway."

"Now don't mind me at all," Baumberger protested generously. "Go ahead
just as if I wasn't here--that's what'll please me best. I hope I ain't
so much of a stranger you've got to stand on ceremony. Go on, and find
out what the old buck wants; he's got something on his mind, that's
sure. Been stealing fruit, maybe, and wants to square himself before you
catch him at it." He laughed his laziest, and began leisurely to fill
his pipe.

Peppajee led the way to the stable, where he stopped short and faced
Peaceful, his arms folded, one foot thrust forward in the pose he
affected when about to speak of matters important.

"Long time ago, when yo' hair black," he began deliberately, with a
sonorous lingering upon his vowels, "yo' all time my frien'. I yo'
frien' all same. Yo' no likum otha white man. Yo' all time bueno. Yo'
house all same my wikiup. Me come eat at yo' house, talk yo' all same
brotha. Yo' boys all same my boys--all time my frien'. Me speakum all
time no lie, mebbyso."

"No," Peaceful assented unhesitatingly, "you no tell lies, Peppajee. We
good friends, many years."

"Huh! Man-that-catchum-fish, him no yo' frien'. Shont-isham. All time
him speakum lies--tellum frien' yo', no frien'. Yo' no more tellum stop
yo' wikiup. Kay bueno. Yo' thinkum frien'. All time him have bad heart
for yo'. Yo' got ranch. Got plenty hay, plenty apple, plenty all thing
for eat. All time him think bad for yo'. All time him likum steal yo'
ranch."

Peaceful laughed indulgently. "You no sabe," he explained. "Him like
my ranch. Him say, long time ago, pay much money for my ranch. Me no
sell--me like for keep all time. Baumberger good man. Him no steal my
ranch. Me got one paper from government--you sabe?--one paper say ranch
all time b'longum me all same. Big white chief say ranch b'longum me all
time. I die, ranch b'longum my boys. You sabe?"

Peppajee considered. "Me sabe," he said at length. "Me sabe paper, sabe
ranch all time b'longum yo'. All same, him like for ketchum yo' ranch.
Me hear much talk, him talk Man-that-coughs, tellum him ketchum ranch.
Much white man come, so--" He lifted one hand with thumb and fingers
outspread, made a downward gesture, and then raised three fingers.
"Catchum ranch."

Peaceful shook his head while he smiled. "No can do that. Mebbyso much
men come, heap fight, mebbyso killum me, ranch all same b'longum my
boys. Men that fights go to jail, mebbyso hangum." He indicated by signs
his exact meaning.

Peppajee scowled, and shook his head stubbornly. "Me heap sabe. All
same, ketchum yo' ranch. Man-that-catchum-fish kay bueno. Yo' thinkum
frien', yo' damfool. Him all same rattlesnake. Plenty foolum yo'. Yo'
see. Yo' thinkum Peppajee Jim heap big fool. Peaceful Hart, him all time
one heap big damfool. Him ketchum yo' ranch. Yo' see." He stopped and
stared hard at the dim bulk of the grove, whence came the faint odor of
smoke from Baumberger's pipe.

"Yo' be smart man," he added grimly, "yo' all same kickum dat mans
off yo' ranch." For emphasis he thrust out a foot vigorously in the
direction of the house and the man he maligned, and turned his face
toward camp. Peaceful watched until the blanketed form merged into the
dusk creeping over the valley, and when it disappeared finally into the
short cut through the sage, he shook his gray head in puzzlement over
the absurd warning, and went back to talk politics with Baumberger.



CHAPTER X. MIDNIGHT PROWLERS

Came midnight and moonlight together, and with them came also Good
Indian riding somewhat sullenly down the trail to the ranch. Sullen
because of Evadna's attitude, which seemed to him permanently
antagonistic, and for very slight cause, and which made the ranch an
unpleasant abiding place.

He decided that he would not stop at the ranch, but would go on up
the valley to where one Abuer Hicks lived by himself in a half-dugout,
half-board shack, and by mining a little where his land was untillable,
and farming a little where the soil took kindly to fruit and grasses,
managed to exist without too great hardship. The pension he received for
having killed a few of his fellow-men at the behest of his government
was devoted solely to liquid relief from the monotony of his life,
and welcome indeed was the man who brought him a bottle of joy between
times. Wherefore Good Indian had thoughtfully provided himself with a
quart or so and rode with his mind at ease so far as his welcome at the
Hicks dwelling place was concerned.

Once again the Peaceful Hart ranch lay in brooding silence under the
shadow of the bluff. A few crickets chirped shrilly along the trail, and
from their sudden hush as he drew near marked unerringly his passing.
Along the spring-fed creek the frogs croaked a tuneless medley before
him, and, like the crickets, stopped abruptly and waited in absolute
silence to take up their night chant again behind him. His horse stepped
softly in the deep sand of the trail, and, when he found that his rider
refused to let him stop at the stable-door, shook his head in mute
displeasure, and went quietly on. As he neared the silent house, the
faint creak of saddle-leather and the rattle of spur-chains against his
iron stirrups were smothered in the whispering of the treetops in the
grove, so that only the quick hushing of night noises alone betrayed him
to any wakeful ear.

He was guilty of staring hard at that corner of the house where he knew
Evadna slept, and of scowling over the vague disquiet which the thought
of her caused him. No girl had ever troubled his mind before. It annoyed
him that the face and voice of Evadna obtruded, even upon his thoughts
of other things.

The grove was quiet, and he could hear Gene's unmistakable snore over
by the pond--the only sound save the whispering of the trees, which
went on, unmindful of his approach. It was evident, he thought, that
the ghost was effectually laid--and on the heels of that, as he rode out
from the deep shade of the grove and on past the garden to the meadows
beyond, he wondered if, after all, it was again hardily wandering
through the night; for he thought he glimpsed a figure which flitted
behind a huge rock a few rods in advance of him, and his eyes were not
used to playing him tricks.

He gave a twitch of his fingers upon the reins, and turned from the
trail to investigate. He rode up to the rock, which stood like an island
of shade in that sea of soft moonlight, and, peering into the shadows,
spoke a guarded challenge:

"Who's that?"

A figure detached itself without sound from the blot of darkness there,
and stood almost at his stirrup.

"Yo' Good Injun--me likum for talk yo'."

Good Indian was conscious of a distinct disappointment, though he kept
it from his voice when he answered:

"Oh, it's you, Peppajee. What you do here? Why you no sleepum yo'
wikiup?"

Peppajee held up a slim, brown hand for silence, and afterward rested it
upon the saddle-fork.

"Yo' heap frien' Peaceful. Me heap frien' all same. Mebbyso we talk.
Yo' get down. No can see yo', mebbyso; yo' no likum bad man for se--" He
stepped back a pace, and let Good Indian dismount; then with a gesture
he led him back into the shadow of the rock.

"Well, what's the row?" Good Indian asked impatiently, and curiously as
well.

Peppajee spoke more hastily than was usual. "Me watchum
Man-that-catchum-fish. Him hee-eeap kay bueno. Me no sabe why him walk,
walk in night--me heap watchum."

"You mean Baumberger? He's all right. He comes down here to catchum many
fish--trout, up in the Malad, you sabe. Heap friend Peaceful. You no
likum?"

"Kay bueno." Peppajee rested a forefinger upon Good Indian's arm. "Sun
up there," he pointed high in the west. "Me go all same Hartley. Come
stable--Pete stable--me walkum close--no makum noise. Me hear talk.
Stoppum--no can see--me hear much bad talk. All time me hear, heap
likum for steal dis ranch. Me no sabe"--his tone was doubtful for a
space--"all same, me hear stealum this ranch. Man, you callum--"

"Baumberger?" suggested Grant.

"Him. All same Baumberga, him talk Man-that-coughs. All time say
stealum ranch. Makum much bad talk, them mans. Me come ranch, me tellum
Peaceful, him all time laugh, me. All time shakum head. Mebbyso thinkum
I lie--shont-isham!"

"What more you do?" Good Indian, at least, did not laugh.

"Me go camp. Me thinkum, thinkum all time. Dat man have bad heart. Kay
bueno. No can sleep--thinkum mebbyso do bad for Peaceful. Come ranch,
stop all time dark, all time heap watchum. Bimeby, mebbyso man--all same
yo' callum Baumberga--him come, look, so--" He indicated, by a great
craning of neck in all directions, the wariness of one who goes by
stealth. "Him walk still all time, go all time ova there." He swept his
arm toward the meadows. "Me go still, for watchum. Yo' come, mebbyso
make heap much noise--kay bueno. Dat mans, him hear, him heap scare.
Me tellum, yo' mebbyso go still." He folded his arms with a gesture of
finality, and stood statue-like in the deep gloom beside the rock.

Good Indian fingered his horse's mane while he considered the queer
story. There must be something in it, he thought, to bring Peppajee
from his blankets at midnight and to impel him, unfriendly as he usually
seemed, to confide his worry to him at once and without urging. And yet,
to steal the Peaceful Hart ranch--the idea was ludicrous. Still, there
was no harm in looking around a bit. He sought a sagebrush that suited
his purpose, tied his horse to it, stooped, and took the clanking
Mexican spurs from his heels, and touched Peppajee on the shoulder.

"All right," he murmured close to his ear, "we go see."

Without a word, Peppajee turned, and stole away toward the meadows,
keeping always in the shadow of rock or bush, silent-footed as a
prowling bobcat. Close behind him, not quite so silent because of his
riding-boots, which would strike now and then upon a rock, however
careful he was of his footing, went Good Indian.

So they circled the meadow, came into sand and sage beyond, sought there
unavailingly, went on to the orchard, and skirted it, keen of eye and
ear, struck quietly through it, and came at last to the place where,
the night before, Grant had overtaken Evadna--and it surprised him not a
little to feel his heart pounding unreasonably against his ribs when he
stopped beside the rock where they had sat and quarreled.

Peppajee looked back to see why Grant paused there, and then, wrapping
his blanket tightly around him, crawled through the fence, and went on,
keeping to the broad belt of shade cast upon the ground by the row
of poplars. Where the shade stopped abruptly, and beyond lay white
moonlight with the ranch buildings blotching it here and there, he
stopped and waited until Good Indian stood close beside him. Even then
he did not speak, but, freeing an arm slowly from the blanket folds,
pointed toward the stable.

Grant looked, saw nothing, stared harder, and so; feeling sure there
must be something hidden there, presently believed that a bit of the
shadow at that end which was next the corral wavered, stopped, and then
moved unmistakably. All the front of the stable was distinctly visible
in the white light, and, while they looked, something flitted across it,
and disappeared among the sage beyond the trail.

Again they waited; two minutes, three minutes, five. Then another shadow
detached itself slowly from the shade of the stable, hesitated, walked
out boldly, and crossed the white sand on the path to the house.
Baumberger it was, and he stopped midway to light his pipe, and so,
puffing luxuriously, went on into the blackness of the grove.

They heard him step softly upon the porch, heard also the bovine sigh
with which he settled himself in the armchair there. They caught the
aromatic odor of tobacco smoke ascending, and knew that his presence
there had all at once become the most innocent, the most natural
thing in the world; for any man, waking on such a night, needs no
justification for smoking a nocturnal pipe upon the porch while he gazes
dreamily out upon the moon-bathed world around him.

Peppajee touched Grant's arm, and turned back, skirting the poplars
again until they were well away from the house, and there was no
possibility of being heard. He stopped there, and confronted the other.

"What for you no stoppum stable?" he questioned bluntly. "What for you
no stoppum ranch, for sleepum?"

"I go for stoppum Hicks' ranch," said Good Indian, without any attempt
at equivocation.

Peppajee grunted. "What for yo' no stoppum all same Peaceful?"

Good Indian scorned a subterfuge, and spoke truly. "That girl, Evadna,
no likum me. All time mad me. So I no stoppum ranch, no more."

Peppajee grinned briefly and understandingly, and nodded his head. "Me
heap sabe. Yo' all time heap like for catchum that girl, be yo' squaw.
Bimeby that girl heap likum yo'. Me sabe." He stood a moment staring at
the stars peeping down from above the rim-rock which guarded the bluff.
"All same, yo' no go stoppum Hicks," he commanded. "Yo' stoppum dis
ranch all time. Yo' all time watchum man--yo' callum Baumberga." He
seemed to remember and speak the name with some difficulty. "Where
him go, yo' go, for heap watchum. All time mebbyso me watchum
Man-that-coughs. Me no sabe catchum ranch--all same, me watchum. Them
mans heap kay bueno. Yo' bet yo' life!"

A moment he stood there after he was through speaking, and then he was
not there. Good Indian did not hear him go, though he had stood
beside him; neither could he, catching sight of a wavering shadow, say
positively that there went Peppajee.

He waited for a space, stole back to where he could hear any sound
from the porch even if he could not see, and when he was certain that
Baumberger had gone back to his bed, he got his horse, took him by a
roundabout way to the stable, and himself slept in a haystack. At least,
he made himself a soft place beside one, and lay there until the sun
rose, and if he did not sleep it was not his fault, for he tried hard
enough.

That is how Good Indian came to take his usual place at the breakfast
table, and to touch elbows with Evadna and to greet her with punctilious
politeness and nothing more. That is why he got out his fishing-tackle
and announced that he thought he would have a try at some trout himself,
and so left the ranch not much behind Baumberger. That is why he
patiently whipped the Malad riffles until he came up with the portly
lawyer from Shoshone, and found him gleeful over a full basket and
bubbling with innocent details of this gamy one and that one still
gamier. They rode home together, and together they spent the hot
afternoon in the cool depths of the grove.

By sundown Good Indian was ready to call himself a fool and Peppajee Jim
a meddlesome, visionary old idiot. Steal the Peaceful Hart ranch? The
more he thought of it, the more ridiculous the thing seemed.



CHAPTER XI. "YOU CAN'T PLAY WITH ME"

Good Indian was young, which means that he was not always logical,
nor much given to looking very far into the future except as he was
personally concerned in what he might see there. By the time Sunday
brought Miss Georgie Howard and the stir of preparation for the fishing
trip, he forgot that he had taken upon himself the responsibility of
watching the obviously harmless movements of Baumberger, or had taken
seriously the warnings of Peppajee Jim; or if he did not forget, he at
least pushed it far into the background of his mind with the assertion
that Peppajee was a meddlesome old fool and Baumberger no more designing
than he appeared--which was not at all.

What did interest him that morning was the changeful mood of Evadna;
though he kept his interest so well hidden that no one suspected it--not
even the young lady herself. It is possible that if Evadna had known
that Good Indian's attitude of calm oblivion to her moods was only a
mask, she might have continued longer her rigorous discipline of averted
face and frigid tones.

As it was, she thawed toward him as he held himself more aloof, until
she actually came to the point of addressing him directly, with a
flicker of a smile for good measure; and, although he responded with
stiff civility, he felt his blood pulse faster, and suddenly conceived
the idea that women are like the creatures of the wild. If one is very
quiet, and makes no advance whatever, the hunted thing comes closer and
closer, and then a sudden pounce--he caught his breath. After that he
was wary and watchful and full of his purpose.

Within ten minutes Evadna walked into the trap. They had started, and
were fifty yards up the trail, when Phoebe shouted frantically after
them. And because she was yet a timid rider and feared to keep the pace
set by the others, it was Evadna who heard and turned back to see what
was the trouble. Aunt Phoebe was standing beside the road, waving a
flask.

"It's the cream for your coffee," she cried, going to meet Evadna. "You
can slip it into your jacket-pocket, can't you, honey? Huckleberry is so
steady--and you won't do any wild riding like the boys."

"I've got my veil and a box of bait and two handkerchiefs and a piece of
soap," the girl complained, reaching down for the bottle, nevertheless.
"But I can carry it in my hand till I overtake somebody to give it to."

The somebody proved to be Good Indian, who had found it necessary to
stop and inspect carefully the left forefoot of his horse, without
appearing aware of the girl's approach. She ambled up at Huckleberry's
favorite shuffling gait, struck him with her whip--a blow which would
not have perturbed a mosquito--when he showed a disposition to stop
beside Grant, and then, when Huckleberry reluctantly resumed his pacing,
pulled him up, and looked back at the figure stooped over the hoof he
held upon his knee. He was digging into the caked dirt inside the hoof
with his pocketknife, and, though Evadna waited while she might have
spoken a dozen words, he paid not the slightest attention--and that in
spite of the distinct shadow of her head and shoulders which lay at his
feet.

"Oh--Grant," she began perfunctorily, "I'm sorry to trouble you--but do
you happen to have an empty pocket?"

Good Indian gave a final scrape with his knife, and released the foot,
which Keno immediately stamped pettishly into the dust. He closed the
knife, after wiping the blade upon his trousers leg, and returned it to
his pocket before he so much as glanced toward her.

"I may have. Why?" He picked up the bridle-reins, caught the
saddle-horn, and thrust his toe into the stirrup. From under his
hat-brim he saw that she was pinching her under lip between her teeth,
and the sight raised his spirits considerably.

"Oh, nothing. Aunt Phoebe called me back, and gave me a bottle of cream,
is all. I shall have to carry it in my hand, I suppose." She twitched
her shoulders, and started Huckleberry off again. She had called him
Grant, instead of the formal Mr. Imsen she had heretofore clung to, and
he had not seemed to notice it even.

He mounted with perfectly maddening deliberation, but for all that he
overtook her before she had gone farther than a few rods, and he pulled
up beside her with a decision which caused Huckleberry to stop
also; Huckleberry, it must be confessed, was never known to show any
reluctance in that direction when his head was turned away from home. He
stood perfectly still while Good Indian reached out a hand.

"I'll carry it--I'm more used to packing bottles," he announced gravely.

"Oh, but if you must carry it in your hand, I wouldn't dream of--" She
was holding fast the bottle, and trying to wear her Christmas-angel
look.

Good Indian laid hold of the flask, and they stood there stubbornly
eying each other.

"I thought you wanted me to carry it," he said at last, pulling harder.

"I merely asked if you had an empty pocket." Evadna clung the tighter.

"Now, what's the use--"

"Just what I was thinking!" Evadna was so impolite as to interrupt him.

Good Indian was not skilled in the management of women, but he knew
horses, and to his decision he added an amendment. Instinctively he
followed the method taught him by experience, and when he fancied he
saw in her eyes a sign of weakening, he followed up the advantage he had
gained.

"Let go--because I'm going to have it anyway, now," he said quietly,
and took the flask gently from her hands. Then he smiled at her for
yielding, and his smile was a revelation to the girl, and brought the
blood surging up to her face. She rode meekly beside him at the pace
he himself set--which was not rapid, by any means. He watched her with
quick, sidelong glances, and wondered whether he would dare say what he
wanted to say--or at least a part of it.

She was gazing with a good deal of perseverance at the trail, down
the windings of which the others could be seen now and then galloping
through the dust, so that their progress was marked always by a
smothering cloud of gray. Then she looked at Grant unexpectedly, met one
of his sharp glances, and flushed hotly again.

"How about this business of hating each other, and not speaking except
to please Aunt Phoebe?" he demanded, with a suddenness which startled
himself. He had been thinking it, but he hadn't intended to say it until
the words spoke themselves. "Are we supposed to keep on acting the fool
indefinitely?"

"I was not aware that I, at least, was acting the fool," she retorted,
with a washed-out primness.

"Oh, I can't fight the air, and I'm not going to try. What I've got
to say, I prefer to say straight from the shoulder. I'm sick of this
standing off and giving each other the bad eye over nothing. If we're
going to stay on the same ranch, we might as well be friends. What do
you say?"

For a time he thought she was not going to say anything. She was staring
at the dust-cloud ahead, and chewing absently at the corner of her under
lip, and she kept it up so long that Good Indian began to scowl and call
himself unseemly names for making any overture whatever. But, just as he
turned toward her with lips half opened for a bitter sentence, he saw a
dimple appear in the cheek next to him, and held back the words.

"You told me you didn't like me," she reminded, looking at him briefly,
and afterward fumbling her reins. "You can't expect a girl--"

"I suppose you don't remember coming up to me that first night, and
calling me names, and telling me how you hated me, and--and winding up
by pinching me?" he insinuated with hypocritical reproach, and felt of
his arm. "If you could see the mark--" he hinted shamelessly.

Evadna replied by pushing up her sleeve and displaying a scratch at
least an inch in length, and still roughened and red. "I suppose you
don't remember trying to MURDER me?" she inquired, sweetly triumphant.
"If you could shoot as well as Jack, I'd have been killed very likely.
And you'd be in jail this minute," she added, with virtuous solemnity.

"But you're not killed, and I'm not in jail."

"And I haven't told a living soul about it--not even Aunt Phoebe,"
Evadna remarked, still painfully virtuous. "If I had--"

"She'd have wondered, maybe, what you were doing away down there in
the middle of the night," Good Indian finished. "I didn't tell a soul,
either, for that matter."

They left the meadowland and the broad stretch of barren sand and sage,
and followed, at a leisurely pace, the winding of the trail through
the scarred desolation where the earth had been washed for gold. Evadna
stared absently at the network of deep gashes, evidently meditating
very seriously. Finally she turned to Grant with an honest impulse of
friendliness.

"Well, I'm sure I'm willing to bury the tomahawk--er--that is, I mean--"
She blushed hotly at the slip, and stammered incoherently.

"Never mind." His eyes laughed at her confusion. "I'm not as bad as
all that; it doesn't hurt my feelings to have tomahawks mentioned in my
presence."

Her cheeks grew redder, if that were possible, but she made no attempt
to finish what she had started to say.

Good Indian rode silent, watching her unobtrusively and wishing he knew
how to bring the conversation by the most undeviating path to a certain
much-desired conclusion. After all, she was not a wild thing, but a
human being, and he hesitated. In dealing with men, he had but
one method, which was to go straight to the point regardless of
consequences. So he half turned in the saddle and rode with one foot
free of the stirrup that he might face her squarely.

"You say you're willing to bury the tomahawk; do you mean it?" His
eyes sought hers, and when they met her glance held it in spite of her
blushes, which indeed puzzled him. But she did not answer immediately,
and so he repeated the question.

"Do you mean that? We've been digging into each other pretty
industriously, and saying how we hate each other--but are you willing
to drop it and be friends? It's for you to say--and you've got to say it
now."

Evadna hung up her head at that. "Are you in the habit of laying down
the law to everyone who will permit it?" she evaded.

"Am I to take it for granted you meant what you said?" He stuck
stubbornly to the main issue. "Girls seem to have a way of saying
things, whether they mean anything or not. Did you?"

"Did I what?" She was wide-eyed innocence again.

Good Indian muttered something profane, and kicked his horse in the
ribs. When it had taken no more than two leaps forward, however, he
pulled it down to a walk again, and his eyes boded ill for the misguided
person who goaded him further. He glanced at the girl sharply.

"This thing has got to be settled right now, without any more fooling
or beating about the bush," he said--and he said it so quietly that she
could scarcely be blamed for not realizing what lay beneath. She was
beginning to recover her spirits and her composure, and her whole
attitude had become demurely impish.

"Settle it then, why don't you?" she taunted sweetly. "I'm sure I
haven't the faintest idea what there is to settle--in that solemn
manner. I only know we're a mile behind the others, and Miss Georgie
will be wondering--"

"You say I'm to settle it, the way I want it settled?"

If Evadna did not intend anything serious, she certainly was a fool not
to read aright his ominously calm tone and his tensely quiet manner. She
must have had some experience in coquetry, but it is very likely that
she had never met a man just like this one. At all events, she tilted
her blonde head, smiled at him daringly, and then made a little grimace
meant to signify her defiance of him and his unwarranted earnestness.

Good Indian leaned unexpectedly, caught her in his arms, and kissed her
three times upon her teasing, smiling mouth, and while she was gasping
for words to voice her amazement he drew back his head, and gazed
sternly into her frightened eyes.

"You can't play with ME," he muttered savagely, and kissed her again.
"This is how I settle it. You've made me want you for mine. It's got to
be love or--hate now. There isn't anything between, for me and you." His
eyes passed hungrily from her quivering lips to her eyes, and the glow
within his own made her breath come faster. She struggled weakly to free
herself, and his clasp only tightened jealously.

"If you had hated me, you wouldn't have stopped back there, and spoken
to me," he said, the words coming in a rush. "Women like to play with
love, I think. But you can't play with me. I want you. And I'm going to
have you. Unless you hate me. But you don't. I'd stake my life on it."
And he kissed her again.

Evadna reached up, felt for her hat, and began pulling it straight,
and Good Indian, recalled to himself by the action, released her with
manifest reluctance. He felt then that he ought never to let her go out
of his arms; it was the only way, it seemed to him, that he could
be sure of her. Evadna found words to express her thoughts, and her
thoughts were as wholly conventional as was the impulse to straighten
her hat.

"We've only known each other a week!" she cried tremulously, while
her gloved fingers felt inquiringly for loosened hairpins. "You've no
right--you're perfectly horrid! You take everything for granted--"

Good Indian laughed at her, a laugh of pure, elemental joy in life and
in love.

"A man's heart does not beat by the calendar. Nature made the heart to
beat with love, ages before man measured time, and prattled of hours and
days and weeks," he retorted. "I'm not the same man I was a week ago.
Nor an hour ago. What does it matter, I am--the man I am NOW." He
looked at her more calmly. "An hour ago," he pointed out, "I didn't
dream I should kiss you. Nor you, that you would let me do it."

"I didn't! I couldn't help myself. You--oh, I never saw such a--a
brute!" The tears in her eyes were, perhaps, tears of rage at the
swiftness with which he had mastered the situation and turned it in a
breath from the safe channel of petty argument. She struck Huckleberry a
blow with her whip which sent that astonished animal galloping down the
slope before them, his ears laid back and his white eyelashes blinking
resentment against the outrage.

Good Indian laughed aloud, spurred Keno into a run, and passed her with
a scurry of dust, a flash of white teeth and laughing black eyes, and a
wave of his free hand in adieu. He was still laughing when he overtook
the others, passed by the main group, and singled out Jack, his
particular chum. He refused to explain either his hurry or his mirth
further than to fling out a vague sentence about a race, and thereafter
he ambled contentedly along beside Jack in the lead, and told how he had
won a hundred and sixty dollars in a crap game the last time he was in
Shoshone, and how he had kept on until he had "quit ten dollars in
the hole." The rest of the boys, catching a few words here and there,
crowded close, and left the two girls to themselves, while Good Indian
recounted in detail the fluctuations of the game; how he had seesawed
for an hour, winning and losing alternately; and how his luck had
changed suddenly just when he had made up his mind to play a five-dollar
gold piece he had in his hand and quit.

"I threw naturals three times in succession," he said, "and let my bets
ride. Then I got Big Dick, made good, and threw another natural. I was
seeing those Spanish spurs and that peach of a headstall in Fernando's
by that time; seeing them on Keno and me--they're in the window yet,
Jack, and I went in when I first hit town and looked them over and
priced them; a hundred and fifty, just about what we guessed he'd
hold them at. And say, those conchos--you remember the size of 'em,
Jack?--they're solid silver, hammered out and engraved by hand. Those
Mexicans sure do turn out some fine work on their silver fixings!" He
felt in his pocket for a match.

"Pity I didn't let well enough alone," he went on. "I had the price of
the outfit, and ten dollars over. But then I got hoggish. I thought I
stood a good chance of making seven lucky passes straight--I did once,
and I never got over it, I guess. I was going to pinch down to ten--but
I didn't; I let her ride. And SHOT CRAPS!"

He drew the match along the stamped saddle-skirt behind the cantle,
because that gave him a chance to steal a look behind him without being
caught in the act. Good, wide hat-brims have more uses than to shield
one's face from the sun. He saw that Evadna was riding in what looked
like a sulky silence beside her friend, but he felt no compunction for
what he had done; instead he was exhilarated as with some heady wine,
and he did not want to do any thinking about it--yet. He did not even
want to be near Evadna. He faced to the front, and lighted his cigarette
while he listened to the sympathetic chorus from the boys.

"What did you do then?" asked Gene.

"Well, I'd lost the whole blamed chunk on a pair of measly aces," he
said. "I was pretty sore by that time, I'm telling you! I was down
to ten dollars, but I started right in to bring back that hundred
and sixty. Funny, but I felt exactly as if somebody had stolen that
headstall and spurs right out of my hand, and I just had to get it
back pronto. I started in with a dollar, lost it on craps--sixes, that
time--sent another one down the same trail trying to make Little Joe
come again, third went on craps, fourth I doubled on nine, lost 'em both
on craps--say, I never looked so many aces and sixes in the face in my
life! It was sure kay bueno, the luck I had that night. I got up broke,
and had to strike Riley for money to get out of town with."

So for a time he managed to avoid facing squarely this new and very
important factor which must henceforth have its place in the problem of
his life.



CHAPTER XII. "THEM DAMN SNAKE"

Three hundred yards up the river, in the shade of a huge bowlder, round
an end of which the water hurried in a green swirl that it might the
sooner lie quiet in the deep, dark pool below, Good Indian, picking his
solitary way over the loose rocks, came unexpectedly upon Baumberger,
his heavy pipe sagging a corner of his flabby mouth, while he
painstakingly detached a fly from his leader, hooked it into the proper
compartment of his fly-book, and hesitated over his selection of another
to take its place. Absorption was writ deep on his gross countenance,
and he recognized the intruder by the briefest of flickering glances and
the slightest of nods.

"Keep back from that hole, will yuh?" he muttered, jerking his head
toward the still pool. "I ain't tried it yet."

Good Indian was not particularly interested in his own fishing. The
sight of Baumberger, bulking there in the shade with his sagging cheeks
and sagging pipe, his flopping old hat and baggy canvas fishing-coat,
with his battered basket slung over his slouching shoulder and sagging
with the weight of his catch; the sloppy wrinkles of his high, rubber
boots shining blackly from recent immersion in the stream, caught his
errant attention, and stayed him for a few minutes to watch.

Loosely disreputable looked Lawyer Baumberger, from the snagged hole
in his hat-crown where a wisp of graying hair fluttered through, to the
toes of his ungainly, rubber-clad feet; loosely disreputable, but not
commonplace and not incompetent. Though his speech might be a slovenly
mumble, there was no purposeless fumbling of the fingers that chose a
fly and knotted it fast upon the leader. There was no bungling movement
of hand or foot when he laid his pipe upon the rock, tiptoed around the
corner, sent a mechanical glance upward toward the swaying branches of
an overhanging tree, pulled out his six feet of silk line with a sweep
of his arm, and with a delicate fillip, sent the fly skittering over the
glassy center of the pool.

Good Indian, looking at him, felt instinctively that a part, at least,
of the man's nature was nakedly revealed to him then. It seemed scarcely
fair to read the lust of him and the utter abandonment to the hazard of
the game. Pitiless he looked, with clenched teeth just showing
between the loose lips drawn back in a grin that was half-snarl,
half-involuntary contraction of muscles sympathetically tense.

That was when a shimmering thing slithered up, snapped at the fly, and
flashed away to the tune of singing reel and the dance of the swaying
rod. The man grew suddenly cruel and crafty and full of lust; and Good
Indian, watching him, was conscious of an inward shudder of repulsion.
He had fished all his life--had Good Indian--and had found joy in
the sport. And here was he inwardly condemning a sportsman who stood
self-revealed, repelling, hateful; a man who gloated over the struggle
of something alive and at his mercy; to whom sport meant power indulged
with impunity. Good Indian did not try to put the thing in words, but he
felt it nevertheless.

"Brute!" he muttered aloud, his face eloquent of cold disgust.

At that moment Baumberger drew the tired fish gently into the shallows,
swung him deftly upon the rocks, and laid hold of him greedily.

"Ain't he a beaut?" he cried, in his wheezy chuckle. "Wait a minute
while I weigh him. He'll go over a pound, I'll bet money on it."
Gloatingly he held it in his hands, removed the hook, and inserted under
the gills the larger one of the little scales he carried inside his
basket.

"Pound and four ounces," he announced, and slid the fish into his
basket. He was the ordinary, good-natured, gross Baumberger now. He
reached for his pipe, placed it in his mouth, and held out a hand to
Good Indian for a match.

"Say, young fella, have you got any stand-in with your noble red
brothers?" he asked, after he had sucked life into the charred tobacco.

"Cousins twice or three times removed, you mean," said Good Indian
coldly, too proud and too lately repelled to meet the man on friendly
ground. "Why do you ask?"

Baumberger eyed him speculatively while he smoked, and chuckled to
himself.

"One of 'em--never mind placing him on his own p'ticular limb of the
family tree--has been doggin' me all morning," he said at last, and
waved a fishy hand toward the bluff which towered high above them. "Saw
him when I was comin' up, about sunrise, pokin' along behind me in the
sagebrush. Didn't think anything of that--thought maybe he was hunting
or going fishing--but he's been sneakin' around behind me ever since. I
don't reckon he's after my scalp--not enough hair to pay--but I'd like
to know what the dickens he does mean."

"Nothing probably," Good Indian told him shortly, his eyes nevertheless
searching the rocks for a sight of the watcher.

"Well, I don't much like the idea," complained Baumberger, casting an
eye aloft in fear of snagging his line when he made another cast. "He
was right up there a few minutes ago." He pointed his rod toward a
sun-ridden ridge above them. "I got a flicker of his green blanket when
he raised up and scowled down at me. He ducked when he saw me turn my
head--looked to me like the surly buck that blew in to the ranch the
night I came; Jim something-or-other. By the great immortal Jehosaphat!"
he swore humorously, "I'd like to tie him up in his dirty blanket and
heave him into the river--only it would kill all the fish in the Malad."

Good Indian laughed.

"Oh, I know it's funny, young fella," Baumberger growled. "About as
funny as being pestered by a mosquito buzzing under your nose when
you're playing a fish that keeps cuttin' figure eights in a hole the
size uh that one there."

"I'll go up and take a look," Good Indian offered carelessly.

"Well, I wish you would. I can't keep my mind on m' fishing--just
wondering what the deuce he's after. And say! You tell him I'll stand
him on his off ear if I catch him doggie' me ag'in. Folks come with
yuh?" he remembered to ask as he prepared for another cast into the
pool.

"They're down there getting a campfire built, ready to fry what fish
they catch," Good Indian informed him, as he turned to climb the bluff.
"They're going to eat dinner under that big ledge by the rapids. You
better go on down."

He stood for a minute, and watched Baumberger make a dexterous cast,
which proved fruitless, before he began climbing up the steep slope of
jumbled bowlders upon which the bluff itself seemed to rest. He was
not particularly interested in his quest, but he was in the mood for
purposeless action; he still did not want to think.

He climbed negligently, scattering loose rocks down the hill behind
him. He had no expectation of coming upon Peppajee--unless Peppajee
deliberately put himself in his way--and so there was no need of
caution. He stopped once, and stood long minutes with his head turned to
catch the faint sound of high-keyed laughter and talk which drifted
up to him. If he went higher, he thought, he might get a glimpse of
them--of her, to tell his thought honestly. Whereupon he forgot all
about finding and expostulating with Peppajee, and thought only a point
of the ridge which would give him a clear view downstream.

To be sure, he might as easily have retraced his steps and joined the
group, and seen every changing look in her face. But he did not want
to be near her when others were by; he wanted her to himself, or not at
all. So he went on, while the sun beat hotly down upon him and the rocks
sent up dry waves of heat like an oven.

A rattlesnake buzzed its strident warning between two rocks, but before
he turned his attention to the business of killing it, the snake had
crawled leisurely away into a cleft, where he could not reach it with
the stones he threw. His thoughts, however, were brought back to his
surroundings so that he remembered Peppajee. He stood still, and scanned
carefully the jumble of rocks and bowlders which sloped steeply down to
the river, looking for a betraying bit of color or dirty gray hat-crown.

"But I could look my eyes out and welcome, if he didn't want to be
seen," he concluded, and sat down while he rolled a cigarette. "And
I don't know as I want to see him, anyway." Still, he did not move
immediately. He was in the shade, which was a matter for congratulation
on such a day. He had a cigarette between his lips, which made
for comfort; and he still felt the exhilarating effects of his
unpremeditated boldness, without having come to the point of sober
thinking. He sat there, and blew occasional mouthfuls of smoke into
the quivering heat waves, and stared down at the river rushing over the
impeding rocks as if its very existence depended upon reaching as soon
as possible the broader sweep of the Snake.

He finished the first cigarette, and rolled another from sheer force of
habit rather than because he really wanted one. He lifted one foot, and
laid it across his knee, and was drawing a match along the sole of his
boot when his eyes chanced to rest for a moment upon a flutter of green,
which showed briefly around the corner of a great square rock poised
insecurely upon one corner, as if it were about to hurl its great bulk
down upon the river it had watched so long. He held the blazing match
poised midway to its destination while he looked; then he put it to the
use he had meant it for, pulled his hat-brim down over his right eye and
ear to shield them from the burn of the sun, and went picking his way
idly over to the place.

"HUL-lo!" he greeted, in the manner of one who refuses to acknowledge
the seriousness of a situation which confronts him suddenly. "What's the
excitement?"

There was no excitement whatever. There was Peppajee, hunched up against
the rock in that uncomfortable attitude which permits a man to come
at the most intimate relations with the outside of his own ankle, upon
which he was scowling in seeming malignity. There was his hunting-knife
lying upon a flat stone near to his hand, with a fresh red blotch upon
the blade, and there was his little stone pipe clenched between his
teeth and glowing red within the bowl. Also there was the ankle, purple
and swollen from the ligature above it--for his legging was off and torn
into strips which formed a bandage, and a splinter of rock was twisted
ingeniously in the wrappings for added tightness. From a crisscross of
gashes a sluggish, red stream trickled down to the ankle-bone, and from
there drip-dropped into a tiny, red pool in the barren, yellow soil.

"Catchum rattlesnake bite?" queried Good Indian inanely, as is the habit
of the onlooker when the scene shouts forth eloquently its explanation,
and questions are almost insultingly superfluous.

"Huh!" grunted Peppajee, disdaining further speech upon the subject, and
regarded sourly the red drip.

"Want me to suck it?" ventured Good Indian unenthusiastically, eying the
wound.

"Huh!" Peppajee removed the pipe, his eyes still upon his ankle. "Plenty
blood come, mebbyso." To make sure, however, he kneaded the swollen
flesh about the wound, thus accelerating slightly the red drip.

Then deliberately he took another turn with the rock, sending the
buckskin thongs deeper into the flesh, and held the burning pipe against
the skin above the wound until Good Indian sickened and turned away his
head. When he looked again, Peppajee was sucking hard at the pipe, and
gazing impersonally at the place. He bent again, and hid the glow of his
pipe against his ankle. His thin lips tightened while he held it there,
but the lean, brown fingers were firm as splinters of the rock behind
him. When the fire cooled, he fanned it to life again with his breath,
and when it winked redly at him he laid it grimly against his flesh.

So, while Good Indian stood and looked on with lips as tightly drawn
as the other's, he seared a circle around the wound--a circle which bit
deep and drew apart the gashes like lips opened for protest. He regarded
critically his handiwork, muttered a "Bueno" under his breath, knocked
the ashes from his pipe, and returned it to some mysterious hiding-place
beneath his blanket. Then he picked up his moccasin.

"Them damn' snake, him no speakum," he observed disgustedly. "Heap fool
me; him biteum"--he made a stabbing gesture with thumb and finger in
the air by way of illustration--"then him go quick." He began gingerly
trying to force the moccasin upon his foot, his mouth drawn down with
the look of one who considers that he has been hardly used.

"How you get home?" Good Indian's thoughts swung round to practical
things. "You got horse?"

Peppajee shook his head, reached for his knife, and slit the moccasin
till it was no more than a wrapping. "Mebbyso heap walk," he stated
simply.

"Mebbyso you won't do anything of the kind," Good Indian retorted. "You
come down and take a horse. What for you all time watchum Baumberger?"
he added, remembering then what had brought them both upon the bluff.
"Baumberger all time fish--no more." He waved his hand toward the Malad.
"Baumberger bueno--catchum fish--no more."

Peppajee got slowly and painfully upon his feet--rather, upon one foot.
When Good Indian held out a steadying arm, he accepted it, and leaned
rather heavily.

"Yo' eyes sick," said Peppajee, and grinned sardonically. "Yo' eyes
see all time Squaw-with-sun-hair. Fillum yo' eyes, yo' see notting. Yo'
catchum squaw, bimeby mebbyso see plenty mo'. Me no catchum sick eye.
Mebbyso me see heap plenty."

"What you see, you all time watchum Baumberger?"

But Peppajee, hobbling where he must walk, crawling where he might,
sliding carefully where a slanting bowlder offered a few feet of smooth
descent, and taking hold of Good Indian's offered arm when necessity
impelled him, pressed his thin lips together, and refused to answer. So
they came at last to the ledge beside the rapids, where a thin wisp of
smoke waved lazily in the vagrant breeze which played with the ripples
and swayed languidly the smaller branches of the nearby trees.

Only Donny was there, sitting disgruntled upon the most comfortable
rock he could find, sulking because the others had taken all the
fishing-tackle that was of any account, and had left him to make shift
with one bent, dulled hook, a lump of fat pork, and a dozen feet of
line.

"And I can catch more fish than anybody in the bunch!" he began
complainingly and without preface, waving a dirty hand contemptuously at
the despised tackle when the two came slowly up. "That's the way it goes
when you take a lot of girls along! They've got to have the best rods
and tackle, and all they'll do will be to snag lines and lose leaders
and hooks, and giggle alla squeal. Aw--DARN girls!"

"And I'm going to pile it on still thicker, Donny!" Good Indian grinned
down at him. "I'm going to swipe your Pirate Chief for a while, till I
take Peppajee into camp. He's gentle, and Peppajee's got a snake-bite.
I'll be back before you get ready to go home."

"I'm ready to go home right now," growled Donny, sinking his chin
between his two palms. "But I guess the walkin' ain't all taken up."

Good Indian regarded him frowningly, gave a little snort, and turned
away. Donny in that mood was not to be easily placated, and certainly
not to be ignored. He went over to the little flat, and selected Jack's
horse, saddled him, and discovered that it had certain well-defined race
prejudices, and would not let Peppajee put foot to the stirrup. Keno
he knew would be no more tractable, so that he finally slapped Jack's
saddle on Huckleberry, and so got Peppajee mounted and headed toward
camp.

"You tell Jack I borrowed his saddle and Huckleberry," he called out to
the drooping little figure on the rock. "But I'll get back before they
want to go home."

But Donny was glooming over his wrongs, and neither heard nor wanted
to hear. Having for his legacy a temper cumulative in its heat, he was
coming rapidly to the point where he, too, started home, and left no
word or message behind; a trivial enough incident in itself, but one
which opened the way for some misunderstanding and fruitless speculation
upon the part of Evadna.



CHAPTER XIII. CLOUD-SIGN VERSUS CUPID

Few men are ever called upon by untoward circumstance to know the
sensations caused by rattlesnake bite, knife gashes, impromptu
cauterization, and, topping the whole, the peculiar torture of congested
veins and swollen muscles which comes from a tourniquet. The
feeling must be unpleasant in the extreme, and the most morbid of
sensation-seekers would scarcely put himself in the way of that
particular experience.

Peppajee Jim, therefore, had reason in plenty for glowering at the world
as he saw it that day. He held Huckleberry rigidly down to his laziest
amble that the jar of riding might be lessened, kept his injured foot
free from the stirrup, and merely grunted when Good Indian asked him
once how he felt.

When they reached the desolation of the old placer-pits, however, he
turned his eyes from the trail where it showed just over Huckleberry's
ears, and regarded sourly the deep gashes and dislodged bowlders which
told where water and the greed of man for gold had raged fiercest. Then,
for the first time during the whole ride, he spoke.

"All time, yo' sleepum," he said, in the sonorous, oracular tone which
he usually employed when a subject held his serious thought. "Peaceful
Hart, him all same sleepum. All same sleepum 'longside snake. No seeum
snake, no thinkum mebbyso catchum bite." He glanced down at his own
snake-bitten foot. "Snake bite, make all time much hurt." His eyes
turned, and dwelt sharply upon the face of Good Indian.

"Yo' all time thinkum Squaw-with-sun-hair. Me tell yo' for watchum, yo'
no think for watchum. Baumberga, him all same snake. Yo' think him all
time catchum fish. HUH! Yo' heap big fool, yo' thinkum cat. Rattlesnake,
mebbyso sleepum in sun one time. Yo' no thinkum bueno, yo' seeum sleep
in sun. Yo' heap sabe him all time kay bueno jus' same. Yo' heap sabe
yo' come close, him biteum. Mebbyso biteum hard, for killum yo' all
time." He paused, then drove home his point like the true orator.
"Baumberga catchum fish. All same rattlesnake sleepum in sun. Kay
bueno."

Good Indian jerked his mind back from delicious recollection of one
sweet, swift-passing minute, and half opened his lips for reply. But
he did not speak; he did not know what to say, and it is ill-spent
time--that passed in purposeless speech with such as Peppajee. Peppajee
roused himself from meditation brief as it seemed deep, lifted a lean,
brown hand to push back from his eyes a fallen lock of hair, and pointed
straight away to the west.

"Las' night, sun go sleepum. Clouds come all same blanket, sun wrappum
in blanket. Cloud look heap mad--mebbyso make much storm. Bimeby much
mens come in cloud, stand so--and so--and so." With pointing finger he
indicated a half circle. "Otha man come, heap big man. Stoppum 'way off,
all time makeum sign, for fight. Me watchum. Me set by fire, watchum
cloud makeum sign. Fire smoke look up for say, 'What yo' do all time,
mebbyso?' Cloud man shakeum hand, makeum much sign. Fire smoke heap sad,
bend down far, lookum me, lookum where cloud look. All time lookum for
Peaceful Hart ranch. Me lay down for sleepum, me dream all time much
fight. All time bad sign come. Kay bueno." Peppajee shook his head
slowly, his leathery face set in deep, somber lines.

"Much trouble come heap quick," he said gravely, hitching his blanket
into place upon his shoulder. "Me no sabe--all same, heap trouble come.
Much mens, mebbyso much fight, much shootum--mebbyso kill. Peaceful Hart
him all time laugh me. All same, me sabe smoke sign, sabe cloud sign,
sabe--Baumberga. Heap ka-a-ay bueno!"

Good Indian's memory dashed upon him a picture of bright moonlight and
the broody silence of a night half gone, and of a figure forming sharply
and suddenly from the black shadow of the stable and stealing away into
the sage, and of Baumberger emerging warily from that same shadow and
stopping to light his pipe before he strolled on to the house and to the
armchair upon the porch.

There might be a sinister meaning in that picture, but it was so well
hidden that he had little hope of ever finding it. Also, it occurred to
him that Peppajee, usually given over to creature comforts and the idle
gossip of camp and the ranches he visited, was proving the sincerity of
his manifest uneasiness by a watchfulness wholly at variance with his
natural laziness. On the other hand, Peppajee loved to play the oracle,
and a waving wisp of smoke, or the changing shapes in a wind-riven cloud
meant to him spirit-sent prophecies not to be ignored.

He turned the matter over in his mind, was the victim of uneasiness for
five minutes, perhaps, and then drifted off into wondering what Evadna
was doing at that particular moment, and to planning how he should
manage to fall behind with her when they all rode home, and so make
possible other delicious moments. He even took note of certain sharp
bends in the trail, where a couple riding fifty yards, say, behind a
group would be for the time being quite hidden from sight and to
all intents and purposes alone in the world for two minutes, or
three--perhaps the time might be stretched to five.

The ranch was quiet, with even the dogs asleep in the shade. Peppajee
insisted in one sentence upon going straight on to camp, so they did not
stop. Without speaking, they plodded through the dust up the grade, left
it, and followed the dim trail through the sagebrush and rocks to the
Indian camp which seemed asleep also, except where three squaws were
squatting in the sharply defined, conical shadow of a wikiup, mumbling
desultorily the gossip of their little world, while their fingers
moved with mechanical industry--one shining black head bent over a
half-finished, beaded moccasin, another stitching a crude gown of
bright-flowered calico, and the third braiding her hair afresh with
leisurely care for its perfect smoothness. Good Indian took note of
the group before it stirred to activity, and murmured anxiety over the
bandaged foot of Peppajee.

"Me no can watchum more, mebbyso six days. Yo' no sleepum all time
yo' walk--no thinkum all time squaw. Mebbyso yo' think for man-snake.
Mebbyso yo' watchum," Peppajee said, as he swung slowly down from
Huckleberry's back.

"All right. I'll watchum plenty," Good Indian promised lightly, gave a
glance of passing, masculine interest at the squaw who was braiding her
hair, and who was young and fresh-cheeked and bright-eyed and slender,
forgot her the instant his eyes left her, and made haste to return to
the Malad and the girl who held all his thoughts and all his desire.

That girl was sitting upon the rock which Donny had occupied, and she
looked very much as if she were sulking, much as Donny had sulked. She
had her chin in a pink palm and was digging little holes in the sand
with the tip of her rod, which was not at all beneficial to the rod and
did not appear even to interest the digger; for her wonderfully blue
eyes were staring at the green-and-white churn of the rapids, and
her lips were pursed moodily, as if she did not even see what she was
looking at so fixedly.

Good Indian's eyes were upon her while he was dismounting, but he did
not go to her immediately. Instead, he busied himself with unsaddling,
and explained to the boys just why he had left so unaccountably.
Secretly he was hoping that Evadna heard the explanation, and he raised
his voice purposely. But Evadna was not listening, apparently; and, if
she had been, the noise of the rapids would have prevented her hearing
what he said.

Miss Georgie Howard was frying fish and consistently snubbing
Baumberger, who hulked loosely near the campfire, and between puffs
at his pipe praised heavily her skill, and professed to own a ravenous
appetite. Good Indian heard him as he passed close by them, and heard
also the keen thrust she gave in return; and he stopped and half
turned, looking at her with involuntary appreciation. His glance took
in Baumberger next, and he lifted a shoulder and went on. Without
intentionally resorting to subterfuge, he felt an urge to wash his
hands, and he chose for his ablutions that part of the river's edge
which was nearest Evadna.

First he stooped and drank thirstily, his hat pushed back, while his
lips met full the hurrying water, clear and cold, yet with the chill it
had brought from the mountain springs which fed it, and as he lifted his
head he looked full at her.

Evadna stared stonily over him to where the water boiled fastest. He
might have been one of the rocks, for all the notice she took of him.

Good Indian frowned with genuine puzzlement, and began slowly to wash
his hands, glancing at her often in hope that he might meet her eyes.
When she did not seem to see him at all, the smile of a secret shared
joyously with her died from his own eyes, and when he had dried his
hands upon his handkerchief he cast aside his inward shyness in the
presence of the Hart boys and Miss Georgie and Baumberger, and went
boldly over to her.

"Aren't you feeling well?" he asked, with tender proprietorship in his
tone.

"I'm feeling quite well, thank you," returned Evadna frigidly,
neglecting to look at him.

"What is the matter, then? Aren't you having a good time?"

"I'm enjoying myself very much--except that your presence annoys me. I
wish you'd go away."

Good Indian turned on his heel and went; he felt that at last Evadna was
looking at him, though he would not turn to make sure. And his instinct
told him withal that he must ignore her mood if he would win her from
it. With a freakish impulse, he headed straight for the campfire and
Miss Georgie, but when he came up to her the look she gave him of
understanding, with sympathy to soften it, sent him away again without
speaking.

He wandered back to the river's edge--this time some distance from
where Evadna sat--and began throwing pebbles at the black nose of a
wave-washed bowlder away toward the other side. Clark and Gene, loitered
up, watched him lazily, and, picking up other pebbles, started to do
the same thing. Soon all the boys were throwing at the bowlder, and were
making a good deal of noise over the various hits and misses, and the
spirit of rivalry waxed stronger and stronger until it was like any
other game wherein full-blooded youths strive against one another for
supremacy. They came to the point of making bets, at first extravagant
and then growing more and more genuinely in earnest, for we're gamblers
all, at heart.

Miss Georgie burned a frying-panful of fish until they sent up an acrid,
blue smoke, while she ran over to try her luck with a stone or two. Even
Baumberger heaved himself up from where he was lounging, and strolled
over to watch. But Evadna could not have stuck closer to her rock if she
had been glued there, and if she had been blind and deaf she would not
have appeared more oblivious.

Good Indian grew anxious, and then angry. The savage stirred within
him, and counseled immediate and complete mastery of her--his woman.
But there was the white man of him who said the thought was brutal and
unchivalrous, and reminded the savage that one must not look upon a
woman as a chattel, to be beaten or caressed, as the humor seized the
master. And, last of all, there was the surface of him laughing with the
others, jeering at those who fell short of the mark, and striving his
utmost to be first of them all in accuracy.

He even smiled upon Miss Georgie when she hit the bowlder fairly, and,
when the stench of the burning fish drifted over to them, he gave his
supply of pebbles into her two hands, and ran to the rescue. He caught
Evadna in the act of regarding him sidelong, just as a horse sometimes
will keep an eye on the man with the rope in a corral; so he knew she
was thinking of him, at least, and was wondering what he meant to do
next, and the savage in him laughed and lay down again, knowing himself
the master.

What he did was to throw away the burnt fish, clean the frying-pan, and
start more sizzling over the fire, which he kicked into just the right
condition. He whistled softly to himself while he broke dry sticks
across his knee for the fire, and when Miss Georgie cried out that she
had made three hits in succession, he called back: "Good shot!" and
took up the tune where he had left off. Never, for one instant, was he
unconscious of Evadna's secret watchfulness, and never, for one instant,
did he let her see that she was in his thoughts.

He finished frying the fish, set out the sandwiches and doughnuts, and
pickled peaches and cheese, and pounded upon a tin plate to announce
that dinner was ready. He poured the coffee into the cups held out to
him, and got the flask of cream from a niche between two rocks at the
water's edge. He said "Too bad," when it became generally known that the
glare of the sun upon the water had given Evadna a headache, and he said
it exactly as he would have spoken if Jack, for instance, had upset the
sugar.

He held up the broken-handled butcher knife that was in the camp kit,
and declaimed tragically: "Is this a dagger that I see before me?" and
much more of the kind that was eery. He saw the reluctant dimple which
showed fleetingly in Evadna's cheek, and also the tears which swelled
her eyelids immediately after, but she did not know that he saw them,
though another did.

He was taken wholly by surprise when Miss Georgie, walking past him
afterward on her way to an enticing pool, nipped his arm for attention
and murmured:

"You're doing fine--only don't overdo it. She's had just about all she
can stand right now. Give her a chance to forgive you--and let her think
she came out ahead! Good luck!" Whereupon she finished whatever she
pretended to have been doing to her fishing-tackle, and beckoned Wally
and Jack to come along.

"We've just got to catch that big one," she laughed, "so Mr. Baumberger
can go home and attend to his own business!" It took imagination to feel
sure there had been a significant accent on the last of the sentence,
and Baumberger must have been imaginative. He lowered his head like
a bull meditating assault, and his leering eyes shot her a glance of
inquiry and suspicion. But Miss Georgie Howard met his look with a smile
that was nothing more than idle amusement.

"I'd like nothing better than to get that four-pounder on my line," she
added. "It would be the joke of the season--if a woman caught him."

"Bet you couldn't land him," chuckled Baumberger, breathing a sigh which
might have been relief, and ambled away contentedly. "I may not see you
folks again till supper," he bethought him to call back. "I'm going to
catch a dozen more--and then I thought I'd take 'em up to Pete Hamilton;
I'm using his horse, yuh see, and--" He flung out a hand to round off
the sentence, turned, and went stumbling over a particularly rocky
place.

Miss Georgie stood where she was, and watched him with her mouth twisted
to one side and three perpendicular creases between her eyebrows. When
he was out of sight, she glanced at Evadna--once more perched sulkily
upon the rock.

"Head still bad, chicken?" she inquired cheerfully. "Better stay here in
the shade--I won't be gone long."

"I'm going to fish," said Evadna, but she did not stir, not even when
Miss Georgie went on, convoyed by all the Hart boys.

Good Indian had volunteered the information that he was going to fish
downstream, but he was a long time in tying his leader and fussing with
his reel. His preparations were finished just when the last straggler
of the group was out of sight. Then he laid down his rod, went over to
Evadna, took her by the arm, and drew her back to the farther shelter of
the ledge.

"Now, what's the trouble?" he asked directly. "I hope you're not trying
to make yourself think I was only--You know what I meant, don't you? And
you said yes. You said it with your lips, and with your eyes. Did you
want more words? Tell me what it is that bothers you."

There was a droop to Evadna's shoulders, and a tremble to her mouth.
She would not look at him. She kept her eyes gazing downward, perhaps
to hide tears. Good Indian waited for her to speak, and when it seemed
plain that she did not mean to do so, he yielded to his instinct and
took her in his arms.

"Sweetheart!" he murmured against her ear, and it was the first time
he had ever spoken the word to any woman. "You love me, I know it. You
won't say it, but I know you do. I should have felt it this morning if
you hadn't cared. You--you let me kiss you. And--"

"And after that you--you rode off and left me--and you went away by
yourself, just as if--just as if nothing had happened, and you've acted
ever since as if--" She bit her lips, turned her face away from him,
plucked at his hands to free herself from his clasping arms, and then
she laid her face down against him, and sobbed.

Good Indian tried his best to explain his mood and his actions that
day, and if he did not make himself very clear--which could scarcely
be expected, since he did not quite understand it himself--he at least
succeeded in lifting from her the weight of doubt and of depression.

They were astonished when Wally and Jack and Miss Georgie suddenly
confronted them and proved, by the number of fish which they carried,
that they had been gone longer than ten minutes or so. They were red as
to their faces, and embarrassed as to manner, and Good Indian went away
hurriedly after the horses, without meeting the quizzical glances of the
boys, or replying t to certain pointed remarks which they fired after
him.

"And he's the buckaroo that's got no use for girls!" commented Wally,
looking after him, and ran his tongue meditatively along the loose edge
of his cigarette. "Kid, I wish you'd tell me how you done it. It worked
quick, anyhow."

"And thorough," grinned Jack. "I was thinking some of falling in love
with you myself, Vad. Soon as some of the shine wore off, and you got so
you acted like a real person."

"I saw it coming, when it first heaved in sight," chirped Miss Georgie,
in a more cheerful tone than she had used that day; in too cheerful a
tone to be quite convincing, if any one there had been taking notice of
mere tones.



CHAPTER XIV. THE CLAIM-JUMPERS

"Guess that bobcat was after my ducks again, last night," commented
Phoebe Hart, when she handed Baumberger his cup of coffee. "The way the
dogs barked all night--didn't they keep you awake?"

"Never slept better in my life," drawled Baumberger, his voice sliding
upward from the first word to the last. His blood-shot eyes, however,
rather gave the lie to his statement. "I'm going to make one more try,
'long about noon, for that big one--girls didn't get him, I guess, for
all their threats, or I'd heard about it. And I reckon I'll take the
evening train home. Shoulda gone yesterday, by rights. I'd like to get
a basket uh fish to take up with me. Great coffee, Mrs. Hart, and such
cream I never did see. I sure do hate to leave so many good things
and go back to a boardin' house. Look at this honey, now!" He sighed
gluttonously, leaning slightly over the table while he fed.

"Dogs were barking at something down in the orchard," Wally volunteered,
passing over Baumberger's monologue. "I was going down there, but it was
so dark--and I thought maybe it was Gene's ghost. That was before the
moon came up. Got any more biscuits, mum?"

"My trap wasn't sprung behind the chicken-house," said Donny. "I looked,
first thing."

"Dogs," drawled Baumberger, his enunciation muffled by the food in his
mouth, "always bark. And cats fight on shed-roofs. Next door to where I
board there's a dog that goes on shift as regular as a policeman. Every
night at--"

"Oh, Aunt Phoebe!" Evadna, crisp and cool in a summery dress of some
light-colored stuff, and looking more than ever like a Christmas angel
set a-flutter upon the top of a holiday fir in a sudden gust of wind,
threw open the door, rushed halfway into the room, and stopped beside
the chair of her aunt. Her hands dropped to the plump shoulder of the
sitter. "Aunt Phoebe, there's a man down at the farther end of the
strawberry patch! He's got a gun, Aunt Phoebe, and he's camped there,
and when he heard me he jumped up and pointed the gun straight at me!"

"Why, honey, that can't be--you must have seen an Indian prowling after
windfalls off the apricot trees there. He wouldn't hurt you." Phoebe
reached up, and caught the hands in a reassuring clasp.

Evadna's eyes strayed from one face to another around the table till
they rested upon Good Indian, as having found sanctuary there.

"But, Aunt Phoebe, he was WASN'T. He was a white man. And he has a camp
there, right by that tree the lightning peeled the bark off. I was close
before I saw him, for he was sitting down and the currant bushes were
between. But I went through to get round where Uncle Hart has been
irrigating and it's all mud, and he jumped up and pointed the gun AT me.
Just as if he was going to shoot me. And I turned and ran." Her fingers
closed upon the hand of her aunt, but her eyes clung to Good Indian, as
though it was to him she was speaking.

"Tramp," suggested Baumberger, in a tone of soothing finality, as when
one hushes the fear of a child. "Sick the dogs on him. He'll go--never
saw the hobo yet that wouldn't run from a dog." He smiled leeringly up
at her, and reached for a second helping of honey.

Good Indian pulled his glance from Evadna, and tried to bore through
the beefy mask which was Baumberger's face, but all he found there was
a gross interest in his breakfast and a certain indulgent sympathy for
Evadna's fear, and he frowned in a baffled way.

"Who ever heard of a tramp camped in our orchard!" flouted Phoebe. "They
don't get down here once a year, and then they always come to the house.
You couldn't know there WAS any strawberry patch behind that thick row
of trees--or a garden, or anything else."

"He's got a row of stakes running clear across the patch," Evadna
recalled suddenly. "Just like they do for a new street, or a railroad,
or something. And--"

Good Indian pushed back his chair with a harsh, scraping noise,
and rose. He was staring hard at Baumberger, and his whole face had
sharpened till it had the cold, unyielding look of an Indian. And
suddenly Baumberger raised his head and met full that look. For two
breaths their eyes held each other, and then Baumberger glanced casually
at Peaceful.

"Sounds queer--must be some mistake, though. You must have seen
something, girl, that reminded you of stakes. The stub off a
sagebrush maybe?" He ogled her quite frankly. "When a little girl gets
scared--Sick the dogs on him," he advised the family collectively,
his manner changing to a blustering anxiety that her fright should be
avenged.

Evadna seemed to take his tone as a direct challenge. "I was scared, but
I know quite well what I saw. He wasn't a tramp. He had a regular camp,
with a coffee-pot and frying-pan and blankets. And there a line of
stakes across the strawberry patch."

Before, the breakfast had continued to seem an important incident
temporarily suspended. Now Peaceful Hart laid hand to his beard, eyed
his wife questioningly, let his glance flicker over the faces of his
sons, and straightened his shoulders unconsciously. Good Indian was at
the door, his mouth set in a thin, straight, fighting line. Wally and
Jack were sliding their chairs back from the table preparing to follow
him.

"I guess it ain't anything much," Peaceful opined optimistically. "They
can't do anything but steal berries, and they're most gone, anyhow. Go
ask him what he wants, down there." The last sentence was but feeble
sort of fiction that his boys would await his commands; as a matter of
fact, they were outside before he spoke.

"Take the dogs along," called out Baumberger, quite as futilely, for not
one of the boys was within hearing.

Until they heard footsteps returning at a run, the four stayed where
they were. Baumberger rumbled on in a desultory sort of way, which might
have caused an observant person to wonder where was his lawyer training,
and the deep cunning and skill with which he was credited, for his words
were as profitless and inconsequential as an old woman's. He talked
about tramps, and dogs that barked o' nights, and touched gallantly upon
feminine timidity and the natural, protective instincts of men.

Peaceful Hart may have heard half of what he said--but more likely he
heard none of it. He sat drawing his white beard through his hand, and
his mild, blue eyes were turned often to Phoebe in mute question. Phoebe
herself was listening, but not to Baumberger; she was permitting Evadna
to tuck in stray locks of her soft, brown hair, but her face was turned
to the door which opened upon the porch. At the first clatter of running
footsteps on the porch, she and Peaceful pushed back their chairs
instinctively.

The runner was Donny, and every freckle stood out distinctly upon his
face.

"There's four of 'em, papa!" he shouted, all in one breath. "They're
jumpin' the ranch for placer claims. They said so. Each one's got a
claim, and they're campin' on the corners, so they'll be close together.
They're goin' to wash gold. Good Injun--"

"Oh!" screamed Evadna suddenly. "Don't let him--don't let them hurt him,
Uncle Hart!"

"Aw, they ain't fightin'," Donny assured her disgustedly. "They're
chewin' the rag down there, is all. Good Injun knows one of 'em."

Peaceful Hart stood indecisively, and stared, one and gripping the back
of his chair. His lips were working so that his beard bristled about his
mouth.

"They can't do nothing--the ranch belongs to me," he said, his eyes
turning rather helplessly to Baumberger. "I've got my patent."

"Jumping our ranch!--for placer claims!" Phoebe stood up, leaning hard
upon the table with both hands. "And we've lived here ever since Clark
was a baby!"

"Now, now, let's not get excited over this," soothed Baumberger, getting
out of his chair slowly, like the overfed glutton he was. He picked up a
crisp fragment of biscuit, crunched it between his teeth, and chewed
it slowly. "Can't be anything serious--and if it is, why--I'm here. A
lawyer right on the spot may save a lot of trouble. The main thing is,
let's not get excited and do something rash. Those boys--"

"Not excited?--and somebody jumping--our--ranch?" Phoebe's soft eyes
gleamed at him. She was pale, so that her face had a peculiar, ivory
tint.

"Now, now!" Baumberger put out a puffy hand admonishingly. "Let's keep
cool--that's half the battle won. Keep cool." He reached for his pipe,
got out his twisted leather tobacco pouch, and opened it with a twirl of
his thumb and finger.

"You're a lawyer, Mr. Baumberger," Peaceful turned to him, still
helpless in his manner. "What's the best thing to be done?"

"Don't--get--excited." Baumberger nodded his head for every word.
"That's what I always say when a client comes to me all worked up. We'll
go down there and see just how much there is to this, and--order 'em
off. Calmly, calmly! No violence--no threats--just tell 'em firmly and
quietly to leave." He stuffed his pipe carefully, pressing down the
tobacco with the tip of a finger. "Then," he added with slow emphasis,
"if they don't go, after--say twenty-four hours' notice--why, we'll
proceed to serve an injunction." He drew a match along the back of his
chair, and lighted his pipe.

"I reckon we'd better go and look after those boys of yours," he
suggested, moving toward the door rather quickly, for all his apparent
deliberation. "They're inclined to be hot-headed, and we must have no
violence, above all things. Keep it a civil matter right through. Much
easier to handle in court, if there's no violence to complicate the
case."

"They're looking for it," Phoebe reminded him bluntly. "The man had a
gun, and threw down on Vadnie."

"He only pointed it at me, auntie," Evadna corrected, ignorant of the
Western phrase.

The two women followed the men outside and into the shady yard, where
the trees hid completely what lay across the road and beyond the double
row of poplars. Donny, leaning far forward and digging his bare toes
into the loose soil for more speed, raced on ahead, anxious to see and
hear all that took place.

"If the boys don't stir up a lot of antagonism," Baumberger kept urging
Peaceful and Phoebe, as they hurried into the garden, "the matter ought
to be settled without much trouble. You can get an injunction, and--"

"The idea of anybody trying to hold our place for mineral land!"
Phoebe's indignation was cumulative always, and was now bubbling into
wrath. "Why, my grief! Thomas spent one whole summer washing every
likely spot around here. He never got anything better than colors on
this ranch--and you can get them anywhere in Idaho, almost. And to come
right into our garden, in the right--and stake a placer claim!" Her
anger seemed beyond further utterance. "The idea!" she finished weakly.

"Well--but we mustn't let ourselves get excited," soothed Baumberger,
the shadow of him falling darkly upon Peaceful and Phoebe as he strode
along, upon the side next the sun. Peppajee would have called that an
evil thing, portending much trouble and black treachery.

"That's where people always blunder in a thing like this. A little
cool-headedness goes farther than hard words or lead. And," he added
cheeringly, "it may be a false alarm, remember. We won't borrow trouble.
We'll just make sure of our ground, first thing we do."

"It's always easy enough to be calm over the other fellow's trouble,"
said Phoebe sharply, irritated in an indefinable way by the oily
optimism of the other. "It ain't your ox that's gored, Mr. Baumberger."

They skirted the double row of grapevines, picked their way over a spot
lately flooded from the ditch, which they crossed upon two planks laid
side by side, went through an end of the currant patch, made a detour
around a small jungle of gooseberry bushes, and so came in sight of the
strawberry patch and what was taking place near the lightning-scarred
apricot tree. Baumberger lengthened his stride, and so reached the spot
first.

The boys were grouped belligerently in the strawberry patch, just
outside a line of new stakes, freshly driven in the ground. Beyond that
line stood a man facing them with a.45-.70 balanced in the hollow of
his arm. In the background stood three other men in open spaces in the
shrubbery, at intervals of ten rods or so, and they also had rifles
rather conspicuously displayed. They were grinning, all three. The man
just over the line was listening while Good Indian spoke; the voice of
Good Indian was even and quiet, as if he were indulging in casual small
talk of the country, but that particular claim-jumper was not smiling.
Even from a distance they could see that he was fidgeting uncomfortably
while he listened, and that his breath was beginning to come jerkily.

"Now, roll your blankets and GIT!" Good Indian finished sharply, and
with the toe of his boot kicked the nearest stake clear of the loose
soil. He stooped, picked it up, and cast it contemptuously from him. It
landed three feet in front of the man who had planted it, and he jumped
and shifted the rifle significantly upon his arm, so that the butt of it
caressed his right shoulder-joint.

"Now, now, we don't want any overt acts of violence here," wheezed
Baumberger, laying hand upon Good Indian's shoulder from behind. Good
Indian shook off the touch as if it were a tarantula upon him.

"You go to the devil," he advised chillingly.

"Tut, tut!" Baumberger reproved gently. "The ladies are within hearing,
my boy. Let's get at this thing sensibly and calmly. Violence only makes
things worse. See how quiet Wally and Jack and Clark and Gene are! THEY
realize how childishly spiteful it would be for them to follow your
example. They know better. They don't want--"

Jack grinned, and hitched his gun into plainer view. "When we start in,
it won't be STICKS we're sending to His Nibs," he observed placidly.
"We're just waiting for him to ante."

"This," said Baumberger, a peculiar gleam coming into his leering,
puffy-lidded eyes, and a certain hardness creeping into his voice, "this
is a matter for your father and me to settle. It's just-a-bide-beyond
you youngsters. This is a civil case. Don't foolishly make it come under
the criminal code. But there!" His voice purred at them again. "You
won't. You're all too clear-headed and sensible."

"Oh, sure!" Wally gave his characteristic little snort. "We're only just
standing around to see how fast the cabbages grow!"

Baumberger advanced boldly across the dead line.

"Stanley, put down that gun, and explain your presence here and your
object," he rumbled. "Let's get at this thing right end to. First, what
are you doing here?"

The man across the line did not put down his rifle, except that he let
the butt of it drop slightly away from his shoulder so that the sights
were in alignment with an irrigating shovel thrust upright into the
ground ten feet to one side of the group. His manner lost little of its
watchfulness, and his voice was surly with defiance when he spoke. But
Good Indian, regarding him suspiciously through half-closed lids, would
have sworn that a look of intelligence flashed between those two. There
was nothing more than a quiver of his nostrils to betray him as he moved
over beside Evadna--for the pure pleasure of being near her, one would
think; in reality, while the pleasure was there, that he might see both
Baumberger's face and Stanley's without turning more than his eyes.

"All there is to it," Stanley began blustering, "you see before yuh.
I've located twenty acres here as a placer claim. That there's the
northwest corner--ap-prox'm'tley--close as I could come by sightin'.
Your fences are straight with yer land, and I happen to sabe all yer
corners. I've got a right here. I believe this ground is worth more for
the gold that's in it than for the turnips you can make grow on top--and
that there makes mineral land of it, and as such, open to entry. That's
accordin' to law. I ain't goin' to build no trouble--but I sure do
aim to defend my prope'ty rights if I have to. I realize yuh may think
diffrunt from me. You've got a right to prove, if yuh can, that all this
ain't mineral land. I've got jest as much right to prove it is."

He took a breath so deep it expanded visibly his chest--a broad,
muscular chest it was--and let his eyes wander deliberately over his
audience.

"That there's where _I_ stand," he stated, with arrogant self-assurance.
His mouth drew down at the corners in a smile which asked plainly what
they were going to do about it, and intimated quite as plainly that he
did not care what they did, though he might feel a certain curiosity as
an onlooker.

"I happen to know--" Peaceful began, suddenly for him. But Baumberger
waved him into silence.

"You'll have to prove there's gold in paying quantities here," he stated
pompously.

"That's what I aim to do," Stanley told him imperturbably.

"_I_ proved, over fifteen years ago, that there WASN'T," Peaceful
drawled laconically, and sucked so hard upon his pipe that his cheeks
held deep hollows.

Stanley grinned at him. "Sorry I can't let it go at that," he said
ironically. "I reckon I'll have to do some washin' myself, though,
before I feel satisfied there ain't."

"Then you haven't panned out anything yet?" Phoebe caught him up.

Stanley's eyes flickered a questioning glance at Baumberger, and
Baumberger puffed out his chest and said:

"The law won't permit you to despoil this man's property without good
reason. We can serve an injunction--"

"You can serve and be darned." Stanley's grin returned, wider than
before.

"As Mr. Hart's legal adviser," Baumberger began, in the tone he employed
in the courtroom--a tone which held no hint of his wheezy chuckle or his
oily reassurance--"I hereby demand that you leave this claim which
you have staked out upon Thomas Hart's ranch, and protest that your
continued presence here, after twenty-four hours have expired, will be
looked upon as malicious trespass, and treated as such."

Stanley still grinned. "As my own legal adviser," he returned calmly, "I
hereby declare that you can go plumb to HEL-ena." Stanley evidently felt
impelled to adapt his vocabulary to feminine ears, for he glanced at
them deprecatingly and as if he wished them elsewhere.

If either Stanley or Baumberger had chanced to look toward Good Indian,
he might have wondered why that young man had come, of a sudden, to
resemble so strongly his mother's people. He had that stoniness of
expression which betrays strong emotion held rigidly in check, with
which his quivering nostrils and the light in his half-shut eyes
contrasted strangely. He had missed no fleeting glance, no guarded tone,
and he was thinking and weighing and measuring every impression as
it came to him. Of some things he felt sure; of others he was half
convinced; and there was more which he only suspected. And all the
while he stood there quietly beside Evadna, his attitude almost that of
boredom.

"I think, since you have been properly notified to leave," said
Baumberger, with the indefinable air of a lawyer who gathers up his
papers relating to one case, thrusts them into his pocket, and turns his
attention to the needs of his next client, "we'll just have it out
with these other fellows, though I look upon Stanley," he added half
humorously, "as a test case. If he goes, they'll all go."

"Better say he's a TOUGH case," blurted Wally, and turned on his
heel. "What the devil are they standing around on one foot for, making
medicine?" he demanded angrily of Good Indian, who unceremoniously left
Evadna and came up with him. "I'D run him off the ranch first, and do
my talking about it afterward. That hunk uh pork is kicking up a lot uh
dust, but he ain't GETTING anywhere!"

"Exactly." Good Indian thrust both hands deep into his trousers pockets,
and stared at the ground before him.

Wally gave another snort. "I don't know how it hits you, Grant--but
there's something fishy about it."

"Ex-actly." Good Indian took one long step over the ditch, and went on
steadily.

Wally, coming again alongside, turned his head, and regarded him
attentively.

"Injun's on top," he diagnosed sententiously after a minute. "Looks
like he's putting on a good, thick layer uh war-paint, too." He waited
expectantly. "You might hand me the brush when you're through," he
hinted grimly. "I might like to get out after some scalps myself."

"That so?" Good Indian asked inattentively, and went on without waiting
for any reply. They left the garden, and went down the road to the
stable, Wally passively following Grant's lead. Someone came hurrying
after them, and they turned to see Jack. The others had evidently stayed
to hear the legal harangue to a close.

"Say, Stanley says there's four beside the fellows we saw," Jack
announced, rather breathlessly, for he had been running through the
loose, heavy soil of the garden to overtake them. "They've located
twenty acres apiece, he says--staked 'em out in the night and stuck up
their notices--and everyone's going to STICK. They're all going to put
in grizzlies and mine the whole thing, he told dad. He just the same as
accused dad right out of covering up valuable mineral land on purpose.
And he says the law's all on their side." He leaned hard against the
stable, and drew his fingers across his forehead, white as a girl's when
he pushed back his hat. "Baumberger," he said cheerlessly, "was
still talking injunction when I left, but--" He flung out his hand
contemptuously.

"I wish dad wasn't so--" began Wally moodily, and let it go at that.

Good Indian threw up his head with that peculiar tightening of lips
which meant much in the way of emotion.

"He'll listen to Baumberger, and he'll lose the ranch listening," he
stated distinctly. "If there's anything to do, we've got to do it."

"We can run 'em off--maybe," suggested Jack, his fighting instincts
steadied by the vivid memory of four rifles held by four men, who looked
thoroughly capable of using them.

"This isn't a case of apple-stealing," Good Indian quelled sharply, and
got his rope from his saddle with the manner of a man who has definitely
made up his mind.

"What CAN we do, then?" Wally demanded impatiently.

"Not a thing at present." Good Indian started for the little pasture,
where Keno was feeding and switching methodically at the flies. "You
fellows can do more by doing nothing to-day than if you killed off the
whole bunch."

He came back in a few minutes with his horse, and found the two still
moodily discussing the thing. He glanced at them casually, and went
about the business of saddling.

"Where you going?" asked Wally abruptly, when Grant was looping up the
end of his latigo.

"Just scouting around a little," was the unsatisfactory reply he got,
and he scowled as Good Indian rode away.



CHAPTER XV. SQUAW-TALK-FAR-OFF HEAP SMART

Good Indian spoke briefly with the good-looking young squaw, who had a
shy glance for him when he came up; afterward he took hold of his hat
by the brim, and ducked through the low opening of a wikiup which she
smilingly pointed out to him.

"Howdy, Peppajee? How you foot?" he asked, when his unaccustomed eyes
discerned the old fellow lying back against the farther wall.

"Huh! Him heap sick all time." Having his injury thus brought afresh
to his notice, Peppajee reached down with his hands, and moved the foot
carefully to a new position.

"Last night," Good Indian began without that ceremony of long waiting
which is a part of Indian etiquette, "much men come to Hart ranch.
Eight." He held up his two outspread hands, with the thumbs tucked
inside his palms. "Come in dark, no seeum till sun come back. Makeum
camp. One man put sticks in ground, say that part belong him. Twenty
acres." He flung up his hands, lowered them, and immediately raised
them again. "Eight men do that all same. Have guns, grub, blankets--stop
there all time. Say they wash gold. Say that ranch have much gold,
stake placer claims. Baumberger"--he saw Peppajee's eyelids draw
together--"tell men to go away. Tell Peaceful he fight those men--in
court. You sabe. Ask Great Father to tell those men they go away, no
wash gold on ranch." He waited.

There is no hurrying the speech of an Indian. Peppajee smoked stolidly,
his eyes half closed and blinking sleepily. The veneer of white men's
ways dropped from him when he entered his own wikiup, and he would not
speak quickly.

"Las' night--mebbyso yo' watchum?" he asked, as one who holds his
judgment in abeyance.

"I heap fool. I no watch. I let those men come while I think of--a girl.
My eyes sleep." Good Indian was too proud to parry, too bitter with
himself to deny. He had not said the thing before, even to himself,
but it was in his heart to hate his love, because it had cost this
catastrophe to his friends.

"Kay bueno." Peppajee's voice was harsh. But after a time he spoke more
sympathetically. "Yo' no watchum. Yo' let heap trouble come. This day
yo' heart bad, mebbyso. This day yo' no thinkum squaw all time. Mebbyso
yo' thinkum fight, no sabe how yo' fight."

Grant nodded silently. It would seem that Peppajee understood, even
though his speech was halting. At that moment much of the unfounded
prejudice, which had been for a few days set aside because of bigger
things, died within him. He had disliked Peppajee as a pompous egotist
among his kind. His latent antagonism against all Indians because they
were unwelcomely his blood relatives had crystallized here and there
against; certain individuals of the tribe. Old Hagar he hated coldly.
Peppajee's staginess irritated him. In his youthful arrogance he had not
troubled to see the real man of mettle under that dingy green blanket.
Now he looked at Peppajee with a startled sense that he had never known
him at all, and that Peppajee was not only a grimy Indian--he was also a
man.

"Me no sabe one thing. One otha thing me sabe. Yo' no b'lieve Baumberga
one frien'. Him all same snake. Them mens come, Baumberga tellum come
all time. All time him try for foolum Peaceful. Yo' look out. Yo' no
sleepum mo'. All time yo' watchum."

"I come here," said Good Indian; "I think you mebbyso hear talk, you
tell me. My heart heap sad, I let this trouble come. I want to kill
that trouble. Mebbyso make my friends laugh, be heap glad those men no
stealum ranch. You hear talk, mebbyso you tell me now."

Peppajee smoked imperturbably what time his dignity demanded. At length
he took the pipe from his mouth, stretched out his arm toward Hartley,
and spoke in his sonorous tone, calculated to add weight to his words.

"Yo' go speakum Squaw-talk-far-off," he commanded. "All time makum
talk--talk--" He drummed with his fingers upon his left forearm.
"Mebbyso heap sabe. Heap sabe Baumberga kay bueno. He thinkum sabe
stealum ranch. All time heap talk come Man-that-coughs, come all same
Baumberga. Heap smart, dat squaw." A smile laid its faint light upon
his grim old lips, and was gone. "Thinkum yo' heap bueno, dat squaw. All
time glad for talkum yo'. Yo' go."

Good Indian stood up, his head bent to avoid scraping his hat against
the sloping roof of the wikiup.

"You no hear more talk all time you watch?" he asked, passing over Miss
Georgie's possible aid or interest in the affair.

"Much talkum--no can hear. All time them damn' Baumberga shut door--no
talkum loud. All time Baumberga walkum in dark. Walkum where apples
grow, walkum grass, walkum all dat ranch all time. All time me heap
watchum. Snake come, bitum foot--no can watchum mo'. Dat time, much
mens come. Yo' sabe. Baumberga all time talkum, him heap frien'
Peacefu'--heap snake all time. Speakum two tongue Yo' no b'lievum. All
time heap big liar, him. Yo' go, speakum Squaw-talk-far-off. Bueno, dat
squaw. Heap smart, all same mans. Yo' go. Pikeway." He settled back with
a gesture of finality, and so Good Indian left him.

Old Hagar shrilled maledictions after him when he passed through the
littered camp on his way back to where he had left his horse, but for
once he was deaf to her upbraidings. Indeed, he never heard her--or if
he did, her clamor was to him as the yelping of the dogs which filled
his ears, but did not enter his thoughts.

The young squaw smiled at him shy-eyed as he went by her, and though
his physical eyes saw her standing demurely there in the shade of her
wikiup, ready to shrink coyly away from too bold a glance, the man-mind
of him was blind and took no notice. He neither heard the baffled
screaming of vile epithets when old Hagar knew that her venom could not
strike through the armor of his preoccupation, nor saw the hurt look
creep into the soft eyes of the young squaw when his face did not turn
toward her after the first inattentive glance.

Good Indian was thinking how barren had been his talk with Peppajee, and
was realizing keenly how much he had expected from the interview. It is
frequently by the depth of our disappointment only that we can rightly
measure the height of our hope. He had come to Peppajee for something
tangible, some thing that might be called real evidence of the
conspiracy he suspected. He had got nothing but suspicion to match his
own. As for Miss Georgie Howard--

"What can she do?" he thought resentfully, feeling as if he had been
offered a willow switch with which to fight off a grizzly. It seemed to
him that he might as sensibly go to Evadna herself for assistance,
and that, even his infatuation was obliged to admit, would be idiotic.
Peppajee, he told himself when he reached his horse, was particularly
foolish sometimes.

With that in his mind, he mounted--and turned Keno's head toward
Hartley. The distance was not great--little more than half a mile--but
when he swung from the saddle in the square blotch of shade east by
the little, red station house upon the parched sand and cinders, Keno's
flanks were heaving like the silent sobbing of a woman with the pace his
master's spurred heels had required of him.

Miss Georgie gave her hair a hasty pat or two, pushed a novel out of
sight under a Boise newspaper, and turned toward him with a breezily
careless smile when he stepped up to the open door and stopped as if he
were not quite certain of his own mind, or of his welcome.

He was secretly thinking of Peppajee's information that Miss Georgie
thought he was "bueno," and he was wondering if it were true. Not that
he wanted it to be true! But he was man enough to look at her with a
keener interest than he had felt before. And Miss Georgie, if one might
judge by her manner, was woman enough to detect that interest and
to draw back her skirts, mentally, ready for instant flight into
unapproachableness.

"Howdy, Mr. Imsen?" she greeted him lightly. "In what official capacity
am I to receive you, please? Do YOU want to send a telegram?" The accent
upon the pronoun was very faint, but it was there for him to notice if
he liked. So much she helped him. She was a bright young woman indeed,
that she saw he wanted help.

"I don't believe I came to see you officially at all," he said, and
his eyes lighted a little as he looked at her. "Peppajee Jim told me to
come. He said you're a 'heap smart squaw, all same mans.'"

"Item: One pound of red-and-white candy for Peppajee Jim next time I see
him." Miss Georgie laughed--but she also sat down so that her face was
turned to the window. "Are you in urgent need of a heap smart squaw?"
she asked. "I thought"--she caught herself up, and then went recklessly
on--"I thought yesterday that you had found one!"

"It's brains I need just now." After the words were out, Good Indian
wanted to swear at himself for seeming to belittle Evadna. "I mean,"
he corrected quickly--"do you know what I mean? I'll tell you what has
happened, and if you don't know then, and can't help me, I'll just have
to apologize for coming, and get out."

"Yes, I think you had better tell me why you need me particularly. I
know the chicken's perfect, and doesn't lack brains, and you didn't mean
that she does. You're all stirred up over something. What's wrong?" Miss
Georgie would have spoken in just that tone if she had been a man or if
Grant had been a woman.

So Good Indian told her.

"And you imagine that it's partly your fault, and that it wouldn't have
happened if you had spent more time keeping your weather eye open, and
not so much making love?" Miss Georgie could be very blunt, as well as
keen. "Well, I don't see how you could prevent it, or what you could
have done--unless you had kicked old Baumberger into the Snake. He's the
god in this machine. I'd swear to that."

Good Indian had been fiddling with his hat and staring hard at a pile of
old ties just outside the window. He raised his head, and regarded her
steadily. It was beginning to occur to him that there was a good deal to
this Miss Georgie, under that offhand, breezy exterior. He felt himself
drawn to her as a person whom he could trust implicitly.

"You're right as far as I'm concerned," he owned, with his queer,
inscrutable smile. "I think you're also right about him. What makes you
think so, anyway?"

Miss Georgie twirled a ring upon her middle finger for a moment before
she looked up at him.

"Do you know anything about mining laws?" she asked, and when he swung
his head slightly to one side in a tacit negative, she went on: "You say
there are eight jumpers. Concerted action, that. Premeditated. My daddy
was a lawyer," she threw in by way of explanation. "I used to help him
in the office a good deal. When he--died, I didn't know enough to go
on and be a lawyer myself, so I took to this." She waved her hand
impatiently toward the telegraph instrument.

"So it's like this: Eight men can take placer claims--can hold them, you
know--for one man. That's the limit, a hundred and sixty acres. Those
eight men aren't jumping that ranch as eight individuals; they're in the
employ of a principal who is engineering the affair. If I were going to
shy a pebble at the head mogul, I'd sure try hard to hit our corpulent
friend with the fishy eye. And that," she added, "is what all these
cipher messages for Saunders mean, very likely. Baumberger had to have
someone here to spy around for him and perhaps help him choose--or at
least get together--those eight men. They must have come in on the night
train, for I didn't see them. I'll bet they're tough customers, every
mother's son of them! Fighters down to the ground, aren't they?"

"I only saw four. They were heeled, and ready for business, all right,"
he told her. "Soon as I saw what the game was, and that Baumberger was
only playing for time and a free hand, I pulled out. I thought Peppajee
might give me something definite to go on. He couldn't, though."

"Baumberger's going to steal that ranch according to law, you see," Miss
Georgie stated with conviction. "They've got to pan out a sample of gold
to prove there's pay dirt there, before they can file their claims. And
they've got to do their filing in Shoshone. I suppose their notices are
up O.K. I wonder, now, how they intend to manage that? I believe," she
mused, "they'll have to go in person--I don't believe Baumberger can do
that all himself legally. I've got some of daddy's law-books over in my
trunk, and maybe I can look it up and make sure. But I know they haven't
filed their claims yet. They've GOT to take possession first, and
they've got to show a sample of ore, or dust, it would be in this case.
The best thing to do--" She drew her eyebrows together, and she
pinched her under lip between her thumb and forefinger, and she
stared abstractedly at Good Indian. "Oh, hurry up, Grant!" she cried
unguardedly. "Think--think HARD, what's best to do!"

"The only thing I can think of," he scowled, "is to kill that--"

"And that won't do, under the circumstances," she cut in airily.
"There'd still be the eight. I'd like," she declared viciously, "to put
rough-on-rats in his dinner, but I intend to refrain from doing as I'd
like, and stick to what's best."

Good Indian gave her a glance of grateful understanding. "This thing
has hit me hard," he confided suddenly. "I've been holding myself in all
day. The Harts are like my own folks. They're all I've had, and she's
been--they've all been--" Then the instinct of repression walled in his
emotion, and he let the rest go in a long breath which told Miss
Georgie all she needed to know. So much of Good Indian would never find
expression in speech; all that was best of him would not, one might be
tempted to think.

"By the way, is there any pay dirt on that ranch?" Miss Georgie kept
herself rigidly to the main subject.

"No, there isn't. Not," he added dryly, "unless it has grown gold in
the last few years. There are colors, of course. All this country
practically can show colors, but pay dirt? No!"

"Look out," she advised him slowly, "that pay dirt doesn't grow over
night! Sabe?"

Good Indian's eyes spoke admiration of her shrewdness.

"I must be getting stupid, not to have thought of that," he said.

"Can't give me credit for being 'heap smart'?" she bantered. "Can't
even let me believe I thought of something beyond the ken of the average
person? Not," she amended ironically, "that I consider YOU an average
person! Would you mind"--she became suddenly matter of fact--"waiting
here while I go and rummage for a book I want? I'm almost sure I have
one on mining laws. Daddy had a good deal of that in his business, being
in a mining country. We've got to know just where we stand, it seems to
me, because Baumberger's going to use the laws himself, and it's with
the law we've got to fight him."

She had to go first and put a stop to the hysterical chattering of
the sounder by answering the summons. It proved to be a message for
Baumberger, and she wrote it down in a spiteful scribble which left it
barely legible.

"Betraying professional secrets, but I don't care," she exclaimed,
turning swiftly toward him. "Listen to this:

"'How's fishing? Landed the big one yet? Ready for fry?"'

She threw it down upon the table with a pettish gesture that was
wholly feminine. "Sounds perfectly innocent, doesn't it? Too perfectly
innocent, if you ask me." She stared out of the window abstractedly,
her brows pinched together and her lips pursed with a corner between her
teeth, much as she had stared after Baumberger the day before; and when
she spoke she seemed to have swung her memory back to him then.

"He came up yesterday--with fish for Pete, he SAID, and of course he
really did have some--and sent a wire to Shoshone. I found it on file
when I came back. That was perfectly innocent, too. It was:

"'Expect to land big one to-night. Plenty of small fry. Smooth trail.'

"I've an excellent memory, you see." She laughed shortly. "Well, I'll
go and hunt up that book, and we'll proceed to glean the wisdom of the
serpent, so that we won't be compelled to remain as harmless as the
dove! You won't mind waiting here?"

He assured her that he would not mind in the least, and she ran out
bareheaded into the hot sunlight. Good Indian leaned forward a little in
his chair so that he could watch her running across to the shack where
she had a room or two, and he paid her the compliment of keeping her
in his thoughts all the time she was gone. He felt, as he had done with
Peppajee, that he had not known Miss Georgie at all until to-day, and he
was a bit startled at what he was finding her to be.

"Of course," she laughed, when she rustled in again like a whiff of
fresh air, "I had to go clear to the bottom of the last trunk I looked
in. Lucky I only have three to my name, for it would have been in the
last one just the same, if I'd had two dozen and had ransacked them all.
But I found it, thank Heaven!"

She came eagerly up to him--he was sitting in the beribboned rocker
dedicated to friendly callers, and had the rug badly rumpled with his
spurs, which he had forgotten to remove--and with a sweep of her forearm
she cleared the little table of novel, newspaper, and a magazine and
deck of cards, and barely saved her box of chocolates from going bottom
up on the floor.

"Like candy? Help yourself, if you do," she said, and tucked a piece
into her mouth absent-mindedly before she laid the leather-bound book
open on the table. "Now, we'll see what information Mr. Copp can give
us. He's a high authority--General Land Office Commissioner, if you
please. He's a few years old--several years old, for that matter--but
I don't think he's out of date; I believe what he says still goes.
M-m-m!-'Liens on Mines'--'Clause Inserted in Patents'--'Affidavits Taken
Without Notice to Opposing'--oh, it must be here--it's GOT to be here!"

She was running a somewhat sticky forefinger slowly down the index
pages. "It isn't alphabetically arranged, which I consider sloppy of Mr.
Copp. Ah-h! 'Minerals Discovered After Patent Has Issued to Agricultural
Claimant'--two hundred and eight. We'll just take a look at that first.
That's what they're claiming, you know." She hitched her chair closer,
and flipped the leaves eagerly. When she found the page, they touched
heads over it, though Miss Georgie read aloud.

"Oh, it's a letter--but it's a decision, and as such has weight. U-m!

"SIR: In reply to your letter of inquiry. . . I have to state that all
mineral deposits discovered on land after United States Patent therefor
has issued to a party claiming under the laws regulating the disposal of
agricultural lands, pass with the patent, and this office has no further
jurisdiction in the premise. Very respectfully,"

"'PASS WITH THE PATENT!'" Miss Georgie turned her face so that she could
look into Grant's eyes, so close to her own. "Old Peaceful must surely
have his patent--Baumberger can't be much of a lawyer, do you think?
Because that's a flat statement. There's no chance for any legal
quibbling in that--IS there?"

"That's about as straight as he could put it," Good Indian agreed, his
face losing a little of its anxiety.

"Well, we'll just browse along for more of the same," she suggested
cheerfully, and went back to the index. But first she drew a lead pencil
from where it had been stabbed through her hair, and marked the letter
with heavy brackets, wetting the lead on her tongue for emphasis.

"'Agricultural Claimants Entitled to Full Protection,'" she read
hearteningly from the index, and turned hastily to see what was to be
said about it. It happened to be another decision rendered in a letter,
and they jubilated together over the sentiment conveyed therein.

"Now, here is what I was telling you, Grant," she said suddenly, after
another long minute of studying silently the index. "'Eight Locaters of
Placer Ground May Convey to One Party'--and Baumberger's certainly that
party!--'Who Can Secure Patent for One Hundred and Sixty Acres.' We'll
just read up on that, and find out for sure what the conditions are.
Now, here"--she had found the page quickly--"listen to this:

"'I have to state that if eight bona-fide locaters'

("Whether they're that remains to be proven, Mr. Baumberger!")

'each having located twenty acres, in accordance with the congressional
rules and regulations, should convey all their right, title, and
interest in said locations to one person, such person might apply for a
patent--'

"And so on into tiresomeness. Really, I'm beginning to think
Baumberger's awfully stupid, to even attempt such a silly thing. He
hasn't a legal leg to stand on. 'Goes with the patent'--that sounds
nice to me. They're not locating in good faith--those eight jumpers
down there." She fortified herself with another piece of candy. "All you
need," she declared briskly, "is a good lawyer to take this up and see
it through."

"You seem to be doing pretty well," he remarked, his eyes dwelling
rather intently upon her face, and smiling as they did so.

"I can read what's in the book," she remarked lightly, her eyes upon
its pages as if she were consciously holding them from meeting his look.
"But it will take a lawyer to see the case through the courts. And let
me tell you one thing very emphatically." She looked at him brightly.
"Many a case as strong as this has been lost, just by legal quibbling
and ignorance of how to handle it properly. Many a case without a leg to
stand on has been won, by smooth work on the part of some lawyer. Now,
I'll just jot down what they'll have to do, and prove, if they get that
land--and look here, Mr. Man, here's another thing to consider. Maybe
Baumberger doesn't expect to get a patent. Maybe he means to make old
Peaceful so deucedly sick of the thing that he'll sell out cheap rather
than fight the thing to a finish. Because this can be appealed, and
taken up and up, and reopened because of some technical error--oh, as
Jenny Wren says in--in--"

"'Our Mutual Friend?'" Good Indian suggested unexpectedly.

"Oh, you've read it!--where she always says: '_I_ know their tricks and
their manners!' And I do, from being so much with daddy in the office
and hearing him talk shop. I know that, without a single bit of justice
on their side, they could carry this case along till the very expense
of it would eat up the ranch and leave the Harts flat broke. And if
they didn't fight and keep on fighting, they could lose it--so there you
are."

She shut the book with a slam. "But," she added more brightly when
she saw the cloud of gloom settle blacker than before on his face, and
remembered that he felt himself at least partly to blame, "it helps a
lot to have the law all on our side, and--" She had to go then, because
the dispatcher was calling, and she knew it must be a train order.
"We'll read up a little more, and see just what are the requirements
of placer mining laws--and maybe we can make it a trifle difficult
for those eight to comply!" she told him over her shoulder, while her
fingers chittered a reply to the call, and then turned her attention
wholly to receiving the message.

Good Indian, knowing well the easy custom of the country which makes
smoking always permissible, rolled himself a cigarette while he waited
for her to come back to his side of the room. He was just holding the
match up and waiting for a clear blaze before setting his tobacco afire,
when came a tap-tap of feet on the platform, and Evadna appeared in the
half-open doorway.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, and widened her indigo eyes at him sitting there
and looking so much at home.

"Come right in, chicken," Miss Georgie invited cordially. "Don't stand
there in the hot sun. Mr. Imsen is going to turn the seat of honor over
to you this instant. Awfully glad you came. Have some candy."

Evadna sat down in the rocker, thrust her two little feet out so that
the toe, of her shoes showed close together beyond the hem of her
riding-skirt, laid her gauntleted palms upon the arms of the chair and
rocked methodically, and looked at Grant and then at Miss Georgie, and
afterward tilted up her chin and smiled superciliously at an insurance
company's latest offering to the public in the way of a calendar two
feet long.

"When did you come up?" Good Indian asked her, trying so hard to keep a
placating note out of his voice that he made himself sound apologetic.

"Oh--about an hour ago, I think," Evadna drawled sweetly--the sweet
tones which always mean trouble, when employed by a woman.

Good Indian bit his lip, got up, and threw his cigarette out of the
window, and looked at her reproachfully, and felt vaguely that he was
misunderstood and most unjustly placed upon the defensive.

"I only came over," Evadna went on, as sweetly as before, "to say that
there's a package at the store which I can't very well carry, and I
thought perhaps you wouldn't mind taking it--when you go."

"I'm going now, if you're ready," he told her shortly, and reached for
his hat.

Evadna rocked a moment longer, making him wait for her reply. She
glanced at Miss Georgie still busy at the telegraph table, gave a little
sigh of resignation, and rose with evident reluctance.

"Oh--if you're really going," she drawled, and followed him outside.



CHAPTER XVI. "DON'T GET EXCITED!"

Lovers, it would seem, require much less material for a quarrel than
persons in a less exalted frame of mind.

Good Indian believed himself very much in love with his Christmas angel,
and was very much inclined to let her know it, but at the same time
he saw no reason why he should not sit down in Miss Georgie's
rocking-chair, if he liked, and he could not quite bring himself to
explain even to Evadna his reason for doing so. It humiliated him even
to think of apologizing or explaining, and he was the type of man who
resents humiliation more keenly than a direct injury.

As to Evadna, her atmosphere was that of conscious and magnanimous
superiority to any feeling so humanly petty as jealousy--which is
extremely irritating to anyone who is at all sensitive to atmospheric
conditions.

She stopped outside the window long enough to chirp a commonplace
sentence or two to Miss Georgie, and to explain just why she couldn't
stay a minute longer. "I told Aunt Phoebe I'd be back to lunch--dinner,
I mean--and she's so upset over those horrible men planted in the
orchard--did Grant tell you about it?--that I feel I ought to be
with her. And Marie has the toothache again. So I really must go.
Good-by--come down whenever you can, won't you?" She smiled, and she
waved a hand, and she held up her riding-skirt daintily as she turned
away. "You didn't say goodby to Georgie," she reminded Grant, still
making use of the chirpy tone. "I hope I am not in any way responsible."

"I don't see how you could be," said Good Indian calmly; and that, for
some reason, seemed to intensify the atmosphere with which Evadna chose
to surround herself.

She led Huckleberry up beside the store platform without giving Grant
a chance to help, mounted, and started on while he was in after the
package--a roll not more than eight inches long, and weighing at least
four ounces, which brought an ironical smile to his lips. But she could
not hope to outrun him on Huckleberry, even when Huckleberry's nose was
turned toward home, and he therefore came clattering up before she
had passed the straggling outpost of rusty tin cans which marked, by
implication, the boundary line between Hartley and the sagebrush waste
surrounding it.

"You seem to be in a good deal of a hurry," Good Indian observed.

"Not particularly," she replied, still chirpy as to tone and
supercilious as to her manner.

It would be foolish to repeat all that was said during that ride home,
because so much meaning was conveyed in tones and glances and in staring
straight ahead and saying nothing. They were sparring politely before
they were over the brow of the hill behind the town; they were indulging
in veiled sarcasm--which came rapidly out from behind the veil and grew
sharp and bitter--before they started down the dusty grade; they were
not saying anything at all when they rounded the Point o' Rocks and held
their horses rigidly back from racing home, as was their habit, and when
they dismounted at the stable, they refused to look at each other upon
any pretext whatsoever.

Baumberger, in his shirt-sleeves and smoking his big pipe, lounged up
from the pasture gate where he had been indolently rubbing the nose of a
buckskin two-year-old with an affectionate disposition, and wheezed out
the information that it was warm. He got the chance to admire a very
stiff pair of shoulders and a neck to match for his answer.

"I wasn't referring to your manner, m' son," he chuckled, after he
had watched Good Indian jerk the latigo loose and pull off the saddle,
showing the wet imprint of it on Keno's hide. "I wish the weather was as
cool!"

Good Indian half turned with the saddle in his hands, and slapped it
down upon its side so close to Baumberger that he took a hasty step
backward, seized Keno's dragging bridle-reins, and started for the
stable. Baumberger happened to be in the way, and he backed again, more
hastily than before, to avoid being run over.

"Snow blind?" he interrogated, forcing a chuckle which had more the
sound of a growl.

Good Indian stopped in the doorway, slipped off the bridle, gave Keno a
hint by slapping him lightly on the rump, and when the horse had gone
on into the cool shade of the stable, and taking his place in his stall,
began hungrily nosing the hay in his manger, he came back to unsaddle
Huckleberry, who was nodding sleepily with his under lip sagging much
like Baumberger's while he waited. That gentleman seemed to be once more
obstructing the path of Good Indian. He dodged back as Grant brushed
past him.

"By the great immortal Jehosaphat!" swore Baumberger, with an ugly leer
in his eyes, "I never knew before that I was so small I couldn't be seen
with the naked eye!"

"You're so small in my estimation that a molecule would look like a
hay-stack alongside you!" Good Indian lifted the skirt of Evadna's
side-saddle, and proceeded calmly to loosen the cinch. His forehead
smoothed a trifle, as if that one sentence had relieved him of some of
his bottled bitterness.

"YOU ain't shrunk up none--in your estimation," Baumberger forgot his
pose of tolerant good nature to say. His heavy jaw trembled as if he had
been overtaken with a brief attack of palsy; so also did the hand which
replaced his pipe between his loosely quivering lips. "That little
yellow-haired witch must have given yuh the cold shoulder; but you
needn't take it out on me. Had a quarrel?" He painstakingly brushed some
ashes from his sleeve, once more the wheezing, chuckling fat man who
never takes anything very seriously.

"Did you ever try minding your own business?" Grant inquired with much
politeness of tone.

"We-e-ell, yuh see, m' son, it's my business to mind other people's
business!" He chuckled at what he evidently considered a witty retort.
"I've been pouring oil on the troubled waters all forenoon--maybe I've
kinda got the habit."

"Only you're pouring it on a fire this time."

"That dangerous, yuh mean?"

"You're liable to start a conflagration you can't stop, and that may
consume yourself, is all."

"Say, they sure do teach pretty talk in them colleges!" he purred,
grinning loosely, his own speech purposely uncouth.

Good Indian turned upon him, stopped as quickly, and let his anger
vent itself in a sneer. It had occurred to him that Baumberger was not
goading him without purpose--because Baumberger was not that kind of
man. Oddly enough, he had a short, vivid, mental picture of him and the
look on his face when he was playing the trout; it seemed to him that
there was something of that same cruel craftiness now in his eyes and
around his mouth. Good Indian felt for one instant as if he were that
trout, and Baumberger was playing him skillfully. "He's trying to make
me let go all holds and tip my hand," he thought, keenly reading him,
and he steadied himself.

"What d'yuh mean by me pouring oil on fire!" Baumberger urged
banteringly. "Sounds like the hero talking to the villain in one of
these here save-him-he's-my-sweetheart plays."

"You go to the devil," said Good Indian shortly.

"Don't repeat yourself, m' son; it's a sign uh failing powers. You said
that to me this morning, remember? And--don't--get--excited!" His right
arm raised slightly when he said that, as if he expected a blow for his
answer.

Good Indian saw that involuntary arm movement, but he saw it from
the tail of his eye, and he drew his lips a little tighter. Clearly
Baumberger was deliberately trying to force him into a rage that would
spend some of its force in threats, perhaps. He therefore grew cunningly
calm, and said absolutely nothing. He led Huckleberry into the stable,
came out, and shut the door, and walked past Baumberger as if he were
not there at all. And Baumberger stood with his head lowered so that his
flabby jaw was resting upon his chest, and stared frowningly after him
until the yard gate swung shut behind his tall, stiffly erect figure.

"I gotta WATCH that jasper," he mumbled over his pipe, as a sort of
summing up, and started slowly to the house. Halfway there he spoke
again in the same mumbling undertone. "He's got the Injun look in his
eyes t'-day. I gotta WATCH him."

He did watch him. It is astonishing how a family can live for months
together, and not realize how little real privacy there is for anyone
until something especial comes up for secret discussion. It struck Good
Indian forcibly that afternoon, because he was anxious for a word in
private with Peaceful, or with Phoebe, and also with Evadna--if it was
only to continue their quarrel.

At dinner he could not speak without being heard by all. After dinner,
the family showed an unconscious disposition to "bunch." Peaceful and
Baumberger sat and smoked upon that part of the porch which was coolest,
and the boys stayed close by so that they could hear what might be said
about the amazing state of affairs down in the orchard.

Evadna, it is true, strolled rather self-consciously off to the head of
the pond, carefully refraining, as she passed, from glancing toward Good
Indian. He felt that she expected him to follow, but he wanted first to
ask Peaceful a few questions, and to warn him not to trust Baumberger,
so he stayed where he was, sprawled upon his back with a much-abused
cushion under his head and his hat tilted over his face, so that he
could see Baumberger's face without the scrutiny attracting notice.

He did not gain anything by staying, for Peaceful had little to say,
seeming to be occupied mostly with dreamy meditations. He nodded,
now and then, in response to Baumberger's rumbling monologues, and
occasionally he removed his pipe from his mouth long enough to reply
with a sentence where the nod was not sufficient. Baumberger droned on,
mostly relating the details of cases he had won against long odds--cases
for the most part similar to this claim-jumping business.

Nothing had been done that day, Grant gathered, beyond giving the eight
claimants due notice to leave. The boys were evidently dissatisfied
about something, though they said nothing. They shifted their positions
with pettish frequency, and threw away cigarettes only half smoked, and
scowled at dancing leaf-shadows on the ground.

When he could no longer endure the inaction, he rose, stretched his arms
high above his head, settled his hat into place, gave Jack a glance of
meaning, and went through the kitchen to the milk-house. He felt sure
that Baumberger's ears were pricked toward the sound of his footsteps,
and he made them purposely audible.

"Hello, Mother Hart," he called out cheerfully to Phoebe, pottering down
in the coolness. "Any cream going to waste, or buttermilk, or cake?" He
went down to her, and laid his hand upon her shoulder with a caressing
touch which brought tears into her eyes. "Don't you worry a bit, little
mother," he said softly. "I think we can beat them at their own game.
They've stacked the deck, but we'll beat it, anyhow." His hand slid down
to her arm, and gave it a little, reassuring squeeze.

"Oh, Grant, Grant!" She laid her forehead against him for a moment, then
looked up at him with a certain whimsical solicitude. "Never mind our
trouble now. What's this about you and Vadnie? The boys seem to think
you two are going to make a match of it. And HAVE you been quarreling,
you two? I only want," she added, deprecatingly, "to see my biggest boy
happy, and if I can do anything in any way to help--"

"You can't, except just don't worry when we get to scrapping." His eyes
smiled down at her with their old, quizzical humor, which she had not
seen in them for some days. "I foresee that we're due to scrap a good
deal of the time," he predicted. "We're both pretty peppery. But we'll
make out, all right. You didn't"--he blushed consciously--"you didn't
think I was going to--to fall dead in love--"

"Didn't I?" Phoebe laughed at him openly. "I'd have been more surprised
if you hadn't. Why, my grief! I know enough about human nature, I hope,
to expect--"

"Churning?" The voice of Baumberger purred down to them. There he stood
bulkily at the top of the steps, good-naturedly regarding them. "Mr.
Hart and I are goin' to take a ride up to the station--gotta send a
telegram or two about this little affair"--he made a motion with his
pipe toward the orchard--"and I just thought a good, cold drink of
buttermilk before we start wouldn't be bad." His glance just grazed Good
Indian, and passed him over as being of no consequence.

"If you don't happen to have any handy, it don't matter in the least,"
he added, and turned to go when Phoebe shook her head. "Anything we can
get for yuh at the store, Mrs. Hart? Won't be any trouble at all--Oh,
all right." He had caught another shake of the head.

"We may be gone till supper-time," he explained further, "and I trust
to your good sense, Mrs. Hart, to see that the boys keep away from those
fellows down there." The pipe, and also his head, again indicated the
men in the orchard. "We don't want any ill feeling stirred up, you
understand, and so they'd better just keep away from 'em. They're good
boys--they'll do as you say." He leered at her ingratiatingly, shot a
keen, questioning look at Good Indian, and went his lumbering way.

Grant went to the top of the steps, and made sure that he had really
gone before he said a word. Even then he sat down upon the edge of the
stairway with his back to the pond, so that he could keep watch of the
approaches to the spring-house; he had become an exceedingly suspicious
young man overnight.

"Mother Hart, on the square, what do you think of Baumberger?" he asked
her abruptly. "Come and sit down; I want to talk with you--if I can
without having the whole of Idaho listening."

"Oh, Grant--I don't know what to think! He seems all right, and I don't
know why he shouldn't be just what he seems; he's got the name of
being a good lawyer. But something--well, I get notions about things
sometimes. And I can't, somehow, feel just right about him taking up
this jumping business. I don't know why. I guess it's just a feeling,
because I can see you don't like him. And the boys don't seem to,
either, for some reason. I guess it's because he won't let 'em get right
after those fellows and drive 'em off the ranch. They've been uneasy as
they could be all day." She sat down upon a rough stool just inside
the door, and looked up at him with troubled eyes. "And I'm getting
it, too--seems like I'd go all to pieces if I can't do SOMETHING!"
She sighed, and tried to cover the sigh with a laugh--which was not,
however, a great success. "I wish I could be as cool-headed as Thomas,"
she said, with a tinge of petulance. "It don't seem to worry him none!"

"What does he think of Baumberger? Is he going to let him take the case
and handle it to please himself?" Good Indian was tapping his boot-toe
thoughtfully upon the bottom step, and glancing up now and then as a
precaution against being overheard.

"I guess so," she admitted, answering the last question first. "I
haven't had a real good chance to talk to Thomas all day. Baumberger has
been with him most of the time. But I guess he is; anyway, Baumberger
seems to take it for granted he's got the case. Thomas hates to hurt
anybody's feelings, and, even if he didn't want him, he'd hate to say
so. But he's as good a lawyer as any, I guess. And Thomas seems to like
him well enough. Thomas," she reminded Good Indian unnecessarily, "never
does say much about anything."

"I'd like to get a chance to talk to him," Good Indian observed.
"I'll have to just lead him off somewhere by main strength, I guess.
Baumberger sticks to him like a bur to a dog's tail. What are those
fellows doing down there now? Does anybody know?"

"You heard what he said to me just now," Phoebe said, impatiently. "He
don't want anybody to go near. It's terribly aggravating," she confessed
dispiritedly, "to have a lot of ruffians camped down, cool as you
please, on your own ranch, and not be allowed to drive 'em off. I don't
wonder the boys are all sulky. If Baumberger wasn't here at all, I guess
we'd have got rid of 'em before now. I don't know as I think very much
of lawyers, anyhow. I believe I'd a good deal rather fight first and
go, to law about it afterward if I had to. But Thomas is so--CALM!"

"I think I'll go down and have a look," said Good Indian suddenly. "I'm
not under Baumberger's orders, if the rest of the bunch is. And I wish
you'd tell Peaceful I want to talk to him, Mother Hart--will you? Tell
him to ditch his guardian angel somehow. I'd like to see him on the
quiet if I can, but if I can't--"

"Can't be nice, and forgiving, and repentant, and--a dear?" Evadna had
crept over to him by way of the rocks behind the pond, and at every
pause in her questioning she pushed him forward by his two shoulders.
"I'm so furious I could beat you! What do you mean, savage, by letting a
lady stay all afternoon by herself, waiting for you to come and coax her
into being nice to you? Don't you know I H-A-ATE you?" She had him by
the ears, then, pulling his head erratically from side to side, and she
finished by giving each ear a little slap and laid her arms around his
neck. "Please don't look at me that way, Aunt Phoebe," she said, when
she discovered her there inside the door. "Here's a horrible young
villain who doesn't know how to behave, and makes me do all the making
up. I don't like him one bit, and I just came to tell him so and be
done. And I don't suppose," she added, holding her two hands tightly
over his mouth, "he has a word to say for himself."

Since he was effectually gagged, Grant had not a word to say. Even when
he had pulled her hands away and held them prisoners in his own, he said
nothing. This was Evadna in a new and unaccountable mood, it seemed to
him. She had certainly been very angry with him at noon. She had accused
him, in that roundabout way which seems to be a woman's favorite
method of reaching a real grievance, of being fickle and neglectful and
inconsiderate and a brute.

The things she had said to him on the way down the grade had rankled in
his mind, and stirred all the sullen pride in his nature to life, and
he could not forget them as easily as she appeared to have done. Good
Indian was not in the habit of saying things, even in anger, which he
did not mean, and he could not understand how anyone else could do so.
And the things she had said!

But here she was, nevertheless, laughing at him and blushing adorably
because he still held her fast, and making the blood of him race most
unreasonably.

"Don't scold me, Aunt Phoebe," she begged, perhaps because there was
something in Phoebe's face which she did not quite understand, and so
mistook for disapproval of her behavior. "I should have told you last
night that we're--well, I SUPPOSE we're supposed to be engaged!" She
twisted her hands away from him, and came down the steps to her aunt.
"It all happened so unexpectedly--really, I never dreamed I cared
anything for him, Aunt Phoebe, until he made me care. And last night
I couldn't tell you, and this morning I was going to, but all this
horrible trouble came up--and, anyway," she finished with a flash of
pretty indignation, "I think Grant might have told you himself! I don't
think it's a bit nice of him to leave everything like that for me. He
might have told you before he went chasing off to--to Hartley." She
put her arms around her aunt's neck. "You aren't angry, are you,
Aunt Phoebe?" she coaxed. "You--you know you said you wanted me to be
par-TIC-ularly nice to Grant!"

"Great grief, child! You needn't choke me to death. Of course I'm not
angry." But Phoebe's eyes did not brighten.

"You look angry," Evadna pouted, and kissed her placatingly.

"I've got plenty to be worked up over, without worrying over your love
affairs, Vadnie." Phoebe's eyes sought Grant's anxiously. "I don't doubt
but what it's more important to you than anything else on earth, but I'm
thinking some of the home I'm likely to lose."

Evadna drew back, and made a movement to go.

"Oh, I'm sorry I interrupted you then, Aunt Phoebe. I suppose you and
Grant were busy discussing those men in the orchard--"

"Don't be silly, child. You aren't interrupting anybody, and there's no
call for you to run off like that. We aren't talking secrets that I know
of."

In some respects the mind of Good Indian was extremely simple and
direct. His knowledge of women was rudimentary and based largely upon
his instincts rather than any experience he had had with them. He had
been extremely uncomfortable in the knowledge that Evadna was angry,
and strongly impelled, in spite of his hurt pride, to make overtures for
peace. He was puzzled, as well as surprised, when she seized him by the
shoulders and herself made peace so bewitchingly that he could scarcely
realize it at first. But since fate was kind, and his lady love no
longer frowned upon him, he made the mistake of taking it for granted
she neither asked nor expected him to explain his seeming neglect of her
and his visit to Miss Georgie at Hartley.

She was not angry with him. Therefore, he was free to turn his whole
attention to this trouble which had come upon his closest friends. He
reached out, caught Evadna by the hand, pulled her close to him,
and smiled upon her in a way to make her catch her breath in a most
unaccountable manner.

But he did not say anything to her; he was a young man unused to
dalliance when there were serious things at hand.

"I'm going down there and see what they're up to," he told Phoebe,
giving Evadna's hand a squeeze and letting it go. "I suspect there's
something more than keeping the peace behind Baumberger's anxiety to
have them left strictly alone. The boys had better keep away, though."

"Are you going down in the orchard?" Evadna rounded her unbelievably
blue eyes at him. "Then I'm going along."

"You'll do nothing of the kind, little Miss Muffit," he declared from
the top step.

"Why not?"

"I might want to do some swearing." He grinned down at her, and started
off.

"Now, Grant, don't you do anything rash!" Phoebe called after him
sharply.

"'Don't--get--excited!'" he retorted, mimicking Baumberger.

"I'm going a little way, whether you want me to or not," Evadna
threatened, pouting more than ever.

She did go as far as the porch with him, and was kissed and sent back
like a child. She did not, however, go back to her aunt, but ran into
her own room, where she could look out through the grove toward the
orchard--and to the stable as well, though that view did not interest
her particularly at first. It was pure accident that made her witness
what took place at the gate.



CHAPTER XVII. A LITTLE TARGET-PRACTICE

A grimy buck with no hat of any sort and with his hair straggling
unbraided over one side of his face to conceal a tumor which grew just
over his left eye like a large, ripe plum, stood outside the gate, in
doubt whether to enter or remain where he was. When he saw Good Indian
he grunted, fumbled in his blanket, and held out a yellowish envelope.

"Ketchum Squaw-talk-far-off," he explained gutturally.

Good Indian took the envelope, thinking it must be a telegram, though
he could not imagine who would be sending him one. His name was written
plainly upon the outside, and within was a short note scrawled upon a
telegraph form:

"Come up as soon as you possibly can. I've something to tell you."

That was what she had written. He read it twice before he looked up.

"What time you ketchum this?" he asked, tapping the message with his
finger.

"Mebbyso one hour." The buck pulled a brass watch ostentatiously
from under his blanket, held it to his ear a moment, as if he needed
auricular assurance that it was running properly, and pointed to the
hour of three. "Ketchum one dolla, mebbyso pikeway quick. No stoppum,"
he said virtuously.

"You see Peaceful in Hartley?" Good Indian asked the question from an
idle impulse; in reality, he was wondering what it was that Miss Georgie
had to tell him.

"Peacefu', him go far off. On train. All same heap fat man go 'long.
Mebbyso Shoshone, mebbyso Pocatello."

Good Indian looked down at the note, and frowned; that, probably,
was what she had meant to tell him, though he could not see where the
knowledge was going to help him any. If Peaceful had gone to Shoshone,
he was gone, and that settled it. Undoubtedly he would return the next
day--perhaps that night, even. He was beginning to feel the need of a
quiet hour in which to study the tangle, but he had a suspicion that
Baumberger had some reason other than a desire for peace in wanting the
jumpers left to themselves, and he started toward the orchard, as he had
at first intended.

"Mebbyso ketchum one dolla, yo'," hinted Charlie, the buck.

But Good Indian went on without paying any attention to him. At the road
he met Jack and Wally, just returning from the orchard.

"No use going down there," Jack informed him sulkily. "They're just
laying in the shade with their guns handy, doing nothing. They won't let
anybody cross their line, and they won't say anything--not even when
you cuss 'em. Wally and I got black in the face trying to make them come
alive. Baumberger got back yet? Wally and I have got a scheme--"

"He and your dad took the train for Shoshone. Say, does anyone know what
that bunch over in the meadow is up to?" Good Indian leaned his back
against a tree, and eyed the two morosely.

"Clark and Gene are over there," said Wally. "But I'd gamble they aren't
doing any more than these fellows are. They haven't started to pan out
any dirt--they haven't done a thing, it looks like, but lay around in
the shade. I must say I don't sabe their play. And the worst of it is,"
he added desperately, "a fellow can't do anything."

"I'm going to break out pretty darned sudden," Jack observed calmly.
"I feel it coming on." He smiled, but there was a look of steel in his
eyes.

Good Indian glanced at him sharply.

"Now, you fellows' listen to me," he said. "This thing is partly my
fault. I could have prevented it, maybe, if I hadn't been so taken up
with my own affairs. Old Peppajee told me Baumberger was up to some
devilment when he first came down here. He heard him talking to Saunders
in Pete Hamilton's stable. And the first night he was here, Peppajee and
I saw him down at the stable at midnight, talking to someone. Peppajee
kept on his trail till he got that snake bite, and he warned me a
plenty. But I didn't take much stock in it--or if I did--" He lifted his
shoulders expressively.

"So," he went on, after a minute of bitter thinking, "I want you to keep
out of this. You know how your mother would feel--You don't want to get
foolish. You can keep an eye on them--to-night especially. I've an idea
they're waiting for dark; and if I knew why, I'd be a lot to the good.
And if I knew why old Baumberger took your father off so suddenly,
why--I'd be wiser than I am now." He lifted his hat, brushed the
moisture from his forehead, and gave a grunt of disapproval when his
eyes rested on Jack.

"What yuh loaded down like that for?" he demanded. "You fellows better
put those guns in cold storage. I'm like Baumberger in one respect--we
don't want any violence!" He grinned without any feeling of mirth.

"Something else is liable to be put in cold storage first," Wally
hinted, significantly. "I must say I like this standing around and
looking dangerous, without making a pass! I wish something would break
loose somewhere."

"I notice you're packing yours, large as life," Jack pointed out. "Maybe
you're just wearing it for an ornament, though."

"Sure!" Good Indian, feeling all at once the utter futility of standing
there talking, left them grumbling over their forced inaction, without
explaining where he was going, or what he meant to do. Indeed, he
scarcely knew himself. He was in that uncomfortable state of mind where
one feels that one must do something, without having the faintest idea
of what that something is, or how it is to be done. It seemed to him
that they were all in the same mental befuddlement, and it seemed
impossible to stay on the ranch another hour without making a hostile
move of some sort--and he knew that, when he did make a move, he at
least ought to know why he did it.

The note in his pocket gave him an excuse for action of some sort, even
though he felt sure that nothing would come of it; at least, he thought,
he would have a chance to discuss the thing with Miss Georgie again--and
while he was not a man who must have everything put into words, he had
found comfort and a certain clarity of thought in talking with her.

"Why don't you invite me to go along?" Evadna challenged from the gate,
when he was ready to start. She laughed when she said it, but there was
something beneath the laughter, if he had only been close enough to read
it.

"I didn't think you'd want to ride through all that dust and heat again
to-day," he called back. "You're better off in the shade."

"Going to call on 'Squaw-talk-far-off'--AGAIN?" She was still laughing,
with something else beneath the laugh.

He glanced at her quickly, wondering where she had gotten the name, and
in his wonder neglected to make audible reply. Also he passed over the
change to ride back to the gate and tell her good-by--with a hasty kiss,
perhaps, from the saddle--as a lover should have done.

He was not used to love-making. For him, it was settled that they loved
each other, and would marry some day--he hoped the day would be soon. It
did not occur to him that a girl wants to be told over and over that she
is the only woman in the whole world worth a second thought or glance;
nor that he should stop and say just where he was going, and what he
meant to do, and how reluctant he was to be away from her. Trouble sat
upon his mind like a dead weight, and dulled his perception, perhaps.
He waved his hand to her from the stable, and galloped down the trail to
the Point o' Rocks, and his mind, so far as Evadna was concerned, was at
ease.

Evadna, however, was crying, with her arms folded upon the top of the
gate, before the cloud which marked his passing had begun to sprinkle
the gaunt, gray sagebushes along the trail with a fresh layer of choking
dust. Jack and Wally came up, scowling at the world and finding no
words to match their gloom. Wally gave her a glance, and went on to
the blacksmith shop, but Jack went straight up to her, for he liked her
well.

"What's the matter?" he asked dully. "Mad because you can't smoke up the
ranch?"

Evadna fumbled blindly for her handkerchief, scoured her eyes well when
she found it, and put up the other hand to further shield her face.

"Oh, the whole place is like a GRAVEYARD," she complained. "Nobody will
talk, or do anything but just wander around! I just can't STAND it!"
Which was not frank of her.

"It's too hot to do much of anything," he said apologetically. "We might
take a ride, if you don't mind the heat."

"You don't want to ride," she objected petulantly. "Why didn't you go
with Good Indian?" he countered.

"Because I didn't want to. And I do wish you'd quit calling him that; he
has a real name, I believe."

"If you're looking for a scrap," grinned Jack, "I'll stake you to my six
gun, and you can go down and kill off a few of those claim-jumpers. You
seem to be in just about the proper frame uh mind to murder the whole
bunch. Fly at it!"

"It begins to look as if we women would have to do something," she
retorted cruelly. "There doesn't seem to be a man on the ranch with
spirit enough to stop them from digging up the whole--"

"I guess that'll be about enough," Jack interrupted her, coldly. "Why
didn't you say that to Good Indian?"

"I told you not to call him that. I don't see why everybody is so mean
to-day. There isn't a person--"

When Jack laughed, he shut his eyes until he looked through narrow
slits under heavy lashes, and showed some very nice teeth, and two deep
dimples besides the one which always stood in his chin. He laughed then,
for the first time that day, and if Evadna had been in a less vixenish
temper she would have laughed with him just as everyone else always did.
But instead of that, she began to cry again, which made Jack feel very
much a brute.

"Oh, come on and be good," he urged remorsefully. But Evadna turned and
ran back into the house and into her room, and cried luxuriously into
her pillow. Jack, peeping in at the window which opened upon the porch,
saw her there, huddled upon the bed.

In the spring-house his mother sat crying silently over her
helplessness, and failed to respond to his comforting pats upon the
shoulder. Donny struck at him viciously when Jack asked him an idle
question, and Charlie, the Indian with the tumor over his eye, scowled
from the corner of the house where he was squatting until someone
offered him fruit, or food, or tobacco. He was of an acquisitive nature,
was Charlie--and the road to his favor must be paved with gifts.

"This is what I call hell," Jack stated aloud, and went straight away to
the strawberry patch, took up his stand with his toes against Stanley's
corner stake, cursed him methodically until he had quite exhausted his
vocabulary, and put a period to his forceful remarks by shooting a neat,
round hole through Stanley's coffee-pot. And Jack was the mild one of
the family.

By the time he had succeeded in puncturing recklessly the frying-pan,
and also the battered pan in which Stanley no doubt meant to wash his
samples of soil, his good humor returned. So also did the other boys,
running in long leaps through the garden and arriving at the spot very
belligerent and very much out of breath.

"Got to do something to pass away the time," Jack grinned, bringing his
front sight once more to bear upon the coffee--pot, already badly dented
and showing three black holes. "And I ain't offering any violence
to anybody. You can't hang a man, Mr. Stanley, for shooting up a
frying-pan. And I wouldn't--hurt--you--for--anything!" He had just
reloaded, so that his bullets saw him to the end of the sentence.

Stanley watched his coffee-pot dance and roll like a thing in pain, and
swore when all was done. But he did not shoot, though one could see how
his fingers must itch for the feel of the trigger.

"Your old dad will sweat blood for this--and you'll be packing your
blanket on your back and looking for work before snow flies," was his
way of summing up.

Still, he did not shoot.

It was like throwing pebbles at the bowlder in the Malad, the day
before.

When Phoebe came running in terror toward the fusillade, with Marie
and her swollen face, and Evadna and her red eyes following in great
trepidation far behind, they found four claim-jumpers purple from long
swearing, and the boys gleefully indulging in revolver practice with
various camp utensils for the targets.

They stopped when their belts were empty as well as their guns, and they
went back to the house with the women, feeling much better. Afterward
they searched the house for more "shells," clattering from room to room,
and looking into cigar boxes and upon out-of-the-way shelves, while
Phoebe expostulated in the immediate background.

"Your father would put a stop to it pretty quick if he was here," she
declared over and over. "Just because they didn't shoot back this time
is no sign they won't next time you boys go to hectoring them." All the
while she knew she was wasting her breath, and she had a secret fear
that her manner and her tones were unconvincing. If she had been a man,
she would have been their leader, perhaps. So she retreated at last
to her favorite refuge, the milk-house, and tried to cover her secret
approval with grumbling to herself.

There was a lull in the house. The boys, it transpired, had gone in
a body to Hartley after more cartridges, and the cloud of dust which
hovered long over the trail testified to their haste. They returned
surprisingly soon, and they would scarcely wait for their supper before
they hurried back through the garden. One would think that they were on
their way to a dance, so eager they were.

They dug themselves trenches in various parts of the garden, laid
themselves gleefully upon their stomachs, and proceeded to exchange,
at the top of their strong, young voices, ideas upon the subject of
claim-jumping, and to punctuate their remarks with leaden periods
planted neatly and with precision in the immediate vicinity of one of
the four.

They had some trouble with Donny, because he was always jumping up that
he might yell the louder when one of the enemy was seen to step about
uneasily whenever a bullet pinged closer than usual, and the rifles
began to bark viciously now and then. It really was unsafe for one to
dance a clog, with flapping arms and taunting laughter, within range of
those rises, and they told Donny so.

They ordered him back to the house; they threw clods of earth at his
bare legs; they threatened and they swore, but it was not until Wally
got him by the collar and shook him with brotherly thoroughness that
Donny retreated in great indignation to the house.

They were just giving themselves wholly up to the sport of sending
little spurts of loose earth into the air as close as was safe to
Stanley, and still much too close for his peace of mind or that of
his fellows, when Donny returned unexpectedly with the shotgun and an
enthusiasm for real bloodshed.

He fired once from the thicket of currant bushes, and, from the
remarks which Stanley barked out in yelping staccato, he punctured that
gentleman's person in several places with the fine shot of which the
charge consisted. He would have fired again if the recoil had not thrown
him quite off his balance, and it is possible that someone would have
been killed as a result. For Stanley began firing with murderous intent,
and only the dusk and Good Indian's opportune arrival prevented serious
trouble.

Good Indian had talked long with Miss Georgie, and had agreed with
her that, for the present at least, there must be no violence. He had
promised her flatly that he would do all in his power to keep the peace,
and he had gone again to the Indian camp to see if Peppajee or some of
his fellows could give him any information about Saunders.

Saunders had disappeared unaccountably, after a surreptitious conference
with Baumberger the day before, and it was that which Miss Georgie had
to tell him. Saunders was in the habit of sleeping late, so that she did
not know until noon that he was gone. Pete was worried, and garrulously
feared the worst. The worst, according to Pete Hamilton, was sudden
death of a hemorrhage.

Miss Georgie asserted unfeelingly that Saunders was more in danger of
dying from sheer laziness than of consumption, and she even went so far
as to hint cynically, that even his laziness was largely hypocritical.

"I don't believe there's a single honest thing about the fellow," she
said to Good Indian. "When he coughs, it sounds as if he just did it for
effect. When he lies in the shade asleep, I've seen him watching people
from under his lids. When he reads, his ears seem always pricked up to
hear everything that's going on, and he gives those nasty little
slanty looks at everybody within sight. I don't believe he's really
gone--because I can't imagine him being really anything. But I do
believe he's up to something mean and sneaky, and, since Peppajee has
taken this matter to heart, maybe he can find out something. I think you
ought to go and see him, anyway, Mr. Imsen."

So Good Indian had gone to the Indian camp, and had afterward ridden
along the rim of the bluff, because Sleeping Turtle had seen someone
walking through the sagebrush in that direction. From the rim-rock above
the ranch, Good Indian had heard the shooting, though the trees hid from
his sight what was taking place, and he had given over his search for
Saunders and made haste to reach home.

He might have gone straight down the bluff afoot, through a rift in
the rim-rock where it was possible to climb down into the fissure and
squeeze out through a narrow opening to the bowlder-piled bluff. But
that took almost as much time as he would consume in riding around, and
so he galloped back to the grade and went down at a pace to break his
neck and that of Keno as well if his horse stumbled.

He reached home in time to see Donny run across the road with the
shotgun, and the orchard in time to prevent a general rush upon Stanley
and his fellows--which was fortunate. He got them all out of the garden
and into the house by sheer determination and biting sarcasm, and bore
with surprising patience their angry upbraidings. He sat stoically
silent while they called him a coward and various other things which
were unpleasant in the extreme, and he even smiled when they finally
desisted and trailed off sullenly to bed.

But when they were gone he sat alone upon the porch, brooding over
the day and all it had held of trouble and perplexity. Evadna appeared
tentatively in the open door, stood there for a minute or two waiting
for some overture upon his part, gave him a chilly good-night when she
realized he was not even thinking of her, and left him. So great was
his absorption that he let her go, and it never occurred to him that she
might possibly consider herself ill-used. He would have been distressed
if he could have known how she cried herself to sleep but, manlike, he
would also have been puzzled.



CHAPTER XVIII. A SHOT FROM THE RIM-ROCK

Good Indian was going to the stable to feed the horses next morning,
when something whined past him and spatted viciously against the side of
the chicken-house. Immediately afterward he thought he heard the sharp
crack which a rifle makes, but the wind was blowing strongly up the
valley, and he could not be sure.

He went over to the chicken-house, probed with his knife-blade into
the plank where was the splintered hole, and located a bullet. He was
turning it curiously in his fingers when another one plunked into the
boards, three feet to one side of him; this time he was sure of the
gun-sound, and he also saw a puff of blue smoke rise up on the rim-rock
above him. He marked the place instinctively with his eyes, and went on
to the stable, stepping rather more quickly than was his habit.

Inside, he sat down upon the oats-box, and meditated upon what he should
do. He could not even guess at his assailant, much less reach him. A
dozen men could be picked off by a rifle in the hands of one at the top,
while they were climbing that bluff.

Even if one succeeded in reaching the foot of the rim-rock, there was
a forty-foot wall of unscalable rock, with just the one narrow fissure
where it was possible to climb up to the level above, by using both
hands to cling to certain sharp projections while the feet sought a
niche here and there in the wall. Easy enough--if one were but left to
climb in peace, but absolutely suicidal if an enemy stood above.

He scowled through the little paneless window at what he could see of
the bluff, and thought of the mile-long grade to be climbed and the
rough stretch of lava rock, sage, and scattered bowlders to be gone over
before one could reach the place upon a horse. Whoever was up there, he
would have more than enough time to get completely away from the spot
before it would be possible to gain so much as a glimpse of him.

And who could he be? And why was he shooting at Good Indian, so far a
non-combatant, guiltless of even firing a single shot since the trouble
began?

Wally came in, his hat far back on his head, a cigarette in the
corner of his mouth, and his manner an odd mixture of conciliation and
defiance, ready to assume either whole-heartedly at the first word from
the man he had cursed so unstintingly before he slept. He looked at Good
Indian, caught sight of the leaden pellet he was thoughtfully turning
round and round in his fingers, and chose to ignore for the moment any
unpleasantness in their immediate past.

"Where you ketchum?" he asked, coming a bit closer.

"In the side of the chicken-house." Good Indian's tone was laconic.

Wally reached out, and took the bullet from him that he might juggle it
curiously in his own fingers. "I don't think!" he scouted.

"There's another one there to match this," Good Indian stated calmly,
"and if I should walk over there after it, I'll gamble there'd be more."

Wally dropped the flattened bullet, stooped, and groped for it in the
litter on the floor, and when he had found it he eyed it more curiously
than before. But he would have died in his tracks rather than ask a
question.

"Didn't anybody take a shot at you, as you came from the house?" Good
Indian asked when he saw the mood of the other.

"If he did, he was careful not to let me find it out." Wally's
expression hardened.

"He was more careless a while ago," said Good Indian. "Some fellow up
on the bluff sent me a little morning salute. But," he added slowly, and
with some satisfaction, "he's a mighty poor shot."

Jack sauntered in much as Wally had done, saw Good Indian sitting there,
and wrinkled his eyes shut in a smile.

"Please, sir, I never meant a word I said!" he began, with exaggerated
trepidation. "Why the dickens didn't you murder the whole yapping bunch
of us, Grant?" He clapped his hand affectionately upon the other's
shoulder. "We kinda run amuck yesterday afternoon," he confessed
cheerfully, "but it sure was fun while it lasted!"

"There's liable to be some more fun of the same kind," Wally informed
him shortly. "Good Injun says someone on the bluff took a shot at him
when he was coming to the stable. If any of them jumpers--"

"It's easy to find out if it was one of them," Grant cut in, as if the
idea had just come to him. "We can very soon see if they're all on their
little patch of soil. Let's go take a look."

They went out guardedly, their eyes upon the rim-rock. Good Indian led
the way through the corral, into the little pasture, and across that to
where the long wall of giant poplars shut off the view.

"I admire courage," he grinned, "but I sure do hate a fool." Which was
all the explanation he made for the detour that hid them from sight of
anyone stationed upon the bluff, except while they were passing from the
stable-door to the corral; and that, Jack said afterward, didn't take
all day.

Coming up from the rear, they surprised Stanley and one other peacefully
boiling coffee in a lard pail which they must have stolen in the night
from the ranch junk heap behind the blacksmith shop. The three peered
out at them from a distant ambush, made sure that there were only two
men there, and went on to the disputed part of the meadows. There the
four were pottering about, craning necks now and then toward the ranch
buildings as if they half feared an assault of some kind. Good Indian
led the way back to the stable.

"If there was any way of getting around up there without being seen,"
he began thoughtfully, "but there isn't. And while I think of it," he
added, "we don't want to let the women know about this."

"They're liable to suspect something," Wally reminded dryly, "if one of
us gets laid out cold."

Good Indian laughed. "It doesn't look as if he could hit anything
smaller than a haystack. And anyway, I think I'm the boy he's after,
though I don't see why. I haven't done a thing--yet."

"Let's feed the horses and then pace along to the house, one at a time,
and find out," was Jack's reckless suggestion. "Anybody that knows us at
all can easy tell which is who. And I guess it would be tolerably safe."

Foolhardy as the thing looked to be, they did it, each after his own
manner of facing a known danger. Jack went first because, as he said,
it was his idea, and he was willing to show his heart was in the right
place. He rolled and lighted a cigarette, wrinkled his eyes shut in a
laugh, and strolled nonchalantly out of the stable.

"Keep an eye on the rim-rock, boys," he called back, without turning his
head. A third of the way he went, stopped dead still, and made believe
inspect something upon the ground at his feet.

"Ah, go ON!" bawled Wally, his nerves all on edge.

Jack dug his heel into the dust, blew the ashes from his cigarette, and
went on slowly to the gate, passed through, and stood well back, out of
sight under the trees, to watch.

Wally snorted disdain of any proceeding so spectacular, but he was as he
was made, and he could not keep his dare-devil spirit quite in abeyance.
He twitched his hat farther back on his head, stuck his hands deep into
his pockets, and walked deliberately out into the open, his neck as
stiff as a newly elected politician on parade. He did not stop, as Jack
had done, but he facetiously whistled "Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are
marching," and he went at a pace which permitted him to finish the tune
before he reached the gate. He joined Jack in the shade, and his face,
when he looked back to the stable, was anxious.

"It must be Grant he wants, all right," he muttered, resting one hand
on Jack's shoulder and speaking so he could not be overheard from the
house. "And I wish to the Lord he'd stay where he's at."

But Good Indian was already two paces from the door, coming steadily up
the path, neither faster nor slower than usual, with his eyes taking in
every object within sight as he went, and his thumb hooked inside his
belt, near where his gun swung at his hip. It was not until his free
hand was upon the gate that lack and Wally knew they had been holding
their breath.

"Well--here I am," said Good Indian, after a minute, smiling down at
them with the sunny look in his eyes. "I'm beginning to think I had a
dream. Only"--he dipped his fingers into the pocket of his shirt and
brought up the flattened bullet--"that is pretty blamed realistic--for
a dream." His eyes searched involuntarily the rim-rock with a certain
incredulity, as if he could not bring himself to believe in that bullet,
after all.

"But two of the jumpers are gone," said Wally. "I reckon we stirred 'em
up some yesterday, and they're trying to get back at us."

"They've picked a dandy place," Good Indian observed. "I think maybe it
would be a good idea to hold that fort ourselves. We should have thought
of that; only I never thought--"

Phoebe, heavy-eyed and pale from wakefulness and worry, came then, and
called them in to breakfast. Gene and Clark came in, sulky still, and
inclined to snappishness when they did speak. Donny announced that he
had been in the garden, and that Stanley told him he would blow the top
of his head off if he saw him there again. "And I never done a thing to
him!" he declared virtuously.

Phoebe set down the coffee-pot with an air of decision.

"I want you boys to remember one thing," she said firmly, "and that is
that there must be no more shooting going on around here. It isn't only
what Baumberger thinks--I don't know as ho's got anything to say about
it--it's what _I_ think. I know I'm only a woman, and you all consider
yourselves men, whether you are or not, and it's beneath your dignity,
maybe, to listen to your mother.

"But your mother has seen the day when she was counted on as much,
almost, as if she'd been a man. Why, great grief! I've stood for hours
peeking out a knot-hole in the wall, with that same old shotgun Donny
got hold of, ready to shoot the first Injun that stuck his nose from
behind a rock."

The color came into her cheeks at the memory, and a sparkle into her
eyes. "I've seen real fighting, when it was a life-and-death matter.
I've tended to the men that were shot before my eyes, and I've sung
hymns over them that died. You boys have grown up on some of the stories
about the things I've been through.

"And here last night," she reproached irritatedly, "I heard someone say:
'Oh, come on--we're scaring Mum to death!' The idea! 'scaring Mum!' I
can tell you young jackanapes one thing: If I thought there was anything
to be gained by it, or if it would save trouble instead of MAKING
trouble, 'MUM' could go down there right now, old as she is, and SCARED
as she is, and clean out the whole, measly outfit!" She stared sternly
at the row of faces bent over their plates.

"Oh, you can laugh--it's only your mother!" she exclaimed indignantly,
when she saw Jack's eyes go shut and Gene's mouth pucker into a tight
knot. "But I'll have you to know I'm boss of this ranch when your
father's gone, and if there's any more of that kid foolishness
to-day--laying behind a currant bush and shooting COFFEE-POTS!--I'll
thrash the fellow that starts it! It isn't the kind of fighting I'VE
been used to. I may be away behind the times--I guess I am!--but I've
always been used to the idea that guns weren't to be used unless you
meant business. This thing of getting out and PLAYING gun-fight is kinda
sickening to a person that's seen the real thing.

"'Scaring Mum to death!"' She seemed to find it very hard to forget
that, or to forgive it. "'SCARING MUM'--and Jack, there, was born in the
time of an Indian uprising, and I laid with your father's revolver on
the pillow where I could put my hand on it, day or night! YOU scare
Mum! MUM will scare YOU, if there's any more of that let's-play-Injun
business going on around this ranch. Why, I'd lead you down there by the
ear, every mother's son of you, and tell that man Stanley to SPANK you!"

"Mum can whip her weight in wildcats any old time," Wally announced
after a heavy silence, and glared aggressively from one foolish-looking
face to another.

As was frequently the case, the wave of Phoebe's wrath ebbed harmlessly
away in laughter as the humorous aspect of her tirade was brought to her
attention.

"Just the same, I want you should mind what I tell you," she said, in
her old motherly tone, "and keep away from those ruffians down there.
You can't do anything but make 'em mad, and give 'em an excuse for
killing someone. When your father gets back, we'll see what's to be
done."

"All right, Mum. We won't look toward the garden to-day," Wally promised
largely, and held out his cup to her to be refilled. "You can keep my
gun, if you want to make dead sure."

"No, I can trust my boys, I hope," and she glowed with real pride in
them when she said it.

Good Indian lingered on the porch for half an hour or so, waiting for
Evadna to appear. She may have seen him through the window--at any rate
she slipped out very quietly, and had her breakfast half eaten before
he suspected that she was up; and when he went into the kitchen, she was
talking animatedly with Marie about Mexican drawn-work, and was drawing
intricate little diagrams of certain patterns with her fork upon the
tablecloth.

She looked up, and gave him a careless greeting, and went back to
discussing certain "wheels" in the corner of an imaginary lunch-cloth
and just how one went about making them. He made a tentative remark or
two, trying to win her attention to himself, but she pushed her cup and
saucer aside to make room for further fork drawings, and glanced at him
with her most exaggerated Christmas-angel look.

"Don't interrupt, please," she said mincingly. "This is IMPORTANT. And,"
she troubled to explain, "I'm really in a hurry, because I'm going to
help Aunt Phoebe make strawberry jam."

If she thought that would fix his determination to remain and have her
to himself for a few minutes, she was mistaken in her man. Good Indian
turned on his heel, and went out with his chin in the air, and found
that Gene and Clark had gone off to the meadow, with Donny an unwelcome
attendant, and that Wally and Jack were keeping the dust moving between
the gate and the stable, trying to tempt a shot from the bluff. They
were much inclined to be skeptical regarding the bullet which Good
Indian carried in his breast-pocket.

"WE can't raise anybody," Wally told him disgustedly, "and I've made
three round trips myself. I'm going to quit fooling around, and go to
work."

Whether he did or not, Good Indian did not wait to prove. He did not
say anything, either, about his own plans. He was hurt most unreasonably
because of Evadna's behavior, and he felt as if he were groping about
blindfolded so far as the Hart trouble was concerned. There must be
something to do, but he could not see what it was. It reminded him oddly
of when he sat down with his algebra open before him, and scowled at
a problem where the x y z's seemed to be sprinkled through it with a
diabolical frequency, and there was no visible means of discovering what
the unknown quantities could possibly be.

He saddled Keno, and rode away in that silent preoccupation which the
boys called the sulks for want of a better understanding of it. As a
matter of fact, he was trying to put Evadna out of his mind for the
present, so that he could think clearly of what he ought to do. He
glanced often up at the rim-rock as he rode slowly to the Point o'
Rocks, and when he was halfway to the turn he thought he saw something
moving up there.

He pulled up to make sure, and a little blue ball puffed out like
a child's balloon, burst, and dissipated itself in a thin, trailing
ribbon, which the wind caught and swept to nothing. At the same time
something spatted into the trail ahead of him, sending up a little spurt
of fine sand.

Keno started, perked up his ears toward the place, and went on, stepping
gingerly. Good Indian's lips drew back, showing his teeth set tightly
together. "Still at it, eh?" he muttered aloud, pricked Keno's flanks
with his rowels, and galloped around the Point.

There, for the time being, he was safe. Unless the shooter upon the
rim-rock was mounted, he must travel swiftly indeed to reach again a
point within range of the grade road before Good Indian would pass out
of sight again. For the trail wound in and out, looping back upon itself
where the hill was oversleep, hidden part of the time from the receding
wall of rock by huge bowlders and giant sage.

Grant knew that he was safe from that quarter, and was wondering whether
he ought to ride up along the top of the bluff before going to Hartley,
as he had intended.

He had almost reached the level, and was passing a steep, narrow, little
gully choked with rocks, when something started up so close beside him
that Keno ducked away and squatted almost upon his haunches. His gun was
in his hand, and his finger crooked upon the trigger, when a voice he
faintly recognized called to him softly:

"Yo' no shoot--no shoot--me no hurtum. All time yo' frien'." She stood
trembling beside the trail, a gay, plaid shawl about her shoulders in
place of the usual blanket, her hair braided smoothly with bright,
red ribbons entwined through it. Her dress was a plain slip of bright
calico, which had four-inch roses, very briery and each with a
gaudy butterfly poised upon the topmost petals running over it in an
inextricable tangle. Beaded moccasins were on her feet, and her eyes
were frightened eyes, with the wistfulness of a timid animal. Yet she
did not seem to be afraid of Good Indian.

"I sorry I scare yo' horse," she said hesitatingly, speaking better
English than before. "I heap hurry to get here. I speak with yo'."

"Well, what is it?" Good Indian's tone was not as brusque as his words;
indeed, he spoke very gently, for him. This was the good-looking young
squaw he had seen at the Indian camp. "What's your name?" he asked,
remembering suddenly that he had never heard it.

"Rachel. Peppajee, he my uncle." She glanced up at him shyly, then down
to where the pliant toe of her moccasin was patting a tiny depression
into the dust. "Bad mans like for shoot yo'," she said, not looking
directly at him again. "Him up there, all time walk where him can look
down, mebbyso see you, mebbyso shootum."

"I know--I'm going to ride around that way and round him up."
Unconsciously his manner had the arrogance of strength and power to do
as he wished, which belongs to healthy young males.

"N-o, no-o!" She drew a sharp breath "o' no good there! Dim shoot yo'.
Yo' no go! Ah-h--I sorry I tellum yo' now. Bad mans, him. I watch, I
take care him no shoot. Him shoot, mebbyso _I_ shoot!"

With a little laugh that was more a plea for gentle judgment than
anything else, she raised the plaid shawl, and gave him a glimpse of a
rather battered revolver, cheap when it was new and obviously well past
its prime.

"I want yo'--" she hesitated; "I want yo'--be heap careful. I want yo'
no ride close by hill. Ride far out!" She made a sweeping gesture toward
the valley. "All time I watch."

He was staring at her in a puzzled way. She was handsome, after her
wild, half-civilized type, and her anxiety for his welfare touched him
and besought his interest.

"Indians go far down--" She swept her arm down the narrowing river
valley. "Catch fish. Peppajee stay--no can walk far. I stay. All go,
mebbyso stay five days." Her hand lifted involuntarily to mark the
number.

He did not know why she told him all that, and he could not learn from
her anything about his assailant. She had been walking along the bluff,
he gathered--though why, she failed to make clear to him. She had, from
a distance, caught a glimpse of a man watching the valley beneath him.
She had seen him raise a rifle, take long aim, and shoot--and she had
known that he was shooting at Good Indian.

When he asked her the second time what was her errand up there--whether
she was following the man, or had suspected that he would be there--she
shook her head vaguely and took refuge behind the stolidity of her race.

In spite of her pleading, he put his horse to scrambling up the first
slope which it was possible to climb, and spent an hour riding, gun in
hand, along the rim of the bluff, much as he had searched it the evening
before.

But there was nothing alive that he could discover, except a hawk which
lifted itself languorously off a high, sharp rock, and flapped lazily
out across the valley when he drew near. The man with the rifle had
disappeared as completely as if he had never been there, and there
was not one chance in a hundred of hunting him out, in all that rough
jumble.

When he was turning back at last toward Hartley, he saw Rachel for a
moment standing out against the deep blue of the sky, upon the very rim
of the bluff. He waved a hand to her, but she gave no sign; only, for
some reason, he felt that she was watching him ride away, and he had a
brief, vagrant memory of the wistfulness he had seen in her eyes.

On the heels of that came a vision of Evadna swinging in the hammock
which hung between the two locust trees, and he longed unutterably to be
with her there. He would be, he promised himself, within the next hour
or so, and set his pace in accordance with his desire, resolved to make
short work of his investigations in Hartley and his discussion of late
events with Miss Georgie.

He had not, it seemed to him, had more than two minutes with Evadna
since that evening of rapturous memory when they rode home together from
the Malad, and afterward sat upon the stone bench at the head of the
pond, whispering together so softly that they did not even disturb the
frogs among the lily-pads within ten feet of them. It was not so long
ago, that evening. The time that had passed since might be reckoned
easily in hours, but to Good Indian it seemed a month, at the very
least.



CHAPTER XIX. EVADNA GOES CALLING

"I have every reason to believe that your two missing jumpers took
the train for Shoshone last night," Miss Georgie made answer to
Good Indian's account of what had happened since he saw her. "Two
furtive-eyed individuals answering your description bought round-trip
tickets and had me flag sixteen for them. They got on, all right. I saw
them. And if they got off before the next station they must have landed
on their heads, because Sixteen was making up time and Shorty pulled the
throttle wide open at the first yank, I should judge, from the way he
jumped out of town. I've been expecting some of them to go and do their
filing stunt--and if the boys have begun to devil them any, the chances
are good that they'd take turns at it, anyway. They'd leave someone
always on the ground, that's a cinch.

"And Saunders," she went on rapidly, "returned safe enough. He sneaked
in just before I closed the office last night, and asked for a telegram.
There wasn't any, and he sneaked out again and went to bed--so Pete told
me this morning. And most of the Indians have pulled out--squaws, dogs,
papooses, and all--on some fishing or hunting expedition. I don't know
that it has anything to do with your affairs, or would even interest
you, though. And there has been no word from Peaceful, and they can't
possibly get back now till the four-thirty--five.

"And that's all I can tell you, Mr. Imsen," she finished crisply, and
took up a novel with a significance which not even the dullest man could
have ignored.

Good Indian stared, flushed hotly, and made for the door.

"Thank you for the information. I'm afraid this has been a lot of bother
for you," he said stiffly, gave her a ceremonious little bow, and went
his way stiff-necked and frowning.

Miss Georgie leaned forward so that she could see him through the
window. She watched him cross to the store, go up the three rough steps
to the platform, and disappear into the yawning blackness beyond the
wide-open door.

She did not open the novel and begin reading, even then. She dabbed her
handkerchief at her eyes, muttered: "My Heavens, what a fool!" apropos
of nothing tangible, and stared dully out at the forlorn waste of
cinders with rows of shining rails running straight across it upon ties
half sunken in the black desolation, and at the red abomination
which was the pump-house squatting beside the dripping tank, the pump
breathing asthmatically as it labored to keep the sliding water
gauge from standing at the figure which meant reproach for the grimy
attendant.

"What a fool--what a fool!" she repeated at the end of ten moody
minutes. Then she threw the novel into a corner of the room, set her
lower jaw into the square lines of stubbornness, went over to the
sleeping telegraph instrument which now and then clicked and twittered
in its sleep, called up Shoshone, and commanded the agent there to
send down a quart freezer of ice cream, a banana cake, and all the late
magazines he could find, including--especially including--the alleged
"funny" ones.

"You certainly--are--the prize--fool!" she said, when she switched
off the current, and she said it with vicious emphasis. Whereupon she
recovered the novel, seated herself determinedly in the beribboned
rocker, flipped the leaves of the book spitefully until she found one
which had a corner turned down, and read a garden-party chapter much as
she used to study her multiplication table when she was ten and hated
arithmetic.

A freight was announced over the wire, arrived with a great wheezing and
snorting, which finally settled to a rhythmic gasping of the air pump,
while a few boxes of store supplies were being dumped unceremoniously
upon the platform. Miss Georgie was freight agent as well as many other
things, and she went out and stood bareheaded in the sun to watch the
unloading.

She performed, with the unthinking precision which comes of long
practice, the many little duties pertaining to her several offices, and
when the wheels began once more to clank, and she had waved her hand
to the fireman, the brakeman, and the conductor, and had seen the dirty
flags at the rear of the swaying caboose flap out of sight around the
low, sage-covered hill, she turned rather dismally to the parlor end
of the office, and took up the book with her former air of grim
determination. So for an hour, perhaps.

"Is Miss Georgie Howard at home?" It was Evadna standing in the doorway,
her indigo eyes fixed with innocent gayety--which her mouth somehow
failed to meet halfway in mirth--upon the reader.

"She is, chicken, and overjoyed at the sight of you!" Miss Georgie
rose just as enthusiastically as if she had not seen Evadna slip from
Huckleberry's back, fuddle the tie-rope into what looked like a knot,
and step lightly upon the platform. She had kept her head down--had Miss
Georgie--until the last possible second, because she was still being a
fool and had permitted a page of her book to fog before her eyes. There
was no fog when she pushed Evadna into the seat of honor, however, and
her mouth abetted her eyes in smiling.

"Everything at the ranch is perfectly horrid," Evadna complained
pathetically, leaning back in the rocking-chair. "I'd just as soon be
shut up in a graveyard. You can't IMAGINE what it's like, Georgie,
since those horrible men came and camped around all over the place! All
yesterday afternoon and till dark, mind you, the boys were down there
shooting at everything but the men, and they began to shoot back, and
Aunt Phoebe was afraid the boys would be hit, and so we all went down
and--oh, it was awful! If Grant hadn't come home and stopped them,
everybody would have been murdered. And you should have heard how they
swore at Grant afterward! They just called him everything they could
think of for making them stop. I had to sit around on the other side of
the house--and even then I couldn't help hearing most of it.

"And to-day it is worse, because they just go around like a lot
of dummies and won't do anything but look mean. Aunt Phoebe was so
cross--CROSS, mind you!--because I burnt the jam. And some of the
jumpers are missing, and nobody knows where they went--and Marie has got
the toothache worse than ever, and won't go and have it pulled because
it will HURT! I don't see how it can hurt much worse than it does
now--she just goes around with tears running down into the flannel
around her face till I could SHAKE her!" Evadna laughed--a self-pitying
laugh, and rocked her small person violently. "I wish I could have an
office and live in it and telegraph things to people," she sighed, and
laughed again most adorably at her own childishness. "But really and
truly, it's enough to drive a person CRAZY, down at the ranch!"

"For a girl with a brand-new sweetheart--" Miss Georgie reproved
quizzically, and reached for the inevitable candy box.

"A lot of good that does, when he's never there!" flashed Evadna,
unintentionally revealing her real grievance. "He just eats and
goes--and he isn't even there to eat, half the time. And when he's
there, he's grumpy, like all the rest." She was saying the things she
had told herself, on the way up, that she would DIE rather than say; to
Miss Georgie, of all people.

"I expect he's pretty worried, chicken, over that land business."
Miss Georgie offered her candy, and Evadna waved the box from her
impatiently, as if her spirits were altogether too low for sweets.

"Well, I'm very sure I'M not to blame for those men being there," she
retorted petulantly. "He"--she hesitated, and then plunged heedlessly
on--"he acts just as if I weren't anybody at all. I'm sure, if he
expects me to be a doll to be played with and then dumped into a corner
where I'm to smile and smile until he comes and picks me up again--"

"Now, chicken, what's the use of being silly?" Miss Georgie turned her
head slightly away, and stared out of the window. "He's worried, I tell
you, and instead of sulking because he doesn't stay and make love--"

"Well, upon my word! Just as if I wanted--"

"You really ought to help him by being kind and showing a little
sympathy, instead--"

"It appears that the supply of sympathy--"

"Instead of making it harder for him by feeling neglected and letting
him see that you do. My Heavens above!" Miss Georgie faced her suddenly
with pink cheeks. "When a man is up against a problem--and carries his
life in his hand--"

"You don't know a thing about it!" Evadna stopped rocking, and sat up
very straight in the chair. "And even if that were true, is that any
reason why he should AVOID me? I'M not threatening his life!"

"He doesn't avoid you. And you're acting sillier than I ever supposed
you could. He can't be in two places at once, can he? Now, let's be
sensible, chicken. Grant--"

"Oh--h!" There was a peculiar, sliding inflection upon that word, which
made Miss Georgie's hand shut into a fist.

"Grant"--Miss Georgie put a defiant emphasis upon it--"is doing all he
can to get to the bottom of that jumping business. There's something
crooked about it, and he knows it, and is trying to--"

"I know all that." Evadna interrupted without apology.

"Well, of course, if you DO--then I needn't tell you how silly it is for
you to complain of being neglected, when you know his time is all taken
up with trying to ferret out a way to block their little game. He feels
in a certain sense responsible--"

"Yes, I know. He thinks he should have been watching somebody or
something instead of--of being with me. He took the trouble to make that
clear to me, at least!" Evadna's eyes were very blue and very bright,
but there was no look of an angel in her face.

Miss Georgie pressed her lips together tightly for a minute. When she
spoke, she was cheerfully impersonal as to tone and manner.

"Chicken, you're a little goose. The man is simply crazy about you, and
harassed to death with this ranch business. Once that's settled--well,
you'll see what sort of a lover he can be!"

"Thank you so much for holding out a little hope and encouragement, my
dear!" Evadna, by the way, looked anything but thankful; indeed, she
seemed to resent the hope and the encouragement as a bit of unwarranted
impertinence. She glanced toward the door as if she meditated an
immediate departure, but ended by settling back in the chair and
beginning to rock again.

"It's a nasty, underhand business from start to finish," said Miss
Georgie, ignoring the remark. "It has upset everybody--me included, and
I'm sure it isn't my affair. It's just one of those tricky cases that
you know is rotten to the core, and yet you can't seem to get hold
of anything definite. My dad had one or two experiences with old
Baumberger--and if ever there was a sly old mole of a man, he's one.

"Did you ever take after a mole, chicken? They used to get in our garden
at home. They burrow underneath the surface, you know, and one never
sees them. You can tell by the ridge of loose earth that they're
there, and if you think you've located Mr. Mole, and jab a stick
down, why--he's somewhere else, nine times in ten. I used to call them
Baumbergers, even then. Dad," she finished reminiscently, "was always
jabbing his law stick down where the earth seemed to move--but he never
located old Baumberger, to my knowledge."

She stopped, because Evadna, without a shadow of doubt, was looking
bored. Miss Georgie regarded her with the frown she used when she was
applying her mental measuring-stick. She began to suspect that Evadna
was, after all, an extremely self-centered little person; she was
sorry for the suspicion, and she was also conscious of a certain
disappointment which was not altogether for herself.

"Ah, well"--she dismissed analysis and the whole subject with a laugh
that was partly yawn--"away with dull care. Away with dull everything.
It's too hot to think or feel. A real emotion is as superfluous and
oppressive as a--a 'camel petticoat!" This time her laugh was real and
infectiously carefree. "Take off your hat, chicken. I'll go beg a hunk
of ice from my dear friend Peter, and make some lemonade as is lemonade;
or claret punch, if you aren't a blue ribboner, or white-ribboner, or
some other kind of a good-ribboner." Miss Georgie hated herself for
sliding into sheer flippancy, but she preferred that extreme to the
other, and she could not hold her ground just then at the "happy
medium."

Evadna, however, seemed to disapprove of the flippancy. She did not take
off her hat, and she stated evenly that she must go, and that she really
did not care for lemonade, or claret punch, either.

"What, in Heaven's name, DO you care for--besides yourself?" flared Miss
Georgie, quite humanly exasperated. "There, chicken--the heat always
turns me snappy," she repented instantly. "Please pinch me." She held
out a beautiful, tapering forearm, and smiled.

"I'm the snappy one," said Evadna, but she did not smile as she began
drawing on her gauntlets slowly and deliberately.

If she were waiting for Miss Georgie to come back to the subject of
Grant, she was disappointed, for Miss Georgie did not come to any
subject whatever. A handcar breezed past the station, the four
section-men pumping like demons because of the slight down grade and
their haste for their dinner.

Huckleberry gave one snort and one tug backward upon the tie rope and
then a coltish kick into the air when he discovered that he was
free. After that, he took off through the sagebrush at a lope, too
worldly-wise to follow the trail past the store, where someone might
rush out and grab him before he could dodge away. He was a wise little
pinto--Huckleberry.

"And now, I suppose I'll have the pleasure of walking home," grumbled
Evadna, standing upon the platform and gazing, with much self-pity,
after her runaway.

"It's noon--stay and eat dinner with me, chicken. Some of the boys will
bring him back after you the minute he gets to the ranch. It's too hot
to walk." Miss Georgie laid a hand coaxingly upon her arm.

But Evadna was in her mood of perversity. She wouldn't stay to dinner,
because Aunt Phoebe would be expecting her. She wouldn't wait for
Huckleberry to be brought back to her, because she would never hear the
last of it. She didn't mind the heat the least bit, and she would walk.
And no, she wouldn't borrow Miss Georgie's parasol; she hated parasols,
and she always had and always would. She gathered up her riding-skirt,
and went slowly down the steps.

Miss Georgie could be rather perverse herself upon occasion. She waited
until Evadna was crunching cinders under her feet before she spoke
another word, and then she only called out a flippant, "Adios,
senorita!"

Evadna knew no Spanish at all. She lifted her shoulders in what might be
disdain, and made no reply whatever.

"Little idiot!" gritted Miss Georgie--and this time she was not speaking
of herself.



CHAPTER XX. MISS GEORGIE ALSO MAKES A CALL

Saunders, limp and apathetic and colorless, shuffled over to the station
with a wheelbarrow which had a decrepit wheel, that left an undulating
imprint of its drunken progress in the dust as it went. He loaded the
boxes of freight with the abused air of one who feels that Fate has used
him hardly, and then sidled up to the station door with the furtive air
which Miss Georgie always inwardly resented.

She took the shipping bill from him with her fingertips, reckoned the
charges, and received the money without a word, pushing a few pieces
of silver toward him upon the table. As he bent to pick them up clawing
unpleasantly with vile finger-nails--she glanced at him contemptuously,
looked again more attentively, pursed her lips with one corner between
her teeth, and when he had clawed the last dime off the smooth surface
of the table, she spoke to him as if he were not the reptile she
considered him, but a live human.

"Horribly hot, isn't it? I wish _I_ could sleep till noon. It would make
the days shorter, anyway."

"I opened up the store, and then I went back to bed," Saunders replied
limply. "Just got up when the freight pulled in. Made so blamed much
noise it woke me. I seem to need a good deal of sleep." He coughed
behind his hand, and lingered inside the door. It was so unusual for
Miss Georgie to make conversation with him that Saunders was almost
pitifully eager to be agreeable.

"If it didn't sound cruel, this weather," said Miss Georgie lightly,
still looking at him--or, more particularly, at the crumpled, soiled
collar of his coarse blue shirt--"I'd advise you to get out of Hartley
once a day, if it was no more than to take a walk. Though to be sure,"
she smiled, "the prospect is not inviting, to say the least. Put it
would be a change; I'd run up and down the track, if I didn't have to
stick here in this office all day."

"I can't stand walking," Saunders whined. "It makes me cough." To
illustrate, he gave another little hack behind his hand. "I went up to
the stable yesterday with a book, and laid down in the hay. And I went
to sleep, and Pete thought I was lost, I guess." He grinned, which was
not pleasant, for he chewed tobacco and had ugly, discolored teeth into
the bargain.

"I like to lay in the hay," he added lifelessly. "I guess I'll take my
bed up there; that lean-to is awful hot."

"Well, you're lucky that you can do exactly as you please, and sleep
whenever you please." Miss Georgie turned to her telegraph instrument,
and began talking in little staccato sparks of electricity to the agent
at Shoshone, merely as a hint to Saunders to take himself away.

"Ain't been anything for me?" he asked, still lingering.

Miss Georgie shook her head. He waited a minute longer, and then
sidled out, and when he was heard crunching over the cinders with his
barrow-load of boxes, she switched off the current abruptly, and went
over to the window to watch him.

"Item," she began aloud, when he was quite gone, her eyes staring
vacantly down the scintillating rails to where they seemed to meet in
one glittering point far away in the desert. "Item--" But whatever the
item was, she jotted it down silently in that mental memorandum book
which was one of her whims. "Once I put a thing in that little blue
book of mine," she used to tell her father, "it's there for keeps. And
there's the advantage that I never leave it lying around to be lost,
or for other people to pick up and read to my everlasting undoing. It's
better than cipher--for I don't talk in my sleep."

The four-thirty-five train came in its own time, and brought the two
missing placer miners. But it did not bring Baumberger, nor Peaceful
Hart, nor any word of either. Miss Georgie spent a good deal of time
staring out of the window toward the store that day, and when she
was not doing that she was moving restlessly about the little office,
picking things up without knowing why she did so, and laying them down
again when she discovered them in her hands and had no use for them. The
ice cream came, and the cake, and the magazines; and she left the whole
pile just inside the door without undoing a wrapping.

At five o'clock she rose abruptly from the rocker, in which she had just
deposited herself with irritated emphasis, and wired her chief for leave
of absence until seven.

"It's important, Mr. Gray. Business which can't wait," she clicked
urgently. "I'll be back before Eight is due. Please." Miss Georgie did
not often send that last word of her own volition. All up and down the
line she was said to be "Independent as a hog on ice"--a simile not
pretty, perhaps, nor even exact, but frequently applied, nevertheless,
to self-reliant souls like the Hartley operator.

Be that as it may, she received gracious permission to lock the office
door from the outside, and she was not long in doing so, and heaved a
great sigh of relief when it was done. She went straight to the store,
and straight back to where Pete Hamilton was leaning over a barrel
redolent of pickled pork. He came up with dripping hands and a
treasure-trove of flabby meat, and while he was dangling it over the
barrel until the superfluous brine dripped away, she asked him for a
horse.

"I dunno where Saunders is again," he said, letting his consent be
taken for granted. "But I'll go myself and saddle up, if you'll mind the
store. Soon as I finish waitin' on this customer," he added, casting a
glance toward a man who sat upon the counter and dangled his legs while
he apathetically munched stale pretzels and waited for his purchases.

"Oh, I can saddle, all right, Pete. I've got two hours off, and I want
to ride down to see how the Harts are getting along. Exciting times down
there, from all accounts."

"Maybe I can round up Saunders. He must be somewheres around," Pete
suggested languidly, wrapping the pork in a piece of brown paper and
reaching for the string which dangled from the ball hung over his head.

"Saunders is asleep, very likely. If he isn't in his room, never mind
hunting him. The horse is in the stable, I suppose. I can saddle better
than Saunders."

Pete tied the package, wiped his hands, and went heavily out. He
returned immediately, said that Saunders must be up at the stable, and
turned his attention to weighing out five pounds of white beans.

Miss Georgie helped herself to a large bag of mixed candy, and put
the money in the drawer, laid her key upon the desk for safe-keeping,
repinned her white sailor hat so that the hot wind which blew should not
take it off her head, and went cheerfully away to the stable.

She did not saddle the horse at once. She first searched the pile of
sweet-smelling clover in the far end, made sure that no man was there,
assured herself in the same manner of the fact that she was absolutely
alone in the stable so far as humans were concerned, and continued her
search; not for Saunders now, but for sagebrush. She went outside, and
looked carefully at her immediate surroundings.

"There's hardly a root of it anywhere around close," she said to
herself. "Nor around the store, either--nor any place where one would be
apt to go ordinarily."

She stood there meditatively for a few minutes, remembered that two
hours do not last long, and saddled hurriedly. Then, mounting awkwardly
because of the large, lumpy bag of candy which she must carry in her
hands for want of a pocket large enough to hold it, she rode away to the
Indian camp.

The camp was merely a litter of refuse and the ashes of various
campfires, with one wikiup standing forlorn in the midst. Miss Georgie
never wasted precious time on empty ceremony, and she would have gone
into that tent unannounced and stated her errand without any compunction
whatever. Put Peppajee was lying outside, smoking in the shade, with his
foot bandaged and disposed comfortably upon a folded blanket. She tossed
him the bag of candy, and stayed upon her horse.

"Howdy, Peppajee? How your foot? Pretty well, mebbyso?"

"Mebbyso bueno. Sun come two time, mebbyso walk all same no snake
biteum." Peppajee's eyes gloated over the gift as he laid it down beside
him.

"That's good. Say, Peppajee," Miss Georgie reached up to feel her
hatpins and to pat her hair, "I wish you'd watch Saunders. Him no good.
I think him bad. I can't keep an eye on him. Can you?"

"No can walk far." Peppajee looked meaningly at his bandages. "No can
watchum."

"Well, but you could tell somebody else to watch him. I think he do
bad thing to the Harts. You like Harts. You tell somebody to watch
Saunders."

"Indians pikeway--ketchum fish. Come back, mebbyso tellum watchum."

Miss Georgie drew in her breath for further argument, decided that it
was not worth while, and touched up her horse with the whip. "Good-by,"
she called back, and saw that Peppajee was looking after her with his
eyes, while his face was turned impassively to the front.

"You're just about as satisfying to talk to as a stump," she paid
tribute to his unassailable calm. "There's four bits wasted," she
sighed, "to say nothing of the trouble I had packing that candy to
you--you ungrateful old devil." With which unladylike remark she
dismissed him from her mind as a possible ally.

At the ranch, the boys were enthusiastically blistering palms and
stiffening the muscles of their backs, turning the water away from the
ditches that crossed the disputed tracts so that the trespassers there
should have none in which to pan gold--or to pretend that they were
panning gold. Since the whole ranch was irrigated by springs running out
here and there from under the bluff, and all the ditches ran to meadow
and orchard and patches of small fruit, and since the springs could not
well be stopped from flowing, the thing was not to be done in a minute.

And since there were four boys with decided ideas upon the
subject--ideas which harmonized only in the fundamental desire to harry
the interlopers, the thing was not to be done without much time being
wasted in fruitless argument.

Wally insisted upon running the water all into a sandy hollow where much
of it would seep away and a lake would do no harm, the main objection
to that being that it required digging at least a hundred yards of new
ditch, mostly through rocky soil.

Jack wanted to close all the headgates and just let the water go where
it wanted to--which was easy enough, but ineffective, because most of it
found its way into the ditches farther down the slope.

Gene and Clark did not much care how the thing was done--so long as it
was done their way. At least, that is what they said.

It was Good Indian who at length settled the matter. There were five
springs altogether; he proposed that each one make himself responsible
for a certain spring, and see to it that no water reached the jumpers.

"And I don't care a tinker's dam how you do it," he said. "Drink it all,
if you want to. I'll take the biggest--that one under the milk-house."
Whereat they jeered at him for wanting to be close to Evadna.

"Well, who has a better right?" he challenged, and then inconsiderately
left them before they could think of a sufficiently biting retort.

So they went to work, each in his own way, agreeing mostly in untiring
industry. That is how Miss Georgie found them occupied--except that Good
Indian had stopped long enough to soothe Evadna and her aunt, and
to explain that the water would really not rise much higher in the
milk-house, and that he didn't believe Evadna's pet bench at the head of
the pond would be inaccessible because of his efforts.

Phoebe was sloshing around upon the flooded floor of her milk-house,
with her skirts tucked up and her indignation growing greater as she
gave it utterance, rescuing her pans of milk and her jars of cream.
Evadna, upon the top step, sat with her feet tucked up under her as if
she feared an instant inundation. She, also, was giving utterance to her
feminine irritation at the discomfort--of her aunt presumably, since she
herself was high and dry.

"And it won't do a BIT of good. They'll just knock that dam business all
to pieces to-night--" She was scolding Grant.

"Swearing, chicken? Things must be in a great state!"

Grant grinned at Miss Georgie, forgetting for the moment his rebuff that
morning. "She did swear, didn't she?" he confirmed wickedly. "And she's
been working overtime, trying to reform me. Wanted to pin me down to 'my
goodness!' and 'oh, dear!'--with all this excitement taking place on the
ranch!"

"I wasn't swearing at all. Grant has been shoveling sand all afternoon,
building a dam over by the fence, and the water has been rising and
rising till--" She waved her hand gloomily at her bedraggled Aunt Phoebe
working like a motherly sort of gnome in its shadowy grotto. "Oh, if I
were Aunt Phoebe, I should just shake you, Grant Imsen!"

"Try it," he invited, his eyes worshiping her in her pretty petulance.
"I wish you would."

As Miss Georgie went past them down the steps, her face had the set
look of one who is consciously and deliberately cheerful under trying
conditions.

"Don't quarrel, children," she advised lightly. "Howdy, Mrs. Hart? What
are they trying to do--drown you?"

"Oh, these boys of mine! They'll be the death of me, what with the
things they won't do, and the things they WILL do. They're trying now
to create a water famine for the jumpers, and they're making their own
mother swim for the good of the cause." Phoebe held out a plump hand,
moist and cold from lifting cool crocks of milk, and laughed at her own
predicament.

"The water won't rise any more, Mother Hart," Grant called down to her
from the top step, where he was sitting unblushingly beside Evadna. "I
told you six inches would be the limit, and then it would run off in the
new ditch. You know I explained just why--"

"Oh, yes, I know you explained just WHY," Phoebe cut in disconsolately
and yet humorously, "but explanations don't seem to help my poor
milk-house any. And what about the garden, and the fruit, if you turn
the water all down into the pasture? And what about the poor horses
getting their feet wet and catching their death of cold? And what's to
hinder that man Stanley and his gang from packing water in buckets from
the lake you're going to have in the pasture?"

She looked at Miss Georgie whimsically. "I'm an ungrateful, bad-tempered
old woman, I guess, for they're doing it because it's the only thing
they can do, since I put my foot down on all this bombarding and burning
good powder just to ease their minds. They've got to do something, I
suppose, or they'd all burst. And I don't know but what it's a good
thing for 'em to work off their energy digging ditches, even if it don't
do a mite of good."

Good Indian was leaning forward with his elbows on his knees, murmuring
lover's confidences behind the shield of his tilted hat, which hid
from all but Evadna his smiling lips and his telltale, glowing eyes. He
looked up at that last sentence, though it is doubtful if he had heard
much of what she had been saying.

"It's bound to do good if it does anything," he said, with an optimism
which was largely the outgrowth of his beatific mood, which in its turn
was born of his nearness to Evadna and her gracious manner toward him.
"We promised not to molest them on their claims. But if they get over
the line to meddle with our water system, or carry any in buckets--which
they can't, because they all leak like the deuce"--he grinned as he
thought of the bullet holes in them--"why, I don't know but what someone
might object to that, and send them back on their own side of the line."

He picked up a floating ribbon-end which was a part of Evadna's belt,
and ran it caressingly through his fingers in a way which set Miss
Georgie's teeth together. "I'm afraid," he added dryly, his eyes once
more seeking Evadna's face with pure love hunger, "they aren't going to
make much of a stagger at placer mining, if they haven't any water."
He rolled the ribbon up tightly, and then tossed it lightly toward her
face. "ARE they, Goldilocks?"

"Are they what? I've told you a dozen times to stop calling me that. I
had a doll once that I named Goldilocks, and I melted her nose off--she
was wax--and you always remind me of the horrible expression it gave
to her face. I'd go every day and take her out of the bureau-drawer
and look at her, and then cry my eyes out. Won't you come and sit down,
Georgie? There's room. Now, what was the discussion, and how far had we
got? Aunt Phoebe, I don't believe it has raised a bit lately. I've been
watching that black rock with the crack in it." Evadna moved nearer to
Good Indian, and pulled her skirts close upon the other side,
thereby making a space at least eight inches wide for Miss Georgie's
accommodation.

"I can't sit anywhere," said Miss Georgie, looking at her watch. "By the
way, chicken, did you have to walk all the way home?"

Evadna looked sidelong at Good Indian, as if a secret had been
betrayed. "No," she said, "I didn't. I just got to the top of the grade
when a squaw came along, and she was leading Huckleberry. A gaudy young
squaw, all red and purple and yellow. She was awfully curious about you,
Grant. She wanted to know where you were and what you were doing. I hope
you aren't a flirtatious young man. She seemed to know you pretty well,
I thought."

She had to explain to her Aunt Phoebe and Grant just how she came to be
walking, and she laughed at the squaw's vivid costume, and declared she
would have one like it, because Grant must certainly admire colors. She
managed, innocently enough, to waste upon such trivialities many of Miss
Georgie's precious minutes.

At last that young woman, after glancing many times at her watch, and
declining an urgent invitation to stay to supper, declared that she
must go, and tried to give Good Indian a significant look without being
detected in the act by Evadna. But Good Indian, for the time being
wholly absorbed by the smiles of his lady, had no eyes for her, and
seemed to attach no especial meaning to her visit. So that Miss Georgie,
feminine to her finger-tips and oversensitive perhaps where those two
were concerned, suddenly abandoned her real object in going to the
ranch, and rode away without saying a word of what she had come to say.

She was a direct young woman who was not in the habit of mincing matters
with herself, or of dodging an issue, and she bluntly called herself a
fool many times that evening, because she had not said plainly that she
would like to talk with Grant "and taken him off to one side--by the
ear, if necessary--and talked to him, and told him what I went down
there to tell him," she said to herself angrily. "And if Evadna didn't
like it, she could do the other thing. It does seem as if girls like
that are always having the trail smoothed down for them to dance their
way through life, while other people climb over rocks--mostly with
packs on their shoulders that don't rightly belong to them." She sighed
impatiently. "It must be lovely to be absolutely selfish--when you're
pretty enough and young enough to make it stick!" Miss Georgie was,
without doubt, in a nasty temper that night.



CHAPTER XXI. SOMEBODY SHOT SAUNDERS

The hot days dropped, one by one, into the past like fiery beads upon a
velvety black cord. Miss Georgie told them silently in the meager
little office, and sighed as they slipped from under her white, nervous
fingers. One--nothing happened that could be said to bear upon the
one big subject in her mind, the routine work of passing trains and
dribbling business in the express and freight departments, and a long
afternoon of heat and silence save for the asthmatic pump, fifty yards
down the main track. Two--this exactly like the first, except that those
inseparables, Hagar, Viney, and Lucy, whom Miss Georgie had inelegantly
dubbed "the Three Greases," appeared, silent, blanket-enshrouded, and
perspiring, at the office door in mid-afternoon. Half a box of soggy
chocolates which the heat had rendered a dismally sticky mass won from
them smiles and half-intelligible speech. Fishing was poor--no ketchum.
Three--not even the diversion of the squaws to make her forget
the dragging hours. Nothing--nothing--nothing, she told herself
apathetically when that third day had slipped upon the black cord of a
soft, warm night, star-sprinkled and unutterably lonely as it brooded
over the desert.

On the morning of the fourth day, Miss Georgie woke with the vague sense
that something had gone wrong. True railroader as she had come to be,
she thought first that there had been a wreck, and that she was wanted
at the telegraph instrument. She was up and partly dressed before the
steps and the voices which had broken her sleep had reached her door.

Pete Hamilton's voice, trembling with excitement, called to her.

"What is it? What has happened?" she cried from within, beset by a
hundred wild conjectures.

"Saunders--somebody shot Saunders. Wire for a doctor, quick as yuh can.
He ain't dead yet--but he's goin' t' die, sure. Hurry up and wire--"
Somebody at the store called to him, and he broke off to run lumberingly
in answer to the summons. Miss Georgie made haste to follow him.

Saunders was lying upon a blanket on the store platform, and Miss
Georgie shuddered as she looked at him.

He was pasty white, and his eyes looked glassy under his half-closed
lids. He had been shot in the side--at the stable, he had gasped out
when Pete found him lying in the trail just back of the store. Now he
seemed beyond speech, and the little group of section-hands, the Chinese
cook at the section-house, and the Swede foreman, and Pete seemed quite
at a loss what to do.

"Take him in and put him to bed," Miss Georgie commanded, turning away.
"See if he's bleeding yet, and--well, I should put a cold compress on
the wound, I think. I'll send for a doctor--but he can't get here till
nine o'clock unless you want to stand the expense of a special. And by
that time--"

Saunders moved his head a trifle, and lifted his heavy lids to look
at her, which so unnerved Miss Georgie that she turned and ran to the
office. When she had sent the message she sat drumming upon the table
while she waited for an answer.

"G-r-a-n-" her fingers had spelled when she became conscious of the
fact, flushed hotly, and folded her hands tightly together in her lap.

"The doctor will come--Hawkinson, I sent for," she announced later to
Pete, holding out the telegram. She glanced reluctantly at the wrinkled
blanket where Saunders had lain, caught a corner of her under lip
between her teeth, and, bareheaded though she was, went down the steps
and along the trail to the stable.

"I've nearly an hour before I need open the office," she said to
herself, looking at her watch. She did not say what she meant to do
with that hour, but she spent a quarter of it examining the stable and
everything in it. Especially did she search the loose, sandy soil in its
vicinity for tracks.

Finally she lifted her skirts as a woman instinctively does at a street
crossing, and struck off through the sagebrush, her eyes upon a line of
uncertain footsteps as of a drunken man reeling that way. They were not
easy to follow--or they would not have been if she had not felt certain
of the general direction which they must take. More than once she lost
sight of them for several rods, but she always picked them up farther
along. At one place she stopped, and stood perfectly still, her skirts
held back tightly with both hands, while she stared fascinatedly at a
red smear upon a broken branch of sage and the smooth-packed hollow in
the sand where he must have lain.

"He's got nerve--I'll say that much for him," she observed aloud, and
went on.

The footprints were plain where he crossed the grade road near the edge
of the bluff, but from there on it was harder to follow them because of
the great patches of black lava rock lying even with the surface of the
ground, where a dozen men might walk abreast and leave no sign that the
untrained eye, at least, could detect.

"This is a case for Indians," she mused, frowning over an open space
where all was rock. "Injun Charlie would hunt tracks all day for a
dollar or two; only he'd make tracks just to prove himself the real
goods." She sighed, stood upon her tiptoes, and peered out over the sage
to get her bearings, then started on at a hazard. She went a few rods,
found herself in a thick tangle of brush through which she could not
force her way, started to back out, and caught her hair on a scraggly
scrub which seemed to have as many prongs as there are briers on a
rosebush. She was struggling there with her hands fumbling unavailingly
at the back of her bowed head, when she was pounced upon by someone or
something through the sage. She screamed.

"The--deuce!" Good Indian brought out the milder expletive with the flat
intonation which the unexpected presence of a lady frequently gives to
a man's speech. "Lucky I didn't take a shot at you through the bushes.
I did, almost, when I saw somebody moving here. Is this your favorite
place for a morning ramble?" He had one hand still upon her arm, and
he was laughing openly at her plight. But he sobered when he stooped a
little so that he could see her face, for there were tears in her eyes,
and Miss Georgie was not the sort of young woman whom one expects to
shed tears for slight cause.

"If you did it--and you must have--I don't see how you can laugh about
it, even if he is a crawling reptile of a man that ought to be hung!"
The tears were in her voice as well as her eyes, and there were reproach
and disappointment also.

"Did what--to whom--to where, to why?" Good Indian let go her arm, and
began helpfully striving with the scraggly scrub and its prongs. "Say,
I'll just about have to scalp you to get you loose. Would you mind very
much, Squaw-talk-far-off?" He ducked and peered into her face again, and
again his face sobered. "What's the matter?" he asked, in an entirely
different tone--which Miss Georgie, in spite of her mood, found less
satisfying than his banter.

"Saunders--OUCH; I'd as soon be scalped and done with, as to have you
pull out a hair at a time--Saunders crawled home with a bullet in his
ribs. And I thought--"

"Saunders!" Good Indian stared down at her, his hands dropped upon her
head.

Miss Georgie reached up, caught him by the wrists, and held him so while
she tilted her head that she might look up at him.

"Grant!" she cried softly. "He deserved it. You couldn't help it--he
would have shot you down like a dog, just because he was hired to do
it, or because of some hold over him. Don't think I blame you--or that
anyone would if they knew the truth. I came out to see--I just HAD to
make sure--but you must get away from here. You shouldn't have stayed
so long--" Miss Georgie gave a most unexpected sob, and stopped that she
might grit her teeth in anger over it.

"You think I shot him." As Good Indian said it, the sentence was merely
a statement, rather than an accusation or a reproach.

"I don't blame you. I suspected he was the man up here with the rifle.
That day--that first day, when you told me about someone shooting at
you--he came over to the station. And I saw two or three scraps of sage
sticking under his shirt-collar, as if he had been out in the brush; you
know how it breaks off and sticks, when you go through it. And he said
he had been asleep. And there isn't any sage where a man would have to
go through it unless he got right out in it, away from the trails. I
thought then that he was the man--"

"You didn't tell me." And this time he spoke reproachfully.

"It was after you had left that I saw it. And I did go down to the ranch
to tell you. But I--you were so--occupied--in other directions--" She
let go his wrists, and began fumbling at her hair, and she bowed her
head again so that her face was hidden from him.

"You could have told me, anyway," Good Indian said constrainedly.

"You didn't want her to know. I couldn't, before her. And I didn't want
to--hurt her by--" Miss Georgie fumbled more with her words than with
her hair.

"Well, there's no use arguing about that." Good Indian also found that
subject a difficult one. "You say he was shot. Did he say--"

"He wasn't able to talk when I saw him. Pete said Saunders claimed he
was shot at the stable, but I know that to be a lie." Miss Georgie spoke
with unfeeling exactness. "That was to save himself in case he got well,
I suppose. I believe the man is going to die, if he hasn't already; he
had the look--I've seen them in wrecks, and I know. He won't talk; he
can't. But there'll be an investigation--and Baumberger, I suspect,
will be just as willing to get you in this way as in any other. More so,
maybe. Because a murder is always awkward to handle."

"I can't see why he should want to murder me." Good Indian took her
hands away from her hair, and set himself again to the work of freeing
her. "You've been fudging around till you've got about ten million more
hairs wound up," he grumbled.

"Wow! ARE you deliberately torturing me?" she complained, winking with
the pain of his good intentions. "I don't believe he does want to murder
you. I think that was just Saunders trying to make a dandy good job of
it. He doesn't like you, anyway--witness the way you bawled him out that
day you roped--ow-w!--roped the dog. Baumberger may have wanted him
to keep an eye on you--My Heavens, man! Do you think you're plucking a
goose?"

"I wouldn't be surprised," he retorted, grinning a little. "Honest! I'm
trying to go easy, but this infernal bush has sure got a strangle hold
on you--and your hair is so fluffy it's a deuce of a job. You keep
wriggling and getting it caught in new places. If you could only manage
to stand still--but I suppose you can't.

"By the way," he remarked casually, after a short silence, save for an
occasional squeal from Miss Georgie, "speaking of Saunders--I didn't
shoot him."

Miss Georgie looked up at him, to the further entanglement of her hair.
"You DIDN'T? Then who did?"

"Search ME," he offered figuratively and briefly.

"Well, I will." Miss Georgie spoke with a certain decisiveness, and
reaching out a sage-soiled hand, took his gun from the holster at his
hip. He shrank away with a man's instinctive dislike of having anyone
make free with his weapons, but it was a single movement, which he
controlled instantly.

"Stand still, can't you?" he admonished, and kept at work while she
examined the gun with a dexterity and ease of every motion which
betrayed her perfect familiarity with firearms. She snapped the cylinder
into place, sniffed daintily at the end of the barrel, and slipped the
gun back into its scabbard.

"Don't think I doubted your word," she said, casting a slanting glance
up at him without moving her head. "But I wanted to be able to swear
positively, if I should happen to be dragged into the witness-box--I
hope it won't be by the hair of the head!--that your gun has not been
fired this morning. Unless you carry a cleaning rod with you," she
added, "which would hardly be likely."

"You may search me if you like," Good Indian suggested, and for an
engaged young man, and one deeply in love withal, he displayed a
contentment with the situation which was almost reprehensible.

"No use. If you did pack one with you, you'd be a fool not to throw it
away after you had used it. No, I'll swear to the gun as it is now. Are
you ever going to get my hair loose? I'm due at the office right
this minute, I'll bet a molasses cooky." She looked at her watch, and
groaned. "I'd have to telegraph myself back to get there on time now,"
she said. "Twenty-four--that fast freight--is due in eighteen minutes
exactly. I've got to be there. Take your jackknife and cut what won't
come loose. Really, I mean it, Mr. Imsen."

"I was under the impression that my name is Grant--to friends."

"My name is 'Dennis,' if I don't beat that freight," she retorted
curtly. "Take your knife and give me a hair cut--quick! I can do it a
different way, and cover up the place."

"Oh, all right--but it's a shame to leave a nice bunch of hair like this
hanging on a bush."

"Tell me, what were you doing up here, Grant? And what are you going to
do now? We haven't much time, and we've been fooling when we should have
been discussing 'ways and means.'"

"Well, I got up early, and someone took a shot at me again. This time he
clipped my hat-brim." He took off his hat, and showed her where the brim
had a jagged tear half an inch deep. "I ducked, and made up my mind I'd
get him this time, or know the reason why. So I rode up the other way
and back behind the orchard, and struck the grade below the Point
o' Rocks, and so came up here hunting him. I kept pretty well out of
sight--we've done that before; Jack and I took sneak yesterday, and came
up here at sunrise, but we couldn't find anything. I was beginning to
think he had given it up. So I was just scouting around here when I
heard you rustling the bushes over here. I was going to shoot, but I
changed my mind, and thought I'd land on you and trust to the lessons
I got in football and the gun. And the rest," he declaimed whimsically,
"you know.

"Now, duck away down--oh, wait a minute." He gave a jerk at the knot
of his neckerchief, flipped out the folds, spread it carefully over
her head, and tied it under her chin, patting it into place and tucking
stray locks under as if he rather enjoyed doing it. "Better wear it till
you're out of the brush," he advised, "if you don't want to get hung up
somewhere again."

She stood up straight, with a long, deep sigh of relief.

"Now, pikeway," he smiled. "And don't run bareheaded through the
bushes again. You've still got time to beat that train. And--about
Saunders--don't worry. I can get to the ranch without being seen, and no
one will know I was up here, unless you tell them."

"Oh, I shall of course!" Miss Georgie chose to be very sarcastic. "I
think I shall wire the information to the sheriff. Don't come with
me--and leave tracks all over the country. Keep on the lava rock.
Haven't you got any sense at all?"

"You made tracks yourself, madam, and you've left a fine lot of
incriminating evidence on that bush. I'll have to waste an hour picking
off the hair, so they won't accuse you of shooting Saunders." Good
Indian spoke lightly, but they both stopped, nevertheless, and eyed the
offending bush anxiously.

"You haven't time," Miss Georgie decided. "I can easily get around
that, if it's put up to me. You go on back. Really, you must!" her eyes
implored him.

"Oh, vey-ree well. We haven't met this morning. Good-by,
Squaw-talk-far-off. I'll see you later, perhaps."

Miss Georgie still had that freight heavy on her conscience, but she
stood and watched him stoop under an overhanging branch and turn his
head to smile reassuringly back at her; then, with a pungent stirring
of sage odors, the bushes closed in behind him, and it was as if he had
never been there at all. Whereupon Miss Georgie once more gathered her
skirts together and ran to the trail, and down that to the station.

She met a group of squaws, who eyed her curiously, but she was looking
once more at her watch, and paid no attention, although they stood
huddled in the trail staring after her. She remembered that she had left
the office unlocked and she rushed in, and sank panting into the chair
before her telegraph table just as the smoke of the fast freight swirled
around the nose of the low, sage-covered hill to the west.



CHAPTER XXII. A BIT OF PAPER

Good Indian came out upon the rim-rock, looked down upon the ranch
beneath him, and knew, by various little movements about the place, that
breakfast was not yet ready. Gene was carrying two pails of milk to the
house, and Wally and Jack were watering the horses that had been stabled
overnight. He was on the point of shouting down to them when his arm
was caught tightly from behind. He wheeled about and confronted Rachel.
Clothed all in dull gray she was, like a savage young Quakeress. Even
the red ribbons were gone from her hair, which was covered by the gray
blanket wrapped tightly around her slim body. She drew him back from the
rim of the bluff.

"You no shout," she murmured gravely. "No lettum see you here. You
go quick. Ketchum you cayuse, go to ranch. You no tellum you be this
place."

Good Indian stood still, and looked at her. She stood with her
arms folded in her blanket, regarding him with a certain yearning
steadfastness.

"You all time think why," she said, shrewdly reading his thoughts, "I no
take shame. I glad." She flushed, and looked away to the far side of the
Snake. "Bad mans no more try for shoot you, mebbyso. I heap--"

Good Indian reached out, and caught her by both shoulders.

"Rachel--if you did that, don't tell me about it. Don't tell me
anything. I don't ask you--I don't want to know." He spoke rapidly, in
the grip of his first impulse to shield her from what she had done.
But he felt her begin to tremble under his fingers, and he stopped as
suddenly as he had begun.

"You no glad? You think shame for me? You think I--all time--very--bad!"
Tragedy was in her voice, and in her great, dark eyes. Good Indian
gulped.

"No, Rachel. I don't think that. I want to help you out of this, if I
can, and I meant that if you didn't tell me anything about it, why--I
wouldn't know anything about it. You sabe."

"I sabe." Her lips curved into a pathetic little smile. "I sabe you know
all what I do. You know for why, me thinkum. You think shame. I no take
shame. I do for you no get kill-dead. All time Man-that-coughs try for
shootum you. All time I try for--" She broke off to stare questioningly
up into his face. "I no tell, you no like for tell," she said quietly.
"All same, you go. You ketchum you hoss, you go ranch. I think sheriff
mans mebbyso come pretty quick. No find out you be here. I no like you
be here this time."

Good Indian turned, yielding to the pleading of her eyes. The heart of
him ached dully with the weight of what she had done, and with an uneasy
comprehension of her reason for doing it. He walked as quickly as the
rough ground would permit, along the bluff toward the grade; and she,
with the instinctive deference to the male which is the heritage of
primitive woman, followed soft-footedly two paces behind him. Once where
the way was clear he stopped, and waited for her to come alongside, but
Rachel stopped and waited also, her eyes hungrily searching his face
with the look a dog has for his master. Good Indian read the meaning of
that look, and went on, and turned no more toward her until he reached
his horse.

"You'd better go on to camp, and stay there, Rachel," he said, as
casually as he could. "No trouble will come to you." He hesitated,
biting his lip and plucking absently the tangles from the forelock of
his horse. "You sabe grateful?" he asked finally. And when she gave a
quick little nod, he went on: "Well, I'm grateful to you. You did what
a man would do for his friend. I sabe. I'm heap grateful, and I'll not
forget it. All time I'll be your friend. Good--by." He mounted, and rode
away. He felt, just then, that it was the kindest thing he could do.

He looked back once, just as he was turning into the grade road. She was
standing, her arms folded in her gray blanket, where he had left her.
His fingers tightened involuntarily the reins, so that Keno stopped and
eyed his master inquiringly. But there was nothing that he might say to
her. It was not words that she wanted. He swung his heels against Keno's
flanks, and rode home.

Evadna rallied him upon his moodiness at breakfast, pouted a little
because he remained preoccupied under her teasing, and later was deeply
offended because he would not tell her where he had been, or what was
worrying him.



"I guess you better send word to the doctor he needn't come," the pump
man put his head in at the office door to say, just as the freight was
pulling away from the water-tank. "Saunders died a few minutes ago.
Pete says you better notify the coroner--and I reckon the sheriff, too.
Pretty tough to be shot down like that in broad daylight."

"I think I'd rather be shot in daylight than in the dark," Miss Georgie
snapped unreasonably because her nerves were all a-jangle, and sent the
messages as requested.

Saunders was neither a popular nor a prominent citizen, and there was
none to mourn beside him. Peter Hamilton, as his employer and a man
whose emotions were easily stirred, was shocked a shade lighter as to
his complexion and a tone lower as to his voice perhaps, and was heard
to remark frequently that it was "a turrible thing," but the chief
emotion which the tragedy roused was curiosity, and that fluttering
excitement which attends death in any form.

A dozen Indians hung about the store, the squaws peering inquisitively
in at the uncurtained window of the lean-to--where the bed held a long
immovable burden with a rumpled sheet over it--and the bucks listening
stolidly to the futile gossip on the store porch.

Pete Hamilton, anxious that the passing of his unprofitable servant
should be marked by decorum if not by grief, mentally classed the event
with election day, in that he refused to sell any liquor until the
sheriff and coroner arrived. He also, after his first bewilderment had
passed, conceived the idea that Saunders had committed suicide, and
explained to everyone who would listen just why he believed it. Saunders
was sickly, for one thing. For another, Saunders never seemed to get
any good out of living. He had read everything he could get his hands
on--and though Pete did not say that Saunders chose to die when the
stock of paper novels was exhausted, he left that impression upon his
auditors.

The sheriff and the coroner came at nine. All the Hart boys, including
Donny, were there before noon, and the group of Indians remained all day
wherever the store cast its shadow. Squaws and bucks passed and repassed
upon the footpath between Hartley and their camp, chattering together
of the big event until they came under the eye of strange white men,
whereupon they were stricken deaf and dumb, as is the way of our
nation's wards.

When the sheriff inspected the stable and its vicinity, looking for
clews, not a blanket was in sight, though a dozen eyes watched every
movement suspiciously. When at the inquest that afternoon, he laid upon
the table a battered old revolver of cheap workmanship and long past its
prime, and testified that he had found it ten feet from the stable-door,
in a due line southeast from the hay-corral, and that one shot had been
fired from it, there were Indians in plenty to glance furtively at the
weapon and give no sign.

The coroner showed the bullet which he had extracted from the body of
Saunders, and fitted it into the empty cartridge which had been under
the hammer in the revolver, and thereby proved to the satisfaction of
everyone that the gun was intimately connected with the death of the
man. So the jury arrived speedily, and without further fussing over
evidence, at the verdict of suicide.

Good Indian drew a long breath, put on his hat, and went over to tell
Miss Georgie. The Hart boys lingered for a few minutes at the store, and
then rode on to the ranch without him, and the Indians stole away over
the hill to their camp. The coroner and the sheriff accepted Pete's
invitation into the back part of the store, refreshed themselves after
the ordeal, and caught the next train for Shoshone. So closed the
incident of Saunders' passing, so far as the law was concerned.

"Well," Miss Georgie summed up the situation, "Baumberger hasn't made
any sign of taking up the matter. I don't believe, now, that he will.
I wired the news to the papers in Shoshone, so he must know. I think
perhaps he's glad to get Saunders out of the way--for he certainly must
have known enough to put Baumberger behind the bars.

"But I don't see," she said, in a puzzled way, "how that gun came onto
the scene. I looked all around the stable this morning, and I could
swear there wasn't any gun."

"Well, he did pick it up--fortunately," Good Indian returned grimly.
"I'm glad the thing was settled so easily."

She looked up at him sharply for a moment, opened her lips to ask a
question, and then thought better of it.

"Oh, here's your handkerchief," she said quietly, taking it from the
bottom of her wastebasket. "As you say, the thing is settled. I'm going
to turn you out now. The four-thirty-five is due pretty soon--and I have
oodles of work."

He looked at her strangely, and went away, wondering why Miss Georgie
hated so to have him in the office lately.

On the next day, at ten o'clock, they buried Saunders on a certain
little knoll among the sagebrush; buried him without much ceremony, it
is true, but with more respect than he had received when he was alive
and shambling sneakily among them. Good Indian was there, saying little
and listening attentively to the comments made upon the subject, and
when the last bit of yellow gravel had been spatted into place he rode
down through the Indian camp on his way home, thankful that everyone
seemed to accept the verdict of suicide as being final, and anxious that
Rachel should know it. He felt rather queer about Rachel; sorry for her,
in an impersonal way; curious over her attitude toward life in general
and toward himself in particular, and ready to do her a good turn
because of her interest.

But Rachel, when he reached the camp, was not visible. Peppajee Jim was
sitting peacefully in the shade of his wikiup when Grant rode up, and he
merely grunted in reply to a question or two. Good Indian resolved to
be patient. He dismounted, and squatted upon his heels beside Peppajee,
offered him tobacco, and dipped a shiny, new nickel toward a bright-eyed
papoose in scanty raiment, who stopped to regard him inquisitively.

"I just saw them bury Saunders," Good Indian remarked, by way of opening
a conversation. "You believe he shot himself?"

Peppajee took his little stone pipe from his lips, blew a thin wreath of
smoke, and replaced the stem between his teeth, stared stolidly straight
ahead of him, and said nothing.

"All the white men say that," Good Indian persisted, after he had waited
a minute. Peppajee did not seem to hear.

"Sheriff say that, too. Sheriff found the gun."

"Mebbyso sheriff mans heap damfool. Mebbyso heap smart. No sabe."

Good Indian studied him silently. Reticence was not a general
characteristic of Peppajee; it seemed to indicate a thorough
understanding of the whole affair. He wondered if Rachel had told her
uncle the truth.

"Where's Rachel?" he asked suddenly, the words following involuntarily
his thought.

Peppajee sucked hard upon his pipe, took it away from his mouth, and
knocked out the ashes upon a pole of the wikiup frame.

"Yo' no speakum Rachel no more," he said gravely. "Yo' ketchum 'Vadnah;
no ketchum otha squaw. Bad medicine come. Heap much troubles come. Me no
likeum. My heart heap bad."

"I'm Rachel's friend, Peppajee." Good Indian spoke softly so that others
might not hear. "I sabe what Rachel do. Rachel good girl. I don't want
to bring trouble. I want to help."

Peppajee snorted.

"Yo' make heap bad heart for Rachel," he said sourly. "Yo' like for be
friend, yo' no come no more, mebbyso. No speakum. Bimeby mebbyso no have
bad heart no more. Kay bueno. Yo' white mans. Rachel mebbyso thinkum all
time yo' Indian. Mebbyso thinkum be yo' squaw. Kay bueno. Yo' all time
white mans. No speakum Rachel no more, yo' be friend.

"Yo' speakum, me like to kill yo', mebbyso." He spoke calmly, but none
the less his words carried conviction of his sincerity.

Within the wikiup Good Indian heard a smothered sob. He listened, heard
it again, and looked challengingly at Peppajee. But Peppajee gave
no sign that he either heard the sound or saw the challenge in Good
Indian's eyes.

"I Rachel's friend," he said, speaking distinctly with his face half
turned toward the wall of deerskin. "I want to tell Rachel what the
sheriff said. I want to thank Rachel, and tell her I'm her friend. I
don't want to bring trouble." He stopped and listened, but there was no
sound within.

Peppajee eyed him comprehendingly, but there was no yielding in his
brown, wrinkled face.

"Yo' Rachel's frien', yo' pikeway," he insisted doggedly.

From under the wall of the wikiup close to Good Indian on the side
farthest from Peppajee, a small, leafless branch of sage was thrust out,
and waggled cautiously, scraping gently his hand. Good Indian's fingers
closed upon it instinctively, and felt it slowly withdrawn until his
hand was pressed against the hide wall. Then soft fingers touched his
own, fluttered there timidly, and left in his palm a bit of paper,
tightly folded. Good Indian closed his hand upon it, and stood up.

"All right, I go," he said calmly to Peppajee, and mounted.

Peppajee looked at him stolidly, and said nothing.

"One thing I would like to know." Good Indian spoke again. "You don't
care any more about the men taking Peaceful's ranch. Before they came,
you watch all the time, you heap care. Why you no care any more? Why you
no help?"

Peppajee's mouth straightened in a grin of pure irony.

"All time Baumberga try for ketchum ranch, me try for stoppum," he
retorted. "Yo' no b'lievum, Peacefu' no b'lievum. Me tellum yo' cloud
sign, tellum yo' smoke sign, tellum yo' hear much bad talk for ketchum
ranch. Yo' all time think for ketchum 'Vadnah squaw. No think for
stoppum mens. Yo' all time let mens come, ketchum ranch. Yo' say fightum
in co't. Cloud sign say me do notting. Yo' lettum come. Yo' mebbyso
makum go. Me no care."

"I see. Well, maybe you're right." He tightened the reins, and rode
away, the tight little wad of paper still hidden in his palm. When he
was quite out of sight from the camp and jogging leisurely down the hot
trail, he unfolded it carefully and looked at it long.

His face was grave and thoughtful when at last he tore it into tiny bits
and gave it to the hot, desert wind. It was a pitiful little message,
printed laboriously upon a scrap of brown wrapping--paper. It said
simply:

"God by i lov yo."



CHAPTER XXIII. THE MALICE OF A SQUAW

Good Indian looked in the hammock, but Evadna was not there. He went to
the little stone bench at the head of the pond, and when he still did
not see her he followed the bank around to the milk-house, where was
a mumble of voices. And, standing in the doorway with her arm thrown
around her Aunt Phoebe's shoulders in a pretty protective manner, he saw
her, and his eyes gladdened. She did not see him at once. She was facing
courageously the three inseparables, Hagar, Viney, and Lucy, squatted at
the top of the steps, and she was speaking her mind rapidly and angrily.
Good Indian knew that tone of old, and he grinned. Also he stopped by
the corner of the house, and listened shamelessly.

"That is not true," she was saying very clearly. "You're a bad old squaw
and you tell lies. You ought to be put in jail for talking that way."
She pressed her aunt's shoulder affectionately. "Don't you mind a
word she says, Aunt Phoebe. She's just a mischief-making old hag, and
she--oh, I'd like to beat her!"

Hagar shook her head violently, and her voice rose shrill and malicious,
cutting short Evadna's futile defiance.

"Ka-a-ay bueno, yo'!" Her teeth gnashed together upon the words. "I no
tellum lie. Good Injun him kill Man-that-coughs. All time I seeum creep,
creep, through sagebrush. All time I seeum hoss wait where much rock
grow. I seeum. I no speakum heap lie. Speakum true. I go tell sheriff
mans Good Indian killum Man-that-coughs. I tellum--"

"Why didn't you, then, when the sheriff was in Hartley?" Evadna flung at
her angrily. "Because you know it's a lie. That's why."

"Yo' thinkum Good Injun love yo', mebbyso." Hagar's witch-grin was at
its malevolent widest. Her black eyes sparkled with venom. "Yo' heap
fool. Good Injun go all time Squaw-talk-far-off. Speakum glad word. Good
Injun ka-a-ay bueno. Love Squaw-talk-far-off. No love yo'. Speakum lies,
yo'. Makum yo' heap cry all time. Makeum yo' heart bad." She cackled,
and leered with vile significance toward the girl in the doorway.

"Don't you listen to her, honey." It was Phoebe's turn to reassure.

Good Indian took a step forward, his face white with rage. Viney saw him
first, muttered an Indian word of warning, and the three sprang up and
backed away from his approach.

"So you've got to call me a murderer!" he cried, advancing threateningly
upon Hagar. "And even that doesn't satisfy you. You--"

Evadna rushed up the steps like a crisp little whirlwind, and caught his
arm tightly in her two hands.

"Grant! We don't believe a word of it. You couldn't do a thing like
that. Don't we KNOW? Don't pay any attention to her. We aren't going to.
It'll hurt her worse than any kind of punishment we could give her. Oh,
she's a VILE old thing! Too vile for words! Aunt Phoebe and I shouldn't
belittle ourselves by even listening to her. SHE can't do any harm
unless we let it bother us--what she says. _I_ know you never could take
a human life, Grant. It's foolish even to speak of such a thing. It's
just her nasty, lying tongue saying what her black old heart wishes
could be true." She was speaking in a torrent of trepidation lest he
break from her and do some violence which they would all regret. She
did not know what he could do, or would do, but the look of his face
frightened her.

Old Hagar spat viciously at them both, and shrilled vituperative
sentences--in her own tongue fortunately; else the things she said
must have brought swift retribution. And as if she did not care for
consequences and wanted to make her words carry a definite sting, she
stopped, grinned maliciously, and spoke the choppy dialect of her tribe.

"Yo' tellum me shont-isham. Mebbyso yo' tellum yo' no ketchum
Squaw-talk-far-off in sagebrush, all time Saunders go dead! Me ketchum
hair--Squaw-talk-far-off hair. You like for see, you thinkum me tell
lies?"

From under her blanket she thrust forth a greasy brown hand, and shook
triumphantly before them a tangled wisp of woman's hair--the hair of
Miss Georgie, without a doubt. There was no gainsaying that color and
texture. She looked full at Evadna.

"Yo' like see, me show whereum walk," she said grimly. "Good Injun boot
make track, Squaw-talk-far-off little shoe make track. Me show, yo'
thinkum mebbyso me tell lie. Stoppum in sagebrush, ketchum hair. Me
ketchum knife--Good Injun knife, mebbyso." Revenge mastered cupidity,
and she produced that also, and held it up where they could all see.

Evadna looked and winced.

"I don't believe a word you say," she declared stubbornly. "You STOLE
that knife. I suppose you also stole the hair. You can't MAKE me believe
a thing like that!"

"Squaw-talk-far-off run, run heap fas', get home quick. Me seeum, Viney
seeum, Lucy seeum." Hagar pointed to each as she named her, and waited
until they give a confirmatory nod. The two squaws gazed steadily at the
ground, and she grunted and ignored them afterward, content that they
bore witness to her truth in that one particular.

"Squaw-talk-far-off sabe Good Injun killum Man-that-coughs, mebbyso,"
she hazarded, watching Good Indian's face cunningly to see if the guess
struck close to the truth.

"If you've said all you want to say, you better go," Good Indian told
her after a moment of silence while they glared at each other. "I won't
touch you--because you're such a devil I couldn't stop short of killing
you, once I laid my hands on you."

He stopped, held his lips tightly shut upon the curses he would not
speak, and Evadna felt his biceps tauten under her fingers as if he
were gathering himself for a lunge at the old squaw. She looked up
beseechingly into his face, and saw that it was sharp and stern, as
it had been that morning when the men had first been discovered in the
orchard. He raised his free arm, and pointed imperiously to the trail.

"Pikeway!" he commanded.

Viney and Lucy shrank from the tone of him, and, hiding their faces in
a fold of blanket, slunk silently away like dogs that have been whipped
and told to go. Even Hagar drew back a pace, hardy as was her untamed
spirit. She looked at Evadna clinging to his arm, her eyes wide and
startlingly blue and horrified at all she had heard. She laughed
then--did Hagar--and waddled after the others, her whole body seeming to
radiate contentment with the evil she had wrought.

"There's nothing on earth can equal the malice of an old squaw," said
Phoebe, breaking into the silence which followed. "I'd hope she don't go
around peddling that story--not that anyone would believe it, but--"

Good Indian looked at her, and at Evadna. He opened his lips for speech,
and closed them without saying a word. That near he came to telling them
the truth about meeting Miss Georgie, and explaining about the hair and
the knife and the footprints Hagar had prated about. But he thought of
Rachel, and knew that he would never tell anyone, not even Evadna. The
girl loosened his arm, and moved toward her aunt.

"I hate Indians--squaws especially," she said positively. "I hate the
way they look at one with their beady eyes, just like snakes. I believe
that horrid old thing lies awake nights just thinking up nasty, wicked
lies to tell about the people she doesn't like. I don't think you ought
to ride around alone so much, Grant; she might murder you. It's in her
to do it, if she ever got the chance."

"What do you suppose made her ring Georgie Howard in like that?" Phoebe
speculated, looking at Grant. "She must have some grudge against her,
too."

"I don't know why." Good Indian spoke unguardedly, because he was still
thinking of Rachel and those laboriously printed words which he had
scattered afar. "She's always giving them candy and fruit, whenever they
show up at the station."

"Oh--h!" Evadna gave the word that peculiar, sliding inflection of
hers which meant so much, and regarded him unwinkingly, with her hands
clasped behind her.

Good Indian knew well the meaning of both her tone and her stare, but he
only laughed and caught her by the arm.

"Come on over to the hammock," he commanded, with all the arrogance of a
lover. "We're making that old hag altogether too important, it seems to
me. Come on, Goldilocks--we haven't had a real satisfying sort of scrap
for several thousand years."

She permitted him to lead her to the hammock, and pile three cushions
behind her head and shoulders--with the dark-blue one on top because her
hair looked well against it--and dispose himself comfortably where he
could look his fill at her while he swung the hammock gently with his
boot-heel, scraping a furrow in the sand. But she did not show any
dimples, though his eyes and his lips smiled together when she looked
at him, and when he took up her hand and kissed each finger-tip in turn,
she was as passive as a doll under the caresses of a child.

"What's the matter?" he demanded, when he found that her manner did not
soften. "Worrying still about what that old squaw said?"

"Not in the slightest." Evadna's tone was perfectly polite--which was a
bad sign.

Good Indian thought he saw the makings of a quarrel in her general
attitude, and he thought he might as well get at once to the real root
of her resentment.

"What are you thinking about? Tell me, Goldilocks," he coaxed, pushing
his own troubles to the back of his mind.

"Oh, nothing. I was just wondering--though it's a trivial matter which
is hardly worth mentioning--but I just happened to wonder how you came
to know that Georgie Howard is in the habit of giving candy to the
squaws--or anything else. I'm sure I never--" She bit her lips as if she
regretted having said so much.

Good Indian laughed. In truth, he was immensely relieved; he had been
afraid she might want him to explain something else--something which he
felt he must keep to himself even in the face of her anger. But this--he
laughed again.

"That's easy enough," he said lightly. "I've seen her do it a couple of
times. Maybe Hagar has been keeping an eye on me--I don't know; anyway,
when I've had occasion to go to the store or to the station, I've nearly
always seen her hanging around in the immediate vicinity. I went a
couple of times to see Miss Georgie about this land business. She's wise
to a lot of law--used to help her father before he died, it seems. And
she has some of his books, I discovered. I wanted to see if there wasn't
some means of kicking these fellows off the ranch without making a lot
more trouble for old Peaceful. But after I'd read up and talked the
thing over with her, we decided that there wasn't anything to be done
till Peaceful comes back, and we know what he's been doing about it.
That's what's keeping him, of course.

"I suppose," he added, looking at her frankly, "I should have mentioned
my going there. But to tell you the truth, I didn't think anything much
about it. It was just business, and when I'm with you, Miss Goldilocks,
I like to forget my troubles. You," he declared, his eyes glowing upon
her, "are the antidote. And you wouldn't have mo believe you could
possibly be jealous!"

"No," said Evadna, in a more amiable tone. "Of course I'm not. But I do
think you showed a--well, a lack of confidence in me. I don't see why
_I_ can't help you share your troubles. You know I want to. I think
you should have told me, and let me help. But you never do. Just for
instance--why wouldn't you tell me yesterday where you were before
breakfast? I know you were SOMEWHERE, because I looked all over the
place for you," she argued naively. "I always want to know where you
are, it's so lonesome when I don't know. And you see--"

She was interrupted at that point, which was not strange. The
interruption lasted for several minutes, but Evadna was a persistent
little person. When they came back to mundane matters, she went right on
with what she had started out to say.

"You see, that gave old Hagar a chance to accuse you of--well, of a
MEETING with Georgie. Which I don't believe, of course. Still, it does
seem as if you might have told me in the first place where you had been,
and then I could have shut her up by letting her see that I knew all
about it. The horrid, mean old THING! To say such things, right to
your face! And--Grant, where DID she get hold of that knife, do you
suppose--and--that--bunch of--hair?" She took his hand of her own
accord, and patted it, and Evadna was not a demonstrative kind of person
usually. "It wasn't just a tangle, like combings," she went on slowly.
"I noticed particularly. There was a lock as large almost as my finger,
that looked as if it had been cut off. And it certainly WAS Georgie's
hair."

"Georgie's hair," Good Indian smilingly asserted, "doesn't interest me
a little bit. Maybe Hagar scalped Miss Georgie to get it. If it had been
goldy, I'd have taken it away from her if I had to annihilate the whole
tribe, but seeing it wasn't YOUR hair--"

Well, the argument as such was a poor one, to say the least, but it had
the merit of satisfying Evadna as mere logic could not have done, and
seemed to allay as well all the doubt that had been accumulating for
days past in her mind. But an hour spent in a hammock in the shadiest
part of the grove could not wipe out all memory of the past few days,
nor quiet the uneasiness which had come to be Good Indian's portion.

"I've got to go up on the hill again right after dinner,
Squaw-with-sun-hair," he told her at last. "I can't rest, somehow, as
long as those gentlemen are camping down in the orchard. You won't mind,
will you?" Which shows that the hour had not been spent in quarreling,
at all events.

"Certainly not," Evadna replied calmly. "Because I'm going with you. Oh,
you needn't get ready to shake your head! I'm going to help you, from
now on, and talk law and give advice and 'scout around,' as you call it.
I couldn't be easy a minute, with old Hagar on the warpath the way she
is. I'd imagine all sorts of things."

"You don't realize how hot it is," he discouraged.

"I can stand it if you can. And I haven't seen Georgie for DAYS. She
must get horribly lonesome, and it's a perfect SHAME that I haven't been
up there lately. I'm sure she wouldn't treat ME that way." Evadna
had put on her angelic expression. "I WOULD go oftener," she declared
virtuously, "only you boys always go off without saying anything
about it, and I'm silly about riding past that Indian camp alone. That
squaw--the one that caught Huckleberry the other day, you know--would
hardly let go of the bridle. I was scared to DEATH, only I wouldn't let
her see. I believe now she's in with old Hagar, Grant. She kept asking
me where you were, and looked so--"

"I think, on the whole, we'd better wait till after supper when it's
cooler, Goldenhair," Good Indian observed, when she hesitated over
something she had not quite decided to say. "I suppose I really ought
to stay and help the boys with that clover patch that Mother Hart is
worrying so about. I guess she thinks we're a lazy bunch, all right,
when the old man's gone. We'll go up this evening, if you like."

Evadna eyed him with open suspicion, but if she could read his real
meaning from anything in his face or his eyes or his manner, she must
have been a very keen observer indeed.

Good Indian was meditating what he called "making a sneak." He wanted
to have a talk with Miss Georgie himself, and he certainly did not want
Evadna, of all people, to hear what he had to say. For just a minute
he wished that they had quarreled again. He went down to the stable,
started to saddle Keno, and then decided that he would not. After all,
Hagar's gossip could do no real harm, he thought, and it could not make
much difference if Miss Georgie did not hear of it immediately.



CHAPTER XXIV. PEACEFUL RETURNS

That afternoon when the four-thirty-five rushed in from the parched
desert and slid to a panting halt beside the station platform, Peaceful
Hart emerged from the smoker, descended quietly to the blistering
planks, and nodded through the open window to Miss Georgie at her
instrument taking train orders.

Behind him perspired Baumberger, purple from the heat and the beer with
which he had sought to allay the discomfort of that searing sunlight.

"Howdy, Miss Georgie?" he wheezed, as he passed the window. "Ever see
such hot weather in your life? _I_ never did."

Miss Georgie glanced at him while her fingers rattled her key, and it
struck her that Baumberger had lost a good deal of his oily amiability
since she saw him last. He looked more flabby and loose-lipped than
ever, and his leering eyes were streaked plainly with the red veins
which told of heavy drinking. She gave him a nod cool enough to lower
the thermometer several degrees, and scribbled away upon the yellow pad
under her hand as if Baumberger had sunk into the oblivion her temper
wished for him. She looked up immediately, however, and leaned forward
so that she could see Peaceful just turning to go down the steps.

"Oh, Mr. Hart! Will you wait a minute?" she called clearly above the
puffing of the engine. "I've something for you here. Soon as I get this
train out--" She saw him stop and turn back to the office, and let it go
at that for the present.

"I sure have got my nerve," she observed mentally when the conductor
had signaled the engineer and swung up the steps of the smoker, and the
wheels were beginning to clank. All she had for Peaceful Hart in that
office was anxiety over his troubles. "Just held him up to pry into his
private affairs," she put it bluntly to herself. But she smiled at him
brightly, and waited until Baumberger had gone lumbering with rather
uncertain steps to the store, where he puffed up the steps and sat
heavily down in the shade where Pete Hamilton was resting after the
excitement of the past thirty-six hours.

"I lied to you, Mr. Hart," she confessed, engagingly. "I haven't a thing
for you except a lot of questions, and I simply must ask them or die.
I'm not just curious, you know. I'm horribly anxious. Won't you take the
seat of honor, please? The ranch won't run off if you aren't there for
a few minutes after you had expected to be. I've been waiting to have a
little talk with you, and I simply couldn't let the opportunity go by."
She talked fast, but she was thinking faster, and wondering if this
calm, white-bearded old man thought her a meddlesome fool.

"There's time enough, and it ain't worth much right now," Peaceful said,
sitting down in the beribboned rocker and stroking his beard in his
deliberate fashion. "It seems to be getting the fashion to be anxious,"
he drawled, and waited placidly for her to speak.

"You just about swear by old Baumberger, don't you?" she began
presently, fiddling with her lead pencil and going straight to the heart
of what she wanted to say.

"Well, I dunno. I've kinda learned to fight shy of swearing by anybody,
Miss Georgie." His mild blue eyes settled attentively upon her flushed
face.

"That's some encouragement, anyhow," she sighed. "Because he's the
biggest old blackguard in Idaho and more treacherous than any Indian
ever could be if he tried. I just thought I'd tell you, in case you
didn't know it. I'm certain as I can be of anything, that he's at the
bottom of this placer-claim fraud, and he's just digging your ranch out
from under your feet while he wheedles you into thinking he's looking
after your interests. I'll bet you never got an injunction against those
eight men," she hazarded, leaning toward him with her eyes sparkling as
the subject absorbed all her thoughts. "I'll bet anything he kept you
fiddling around until those fellows all filed on their claims. And now
it's got to go till the case is finally settled in court, because they
are technically within their rights in making lawful improvements on
their claims.

"Grant," she said, and her voice nearly betrayed her when she spoke
his name, "was sure they faked the gold samples they must have used in
filing. We both were sure of it. He and the boys tried to catch them at
some crooked work, but the nights have been too dark, for one thing, and
they were always on the watch, and went up to Shoshone in couples, and
there was no telling which two meant to sneak off next. So they have all
filed, I suppose. I know the whole eight have been up--"

"Yes, they've all filed--twenty acres apiece--the best part of the
ranch. There's a forty runs up over the bluff; the lower line takes
in the house and barn and down into the garden where the man they call
Stanley run his line through the strawberry patch. That forty's mine
yet. It's part uh the homestead. The meadowland is most all included.
That was a preemption claim." Peaceful spoke slowly, and there was a
note of discouragement in his voice which it hurt Miss Georgie to hear.

"Well, they've got to prove that those claims of theirs are lawful, you
know. And if you've got your patent for the homestead--you have got
a patent, haven't you?" Something in his face made her fling in the
question.

"Y-es--or I thought I had one," he answered dryly. "It seems now there's
a flaw in it, and it's got to go back to Washington and be rectified. It
ain't legal till that's been done."

Miss Georgie half rose from her chair, and dropped back despairingly.
"Who found that mistake?" she demanded. "Baumberger?"

"Y-es, Baumberger. He thought we better go over all the papers
ourselves, so the other side couldn't spring anything on us unawares,
and there was one paper that hadn't been made out right. So it had to be
fixed, of course. Baumberger was real put out about it."

"Oh, of course!" Miss Georgie went to the window to make sure of the
gentleman's whereabouts. He was still sitting upon the store porch, and
he was just in the act of lifting a tall, glass mug of beer to his gross
mouth when she looked over at him. "Pig!" she gritted under her breath.
"It's a pity he doesn't drink himself to death." She turned and faced
Peaceful anxiously.

"You spoke a while ago as if you didn't trust him implicitly," she
said. "I firmly believe he hired those eight men to file on your land. I
believe he also hired Saunders to watch Grant, for some reason--perhaps
because Grant has shown his hostility from the first. Did you know
Saunders--or someone--has been shooting at Grant from the top of
the bluff for--well, ever since you left? The last shot clipped his
hat-brim. Then Saunders was shot--or shot himself, according to the
inquest--and there has been no more rifle practice with Grant for the
target."

"N-no, I hadn't heard about that." Peaceful pulled hard at his beard so
that his lips were drawn slightly apart. "I don't mind telling yuh," he
added slowly, "that I've got another lawyer working on the case--Black.
He hates Baumberger, and he'd like to git something on him. I don't
want Baumberger should know anything about it, though. He takes it for
granted I swallow whole everything he says and does--but I don't. Not by
a long shot. Black'll ferret out any crooked work."

"He's a dandy if he catches Baumberger," Miss Georgie averred, gloomily.
"I tried a little detective work on my own account. I hadn't any right;
it was about the cipher messages Saunders used to send and receive
so often before your place was jumped. I was dead sure it was old
Baumberger at the other end, and I--well, I struck up a mild sort of
flirtation with the operator at Shoshone." She smiled deprecatingly at
Peaceful.

"I wanted to find out--and I did by writing a nice letter or two;
we have to be pretty cute about what we send over the wires," she
explained, "though we do talk back and forth quite a lot, too. There was
a news-agent and cigar man--you know that kind of joint, where they
sell paper novels and magazines and tobacco and such--getting Saunders'
messages. Jim Wakely is his name. He told the operator that he and
Saunders were just practicing; they were going to be detectives, he
said, and rigged up a cipher that they were learning together so they
wouldn't need any codebook. Pretty thin that--but you can't prove it
wasn't the truth. I managed to find out that Baumberger buys cigars and
papers of Jim Wakely sometimes; not always, though."

Miss Georgie laughed ruefully, and patted her pompadour absent-mindedly.

"So all I got out of that," she finished, "was a correspondence I could
very well do without. I've been trying to quarrel with that operator
ever since, but he's so darned easy-tempered!" She went and looked out
of the window again uneasily.

"He's guzzling beer over there, and from the look of him he's had a good
deal more than he needs already," she informed Peaceful. "He'll burst
if he keeps on. I suppose I shouldn't keep you any longer--he's looking
this way pretty often, I notice; nothing but the beer-keg holds him, I
imagine. And when he empties that--" She shrugged her shoulders, and sat
down facing Hart.

"Maybe you could bribe Jim Wakely into giving something away," she
suggested. "I'd sure like to see Baumberger stub his toe in this deal!
Or maybe you could get around one of those eight beauties you've got
camping down on your ranch--but there isn't much chance of that; he
probably took good care to pick clams for that job. And Saunders," she
added slowly, "is eternally silent. Well, I hope in mercy you'll be able
to catch him napping, Mr. Hart."

Peaceful rose stiffly,--and took up his hat from where he had laid it on
the table.

"I ain't as hopeful as I was a week ago," he admitted mildly. "Put if
there's any justice left in the courts, I'll save the old ranch. My wife
and I worked hard to make it what it is, and my boys call it home. We
can't save it by anything but law. Fightin' would only make a bad
matter worse. I'm obliged to yuh, Miss Georgie, for taking such an
interest--and I'll tell Black about Jim Wakely."

"Don't build any hopes on Jim," she warned. "He probably doesn't know
anything except that he sent and received messages he couldn't read any
sense into."

"Well--there's always a way out, if we can find it. Come down and see
us some time. We still got a house to invite our friends to." He smiled
drearily at her, gave a little, old-fashioned bow, and went over to
join Baumberger--and to ask Pete Hamilton for the use of his team and
buckboard.

Miss Georgie, keeping an uneasy vigil over everything that moved in the
barren portion of Hartley which her window commanded, saw Pete get up
and start listlessly toward the stable; saw Peaceful sit down to wait;
and then Pete drove up with the rig, and they started for the ranch.
She turned with a startled movement to the office door, because she felt
that she was being watched.

"How, Hagar, and Viney, and Lucy," she greeted languidly when she saw
the three squaws sidle closer, and reached for a bag of candy for them.

Hagar's greasy paw stretched out greedily for the gift, and placed it in
jealous hiding beneath her blanket, but she did not turn to go, as
she most frequently did after getting what she came for. Instead, she
waddled boldly into the office, her eyes searching cunningly every
corner of the little room. Viney and Lucy remained outside, passively
waiting. Hagar twitched at something under her blanket, and held out her
hand again; this time it was not empty.

"Ketchum sagebrush," she announced laconically. "Mebbyso yo' like for
buy?"

Miss Georgie stared fixedly at the hand, and said nothing. Hagar drew it
under her blanket, held it fumbling there, and thrust it forth again.

"Ketchum where ketchum hair," she said, and her wicked old eyes twinkled
with malice. "Mebbyso yo' like for buy?"

Miss Georgie still stared, and said nothing. Her under lip was caught
tightly between her teeth by now, and her eyebrows were pulled close
together.

"Ketchum much track, same place," said Hagar grimly. "Good Injun makeum
track all same boot. Seeum Good Injun creep, creep in bushes, all time
Man-that-coughs be heap kill. Yo' buy hair, buy knife, mebbyso me no
tell me seeum Good Injun. Me tell, Good Injun go for jail; mebbyso
killum rope." She made a horrible gesture of hanging by the neck.
Afterward she grinned still more horribly. "Ketchum plenty mo' dolla, me
no tell, mebbyso."

Miss Georgie felt blindly for her chair, and when she touched it she
backed and sank into it rather heavily. She looked white and sick, and
Hagar eyed her gloatingly.

"Yo' no like for Good Injun be killum rope," she chuckled. "Yo' all time
thinkum heap bueno. Mebbyso yo' love. Yo' buy? Yo' payum much dolla?"

Miss Georgie passed a hand slowly over her eyes. She felt numb, and she
could not think, and she must think. A shuffling sound at the door made
her drop her hand and look up, but there was nothing to lighten her
oppressive sense of danger to Grant. Another squaw had appeared, was
all. A young squaw, with bright-red ribbons braided into her shining
black hair, and great, sad eyes brightening the dull copper tint of her
face.

"You no be 'fraid," she murmured shyly to Miss Georgie, and stopped
where she was just inside the door. "You no be sad. No trouble come Good
Injun. I friend."

Hagar turned, and snarled at her in short, barking words which Miss
Georgie could not understand. The young squaw folded her arms inside her
bright, plaid shawl, and listened with an indifference bordering closely
on contempt, one would judge from her masklike face. Hagar turned from
berating her, and thrust out her chin at Miss Georgie.

"I go. Sun go 'way, mebbyso I come. Mebbyso yo' heart bad. Me ketchum
much dolla yo', me no tellum, mebbyso. No ketchum, me tell sheriff mans
Good Injun all time killum Man-that-coughs." Turning, she waddled out,
jabbing viciously at the young squaw with her elbow as she passed, and
spitting out some sort of threat or command--Miss Georgie could not tell
which.

The young squaw lingered, still gazing shyly at Miss Georgie.

"You no be 'fraid," she repeated softly. "I friend. I take care. No
trouble come Good Injun. I no let come. You no be sad." She smiled
wistfully, and was gone, as silently as moved her shadow before her on
the cinders.

Miss Georgie stood by the window with her fingernails making little red
half-moons in her palms, and watched the three squaws pad out of sight
on the narrow trail to their camp, with the young squaw following after,
until only a black head could be seen bobbing over the brow of the hill.
When even that was gone, she turned from the window, and stood for a
long minute with her hands pressed tightly over her face. She was
trying to think, but instead she found herself listening intently to the
monotonous "Ah-h-CHUCK! ah-h-CHUCK!" of the steam pump down the track,
and to the spasmodic clicking of an order from the dispatcher to the
passenger train two stations to the west.

When the train was cleared and the wires idle, she went suddenly to the
table, laid her fingers purposefully upon the key, and called up her
chief. It was another two hours' leave of absence she asked for "on
urgent business." She got it, seasoned with a sarcastic reminder that
her business was supposed to be with the railroad company, and that she
would do well to cultivate exactness of expression and a taste for her
duties in the office.

She was putting on her hat even while she listened to the message, and
she astonished the man at the other end by making no retort
whatever. She almost ran to the store, and she did not ask Pete for a
saddle-horse; she just threw her office key at him, and told him she was
going to take his bay, and she was at the stable before he closed the
mouth he had opened in amazement at her whirlwind departure.



CHAPTER XXV. "I'D JUST AS SOON HANG FOR NINE MEN AS FOR ONE"

Baumberger climbed heavily out of the rig, and went lurching drunkenly
up the path to the house where the cool shade of the grove was like
paradise set close against the boundary of the purgatory of blazing
sunshine and scorching sand. He had not gone ten steps from the stable
when he met Good Indian face to face.

"Hullo," he growled, stopping short and eying him malevolently with
lowered head.

Good Indian's lips curled silently, and he stepped aside to pursue his
way. Baumberger swung his huge body toward him.

"I said HULLO. Nothin' wrong in that, is there? HULLO--d'yuh hear?"

"Go to the devil!" said Grant shortly.

Baumberger leered at him offensively. "Pretty Polly! Never learned but
one set uh words in his life. Can't yuh say anything but 'Go to the
devil!' when a man speaks to yuh? Hey?"

"I could say a whole lot that you wouldn't be particularly glad to
hear." Good Indian stopped, and faced him, coldly angry. For one thing,
he knew that Evadna was waiting on the porch for him, and could see
even if she could not hear; and Baumberger's attitude was insulting. "I
think," he said meaningly, "I wouldn't press the point if I were you."

"Giving me advice, hey? And who the devil are you?"

"I wouldn't ask, if I were you. But if you really want to know, I'm the
fellow you hired Saunders to shoot. You blundered that time. You should
have picked a better man, Mr. Baumberger. Saunders couldn't have hit
the side of a barn if he'd been locked inside it. You ought to have made
sure--"

Baumberger glared at him, and then lunged, his eyes like an animal gone
mad.

"I'll make a better job, then!" he bellowed. "Saunders was a fool. I
told him to get down next the trail and make a good job of it. I told
him to kill you, you lying, renegade Injun--and if he couldn't, I can!
Yuh WILL watch me, hey?"

Good Indian backed from him in sheer amazement. Epithets unprintable
poured in a stream from the loose, evil lips. Baumberger was a raving
beast of a man. He would have torn the other to pieces and reveled in
the doing. He bellowed forth threats against Good Indian and the Harts,
young and old, and vaunted rashly the things he meant to do. Heat-mad
and drink-mad he was, and it was as if the dam of his wily amiability
had broken and let loose the whole vile reservoir of his pirate mind. He
tried to strike Good Indian down where he stood, and when his blows were
parried he stopped, swayed a minute in drunken uncertainty, and then
make one of his catlike motions, pulled a gun, and fired without really
taking aim.

Another gun spoke then, and Baumberger collapsed in the sand, a
quivering heap of gross human flesh. Good Indian stood and looked down
at him fixedly while the smoke floated away from the muzzle of his own
gun. He heard Evadna screaming hysterically at the gate, and looked over
there inquiringly. Phoebe was running toward him, and the boys--Wally
and Gene and Jack, from the blacksmith shop. At the corner of the stable
Miss Georgie was sliding from her saddle, her riding whip clenched
tightly in her hand as she hurried to him. Peaceful stood beside the
team, with the lines still in his hand.

It was Miss Georgie's words which reached him clearly.

"You just HAD to do it, Grant. I saw the whole thing. You HAD to."

"Oh, Grant--GRANT! What have you done? What have you done?" That was
Phoebe Hart, saying the same thing over and over with a queer, moaning
inflection in her voice.

"D'yuh KILL him?" Gene shouted excitedly, as he ran up to the spot.

"Yes." Good Indian glanced once more at the heap before him. "And I'm
liable to kill a few more before I'm through with the deal." He swung
short around, discovered that Evadna was clutching his arm and crying,
and pulled loose from her with a gesture of impatience. With the gun
still in his hand, he walked quickly down the road in the direction of
the garden.

"He's mad! The boy is mad! He's going to kill--" Phoebe gave a sob, and
ran after him, and with her went Miss Georgie and Evadna, white-faced,
all three of them.

"Come on, boys--he's going to clean out the whole bunch!" whooped Gene.

"Oh, choke off!" Wally gritted disgustedly, glancing over his shoulder
at them. "Go back to the house, and STAY there! Ma, make Vad quit that
yelling, can't yuh?" He looked eloquently at Jack, keeping pace with him
and smiling with the steely glitter in his eyes. "Women make me sick!"
he snorted under his breath.

Peaceful stared after them, went into the stable, and got a blanket to
throw over Baumberger's inert body, stooped, and made sure that the man
was dead, with the left breast of his light negligee shirt all blackened
with powder and soaked with blood; covered him well, and tied up the
team. Then he went to the house, and got the old rifle that had killed
Indians and buffalo alike, and went quickly through the grove to
the garden. He was a methodical man, and he was counted slow, but
nevertheless he reached the scene not much behind the others. Wally was
trying to send his mother to the house with Evadna, and neither would
go. Miss Georgie was standing near Good Indian, watching Stanley with
her lips pressed together.

It is doubtful if Good Indian realized what the others were doing. He
had gone straight past the line of stakes to where Stanley was sitting
with his back against the lightning-stricken apricot tree. Stanley was
smoking a cigarette as if he had heard nothing of the excitement, but
his rifle was resting upon his knee in such a manner that he had but to
lift it and take aim. The three others were upon their own claims, and
they, also, seemed unobtrusively ready for whatever might be going to
happen.

Good Indian appraised the situation with a quick glance as he came up,
but he did not slacken his pace until he was within ten feet of Stanley.

"You're across the dead line, m' son," said Stanley, with lazy
significance. "And you, too," he added, flickering a glance at Miss
Georgie.

"The dead line," said Good Indian coolly, "is beyond the Point o' Rocks.
I'd like to see you on the other side by sundown."

Stanley looked him over, from the crown of his gray hat to the tips of
his riding-boots, and laughed when his eyes came back to Good Indian's
face. But the laugh died out rather suddenly at what he saw there.

"Got the papers for that?" he asked calmly. But his jaw had squared.

"I've got something better than papers. Your boss is dead. I shot him
just now. He's lying back there by the stable." Good Indian tilted
his head backward, without taking his eyes from Stanley's face--and
Stanley's right hand, too, perhaps. "If you don't want the same
medicine, I'd advise you to quit."

Stanley's jaw dropped, but it was surprise which slackened the muscles.

"You--shot--"

"Baumberger. I said it."

"You'll hang for that," Stanley stated impersonally, without moving.

Good Indian smiled, but it only made his face more ominous.

"Well, they can't hang a man more than once. I'll see this ranch cleaned
up while I'm about it. I'd just as soon," he added composedly, "be
hanged for nine men as for one."

Stanley sat on his haunches, and regarded him unwinkingly for so long
that Phoebe's nerves took a panic, and she drew Evadna away from the
place. The boys edged closer, their hands resting suggestively upon
their gun-butts. Old Peaceful half-raised his rifle, and held it so. It
was like being compelled to watch a fuse hiss and shrivel and go black
toward a keg of gun-powder.

"I believe, by heck, you would!" said Stanley at last, and so long a
time had elapsed that even Good Indian had to think back to know what
he meant. Stanley squinted up at the sun, hitched himself up so that his
back rested against the tree more comfortably, inspected his cigarette,
and then fumbled for a match with which to relight it. "How'd you find
out Baumberger was back uh this deal?" he asked curiously and without
any personal resentment in tone or manner, and raked the match along his
thigh.

Good Indian's shoulders went up a little.

"I knew, and that's sufficient. The dead line is down past the Point
o' Rocks. After sundown this ranch is going to hold the Harts and their
friends--and NO ONE ELSE. Tell that to your pals, unless you've got a
grudge against them!"

Stanley held his cigarette between his fingers, and blew smoke through
his nostrils while he watched Good Indian turn his back and walk away.
He did not easily lose his hold of himself, and this was, with him, a
cold business proposition.

Miss Georgie stood where she was until she saw that Stanley did not
intend to shoot Good Indian in the back, as he might have done easily
enough, and followed so quickly that she soon came up with him. Good
Indian turned at the rustling of the skirts immediately behind him, and
looked down at her somberly. Then he caught sight of something she was
carrying in her hand, and he gave a short laugh.

"What are you doing with that thing?" he asked peremptorily.

Miss Georgie blushed very red, and slid the thing into her pocket.

"Well, every little helps," she retorted, with a miserable attempt at
her old breeziness of manner. "I thought for a minute I'd have to shoot
that man Stanley--when you turned your back on him."

Good Indian stopped, looked at her queerly, and went on again without
saying a word.



CHAPTER XXVI. "WHEN THE SUN GOES AWAY"

"I wish," said Phoebe, putting her two hands on Miss Georgie's shoulders
at the gate and looking up at her with haggard eyes, "you'd see what
you can do with Vadnie. The poor child's near crazy; she ain't used to
seeing such things happen--"

"Where is she?" Good Indian asked tersely, and was answered immediately
by the sound of sobbing on the east porch. The three went together, but
it was Grant who reached her first.

"Don't cry, Goldilocks," he said tenderly, bending over her. "It's all
right now. There isn't going to be any more--"

"Oh! Don't TOUCH me!" She sprang up and backed from him, horror plain in
her wide eyes. "Make him keep away, Aunt Phoebe!"

Good Indian straightened, and stood perfectly still, looking at her in a
stunned, incredulous way.

"Chicken, don't be silly!" Miss Georgie's sane tones were like a breath
of clean air. "You've simply gone all to pieces. I know what nerves can
do to a woman--I've had 'em myself. Grant isn't going to bite you, and
you're not afraid of him. You're proud of him, and you know it. He's
acted the man, chicken!--the man we knew he was, all along. So pull
yourself together, and let's not have any nonsense."

"He--KILLED a man! I saw him do it. And he's going to kill some more. I
might have known he was like that! I might have KNOWN when he tried to
shoot me that night in the orchard when I was trying to scare Gene! I
can show you the mark--where he grazed my arm! And he LAUGHED about it!
I called him a savage then--and I was RIGHT--only he can be so nice when
he wants to be--and I forgot about the Indian in him--and then he killed
Mr. Baumberger! He's lying out there now! I'd rather DIE than let him--"

Miss Georgie clapped a hand over her mouth, and stopped her. Also, she
gripped her by the shoulder indignantly.

"'Vadna Ramsey, I'm ashamed of you!" she cried furiously. "For Heaven's
sake, Grant, go on off somewhere and wait till she settles down. Don't
stand there looking like a stone image--didn't you ever see a case
of nerves before? She doesn't know what she's saying--if she did, she
wouldn't be saying it. You go on, and let me handle her alone. Men are
just a nuisance in a case like this."

She pushed Evadna before her into the kitchen, waited until Phoebe had
followed, and then closed the door gently and decisively upon Grant. But
not before she had given him a heartening smile just to prove that he
must not take Evadna seriously, because she did not.

"We'd better take her to her room, Mrs. Hart," she suggested, "and make
her lie down for a while. That poor fellow--as if he didn't have enough
on his hands without this!"

"I'm not on his hands! And I won't lie down!" Evadna jerked away from
Miss Georgie, and confronted them both pantingly, her cheeks still wet
with tears. "You act as if I don't know what I'm doing' and I DO know.
If I should lie down for a MILLION YEARS, I'd feel just the same about
it. I couldn't bear him to TOUCH me! I--"

"For Heaven's sake, don't shout it," Miss Georgie interrupted,
exasperatedly. "Do you want him--"

"To hear? _I_ don't care whether he does or not." Evadna was turning
sullen at the opposition. "He'll have to know it SOME TIME, won't he? If
you think can forgive a thing like that and let--"

"He had to do it. Baumberger would have killed HIM. He had a perfect
right to kill. He'd have been a fool and a coward if he hadn't. You come
and lie down a while."

"I WON'T lie down. I don't care if he did have to do it--I couldn't
love him afterward. And he didn't have to go down there and threaten
Stanley--and--HE'LL DO IT, TOO!" She fell to trembling again. "He'll DO
it--at sundown."

Phoebe and Miss Georgie looked at each other. He would, if the men
stayed. They knew that.

"And I was going to marry him!" Evadna shuddered when she said it, and
covered her face with her two hands. "He wasn't sorry afterward; you
could see he wasn't sorry. He was ready to kill more men. It's the
Indian in him. He LIKES to kill people. He'll kill those men, and he
won't be a bit sorry he did it. And he could come to me afterward and
expect me--Oh, what does he think I AM?" She leaned against the wall,
and sobbed.

"I suppose," she wailed, lashing herself with every bitter thought
she could conjure, "he killed Saunders, too, like old Hagar said. He
wouldn't tell me where he was that morning. I asked him, and he wouldn't
tell. He was up there killing Saunders--"

"If you don't shut up, I'll shake you!" Miss Georgie in her fury did not
wait, but shook her anyway as if she had been a ten-year-old child in a
tantrum.

"My Heavens above! I'll stand for nerves and hysterics, and almost any
old thing, but you're going a little bit too far, my lady. There's no
excuse for your talking such stuff as that, and you're not going to
do it, if I have to gag you! Now, you march to your own room and--STAY
there. Do you hear? And don't you dare let another yip out of you till
you can talk sense."

Good Indian stood upon the porch, and heard every word of that. He heard
also the shuffle of feet as Miss Georgie urged Evadna to her room--it
sounded almost as if she dragged her there by force--and he rolled a
cigarette with fingers that did not so much as quiver. He scratched a
match upon the nearest post, and afterward leaned there and smoked,
and stared out over the pond and up at the bluff glowing yellow in
the sunlight. His face was set and expressionless except that it was
stoically calm, and there was a glitter deep down in his eyes. Evadna
was right, to a certain extent the Indian in him held him quiet.

It occurred to him that someone ought to pick up Baumberger, and put him
somewhere, but he did not move. The boys and Peaceful must have stayed
down in the garden, he thought. He glanced up at the tops of the nodding
poplars, and estimated idly by their shadow on the bluff how long it
would be before sundown, and as idly wondered if Stanley and the others
would go, or stay. There was nothing they could gain by staying, he
knew, now that Baumberger was out of it. Unless they got stubborn
and wanted to fight. In that case, he supposed he would eventually be
planted alongside his father. He wished he could keep the boys and old
Peaceful out of it, in case there was a fight, but he knew that would be
impossible. The boys, at least, had been itching for something like this
ever since the trouble started.

Good Indian had, not so long ago, spent hours in avoiding all thought
that he might prolong the ecstasy of mere feeling. Now he had reversed
the desire. He was thinking of this thing and of that, simply that he
might avoid feeling. If someone didn't kill him within the next hour or
so, he was going to feel something--something that would hurt him more
than he had been hurt since his father died in that same house. But in
the meantime he need only think.

The shadow of the grove, with the long fingers of the poplars to
point the way, climbed slowly up the bluff. Good Indian smoked another
cigarette while he watched it. When a certain great bowlder that was
like a miniature ledge glowed rosily and then slowly darkened to a chill
gray, he threw his cigarette stub unerringly at a lily-pad which had
courtesied many a time before to a like missile from his hand, pulled
his hat down over his eyes, jumped off the porch, and started around the
house to the gate which led to the stable.

Phoebe came out from the sitting-room, ran down the steps, and barred
his way.

"Grant!" she said, and there were tears in her eyes, "don't do anything
rash--don't. If it's for our sakes--and I know it is--don't do it.
They'll go, anyway. We'll have the law on them and make them go. But
don't YOU go down there. You let Thomas handle that part. You're like
one of my own boys. I can't let you go!"

He looked down at her commiseratingly. "I've got to go, Mother Hart.
I've made my war-talk." He hesitated, bent his head, and kissed her on
the forehead as she stood looking up at him, and went on.

"Grant--GRANT!" she cried heartbrokenly after him, and sank down on the
porch-steps with her face hidden in her arms.

Miss Georgie was standing beside the gate, looking toward the stable.
She may not have been waiting for him, but she turned without any show
of surprise when he walked up behind her.

"Well, your jumpers seem to have taken the hint," she informed him, with
a sort of surface cheerfulness. "Stanley is down there talking to Mr.
Hart now, and the others have gone on. They'll all be well over the
dead-line by sundown. There goes Stanley now. Do you really feel that
your future happiness depends on getting through this gate? Well--if you
must--" She swung it open, but she stood in the opening.

"Grant, I--it's hard to say just what I want to say--but--you did right.
You acted the man's part. No matter what--others--may think or say,
remember that I think you did right to kill that man. And if there's
anything under heaven that I can do, to--to help--you'll let me do it,
won't you?" Her eyes held him briefly, unabashed at what they might
tell. Then she stepped back, and contradicted them with a little laugh.
"I will get fired sure for staying over my time," she said. "I'll wire
for the coroner soon as I get to the office. This will never come to a
trial, Grant. He was like a crazy man, and we all saw him shoot first."

She waited until he had passed through and was a third of the way to
the stable where Peaceful Hart and his boys were gathered, and then she
followed him briskly, as if her mind was taken up with her own affairs.

"It's a shame you fellows got cheated out of a scrap," she taunted Jack,
who held her horse for her while she settled herself in the saddle. "You
were all spoiling for a fight--and there did seem to be the makings of a
beautiful row!"

Save for the fact that she kept her eyes studiously turned away from a
certain place near by, where the dust was pressed down smoothly with
the weight of a heavy body, and all around was trampled and tracked, one
could not have told that Miss Georgie remembered anything tragic.

But Good Indian seemed to recall something, and went quickly over to her
just in time to prevent her starting.

"Was there something in particular you wanted when you came?" he asked,
laying a hand on the neck of the bay. "It just occurred to me that there
must have been."

She leaned so that the others could not hear, and her face was grave
enough now.

"Why, yes. It's old Hagar. She came to me this afternoon, and she had
that bunch of hair you cut off that was snarled in the bush. She had
your knife. She wanted me to buy them--the old blackmailer! She made
threats, Grant--about Saunders. She says you--I came right down to tell
you, because I was afraid she might make trouble. But there was so much
more on hand right here"--she glanced involuntarily at the trampled
place in the dust. "She said she'd come back this evening, 'when the
sun goes away.' She's there now, most likely. What shall I tell her? We
can't have that story mouthed all over the country."

Good Indian twisted a wisp of mane in his fingers, and frowned
abstractedly.

"If you'll ride on slowly," he told her, at last straightening the
twisted lock, "I'll overtake you. I think I'd better see that old
Jezebel myself."

Secretly he was rather thankful for further action. He told the boys
when they fired questions at his hurried saddling that he was going to
take Miss Georgie home, and that he would be back before long; in an
hour, probably. Then he galloped down the trail, and overtook her at the
Point o' Rocks.

The sun was down, and the sky was a great, glowing mass of color. Round
the second turn of the grade they came upon Stanley, walking with his
hands thrust in his trousers pockets and whistling softly to himself as
if he were thinking deeply. Perhaps he was glad to be let off so easily.

"Abandoning my claim," he announced, lightly as a man of his prosaic
temperament could speak upon such a subject. "Dern poor placer mining
down there, if yuh want to know!"

Good Indian scowled at him and rode on, because a woman rode beside him.
Seven others they passed farther up the hill. Those seven gave him scowl
for scowl, and did not speak a word; that also because a woman rode
beside him. And the woman understood, and was glad that she was there.

From the Indian camp, back in the sage-inclosed hollow, rose a sound
of high-keyed wailing. The two heard it, and looked at each other
questioningly.

"Something's up over there," Good Indian said, answering her look. "That
sounds to me like the squaws howling over a death."

"Let's go and see. I'm so late now, a few minutes more won't matter, one
way or the other." Miss Georgie pulled out her watch, looked at it, and
made a little grimace. So they turned into the winding trail, and rode
into the camp.

There were confusion, and wailing, and a buzzing of squaws around a
certain wikiup. Dogs sat upon their haunches, and howled lugubriously
until someone in passing kicked them into yelping instead. Papooses
stood nakedly about, and regarded the uproar solemnly, running to peer
into the wikiup and then scamper back to their less hardy fellows. Only
the bucks stood apart in haughty unconcern, speaking in undertones when
they talked at all. Good Indian commanded Miss Georgie to remain just
outside the camp, and himself rode in to where the bucks were gathered.
Then he saw Peppajee sitting beside his own wikiup, and went to him
instead.

"What's the matter here, Peppajee?" he asked. "Heap trouble walk down at
Hart Ranch. Trouble walk here all same, mebbyso?"

Peppajee looked at him sourly, but the news was big, and it must be
told.

"Heap much trouble come. Squaw callum Hagar make much talk. Do much bad,
mebbyso. Squaw Rachel ketchum bad heart along yo'. Heap cry all time.
No sleepum, no eatum--all time heap sad. Ketchum bad spirit, mebbyso.
Ketchum debbil. Sun go 'way, ketchum knife, go Hagar wikiup.
Killum Hagar--so." He thrust out his arm as one who stabs. "Killum
himself--so." He struck his chest with his clenched fist. "Hagar heap
dead. Rachel heap dead. Kay bueno. Mebbyso yo' heap bad medicine. Yo'
go."

"A squaw just died," he told Miss Georgie curtly, when they rode on. But
her quick eyes noted a new look in his face. Before it had been grave
and stern and bitter; now it was sorrowful instead.



CHAPTER XXVII. LIFE ADJUSTS ITSELF AGAIN TO SOME THINGS

The next day was a day of dust hanging always over the grade because of
much hurried riding up and down; a day of many strange faces whose eyes
peered curiously at the place where Baumberger fell, and at the cold
ashes of Stanley's campfire, and at the Harts and their house, and their
horses and all things pertaining in the remotest degree to the drama
which had been played grimly there to its last, tragic "curtain." They
stared up at the rim-rock and made various estimates of the distance and
argued over the question of marksmanship, and whether it really took a
good shot to fire from the top and hit a man below.

As for the killing of Baumberger, public opinion tried--with the aid of
various plugs of tobacco and much expectoration--the case and rendered
a unanimous verdict upon it long before the coroner arrived. "Done just
right," was the verdict of Public Opinion, and the self-constituted
judges manifested their further approval by slapping Good Indian upon
the back when they had a chance, or by solemnly shaking hands with him,
or by facetiously assuring him that they would be good. All of which
Grant interpreted correctly as sympathy and a desire to show him that
they did not look upon him as a murderer, but as a man who had the
courage to defend himself and those dear to him from a great danger.

With everything so agreeably disposed of according to the crude--though
none the less true, perhaps--ethics of the time and the locality, it was
tacitly understood that the coroner and the inquest he held in the grove
beside the house were a mere concession to red tape. Nevertheless
a general tension manifested itself when the jury, after solemnly
listening, in their official capacity, to the evidence they had heard
and discussed freely hours before, bent heads and whispered briefly
together. There was also a corresponding atmosphere of relief when the
verdict of Public Opinion was called justifiable homicide by the coroner
and so stamped with official approval.

When that was done they carried Baumberger's gross physical shell away
up the grade to the station; and the dust of his passing settled upon
the straggling crowd that censured his misdeeds and mourned not at all,
and yet paid tribute to his dead body with lowered voices while they
spoke of him, and with awed silence when the rough box was lowered to
the station platform.

As the sky clears and grows blue and deep and unfathomably peaceful
after a storm, as trees wind-riven straighten and nod graciously to the
little cloud-boats that sail the blue above, and wave dainty finger-tips
of branches in bon voyage, so did the Peaceful Hart ranch, when the
dust had settled after the latest departure and the whistle of the
train--which bore the coroner and that other quiet passenger--came
faintly down over the rim-rock, settle with a sigh of relief into its
old, easy habits of life.

All, that is, save Good Indian himself, and perhaps one other.

 . . . . . . . . .

Peaceful cleared his white mustache and beard from a few stray drops of
coffee and let his mild blue eyes travel slowly around the table, from
one tanned young face to another.

"Now the excitement's all over and done with," he drawled in his
half-apologetic tones, "it wouldn't be a bad idea for you boys to get
to work and throw the water back where it belongs. I dunno but what the
garden's spoiled already; but the small fruit can be saved."

"Clark and I was going up to the Injun camp," spoke up Gene. "We wanted
to see--"

"You'll have to do some riding to get there," Good Indian informed them
dryly. "They hit the trail before sunrise this morning."

"Huh! What were YOU doing up there that time of day?" blurted Wally,
eying him sharply.

"Watching the sun rise." His lips smiled over the retort, but his eyes
did not. "I'll lower the water in your milk-house now, Mother Hart," he
promised lightly, "so you won't have to wear rubber-boots when you go to
skim the milk." He gave Evadna a quick, sidelong glance as she came into
the room, and pushed back his chair. "I'll get at it right away," he
said cheerfully, picked up his hat, and went out whistling. Then he put
his head in at the door. "Say," he called, "does anybody know where that
long-handled shovel is?" Again he eyed Evadna without seeming to see her
at all.

"If it isn't down at the stable," said Jack soberly, "or by the
apple-cellar or somewhere around the pond or garden, look along the
ditches as far up as the big meadow. And if you don't run across it
there--" The door slammed, and Jack laughed with his eyes fast shut and
three dimples showing.

Evadna sank listlessly into her chair and regarded him and all her
little world with frank disapproval.

"Upon my WORD, I don't see how anybody can laugh, after what has
happened on this place," she said dismally, "or--WHISTLE, after--" Her
lips quivered a little. She was a distressed Christmas angel, if ever
there was one.

Wally snorted. "Want us to go CRYING around because the row's over?" he
demanded. "Think Grant ought to wear crepe, I suppose--because he ain't
on ice this morning--or in jail, which he'd hate a lot worse. Think we
ought to go around with our jaws hanging down so you could step on 'em,
because Baumberger cashed in? Huh! All hurts MY feelings is, I didn't
get a whack at the old devil myself!" It was a long speech for Wally to
make, and he made it with deliberate malice.

"Now you're shouting!" applauded Gene, also with the intent to be
shocking.

"THAT'S the stuff," approved Clark, grinning at Evadna's horrified eyes.

"Grant can run over me sharp-shod and I won't say a word, for what he
did day before yesterday," declared Jack, opening his eyes and looking
straight at Evadna. "You don't see any tears rolling down MY cheeks, I
hope?"

"Good Injun's the stuff, all right. He'd 'a' licked the hull damn--"

"Now, Donny, be careful what language you use," Phoebe admonished, and
so cut short his high-pitched song of praise.

"I don't care--I think it's perfectly awful." Evadna looked
distastefully upon her breakfast. "I just can't sleep in that room, Aunt
Phoebe. I tried not to think about it, but it opens right that way."

"Huh!" snorted Wally. "Board up the window, then, so you can't see the
fatal spot!" His gray eyes twinkled. "I could DANCE on it myself," he
said, just to horrify her--which he did. Evadna shivered, pressed her
wisp of handkerchief against her lips, and left the table hurriedly.

"You boys ought to be ashamed of yourselves!" Phoebe scolded
half-heartedly; for she had lived long in the wild, and had seen much
that was raw and primitive. "You must take into consideration that
Vadnie isn't used to such things. Why, great grief! I don't suppose the
child ever SAW a dead man before in her life--unless he was laid out in
church with flower-anchors piled knee-deep all over him. And to see
one shot right before her very eyes--and by the man she expects--or did
expect to marry--why, you can't wonder at her looking at it the way she
does. It isn't Vadnie's fault. It's the way she's been raised."

"Well," observed Wally in the manner of delivering an ultimatum, "excuse
ME from any Eastern raising!"

A little later, Phoebe boldly invaded the secret chambers of Good
Indian's heart when he was readjusting the rocks which formed the floor
of the milk-house.

"Now, Grant," she began, laying her hand upon his shoulder as he knelt
before her, straining at a heavy rock, "Mother Hart is going to give you
a little piece of her mind about something that's none of her business
maybe."

"You can give me as many pieces as you like. They're always good
medicine," he assured her. But he kept his head bent so that his
hat quite hid his face from her. "What about?" he asked, a betraying
tenseness in his voice.

"About Vadnie--and you. I notice you don't speak--you haven't that I've
seen, since that day--on the porch. You don't want to be too hard on
her, Grant. Remember she isn't used to such things. She looks at it
different. She's never seen the times, as I have, where it's kill or be
killed. Be patient with her, Grant--and don't feel hard. She'll get over
it. I want," she stopped because her voice was beginning to shake "--I
want my biggest boy to be happy." Her hand slipped around his neck and
pressed his head against her knee.

Good Indian got up and put his arms around her and held her close. He
did not say anything at all for a minute, but when he did he spoke very
quietly, stroking her hair the while.

"Mother Hart, I stood on the porch and heard what she said in the
kitchen. She accused me of killing Saunders. She said I liked to kill
people; that I shot at her and laughed at the mark I made on her arm.
She called me a savage--an Indian. My mother's mother was the daughter
of a chief. She was a good woman; my mother was a good woman; just as
good as if she had been white.

"Mother Hart, I'm a white man in everything but half my mother's blood.
I don't remember her--but I respect her memory, and I am not ashamed
because she was my mother. Do you think I could marry a girl who thinks
of my mother as something which she must try to forgive? Do you think
I could go to that girl in there and--and take her in my arms--and love
her, knowing that she feels as she does? She can't even forgive me for
killing that beast!

"She's a beautiful thing--I wanted to have her for my own. I'm a man.
I've a healthy man's hunger for a beautiful woman, but I've a healthy
man's pride as well." He patted the smooth cheek of the only woman he
had ever known as a mother, and stared at the rough rock wall oozing
moisture that drip-dripped to the pool below.

"I did think I'd go away for awhile," he said after a minute spent in
sober thinking. "But I never dodged yet, and I never ran. I'm going to
stay and see the thing through, now. I don't know--" he hesitated and
then went on. "It may not last; I may have to suffer after awhile, but
standing out there, that day, listening to her carrying on, kind of--oh,
I can't explain it. But I don't believe I wes half as deep in love as I
thought I was. I don't want to say anything against her; I've no right,
for she's a thousand times better than I am. But she's different. She
never would understand our ways, Mother Hart, or look at life as we
do; some people go through life looking at the little things that don't
matter, and passing by the other, bigger things. If you keep your eye
glued to a microscope long enough, you're sure to lose the sense of
proportion.

"She won't speak to me," he continued after a short silence. "I tried to
talk to her yesterday--"

"But you must remember, the poor child was hysterical that day when--she
went on so. She doesn't know anything about the realities of life. She
doesn't mean to be hard."

"Yesterday," said Grant with an odd little smile, "she was not
hysterical. It seems that--shooting--was the last little weight that
tilted the scale against me. I don't think she ever cared two whoops
for me, to tell you the truth. She's been ashamed of my Indian blood all
along; she said so. And I'm not a good lover; I neglected her all the
while this trouble lasted, and I paid more attention to Georgie Howard
than I did to her--and I didn't satisfactorily explain about that hair
and knife that Hagar had. And--oh, it isn't the killing, altogether! I
guess we were both a good deal mistaken in our feelings."

"Well, I hope so," sighed Phoebe, wondering secretly at the decadence of
love. An emotion that could burn high and hot in a week, flare bravely
for a like space, and die out with no seared heart to pay for the
extravagance--she shook her head at it. That was not what she had been
taught to call love, and she wondered how a man and a maid could be
mistaken about so vital an emotion.

"I suppose," she added with unusual sarcasm for her, "you'll be falling
in love with Georgie Howard, next thing anybody knows; and maybe that
will last a week or ten days before you find out you were MISTAKEN!"

Good Indian gave her one of his quick, sidelong glances.

"She would not be eternally apologizing to herself for liking me,
anyway," he retorted acrimoniously, as if he found it very hard to
forgive Evadna her conscious superiority of race and upbringing.
"Squaw."

"Oh, I haven't a doubt of that!" Phoebe rose to the defense of her own
blood. "I don't know as it's in her to apologize for anything. I never
saw such a girl for going right ahead as if her way is the only way!
Bull-headed, I'd call her." She looked at Good Indian afterward,
studying his face with motherly solicitude.

"I believe you're half in love with her right now and don't know it!"
she accused suddenly.

Good Indian laughed softly and bent to his work again.

"ARE you, Grant?" Phoebe laid a moist hand on his shoulder, and felt the
muscles sliding smoothly beneath his clothing while he moved a rock. "I
ain't mad because you and Vadnie fell out; I kind of looked for it to
happen. Love that grows like a mushroom lasts about as long--only _I_
don't call it love! You might tell me--"

"Tell you what?" But Grant did not look up. "If I don't know it, I can't
tell it." He paused in his lifting and rested his hands upon his knees,
the fingers dripping water back into the spring. He felt that Phoebe was
waiting, and he pressed his lips together. "Must a man be in love with
some woman all the time?" He shook his fingers impatiently so that the
last drops hurried to the pool.

"She's a good girl, and a brave girl," Phoebe remarked irrelevantly.

Good Indian felt that she was still waiting, with all the quiet
persistence of her sex when on the trail of a romance. He reached up
and caught the hand upon his shoulder, and laid it against his cheek. He
laughed surrender.

"Squaw-talk-far-off heap smart," he mimicked old Peppajee gravely. "Heap
bueno." He stood up as suddenly as he had started his rock-lifting a
few minutes before, and taking Phoebe by the shoulders, shook her with
gentle insistence. "Put don't make me fall out of one love right into
another," he protested whimsically. "Give a fellow time to roll a
cigarette, can't you?"

========================================
========================================

THE TRAIL OF THE WHITE MULE


by

B. M. Bower




CHAPTER ONE

Casey Ryan, hunched behind the wheel of a large, dark blue touring car
with a kinked front fender and the glass gone from the left  headlight,
slid out from the halted traffic, shied sharply away from a
hysterically clanging street car, crossed the path of a huge red truck
coming in from his right, missed it with two inches to spare and was
halfway down the block before the traffic officer overtook him.

The traffic officer was Irish too, and bigger than Casey, and madder.
For all that, Casey offered to lick the livin' tar outa him before
accepting a pale, expensive ticket which he crumbled and put into his
pocket without looking at it.

"What I know about these here fancy city rules ain't sufficient to give
a horn-toad a headache--but it's a darn sight more'n I care," Casey
declaimed hotly.  "I never was asked what I thought of them tin signs
you stick up on the end of a telegraft pole, to tell folks when to go
an' when to quit goin'.  Mebby it's all right fer these here city
drivers--"

"This'll mean thirty days for you," spluttered the officer.  "I ought
to call the patrol right now--"

"Get the undertaker on the line first!"  Casey advised him ominously.

Traffic was piling up behind them, and horns were honking a blatant
chorus that extended two blocks up the street.  The traffic officer
glanced into the troubled gray eyes of the Little Woman beside Casey
and took his foot off the running board.

"Better go put up your bail and then forfeit it," he advised in a
milder tone.  "The judge will probably remember you; I do, and my
memory ain't the best in the world.  Twice you've been hooked for
speeding through traffic; and parking by fire-plugs and in front of the
No Park signs and after four, seems to be your big outdoor sport.
Forfeit your bail, old boy--or it's thirty days for you, sure."

Casey Ryan made bitter retort, but the traffic cop had gone to untangle
two furious Fords from a horse-drawn mail wagon, so he did not hear.
Which was good luck for Casey.

"Why do you persist in making trouble for yourself?" the Little Woman
beside him exclaimed. "It can't be so hard to obey the rules; other
drivers do.  I know that I have driven this car all over town without
any trouble whatever."

Casey hogged the next safety-zone line to the deep disgust of a young
movie star in a cream-and-silver racer, and pulled in to the curb just
where he could not be passed.

"All right, ma'am.  You can drive, then."  He slid out of the driver's
seat to the pavement, his face a deeper shade of red than usual.

"For pity's sake, Casey!  Don't be silly," his wife cried sharply, a
bit of panic in her voice.

"You was in a hurry to git home," Casey pointed out to her with that
mildness of manner which is not mild.  "I was hurryin', wasn't I?"

"You aren't hurrying now--you're delaying the traffic again.  Do be
reasonable!  You know it costs money to argue with the police."

"Police be damned!  I'm tryin' to please a woman, an' I'm up agin a
hard proposition.  You can ask anybody if I'm the unreasonable one. You
hustled me out of the show soon as the huggin' commenced.  You wouldn't
even let me stay to see the first of Mutt and Jeff.  You said you was
in a hurry.  I leaves the show without seein' the best part, gits the
car an' drills through the traffic tryin' to git yuh home quick.  Now
you're kickin' because I did hurry."

"Hey!  Whadda yuh mean, blockin' the traffic?" a domineering voice
behind him bellowed.  "This ain't any reception hall, and it ain't no
free auto park neither."

Another traffic officer with another pencil and another pad of tickets
such as drivers dread to see began to write down the number of Casey's
car.  This man did not argue.  He finished his work briskly, presented
another notice which advised Casey Ryan to report immediately to police
headquarters, waved Casey peremptorily to proceed, and returned to his
little square platform to the chorus of blatting automobile horns.

"The cops in this town hands out tickets like they was Free Excursion
peddlers!" snorted Casey, his eyes a pale glitter behind his
half-closed lids.  "They can go around me, or they can honk and be
darned to 'em. Git behind the wheel, ma'am--Casey Ryan's drove the last
inch he'll ever drive in this darned town. If they pinch me again,
it'll have to be fer walkin'."

The Little Woman looked at him, pressed her lips together and moved
behind the wheel.  She did not say a word all the way out to the white
apartment house on Vermont which held the four rooms they called home.
She parked the car dexterously in front and led the way to their
apartment (ground floor, front) before she looked at me.

"It's coming to a show-down, Jack," she said then with a faint smile.
"He's on probation already for disobeying traffic rules of one sort and
other, and his fines cost more than the entire upkeep of the car. I
think he really will have to go to jail this time.  It just isn't in
Casey Ryan to take orders from any one, especially when his own
personal habits of driving a car are concerned."

"Town life is getting on his nerves," I tried to defend Casey, and at
the same time to comfort the Little Woman.  "I didn't think it would
work, his coming here to live, with nothing to do but spend money.
This is the inevitable result of too much money and too much leisure."

"It sounds much better, putting it that way," murmured Mrs. Casey. "I
think you're right--though he did behave back there as if it were too
much matrimony.  Jack, he's been looking forward to your visit.  I'm
sorry this has happened to spoil it."

"It isn't spoiled," I grinned. "Casey Ryan is, always and ever shall be
Casey Ryan.  He's running true to form, though tamer than one would
expect.  When do you think he'll show up?"

Mrs. Casey did not know.  She ventured a guess or two, but there was no
conviction in her tone.  With two nominal arrests in five minutes
chalked against him, and with his first rebellion against the Little
Woman to rankle in his conscience and memory, she owned herself at a
loss.

With a cheerfulness that was only conversation deep, we waited for
Casey and finally ate supper without him.  The evening was enlivened
somewhat by Babe's chatter of kindergarten doings; and was punctuated
by certain pauses while steps on the sidewalk passed on or ended with
the closing of another door than the Ryans'.  I fought the impulse to
call up the police station, and I caught the eyes of the Little Woman
straying unconsciously to the telephone in the hall while she talked of
things remote from our inner thoughts.  Margaret Ryan is game, I'll say
that.  We played cribbage for an hour or two, and the Little Woman beat
me until finally I threw up my hands and quit.

"I can't stand it any longer, Mrs. Casey.  Do you think he's in jail,
or just sulking at a movie somewhere?" I blurted.  "Forgive my butting
in, but I wish you'd talk about it.  You know you can, to me.  Casey
Ryan is a friend and more than a friend: he's a pet theory of mine--a
fad, if you prefer to call him that.

"I consider him a perfect example of human nature in its unhampered,
unbiased state, going straight through life without deviating a hair's
breadth from the viewpoint of youth.  A fighter and a castle builder; a
sort of rough-edged Peter Pan. Till he gums soft food and hobbles with
a stick because the years have warped his back and his legs, Casey Ryan
will keep that indefinable, bubbling optimism of spiritual youth.  So
tell me all about him.  I want to know who has licked, so far; luxury
or Casey Ryan."

The Little Woman laughed and picked up the cards, evening their edges
with sensitive fingers that had not been manicured so beautifully when
first I saw them.

"Well-sir," she drawled, making one word of the two and failing to keep
a little twitching from her lips, "I think it's been about a tie, so
far.  As a husband--Casey's a darned good bachelor."  Her chuckle
robbed that statement of anything approaching criticism.  "Aside from
his insisting on cooking breakfast every morning and feeding me in bed,
forcing me to eat fried eggs and sour-dough hotcakes swimming in butter
and honey--when I crave grapefruit and thin toast and one French lamb
chop with a white paper frill on the handle and garnished with fresh
parsley--he's the soul of consideration.  He wants four kinds of jam on
the table every meal, when fresh fruit is going to waste.  He's bullied
the laundryman until the poor fellow's reached the point where he won't
stop if the car's parked in front and Casey's liable to be home; but
aside from that, Casey's all right.

"After serving time in the desert and rustling my own wood and living
on bacon and beans and sour-dough bread,  I'm perfectly willing to
spend the rest of my life doing painless housekeeping with all the
modern built-in features ever invented; and buying my bread and cakes
and salads from the delicatessen around the corner.  I never want to
see a sagebush again as long as I live, or feel the crunch of gravel
under my feet.  I expect to die in French-heeled pumps and embroidered
silk stockings and the finest, silliest silk things ever put in a show
window to tempt the soul of a woman.  But it took just two weeks and
three days to drive Casey back to his sour-dough can."

"He craved luxury more than you seemed to do," I remembered aloud.

"He did, yes.  But his idea of luxury is sitting down in the kitchen to
a real meal of beans and biscuits and all the known varieties of jam
and those horrible whitewashed store cookies and having the noise of
the phonograph drowned every five minutes by a passing street car.
Casey wants four movies a day, and he wants them all funny.  He brings
home silk shirts with the stripes fairly shrieking when he unwraps
them--and he has to be thrown and tied to get a collar on him.

"He will get up at any hour of the night to chase after a fire engine,
and every whipstitch he gets pinched for doing something which is
perfectly lawful and right in the desert and perfectly awful in the
city.  You saw him," said the Little Woman, "to-day."  And she added
wistfully, "It's the first time since we were married that he has ever
talked back--to me.

"And you know," she went on, shuffling the cards and stopping to regard
the joker attentively (though I am sure she didn't know what card she
was looking at), "just chasing around town and doing nothing but square
yourself for not playing according to the rules costs money without
getting you anywhere.  Fifty-five thousand dollars isn't so much just
to play with, in this town. Casey's highest ambition now seems to be
nickel disk wheels on a new racing car that can make the speed cops go
some to catch him. His idea of economy is to put six or seven thousand
dollars into a car that will enable him to outrun a twenty-dollar fine!

"We have some money invested," she went on.  "We own this apartment
house--and fortunately it's in my name.  So long as the housing problem
continues critical, I think I can keep Casey going without spending our
last cent."

"He did one good stroke of business," I ventured, "when he bought this
place.  Apartment houses are good as gold mines these days."

The Little Woman laughed. "Well-sir, it wasn't so much a stroke as it
was a wallop.  Casey bought it just to show who was boss, he or the
landlord.  The first thing he did when we moved in was to take down the
nicely framed rules that said we must not cook cabbage nor onions nor
fish, nor play music after ten o'clock at night, nor do any loud
talking in the halls.

"Every day for a week Casey cooked cabbage, onions and fish.  He sat up
nights to play the graphophone.  He stayed home to talk loudly and play
bucking bronk with Babe all up and down the stairs and in the halls.
Our rent was paid for a month in advance, and the landlord was too
little and old to fight.  So he sold out cheap--and it really was a
good stroke of business for us, though not deliberate.

"Well-sir, at first we lost tenants who didn't enjoy the freedom of
their neighbors' homes.  But really, Jack, you'd be surprised to know
how many people in this city just LOVE cabbage and onions and fish, and
to have children they needn't disown whenever they go house-hunting. I
had ventilator hoods put over every gas range in the house, and turned
the back yard into a playground with plenty of sand piles and swings.
I raised the price, too, and made the place look very select, with a
roof garden for the grown-ups.  We have the house filled now with
really nice families--avoiding the garlic brand--and as an investment I
wouldn't ask for anything better.

"Casey enjoyed himself hugely while he was whipping things into shape,
but the last month he's been going stale.  The tenants are all so
thankful to do as they please that they're excruciatingly polite to
him, no matter what he does or says.  He's tired of the beaches and he
has begun to cuss the long, smooth roads that are signed so that he
couldn't get lost if he tried.  It does seem as if there's no interest
left in anything, unless he can get a kick out of going to jail.  And,
Jack, I do believe he's gone there."

The telephone rang and the Little Woman excused herself and went into
the hall, closing the door softly behind her.

I'm not greatly given to reminiscence, but while I sat and watched the
flames of civilization licking tamely at the impregnable iron bark of
the gas logs, the eyes of my memory looked upon a picture:

Desert, empty and with the mountains standing back against the sky, the
great dipper uptilted over a peak and the stars bending close for very
friendliness.  The licking flames of dry greasewood burning, with a
pungent odor in my nostrils when the wind blew the smoke my way. The
far-off hooting of an owl, perched somewhere on a juniper branch
watching for mice; and Casey Ryan sitting cross-legged in the sand,
squinting humorously at me across the fire while he talked.

I saw him, too, bolting a hurried breakfast under a mesquite tree in
the chill before sunrise, his mind intent upon the trail; facing the
desert and its hardships as a matter of course, with never a thought
that other men would shrink from the ordeal.

I saw him kneeling before a solid face of rock in a shallow cut in the
hillside, swinging his "single-jack" with tireless rhythm; a tap and a
turn of the steel, a tap and a turn--chewing tobacco industriously and
stopping now and then to pry off a fresh bit from the plug in his hip
pocket before he reached for the "spoon" to muck out the hole he was
drilling.

I saw him larruping in his Ford along a sandy, winding trail it would
break a snake's back to follow, hot on the heels of his next adventure,
dreaming of the fortune that finally came. . . .

The Little Woman came in looking as if she had been talking with
Destiny and was still dazed and unsteady from the meeting.

"Well-sir, he's gone!" she announced, and stopped and tried to smile.
But her eyes looked hurt and sorry.  "He has bought a Ford and a tent
and outfit since he left us down on Seventh and Broadway, and he just
called me up on long-distance from San Bernardino.  He's going out on a
prospecting trip, he says.  I'll say he's been going some!  A speed cop
overhauled him just the other side of Claremont, he told me, and he was
delayed for a few minutes while he licked the cop and kicked him and
his motorcycle into a ditch.  He says he's sorry he sassed me, and if I
can drive a car in this darned town and not spend all my loose change
paying fines, I'm a better man than he is.  He doesn't know when he'll
be back--and there you are."

She sat down wearily on the arm of an over-stuffed armchair and looked
up at the gilt-and-onyx clock which I suspected Casey of having bought.
"If he isn't lynched before morning," she sighed whimsically, "he'll
probably make it to the Nevada line all right."

I rose, also glancing at the clock.  But the Little Woman put up a hand
to forbid the plan she read in my mind.

"Let him alone, Jack," she advised.  "Let him go and be just as wild
and devilish as he wants to be.  I'm only thankful he can take it out
on a Ford and a pick and shovel.  There really isn't any trouble
between us two.  Casey knows I can look out for myself for awhile.
He's got to have a vacation from loafing and matrimony. I'm so thankful
he isn't taking it in jail!"

I told her somewhat bluntly that she was a brick, and that if I could
get in touch with Casey I'd try to keep an eye on him. It would
probably be a good thing, I told her, if he did stay away long enough
to let this collection of complaints against him be forgotten at the
police station.

I went away, hoping fervently that Casey would break even his own
records that night.  I really intended to find him and keep an eye on
him.  But keeping an eye on Casey Ryan is a more complicated affair
than it sounds.

Wherefore, much of this story must be built upon my knowledge of Casey
and a more or less complete report of events in which I took no part,
welded together with a bit of healthy imagination.



CHAPTER TWO

Casey Ryan knew his desert.  Also, from long and not so happy
experience, he knew Fords, or thought he did.  He made the mistake,
however, of buying a nearly new one and asking it to accomplish the
work of a twin six from the moment he got behind the wheel.

He was fortunate in buying a demonstrator's car with a hundred miles or
so to its credit.  He arrived in Barstow before the proprietor of a
supply store had gone to bed--for which he was grateful to the Ford. He
loaded up there with such necessities for desert prospecting as he had
not waited to buy in Los Angeles, turned short off the main highway
where traffic officers might be summoned by telephone to lie in wait
for him, and took the steeper and less used trail north. He was still
mad and talking bitterly to himself in an undertone while he
drove--telling the new Ford what he thought of city rules and city
ways, and driving it as no Ford was ever meant by its maker to be
driven.

The country north of Barstow is not to be taken casually in the middle
of a dark night, even by Casey Ryan and a Ford.  The roads, once you
are well away from help, are all pretty much alike, and all bad.  And
although the white, diamond-shaped signs of a beneficent automobile
club are posted here and there, where wrong turnings are most likely to
prove disastrous to travelers, Casey Ryan was in the mood to lick any
man who pointed out a sign to him.  He did see one or two in spite of
himself and gave a grunt of contempt.  So, where he should have turned
to the east (his intention being to reach Nevada by way of Silver Lake)
he continued traveling north and didn't know it.

Driving across the desert on a dark night is confusing to the most
observant wayfarer.  On either side, beyond the light of the car,
illusory forest stands for mile upon mile.  Up hill or down or across
the level it is the same--a narrow, winding trail through dimly seen
woods.  The most familiar road grows strange; the miles are longer; you
drive through mystery and silence and the world around you is a
formless void.

Dawn and a gorgeous sunrise painted out the woods and revealed barren
hilltops which Casey did not know.  Because he did not know them, he
guessed shrewdly that he was on his way to the wilderness of mountains
and sand which lies west of Death Valley. Small chance he had of
hearing the shop whistles blow in Las Vegas at noon, as he had expected.

He was telling himself that he didn't care where he went, when the car,
laboring more and more reluctantly up a long, sandy hill, suddenly
stopped.  In Casey's heart was a thrill at the sheer luxury of stopping
in the middle of the road without having some thick-necked cop stride
toward him bawling insults.  That he was obliged to stop, and that a
hill uptilted before him, and the sand was a foot deep outside the ruts
failed to impress him with foreboding.  He gloried in his freedom and
thought not at all of the Ford.

He climbed stiffly out, squinted at the sky line, which was jagged, and
at his immediate surroundings, which were barren and lonely and
soothing to his soul that hungered for these things. Great, gaunt
"Joshua" trees stood in grotesque groups all up and down the narrow
valley, hiding the way he had come from the way he would go.  It was as
if the desert had purposely dropped a curtain before his past and would
show him none of his future. Whereat Casey Ryan grinned, took a chew of
tobacco and was himself again.

"If they wanta come pinch me here, I'll meet 'em man to man. Back in
town no man's got a show.  They pile in four deep and gang a feller.
Out here it's lick er git licked.  They can all go t' thunder. Tahell
with town!"

The odor of coffee boiling in a new pot which the sagebrush fire was
fast blackening; the salty, smoky smell of bacon frying in a new frying
pan that turned bluish with the heat; the sizzle of bannock batter
poured into hot grease--these things made the smiling mouth of Casey
Ryan water with desire.

"Hell!" said Casey, breathing deep when, stomach full and resentment
toward the past blurred by satisfaction with his present, he filled his
pipe and fingered his vest pocket for a match.  "Gas stoves can't cook
nothin' so there's any taste to it.  That there's the first real meal
I've et in six months. Light a match and turn on the gas and call that
a fire!  Hunh! Good old sage er greasewood fer Casey Ryan, from here
on!"

He laid back against the sandy sidehill, tilted his hat over his eyes
and crossed his legs luxuriously.  He was in no hurry to continue his
journey.  Now that he and the desert were alone together, haste and
Casey Ryan held nothing in common.  For awhile he watched a Joshua palm
that looked oddly like a giant man with one arm hanging loose at its
side and another pointing fixedly at a distant, black-capped butte
standing aloof from its fellows.  Casey was tired after his night on
the trail.  Easy living in town had softened his muscles and slowed a
little that untiring energy which had balked at no hardship.  He was
drowsy, and his brain stopped thinking logically and slipped into
half-waking fancy.

The Joshua seemed to move, to lift its arm and point more imperatively
toward the peak.  Its ungainly head seemed to turn and nod at Casey.
What did the darned thing want?  Casey would go when he, got good and
ready.  Perhaps he would go that way, and perhaps he would not. Right
here was good enough for Casey Ryan at present; and you could ask
anybody if he were the man to follow another man's pointing, much less
a Joshua tree.

Battering rain woke Casey some hours later and drove him to the shelter
of the Ford.  Thunder and lightning came with the rain, and a bellowing
wind that rocked the car and threatened once or twice to overturn it.
With some trouble Casey managed to button down the curtains and sat
huddled on the front seat, watching through a streaming windshield the
buffeted wilderness.  He was glad he had not unloaded his outfit;
gladder still that the storm had not struck which he was traveling.
Down the trail toward him a small river galloped, washing deep gullies
where the wheels of his car offered obstruction to its boisterousness.

"She's a tough one," grinned Casey, in spite of the chattering of his
teeth.  "Looks like all the water in the world is bein' poured down
this pass.  Keeps on, I'll have to gouge out a couple of Joshuays an'
turn the old Ford into a boat--but Casey'll keep agoin'!"

Until inky dark it rained like the deluge.  Casey remained perched in
his one-man ark and tried hard to enjoy himself and his hard-won
freedom.  He stabbed open a can of condensed milk, poured it into a
cup, and drank it and ate what was left of his breakfast bannock, which
he had fortunately put away in the car out of the reach of a hill of
industrious red ants.

He thought vaguely of cranking the car and going on, but gave up the
notion.  One sidehill, he decided, was as good as another sidehill for
the present.

That night Casey slept fitfully in the car and discovered that even a
wall bed in a despised apartment house may be more comfortable than the
front seat of a Ford.  His bones ached by morning, and he was hungry
enough to eat raw bacon and relish it. But the sun was fighting through
the piled clouds and shone cheerfully upon the draggled pass, and Casey
boiled coffee and fried bacon and bannock beside the trail, and for a
little while was happy again.

From breakfast until noon he was busy as a beaver repairing the washout
beneath the car and on to the top of the hill. She was going to have to
get down and dig in her toes to make it, he told the Ford, when at last
he heaved pick and shovel into the tonneau, packed in his cooking
outfit and made ready to crank up.

From then until supper time he wore a trail around the car, looking to
see what was wrong and why he could not crank.  He removed
hootin'-annies and dingbats (using Casey's mechanical terms) looked
them over dissatisfiedly, and put them back without having done them ny
good whatever.  Sometimes they were returned to a different place, I
imagine, since I know too well how impartial Casey is with the
mechanical parts of a Ford.

He made camp there that night, pitching his little tent in the trail
for pure cussedness, and defying aloud a traveling world to make him
move until he got good and ready.  He might have saved his vocabulary,
for the road was impassable before him and behind; and had Casey
managed to start the car, he could not have driven a mile in either
direction.

Since he did not know that, the next day he painstakingly cleaned the
spark plugs and tried again to crank the Ford; couldn't, and removed
more hootin'-annies and dingbats than he had touched the day before.
That night he once more pitched his tent in the trail, hoping in his
heart that some one would drive along and dispute his right to camp
there; when he would lick the doggone cuss.

On the fourth day, after a long, fatiguing session with the vitals of a
Ford that refused to be cranked, Casey was busy gathering brush, for
his supper fire when Fate came walking up' the trail.  Fate appears in
many forms.  In this instance it assumed the shape of a packed burro
that poked its nose around a group of Joshuas, stopped abruptly and
backed precipitately into another burro which swung out of the trail
and went careening awkwardly down the slope.  The stampeding burro had
not seen the Ford at all, but accepted the testimony of its leader that
something was radically wrong with the trail ahead. His pack bumped
against the yuccas as he went; after him lurched a large man, heavy to
the point of fatness, yelling hoarse threats and incoherent
objurgations.

Casey threw down his armful of dead brush and went after the lead burro
which was blazing itself a trail in an entirely different direction.
The lead burro had four large canteens strapped outside its pack, and
Casey was growing so short of water that he had begun to debate
seriously the question of draining the radiator on the morrow.

I don't suppose many of you would believe the innate cussedness of a
burro when it wants to be that way.  Casey hazed this one to the hills
and back down the trail for half a mile before he rushed it into a
clump of greasewood and sneaked up on it when it thought itself hidden
from all mortal eyes.  After that he dug heels into the sand and hung
on.  Memory resurrected for his need certain choice phrases coined in
times of stress for the ears of burros alone.  Luxury and civilization
and fifty-five thousand dollars and a wife were as if they had never
been.  He was Casey Ryan, the prospector, fighting a stubborn donkey
all over a desert slope. He led it conquered back to the Ford, tied it
to a wheel and lifted off the four canteens, gratified with their
weight and hoping there were more on the other burro.  He had quite
forgotten that he had meant to lick the first man he saw, and grinned
when the fat man came toiling back with the other animal.

By the time their coffee was boiled and their bacon fried, each one
knew the other's past history and tentative plans for the future,
censored and glossed somewhat by the teller but received without
question or criticism.

The fat man's name was Barney Oakes, and he had heard of Casey Ryan and
was glad to meet him.  Though Casey had never heard of Barney Oakes, he
discovered that they both knew Bill Masters, the garage man at Lund;
and further gossip revealed the amazing fact that Barney Oakes had once
been the husband of the woman whom Casey had very nearly married, the
widow who cooked for the Lucky Lode.

"Boy, you're sure lucky she turned loose on yuh before yuh went an'
married her!"  Barney congratulated Casey, slapping his great thigh and
laughing loudly.  "She shore is handy with her tongue--that old girl.
Ever hear a sawmill workin' overtime? That's her--rippin' through knots
an' never blowin' the whistle fer quittin' time. I never knowed a man
could have as many faults as what she used t' name over fer me."  He
drained his cup and sighed with great content.  "At that, I stayed with
her seven months and fourteen days," he boasted.  "I admit, two of them
months I was laid up with a busted ankle an' shoulder blade. Tunnel
caved in on me."

They talked late that night and were comrades, brothers, partners share
and share alike before they slept.  Next morning Casey tried again to
start the Ford; couldn't; and yielded to Barney's argument that burros
were better than a car for prospectin' in that rough country.  They
overhauled Casey's outfit, took all the grub and as much else as the
burros could carry and debated seriously what point in the Panamints
they should aim for.

"Where's that there Joshuay tree pointin' to?" Casey asked finally.
"She's the biggest and oldest in the bunch, and ever since I've been
here she's looked like she's got somethin' on 'er mind. Whadda yuh
think, Barney?"

Barney walked around the yucca, stood behind the extended arm, squinted
at the sharp-peaked butte with the black capping, toward which the
gaunt tree seemed to point.  He spat out a stale quid of tobacco and
took a fresh one, squinted again toward the butte and looked at Casey.

"She's country I never prospected in, back in there.  I've follered
poorer advice than a Joshuay.  Le's try it a whirl."

Thus it came to pass that Casey Ryan forsook his Ford for a strange
partner with two burros and a clouded past, and fared forth across the
barren foothills with no better guidance than the rigid, outstretched
limb of a great, gaunt Joshua tree.



CHAPTER THREE

In a still sunny gulch which shadows would presently fill to the brim,
Casey Ryan was reaching, soiled bandanna in his hand, to pull a pot of
bubbling coffee from the coals,--a pot now blackened with the smoke of
many campfires to prove how thoroughly a part of the open land it had
become.  Something nipped at his right shoulder, and at the same
instant ticked the coffeepot and overturned it into a splutter of steam
and hot ashes.  The spiteful crack of a rifle shot followed close.
Casey ducked behind a nose of rock, and big Barney Oakes scuttled for
cover, spilling bacon out of the frying pan as he went.

For a week the two had been camped in this particular gulch, which drew
in to a mere wrinkle on the southwestern slope of the black-topped
butte, toward which the Joshua tree in the pass had directed them.
Nearly a week they had spent toiling across the hilly, waterless waste,
with two harrowing days when their canteens flopped empty on the burros
and big Barney stumbled oftener than Casey liked to see.  Casey himself
had gone doggedly ahead, his body bent forward, his square shoulders
sagging a bit, but with never a thought of doing anything but go on.

A red splotch high up on the side of this gulch promised "water
formation" as prospectors have a way of putting it.  They had found the
water, else adventure would have turned to tragedy. Near the water they
had also found a promising outcropping of silver-bearing quartz.
Barney's blowpipe had this very day shown them silver in
castle-building quantities.

Just at this moment, however, they were not thinking of mines. They
were eyeing a round hole in the coffeepot from which a brown rivulet
ran spitting into the blackening coals.

Casey was the more venturesome.  He raised himself to see if he could
discover where the bullet had come from, and very nearly met the fate
of the coffeepot.  He felt the wind of a second bullet that spatted
against a boulder near Barney.  Barney burrowed deeper into his covert.

Casey went down on all fours and crawled laboriously toward a
concealing bank covered thick with brush.  A third bullet clipped a
twig of sage just about three inches above the middle of his back, and
Casey flattened on his stomach and swore.  Some one on the peak of the
hill had good eyesight, he decided.  Neither spoke, other than to swear
in undertones; for voices carried far in that clear atmosphere, and
nothing could be gained by conversation.

Darkness never had poured so slowly into that gulch since the world was
young.  The campfire had died to black embers before Casey ventured
from his covert, and Barney Oakes seemed to have holed up for the
season.  Unless you have lived for a long while in a land altogether
empty of any human life save your own, you cannot realize the effect of
having mysterious bullets zip past your ears and ruin your supper for
you.

"Somebody's gunnin' fer us, looks like t' me," Barney observed
belatedly in a hoarse whisper, from his covert.

"Found that out, did yuh?  Well, it ain't the first time Casey's been
shot at and missed," Casey retorted peevishly in the lee of the bank.
"Say! I knowed the sing of bullets before I was old enough to carry a
tune."

"So'd I," boasted Barney, "but that ain't sayin' I learned t' like the
song."

"What I'm figurin' out now," said Casey, "is how to get up there an' AT
'am.  An' how we kin do it without him seein' us.  Goin' t' be kinda
ticklish--but it ain't the first ticklish job Casey Ryan ever tackled."

"It can't be did," Barney stated flatly.  "An' if it could be did, I
wouldn't do it.  I ain't as easy t' miss as what you be. I got bulk."

"A hole bored through your tallow might mebbe do you good," Casey
suggested harshly.  "Might let in a little sand.  You can't never
tell--"

"My vitals," said Barney with dignity, "is just as close to the surface
as what your vitals be.  I ain't so fat--I'm big.  An' I got all the
sand I need.  I also have got sense, which some men lacks."

"What yuh figurin' on doin'?" Casey wanted to know.  "Set here under a
bush an' let 'em pick yuh up same as they would a cottontail, mebbe? We
got a hull night to work in, an' Casey's eyes is as good as anybody's
in the dark.  More'n that, Casey's six-gun kin shoot just as hard an'
fast as a rifle--let 'im git close enough."

Barney did not want to be left alone and said so frankly. Neither did
he want to climb the butte.  He could see no possible gain in climbing
to meet an enemy or enemies who could hear the noise of approach. It
was plain suicide, he declared, and Barney Oakes was not ready to die.

But Casey could never listen to argument when a fight was in prospect.
He filled a canteen, emptied a box of cartridges into his pocket, stuck
his old, Colt six-shooter inside his trousers belt, and gave Barney
some parting instruction under his breath.

Barney was to move camp down under the bank by the spring, and dig
himself in there, so that the only approach would be up the narrow
gulch.  He would then wait until Casey returned.

"Somebody's after our outfit, most likely," Casey reasoned. "It ain't
the first time I've knowed it to happen.  So you put the hull outfit
outa sight down there an' stand guard over it.  If we'd 'a' run when
they opened up, they'd uh cleaned us out and left us flat.  They's two
of us, an' we'll git 'em from two sides."

He stuffed cold bannock into the pocket that did not hold the
cartridges and disappeared, climbing the side of the gulch opposite the
point which held their ambitious marksman.

To Barney's panicky expostulations he had given little heed. "If yore
vitals is as close to your hide as what you claim," Casey had said
impatiently, "an' you don't want any punctures in 'em, git to work an'
git that hide of yourn outa sight. It'll take some diggin'; they's a
lot of yuh to cover."

Barney, therefore, dug like a badger with a dog snuffing at its tail.
Casey, on the other hand, climbed laboriously in the darkness a bluff
he had not attempted to climb by daylight.  It was hard work and slow,
for he felt the need of going quietly. What lay over the rim-rock he
did not know, though he meant to find out.

Daylight found him leaning against a smooth ledge which formed a part
of the black capping he had seen from the road.  He had spent the night
toiling over boulders and into small gulches and out again, trying to
find some crevice through which he might climb to the top. Now he was
just about where he had been several hours before, and even Casey Ryan
could not help realizing what a fine target he would make if he
attempted to climb back down the bluff to camp before darkness again
hid his movements.

Standing there puffing and wondering what to do next, he saw the two
burros come picking their way toward the spring for their morning drink
and a handful apiece of rolled oats which Barney kept to bait them into
camp.  The lead burro was within easy flinging distance of a rock, from
camp, when the thin, unmistakable crack of a rifle-shot came from the
right, high up on the rim somewhere beyond Casey.  The lead burro
pitched forward, struggled to get up, fell again and rolled over,
lodging against a rock with its four feet sticking up at awkward angles
in the air.

The second burro, always quick to take alarm, wheeled and went
galloping away down the draw.  But he couldn't outgallop the bullet
that sent him in a complete somersault down the slope. Barney might
keep the rest of his rolled oats, for the burros were through wanting
them.

Casey squinted along the rim of black rock that crested the peak
irregularly like a stiff, ragged frill of mourning stuff the gods had
thrown away.  He could not see the man who had shot the burros. By the
intervals between shots, Casey guessed that one man was doing the
shooting, though it was probable there were others in the gang. And now
that the burros were dead, it became more than ever necessary to locate
the gang and have it out with them.  That necessity did not worry Casey
in the least.  The only thing that troubled him now was getting up on
the rim without being seen.

It was characteristic of Casey Ryan that, though he moved with caution,
he nevertheless moved toward their unseen enemy.  Not for a long, long
while had Casey been cautious in his behavior, and the necessity galled
him.  If the hidden marksman had missed that last burro, Casey would
probably have taken a longer chance. But to date, every bullet had gone
straight to its destination; which was enough to make any man think
twice.

Once during the forenoon, while Casey was standing against the rim-rock
staring glumly down upon the camp, Barney's hat, perched on a pick
handle, lifted its crown above the edge of his hiding place; an old,
old trick Barney was playing to see if the rifle were still there and
working.  The rifle worked very well indeed, for Barney was presently
flattened into his retreat, swearing and poking his finger through a
round hole in his hat.

Casey seized the opportunity created by the diversion and scurried like
a lizard across a bare, gravelly slide that had been bothering him for
half an hour.  By mid-afternoon he reached a crevice that looked
promising enough when he craned up it, but which nearly broke his neck
when he had climbed halfway up. Never before had he been compelled to
measure so exactly his breadth and thickness.  It was drawing matters
down rather fine when he was compelled to back down to where he had
elbow room, and remove his coat before he could squeeze his body
through that crack.  But he did it, with his six-shooter inside his
shirt and the extra ammunition weighting his trousers pockets.

In spite of his long experience with desert scenery, Casey was somewhat
astonished to find himself in a new land, fairly level and with thick
groves of pinon cedar and juniper trees scattered here and there.  Far
away stood other barren hills with deep canyons between.  He knew now
that the black-capped butte was less a butte than the uptilted nose of
a high plateau not half so barren as the lower country.  From the
pointing Joshua tree it had seemed a peak, but contours are never so
deceptive as in the high, broken barrens of Nevada.

He looked down into the gulch where Barney was holed up with their
outfit.  He could scarcely distinguish the place, it had dwindled so
with the distance.  He had small hope of seeing Barney.  After that
last leaden bee had buzzed through his hat crown, you would have to dig
faster than Barney if you wanted a look at him. Casey grinned when he
thought of it.

When he had gotten his breath and had scraped some loose dirt out of
his shirt collar, Casey crouched down behind a juniper and examined his
surroundings carefully, his pale, straight-lidded eyes moving slowly as
the white, pointing finger of a searchlight while he took in every
small detail within view.  Midway in the arc of his vision was a ledge,
ending in a flat-topped boulder.

The ledge blocked his view, except that he could see trees and a higher
peak of rocks beyond it.  He made his way cautiously toward the ledge,
his eyes fixed upon the boulder.  A huge, sloping slab of the granite
outcropping it seemed, scaly with gray-green fungus in the cracks where
moisture longest remained; granite ledge banked with low junipers
warped and stunted and tangled with sage. The longer Casey looked at
the boulder, the less he saw that seemed unnatural in a country filled
with boulders and outcroppings and stunted vegetation.

But the longer he looked at it, the stronger grew his animal instinct
that something was wrong.  He waited for a time--a long time indeed for
Casey Ryan to wait.  There was no stir anywhere save the sweep of the
wind blowing steadily from the west.

He crept forward, halting often, eyeing the boulder and its neighboring
ledge, distrust growing within him, though he saw nothing, heard
nothing but the wind sweeping through branches and bush.  Casey Ryan
was never frightened in his life.  But he was Irish born--and there's
something in Irish blood that will not out; something that goes beyond
reason into the world of unknown wisdom.

It's a tricksy world, that realm of intuitions.  For this is what
befell Casey Ryan, and you may account for it as best pleases you.

He circled the rock as a wolf will circle a coiled rattler which it
does not see.  Beyond the rock, built close against it so that the rear
wall must have been the face of the ledge, a little rock cabin squatted
secretively.  One small window, with two panes of glass was set high
under the eaves on the side toward Casey. Cleverly concealed it was,
built to resemble the ledge.  Visible from one side only, and that was
the side where Casey stood. At the back the sloping boulder, untouched,
impregnable; at the north and west, a twist of the ledge that hid the
cabin completely in a niche.  It was the window on the south side that
betrayed it.

So here was what the boulder concealed,--and yet, Casey was not
satisfied with the discovery.  Unconsciously he reached for his gun.
This, he told himself, must be the secret habitation of the fiend who
shot from rim-rocks with terrible precision at harmless prospectors and
their burros.

Casey squinted up at the sun and turned his level gaze again upon the
cabin.  Reason told him that the man with the rifle was still watching
for a pot shot at him and Barney, and that there was nothing whatever
to indicate the presence of only one man in the camp below. Had he been
glimpsed once during the climb, he would have been fired upon; he would
never have been given the chance to gain the top and find this cabin.

The place looked deserted.  His practical, everyday mind told him it
was empty for the time being.  But he felt queer and uncomfortable,
nevertheless.  He sneaked along the ledge to the cabin, flattened
himself against the corner next the gray boulder and waited there for a
minute.  He felt the flesh stiffening on his jaws as he crept up to the
window to look in.  By standing on his toes, Casey's eyes came on a
level with the lowest inch of glass,--the window was so high.

Just at first Casey could not see much.  Then, when his eyes had
adjusted themselves to the half twilight within, his mind at first
failed to grasp what he saw.  Gradually a dimly sensed dread took hold
of him, and grew while he stood there peering in at commonplace things
which should have given him no feeling save perhaps a faint surprise.

A fairly clean, tiny room he saw, with a rough, narrow bed in one
corner and a box table at its head.  From the ceiling hung a lantern
with the chimney smoked on one side and the warped, pole rafter above
it slightly blackened to show how long the lantern had hung there
lighted.  A door opposite the tiny window was closed, and there was no
latch or fastening on the inner side. An Indian blanket covered half
the floor space, and in the corner opposite the bed was a queer,
drumlike thing of sheet iron with a pipe running through the wall; some
heating arrangement, Casey guessed.

In the center of the room, facing the window, a woman sat in a wooden
rocking chair and rocked.  A pale old woman with dark hollows under her
eyes that were fixed upon the pattern of the Indian rug. Her hair was
white.  Her thin, white hands rested limply on the arms of the chair,
and she was rocking back and forth, back and forth, steadily,
quietly,--just rocking and staring at the Indian rug.

Casey has since told me that she was the creepiest thing he ever saw in
his life.  Yet he could not explain why it was so. The woman's face was
not so old, though it was lined and without color.  There was a
terrible quiet in her features, but he felt, somehow, that her thoughts
were not quiet.  It was as if her thoughts were reaching out to him,
telling him things too awful for her thin, hushed lips to let pass.

But after all, Casey's main object was to locate the man with the
rifle, and to do it before he himself was seen on the butte.  He
watched a little longer the woman who rocked and rocked. Never once did
her eyes move from that fixed point on the rug.  Never once did her
fingers move on the arm of the chair.  Her mouth remained immobile as
the lips of a dead woman.  He had to force himself to leave the window;
and when he did, he felt guilty, as if he had somehow deserted some one
helpless and needing him.  He sneaked back, lifted himself and took
another long look.  The old woman was rocking back and forth, her face
quiet with that terrible, pent placidity which Casey could not
understand.

Away from the cabin a pebble's throw, he shook his shoulders and pulled
his mind away from her, back to the man with the rifle--and to Barney.
Rocking in a chair never hurt anybody that he ever heard of.  And
shooting from rim-rocks did.  And Barney was down there, holed up and
helpless, though he had grub and water. Casey was up here in a mighty
dangerous place without much grub or water but--he hoped--not quite
helpless.  His immediate, pressing job was not to peek through a
high-up window at an old woman rocking back and forth in a chair, but
to round up the man who was interfering with Casey's peaceful quest
for--well, he called it wealth; but I think that adventure meant more
to him.

He picked his way carefully along the edge of the rim-rock, keeping
under cover when he could and watching always the country ahead.  And
without any artful description of his progress, I will simply say that
Casey Ryan combed the edge of that rampart for two miles before dark,
and found himself at last on the side farthest from Barney without
having discovered the faintest trace of any living soul save the woman
who rocked back and forth in the little, secret cabin.

Casey sat down on a rock, took a restrained drink from his canteen, and
said everything he knew or could invent that was profane and
condemnatory of his luck, of the unseen assassin, of the country and
his present predicament.  He got up, looked all around him, sniffed
unavailingly for some tang of smoke in the thin, crisp air, reseated
himself and said everything all over again.

Presently he rose and made his way straight across the butte, going
slowly to lessen his chance of making a noise for unfriendly ears to
hear, and with the stars for guidance.



CHAPTER FOUR

The night was growing cold, and Casey had no coat.  At least he could
go down and tell Barney what he had discovered and had failed to
discover, and get something to eat.  Barney would probably be worrying
about him, though there was a chance that a bullet had found Barney
before dark.  Casey was uneasy, and once he was down the fissure again,
he hurried as much as possible.

He managed to reach the camp by the little spring without being shot at
and without breaking a leg.  But Barney was not there. Just at first
Casey believed he was dead; but a brief search told Casey that two of
the largest canteens were gone, together with a side of bacon, some
flour and all of the tobacco.  White assassins would have made a more
thorough job of robbing the camp.  Barney, it was evident, had fled the
fate of the burros.

Casey told the stars what he thought of a partner like Barney.
Afterward he ate what was easiest to swallow without cooking,
overhauled what was left of their outfit, cached the remainder in a
clump of bushes, and wearily climbed the bluff again under a capacity
load.  He concealed himself in the bottom of the fissure to sleep,
since he could search no farther.

If he thought wistfully of the palled comfort of his apartment in Los
Angeles, and of the Little Woman there, he still did not think strongly
enough to send him back to them.  For with a canteen or two of water,
some food and his two capable legs to carry him, Casey Ryan could have
made it to Barstow easily enough.  But because he was Casey Ryan, and
Irish, and because he was always on the hunt for trouble without
recognizing it when he met it in the trail, it never occurred to him to
follow Barney down to safer country.

"That there Joshuay tree meant a lot more'n what it let on, pointin' up
this way!"  Casey muttered, staring down upon a somnolent wilderness
blanketed with hushed midnight.  "If it thinks it's got Casey whipped,
it better think agin and think quick.  I'll give it somethin' to point
at, 'fore I leave this here butte.

"Funny, the way it kept pointin' up this way.  I've saw Joshuays
before--miles of 'em. But I never seen one that looked so kinda human
and so kinda like it was tryin' to talk.  Seems kinda funny; an' that
old lady rockin' an' lookin'--seems like her an' the Joshuay has kinda
throwed in together, hopin' somebody might come along with savvy enough
to kinda--aw, hell!"  So did Casey and his Irish belief in the
supernatural fall plump against the limitations of his vocabulary.

Against the limitations proscribed by his material predicament,
however, Casey Ryan set his face with a grin.  Somebody was going to
get the big jolt of his life before long, he told himself over a
careful breakfast fire built cunningly far back in the crevice where a
current of air sucked into the rock capping of the butte. Something was
going on up here that shouldn't go on.  He did not know what it was,
but he meant to stop it.  He did not know who was making Indian war on
peaceful prospectors, but Casey felt that they were already as good as
licked, since he was here with breakfast under his belt and his
six-shooter tucked handily inside his waistband.

He squinted up the crack in the ledge, made certain mental alterations
in its narrow, jagged walls, and reached for the tough-handled,
efficient prospector's pick he had thoughtfully included in his meagre
equipment.  Slowly and methodically he worked up the crevice, knocking
off certain sharp points of rock, and knowing all the while what would
probably happen to him if he were overheard.

He was not discovered, however.  When he laid elbows on the upper level
of the rim and pulled himself up, his coat was on his back where it
belonged, and even Barney could have followed him.  Yet the top showed
no evidence of a widening of the fissure.  The bushy junipers hid him
completely while he reconnoitred and considered what he should do.

Because the place was close and the invisible call was strong, Casey
went first to the rock hut, circled it carefully and found that it was
exactly what it had seemed at first sight; a hidden place with no
evident opening save that high, small window under the eaves.  There
was no sign of pathway leading to it, no trace of life outside its
wall.  But when he crept close and peeked in again, there sat the old
woman rocking back and forth.  But to-day she stared at the wall before
her.

Casey felt a distinct sensation of relief just in knowing that she was,
after all, capable of moving.  Now her head was not bent, but rested
against the back of her chair.  She was rocking steadily, quietly, with
never a halt.

Casey rapped on the window and waited, fighting a nameless dread of the
mystery of her.  But she continued to rock and to stare at the wall; if
she heard the tapping she gave no sign whatever. So presently he turned
away and set himself to the work of finding the man with the rifle.

To that end he first of all climbed the tallest pinon tree in sight; a
tree that stood on a rise of ground apart from its brothers. From the
concealment of its branches, he surveyed his surroundings carefully,
noting especially the notched unevenness of the butte's rim and how
just behind him it narrowed unexpectedly to a thin ridge not more than
a couple of hundred yards in breadth.  A jagged outcropping cut
straight across and Casey saw how yesterday he had mistaken that ledge
for the rim of the butte.  His man must have been out on the point
beyond him all the while.  He was out there now, very likely; there, or
down in the camp he had watched yesterday like a vulture.

His search having narrowed to an area easily covered in an hour or two,
Casey turned his head and examined as well as he could the deep canyon
that had bitten into the butte and caused that narrow peak. Trees
blocked his view there, and he was feeling about for a lower foothold
so that he could make the descent when a voice from the ground startled
him considerably.

"Come down outa there, before I shoot yuh down!"

Casey looked down and saw what he afterwards declared was the meanest
looking man on earth, pointing straight at him the widest muzzled
shotgun he had ever seen in his life.

Casey came down.  The last ten feet of the distance he made in a clean
jump, planting his feet full in the old man's stomach. The meanest
looking man on earth gave a grunt and crumpled, with Casey's fingers
digging into his throat.

Whether Casey would have killed him or not will never be known. For
just as the man was falling limp in his hands, another heavy body
landed upon Casey's back.  Casey felt a hard, chill circle pressed
against his perspiring temple.  His hands relaxed and fall away from
the throat, leaving finger marks there in the flesh.

"Git up off'n him!" a new voice commanded harshly, and Casey obeyed.
His captor shifted the gun muzzle to the back of Casey's neck and poked
the gasping, bearded old man with his toe.

"Git up, Paw, you old fool, you!  What'd you let 'im light on yuh fer?
Why couldn't you a stood back a piece, outa reach?  You like to got
croaked."

Casey found it prudent to hold his head rather still, as a man does
when he carries a boil on his neck.  The muzzle of a six-shooter has a
quieting effect, when applied to the person by an unfriendly hand.
Casey did not at once see the intruder.  But presently "Paw" recovered
himself and his shotgun, and swung it menacingly toward Casey.
Whereupon the cold circle left Casey's medulla oblongata and a
long-faced, long-legged youth stepped somewhat hastily to one side.

"Paw, you ol' fool, you, get your finger off'n that trigger whilst
you're aimin' at me!" he exclaimed pettishly.

"I wa'n't aimin' at you.  I was aimin' at this 'ere--" Casey heard
himself called many names, any one of which was good for a fight when
Casey was free.

"Aw, you shut up, Paw.  You ain't gittin' nobody nowhere," the son
interrupted.  "You can't cuss 'im t' death--he looks like he could cut
loose a few of them pet names hisself if he got a chancet. Yuh might
tell us what you was doin' up that there tree, mister. An' what you're
doin' on this here butte, anyhow."

Casey looked at him.  Knowing Casey, I should say that his eyes were
not pleasant.  "Talk to Paw," he advised contemptuously. "The two of
yuh may possibly be able to stand each other without gittin' sick; but
me, I never did git used to skunks!"

That remark very nearly got him a through ticket to Land Beyond. But,
being very nearly what Casey had called them, they contented themselves
with mouthing vile epithets.

"Better take 'im down to the mine an' keep 'im till Mart gets back,
Paw," the long-jawed youth suggested, when he ran short of
objurgations. "Mart'll fix 'im when he comes."

"I'd fix 'im, here an', now," threatened Paw, "but Mart, he's so damned
techy lately--what we oughta do is bust 'is head with a rock an' pitch
'im over the rim.  That'd fix 'im."

They wrangled over the suggestion, and finally decided to take him down
and turn him over to one whom they called Joe.  Casey went along
peaceably, hopeful that he would later have a chance to fight back. He
told himself that they both had heads like peanuts, and whenever they
moved, he swore, he could hear their brains rattle in their skulls. It
doesn't take brains to shoot straight, and he decided that the lanky
young man was the one who had shot from the rim-rock. They drove him
down into the narrow, deep gulch, following a steep trail that Casey
had not seen the day before.  The trail led them to the mouth of a
tunnel; and by the size of the dump Casey judged that the workings were
of a considerable extent.  They were getting out silver ore, he
guessed, after a glance or two at stray pieces of rock.

Joe was a big, glum-looking individual with his left hand bandaged. He
chewed tobacco industriously and maintained a complete silence while
Hank, frequently telling Paw to shut up, told how and where they had
found Casey spying up on the butte.

"We don't fancy stray desert rats prowlin' around without no reason,"
said Joe.  "Our boss that we're workin' for ain't at home.  We're
lookin' for 'im back any day now, an' we'll just hold yuh till he
comes.  He can do as he likes about yuh.  You'll have to work fer your
board--c'm on an' I'll show yuh how."

Hank followed Casey and Joe into the tunnel.  Casey made no objections
whatever to going.  The tunnel was a fairly long one, he noticed, with
drifts opening out of it to left and right. At the end of the main
tunnel, Joe turned, took Casey's candle from him and stuck it into a
seam in the wall, as he had done with his own.

"Ever drill in rock?" he asked shortly.

"Mebbe I have an' mebbe I ain't," Casey returned defiantly.

"Here's a drill, an' here's your single-jack.  Now git t' work. There
ain't any loafin' around this camp, and spies never meant good to
nobody.  Yuh needn't expect to be popular with us--but you'll git your
grub if yuh earn it."

Casey looked at the drill, took the double-headed, four-pound hammer
and hesitated.  He has said that it was pretty hard to resist braining
the two of them at once.  But there would still be the old man with the
shotgun, and he admitted that he was curious about the old woman who
rocked and rocked.  He decided to wait awhile and see, why these miners
found it necessary to shoot harmless prospectors who came near the
butte.  So he spat into the dust of the tunnel floor, squinted at Joe
for a minute and went to work.

That day Casey was kept underground except during the short interval of
"shooting" and waiting for the dynamite smoke to clear out of the
tunnel; which process Casey assisted by operating a hand blower much
against his will.  Joe remained always on guard, eyeing Casey
suspiciously.  When at last he was permitted to pick up his coat and
leave the tunnel, night had fallen so that the gulch was dim and
shadowy.  Casey was conducted to a dugout cabin where bacon was frying
too fast and smoking suffocatingly.  Paw was there, in a vile temper
which seemed to be directed toward the three impartially and to have
been caused chiefly by his temporary occupation as camp cook.

Casey watched the old man place food for one person in little dishes
which he set in a bake pan for want of a tray.  He added a small tin
teapot of tea and disappeared from the dugout.

"Two of us waitin' to see your boss, huh?"  Casey inquired boldly of
Joe.  "Can't we eat together?"

"You can call yourself lucky if you eat at all," Joe retorted glumly.
"The old man's pretty sore at the way you handled him. He's runnin'
this camp; I ain't."

Casey let it go at that, chiefly because he was hungry and tired and
did not want to risk losing his supper altogether.  Hounds like these,
he told himself bitterly, were capable of any crime--from smashing a
man's skull and throwing him off the rim-rock to starving him to death.
He was Casey Ryan, ready always to fight whether his chance of winning
was even or merely microscopical; but even so, Casey was not inclined
toward suicide.

When the old man presently returned and the three sat down to the
table, Casey obeyed a gesture and sat down with them.  In spite of
Joe's six-shooter laid handily upon the table beside his plate, Casey
ate heartily, though the food was neither well cooked nor over
plentiful.

After supper he rose and filled his pipe which they had permitted him
to keep.  A stranger coming into the cabin might not have guessed that
Casey was a prisoner.  When the table was cleared and Hank set about
washing the dishes, Casey picked up a grimy dish towel branded black in
places where it had rubbed sooty kettles, and grinned cheerfully at Paw
while he dried a tin plate.  Paw eyed him dubiously over a stinking
pipe, spat reflectively into the woodbox and crossed his legs the other
way, loosely swinging an ill-shod foot.

"Y'ain't told us yet what brung yuh up on the butte," Paw observed
suddenly.  "Yuh wa'n't lost--yuh ain't got the mark uh no tenderfoot.
What was yuh doin' up in that tree?"

"Mebbe I mighta been huntin' mountain sheep," Casey retorted calmly.

"Huntin' mountain sheep up a tree is a new one," tittered Hank. "Wish
you'd give me a swaller uh that brand.  Must have a kick like a brindle
mule."

"More likely 'White Mule.'" Casey cocked a knowing eye at Hank. "You're
too late, young feller.  I chewed the cork day before yesterday," he
declared.

While he fished another plate out of the pan, Casey observed that Paw
looked at Joe inquiringly, and that Joe moved his head sidewise a
careful inch, and back again.

"Moonshine, huh?" Paw hazarded hopefully.  "Yuh peddlin' it, er makin'
it?"

Casey grinned secretively.  "A man can't be pinched without the goods,"
he observed shrewdly.  "I was raised in a country where they took fools
out an' brained 'em with an axe.  You fellers ain't been none too
friendly, recollect.  When's your boss expected home, did yuh say?  I'd
kinda like to meet 'im."

"He'll kinda like to meet you," Joe returned darkly. "Your actions has
been plumb suspicious.

"Nothin' suspicious about MY actions," Casey stated truculently,
throwing discretion behind him.  "The suspiciousness lays up here
somewheres on this butte.  If yuh want to know what brung me up here,
Casey Ryan's the man that can tell yuh to your faces.  I come up here
to find out who's been gittin' busy with a high-power on my camp down
below.  Ain't it natural a man'd want to know who'd shot his two
burros--an' 'is pardner?"  Casey had impulsively decided to throw in
Barney for good measure.  "Casey Ryan ain't the man to set under a bush
an' be shot at like a rabbit.  You can ask anybody if Casey ever backed
up fer man er beast.  I come up here huntin'. Shore I did.  It wasn't
sheep I was after--that there's my mistake. It was goats."

"Guess I got yourn," Hank leered "when stuck my gun in your back hair."

"If any one's 'been usin' a high-power it wasn't on this butte," Joe
growled.  "None uh this bunch done any shootin'.  Pap an' Hank, they
was up here huntin' burros an I caught yuh up a tree spyin'. We got a
little band uh antelope up here we're pertectin'.  Our boss got himself
made a deppity fer just such cases as yourn appears t' be--pervidin'
your case ain't worse.

"Now you say your pardner was shot down below in your camp. That shore
looks bad fer you, old-timer.  The boss'll shore have t' look into it
when he gits here.  Lucky we made up our minds t' hold yuh--a murderer,
like as not."  He filled his pipe with deliberation, while Casey, his
jaw sagging, stared from one to the other.

Casey had meant to accuse them to their faces of shooting Barney and
the burros from the rim-rock.  It had occurred to him that if they
believed Barney dead, they might reveal something of their purpose in
the attack.  Concealment, he felt vaguely, would serve merely to
sharpen their suspicion of him.  It had seemed very important to Casey
that these three should not know that Barney was probably well on his
way to Barstow by now.

Barney in Barstow would mean Barney bearing news that Casey Ryan was
undoubtedly murdered by outlaws in the Panamints; which would mean a
few officers on the trail, with Barney to guide them to the spot.  Paw
and Hank and Joe--outlaws all, he would have sworn would get what Casey
called their needin's.  His jaw muscles tightened when he thought of
that, and the prospect held him quiet under Joe's injustice.

"I can prove anything I'm asked to prove when the time comes," he said
sourly, and began to roll himself a cigarette, since his pipe had gone
out.  "But I ain't in any courtroom yet, an' you fellers ain't any
judge an' jury."

"We got to hold ye,"  Paw spoke up unctiously, as if the decision had
been his.  "Ef a crime's been committed, like you say it has, we got to
do our duty an' hold ye.  The boss'll know what to do with ye--like I
said all along; when I hauled ye down outa that tree, for instance.

"Aw, shut up, Paw, you ol' fool, you," Hank commanded again with filial
gentleness.  "He had yore tongue hangin' out a foot when I come along
an' captured 'im.  Don't go takin' no credit to yourself--you ain't got
none comin'.  Mart'll know what to do with 'im, all right.  But yuh
needn't go an' try to let on to Mart that you was the one that caught
'im.  He had you caught. An' he'd a killed yuh if I hadn't showed up
an' pulled 'im off'n yuh."

"Well now, when it comes to KILLIN'," Casey interjected spitefully, "I
guess I coulda put the two of yuh away if I'd a wanted to right bad.
Casey Ryan ain't no killer, because he don't have to be.  G'wan an'
hold me if yuh feel that way.  Grub ain't none too good, but I can
stand it till your boss comes.  I want a man-to-man talk with him,
anyway."



CHAPTER FIVE

That night Casey slept soundly in a bunk built above Joe's bed in the
dugout, with Hank and Paw on the opposite side of the room with their
guns handy.  In the morning he thought well enough of his stomach to
get up and start breakfast when Hank had built the fire. He was aware
of Joe's suspicious gaze from the lower bunk, and of the close presence
of Joe's six-shooter eyeing him balefully from underneath the top
blanket.  Hank, too, was watchful as a coyote, which he much resembled,
in Casey's opinion.  But Casey did not mind trifles of that kind, once
his mind was at ease about the breakfast and he was free to slice bacon
the right thickness, and mix the hot-cake batter himself. For the first
time in many weeks he sang--if you could call it singing--over his work.

When Casey Ryan sings over a breakfast fire, you may expect the bacon
fried exactly right.  You may be sure the hot-cakes will be browned
correctly with no uncooked dough inside, and that the coffee will give
you heart for whatever hardship the day may hold.

Even Paw's surliness lightened a bit by the time he had speared his
tenth cake and walloped it in the bacon grease before sprinkling it
thick with sugar and settling the eleventh cake on top.  Casey was
eyeing the fourteenth cake on Hank's plate when Joe looked up at him
over a loaded fork.

"Save out enough dough for three good uns," Joe ordered, "an' fill that
little coffee pot an' set it to keep hot, before Hank hogs the hull
thing.  Dad, seems like you're, too busy t' think uh some things Mart
wouldn't want forgot."  Paw looked quickly at Casey; but Casey Ryan had
played poker all his life, and his weathered face showed no expression
beyond a momentary interest, which was natural.

"Other feller hurt bad?" he inquired carelessly,  looking at Joe's
bandaged hand.  He almost grinned when he saw the relieved glances
exchanged between Joe and Paw.

"Leg broke," Joe mumbled over a mouthful.  "Dad, he set it an' it's
doin' all right.  He's up in another cabin."  Through Hank's brainless
titter, Joe added carefully, "Bad ground in the first right-hand drift.
We had to abandon it.  Rocks big as your head comin' in on yuh
onexpected.  None uh them right-hand drifts is safe fer a man t' walk
in, much less work."

Thereupon Casey related a thrilling story of a cave-in, and assured Joe
that he and his partner were lucky to get off with mere broken bones.
Casey, you will observe, was running contrary to his nature and leaning
to diplomacy.

For himself, I am sure he would never have troubled to placate them. He
would have taken the first slim chance that offered--or made one--and
fought the three to a finish.

But there was the old woman in the rock hut above them, rocking back
and forth and staring at a wall that had no visible opening save one
small window to let in the light of outdoors.  Prisoner she must
be--though why, Casey could only guess.

Perhaps she was some desert woman, the widow of some miner who had been
shot as these three had tried to shoot him and Barney Oakes. Mean,
malevolent as they were, they would still lack the brutishness
necessary to shoot an old woman.  So they had shut her up there in the
rock hut, not daring to take her back to civilization where she would
tell of the crime.  It was all plain enough to Casey.  The story of the
crippled miner made him curl his lip contemptuously when his back was
safely turned from Joe.

That day Casey thought much of the old woman in the hut, and of Paw's
worse than inferior cooking.  Though he did not realize the change in
himself, six months of close companionship with the Little Woman had
changed Casey Ryan considerably.  Time was when even his
soft-heartedness would not have impelled him to patient scheming that
he might help an old woman whose sole claim upon his sympathy consisted
of four rock walls and a look of calm despair in her eyes.  Now, Casey
was thinking and planning for the old woman more than for himself.

Wherefore, Casey chose the time when he was "putting in an upper"
(which is miner's parlance for drilling a hole in the upper face of the
tunnel).  He gritted his teeth when he swung back the single-jack and
landed a glancing blow on the knuckles of his left hand instead of the
drill end.  No man save Casey Ryan or a surgeon could have told
positively whether the metacarpal bones were broken or whether the hand
was merely skinned and bruised.

Joe came up, regarded the bleeding hand sourly, led Casey out to the
dugout and bandaged the hand for him.  There would be no more tunnel
work for Casey until the hand had healed; that was accepted without
comment.

That night Casey proved to Paw that, with one hand in a sling much
resembling Joe's, he could nevertheless cook a meal that made eating a
pleasure to look forward to.  After that the old woman in the little
stone hut had pudding, sometimes, and cake made without eggs, and pie;
and the potatoes were mashed or baked instead of plain boiled. Casey
had the satisfaction of seeing the dishes return empty to the dugout,
and know that he was permitted to add something to her comfort and
well-being. The Little Woman would be glad of that, Casey thought with
a glow.  She might never hear of it, but Casey liked to feel that he
was doing something that would please the Little Woman.

For the first few days after Casey was installed as cook, one of the
three remained always with him, making it plain that he was under
guard.  Two were always busy elsewhere.  Casey saw that he was expected
to believe that they were at work in the tunnel, driving it in to a
certain contact of which they spoke frequently and at length.

At supper they would mention their footage for that day's work, and
Casey would hide a grin of derision.  Casey knew rock as he knew bacon
and beans and his sour-dough can.  To make the footage they claimed to
be making in that tunnel, they would need to shoot twice a day, with a
round of, say, five holes to a shot.

As a matter of fact, two holes a day, one shot at noon and one at
night, were the most Casey ever heard fired in the tunnel or elsewhere
about the mine.  But he did not tell them any of the things he thought;
not even Joe, who had intelligence far above Paw and Hank, ever guessed
that Casey listened every day for their shots and could tell, almost to
an inch what progress they were actually making in the tunnel.  Nor did
he guess that Casey Ryan with his mouth shut was more unsafe than
"giant powder" laid out in the sun until it sweated destruction.

Persistent effort, directed by an idea based solely upon an abstract
theory, must be driven by a trained intelligence.  In this case the
abstract theory that every prisoner must be watched must support itself
unaided by Casey's behavior.  Not even Joe's intelligence was trained
to a degree where the theory in itself was sufficient to hold him to
the continuous effort of watching Casey.

Wherefore Paw, Hank and Joe presently slipped into the habit of leaving
Casey alone for an hour or so; being careful to keep the guns out of
his reach, and returning to the dugout at unexpected intervals to make
sure that all was well.

Casey Ryan knew his pots and pans, and how to make them fill his days
if need be.  With savory suppers and his care-free, Casey Ryan grin, he
presently lulled them into accepting him as a handy man around camp,
and into forgetting that he was at least a potential enemy.  Afoot and
alone in that unfriendly land, with his left hand smashed and carried
in a sling, and on his tongue an Irish joke that implied content with
his captivity, Casey Ryan would not have looked dangerous to more
intelligent men than these three.

They should have looked one night under the bedding in Casey's bunk.
More important still would have been the safeguarding of their "giant
powder" and caps and fuse.  They should not have left it in a gouged,
open hollow under a boulder near the dugout. They were not burdened by
the weight of their brains, I imagine.

Just here I should like to say a few words to those who are wholly
ignorant of the devastating power contained in "giant powder"--which is
dynamite.  If you have never had any experience with the stuff, you are
likely to go out with a bang and a puff of bluish-brown smoke when you
go.  On the other hand, you may believe the weird tales one reads now
and then, of how whole mountainsides have been thrown down by the
discharge of a few sticks of dynamite.  Or of one man striking terror
to the very souls of a group of mutinous miners by threatening to throw
a piece at them.  Very well, now this is the truth without any frills
of exaggeration or any belittlement:

Dynamite MAY go off by being thrown so that it lands with a jar, but it
is not likely to be so hasty as all that.  Whole boxes of it have been
dropped off wagons traveling over rough trails, with no worse effect
than a nervous chill down the spine of the driver of the wagon.  It is
true that old stuff, after lying around for months and months through
varying degrees of temperature, may perform erratically, exploding when
it shouldn't and refusing to explode when it should.  The average miner
refuses to take a chance with stale "giant" if he can get hold of fresh.

One stick the size of an ordinary candle, and from that to a maximum
amount of four sticks, may be used to "load" a hole eighteen to
twenty-four inches long, drilled into living rock. The amount of
dynamite used depends upon the quality of rock to be broken and the
skill and good judgment of the miner.  In average hard-rock mining,
from three to five of these holes are drilled in a space four-by-six
feet in area.

A stick of dynamite is exploded by inserting in one end of the stick a
high-power detonating cap which will deliver a twenty-pound blow per
X--whatever that means.  From three- to six-X caps are used in ordinary
mining.  Three-X caps sometimes fail to explode a stick of dynamite.  A
six-X cap, delivering a one-hundred-and-twenty-pound blow, may be
counted upon to do the work without fail.

The cap itself is exploded by a spark running through a length of fuse,
the length depending altogether upon the time required to reach a point
of safety after the fuse is lighted.  The cap is really more dangerous
to handle than is the dynamite itself.  The cap is a tricky thing that
may go off at any jar or scratch or at a spark from pipe or cigarette.
You can, if you are sufficiently careless of possible results, light
the twisted paper end of a stick of dynamite and watch the dynamite
burn like wax in your fingers; it MAY go off and set your friends to
work retrieving portions of your body.  More likely, it will do nothing
but burn harmlessly.

Well, then, a piece of fuse is inserted in the open end of the cap, and
the metal pressed tight against the fuse to hold it in place. Pressed
down by the miner's teeth, sometimes, if he has been long in the
business and has grown careless about his head; otherwise he crimps the
cap on with a small pair of pliers or the back of his knife blade--and
feels a bit easier when it is done without losing a hand.

You would think, unless you are accustomed to the stuff, that when five
holes are loaded with, probably, ten or twelve sticks of dynamite to
the lot, each hole containing a six-X exploding cap as well, that the
first shot would likewise be the last shot and that the whole tunnel
would cave in and the mountain behind it would shake. Nothing like that
occurs.  If there are five loaded holes in the tunnel face, and you do
not hear, one after the other, five muffled BOOMS, you will know that
one hole failed to go off--and that the miner is worried.  It happens
sometimes that four holes loaded with eight sticks of dynamite explode
within a foot or so of the fifth hole and yet the fifth hole remains
"dead" and a menace to the miner until it is discharged.

So please don't swallow those wild tales of a stick of dynamite that
threw down a mountainside.  I once read a story--it was not so long
ago--of a Chinaman who wiped out a mine with a little piece of dynamite
which he carried in his pocket.  I laughed.

Casey Ryan, on the first day when he was left alone with his crippled
hand and his pots and pans for company, did nothing whatever that he
would not have done had one of the three been present.  He was
suspicious of their going and thought it was a trap set to catch him in
an attempted escape.

On the second day when the three went off together and left him alone,
Casey went out gathering wood and discovered just where the "powder,"
fuse and caps were kept under a huge, black boulder between the tunnel
portal and the dugout.  On the third day he also gathered wood and
helped himself to two sticks of dynamite, three caps and eighteen
inches of fuse.  Not enough to be missed unless they checked their
supply more carefully than Casey believed they did; but enough for
Casey's purpose nevertheless.

That night, while the moon shone in through the dingy window at the
head of his bunk and gave him a little light to work by, Casey sat up
in bed and snored softly and with a soothing rhythm while he cut a
stick of dynamite in two, capped five inches of fuse for each piece
working awkwardly with his one good hand and pinching the caps tight
with his teeth, which might have sent him with a bang into Kingdom
Come--and very carefully worked the caps into the powder until no more
than three inches of fuse protruded from the end of the half stick.  It
would have been less dangerous to land with a yell in the middle of the
floor and fight the three men with one bare hand, but Casey's courage
never turned a hair.

Still snoring mildly, he held up to the moonlight two deadly weapons
and surveyed them with much satisfaction.  They would not be so quick,
as fiction would have them, but if his aim was accurate in throwing,
they would be deadly enough.  Moreover, he could count with a good deal
of certainty upon a certain degree of terror which the sight of them in
his hand would produce.

When Casey Ryan cooked breakfast next morning, he carried two
half-sticks of loaded dynamite under his hand in the sling. Can you
wonder that even he shied at standing over the stove cooking hot cakes
and complained that his broken hand pained him a lot and that the heat
made it worse?  But a shrewd observer would have noticed on his face
the expression of a cat that has been shut in the pantry over night.

Joe volunteered to take another look at the hand and see if blood
poison was "setting in"; but Casey said it didn't feel like blood
poison.  He had knocked it against the bunk edge in his sleep, he
declared.  He'd dose 'er with iodine after a while, and she'd be all
right.

Joe let it go at that, being preoccupied with other matters at which
Casey could only guess.  He conferred with Paw outside the dugout after
breakfast, called Hank away from the dish-washing and the three set off
toward the tunnel with a brisker air than usually accompanied them to
work.  Casey watched them go and felt reasonably sure of at least two
hours to himself.

The first thing Casey did after he had made sure that he was actually
alone was to remove the deadly stuff from the sling and lay it on a
shadowed shelf where it would be safe but convenient to his hand. Then,
going to his bunk, he reached under the blankets and found the other
stick of dynamite which he had not yet loaded.  This he laid on the
kitchen table and cut it in two as he had done last night with the
other stick.  With his remaining cap he loaded a half and carried it
back to his bunk. He was debating in his mind whether it was worth
while purloining another cap from a box under the boulder when another
fancy took him and set him grinning.

Four separate charges of dynamite, he reasoned, would not be necessary.
It was an even chance that the sight of a piece with the fuse in his
hand would be sufficient to tame Paw or Hank or Joe--or the three
together, for that matter--without going further than to give them a
sight of it.

With that idea uppermost, Casey split the paper carefully down the side
of the remaining half-stick, took out the contents in a tin plate and
carried it outside where he buried it in the sand beneath a bush.
Returning to the dugout he made a thick dough of leftover pancake
batter and molded it into the dynamite wrapping with a fragment of
harmless fuse protruding from the opened end. When the thing was dry,
Casey thought it would look very deadly and might be useful.  After
several days of helplessness for want of a weapon, Casey was in a mood
to supply himself generously.

He finished the dish-washing, working awkwardly with one hand. After
that he put a kettle of beans on to boil, filled the stove with pinon
sticks and closed the drafts.  He armed himself with the two loaded
pieces of dynamite from the cupboard, filled his pockets with such
other things as he thought he might need, and went prospecting on his
own account.

At the portal of the tunnel he stopped and listened for the ping-g,
ping-g of a single-jack striking steadily upon steel. But the tunnel
was silent, the ore car uptilted at the end of its track on the dump.
Yet the three men were supposedly at work in the mine, had talked at
breakfast about wanting to show a certain footage when the boss
returned, and of needing to hurry.

Casey went into the tunnel, listening and going silently; sounds travel
far in underground workings.  At the mouth of the first right-hand
drift he stopped again and listened.  This, if he would believe Joe,
was the drift where the bad ground had caused the accident to Joe and
his partner whose leg had been broken. Casey found the drift as silent
as the main tunnel.  He went in ten feet or so and lighted the candle
he had pulled from inside his shirt. With the candle held in the
swollen fingers of his injured hand, and a prospector's pick taken from
the portal in his other, Casey went on cautiously, keeping an eye upon
the roof which, to his wise, squinting eyes, looked perfectly solid and
safe.

If a track had ever been laid in this drift it had long since been
removed.  But a well-defined path led along its center with boot tracks
going and coming, blurring one another with much passing. Casey grinned
and went on, his ears cocked for any sound before or behind, his shoes
slung over his arm by their tied laces.

So he came, in the course of a hundred feet or so, to a crude door of
split cedar slabs, the fastening padlocked on his side. Casey had
vaguely expected some such bar to his path, and he merely gave a grunt
of satisfaction that the lock was old and on his side of the door.

With his jackknife Casey speedily took off one side of the lock and
opened it.  Making the door appear locked behind him when he had passed
through was a different matter, and Casey did not attempt it.  Instead,
he merely closed the door behind him, carrying the padlock in with him.

As Casey reviewed his situation, being on the butte at all was a risk
in itself.  One detail more or less could not matter so much. Besides,
he was a bold Casey Ryan with two loaded half-sticks of dynamite in his
sling.

A crude ladder against the wall of a roomy stope beyond the door did
not in the least surprise him.  He had expected something of this sort.
When he had topped the ladder and found himself in a chamber that
stretched away into blackness, he grunted again his mental confirmation
of a theory working out beautifully in fact. His candle held close to
the wall, he moved forward along the well-trodden path, looking for a
door.  Mechanically he noticed also the formation of the wall and the
vein of ore--probably high-grade in pockets, at least--that had caused
this chamber to be dug.  The ore, he judged, had long since been taken
out and down through the stope into the tunnel and so out through the
main portal. These workings were old and for mining purposes abandoned.
But just now Casey was absorbed in solving the one angle of the mystery
which he had stumbled upon at first, and he gave no more than a glance
and a thought to the silent testimony of the rock walls.

He found the door, fastened also on the outside just as he had expected
it would be.  Beside it stood a rather clever heating apparatus which
Casey did not examine in detail.  His Irish heart was beating rather
fast while he unfastened the door.  Beyond that door his thoughts went
questing eagerly but he hesitated nevertheless before he lifted his
knuckles and rapped.

There was no reply.  Casey waited a minute, knocked again, then pulled
the door open a crack and looked in.  The old woman sat there rocking
back and forth, steadily, quietly.  But her thin fingers were rolling a
corner of her apron hem painstakingly, as if she meant to hem it again.
Her eyes were fixed absently upon the futile task.  Casey watched her
as long as he dared and cleared his throat twice in the hope that she
would notice him. But the old woman rocked back and forth and rolled
her apron hem; unrolled it and carefully rolled it again.

"Good morning, ma'am," said Casey, clearing his throat for the third
time and coming a step into the room with his candle dripping wax on
the floor.

For just an instant the uneasy fingers paused in their rolling of the
apron hem.  For just so long the rockers hesitated in their motion.
But the old woman did not reply nor turn her face toward him; and Casey
pushed the door shut behind him and took two more steps toward her.

"I come to see if yuh needed anything, ma'am; a friend, mebbe." Casey
grinned amiably, wanting to reassure her if it were possible to make
her aware of his presence.  "They had yuh locked in, ma'am. That don't
look good to Casey Ryan.  If yuh wanta get out--if they got yuh held a
prisoner here, or anything like 'that, you can trust Casey Ryan any old
time. Is--can I do anything for yuh, ma'am?" The old woman dropped her
hands to her lap and held them there, closely clasped.  Her head swung
slowly round until she was looking at Casey with that awful, fixed
stare she had heretofore directed at the wall or the floor.

"Tell those hell-hounds they have a thousand years to burn--every one
of them!" she said in a deep, low voice that had in it a singing
resonance like a chant.  "Every cat, every rat, every mouse, every
louse, has a thousand year's to burn.  Tell Mart the hounds of hell
must burn!"  Her voice carried a terrible condemnation far beyond the
meaning of the words themselves.  It was as if she were pronouncing the
doom of the whole world. "Every cat, every rat, every mouse, every
louse--"

Casey Ryan's jaw dropped an inch.  He backed until he was against the
door.  He had to swallow twice before he could find his voice, and
those of you who know Casey Ryan will appreciate that. He waited until
she had finished her declaration.

"No, ma'am, you're wrong.  I come up here to see if I could help yuh."

"Hounds of hell--black as the bottomless pit that spewed you forth to
prey upon mankind!  The world will have to burn.  Tell those hounds of
hell that bay at the gibbous moon the world will have to burn.  Every
cat, every rat, every mouse, every louse has a thousand years to burn!"

Casey Ryan, with his mouth half open and his eyes rather wild,
furtively opened the door behind him.  Still meeting fixedly the dull
glare of the old woman's eyes, Casey slid out through the door and
fastened it hastily behind him.  With an uneasy glance now and then
over his shoulder as if he feared the old woman might be in pursuit of
him, he hurried back down the ladder to the closed door in the drift,
pulled the door shut behind him and put the padlock in place before he
breathed naturally.

He stopped then to put on his shoes, made his way to the drift opening
and listened again for voices or footsteps.  When he found the way
clear he hurried out and back to the dugout.  The first thing he did
was to fill his pipe and light it.  Even then the sonorous voice of the
old woman intoning her dreadful proclamation against the world rang in
his ears and sent occasional ripples of horror down his spine.  Seen
through the window, she had looked a sad, lonely old lady who needed
sympathy and help.  At closer range she was terrible.  Casey was trying
to forget her by busying himself about the stove when Joe walked in
unexpectedly.

Joe stood just inside the door, staring at Casey with a glassy look in
his eyes.  Something in Joe's face warned Casey of impending events;
but with that terrible old woman still fresh in his mind, Casey was in
the mood to welcome distraction of any sort.  He shifted his hand in
the sling so that his concealed weapons lay more comfortably therein,
secure from detection, and waited.

Joe leaned forward, lifted an arm slowly and aimed a finger at Casey
accusingly.

"Pap says that you're a Federal officer!" he began, waggling his finger
at Casey.  "Pap thinks you come here spyin' around t' see what we're up
to on this here butte.  Now, you can't pull nothin' like that!  You
can't get away with it.

"Hank, he wants t' bump yuh off an' say nothin' to anybody.  Now, I
come t' have it out with yuh.  If you're a Federal officer we're goin'
t' settle with yuh an' take no chances.  Mart, he's more easy-goin' in
some ways, on account of havin' his crazy ol' mother on 'is hands t'
take care of.  Mart don't want no killin'--on account of his mother
goin' loony when 'is dad got killed.  But Mart ain't here. Pap an'
Hank, they been at me all mornin' t' let 'em bump yuh off.

"But Pap an' Hank, they're drunk, see?  I'm the only sober man left on
the job.  So I come up here t' settle with yuh myself. Takes a sober
man with a level head t' settle these things.  Now, if you come up here
spyin' an' snoopin', you git bumped off an' no argument about it.
Mart's got his mother t' take care of--an' we aim t' pertect Mart.  If
you're a Federal officer, I want t' know it here an' now.  If yuh
ain't, I want yuh t' sample some uh the out-kickin'est 'White Mule' yuh
ever swallered.  Now which are yuh, and what yuh goin' t' do?  I want
my answer here an' now, an' no argument an' no foolin'!"

Casey blinked but his mouth widened in a grin.  "Me, I never went
lookin' fer nothin, I wouldn't put under my vest, Joe," he declared
convincingly.  So that was it!  He was thinking against time.
Moonshiners as well as would-be murderers they were--and Joe drunk and
giving them away like a fool.  Casey wished that he knew where Hank and
Paw were at this moment.  He hoped, too, that Joe was right--that Hank
and Paw were drunk.  He'd have the three of them tied in a row before
dark, in any case.  The thing to do now was to humor Joe along--leave
it to Casey Ryan!

Joe was uncorking a small, flat bottle of pale liquor.  Now he held it
out to Casey.  Casey took it, thinking he would pretend to drink, would
urge Joe to take a drink; it would be simple, once he got Joe started.
But Joe had a few ideas of his own concerning the celebration.  He
pulled a gun unexpectedly, leaned against the closed door to steady
himself and aimed it full at Casey.

"In just two minutes I'm goin' t' shoot if that there bottle ain't
empty," he stated gravely, nodding his head with intense pride in his
ability to handle the situation.  "If you're a Federal officer, yuh
won't dast t' drink.  If yuh ain't, you'll be almighty glad to. Anyway,
it'll be settled one way or t'other. Drink 'er down!"

Casey blinked again, but this time he did not grin.  He debated swiftly
his chance of scaring Joe with the dynamite before Joe would shoot.
But Joe had his finger crooked with drunken solemnity upon the trigger.
The time for dynamite was not now.

"Pap an' Hank, they lap up anything an' call it good.  I claim that's
got a back-action kick to it.  Drink 'er down!"

Casey drank 'er down.  It was like swallowing flames. It was a
half-pint flask, and it was full when Casey, with Joe's eyes fixed upon
him, tilted it and began to drink.  Under Joe's baleful glare Casey
emptied the flask before he stopped.

Joe settled his shoulders comfortably against the doorway and watched
Casey make for the water bucket.

"I claim that's the out-kickin'est stuff that ever was made on Black
Butte.  How'd yuh like it?"

"All right," Casey bore witness, keeping his eyes fixed on Joe and the
gun and trying his best to maintain a nonchalant manner. "I'd call it
purty fair hootch."

"It's GOOD hootch!" Joe declared impressively, apparently quite
convinced that Casey was not a Federal officer.  "Can yuh feel the
kick'to it?"

Casey backed until he sat on the edge of the table his good right hand
supporting his left elbow outside the sling.  He grinned at Joe and
while he still keenly realized that he was playing a part for the sole
purpose of gaining somehow an advantage over Joe, he was conscious of a
slight giddiness.  An unprejudiced observer would have noticed that his
grin was not quite the old, Casey Ryan grin.  It was a shade foolish.

"Bet your life I can feel the kick!" he agreed, nodding his head. "You
can ask anybody."  Then Casey discovered something strange in Joe's
appearance.  He lifted his head, held it very still and regarded Joe
attentively.

"Say, Joe, what yuh tryin' to do with that six-gun?  Tryin' to write
your name in the air with it?"

Joe looked inquiringly down at the gun, eyeing it as if it were a new
and absolutely unknown object.  He satisfied himself apparently beyond
all doubt that the gun was doing nothing it should not do, and finally
turned his attention to Casey sitting on the table and grinning at him
meaninglessly.

"Ain't writin' nothin'," Joe stated solemnly.  "It's yore eyes. Gun's
all right--yo'r seein' crooked.  It's the hootch. Back-action kick to
it.  Ain't that right?"

"That's right," nodded Casey and he added, grinning more foolishly,
"Darn right, that's right!  Back-action kick--bet your life."

Joe pushed the gun inside his waistband and crooked his finger at
Casey, beckoning mysteriously.  "C'mon an' I'll show yuh how it's
made," he invited with heavy enthusiasm.  "Yore a judge uh hootch all
right--I can see that.  I'll show yuh how we do it.  Best White Mule in
Nevada.  Ain't that right?  Ain't that the real hootch?"

"'S right, all right," Casey agreed earnestly.  "Puttin' the hoot in
hootch--you fellers.  You can ask anybody if that ain't right."

Joe laughed hoarsely.  "Puttin' the hoot in hootch--that's right. I
knowed you was all right.  Didn't I say you was?  I told Hank an' Pap
you wasn't no Federal officer.  They know it, too. I was foolin' back
there.  I knowed you didn't need no gun pulled on yuh t' make yuh put
away the hootch.  Lapped it up like a thirsty hound. I knowed yuh
would--I was kiddin' yuh, runnin' that razoo with the gun.  Ain't that
right?"

"Darn right, that's right! I knew you was foolin' all along. You knew
Casey Ryan's all right--sure, you knowed it!"  Casey laid his good hand
investigatively against his stomach.  "Pretty hot hootch--you can ask
anybody if it ain't!  Workin' like an air drill a'ready."

He blinked inquisitively at Joe, who stared back inquiringly. "Who's
your friend?"  Casey demanded pugnaciously.  "He sneaked in on yuh.  I
never seen 'im come in."

Joe turned slowly and looked behind him at the blank boards of the
unpainted door.  Just as slowly he turned back to Casey.  A slow grin
split his leathery face.

"Ain't nobody.  It's the hootch. Told yuh, didn't I?  Gittin' the best
of yuh, ain't it?  C'mon--I'll show yuh how it's made."

"Take a barr'l t' git the besta--Casey Ry'n," Casey boasted, his words
blurring noticeably.  "Where's y'r White Mule?  Let 'er kick--Casey
Ry'n can lead 'er an' tame 'er--an' make'r eat outa 's hand!"
Following Joe, Casey stepped high over a rock no bigger than his fist.

With a lurch he straightened and tried to pull his muddled wits out of
the fog that was fast enveloping them.  Dimly he sensed the importance
of this discovery which Joe had forced upon him. In flashes of normalcy
he knew that he must see all he could of their moonshine operations.
He must let them think he was drunk until he knew all their secrets.
He assured himself vaguely that he must, above all things, keep his
head.

But it was all pretty hazy and rapidly growing hazier. Casey Ryan, you
must know, was not what is informally termed a drinking man. In his
youth he might have been able to handle a sudden half-pint of moonshine
whisky and keep as level a head as he now strove valiantly to retain.
But Casey's later years had been more temperate than most desert men
would believe.  Unfortunately virtue is not always it own reward; at
least Casey now found himself the worse for past abstinences.

Joe led him into the tunnel, laughing sardonically because Casey found
it scarcely wide enough for his oscillating progress. They turned into
a drift.  Casey did not know which drift it was, though he tried
foggily to remember.  He was still, you must know, trying to keep a
level head and gain valuable information for the sheriff who he hoped
would return to the butte with Barney.

Paw and Hank were wrangling somewhere ahead.  Casey could hear their
raised voices mingled in a confused rumbling in the pent walls of the
drift.  Casey thought they passed through a doorway, and that Joe
closed a heavy door behind them, but he was not sure.

Memory of the old woman intoning her horrible anathema surged back upon
Casey with the closing of the door.  The voices of Hank and Paw he now
mistook for the ravings of the woman in the stone hut. Casey balked
there, and would not go on.  He did not want to face the old woman
again, and he said so repeatedly--or believed that he did.

Joe caught him by the arm and pulled him forward by main strength. The
voices of Paw and Hank came closer and clarified into words; or did
Casey and Joe walk farther and come into their presence?

They were all standing together somewhere, in a large, underground
chamber with a hole letting in the sunlight high up on one side. Casey
was positive there was a hole up there, because the sun shone in his
eyes and to avoid it he moved aside and fell over a bucket or a keg or
something.  Hank laughed loudly at the spectacle, and Paw swore because
the fall startled him; but it was Joe who helped Casey up.

Casey knew that he was sitting on a barrel--or something--and telling a
funny story.  He thought it must be very funny indeed, because every
one was laughing and bending double and slapping legs while he talked.
Casey realized that here at last were men who appreciated Casey Ryan as
he deserved to be appreciated. Tears ran down his own weathered
cheeks--tears of mirth.  He had never laughed so much before in all his
life, he thought.  Every one, even Paw, who was normally a mean,
cantankerous old cuss, was having the time of his life.

They attempted to show Casey certain intricacies of their still, which
made it better than other stills and put a greater kick in the White
Mule it bred.  Somewhere back in the dim recesses of Casey's mind, he
felt that he ought to listen and remember what they told him.  Vaguely
he knew that he must not take another drink, no matter how insistent
they were.  In the brief glow of that resolution Casey protested that
he could hoot without any more hootch.  But he hated to hurt Paw's
feelings, or Hank's or Joe's. They had made the hootch with a new and
different twist, and they were honestly anxious for his judgment and
approval.  He decided that perhaps he really ought to take a little
more just to please them; not much--a couple of drinks maybe.
Wherefore, he graciously consented to taste the "run" of the day
before. Thereafter Casey Ryan hooted to the satisfaction of everybody,
himself most of all.

After an indeterminate interval the four left the still, taking a
bottle with them so that it might be had without delay, should they
meet a snake or a hydrophobia skunk or some other venomous reptile. It
was Casey who made the suggestion, and he became involved in
difficulties when he attempted the word venomous. Once started Casey
was determined to pronounce the word and pronounce it correctly,
because Casey Ryan never backed up when he once started. The result was
a peculiar humming which accompanied his reeling progress down the
drift (now so narrow that Casey scraped both shoulders frequently) to
the portal.

They stopped on the flat of the dump and argued over the advisability
of taking a drink apiece before going farther, as a sort of preventive.
Joe told them solemnly that they couldn't afford to get drunk on the
darn' stuff.  It had too hard a back-action kick, he explained, and
they might forget themselves if they took too much.  It was important,
Joe explained at great length, that they should not forget themselves.
The boss had always impressed upon them the grim necessity of remaining
sober whatever happened.

"We never HAVE got drunk," Joe reiterated, "and we can't afford t' git
drunk now.  We've got t' keep level heads, snakes or no snakes."

Casey Ryan's head was level.  He wabbled up to Joe and told him so to
his face, repeating the statement many times and in many forms.  He
declaimed it all the way up the path to the dugout, and when they were
standing outside.  Beyond all else, Casey was anxious that Joe should
feel perfectly certain that he, Casey Ryan, knew what he was doing,
knew what he was saying, and that his head was and always had been
perr-rf'c'ly level-l-l.

"Jus' t' prove-it--I c'n kill that jack-over-there--without-no-gun!"
Casey bragged bubblingly, running his words together as if they were
being poured in muddy liquid from his mouth.  "B'lieve it?
Think-I-can't?"

The three turned circumspectly and stared solemnly at a gray burro with
a crippled front leg that had limped to the dump heap within easy
throwing distance from the cabin door.  Hobbling on three legs it went
nosing painfully amongst a litter of tin cans and bent paper cartons,
hunting garbage.  As if conscious that it was being talked about, the
burro lifted its head and eyed the four mournfully, its ears loosely
flopping.

"How?" questioned Paw, waggling his beard disparagingly.  "Spit 'n 'is
eye?"

"Talk 'm t' death," Hank guessed with imbecile shrewdness.

"Think-I-can't?  What'll--y'bet?"

They disputed the point with drunken insistence and mild imprecations,
Hank and Paw and Joe at various times siding impartially for and
against Casey.  Casey gathered the impression that none of them
believed him.  They seemed to think he didn't know what he was talking
about.  They even questioned the fact that his head was level.  He felt
that his honor was at stake and that his reputation as a truthful man
and a level-headed man was threatened.

While they wrangled, the fingers of Casey's right hand fumbled
unobserved in the sling on his left, twisting together the two short
lengths of fuse so that he might light both as one piece. Even in his
drunkenness Casey knew dynamite and how best to handle it.  Judgment
might be dethroned, but the mechanical details of his profession were
grooved deep into habit and were observed automatically and without the
aid of conscious thought.

He braced himself against the dugout wall and raised his hand to the
cigarette he had with some trouble rolled and lighted. A spitting
splutter arose, that would have claimed the attention of the three, had
they not been unanimously engaged in trying to out-talk one another
upon the subject of Casey's ability to kill a burro seventy-five feet
away without a gun.

Casey glanced at them cunningly, drew back his right hand and pitched
something at the burro.

"Y' watch 'im!" he barked, and the three turned around to look, with no
clear conception of what it was they were expected to watch.

The burro jerked its head up, then bent to sniff at the thin curl of
powder smoke rising from amongst the cans.  Paw and Hank and Joe were
lifted some inches from the ground with the explosion. They came down
in a hail of gravel, tin cans and fragments of burro. Casey, flattened
against the wall in preparation for the blast, laughed exultantly.

Paw and Hank and Joe picked themselves up and clung together for mutual
support and comfort.  They craned necks forward, goggling incredulously
at what little was left of the burro and the pile of tin cans.

"'Z that a bumb?"  Paw cackled nervously at last, clawing gravel out of
his uncombed beard.  "'Z got me all shuck up. Whar's that 'r bottle?"

"'Z goin' t' eat a bumb--ol' fool burro!"  Hank chortled weakly,
feeling tenderly certain nicks on his cheeks where gravel had landed.
"Paw, you ol' fool, you, don't hawg the hull thing--gimme a drink!"

"Casey's sure all right," came Joe's official O.K. of the performance.
"Casey said 'e c'd do it--'n' Casey done it!"  He turned and slapped
Casey somewhat uncertainly on the back, which toppled him against the
wall again.  "Good'n on us, Casey!  Darn' good joke on us--'n' on the
burro!"

Whereupon they drank to Casey solemnly, and one and all, they
proclaimed that it was a VERY good joke on the burro.  A merciful joke,
certainly; as you would agree had you seen the poor brute hungry and
hobbling painfully, hunting scraps of food amongst the litter of tin
cans.

After that, Casey wanted to sleep.  He forced admissions from the three
that he, Casey Ryan, was all right and that he knew exactly what he was
doing and kept a level head.  He crawled laboriously into his bunk,
shoes, hat and all; and, convinced that he had defended his honor and
preserved the Casey Ryan reputation untarnished, he blissfully skipped
the next eighteen hours.



CHAPTER SIX

Casey awoke under the vivid impression that some one was driving a
gadget into his skull with a "double-jack."  The smell of bacon
scorching filled his very soul with the loathing of food.  The sight of
Joe calmly filling his pipe roused Casey to the fighting mood--with no
power to fight.  He was a sick man; and to remain alive was agony.

The squalid disorder and the stale aroma of a drunken orgy still
pervaded the dugout and made it a nightmare hole to Casey.  Hank came
tittering to the bunk and offered him a cup of coffee, muddy from too
long boiling, and Joe grinned over his pipe at the colorful language
with which Casey refused the offering.

"Better take a brace uh hootch," Joe suggested with no more than his
normal ill nature.  "I got some over at the still we made awhile back
that, ain't quite so kicky.  Been agin' it in wood an' charcoal. That
tones 'er down.  I'll go git yuh some after we eat.  Kinda want a
brace, myself.  That new hootch shore is a kickin' fool."

Paw accepted this remark, as high praise, and let three hot cakes burn
until their edges curled while he bragged of his skill as a maker of
moonshine.  Paw himself was red-eyed and loose-lipped from yesterday's
debauch.  Hank's whole face, especially in the region of his eyes, was
puffed unbecomingly.  Casey, squinting an angry eye at Hank and the cup
of coffee, spared a thought from his own misery to acknowledge surprise
that anything on earth could make Hank more unpleasant to look upon.
Joe had a sickly pallor to prove the potency of the brew.

For such is the way of moonshine when fusel oil abounds, as it does
invariably in new whisky distilled by furtive amateurs working in
secret and with neither the facilities nor the knowledge for its
scientific manufacture.  There is grim significance in the sardonic
humor of the man who first named it White Mule.  The kick is certain
and terrific; frequently it is fatal as well.  The worst of it is, you
never know what the effect will be until you have drunk the stuff; and
after you have drunk it, you are in no condition to resist the effect
or to refrain from courting further disaster.

That is what happened to Casey.  The poison in the first half-pint,
swallowed under the eye of Joe's six-shooter, upset his judgment. The
poison in his further potations made a wholly different man of Casey
Ryan; and the after effect was so terrific that he would have swallowed
cyanide if it promised relief.

He gritted his teeth and suffered tortures until Joe returned and gave
him a drink of whisky in a chipped granite cup.  Almost immediately he
felt better.  The pounding agony in his head eased perceptibly and his
nerves ceased to quiver.  After a while he sat up, gazed longingly at
the water bucket and crawled down from the bunk. He drank largely in
great gulps.  His bloodshot eyes strayed meditatively to the coffee
pot.  After an undecided moment he walked uncertainly to the stove and
poured himself a cup of coffee.

Casey lifted the cup to drink, but the smell of it under his nose
sickened him.  He weaved uncertainly to the door, opened it and threw
out the coffee--cup and all.  Which was nature flying a storm flag, had
any one with a clear head been there to observe the action and the look
on Casey's face.

"Gimme another shot uh that damn' hootch," he growled.  Joe pushed the
bottle toward Casey, eyeing him curiously.

"That stuff they run yesterday shore is kicky," Joe ruminated
sympathetically.  "Pap's proud as pups over it.  He thinks it's the
real article--but I dunno.  Shore laid yuh out, Casey, an' yuh never
got much, neither.  Not enough t' lay yuh out the way it did. Y' look
sick."

"I AM sick!"  Casey snarled, and poured himself a drink more generous
than was wise.  "When Casey Ryan says he's sick, you can put it down
he's SICK!  He don't want nobody tellin' 'im whether 'e's sick 'r
not.--he KNOWS 'e's sick!"  He drank, and swore that it was rotten
stuff not fit for a hawg (which was absolute truth).  Then he staggered
to the stove, picked up the coffee pot, carried it to the door and
flung it savagely outside because the odor offended him.

"Mart got back last night," Joe announced casually. "You was dead t'
the world.  But we told 'im you was all right, an' I guess he aims t'
give yuh steady work an' a cut-in on the deal.  We been cleanin' up
purty good money--but Mart says the market ain't what it was; too many
gone into the business.  You're a good cook an' a good miner an' a
purty good feller all around--only the boss says you'll have t' cut out
the booze."

"'J you tell 'im you MADE me drink it?"  Casey halted in the middle of
the floor, facing Joe indignantly.

"I told 'im I put it up t' yuh straight--what your business is, an'
all.  You got no call t' kick--didn't I go swipe this bottle uh booze
for yuh t' sober up on, soon as the boss's back was turned? I knowed
yuh needed it; that's why.  We all needed it. I'm just tellin' yuh the
boss don't approve of no celebrations like we had yest'day.  I got up
early an' hauled that burro outa sight 'fore he seen it.  That's how
much a friend I be, an' it wouldn't hurt yuh none to show a little
gratitude!"

"Gratitude, hell!  A lot I got in life t' be grateful for!" Casey
slumped down on the nearest bench, laid his injured hand carefully on
the table and leaned his aching head on the other while he discoursed
bitterly on the subject of his wrongs.

His muddled memory fumbled back to his grievance against traffic cops,
distorting and magnifying the injustice he had received at their hands.
He had once had a home, a wife and a fortune, he declared, and what had
happened?  Laws and cops had driven him out, had robbed him of his home
and his family and sent him out in the hills like a damned kiotey,
hopin' he'd starve to death. And where, he asked defiantly, was the
gratitude in that?

He told Joe ramblingly but more or less truthfully how he had been
betrayed and deserted by a man he had befriended; one Barney Oakes,
upon whom Casey would like to lay his hands for a minute.

"What I done to the burro ain't nothin' t' what I'd do t' that hound uh
hell!" he declared, pounding the table with his good fist.

Homeless, friendless; but Joe was his friend, and Paw and Hank were his
friends--and besides them there was in all the world not one friend of
Casey Ryan's.  They were good friends and good fellows, even if they
did put too much hoot in their hootch. Casey Ryan liked his hootch with
a hoot in it.

He was still hooting (somewhat incoherently it is true, with recourse
now and then to the bottle because he was sick and he didn't give a
darn who knew it) when the door opened and he whom they called Mart
walked in.  Joe introduced him to Casey, who sat still upon the bench
and looked him over with drunken disparagement.  Casey had a hazy
recollection of wanting to see the boss and have it out with him, but
he could not recall what it was that he had been so anxious to quarrel
about.

Mart was a slender man of middle height, with thin, intelligent face
and a look across the eyes like the old woman who rocked in the stone
hut.  He glanced from the bottle to Casey, eyeing him sharply.  Drunk
or sober, Casey was not the man to be stared down; nevertheless his
fingers strayed involuntarily to his shirt collar and pulled fussily at
the wrinkles.

"So you're the man they've been holding here for my inspection," Mart
said coolly, with a faint smile at Casey's evident discomfort. "You're
still hitting it up, I see. Joe, take that bottle away from him.  When
he's sober enough to talk straight, I'll give him the third degree and
see what he really is, anyway. Guess he's all right--but he sure can
lap up the booze.  That's a point against him."

Casey's hand went to the bottle, beating Joe's by three inches. He did
not particularly want the whisky, but it angered him to hear Mart order
it taken from him.  Away back in his mind where reason had gone into
hiding, Casey knew that some great injustice was being done him; that
he, Casey Ryan, was not the man they were calmly taking it for granted
that he was.

With the bottle in his hand he rose and walked unsteadily to his bunk.
He did not like this man they called the boss.  He remembered that in
his bunk, under the bedding, he had concealed something that would make
him the equal of them all.  He fumbled under the blankets, found what
he sought and with his back turned to the others he slipped the thing
into his sling out of sight.

Mart and Joe were talking together by the table, paying no attention to
Casey, who was groggily making up his mind to crawl into his bunk and
take another sleep.  He still meant to have it out with Mart, but he
did not feel like tackling the job just now.

Mart turned to the door and Joe got up to follow him, with a careless
glance over his shoulder at Casey, who was lifting a foot as if it
weighed a great deal, and was groping with it in the air trying to
locate the edge of the lower bunk.  Joe laughed, but the laugh died in
his throat, choked off suddenly by what he saw when Mart pulled open
the door.

Casey turned suspiciously at the laugh and the sound of the door
opening.  He swung round and steadied himself with his back against the
bunk when he saw Mart and Joe lift their hands and hold them there,
palms outward, a bit higher than their heads. Something in the sight
enraged Casey unreasoningly.  A flick of the memory may have carried
him back to the old days in the mining camps when Casey drove stage and
hold-ups were frequent.

"What 'r yuh tryin' to pull on me now?" he bawled, and rushed headlong
toward them, pushing them forcibly out into the open with a collision
of his body against Joe.  Outside, a voice harshly commanded him to
throw up his hands--and it was then that Casey Ryan's Irish fighting
blood boiled and bubbled over. Unconsciously he pushed his hat forward
over one eye, drew back his lips in a fighting grin, stepped down off
the low doorsill with a lurch that nearly sent him sprawling and went
weaving belligerently toward a group of five men whose attitude was
anything but conciliatory.

"Casey Ryan!  I'm dogged if it ain't Casey!" exclaimed a familiar voice
in the group, whereat the others looked astonished. Through his slits
of swollen lids Casey glared toward the voice and recognized Barney
Oakes, grinning at him with what Casey considered a Judas treachery.
He saw two men step away from Joe and the boss, leaving them in
handcuffs.

"Take them irons off'n my friends!" bellowed Casey as he charged.
"Whadda yuh think you're doin', anyway?  Take 'em off!  It's Casey Ryan
that's tellin' yuh, an' yuh better heed what he says, before you're
tore from limb to limb!"

"B-but, Casey!  This 'ere's a shurf's possy!"  The voice of Barney rose
in a protesting 'squawk.  "I brung 'em all the way over here to your
rescue!  They brung a cor'ner to view your remains!  Don't you know
your pardner, BARNEY OAKES?

"Ah-h--I know yuh think I don't?  I know yuh to a fare-yuh-well! Brung
a cor'ner, did yuh?  Tha's all right--goin' t' need a cor'ner-but he
won't set on Casey Ryan's remains--you c'n ask anybody if any cor'ners
ever set on Casey Ryan yit!  Naw." Casey snarled as contemptuously as
was possible to a man in his condition. "No cor'ner ever set on Casey
Ryan, an' he ain't goin' to!"

The men glanced questioningly at one another.  One laughed. He was a
large, smooth-jowled man inclined to portliness, and his laugh vibrated
his entire front contagiously so that the others grinned and took it
for granted that Casey Ryan was a comedy element introduced
unexpectedly where they had thought to find him a tragedy.

"No, you're a pretty lively man for me to sit on; I admit it," the
portly man remarked.  "I'm the  coroner, and it looks as if I wouldn't
sit, this trip."

Casey eyed him blearily, not in the least mollified but instead
swinging to a certain degree of lucidity that was nevertheless governed
largely by the hoot he had swallowed in the hootch.

"There's part of a burro 'round here some'er's you c'n set on," Casey
informed him grimly, and fumbled in his coat pocket for his pipe.  He
drew it out empty, looked at it and returned it to his pocket.  One who
knew Casey intimately would have detected a hidden purpose in his
manner.  The warning was faint, indefinable at best, and difficult to
picture in words.  One might say that an intimate acquaintance would
have detected a false note in Casey's defiance. His manner was
restrained just when violence would have been more natural.

"Damn a pipe," Casey grumbled with drunken petulance.  "Anybody got a
cigarette?  I'm single-handed an' I ain't able t' roll 'em."

It was the coroner himself who handed Casey a "tailor-made." Casey
nodded glumly, accepted a match and lighted the cigarette almost as if
he were sober.  He looked the group over noncommittally, eyed again the
handcuffs on Mart and Joe, sent a veiled glance toward Barney Oakes and
turned away.  He still held the center of the stage.  Fully expecting
to find him dead, the sheriff and his men were slow to adjust
themselves to the fact that he was very much alive and very drunk and
apparently not greatly interested in his rescue.

Casey halted in his unsteady progress toward the dugout.  The sheriff
was already questioning his two prisoners about other members of the
gang; but he looked up when Casey lifted up his voice and spoke his
mind of the moment.

"Brung a cor'ner, did yuh, lookin' for some one to set on! Barney Oakes
is the man that'll need a cor'ner in a minute. You're all goin' to need
'im.  Casey Ryan never stood around yit whilst his friends was hobbled
up by a shurf--turn 'em loose an' turn 'em loose quick!  An' git back
away from Barney Oakes so he won't drop on yuh in chunks--I'll fix 'im
for yuh to set on!"

His hand had gone up to his cigarette, but only Joe knew what was
likely to follow.  Joe gave a yell of warning, ducked and ran straight
away from the group.  The sheriff yelled also and gave chase.  The
group was broken--luckily--just as Casey heaved something in that
direction.

"I blowed up a jackass yesterday when they thought I couldn't--I'll
blow up a bunch of 'em to-day!  Yuh c'n set on what's left uh Barney
Oakes!"

The explosion scattered dirt and small stones--and the sheriff's posse.
Casey sent one malevolent glance over his shoulder as he stumbled into
the dugout.

"Missed 'im!" he grumbled disgustedly to himself when he saw no
fragments of Barney falling.  His ferociousness, like the dynamite,
annihilated itself with the explosion.  "Missed 'im! Casey Ryan's
gittin' old; old an' sick an' a damn' fool.  Missed 'im with the last
shot--drunk--drunk an' don't give a darn!"

He slammed the door shut behind him, pushed his hat forward so
violently that it rested on the bridge of his nose, and wabbled over to
his bunk.  This time his foot found the edge of the lower bunk, and he
scratched and clawed his way up and rolled in upon the blankets.

He was asleep and snoring when the sheriff, edging his way in as if he
were an animal trainer's apprentice entering the lion's cage, sneaked
on his toes to the bunk and slipped the handcuffs on Casey.



CHAPTER SEVEN

Casey awoke almost sober and considerably surprised when he discovered
the handcuffs.  His injured hand was throbbing from the poison in his
system and the steel band on his swollen wrist. His head still ached
frightfully and his tongue felt thick and dry as flannel in his mouth.

He rolled over and sat up, staring uncomprehendingly at the cabin full
of men.  The sight of Barney Oakes recalled in a measure his
performance with the dynamite; at least, he felt a keen disappointment
that Barney was alive and whole and grinning. Casey could not see what
there was to grin about, and he took it as a direct insult to himself.

Mart and Joe sat sullenly on a bench against the wall, and Paw reclined
in his bunk at the farther end of the room.  A blood-stained bandage
wrapped Paw's head turbanwise, and his little, deep-set eyes gleamed
wickedly in his pallid face.  Casey looked for Hank, but he was not
there.

A strange man was cooking supper, and Casey wanted to tell him that he
was slicing the bacon twice as thick as it should be. The corpulent
man, whom he dimly remembered as a coroner, was talking with a big,
burly individual whom Casey guessed was the sheriff.  A man came in and
announced to the big man that the car was fixed and they could go any
time.  Mart, who had been staring morosely down at his shackled wrists,
lifted his head and spoke to the sheriff.

"You'll have to do something about my mother," he said, and bit his lip
at the manner in which every head swung his way.

"What about your mother?" the sheriff asked moving toward him. "Is she
here?"  His eyes sent a quick glance around the room which obviously
had four outside walls.

Mart swallowed.  "She has a cabin to herself," he explained
constrainedly.  "She--she isn't quite right.  Strangers excite her.
She--hasn't been well since my father was killed in the mine; she's
quiet enough with us--she knows us.  I don't know how she'll be now.
I'm afraid--but she can't be left here alone; all I ask is, be as
gentle as you can."

The sheriff looked from him to Joe.  Joe nodded confirmation. "Plumb
harmless," he said gruffly.  "It IS kinda--pitiful. Thinks everybody in
the world is damned and going to hell on a long lope."  He gave a snort
that resembled neither mirth nor disgust.  "Mebbe she's right at that,"
he added grimly.

The sheriff asked more questions, and Mart stood up.  "I'll show you
where she is, sure.  But can't you leave her be till we're ready to
start?  She--it ain't right to bring her here."

"She'll want her supper," the sheriff reminded Mart. "We'll be driving
all night. Is she sick abed?"

Casey lay down again and turned his face to the wall.  He remembered
the old woman now, and he hoped sincerely they would not bring her into
the cabin.  But whatever they did, Casey wanted no part in it whatever.
He wanted to be left alone, and he wanted to think. More than all else
he wanted not to see again the old woman who chanted horrible things
while she rocked and rocked.

He was roused from uneasy slumber by two officious souls, one of whom
was Barney Oakes.  Their intentions were kindly enough, they only
wanted to give him his supper.  But Casey wanted neither supper nor
kindly intentions, and he was still unregenerately regretful that
Barney Oakes was not lying out on the garbage heap in a more or less
fragmentary condition.  They raised him to a sitting posture, and Casey
swung his legs over the edge of the bunk and delivered a ferocious kick
at Barney Oakes.

He caught Barney under the chin, and Barney went down for several
counts.  After that Casey wore hobbles on his feet, and was secretly
rather proud of the fact that they considered him so dangerous as all
that.  Had his mood not been a sulky one which refused to have speech
with any one there, they would probably have found it wise to gag him
as well.

That is one night in Casey's turbulent life which he never recalled if
he could help it.  Two cars had brought the sheriff's party, and one
was a seven-passenger.  In the roomy rear seat of this car, Casey,
shackled and savage, was made to ride with Mart and his mother. Two
deputies occupied the folding seats and never relaxed their
watchfulness.

Casey's head still ached splittingly, and the jolting of the car did
not serve to ease the pain.  The old woman sat in the middle, with a
blanket wound round and round her to hold her quiet; which it failed to
do.  Into Casey's ear rolled the full volume of her rich contralto
voice as she monotonously intoned the doom of all mankind--together
with every cat, every rat, etc. Mart's fear had proved well-founded.
Strangers had excited the woman and it was not until sheer exhaustion
silenced her that she ceased for one moment her horrible chant.

I read the story in the morning paper, and made a flying trip to San
Bernardino.  Casey was in jail, naturally; but he didn't care much
about that so long as he owned a head with an air-drill going inside.
At least, that is what he told me when I was let in to see him.  I was
working to get him out of there on bail if possible before I sent word
to the Little Woman, hoping she had not read the papers.  I had some
trouble piecing the facts together and trying to get the straight of
things before I sent word to the Little Woman. I went out and got him
some medicine guaranteed, by the doctor who wrote the prescription, to
take the hoot out of the hootch Casey had swallowed.  That afternoon
Casey left off glaring at me, sat up, accepted a cigarette and
consented to talk.

"--an' all I got to say is, Barney Oakes is a liar an' the father uh
liars.  I never was in cahoots with him at no time.  When he says I got
'im to foller a Joshuay palm jest to git 'im out in the hills an' kill
'im off, he lies.  Let 'im come an' tell me that there story!"

Casey was still slightly abnormal, I noticed, so I calmed him as best I
could and left him alone for a time.  There was some hesitancy about
the bail, too, which I wished to overcome. Throwing that half-stick of
dynamite might be construed as an attempt at wholesale murder.  I did
not want the county officials to think too long and harshly about the
matter.

I explained later to Casey that Barney Oakes had reported his
disappearance to the officials in Barstow.  The sheriff's office had
long suspected a nest of moonshiners somewhere near Black Butte, and it
was rumored that one Mart Hanson, who owned a mine up there, was
banking more money than was reasonable, these hard times, for a miner,
who ships no ore.  Casey's disappearance had crystallized the
suspicions into an immediate investigation.  And Barney's assertion
that Casey had been murdered took the coroner along with the posse.

It had all been straight and fairly simple until they reached the mine
and discovered Casey uproariously one of the gang.  Throwing loaded
dynamite at sheriffs is frowned upon nowadays in the best official
circles, I told Casey; he would have to explain that in court, I was
afraid.

Then Barney, after Casey had kicked him in the chin, had reversed his
first report of the trouble and was now declaiming to all who would
listen that he had been decoyed to Black Butte by Casey Ryan and there
ambushed and nearly killed.  Casey, as Barney now interpreted the
incident, had joined his confederates under the very thin pretense of
climbing the butte to come at them from behind. Barney now remembered
that he had been shot at from three different angles, and that the
burros had been killed by pistol shots fired at close range--presumably
by Casey Ryan.

It was like taming tigers to make Casey sit still and listen to all
this, but I had to do it so that he would know what to disprove.
Afterwards I had a talk with Joe and Paw, separately, and so got at the
whole truth.  They bore no malice toward Casey and were perfectly
willing to see him out of the scrape.  They were a sobered pair; Hank,
like a fool, had fired at the posse and was killed.

The next day came the Little Woman to the rescue.  I told her the whole
story, not even omitting the burro, before she went to the jail to see
Casey.  It was a pretty mess--take it all around--and I was secretly
somewhat doubtful of the outcome.

The Little Woman is game as women are made.  She went with me to the
jail, and she met Casey with a whimsical smile.  We found him sitting
on the side of his bunk with his legs stretched out and his feet
crossed, his good hand thrust in his trousers pocket and a cigarette in
one corner of his mouth, which turned sourly downward. He cocked an eye
up at us and rose, as the Little Woman had maybe taught him was proper.
But he did not say a word until the Little Woman walked up and kissed
him on both cheeks, turning his face this way and that with her hand
under his chin.

Casey grinned sheepishly then and hugged her with his good arm. I wish
you could have seen the look in his eyes when they dwelt on the Little
Woman!

"Casey Ryan, you need a shave.  And your shirt collar is a disgrace to
a Piute," she drawled reprovingly.

Casey looked at me over her shoulder and grinned.  He hadn't a word to
say for himself, which was unusual in Casey Ryan.

"It's lucky for you, Casey Ryan, that I remembered to go down to the
police station and get the proof that you were pinched twice on
Broadway just five days before Barney Oakes says he found you stalled
in the trail north of Barstow; and that you had been pinched pretty
regularly every whip-stitch for the last six months, and were a
familiar and unwelcome figure in downtown traffic and elsewhere.

"The sheriff who raided Black Butte admitted to me that it is utterly
impossible for the world to hold more than one Casey Ryan at a time;
and that he, for one, is willing to accept the word of the city police
that you were there raising the record for traffic trouble and not
moonshining at Black Butte.  He doesn't approve of throwing dynamite at
people, but--well, I talked with the prosecuting attorney, too, and
they both seem to be mighty nice men and reasonable.  I'm afraid Barney
Oakes will see his beautiful story all spoiled."

"He'll forget it when he feels the ruin to his face I'm goin' t' create
for him if I ever meet up with 'im again," Casey commented grimly.

"Babe sent you a pincushion she made in school.  I think she made
beautiful, neat stitches in that C," went on the Little Woman in a
placid, gossipy tone invented especially for domestic conversation.
"And--oh, yes!  There's a new laundryman on our route, and he PERSISTS
in running across the lawn and dumping the laundry in the front hall,
though I've told him and TOLD him to deliver it at the back.  And
there's a new tenant in Number Six, and they hadn't been in more than
three days before he came home drunk and kept everybody in the house
awake, bellowing up and down the hall and abusing his wife and all.  I
told him held have to go when his month is up, but he says he'll be
damned if he will. He says he won't and I can't make him."

"He won't, hey?"  A familiar, pale glitter came into Casey's eyes. "You
watch and see whether he goes or not!  He better tell Casey Ryan he
won't go!  Who'd, they think's runnin' the place? Lemme ketch that
laundry driver oncet, runnin' across our lawn; I'll run 'im across
it--on his nose!  They take advantage of you quick as my back's turned.
I'll learn 'em they got Casey Ryan to reckon with!"

The Little Woman gave me a smiling glance over Casey's shoulder, and
lowered a cautious eyelid.  I left them then and went away to have a
satisfying talk with the sheriff and the prosecuting attorney.



CHAPTER EIGHT

In the desert, where roads are fewer and worse than they should be, a
man may travel wherever he can negotiate the rocks and sand, and none
may say him nay.  If any man objects, the traveler is by custom
privileged to whip the objector if he is big enough, and afterwards go
on his way with the full approval of public opinion.  He may blaze a
trail of his own, return that way a year later and find his trail an
established thoroughfare.

In the desert Casey gave trail to none nor asked reprisals if he
suffered most in a sudden meeting.  In Los Angeles Casey was halted and
rebuked on every corner, so he complained; hampered and annoyed by
rules and regulations which desert dwellers never dreamed of.

Since he kept the optimistic viewpoint of a child, experience seemed to
teach him little. Like the boy he was at heart, he was perfectly
willing to make good resolutions--all of which were more or less
theoretical and left to a kindly Providence to keep intact for him.

So here he was, after we had pried him loose from his last predicament,
perfectly optimistic under his fresh haircut, and thinking the traffic
cops would not remember him.  Thinking, too--as he confided to the
Little Woman--that Los Angeles looked pretty good, after all. He was
resolved to lead henceforth a blameless life. It was time he settled
down, Casey declared virtuously.  His last trip into the desert was all
wrong, and he wanted you to ask anybody if Casey Ryan wasn't ready at
any and all times to admit his mistakes, if he ever happened to make
any. He was starting in fresh now, with a new deal all around from a
new deck.  He had got up and walked around his chair, he told us, and
had thrown the ash of a left-handed cigarette over his right shoulder;
he'd show the world that Casey Ryan could and would keep out of gunshot
of trouble.

He was rehearsing all this and feeling very self-righteous while he
drove down West Washington Street.  True, he was doing twenty-five
where he shouldn't, but so far no officer had yelled at him and he
hadn't so much as barked a fender.  Down across Grand Avenue he
larruped, never noticing the terrific bounce when he crossed the water
drains there (being still fresh from desert roads).  He was still doing
twenty-five when he turned into Hill Street.

Busy with his good resolutions and the blameless life he was about to
lead, Casey forgot to signal the left-hand turn.  In the desert you
don't signal, because the nearest car is probably forty or fifty miles
behind you and collisions are not imminent.
West-Washington-and-Hill-Street crossing is not desert, however. A car
was coming behind Casey much closer than fifty miles; one of those
scuttling Ford delivery trucks.  It locked fenders with Casey when he
swung to the left.  The two cars skidded as one toward the right-hand
curb; caught amidships a bright yellow, torpedo-tailed runabout coming
up from Main Street, and turned it neatly on its back, its four wheels
spinning helplessly in the quiet, sunny morning.  Casey himself was
catapulted over the runabout, landing abruptly in a sitting position on
the corner of the vacant lot beyond, his self-righteousness
considerably jarred.

A new traffic officer had been detailed to watch that intersection and
teach a driving world that it must not cut corners.  A bright, new
traffic button had been placed in the geographical center of the
crossing; and woe be unto the right-hand pocket of any man who failed
to drive circumspectly around it.  New traffic officers are apt to be
keenly conscientious in their work.  At twenty-five dollars per cut,
sixteen unhappy drivers had been taught where the new button was
located and had been informed that twelve miles per hour at that
crossing would be tolerated, and that more would be expensive.

Not all drivers take their teaching meekly, and the new traffic officer
near the end of his shift had pessimistically decided that the driving
world is composed mostly of blamed idiots and hardened criminals.

He gritted his teeth ominously when Casey Ryan came down upon the
crossing at double the legal speed.  He held his breath for an instant
during the crash that resounded for blocks.  When the dust had settled,
he ran over and yanked off the dented sand of the vacant lot a dazed
and hardened malefactor who had committed three traffic crimes in three
seconds: he had exceeded the speed limit outrageously, cut fifteen feet
inside the red button, and failed to signal the turn.

"You damned, drunken boob!" shouted the new traffic cop and shook Casey
Ryan (not knowing him).

Shaking Casey will never be safe until he is in his coffin with a lily
in his hand.  He was considerably jolted, but he managed a fourth crime
in the next five minutes.  He licked the traffic cop rather
thoroughly--I suppose because his onslaught was wholly
unexpected--kicked an expostulating minister in the pit of the stomach,
and was profanely volunteering to lick the whole darned town when he
was finally overwhelmed by numbers and captured alive; which speaks
well for the L. A. P.

Wherefore Casey Ryan continued his ride down town in a dark car that
wears a clamoring bell the size of a breakfast plate under the driver's
foot, and a dark red L. A. Police Patrol sign painted on the sides.
Two uniformed, stern-lipped cops rode with him and didn't seem to care
if Casey's nose WAS bleeding all over his vest. A uniformed cop stood
on the steps behind, and another rode beside the driver and kept his
eye peeled over his shoulder, thinking he would be justified in
shooting if anything started inside.  Boys on bicycles pedaled
furiously to keep up, and many an automobile barely escaped the curb
because the driver was goggling at the mussed-up prisoner in the "Black
Maria."

The Little Woman telegraphed me at San Francisco that night. The wire
was brief but disquieting. It merely said,  "CASEY IN JAIL SERIOUS NEED
HELP."  But I caught the Lark an hour later and thanked God it was
running on time.

The Little Woman and I spent two frantic days getting Casey out of
jail.  The traffic cop's defeat had been rather public; and just as
soon as he could stand up straight in the pulpit, the minister meant to
preach a series of sermons against the laxity of a police force that
permits such outrages to occur in broad daylight.  More than that, the
thing was in the papers, and people were reading and giggling on the
street cars and in restaurants. Wherefore, the L. A. P. was on its tin
ear.

Even so, much may be accomplished for a man so wholesomely human as
Casey Ryan.  On the third day the charge against him was changed from
something worse to  "Reckless driving and disturbing the peace." Casey
was persuaded to plead guilty to that charge, which was harder to
accomplish than mollifying the L. A. P.

He paid two fifty-dollar fines and was forbidden to drive a car "in the
County of Los Angeles, State of California, during the next succeeding
period of two years."  He was further advised (unofficially but
nevertheless with complete sincerity) to pay all damages to the two
cars he had wrecked and to ask the minister's doctor what was his fee;
a new uniform for the traffic cop was also suggested, since Casey had
thrust his foot violently into the cop's pocket which was not tailored
to resist the strain.  The judge also observed, in the course of the
conversation, that desert air was peculiarly invigorating and that
Casey should not jeopardize his health and well-being by filling his
lungs with city smoke.

I couldn't blame Casey much for the mood he was in after a setback like
that to his good resolutions.  I was inclined to believe with Casey
that Providence had lain down on the job.



CHAPTER NINE

At the corner of the Plaza where traffic is heaviest, a dingy Ford
loaded with camp outfit stalled on the street-car track just as the
traffic officer spread-eagled his arms and turned with majestic
deliberation to let the East-and-West traffic through. The motorman
slid open his window and shouted insults at the driver, and the traffic
cop left his little platform and strode heavily toward the Ford,
pulling his book out of his pocket with the mechanical motion born of
the grief of many drivers.

Casey Ryan, clinging to the front step of the street car on his way to
the apartment house he once more called home, swung off and beat the
traffic officer to the Ford.  He stooped and gave a heave on the crank,
obeyed a motion of the driver's head when the car started, and stepped
upon the running board.  The traffic officer paused, waved his book
warningly and said something.  The motorman drew in his head, clanged
the bell, and the afternoon traffic proceeded to untangle.

"Get in, old-timer," invited the driver whom Casey had assisted. Casey
did not ask whether the driver was going in his direction, but got in
chuckling at the small triumph over his enemies, the police.

"Fords are mean cusses," he observed sympathetically.  "They like
nothing better than to get a feller in bad.  But they can't pull
nothin' on me.  I know 'em to a fare-you-well.  Notice how this one
changed 'er mind about gettin' you tagged, soon as Casey Ryan took 'er
by the nose?"

"Are you Casey Ryan?"  The driver took his eyes off the traffic long
enough to give Casey an appraising look that measured him mentally and
physically.  "Say, I've heard quite a lot about you. Bill Masters, up
at Lund, has spoke of you often.  He knows you, don't he?"

"Bill Masters sure had ought t' know me," Casey grinned. In a big,
roaring, unfriendly city, here sounded a friendly, familiar tone; a
voice straight from the desert, as it were.  Casey forgot what had
happened when Barney Oakes crossed his path claiming acquaintance with
Bill Masters, of Lund.  He bit off a chew of tobacco, hunched down
lower in the seat, and prepared himself for a real conflab with the man
who spoke the language of his tribe.

He forgot that he had just bought tickets to that evening's performance
at the Orpheum, as a sort of farewell offering to his domestic goddess
before once more going into voluntary exile as advised by the judge.
Pasadena Avenue heard conversational fragments such as, "Say!  Do you
know--?  Was you in Lund when--?"

Casey's new friend drove as fast as the law permitted.  He talked of
many places and men familiar to Casey, who was in a mood that hungered
for those places and men in a spiritual revulsion against the city and
all its ways.

Pasadena, Lamanda Park, Monrovia--it was not until the car slowed for
the Glendora speed-limit sign that Casey lifted himself off his
shoulder blades, and awoke to the fact that he was some distance from
home and that the shadows were growing rather long.

"Say!  I better get out here and 'phone to the missus," he exclaimed
suddenly.  "Pull up at a drug store or some place, will yuh?  I got to
talkin' an' forgot I was on my way home when I throwed in with yuh."

"Aw, you can 'phone any time.  There is street cars running back to
town all the time I or you can catch a bus anywhere's along here. I got
pinched once for drivin' through here without a tail-light; and twice
I've had blowouts right along here.  This town's a jinx for me and I
want to slip it behind me."

Casey nodded appreciatively.  "Every darn' town's a jinx for me," he
confided resentfully.  "Towns an' Casey Ryan don't agree. Towns is
harder on me than sour beans."

"Yeah--I guess L. A.'s a jinx for you all right.  I heard about your
latest run-in with the cops.  I wish t' heck you'd of cleaned up a few
for me.  I love them saps the way I like rat poison.  I've got no use
for the clowns nor for towns that actually hands 'em good jack for
dealin' misery to us guys.  The bird never lived that got a square deal
from 'em.  They grab yuh and dust yuh off--"

"They won't grab Casey Ryan no more.  Why, lemme tell yuh what they
done!"

Glendora slipped behind and was forgotten while Casey told the story of
his wrongs.  In no particular, according to his version, had he been
other than law-abiding.  Nobody, he declaimed heatedly, had ever taken
HIM by the scruff of the neck and shaken him like a pup, and got away
with it, and nobody ever would. Casey was Irish and his father had been
Irish, and the Ryan never lived that took sass and said thank-yuh.

His new friend listened with just that degree of sympathy which
encourages the unburdening of the soul.  When Casey next awoke to the
fact that he was getting farther and farther away from home, they were
away past Claremont and still going to the full extent of the speed
limit.  His friend had switched on the lights.

"I GOT to telephone my wife!" Casey exclaimed uneasily.  "I'll gamble
she's down to the police station right now, lookin' for me. An' I want
the cops t' kinda forgit about me.  I got to talkin' along an' plumb
forgot I wasn't headed home."

"Aw, you can 'phone from Fontana.  I'll have to stop there anyway for
gas.  Say, why don't yuh stall 'er off till morning?  You couldn't get
home for supper now if yuh went by wireless. I guess yuh wouldn't hate
a mouthful of desert air after swallowing smoke and insults, like yuh
done in L. A.  Tell her you're takin' a ride to Barstow.  You can catch
a train out of there and be home to breakfast, easy.  If you ain't got
the change in your clothes for carfare," he added generously, "Why,
I'll stake yuh just for your company on the trip.  Whadda yuh say?"

Casey looked at the orange and the grapefruit and lemon orchards that
walled the Foothill Boulevard.  All trees looked alike to Casey, and
these reminded him disagreeably of the fruit stalls in Los Angeles.

"Well, mebby I might go on to Barstow.  Too late now to take the missus
to the show, anyway.  I guess I can dig up the price uh carfare from
Barstow back."  He chuckled with a sinful pride in his prosperity,
which was still new enough to be novel.  "Yuh don't catch Casey Ryan
goin' around no more without a dime in his hind pocket. I've felt the
lack of 'em too many times when they was needed. Casey Ryan's going to
carry a jingle louder'n a lead burro from now on.  You can ask anybody."

"You bet it's wise for a feller to go heeled," the friend of Bill
Masters responded easily.  "You never know when yuh might need it.
Well, there's a Bell sign over there.  You can be askin' your wife's
consent while I gas up."

Innocent pleasure; the blameless joy of riding in a Ford toward the
desert, with a prince of a fellow for company, was not so easily made
to sound logical and a perfectly commonplace incident over a
long-distance telephone.  The Little Woman seemed struck with a sense
of the unusual; her voice betrayed trepidation and she asked questions
which Casey found it difficult to answer. That he was merely riding as
far as Barstow with a desert acquaintance and would catch the first
train back, she apparently failed to find convincing.

"Casey Ryan, tell me the truth.  If you're in a scrape again, you know
perfectly well that Jack and I will have to come and get you out of it.
San Bernardino sounds bad to me, Casey, and you're pretty close to the
place.  Do you really want me to believe that you're coming back on the
next train?"

"Sure as I'm standin' here!  What makes yuh think I'm in a scrape?
Didn't I tell yuh I'm goin' to walk around trouble from now on? When
Casey tells you a thing like that, yuh got a right to put it down for
the truth. I'm going to Barstow for a breath uh fresh air. This is a
feller that knows Bill Masters.  I'll be home to breakfast. I ain't in
no trouble an' I ain't goin' to be. You can believe that or you can set
there callin' Casey Ryan a liar till I git back. G'by."

Whatever the Little Woman thought of it, Casey really meant to do
exactly what he said he would do.  And he really did not believe that
trouble was within a hundred miles of him.



CHAPTER TEN

"Wanta drive?"  Casey's friend was rolling a smoke before he cranked
up.  "They tell me up in Lund that no man livin' ever got the chance to
look back and see Casey Ryan swallowing dust.  I've heard of some
that's tried.  But I reckon," he added pensively, while he rubbed the
damp edge of the paper down carefully with a yellowed thumb, "Fords is
out of your line, now.  Maybe you don't toy with nothin' cheaper than a
twin-six."

"Well, you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan's the man to git big-headed!
Money don't spoil ME none.  There ain't anybody c'n say it does. Casey
Ryan is Casey Ryan wherever an' whenever yuh meet up with him. Yuh
might mebby see me next, hazin' a burro over a ridge.  Or yuh might see
me with ten pounds uh flour, a quart uh beans an' a sour-dough bucket
on my back.  Whichever way the game breaks--you'll be seein' Casey
Ryan; an' you'll see 'im settin' in the game an' ready t' push his last
white chip to the center."

"I believe it, Casey.  Darned if I don't.  Well, you drive 'er awhile;
till yuh get tired, anyway."  He bent to the crank, gave a heave and
climbed in, with Casey behind the wheel, looking pleased to be there
and quite ready to show the world he could drive.

"Say, if I drive till I'm TIRED," he retorted, "I'm liable to soak 'er
hubs in the Atlantic Ocean before I quit.  And then, mebby I'll back
'er out an' drive 'er to the end of Venice Pier just for pastime."

"Up in Lund they're talkin' yet about your drivin'," his new friend
flattered him.  "They say there's no stops when you get the wheel
cuddled up to your chest.  No quittin' an' no passin' yuh by with a
merry laugh an' a cloud of alkali dust.  I guess it's right. I've been
wantin' to meet yuh."

"That there last remark sounds like a traffic cop I had a run-in with
once!"  Casey snorted--merely to hide his gratification. "You sound
good, just to listen to, but you ain't altogether believable.  There's
men in Lund that'd give an ear to meet me in a narrow trail with a
hairpin turn an' me on the outside an' drunk.

"They'd like it to be about a four-thousand-foot drop, straight down.
Lund as a town ain't so crazy about me that they'd close up whilst I
was bein' planted, an' stop all traffic for five minutes.  A show
benefit was sprung on Lund once, to help Casey Ryan that was supposed
to be crippled.  An' I had to give a good Ford--a DARN' good Ford!--to
the benefitters, so is they could git outa town ahead uh the howlin'
mob.  That's how I know the way Lund loves Casey Ryan. Yuh can't kid
ME, young feller."

Meanwhile, Casey swung north into Cajon Pass; up that long, straight,
cement-paved highway to the hills he showed his new friend how a Ford
could travel when Casey Ryan juggled the wheel. The full moon was
pushing up into a cloud bank over a high peak beyond the Pass. The few
cars they met were gone with a whistle of wind as Casey shot by.

He raced a passenger train from the mile whistling-post to the
crossing, made the turn and crossed the track with the white finger of
the headlight bathing the Ford blindingly.  He completed that S turn
and beat the train to the next crossing half a mile farther on; where
he "spiked 'er tail", as he called it, stopping dead still and waiting
jeeringly for the train to pass.  The engineer leaned far out of the
cab window to bellow his opinion of such driving; which was unfavorable
to the full extent of his vocabulary.

"Nothin' the matter with a Ford, as I can see," Casey observed
carelessly, when he was under way again.

"You sure are some driver," his new friend praised him, letting go the
edge of the car and easing down again into the seat. "Give yuh a Ford
and all the gas yuh can burn and I can't see that you'd need to worry
none about any of them saps that makes it their business to interfere
with travelin'.  I'm glad that moon's quit the job. Gives the
headlights a show.  Hit 'er up now, fast as yuh like. After that
crossin' back there I ain't expectin' to tremble on no curves.  I see
you're qualified to spin 'er on a plate if need be.  And for a Ford,
she sure can travel."

Casey therefore "let 'er out", and the Ford went like a scared lizard
up the winding highway through the Pass.  At Cajon Camp he slowed,
thinking they would need to fill the radiator before attempting to
climb the steep grade to the summit.  But the young man shook his head
and gave the "highball."  (Which, if you don't already know it, is the
signal for full speed ahead.)

Full speed ahead Casey gave him, and they roared on up the steep,
twisting grade to the summit of the Pass.  Casey began to feel a
distinct admiration for this particular Ford.  The car was heavily
loaded--he could gauge the weight by the "feel" of the car as he drove
yet it made the grade at twenty-five miles an hour and reached the top
without boiling the radiator; which is better than many a more
pretentious car could do.

"Too bad you've made your pile already," the young man broke a long
silence.  "I'd like to have a guy like you for my pardner. The desert
ain't talkative none when you're out in the middle of it, and you know
there ain't another human in a day's drive. I've been going it alone.
Nine-tenths of these birds that are eager to throw in with yuh thinks
that fifty-fifty means you do the work and they take the jack.  I'm
plumb fed upon them pardnerships.  But if you didn't have your jack
stored away--a hull mountain of it, I reckon--I'd invite yuh to set
into the game with me; I sure would."

Casey spat into the dark beside the car.  "They's never a pile so big a
feller ain't willin' to make it bigger," he replied sententiously.
"Fer, as I'm concerned, Casey's never backed up from a dollar yet.  But
I ain't no wild colt no more, runnin' loose an' never a halter mark on
me.  I'm bein' broke to harness, and it's stable an' corral from now
on, an' no more open range fer Casey.  The missus hopes to high-school
me in time.  She's a good hand--gentle but firm, as the preacher says.
And I guess it's time fer Casey Ryan to quit hellin' around the country
an' settle down an' behave himself."

"I could put you in the way of adding some easy money to your bank
roll," the other suggested tentatively.

But Casey shook his head.  "Twenty years ago yuh needn't have asked me
twice, young feller. I'd 'a' drawed my chair right up and stacked my
chips a mile high.  Any game that come along, I played 'er down to the
last chip.  Twenty years ago--yes, er ten!--Casey Ryan woulda tore that
L. A. jail down rock by rock an' give the roof t' the kids to make a
playhouse.  Them L. A. cops never woulda hauled me t' jail in no wagon.
I mighta loaded 'em in behind, and dropped 'em off at the first morgue
an' drove on a-whistlin'.  That there woulda been Casey Ryan's gait a
few years back.  Take me now, married to a good woman an' gettin'
gray--" Casey sighed, gazing wishfully back at the Casey Ryan he had
been and might never be again.

"No, sir, I ain't so darned rich I ain't willin' to add a few more iron
men to the bunch.  But on account of the missus I've got to kinda pick
my chances.  I ain't had money so long but what it feels good to remind
myself I got it.  I carry a thousand dollars or so in my inside pocket,
just to count over now an' then to convince myself I needn't worry
about a grubstake.  I've got to soak it into my bones gradual that I
can afford to settle down and live tame, like the missus wants.
Stand-up collars every day, an' step into a chiny bathtub every night
an' scrub--when you ain't doin' nothin' to git dirt under your finger
nails even!  Funny, the way city folks act.  The less they do to git
dirty, the more soap they wear out. You can ask anybody if that ain't
right.

"Can't chew tobacco in the house, even, 'cause there's no place yuh
dast to spit.  I stuck m' head out of the bedroom window oncet, an I
let fly an' it landed on a lady; an' the missus went an' bought her a
new hat an took my plug away from me.  I had to keep my chewin' tobacco
in the tool-box of my car, after that, an' sneak out to the beach now
an' then an' chew where I could spit in the ocean.  That's city life
for yuh!"

"When I git to thinkin' about hittin' out into the hills prospectin, or
somethin', that roll uh dough I pack stands right on its hind legs an'
says I got no excuse.  I've got enough to keep me in bacon an' beans,
anyway.  An' the missus gits down in the mouth when I so much as
mention minin'."

"A guy grows old fast when he quits the game and sets down to do the
grandpa-by-the-fire.  First you know, a clown that thinks it's time he
took it easy is gummin' 'is grub, and shiverin' when yuh open the door,
an' takin' naps in the daytime same as babies. Let a guy once preach
he's gettin' old--"

Casey jerked the gas lever and jumped the car ahead viciously. "Well,
now, any time yuh see CASEY RYAN gummin' 'is grub an' needin' a nap
after dinner--"

"A clown GITS that way once he pulls out of the game.  I've saw it
happen time an' again."  The young man laughed rather irritatingly.
"Say, when I tell it to Bill Masters that Casey Ryan has plumb played
out his string an' laid down an' QUIT, by hock, and can be seen
hereafter SETTIN' WITH A SHAWL OVER HIS SHOULDERS--"

Casey nearly turned the Ford over at that insult.  He jerked it back
into the road and sent it ahead again at a faster pace.

"Well, now, any time yuh see CASEY RYAN settin' with a shawl over his
shoulders--"

"Well, maybe not YOU; but the bird sure comes to it that thinks he's
too old to play the game.  Why, you'll never be ready to settle down!
Take yuh twenty years from now--I'd rather bank on a pardner like you'd
be than some young clown that ain't had the experience. From the yarns
I've heard about yuh, yuh don't back down from nothing.  And you're
willing to give a pardner a chance to get away with his hide on him.
I'd rather be held up by the law than by some clown that's workin' with
me."

He paused; and when he, spoke again his tone had changed to meet a
prosaic detail of the drive.

"Stop here in Victorville, will yuh, Casey?  I'll take a look at the
radiator and maybe take on some more gas and oil.  I've been stuck on
the desert a few times with an empty tank--and that learns a guy to
keep the top of his gas tank full and never mind the bottom."

"Good idea," said Casey shortly, his own tone relaxing its tension of a
few minutes before.  "I run a garage over at Patmos once, an' the boobs
I seen creepin' in on their last spoonful uh gas--walkin' sometimes for
miles to carry gas back to where they was stalled--learnt Casey Ryan to
fill 'er up every chancet he gits."

But although the subject of age had been dropped half a mile back in
the sand, certain phrases flung at him had been barbed and had bitten
deep into Casey Ryan's self-esteem.  They stung and rankled there.  He
had squirmed at the picture his new friend had so ruthlessly drawn with
crude words, but bold, of doddering old age. Casey resented the
implication that he might one day fill that picture.

He began vaguely to resent the Little Woman's air of needing to protect
him from himself.  Casey Ryan, he told himself boastfully, had never
needed protection from anybody.  He had managed for a good many years
to get along on his own hook.  The Little Woman was all right, but she
was making a mistake--a big mistake--if she thought she had to
close-herd him to keep him out of trouble.

He rolled a smoke and wished that the Little Woman would settle down
with him somewhere in the desert, where he could keep a couple of
burros and go prospecting in the hills.  Where sagebrush could grow to
their very door if it wanted to, and the moon could show them long
stretches of mesa land shadowed with mystery, and then drop out of
sight behind high peaks.

He felt that he might indeed grow old fast, shut up in a city. It
occurred to him that the Little Woman was unreasonable to expect it of
him.  Her idea of getting him out of town for a time, as the judge had
advised, was to send him up to San Francisco to be close-herded there.
Casey had promised to go, but now the prospect jarred.  He wasn't
feeble-minded, that he knew of; it seemed natural to want to do his own
deciding now and then.  When he got back home in the morning,  Casey
meant to have a serious talk with the Little Woman, and get right down
to cases, and tell her that he was built for the desert, and that you
can't teach an old dog new tricks.

"They been tryin' to make Casey Ryan over into something he ain't," he
muttered under his breath, while his new friend was in the garage
office paying for the gas.  "Jack an' the Little Woman's all right, but
they can't drive Casey Ryan in no town herd.  Cops is cops; and they
got 'em in San Francisco same as they got 'em in L. A. If they got 'em,
I'll run agin' 'em. I'll tell 'em so, too."

The young man came out, sliding silver coins into his trousers pocket.
He glanced up and down the narrow, little street already deserted,
cranked the Ford and climbed in.

"All set," he observed cheerfully, "Let's go!"

Casey slipped his cigarette to the upper, left-hand corner of his
whimsical, Irish mouth, forced a roar out of the little engine and
whipped around the corner and across the track into the faintly lighted
road that led past shady groves and over a hill or two, and so into the
desert again.

His new friend had fallen into a meditative mood, staring out through
the windshield and whistling under his breath a pleasant little melody
of which he was probably wholly unaware.  Perhaps he felt that he had
said enough to Casey just at present concerning a possible partnership.
Perhaps he even regretted having said anything at all.

Casey himself drove mechanically, his rebellious mood slipping
gradually into optimism.  You can't keep Casey Ryan down for long; in
spite of his past unpleasant experiences he was presently weaving
optimistic plans of his own.  The young fellow beside him seemed to
return Casey's impulsive friendship.  Casey thought pleasureably of the
possibility of their driving over the desert together, sharing alike
the fortunes of the game and the adventures of the trail. Casey himself
had learned to be shy of partnerships--witness Barney Oakes!--but any
man with a drop of Irish in his blood and a bit of Irish twinkle in his
eye would turn his back on defeat and try again for a winning.

They had just passed over a hilly stretch with many turns and windings,
the moon blotted out completely now by the cloud bank. For half an hour
they had not seen any evidence that other human beings were alive in
the world.  But when they went rattling across a small mesa where the
sand was deep, a car with one brilliant spotlight suddenly showed
itself around a turn just ahead of them.

Casey slowed down automatically and gave a twist to the steering wheel.
But the sand just here was deep and loose, and the front wheels of the
Ford gouged unavailingly at the sides of the ruts. Casey honked the
horn warningly and stopped full, swearing a good, Caseyish oath.  The
other car, having made no apparent effort to turn out, also stopped
within a few feet of Casey, the spotlight fairly blinding him.

The young man beside Casey slid up straight in the seat and stopped
whistling.  He leaned out of the car and stared ahead without the dusty
interference of the windshield.

"You can back up a few lengths and make the turn-out all right," he
suggested.

"If I can back up, so can he.  He's got as much road behind him as what
I'VE got," Casey retorted stubbornly.  "He never made a try at turnin'
out.  I was watchin'.  Any time I can't lick a road hawg, he's got a
license to lick me.  Make yourself comf'table, young feller--we're
liable to set here a spell." Casey grinned.  "I spent four hours on a
hill once, out-settin, a road hawg that wanted me to back up."

The man in the other car climbed out and came toward them, walking
outside the beams cast by his own glaring spotlight.  He bulked rather
large in the shadows; but Casey Ryan, blinking at him through the
windshield, was still ready and willing to fight if necessary.  Or, if
stubbornness were to be the test, Casey could grin and feel secure.  A
little man, he reflected, can sit just as long as a big man.

The big man walked leisurely up to the car and smiled as he lifted a
foot to the running board.  He leaned forward, his eyes going past
Casey to the other man.

"I kinda thought it was you, Kenner," he drawled.  "How much liquor you
got aboard to-night?"

Casey, slanting a glance downward, glimpsed the barrel of a big
automatic looking toward them.

"What if I ain't got any?" the young man parried glumly.  "You're
taking a lot for granted."

The big man chuckled.  "If you ain't loaded with hootch, it's because
one of the boys met up with yuh before I did.  Open 'er up.  Lemme see
what you got."

The young fellow scowled, swore under his breath and climbed out,
turning toward the loaded tonneau with reluctant obedience.

"I can't argue with the law," he said, as he began to pull out a roll
of bedding wedged in tightly.  "But, for cripes sake, go as easy as you
can.  I'm plumb lame from my last fall!"

The big man chuckled again.  "The law's merciful as, it can afford to
be, and I've got a heart like an ox.  Got any jack on yuh?"

"I'm just about cleaned, and that's the Gawd's truth.  Have a heart,
can't yuh?  A man's got t' live."

"Slip me five hundred, anyway.  How much is your load?"

"Sixty gallons--bottled, most of it.  Two kegs in bulk."  Young Kenner
was proceeding stoically with the unloading.  Casey, his mouth clamped
tight shut, was glaring stupifiedly straight out through the windshield.

"Pile out thirty gallons of the bottled goods by that bush. You can
keep the kegs."  The big man's eyes shifted to Casey Ryan's
expressionless profile and dwelt there curiously.

"Seems like I know you," he said abruptly.  "Ain't you the guy that was
brought in with that Black Butte bunch of moonshiners and got off on
account of a nice wife and an L. A. alibi?  Sure you are! Casey Ryan.
I got yuh placed now."  He threw back his head and laughed.

Casey might have been an Indian making a society call for all the sign
of life he gave.  Young Kenner, having deposited his camp outfit in a
heap on the ground, began lifting out tall, round bottles, four at a
time and ricking them neatly beside the large sagebush indicated by the
officer.

Standing upon the running board at Casey's shoulder where he had a
clear view, the big man watched the unloading and at the same time kept
an eye on Casey.  It was perfectly evident that for all his easy good
nature, he was not a man who could be talked out of his purpose.

"All right, pile in your blankets," the big man ordered at last, and
young Kenner unemotionally began to reload the camp outfit. The big
man's attention shifted to Casey again.  He looked at him curiously and
grinned.

"Say, that's a good one you pulled!  You had all the county officials
bluffed into thinking you were the victim of that Black Butte bunch,
instead of being in cahoots.  That alibi of yours was a bird. Does
Kenner, here, know you hit the hootch pretty strong at times?
Bootlegging's bad business for a man that laps it up the way you do.
Where's that piece of change, Kenner?"

"Aw, can't yuh find some way to leave me jack enough to buy gas and
grub?"  Young Kenner asked sullenly, reaching into his pocket. The big
man shook his head.

"I'm doing a lot for you boys, when I let yuh get past me with the
Lizzie, to say nothing of half your load.  I'd ought to trundle yuh
back to San Berdoo; you both know that as well as I do.  I'm too
soft-hearted for this job, anyway.  Hand over the roll."

Young Kenner swore and extended his arm behind Casey.  "That leaves me
six bits," he growled, as the big man dropped something into his coat
pocket.  "You might give me back ten, anyway."

"Couldn't possibly.  I have to have something to square myself with if
this leaks out.  Just back up, till you can get around my car. Turn to
the left where the sand ain't so deep and you ain't likely to run over
the booze."

With the big man still standing at his shoulder on the running board,
Casey Ryan did what he had rashly declared he never would do; he backed
the Ford, turned it to the left as he had been commanded to do, and
drove around the other car.  It was bitter work for Casey; but even he
recognized the fact that the "settin'" was not good that evening.  Back
in the road again, he stopped when he was told to stop, and waited,
with a surface calm altogether strange to Casey, while the officer
stepped off and gave a bit of parting advice.

"Better keep right on going, boys. I'd hate to see yuh get in trouble,
so you'd better take this old road up ahead here. That'll bring yuh out
at Dagget and you'll miss Barstow altogether.  I just came from there;
there's a hard gang hanging around on the lookout for anything they can
pick up.  Don't get caught again.  On your way!"

Casey drove for half a mile still staring straight before him. Then
young Kenner laughed shortly.

"That's Smilin' Lou," he said.  "He's a mean boy to monkey with. Talk
about road hawgs--he's one yuh can't outset!"



CHAPTER ELEVEN

"So that's the kind uh game yuh asked me to set in on!"  Casey broke
another long silence.  He had felt in his bones that young Kenner was
watching him secretly, waiting for him to take his stand for or against
the proposition.

"I'd like to know who passed the word around amongst outlaws that Casey
Ryan is the only original easy mark left runnin' wild, an' that he can
be caught an' made a goat of any time it's handy! Look at the crowd of
folks bunched on that crossing this afternoon! Why didn't yuh pick some
one else for the goat?  Outa all them hundreds uh people, why'n hell
did yuh have to go an' pick on Casey Ryan?  Ain't he had trouble enough
tryin' to keep outa trouble?

"Naw!  Casey Ryan's went an' blowed hisself to show tickets, an' he's
headed home, peaceful an' on time, so's he can shave an' put on a clean
collar an' slick up to please his wife an' take 'er to the show!
Nothin' agin the law in that!  Not a damn' thing yuh can haul 'im to
jail fer!  So YOU had to come along, loaded to the guards with
hootch--stall your Ford on the car track right under m' nose, an' tell
Casey Ryan to git in!  Couldn't leave 'im to go home peaceful to 'is
wife--naw!  You had t' haul 'im away out here an' git 'im in wrong with
a cop agin!  That's a fine game you're playin'!  That's a DARNED fine
game!"

"Sure, it is!  It's better than the game you've been playing," young
Kenner stated calmly.  "Take your own story, for instance. You've been
dubbin' along, tryin' t' play the way the law tells you to.  An' the
saps has been flockin' to yuh like a bunch uh hornets--every bird
tryin' t' sink his stinger in first. Ain't that right?

"Keepin' the law has laid yuh in jail twice in the last month, by your
own tell.  Why, a clown like you, that's aimin' t' keep the law an'
live honest, is the easiest mark in the world.  Them's the guys that do
the most harm--they make graftin' so darned easy! Them's the guys the
saps lay for and dust off regular in the shape of fines an' taxes an'
the like uh that.  Oncet in awhile they'll snatch yuh fer somethin' yuh
never done at all an' lay yuh away fer a day or two, just t' keep yuh
scared and easy t' handle next time.

"Now, yuh take me, fer instance.  I play agin' the law--an' I'm
cleanin' up right along, and have yet to take my morning sunlight in
streaks.  I know as much about the inside of a jail as I know about the
White House--an' no more.  I've hauled hootch all over the country, an'
I never yet was dusted off so hard by the law that I didn't come
through with a roll uh jack they'd overlooked.

"Take this highjackin' to-night, for instance.  Look what Smilin' Lou
took off'n me!  And yet," Kenner turned and grinned impudently at
Casey, "don't never think I didn't come out a long jump ahead! I carry
nothin' cheap; nothin' but good whisky an' brandy that the liquor
houses failed to declare when the world went dry. Then there's real,
honest-to-gosh European stuff run in from Mexico; now you're in, Casey,
I'll tell yuh the snap.  When I said easy money, I was in my right mind.

"You can count on highjackers leavin' yuh half your load; mebby a
little more, if yuh set purty.  They don't aim t' force yuh out uh the
business.  They grab what the traffic'll bear, an' let yuh go on an
make a profit so you'll stay.

"Now there's a card you can slip up your sleeve for this game. Yuh load
in the best stuff first--see?  Anything real special you wanta put in
kegs with double sides an' ends which you fill with moonshine.  Yuh
never can tell--they might wanta sample it. Smilin' Lou did once--an'
you notice to-night he left the kegs be. So they get a good grade of
whisky from the liquor houses. And they pass up the best, imported
stuff that can be got to-day. We'll have regular customers for that;
and you can gamble they'll pay the price!" He laughed at some secret
joke which he straightway shared with Casey.

"You noticed I got my gas-tank behind--a twenty-gallon tank at that.
Well, what if I tell yuh that right under this front seat there's a
false bottom to the tool-box and under that--well, suppose you're
settin' on forty pints uh French champagne? More'n all that, this
cushion we're settin' on has got a concealed pocket down both
sides--for hop.  So yuh see, Casey, a man can make an honest livin' at
this game, even if he's highjacked every trip.  Now you're in, I can
show yuh all kinds uh tricks."

The muscles, along Casey's jaw had hardened until they looked bunched.
His eyes, fixed upon the winding trail in front of him, were a pale,
unwinking glitter.

"Who says I'm in?  Yuh ain't heard Casey Ryan say it yet, have yuh? Yuh
better wait till Casey says he's in b'fore yuh bank on 'im too strong.
Casey may be an easy mark--he may be the officious goat pro tem of
every darn' bootlegger an' moonshiner an' every darn' cop that crosses
his trail; but you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan don't do 'is own
decidin'!

"Before you go any further, young feller, I'll tell yuh just how fur
Casey's in your game--an' that's as fur as Barstow.  When Casey says
he'll do a thing he comes purty near doin' it.  I ain't playin' no
bootleg game, young feller; White Mule an' me ain't an' never was trail
pardners.  Make me choose between bootleggers an' cops, an' I'd have to
flip a dollar on it.  Only fer Bill Masters bein' your friend, I dunno
but what I'd take yuh right back with me t' L. A. an' let yuh sleep in
a jail oncet--seein' you've never had the pleasure!"

The young man laughed imperturbably. "Flip that dollar for me, Casey,
to see whether I shoot yuh now an' dump yuh out in the brush
somewheres, or make yuh play the hootch game an' like it. Why, you
didn't think for one minute, did yuh, that I was takin' any chance with
you?  Not a chance in the world!  Go squeal to the law--an' what would
it get yuh?

"You was drivin' this car yourself when Smilin' Lou stopped us,
recollect.  He had yuh placed as one of that Black Butte gang quick as
he lamped yuh.  Yuh think Smilin' Lou is goin' to take a chance? You
was caught with the goods t'night, old-timer, an' it's the second time
inside a month.  It'd be the third time you an' the law has tangled.
Why, you set there yourself an' told me how you was practically run
outa L. A., right this week.  You set still a minute and figure out
about how many years they'd give yuh!

"How come Smilin' Lou overlooked cleanin' yuh of your roll when he took
mine, do yuh think?  He was treatin' yuh white, an' givin' yuh a chance
to come back strong next time--that's why. They got so much on yuh now
after to-night, that he knows you got just one chance to sidestep a
stretch in the pen.  That's to play the game with pertection.  Smilin'
Lou never to my knowledge throwed down a guy that come through on
demand.

"Smilin' Lou stood there an' sized yuh up about the same as I did,
somethin' like this: 'Here Is Casey Ryan--a clown that's safe anywhere
in the desert States.  He got honest prospector wrote all over 'im.
Why, if you boarded a street car the conductor would be guessin',
wild-eyed, how much gold dust it takes to make a nickel, expectin' you
to haul out your poke an' look around fer the gold scales.  Why, you
could git by where a town guy couldn't. You've got a rep a mile long as
a fightin', squareshootin' Irishman that's a drivin' fool an' knows the
desert like he knows ham-an'-eggs. Tie on some picks an' shovels an'
put you behind the wheel, and only the guys that are in the know would
ever get wise in a thousand years.

"Why, look what he said about you havin' 'em all bluffed in San Berdoo!
Grabbed you with a bunch uh moonshiners, and you fightin' the saps
harder'n any of 'em--and then, by heck, you slips the noose an' leaves
'em thinkin' you're honest but unlucky.

"So you 'n' me is pardners till I say when.  We'll clean up some real
jack together.  Minin' ain't in it, no more, with hootch runnin'--if
yuh play it right.  The good old White Mule goes under the wire,
old-timer, an' takes the money.  Burros is extinct."

"Burros ain't any extincter than what you'll be when I git through with
yuh," gritted Casey savagely, shutting off the gas. "Bill Masters can
like it or not--I'm goin' to lick the livin' tar outa you here an' now.
When I'm through with yuh, if you're able to wiggle the wheel, yuh can
take your load uh hootch an' go tahell! I'll hoof it down here to the
next station on the railroad an' ketch a ride back to L. A."

Kenner laughed.  "An' what would I be doin', you poor nut?  Set here
meek till yuh tell me to git out an' take a lickin'?  Yuh feel that gun
proddin' yuh in the ribs, don't yuh?  I can't help wonderin' how your
wife would feel towards you if you was found with a hole drilled
through your middle, an' a carload uh booze. That'd jar the faith of
the most believin' woman on earth.  You take this cut-off road up here
an' drive till I tell yuh t' stop. As you may know, a man can't be
chickenhearted and peddle hootch--an' I'm called an expert.  So you
think that over, Casey--an' drive purty, see?"

Casey drove as "purty" as was possible with a six-shooter pressed
irritatingly against his lowest floating rib; but he did not dwell upon
the spectacle of himself found dead with a carload of booze. He wished
to heaven he hadn't let the Little Woman talk him out of packing a gun,
and waited for his chance.

Young Kenner was thoughtful, brooding through the hours of darkness
with his head slightly bent and his eyes, so far as Casey could
determine, fixed steadily on the uneven trail where the headlights
revealed every rut, every stone, every chuck-hole. But Casey was not
deceived by that quiescence.  The revolver barrel never once ceased its
pressure against his side, and he knew that young Kenner never for an
instant forgot that he was riding with Casey Ryan at the wheel, waiting
for a chance to kill him.

By daylight, such was Casey's driving, they were well down the highway
which leads to Needles and on through Arizona. Casey was just thinking
that they would soon run out of gas, and that he would then have a
fighting chance, when he was startled almost into believing that he had
spoken his plan.

"I told you there's a twenty-gallon tank on this car; well, it holds
twenty-five.  I've got a special carburetor that gives an actual
mileage of twenty-two miles to the gallon on ordinary desert roads. I
filled 'er till she run over at Victorville--and I notice you're easy
on the gas with your drivin'.  Figure it yourself, Casey, and don't be
countin' on a stop till I'm ready t' stop."

Casey grunted, more crestfallen than he would ever admit. But he hadn't
given up; the give-up quality had been completely forgotten when
Casey's personality was being put together.  He drove on, around the
rubbly base of a blackened volcano long since cold and bleak, and bored
his way through the sandy stretch that leads through Patmos.

Patmos was a place of unhappy memories, but he drove through the little
hamlet so fast that he scarcely thought of his unpleasant sojourn there
the summer before.  Young Kenner had fallen silent again and they drove
the sixty miles or so to Goffs with not a word spoken between them.

Casey spent most of that time in mentally cursing the Ford for its
efficiency.  He had prayed for blowouts, a fouled timer, for something
or anything or everything to happen that could possibly befall a Ford.
He couldn't even make the radiator boil.  Worst and most persistent of
his discomforts was the hard pressure of that six-shooter against his
side.  Casey was positive that the imprint of it would be worn as a
permanent brand upon his person for the rest of his life.  Young
Kenner's voice speaking to him came so abruptly that Casey jumped.

"I've been thinking over your case," Kenner said cheerfully. "Stop
right here while we talk it over."

Casey stopped right there.

"I've changed my mind about havin' you for a pardner," young Kenner
went on.  "You'd be a valuable man all right; but when a harp like you
gets stubborn-bitter, my hunch tells me to break away clean. You're a
mick--an' micks is all alike when they git a grudge. I can't be
bothered keepin' yuh under my eye all the time, and the way I've felt
yuh oozin' venom all this while shows me I'd have to. An' bumpin' yuh
off would be neither pleasant ner safe.

"Now, the way I've doped this out,  I'm goin' to sell yuh the outfit
fer just what jack yuh got in your clothes.  Fork it over, an' I'll
give yuh the layout just as she stands."

"Yuh better wait till Casey says he wants t' buy!"  Swallowing
resentment all night had made his voice husky; and it was bitter indeed
to sit still and hear himself called a harp and a mick.

"Why wait?  Hand over the roll, and that closes the deal. I didn't ask
yuh would yuh buy--I'm givin' yuh somethin' fer your money, is all.  I
could take it off yuh after yuh quit kickin' and drive your remains in
to this little burg, with a tale of how I'd caught a bootlegger that
resisted arrest.  So fork over the jack, old-timer. I want to catch
that train over there that's about ready to pull out." He prodded
sharply with the gun, and Casey heard a click which needed no
explanation.

Casey fumbled for a minute inside his vest and glumly "forked over."
Young Kenner inspected the folded bank notes, smiled and slipped the
flat bundle inside his shirt.

"You're stronger on the bank roll than what yuh let on," he remarked
contentedly.  "I don't stand to lose so much, after all. Sixteen
hundred, I make it.  What's in your pants pockets?"

Casey, still balefully silent, emptied first one pocket and then the
other into Kenner's cupped palm.  With heavy sarcasm he felt in his
watch pocket and produced a nickel slipped there after paying
street-car fare.  He held it out to young Kenner between his finger and
thumb, still gazing straight before him.

Young Kenner took it and grinned.  "Oh, well--you're rich!  Drive on
now, and when you get about even with that caboose, slow to twelve
miles whilst I hop off; and then hit 'er up again an' keep 'er goin'.
If yuh don't, I'll grab yuh fer a bootlegger, sure. And I'd have the
hull train crew to help me wrassle yuh down. They'd be willin' to
sample the evidence, I guess, an' be witnesses against yuh.  An' bear
in mind, Casey, that yuh got a darned good Ford and all its valuable
contents for sixteen hundred and some odd bucks.  If you meet up with
the law, you can treat 'em white an' still break even on the deal yuh
just consummated with me."

"Like hell I consummated the deal!" Casey was goaded into muttering.

He drove abreast of the caboose, and at a final prod in the ribs Casey
slowed down.  Young Kenner dropped off the running board, alighted
running with his body slanted backwards and his lips smiling
friendly-wise.

"Don't take any bad money--an' don't let 'em catch yuh!" he cried
mockingly, as he headed for the caboose.

At a crossing, two miles farther on, Casey came larruping out of the
sand hills and was forced to wait while the freight train went rattling
past, headed east on a downhill grade.

Young Kenner, up in the cupola, leaned far out and waved his hat as the
caboose flicked by.



CHAPTER TWELVE

The highway north from the Santa Fe Railroad just west of Needles
climbs an imperceptible grade across barren land to where the mesa
changes and becomes potentially fertile.  Up this road, going north, a
cloud of yellow dust rolled swiftly.  See at close range, the nose of a
dingy Ford protruded slightly in front of the enveloping cloud--and
behind it Casey Ryan, hard-eyed and with his jaw set to the fighting
mood, gripped the wheel and drove as if he had a grudge against the
road.

At the first signpost Casey canted a malevolent eye upward and went
lurching by at top speed.  The car bulked black for a moment, dimmed,
and merged into the fleeing cloud that presently seemed no more than a
dust-devil whirling across the mesa.  At the second signpost Casey
slowed, his eyes dwelling speculatively upon the legend:

"JUNIPER WELLS 3 M"

The arrow pointed to the right where a narrow, little-used trail angled
crookedly away through the greasewood.  Casey gave a deciding twist to
the steering wheel and turned into the trail.

Juniper Wells is not nearly so nice a place as it sounds.  But it is
the first water north of the Santa Fe, and now and then a wayfarer of
the desert leaves the main highway and turns that way, driven by
necessity.  It is a secluded spot, too unattractive to tempt people to
linger; because of its very seclusion it therefore tempted Casey Ryan.

When a man has driven a Ford fifteen hours without once leaving the
wheel or taking a drink of water or a mouthful of food, however great
his trouble or his haste, his first thought will be of water, food and
rest.  Even Casey's deadly rage at the diabolical trick played upon him
could not hold his thoughts from dwelling upon bacon and coffee and a
good sleep afterwards.

Wind and rain and more wind, buffeting that trail since the last car
had passed, made "heavy going."  The Ford labored up small hills and
across gullies, dipping downward at last to Juniper Wells; there Casey
stopped close beside the blackened embers left by some forgotten
traveler of the wild.  He slid stiffly from behind the wheel to the
vacant seat beside him, and climbed out like the old man he had last
night determined never to become. He walked away a few paces, turned
and stood glaring back at the car as if familiarizing himself with an
object little known and hated much.

Fate, he felt, had played a shabby trick upon an honest man. Here he
stood, a criminal in the eyes of the law, a liar in the eyes of the
missus.  An honest man and a truthful, here he was--he, Casey
Ryan--actually afraid to face his fellow men.

"HE wasn't no friend of Bill Masters; the divil himself wouldn'ta owned
him fer a friend!" snarled Casey, thinking of Kenner. "Me--CASEY
RYAN!--with a load uh booze wished onto me--and a car that may have
been stolen fer all I know--an' not a darn' nickel to my name! They can
make a goat uh Casey Ryan once, but watch clost when they try it the
second time!  Casey MAY be gittin' old; he might possibly have
softenin' of the brain; but he'll git the skunk that done this, or
you'll find his carcass layin' alongside the trail bleachin' like a
blowed-out tire!  I'll trail 'im till my tongue hangs down to my knees!
I'll git 'im an' I'll drown 'im face down in a bucket of his own
booze!"  Whipped by emotion, his voice rose stridently until it cracked
just under a shout.

"That sounds pretty businesslike, old man," a strange voice spoke
whimsically behind Casey.  "Who's all this you're going to trail till
your tongue hangs down to your knees?  Going to need any help?"

Casey whirled belligerently upon the man who had walked quietly up
behind him.

"Where the hell did YOU come from?" he countered roughly.

"Does it matter?  I'm here," the other parried blandly.  "But by the
way!  If you've got the makings of a meal in your car--and you look too
old a hand in the desert to be without grub--I won't refuse to have a
snack with you.  I hate to invite myself to breakfast, but it's that or
go hungry--and an empty belly won't stand on ceremony."

The hard-bitten features of Casey Ryan, tanned as they were by wind and
sun to a fair imitation of leather, were never meant to portray mixed
emotions.  His face, therefore, remained impassive except for a queer,
cornered look in his eyes.  With a sick feeling at the pit of his
stomach he wondered just how much of his impassioned soliloquy the man
had overheard; who and what this man was, and how he had managed to
approach within six feet of Casey without being overheard.  With a
sicker feeling, he wondered if there were any grub in the car; and if
so, how he could get at it without revealing his contraband load to
this stranger.

But Casey Ryan was nothing if not game.  He reached for his trusty plug
of tobacco and pried off a corner with his teeth.  He lifted his left
hand mechanically to the back of his head and pushed his black felt hat
forward so that it rested over his right eyebrow at a devil-may-care
angle.  These preparations made involuntarily and unconsciously, Casey
Ryan was himself again.

"All right--if you're willin' to rustle the wood an' start a fire, I'll
see if I can dig up somethin'."  He cocked an eye up at the sun. "I et
my breakfast long enough ago so I guess it's settled. I reckon mebby I
c'd take on some bacon an' coffee myself.  Feller I had along with me I
ditched, back here at the railroad.  He done the packin' up--an' I'd
hate to swear to what he put in an' what he left out.  Onery cuss--I
wouldn't put nothin' past him.  But mebby we can make out a meal."

The stranger seemed perfectly satisfied with this arrangement and
studied preamble.  He started off to gather dead branches of
greasewood; and Casey, having prepared the way for possible
disappointment, turned toward the car.

Fear and Casey Ryan have ever been strangers; yet he was conscious of a
distinct, prickly chill down his spine.  The glance he cast over his
shoulder at the stranger betrayed uneasiness, best he could do.  He
turned over the roll of bedding and cautiously began a superficial
search which he hoped would reveal grub in plenty--without revealing
anything else.  He wished now that he had taken a look over his
shoulder when young Kenner was unloading the car at Smiling Lou's
command.  He would be better prepared now for possible emergencies.  He
remembered, with a bit of comfort, that the bootlegger had piled a good
deal of stuff upon the ground before Casey first heard the clink of
bottles.

A grunt of relief signaled his location of a box containing grub. A
moment later he lifted out a gunny sack bulging unevenly with cooking
utensils.  He fished a little deeper, turned back a folded tarp and
laid naked to his eyes the top of a whisky keg. With a grunt of
consternation he hastily replaced the tarp, his heart flopping in his
chest like a fresh-landed fish.

The stranger was kneeling beside a faintly crackling little pile of
twigs, his face turned inquiringly toward Casey.  Casey, glancing
guiltily over his shoulder, felt the chill hand of discovery reaching
for his very soul.  It was as if a dead man were hidden away beneath
that tarp.  It seemed to him that the eyes of the stranger were sharp,
suspicious eyes, and that they dwelt upon him altogether too
attentively for a perfectly justifiable interest even in the box of
grub.

Black coffee, drunk hot and strong, gave the world a brighter aspect.
Casey decided that the situation was not so desperate, after all. Easy
enough to bluff it out--easiest thing in the world!  He would just go
along as if there wasn't a thing on his mind heavier than his thinning,
sandy hair.  No man living had any right or business snooping around in
his car, unless he carried a badge of an officer of the law.  Even with
the badge, Casey told himself sternly, a man would have to show a
warrant before he could touch a finger to his outfit.

Over his third cup of coffee Casey eyed the stranger guardedly. He did
not look like an officer.  He was not big and burly, with arrogant eyes
and the hint of leashed authority in his tone. Instead, he was of
medium height, owned a pair of shrewd gray eyes and an easy drawl, and
was dressed in the half military style so popular with mining men,
surveyors and others who can afford to choose what garb they will adopt
for outdoor living.

He had shown a perfect familiarity with cooking over a campfire, and
had fried the bacon in a manner which even Casey could not criticize.
Before the coffee was boiled he had told Casey that his name was Mack
Nolan.  Immediately afterward he had grinned and added the superfluous
information that he was Irish and didn't care who knew it.

"Well, I'm Irish, meself," Casey returned approvingly and with more
than his usual brogue.  "You can ask anybody if Casey Ryan has ever
showed shame fer the blood that's in' 'im.  'Tis the Irish that never
backs up from a rough trail or a fight."  He poured a fourth cup of
coffee into a chipped enamel cup and took his courage in his two hands.
Mack Nolan, he assured himself optimistically, couldn't possibly know
what lay hidden under the camp outfit in the Ford.  Until he did know,
he was harmless as anybody, so long as Casey kept an eye on him.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN

During the companionable smoke that followed breakfast, Casey learned
that Mack Nolan had spent some time in Nevada, ambling through the
hills, examining the geologic formation of the country with a view to
possible future prospecting in districts yet undeveloped.

"The mineral possibilities of Nevada haven't been more than scratched,"
Mack Nolan observed, lying back with one arm thrown up under his head
as a makeshift pillow and the other hand negligently attending to the
cigarette he was smoking.  His gray army hat was tilted over his eyes,
shielding them from the sun while they dwelt rather studiously upon the
face of Casey Ryan.

"Every spring I like to get out and poke around through these hills
where folks as a rule don't go.  Never did much prospecting--as such.
Don't take kindly enough to a pick and shovel for that.  What I like
best is general field work.  If I run across something rich, time
enough then to locate a claim or two and hire a couple of strong backs
to do the digging.

"I've been out now for about three weeks; and night before last, just
as I stopped to make camp and before I'd started to unpack, my two
mules got scared at a rattler and quit the country.  Left me flat,
without a thing but my clothes and six-shooter, and what I had in my
pockets."  He lifted the cigarette from between his lips--thin, they
were, and curved and rather pitiless, one could guess, if the man were
sufficiently roused.

"I wasted all yesterday trying to trail 'em.  But you can't do much
tracking in these rocks back here toward the river.  I was hitting for
the highway to catch a ride if I could, when I saw you topping this
last ridge over here.  Don't blame me much for bumming a breakfast, do
you?"  And he added, with a sigh of deep physical content, "It sure-lee
was some feed!"

His lids drooped lower as if sleep were overtaking him in spite of
himself.  "I'd ask yuh if you'd seen anything of those mules--only I
don't give a damn now.  I wish this was night instead of noon; I could
sleep the clock around after that bacon and bannock of yours.  Haven't
a care in the world," he murmured drowsily. "Happy as a toad in the
sun, first warm day of spring.  How soon you going to crank up?"

Casey stared at him unwinkingly through narrowed lids.  He pushed his
hat forward with a sharp tilt over his eyebrow--which meant always that
Casey Ryan had just O. K.'d an idea--and reached for his chewing
tobacco.

"Go ahead an' take a nap if yuh want to," he urged.  "I got some
tinkerin' to do on the Ford, an' I was aimin' to lay over here an' do
it.  I'm kinda lookin' around, myself, for a likely prospect; I got all
the time there is.  I guess I'll back the car down the draw a piece
where she'll set level, an' clean up 'er dingbats whilst you take a
sleep."

Casey left the breakfast things where they were, as a silent
reassurance to Mack Nolan that the car would not go off without him. It
was a fine, psychological detail of which Casey was secretly rather
proud.  A box of grub, a smoked coffee pot and dirty breakfast dishes
left beside a dead campfire establishes evidence, admissible before any
jury, that the owner means to return.

Casey went over and cranked the Ford, grimly determined to make the
coffee pot lie for him if necessary.  He backed the car down the draw a
good seventy-five yards, to where a wrinkle in the bank hid him from
the breakfast camp.  He stopped there and left the engine running while
he straddled out over the side and went forward to the dip of the front
fender to see if the Ford were still visible to Mack Nolan.  He was
glad to find that by crouching and sighting across the fender he could
just see the campfire and the top of Nolan's hat beyond it.  The man
need only lift his head off his arm to see that the Ford was standing
just around the turn of the draw.

"The corner was never yet so tight that Casey Ryan couldn't find a
crack somewhere to crawl through," he told himself vaingloriously. "An'
I hope to thunder the feller sleeps long an' sleeps solid!"

For fifteen minutes the mind of Casey Ryan was at ease.  He had found a
shovel in the car, placed conveniently at the side where it could be
used for just such an emergency as this.  For fifteen minutes he had
been using that shovel in a shelving bank of loose gravel just under an
outcropping of rhyolite a rod or so behind the car and well out of
sight of Nolan.

He was beginning to consider his excavation almost deep enough to bury
two ten-gallon kegs and forty bottles of whisky, when the shadow of a
head and shoulders fell across the hole.  Casey did not lift the dirt
and rocks he had on his shovel.  He froze to a tense quiet, goggling at
the shadow.

"What are yuh doing, Casey?  Trying to outdig a badger?" Mack Nolan's
chuckle was friendliness itself.

Casey's head snapped around so that he could cock an eye up at Nolan.
He grinned mechanically.  "Naw.  Picked up a rich-lookin' piece uh
float. Thought I'd just see if it didn't mebby come from this ledge."

Mack Nolan stepped forward interestedly and looked at the ledge.

"Where's the piece you found?" he very naturally inquired.  "The
formation just here wouldn't lead me to expect gold-bearing rock; but
of course, anything is possible with gold.  Let's have a look at the
specimen."

Casey had once tried to bluff a stranger with two deuces and a pair of
fives, and two full stacks of blue chips pushed to the center to back
the bluff.  The stranger had called him, with three queens and a pair
of jacks.  Casey felt like that now.

He had laughed over his loss then, and he grinned now and reached
carelessly to the bank beside him as if he fully expected to lay his
hand on the specimen of gold-bearing rock.  He went so far as to utter
a surprised oath when he failed to find it.  He felt in his pockets.
He went forward and scanned the top of the ledge almost convincingly.
He turned and stood a-straddle, his hands on his hips, and gazed on the
pile of dirt he had thrown out of the hole.  Last, he pushed his hat
back so that with the next movement he could push it forward again over
his eyebrow.

"Now if that there lump uh high-grade ain't went an' slid down the bank
an' got covered up with the muck!" he exclaimed disgustedly. "I'm a son
of a gun if Fate ain't playin' agin' Casey Ryan with a flock uh aces
under its vest!"

Mack Nolan laughed, and Casey slanted a look his way.  "Thought I left
you takin, a nap," he said brazenly.  "What's the matter? Didn't your
breakfast set good?"

Mack Nolan laughed again.  It was evident that he found Casey Ryan very
amusing.

"The breakfast was fine," he replied easily.  "A couple of lizards got
to playing tag over me.  That woke me up, and the sun was so hot I just
thought I'd come down and crawl into the car and go to sleep there.  Go
ahead with your prospecting, Casey--I won't bother you."

Casey went on with his digging, but his heart was not in it. With every
laggard shovelful of dirt, he glanced over his shoulder apprehensively,
watching Mack Nolan crawl into the back of the car and settle himself,
with an audible sigh of satisfaction, on top of the load.  He had one
wild, wicked impulse to lengthen the hole and make it serve as a grave
for more than bootleg whisky; but it was an impulse born of
desperation, and it died almost before it had lived.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Casey left his digging and returned to the Ford, still determined to
carry on the bluff and pretend that much tinkering was necessary before
he could travel further.  With a great show of industry he rummaged for
pliers and wrenches, removed the hood from the motor and squinted down
at the little engine.

By that time Mack Nolan was snoring softly in deep slumber. Casey
listened suspiciously, knowing too well how misleading a snore could
be.  But his own eyelids were growing exceeding heavy, and the
soporific sound acted hypnotically upon his sleep-hungry brain. He
caught himself yawning, and suddenly threw down the wrench.

"Aw, hell!" he muttered disgustedly, and went and crawled under the
back of the car where it was shady.

The sun was nearly down when Casey awoke and crawled out.  Mack Nolan
was still curled comfortably in the car, his back against the bed roll.
He opened his eyes and yawned when Casey leaned and looked in upon him.

"By Jove, that was a fine sleep I had," he announced cheerfully,
lifting himself up and dangling his legs outside the car. "Strike
anything yet?"

"Naw."  Casey's grunt was eloquent of the mood he was in.

"Get the car fixed all right?"  Mack Nolan's cheerfulness seemed
nothing less than diabolical to Casey.

"Naw." Then Casey added grimly, "I'm stuck.  I dunno what ails the
damned thing.  Have to send to Vegas fer new parts, I guess. It's only
three miles out here to the road.  Mebby you better hike over to the
highway an' ketch a ride with somebody.  I might send in for a timer
an' some things, too.  No use waitin' fer me, Nolan--can't tell how
long I'll be held up here."

Mack Nolan climbed out of the car.  Casey's spirits rose instantly.
Nolan came forward and looked down at the engine as casually as he
would glance at a nickel alarm clock.

"She was hitting all right when you backed down here," Nolan remarked
easily.  "I'll just take a look at her myself.  Fords are cranky
sometimes.  But I've assembled too many of them in the factory to let
one get the best of me in the desert."

Casey could almost hear his heart when it slumped down into his boots.
But he wasn't licked yet.

"Aw, let the darned thing alone till we eat," he said, pushing his hat
forward to hurry his wits.

"Well--I can throw a Ford together in the dark, if necessary," smiled
Mack Nolan.  "Eat, it is, if you want it that way. That breakfast I put
away seems to have sharpened my appetite for supper.  Tell you what,
Ryan.  I'll do a little trouble-shooting here while you cook supper.
How'll that be?"

That wouldn't be, if Casey could prevent it.  His pale, narrow-lidded
eyes dwelt upon Nolan unwinkingly.

"Well, mebby I'm kind of a crank about my car," he hedged, with a
praiseworthy calmness.  "Fords is like horses, to me. I drove stage all
m' life till I took to prospectin'--an' I never could stand around and
let anybody else monkey with my teams.  I ain't a doubt in the world,
Mr. Nolan, but what you know as much about Fords as I do.  More, mebby.
But Casey Ryan's got 'is little ways, an' he can't seem to ditch 'em.
We'll eat; an' then mebby we'll look 'er over together.

"At the same time," he went on with rising courage, "I'm liable to
stick around here for awhile an' prospect a little.  If you wanta find
them mules an' outfit, don't bank too strong on Casey Ryan. He's liable
to change 'is mind any old time.  Day or night, you can't tell what
Casey might take a notion to do.  That there's a fact.  You can ask
anybody if it ain't."

Mack Nolan laughed and slapped Casey unexpectedly on the shoulder.
"You're a man after my own heart, Casey Ryan," he declared
enigmatically.  "I'll stick to you and take a chance. Darn the mules!
Somebody will find them and look after them until I show up."

Casey's spirits, as he admitted to himself, were rising and falling
like the hammer of a pile driver; and like the pile driver, the hammer
was driving him deeper and deeper into hopelessness.  He would have
given an ear to know for certain whether Mack Nolan were as innocent
and friendly as he seemed. Until he did know, Casey could see nothing
before him but to wait his chance to give Nolan the slip.

Sitting cross-legged in the glow of the campfire after supper, with a
huge pattern of stars drawn over the purple night sky, Casey pulled out
the old pipe with which he had solaced many an evening and stuffed it
thoughtfully with tobacco.  Across the campfire, Mack Nolan sat with
his hat tilted down over his eyes, smoking a cigarette and seeming at
peace with all the world.

Casey hoped that Nolan would forget about fixing the Ford.  He hoped
that Nolan would sleep well to-night.  Casey was perfectly willing to
sacrifice a good roll of bedding and the cooking outfit for the
privilege of traveling alone.  No man, he told himself savagely, could
ask a better deal than he was prepared to give Nolan.  He bent to reach
a burning twig for his pipe, and found Nolan watching him steadily from
under his hat brim.

"What sort of looking fellows were those, Ryan, that left a load of
booze on your hands?"  Nolan asked casually when he saw that he was
observed.

Casey burned his fingers with the blazing twig.  "Who said anything
about any fellers leavin' me booze?" he evaded sharply. "If it's a
drink you're hintin' for, you won't get it.  Casey Ryan ain't no booze
peddler, an' now's as good a time as any to let that soak into your
system."

Mack Nolan's gray eyes were still watching Casey with a steadfastness
that was disconcerting to a man in Casey's dilemma.

"It might help us both considerably," he said quietly, "if you told me
all about it.  You can't cache that booze you've got in the car--I
won't let you, for one thing; for another, that would be merely dodging
the issue, and if you'll forgive my frankness, dodging doesn't seem to
be quite in your line."

Casey puffed hard on his pipe.  "The world's gittin' so darned full uh
crooks, a man can't turn around now'days without bumpin' into a few!"
he exploded bitterly.  "What kind uh hold-up game YOU playin', Mr.
Nolan?  If that's your name," he added fiercely.

Mack Nolan laughed to himself and rubbed the ash from his cigarette
against the sole of his shoe.  "Why," he answered genially, "my game is
holding up bootleggers--and crooked cops. Speaking off-hand (which I
don't often do) I should say you have a fine chance to sit in with me.
I'm just guessing, now,"  he added dryly,  "but I'm tolerably good at
guessing; a man's got to be, these days."

"A man's got to do better than guess--with Casey Ryan," Casey remarked
ominously.  "The last man that guessed Casey Ryan, guessed 'im plumb
wrong."

"Meaning that you'd refuse to help me round up bootleggers and the
officers that protect them?" A steel edge crept into Mack Nolan's
voice.  He leaned forward, his elbows on his knees, his eyes boring
into Casey's mind.

"Man, don't stall with me!  You've got brains enough to know that if I
were a crook I'd have held you up long before now.  You gave me three
splendid opportunities to stick a gun in your back--and I could have
made others.  And," he added with a smile, "if I had thought that you
were a bootlegger or a crook of any other kind, I'd have had you in Las
Vegas jail by this time.  You're no more a crook than I am.  You've got
neither the looks nor the actions of a slicker.  I may say I know you
pretty well--"

Casey thrust out a pugnacious chin.  "Say!  D' you know Bill Masters,
too?  That's all I wanta know!"

"Bill Masters?  Why, is he the fellow who stepped out from under this
load of hootch?  If he is, he must have picked himself a new name; I
never heard it."

Casey glared suspiciously for twenty seconds before he settled back
glumly into his mental corner.

"Ryan, I've been all day sizing you up.  I'm going to be perfectly
honest with you and tell you why I think you're straight--although you
must admit the evidence is rather against you.

"I happened to be right close when you drove down in here and stopped.
As a matter of fact, I was behind that little clump of junipers. Had
you driven around them instead of stopping this side, you couldn't have
failed to see me.

"You came down here mad at the trick that had been played you. You were
so mad, you started talking to yourself as a safety valve--blowing off
mental steam.  You've spent a lot of time in the desert--alone.  Men
like that frequently talk aloud their thoughts, just to hear a human
voice.  You made matters pretty plain to me before you knew there was
any one within miles of you.  For instance, you're not at all sure this
car you've got wasn't stolen.  You're inclined to think it was.  You're
broke--robbed, I take it, by the men who somehow managed to leave you
with the car and a load of booze on your hands.  The trick must have
been turned this morning; down at the railroad,  I imagine--because you
hadn't taken time to stop and size up the predicament you were in until
you got here.

"Your main idea was to get off somewhere out of sight.  You were
scared. You didn't hear me behind you until I spoke--which proves
you're a green hand at dodging.  And that, Ryan, is a very good
recommendation to a man in my line of work.  But you're shrewd, and
you're game--dead game.  You're a peach at thinking up schemes to get
yourself out of a hole.  Of course, being new at it, you don't think
quite far enough.  For instance, because you found me afoot it never
occurred to you that I might know something about a car; but the rest
of your plan was a dandy.

"Your idea of backing down there around the turn and burying the booze
was all right.  With almost any other man it would have worked. Once
you got that hootch off your mind, I rather think you'd have been glad
to have me along with you, instead of giving me broad hints to leave.
But you haven't got the booze buried yet, and you've been figuring all
the evening.  You don't see how the devil you're going to manage it
with me around.

"I'll do a little more guessing, now: I guess you've doped it out that
you'll pack the bedroll up here, tuck me in and pray to the Lord I'll
sleep sound.  You're hoping you can cache the booze and make your
getaway while I've gone bye-low.  Or possibly, if you got the booze put
away safe from my prying eyes, you might come back to bed and I'd find
you here in the morning just as if nothing had happened.  How Is that
for guesswork?"

"You go tahell!" growled Casey, swallowing a sickly grin.  He pressed
down the tobacco in his pipe, eyeing Nolan queerly.  "If them damn'
lizards had uh let yuh alone, I wouldn't have nothin' on m' mind now
but my hat."  He looked across the fire and grinned again.

"Keep on; you'll be tellin' me what the missus an' I was arguin' about
last night over long-distance.  I've heard tell uh this four-bit mind
reading an' forecastin' your horrorscope fer a dime; but I never met up
with it before.  If you're aimin' to take up a collection after the
show, you'll fare slim.  I've been what a feller called 'dusted off'."
He added, after a pause that was eloquent, "They done it thorough!"

Mack Nolan laughed.  "They usually are thorough, when they're 'dusting
off a chump', as I believe they call it."

Casey grunted.  "'Chump' is right, mebby.  But anyways, you're too
late, Mr. Nolan. I'm cleaned."

Mack Nolan rolled another cigarette, lighted it and flipped the match
into the campfire.  He smoked it down to the last inch, staring into
the fire and saying nothing the while.  When the cigarette stub
followed the match, he leaned back upon one elbow and began tracing a
geometrical figure in the sand with a stick.

"Ryan," he said abruptly, "you're square and I know it.  The very
nature of my business makes me cautious about trusting men--but I'm
going to trust you."  He stopped again, taking great pains with the
point of a triangle he was drawing.

Casey knocked the ashes out of his pipe against a rock.  "Puttin' it
that way, Mr. Nolan, the man's yet to live that Casey Ryan ever
double-crossed.  Cops I got no use for; nor yet bootleggers. Whether I
got any use for you, Mr. Nolan, I can say better when I've heard yuh
out.  A goat I've been for the last time.  But I'm willin' to HEAR yuh
out--and that there's more'n what I'd uh said this morning."

"And that's fair enough, Ryan.  If you jumped into things with your
eyes shut, I don't think I'd want you with me."

Casey squirmed, remembering certain times when he had gone too headlong
into things.

"I'm going to ask you, Ryan, to tell me the whole story of this car and
its load of whisky.  Before you do that, I'll tell you this much to
show good faith and prove to you how much I trust you: I'm an officer,
and my special work right now is to clean up a gang of bootleggers and
the crooked officers who are protecting them. What I know about your
case leads me to believe that you've run afoul of them and that you're
the man I've been looking for that can help me set a trap for them.
Would you like to do that?"

"If it's that bunch you're after, Mr. Nolan, I'd ruther land 'em in
jail than to find a ledge of solid gold ten feet thick an' a mile long.
One thing I'd like to know first.  Are yuh or ain't yuh huntin' mules?"

Mack Nolan laughed.  "I am, yes.  But the mule I'm hunting is white!"

Casey studied that until he had the fresh pipeful of tobacco going
well.  Then he looked up and grinned understandingly.

"So it's White Mule you're trailin'."  He kicked a stub of greasewood
branch back into the flames and laughed.  "Well, the tracks is deep an'
plenty, and if that's the trail you're takin', I'm with yuh. You ain't
a cop--leastways you don't spread your arms every time you turn around.
Gosh, I hate them wing-floppin' kind!  They's one thing an' one only
that I hate worse--an' that's bootleggers an' moonshiners.  If you got
a scheme to give them cusses their needin's, you can ask anybody if
Casey Ryan ain't the feller you can bank on."

"Yes.  That's what I've been thinking.  Now, I wish you'd tell me
exactly what you've been up against.  Don't leave out anything, however
trivial it might seem to you."

Wherefore, Casey sat with the firelight flickering across his seamed,
Irish face and told the story of his wrongs.  Trivial details Nolan had
asked for--and he got them with the full Casey Ryan flavor. Even the
old woman who rocked, Casey pictured--from his particular angle.  Mack
Nolan sat up and listened, his eyes steady and his mouth, that had
curved to laughter many times during the recital, once more firm and
somewhat pitiless when Casey finished.

"This Smiling Lou; you'd know him again, of course?"

"Know him!  Say, I'd know him after he'd fried a week in hell!" Casey's
tone left no doubt of his meaning.

"And I suppose you could tell this man Kenner a mile off and around a
corner.  Now, I'll tell you what I want you to do, Casey.  This may jar
you a little--until I explain.  I want you--"  Mack Nolan paused, his
lips twitching in a faint smile--"to do a little bootlegging yourself."

"Yuh--WHAT?" In the firelight Casey's eyes were seen to bulge.

"I want you to bootleg this whisky you've got in the car." Nolan's eyes
twinkled.  "I want you to go back and peddle this booze, and I want you
to do it so that Smiling Lou or one of his bunch will hold you up and
highjack you.  Do you see what I mean? You don't--so I'll tell you.
We'll put it in marked bottles.  I have the bottles and the seals and
labels for every brand of liquor to be had in the country to-day.  With
marked money and marked bottles, we ought to be able to get the goods
on that gang."

Casey thought of something quite suddenly and held out an imperative,
pointing finger.

"There's something else that feller told me was in the car!" he cried
agitatedly.  "He said he had forty pints of French champagne cached in
a false bottom under the front seat.  And he said the front cushion had
a blind pocket around the edges that was full uh dope.  Hop, he called
it."

Mack Nolan whistled under his breath.

"And he turned the whole outfit over to you for sixteen hundred dollars
or so?"  He stared thoughtfully into the fire.  Abruptly he looked at
Casey.

"What the deuce had you done to him, Ryan?" he asked, with a quizzical
intentness.  "He must have been scared stiff, to let go of all that
stuff for sixteen hundred.  Why, man, the 'junk'--that's dope--alone
must be worth more than that.  And the champagne--forty pints, you say?
He ought to get twenty dollars a pint for that.  Figure it yourself.  I
hope," he added seriously, "the fellow wasn't too scared to show up
again."

"Well," Casey said grimly, "I dunno how scart he is--but he knows darn'
well I'll kill 'im. I told im I would."

Again Mack Nolan laughed.  "Catching's much better than killing, Ryan.
It hurts a man worse, and it lasts a heap longer.  What do you say to
turning in?  To-morrow we'll have a full day at my private bottling
works."

They moved their cooking outfit down near the Ford for safety's sake.
While it was wholly improbable that the car would be robbed in the
night, Mack Nolan was a man who took as few chances as possible. It
happened that the excavation Casey had so hopefully made that morning
formed a convenient level for their bed; wherefore they spread it
there, talking in low tones of their plans until they went to sleep.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Dawn was just thinning the curtain of darkness when Nolan woke Casey
with a shake of the shoulder.

"I think we'd better be moving from here before the world's astir. You
can back on down this draw, Ryan, and strike an old trail that cuts
over the ridge and up the next gulch to an old, deserted mine where
I've made headquarters.  It isn't far, and we can have breakfast at my
camp."

Casey swallowed his astonishment, and for once in his life he did as he
was told without argument.

Mack Nolan's camp was fairly accessible by roundabout trail with a few
tire tracks to point the way for Casey.  Straight across the ridges, it
would not have been more than two miles to Juniper Wells. Nevertheless
not one man in a year would be tempted to come this way, unless it were
definitely known that some one lived here.

As the camp of a man who was prospecting for pastime rather than for a
grubstake, the place was perfect.  Mack Nolan had taken possession of a
cabin dug into the hill at the head of a long draw. A brush-covered
shed of makeshift construction sheltered a car of the ubiquitous Ford
make.  Fifty yards away and in full sight of the cabin, the mouth of a
tunnel yawned blackly under a rhyolite ledge.

Casey swept the camp with an observant glance and nodded approval as
and stopped before the cabin.

"As a prospector, Mr. Nolan, I'll say 'tis a fine layout you got here.
An' tain't the first time an honest-lookin' mine has been made to cover
things far off from minin'.  Like the Black Butte bunch, f'r instance.
But if any one was to ride up on yuh unexpected here, I'll say yuh
could meet 'em with a grin an' feel easy about your secrets."

"That's praise indeed, coming from an old hand like you," Nolan
declared.  "Now I'll tell you something else.  With Casey Ryan in the
camp the whole thing's twice as convincing.  Come in.  I want to show
you what I call an artistic interior."

Grinning, Casey followed him inside and exclaimed profanely in
admiration of Mack Nolan's genius.  The cabin showed every mark of the
owner's interest in the geologic formation of that immediate district.

On the floor along the wall lay specimens of mineralized rock, a couple
of prospector's picks, a single-jack and a set of drills; a sample
sack, grimed and with a hole in the corner mended by the simple process
of gathering the cloth together around it and tying it tightly with a
string, hung from a nail above the tools. On the window sill were
specimens of ore; two or three of the pieces showed a richness that
lighted Casey's eyes with the enthusiasm of an old prospector.  Mining
journals and a prospector's manual lay upon a box table at the foot of
the bunk. For the rest, the cabin looked exactly what it was--the
orderly home of a man quite accustomed to primitive living far off from
his fellows.

They had a very satisfactory breakfast cooked by Mack Nolan from his
own supplies and eaten in a leisurely manner while Nolan talked of
primary formations and secondary, and of mineral intrusions and breaks.
Casey listened and learned a few things he had not known, for all his
years of prospecting.  Mack Nolan, he decided, could pass anywhere as a
mining expert.

"And now," said Nolan briskly, when he had hung up the dishpan and
draped the dishcloth over it to dry, "I'll show you the bottling works.
We'll have to do the work by lantern-light.  There's not one chance in
fifty that any one would show up here--but you never can tell. We could
get the stuff out of sight easily enough while the car was coming up
the gulch.  But the smell is a different matter. We'll take no chances."

At the head of the bunk, a curtained space beneath a high shelf very
obviously did duty as a wardrobe.  A leather motor coat hung there, one
sleeve protruding beyond the curtain of flowered calico. Other garments
bulged the cloth here and there.  Nolan, smiling over his shoulder at
Casey, nodded and pushed the clothing aside.  A door behind opened
inward, admitting the two into a small recess from which another door
opened into a cellar dug deep into the hill.

Undoubtedly this had once been used as a frost-proof storeroom. A small
ventilator pipe opened--so Nolan told Casey--in the middle of a
greasewood clump.  Nolan lighted a gasoline lantern that shed a white
brilliance upon the room.  On the long table which extended down one
side of the room, Casey saw boxes of bottles and other supplies which
he did not at the moment recognize.

"We'll have to rebottle all the whisky," said Nolan.

"You'll see a certain mark blown into the bottom of each one of these.
The champagne, I'm afraid, I must either confiscate and destroy or run
the risk of marking the labels.  The hop we'll lay aside for further
consideration."

Casey grinned, thinking of the speedy downfall of his enemies, Smiling
Lou and Kenner--and, as a secondary consideration other crooks of their
type.

"So now we'll unload the stuff, Ryan, and get to work here." Nolan
adjusted the white flame in the mantle of the gasoline lantern and led
the way outside.  "Take in the seat-cushion, Casey.  I don't fancy
opening it outside, even in this howling wilderness."

"I think I'll just pack in the kegs first, Mr. Nolan."  For the first
time since the shock of Mr. Nolan's "mind-reading" the night before,
Casey ventured a suggestion.  "Anybody comes along, it's the kegs
they'd look at cross-eyed.  Cushions is expected in Fords--if I ain't
buttin' in," he added meekly.

"Which you're not.  You're acting as my agent now, Ryan, and it will
take two heads to put this over without a hitch.  Sure, put the kegs
out of sight first.  The bottles next--and then we'll make short work
of the dope in the cushion."

Casey carried in the kegs while Nolan kept watch for inopportune
visitors.  It was thought inadvisable to unload the camp outfit from
the car until the whisky was all removed.  The outfit effectually hid
what was below--and they were taking no chances. They both breathed
freer when the two kegs were in the cellar. Nolan was pleased; too,
when Casey came out with the sample bag and announced that he would
carry the bottles in the bag.  Then Nolan fancied he heard a car, and
walked away to where he would have a longer view down the gulch.  He
would whistle, he said, and warn Casey if someone was coming.

He had not proceeded fifty yards when Casey yelled and brought him back
at a run.  Casey was rummaging in the car, throwing things about with a
recklessness which ill-became an agent of the self-possessed Mack Nolan.

"There ain't a damn' bottle here!" he bellowed indignantly. "Them
crooks gypped me outa ten gallons uh good, bottle whisky! Now what do
you know about that, Mr. Nolan?  That feller said it was high-grade
stuff he had packed away at the bottom.  He lied. There ain't nothin'
here but a set uh skid chains an' a jack. An' the champagne, mebby,
under the front seat!"

Mack Nolan's eyes narrowed.  "I think Ryan, I'll have a look under that
front seat."

He had a look--several looks, in fact.  There was the false bottom
under the seat, but there was nothing in it.  He took his pocket knife,
opened a blade and split the edge of the seat-cushion at the bottom. He
inserted a finger and thumb and drew out a bit of hair stuffing. He
stood up and eyed Casey sharply, and Casey stared back defensively.

"He was a darned liar from start t' finish.  He said there was
champagne an' he said there was hop," Casey stated flatly.

"I wondered at his letting go of stuff as valuable as that," said
Nolan. "I think we'd better take a look at those kegs."

They went into the cellar and took a look at the kegs.  Both kegs.
Afterward they stood and looked at each other.  Casey's hands went to
his hips, and the muscles along his jaw hardened into lumps. He spat
into the dirt of the cellar floor.

"Water!"  He snorted disgustedly.  "Casey Ryan with the devil an' all
scart outa him, thinkin' he had ownership of a load uh booze an' hop
sufficient t' hang 'im!"  His hand slid into his trousers pocket,
reaching for the comforting plug of tobacco.  "Stuck up an' robbed is
what happens t' Casey.  You can ask anybody if it ain't highway
robbery!"

Nolan stopped whistling under his breath. "There's the Ford," he
reminded Casey comfortingly.

"Which I wisht it wasn't!" snarled Casey.  "You know yourself, Mr.
Nolan, it's likely stole, an' the first man I meet in the trail'll
likely take it off me, claimin' it's his'n!"

Mack Nolan started whistling again, but checked himself abruptly.
"Well, our trap's wanting bait, I see.  This leaves me still hunting
the White Mule."

"Aw, tahell with your White Mule!  Tahell with everything!" Casey
kicked the nearest keg viciously and went out into the sunshine,
swearing to himself.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN

In the shade of a juniper that grew on the highest point of the gulch's
rim, Mack Nolan lay sprawled on the flat of his back, one arm for a
pillow, and stared up into the serene blue of the sky with cottony
flakes of cloud swimming steadily to the northeast. Three feet away,
Casey Ryan rested on left hip and elbow and stared glumly down upon the
cabin directly beneath them. Whenever his pale, straight-lidded eyes
focussed upon the dusty top of the Ford car standing in front of the
cabin, Casey said something under his breath.       Miles away to the
south, pale violet, dreamlike in the distance, the jagged outline of a
small mountain range stood as if painted upon the horizon.  A wavy
ribbon of smudgy brown was drawn uncertainly across the base of the
mountains.  This, Casey knew, when his eyes lifted to look that way,
marked the line of the Sante Fe and a train moving heavily upgrade to
the west.

Toward it dipped the smooth stretch of barren mesa cut straight down
the middle with a yellow line that was the highway up which Casey had
driven the morning before.  The inimitable magic of distance and high
desert air veiled greasewood, sage and sand with the glamour of
unreality.  The mountains beyond, unspeakably desolate and forbidding
at close range, and the little black buttes standing afar, off--small
spewings of age-old volcanos dead before man was born--seemed
fascinating, unknown islets anchored in a sea of enchantment.  Across
the valley to the west nearer mountains, all amethyst and opal tinted,
stood bold and inscrutable, with jagged peaks thrust into the blue to
pierce and hold the little clouds that came floating by.  Even the
gulch at hand had been touched by the enchanter's wand and smiled
mysteriously in the vivid sunlight, the very air a-quiver with that
indescribable beauty of the high mesa land which holds desert dwellers
in thrall.

When first Casey saw the smoke smudge against the mountains to the
south, he remembered his misadventure of the lower desert and swore.
When he looked again, the majestic sweep of distance gave him a
satisfied feeling of freedom from the crowded pettinesses of the city.
For the first time since trouble met him in the trail between
Victorville and Barstow, Casey heaved a sigh of content because he was
once more out in the big land he loved. Those distant, painted
mountains, looking as impossible as the back drop of a stage, held
gulches and deep canyons he knew.  The closer hills he had prospected.
The mesa, spread all around him, seemed more familiar than the white
apartment house in Los Angeles which Casey had lately called home.  And
if the thought of the Little Woman brought with it the vague discomfort
of a schoolboy playing hookey, Casey could not have regretted being
here with Mack Nolan if he had tried.

They were lying up here in the shade--following the instinct of other
creatures of the wild to guard against surprises--while they worked out
a nice problem in moonshine.  And since the desert had never meant a
monotonously placid life to Casey--who carried his problems
philosophically as a dog bears patiently with fleas--he had every
reason now for feeling very much at home.  When he reached mechanically
into his pocket for his Bull Durham and papers, any man who knew him
well would have recognized the motion as a sign that Casey was himself
again, once more on his mental feet and ready to go boring
optimistically into his next bunch of trouble.

Mack Nolan raised his head off his arm and glanced at Casey quizzically.

"Well--we can't catch fish if we won't cut bait," he volunteered
sententiously.  "I've a nice little job staked out for you, Casey."

Casey gave a grunt that might mean one of several things, and which
probably meant them all.  He waited until he had his cigarette going.
"If it ain't a goat's job I'm fer it," he said. "Casey Ryan ain't the
man t' set in the shade whilst there's men runnin' loose he's darned
anxious t' meet."

"I've been thinking over the deal those fellows pulled on you. If the
man Kenner had left you the booze and dope he told you was in the car,
I'd say it was a straight case of a sticky-fingered officer letting a
bootlegger by with part of his load, and a later attack of cold feet on
the part of the bootlegger.  But they didn't leave you any booze.  So I
have doped it this way, Ryan.

"The thing's deeper than it looked, yesterday.  Those two were working
together, part of a gang, I should say, with a fairly well-organized
system.  By accident--and probably for a greater degree of safety in
getting out of the city, Kenner invited you to ride with him.  He
wanted no argument with that traffic cop--no record made of his name
and license number.  So he took you in. When he found out who you were,
he knew you were at outs with the law. He knew you as an experienced
desert man.  He had you placed as a valuable member of their gang, if
you could be won over and persuaded to join them.

"As soon as possible he got you behind the wheel--further protection to
himself if he should meet an officer who was straight.  He felt you out
on the subject of a partnership.  And when you met Smiling Lou--well,
this Kenner had decided to take no chance with you. He still had hopes
of pulling you in with them, but he was far from feeling sure of you.
He undoubtedly gave Smiling Lou the cue to make the thing appear an
ordinary case of highjacking while he ditched his whole load so that
there would be no evidence against him if he lost out and you turned
nasty.

"I'm absolutely certain, Casey, that if you had not been along, Smiling
Lou would not have touched that load.  They'd probably have stopped
there for a talk, exchanged news and perhaps perfected future plans,
and parted like two old cronies.  It's possible, of course, that
Smiling Lou might have taken some whisky back with him--if he had
needed it.  Otherwise, I think they split more cash than booze, as a
rule."

Casey sat up.  "Well, they coulda played me for a sucker easy enough,"
he admitted reluctantly.  "An' if it'll be any help to yuh, Mr. Nolan,
I'll say that I never seen the money passed from Kenner to Smilin' Lou,
an' I never seen a bottle unloaded from the car.  I heard 'em yes. An'
I'll say there was a bunch of 'em all right.  But what I SEEN was the
road ahead of me and that car of Smilin' Lou's standin' in the middle
of it.  He had a gun pulled on me, mind yuh--and you can ask anybody if
a feller feels like rubberin' much when there's only the click of a
trigger between him an' a six-foot hole in the ground."

"All the more reason," said Nolan, also sitting up with his hands
clasped around his knees, "why it's important to catch them with the
goods.  You'll have to peddle hootch, Casey, until we get Smiling Lou
and his outfit."

"And where, Mr. Nolan, do I git the booze to peddle?" asked Casey
practically.

Nolan laughed to himself.  "It can be bought," he said, "but I'd rather
not.  Since you've never monkeyed with the stuff, it might make you
conspicuous if you went around buying up a load of hootch. And of
course I can't appear in this thing at all.  But I have what I think is
a very good plan."

Casey looked at him inquiringly, and again Nolan laughed.

"Nothing for it, Casey,--we'll have to locate a still and rob it. That,
or make some of our own, which takes time.  And it's an unpleasant,
messy job anyway."

Casey stared dubiously down into the gulch.  "That'd be fine, Mr.
Nolan, if we knew where was the still.  Or mebby yuh do know."

Mack Nolan shook his head.  "No, I don't, worse luck. I haven't been
long enough in the district to know as much about it as I hope to know
later on.  Prospecting for this headquarters took a little time; and
getting my stuff moved in here secretly took more time.  A week ago,
Casey, I shouldn't have been quite ready to use you.  But you came when
you were needed, and so--I feel sure the White Mule will presently show
up."

Casey lifted his head and stared meditatively out across the immensity
of the empty land around them.

"She's a damn' big country, Mr. Nolan. I dunno," he remarked
doubtfully.  "But Casey Ryan has yet t' go after a thing an' fail t'
git it.  I guess if it's hootch we want, it ought t' be easy enough t'
find; it shore has been hard t' dodge it lately! If yuh want White
Mule, Mr. Nolan, you send Casey out travelin' peaceful an' meanin' harm
t' nobody.  Foller Casey and you'll find 'im tangled up with a mess uh
hootch b'fore he gits ten miles from camp."

"You could go out and highjack some one." Nolan agreed, taking him
seriously--which Casey had not intended.  "I think we'll go down and
load the camp outfit into my car, Ryan, and I'll start you out.  Go up
into your old stamping ground where people know you. If you're careful
in picking your men, you could locate some hootch, couldn't you,
without attracting attention?"

Casey studied the matter.  "Bill Masters could mebby help me out," he
said finally.  "Only I don't like the friends Bill's been wishin' onto
me lately.  This man Kenner, that held me up, knowed Bill Masters
intimate.  I'm kinda losin' my taste fer Bill lately."

Mack Nolan seized upon the clue avidly.  Before Casey quite realized
what he had done, he found himself hustled away from camp in Mack
Nolan's car, headed for Lund in the service of his government. Since
young Kenner had been able to talk so intimately of Bill Masters, Mack
Nolan argued that Bill Masters should likewise be able to give some
useful information concerning young Kenner. Moreover, a man in Bill
Masters' position would probably know at least a few of the hidden
trails of the White Mule near Lund.

"If you can bring back a load of moonshine Ryan, by all means do so,"
Nolan instructed Casey at the last moment.  "Here's money to buy it
with.  We should have enough to make a good haul for Smiling Lou.
Twenty gallons at least--forty, if you can get them. Keep your weather
eye open, and whatever happens, don't mention my name or say that you
are working with the law.  In five days, if you are not here, I shall
drive to Las Vegas.  Get word to me there if anything goes wrong.  Just
write or wire to General Delivery. But I look for you back, Ryan, not
later than Friday midnight. Take no unnecessary risk; this is more
important than you know."

Nolan's crisp tone of authority remained with Casey mile upon mile. And
such was the Casey Ryan driving that midnight found him coasting into
Bill Masters' garage in Lund with the motor shut off and a grin on the
Casey Ryan face.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Mack Nolan had just crawled into his bunk on Wednesday night when he
thought he heard a car laboring up the gulch.  He sat up in bed to
listen and then got hurriedly into his clothes.  He was standing just
around the corner of the dugout where the headlights could not reach
him, when Casey killed the engine and stopped before the door. Steam
was rising in a small cloud from the radiator cap, and the sound of
boiling water was distinctly audible some distance away.

Mack Nolan waited until Casey had climbed out from behind the wheel and
headed for the door.  Then he stepped out and hailed him.  Casey
started perceptibly, whirling as if to face an enemy. When he saw that
it was Nolan he apparently lost his desire to enter the cabin. Instead
he came close to Nolan and spoke in a hoarse whisper.

"We better run 'er under the shed, Mr. Nolan, and drain the darned
radiator.  I dunno am I follered or not, but I was awhile back. But the
man that catches Casey Ryan when he's on the trail an' travelin, has
yet t' be born.  An' you can ask anybody if that ain't so."

Mack Nolan's eyes narrowed.  "And who followed you then?" he asked
quietly. "Did you bring any hootch?"

"Did yuh send Casey Ryan after hootch, or was it mebby spuds er
somethin'?"  Casey retorted with heavy dignity.  "Will yuh pack it in,
Mr. Nolan, whilst I back the car in the shed, or shall I bring it when
I come?  It ain't so much," he added drily,  "but it cost the trouble
of a trainload."

"I'll take it in," said Nolan.  "If any one does come we want no
evidence in reach."

Casey turned to the car, clawed at his camp outfit and lifted out a
demijohn which he grimly handed to Nolan.  "Fer many a mile it rode on
the seat with me so I could drink 'er down if they got me cornered," he
grinned.  "One good swaller is about the size of it, Mr. Nolan."

Nolan grinned in sympathy and turned into the cabin, bearing the
three-gallon, wicker-covered glass bottle in his arms.  Presently he
returned to the doorway and stood there listening down the gulch until
Casey came up, walking from the shed.

"'Tis a good thing yuh left this other car standin' here cold an'
peaceful, Mr. Nolan," Casey, observed, after he also had stood for a
minute listening.  "If they're follerin' they'll be here darn' soon. If
they ain't I've ditched 'em.  Let's git t' bed an' I'll tell yuh my
tale uh woe."

Without a word Nolan led the way into the cabin.  In the dark they
undressed and got into the bed which was luckily wide enough for two.

"Had your supper?" Nolan asked belatedly when they were settled.

"I did not," Casey grunted.  "I will say, Mr. Nolan, there's few times
in my life when you'd see Casey Ryan missin' 'is supper whilst layin'
tracks away from a fight.  But if it was light enough you could gaze
upon 'im now.  And I must hand it t' the Gallopin' Gussie yuh give me
the loan of fer the trip.  She brung me home ahead of the sheriff--and
you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan himself can't be proud uh that!"

"The sheriff?" Nolan's voice was puzzled.  He seemed to be considering
something for a minute, before he spoke again.  "You could have
explained to the sheriff, couldn't you, your reason for having booze in
the car?"

Casey raised to one elbow.  "When yuh told Casey Ryan 'twas not many
men you'd trust, and that you trusted me an' the business was t' be
secret--Mr. Nolan, you 'was talkin' t' CASEY RYAN!" He lay down again
as if that precluded further argument.

"Good! I thought I hadn't made a mistake in my man," Nolan approved, in
a tone that gave Casey an inner glow of pride in himself.  "Let's have
the story, old man.  Did you see Bill Masters?"

"Bill Masters," said Casey grimly, "was not in Lund.  His garage is
sold an' Bill's in Denver--which is a long drive for a Ford t' git
there an' back before Friday midnight.  Yuh put a time limit me, Mr.
Nolan, an' nobody had Bill's address.  I didn't foller Bill t' Denver.
I asked some others in Lund if they knowed a man named Kenner, and they
did not.  So then I went huntin' booze that I could git without the
hull of Nevada knowin' it in fifteen minutes.  An' Casey's got this t'
say: When yuh WANT hootch, it's hard t' find as free gold in granite.
When yuh DON'T want it, it's forced on yuh at the point of a gun.  This
jug I stole--seein' your business is private, Mr. Nolan.

"I grabbed it off some fellers I knowed in Lund an' never had no use
for, anyway.  They're mean enough when they're sober, an' when they're
jagged they're not t' be mentioned on a Sunday.  I mighta paid 'em for
it, but money's no good t' them fellers an' there's no call t' waste
it.  So they made a holler and I sets the jug down an' licks them both,
an' comes along home mindin' my own business.

"So I guess they 'phoned the sheriff in Vegas that here comes a
bootlegger and land 'im quick.  Anyway, I was goin' t' stop there an'
take on a beefsteak an' a few cups uh coffee, but I never done it.  I
was slowin' down in front uh Sam's Place when a friend uh mine gives me
the high sign t' put 'er in high an' keep 'er goin'. Which I done.

"Down by Ladd's, Casey looks back an' here comes the sheriff's car hell
bent fer 'lection (anyway it looked like the sheriff's car). An' I
wanta say right here, Mr. Nolan, that's a darn' good Ford yuh got!  I
was follered, and 'I was follered hard.  But I'm here an' they'
ain't--an' you can ask anybody if that didn't take some going'!"

In the darkness of the cabin Casey turned over and heaved a great sigh.
On the heels of that came a chuckle.

"I got t' hand it t' the L. A. traffic cops, Mr. Nolan.  They shore
learned me a lot about dodgin'.  So now yuh got the hull story. If it
was the sheriff behind me an' if he trails me here, they got no
evidence an' you can mebby square it with 'im.  You'd know what t' tell
'im--which is more'n what Casey Ryan can say."

Casey fell asleep immediately afterward, but Mack Nolan lay for a long
while with his eyes wide open and his ears alert for strange sounds in
the gulch.  He was a new man in this district, working independently of
sheriff's offices.  Casey Ryan was the first man he had confided in;
all others were fair game for Nolan to prove honest or dishonest with
the government.  The very nature of his business made it so.  For when
whisky runners drove openly in broad daylight through the country with
their unlawful loads, somewhere along the line officers of the law were
sharing the profits. Nolan knew none of them,--by sight.  If he carried
the records of some safely memorized and pigeonholed for future use,
that was his own business. Mack Nolan's thoughts were his own and he
guarded them jealously and slept with his lips tightly closed. He
wanted no sheriff coming to him for explanation of his movements.
Wherefore he listened long, and when he slept his slumber was light.

At daylight he was up and abroad.  Two hours after sunrise Casey awoke
with the smell of breakfast in his nostrils.  He rolled over and
blinked at Mack Nolan standing with his hat on the back of his head and
a cigarette between his lips, calmly turning three hot-cakes with a
kitchen knife.  Casey grinned condescendingly.  He himself turned his
cakes by the simple process of tossing them in the air a certain kind
of flip, and catching them dexterously as they came down.  Right there
he decided that Mack Nolan was not after all a real outdoors man.

"Well, the sheriff didn't arrive last night," Nolan observed
cheerfully, when he saw that Casey was awake.  "I don't much look for
him, either.  Your driving on past the turn to Juniper Wells and coming
up that other old road very likely threw him off the track.  You must
have been close to the State line then and he gave you up as a bad job."

"It was a GOOD job!"  Casey maintained reaching for his clothes. "I
made 'em think I was headed clean outa the country.  If they knowed who
it was at all, they'd know I belong in L. A., and I figured they'd
guess I was headed there.  They stopped for something this side of
Searchlight an' so I pulls away from 'em a couple of miles.  They never
seen where I went to."

While he washed for breakfast, Casey began to take stock of certain
minor injuries.

"That darned Pete Gibson has got tushes in his mouth like a wild hawg;
the kind that sticks out," he grumbled, touching certain skinned places
on his knuckles.  "Every time I landed on 'im yesterday I run against
them tushes uh his'n."  But he added with a grin, "They ain't so solid
as they was when I met up with 'im. I felt one of 'em give 'fore I got
through."

"Brings the price of moonshine up a bit, doesn't it?"  Nolan suggested
drily.  "I rather think you might better have paid the men their price.
A fight is well enough in its way--I'm Irish myself.  But as my agent,
Ryan, the main idea is to let the law fight for you.  Our work is
merely to give the law a chance.  I like your not wanting to explain to
the sheriff.  Prohibition officers do not explain, as a rule. The law
behind them does that.

"And since the price seems to be rather hard on the knuckles--" He
glanced down at Casey's hands and grinned.  "--I think it may come
cheaper to make the stuff ourselves.  Licking two men for three
gallons, and getting the officers at your tail light into the bargain,
is all right as an experiment; but I don't believe, Ryan, we ought to
adopt that as a habit."

Casey cocked an eye up at him.  "Did yuh ever make White Mule, Mr.
Nolan?" he asked grimly.

Nolan laughed his easy little chuckle. "Why, no, Ryan, I never did. Did
you?"

"Naw.  I seen some made once, but I had too much of it inside me at the
time to learn the receipt for it.  I'd rather steal it, if it's all the
same to you, Mr. Nolan."  His hand went up to the back of his head and
moved forward, although there was no hat to push. "I've lived honest
all these years--an', dammit, it's kinda tough to break out with
stealin I what yuh don't want!  Couldn't we fill them bottles with
somethin' that LOOKS like hootch?  Cold tea should get by, Mr. Nolan.
It'd be a fine joke on Smilin' Lou."

"A good joke, maybe--but no evidence.  It isn't against the law, Ryan,
to have cold tea in your possession.  No, it's got to be whisky, and
there's got to be a load of it.  Enough to look like business and tempt
him or any other member of the gang you happen to meet.  If they caught
you with three gallons, Casey, they'd probably run you in and feel very
virtuous about it.  Nothing for it, I'm afraid.  We'll have to become
real moonshiners ourselves for awhile."

Casey ate with less appetite after that.  Making moonshine did not
appeal to him at all.  Given his choice, I think he would even prefer
drinking it, unhappy as the effect had been on him.

"We'll need a still, and we'll need the stuff.  I'm going to leave you
in charge of the camp, Ryan, while I make a trip to Needles. I'll
deputize you to assist me in cleaning up this district. And this
district, Ryan, touches salt water.  So if revenge looks good to you,
you'll have a fine chance to get even with the bootleggers.  And in the
meantime, just kill time around camp here while I'm gone.  If any one
shows up, you're prospecting."

That day, doubt-devils took hold of Casey Ryan and plucked at his
belief.  How did he know that Mack Nolan wasn't another bootlegger,
wanting to rope Casey in on a job for some fell purpose of his own?  He
had Mack Nolan's word and nothing more. For that matter, he had also
had young Kenner's word.  Kenner had fooled him completely.  Mack Nolan
could also fool him--perhaps.

"Well, anyhow, he never claimed to know Bill Masters, and that's a
point in 'is favor.  And if it's some dirty work he's up to, he coulda
made it shorter than what he's doin'.  An' if he's double-crossin'
Casey Ryan--well, anyway, Casey Ryan 'll be present at the time an'
place when he does it!"

Upon that comforting thought, Casey decided to trust Mack Nolan until
he caught him playing crooked; and proceeded to kill time as best he
could.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

It was noon the next day when Nolan returned, and he did not explain
why he was eighteen hours overdue.  Casey eyed him expectantly, but
Nolan's manner was brisk and preoccupied.

"Help me unload this stuff, Ryan," he said, "and put it out of sight in
the cellar.  We won't have to go through the process of making
moonshine, after all."

Casey looked into the car, pulling aside the tarp.  Four kegs he
counted, and lifted out one.

"An' how many did YOU lick, Mr. Nolan?" he grinned over his shoulder as
he started for the door.

Nolan laughed noncommittally.

"Perhaps I'm luckier at picking my bootleggers," he retorted. "If you
carry the right brand of bluff, you can keep the skin on your knuckles,
Ryan.  This beats making it, at any rate."

That afternoon and the next day, Casey Ryan did what he never dreamed
was possible.  With Mack Nolan to show him how, Casey performed
miracles.  While he did not, literally change water into wine, he did
give forty-three gallons of White Mule a most imposing pedigree.

He turned kegs of crude, moonshine whisky into Canadian Club, Garnkirk,
Tom Pepper, Three Star Hennessey and Cognac--if you were to believe the
bottles, labels and government seals.  Under Mack Nolan's instruction
and with his expert assistance, the forgery was perfect.  While the
cellar reeked with the odor of White Mule when they had finished, the
bottled array on the table whispered of sybaritic revelings to glisten
the eyes of the most dissipated man about town.

"When it's as easy done as that, Mr. Nolan, the feller's a fool that
drinks it.  You've learnt Casey Ryan somethin' that mighta done 'im
some good a few years back."  He picked up a flat, pint bottle and
caressed its label with reminiscent finger tips.

"Many's the time me an' old Tommy Pepper drove stage together," he
mused.  "Throwed 'im at a bear once that I met in the trail over in
Colorado when I hadn't no gun on me.  Busted a pint on his nose--man!
Then I never waited to see what happened. I was a wild divil them days
when me an' Tommy Pepper was side pardners. But a yaller snake with a
green head crawled out of a bottle of 'im once--and that there was
where Casey Ryan says good-by to booze. If I hadn't quit 'im then, I'd
sure as hell quit 'im now. After this performance, Mr. Nolan, Casey
Ryan's goin' to look twice into his coffee pot.  I wouldn't believe in
cow's milk, if I done the milkin' myself!"

"Most of the stuff that's peddled nowadays is doctored,"  Nolan
replied, with the air of one who knows.  "When it isn't White Mule,
it's likely to be something worse.  That's one of the chief reasons why
I'm fighting it.  If they only peddled decent whisky it wouldn't be so
bad, Ryan.  But it's rank poison.  I've seen so many go stone blind--or
die--that it makes me pretty savage sometimes.  So now I'll coach you
in the part you're to play as hootch runner; and to-morrow you can
start for Los Angeles."

Casey did not answer.  He felt absently for his pipe, filled and
lighted it and went out to sit on the doorstep in gloomy meditation
while he smoked.

Returning to Los Angeles, even without a bootlegger's load, was not a
matter which Casey liked to contemplate.  He would have to face the
Little Woman if he went back; either as a deliberate liar, who lied to
his wife to gain the freedom he might have had without resorting to
deceit, or as the victim once more of crooks.  Casey thought he would
prefer the accusation of lying deliberately to the Little Woman, though
it made him squirm to think of it.  He wished she had not openly
taunted him with getting into trouble and needing her always to get him
out.

He would like to tell her that he was now working for the government.
The secrecy of his mission, the danger it involved, would impress even
her amused cynicism.  But the very secrecy of his mission in itself
made it impossible for him to tell her anything about it. Casey would
not admit it, but it was a real disappointment to him that he could not
wear a star on his coat.

All that day and evening he was glum, a strange mood for Casey Ryan.
But if Mack Nolan noticed his silence, he gave no sign. Nolan himself
was wholly absorbed by the business in hand.  The success of this plan
meant a good deal to him, and he told Casey so very frankly; which
lightened Casey's gloom perceptibly.

Casey was to drive to Los Angeles--even to San Diego if necessary--and
return within a week, unless Nolan's hopes were fulfilled and Casey was
held up and highjacked.  If he were apprehended by officers who were
honestly discharging their duty, Casey was to do thus-and-so, and
presently be free to drive on with his load.  If he were highjacked
(Casey gritted his teeth and said he hoped the highjacker would be
Smiling Lou), he was to permit himself to be robbed, worm himself as
far as possible into their confidence and return for further orders.

If Mack Nolan should chance to be absent from the cabin, then Casey was
to wait until he returned.  And Nolan intimated that hereafter the
making of moonshine might be a part of Casey's duties. Then, without
warning, Mack Nolan struck at the heart of Casey's worry.

"I don't want to dictate to any man in family affairs, Ryan. But I've
got to speak of one other matter," he said diffidently. "I suppose
naturally you'll want to go home and let your wife know you're still
alive, anyway.  But if you can manage to keep your present business a
secret for the time being, I think you'd better do it.  You said you
were planning to be away on a trip for some time, I remember.  If you
can just let it go that way, or say that you are prospecting over here,
I wish you would. Think you can manage that all right?"

"I'd rather manage a six-horse team of bronk mules," Casey admitted.
"But after the way the missus thinks I lied to 'er about takin' the
next train home from Barstow, anything I say 'll be used agin' me. My
wife's got brains.  She ain't put it down that the trains have quit
runnin'.  Accordin' to her figures, Casey's lied and he's in a hole
again, an' it'll be up to her an' Jack to run windlass an' pull 'im
out.  Don't matter what I say she won't believe me anyhow--so Casey
won't say nothin'.  Can't lie with your mouth shut, can yuh?"

"Oh, yes, it's been done," Mack Nolan chuckled.  "Now we'll set down
the serial numbers and the bank name of this 'jack',--and here's your
expense money separate.  And if there's anything that isn't clear to
you, Ryan, speak up.  You won't hear from me again, probably, until
you're back from this fishing trip."

Casey thought that everything was perfectly clear, and rashly he said
so, as he started off.

From Barstow to Victorville, from Victorville to Camp Cajon Casey drove
expectantly, hoping to meet Smiling Lou.  He scanned each car that
approached and slowed for every meeting like a searching party or a man
who is lost and wishes to inquire the way.  His pace would have been
law-abiding in Los Angeles at five o'clock on Broadway between Fourth
and Eighth streets.  Goggled women tourists eyed him curiously, and one
car stopped full to see what he wanted. But his "Tom Pepper" rode safe
under the tarp behind him, and the "Three Star Hennessey" beaded
daintily with the joggling it got, and Casey was neither halted nor
questioned as he passed.

At Camp Cajon Casey stopped and cooked an early supper, because the
summer crowd was there and a real bootlegger would have considered
stopping rather unsafe.  Casey boiled coffee over one of the camp
fireplaces and watched furtively the sunburned holiday group nearest.
He placed his supper on one of the round, cement tables near the car,
and every man who passed that way Casey watched unblinkingly while he
ate.

He succeeded in making three different parties swallow their supper in
a hurry and pack up and leave, glancing back uneasily at Casey as they
drove away.  But Casey himself was unmolested, and no one asked about
his load.

From Camp Cajon to San Bernardino Casey drove furiously, remembering
young Kenner's desire for speed.  He stopped there for the night, and
nearly had a fight with the garage man where he put up, because he
showed undue caution concerning the safety of his car from prowlers
during the night.

He left the car there that day and returned furtively after dark,
asking the night man if he had seen any saps around his car. The night
man looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"I dunno--nothin's been picked up since I come on at six.  We ain't
responsible for lost articles, anyway.  See that sign?"

Casey grunted, cranked up and drove away, wondering whether the night
man was as innocent as he tried to act.

From San Bernardino to Los Angeles Casey drove placidly as a load of
oranges in February.  He put up at a cheap place on San Pedro Street,
with his car in the garage next door and a five-dollar tip in the palm
of a rat-faced mechanic with Casey's injunction to clean 'er dingbats
and keep other people away.

He did not go out to see the Little Woman, after all.  He had sent her
a wire from Goffs the day before, saying that he was prospecting with a
fellow and he hoped she was well.  This, after long pondering, had
seemed to him the easiest way out of an argument with the Little Woman.
The wire had given no address whereby she might reach him, but the
omission was not the oversight Casey hoped she would consider it.  He
wanted to be reassuring without starting anything.

Los Angeles with no Little Woman at his elbow was a dismal hole, and
Casey got out of it as soon as possible.  As per instructions, he drove
down to San Diego, ventured perilously close to the Mexico line, fooled
around there for a day looking for trouble, failed to find so much as a
frown and drove back.

He headed straight for San Bernardino, which was Smiling Lou's
headquarters.  He killed time there and met the sheriff on the street
the day he arrived.  The sheriff had a memory trained to hold faces
indefinitely.  He smiled a little, made a polite gesture in the general
direction of his hat and passed on.  Casey swore to himself and
resolved to duck guiltily around the nearest corner if he saw the
sheriff coming his way again.

On the day when his time limit expired Casey drove up the gulch to
Nolan's camp.  In the car behind him rode undisturbed his Canadian
Club, Garnkirk, Three-Star Hennessey, Cognac and Tom Pepper; bottles,
labels, government seals and all.  Nolan was walking over from the
tunnel when Casey arrived.  He smiled inquiringly as he shook hands,--a
ceremony to which Casey was plainly unaccustomed.

"What luck, Ryan?  I beat you back by about two hours.  Getting things
ready to begin making it. Did they catch you all right?"

"Naw!" Casey spat disgustedly.  "Never seen a booze peddler, never seen
a cop look my way.  I went around actin' like I just killed a man an'
stole a lady's diamonds, and the sheriff at San Berdoo TIPS 'IS HAT TO
ME, by golly!  Drove through L. A. hella-whoopin' an' not a darned
traffic cop knowed it was Casey Ryan.  You can ask anybody if I didn't
do every thing possible to git in bad or give bootleggers a tip I was
one of 'em.

"You can't git Casey Ryan up agin' the gang you're after, Mr. Nolan.
Only way Casey Ryan can git up agin' the law is to go along peaceable
tryin' to please the missus an' mindin' his own business.  I coulda
peddled that damn' hootch on a hangin' tray like circus lemonade. I
coulda stood on the corner in any uh them damned towns with the hull
works piled out on a table in front of me, an' I coulda hollered my
damn' head off; an' Smilin' Lou woulda passed me by like I was sellin'
chewin' gum and shoe strings."

Mack Nolan looked at Casey, turned and went into the cabin, sat down on
the edge of the bed and laughed until the tears dripped over his
lashes.  Casey Ryan followed him, and sat on the edge of the table with
his arms folded.  Whenever Mack Nolan lifted his face from his palms
and looked at Casey, Casey swore.  Whereat Mack Nolan would give
another whoop.

You can't wonder if relations were somewhat strained, between them for
the rest of that day.



CHAPTER NINETEEN

Nature had made Casey Ryan an optimist.  The blood of Ireland had made
him pugnacious.  And Mack Nolan had a way with him. Wherefore, Casey
Ryan once more came larruping down the grade to Camp Cajon and turned
in there with a dogged purpose in his eyes and with his jaw set
stubbornly.  History has it that whenever Casey Ryan gets that look in
his face, the man underneath might just as well holler and crawl out;
because holler he must, before Casey would ever let him up.

Behind him, stowed under the bedding, grub and camp dishes, rode his
eight cases of bootlegger's bait, packed convincingly in the sawdust,
straw and cardboard of the wet old days when Uncle Sam himself O. K.'d
the job.  A chain of tiny beads at the top of each bottle lied and said
it was good liquor.  The boxes themselves said, "This side up"--when
any side up would thrill the soul of the man who owned a wet appetite
and a dry throat.

It was a good job Mack Nolan had made of the bottling.  Uncle Sam
himself must needs polish his spectacles and take another look to
detect the fraud.  It was a marvelous job of bottling,--and the proof
lay only in the drinking.  "Tommy" Pepper rode in pint flasks designed
to slip safely into a man's coat pocket.  Beside him two cases of
Canadian Club (if you were satisfied with the evidence of your eyes)
sat serene in round-shouldered bottles--conventional, secure in its
reputation.  Cognac and Garnkirk, a case for each, rode in tall, slim
bottles with no shoulders at all.  Plumper than they, Three Star
Hennessey sat smugly waiting until the joke was turned upon its victim.
A tempting load it was, to men of certain minds and morals.  Casey
grinned sardonically when he thought of it.

Casey drove deep into the grove of sycamores and made camp there, away
from the chattering picnic parties at the cement tables. By Mack
Nolan's advice he was adopting a slightly different policy. He no
longer shunned his fellow men or glared suspiciously when strangers
approached.  Instead he was very nearly the old Casey Ryan, except that
he failed to state his name and business to all and sundry with the old
Casey Ryan candor, but instead avoided the subject altogether or evaded
questions with vague generalities.

But as an understudy for Ananias, Casey Ryan would have been a failure.
In two hours or less he had made easy trail acquaintance with six
different men, and he had unconsciously managed to vary his vague
account of himself six different times.  Wherefore he was presently
asked cautiously concerning his thirst.

"They's times," said Casey, hopefully lowering an eyelid, "when a
feller dassent take a nip, no matter how thirsty he gits."

The questioner stared at him for a minute and slowly nodded. "You're
darn' right," he assented.  "I scursely ever touch anything, myself."
And he added vaguely, "Quite a lot of it peddled out here in this camp,
I guess.  Tourists comin' through are scared to pack it themselves--but
they sure don't overlook any chances to take a snort."

"Yeah?"  Casey cocked a knowing eye at the speaker.  "They must pay a
pretty fair price fer it, too.  Don't the cops bother folks none?"

"Some--I guess."

Casey filled his pipe and offered his tobacco sack to the man. The
fellow took it, nodding listless thanks, and filled his own pipe. The
two sat down together on the knee of a deformed sycamore and smoked in
circumspect silence.

"Arizona, I see."  The man nodded toward the license plates on Casey's
car.

"Uh-huh."  Casey glanced that way.  "Know a man name of Kenner?" He
asked abruptly.

The fellow looked at Casey sidelong, without turning his head.

"Some. Do you?"

"Some."  Casey felt that he was making headway, though it was a good
deal like playing checkers with the king row wide open and only two
crowned heads to defend his men.

"Friend uh yours?"  The fellow turned his head and looked straight at
Casey.

Casey returned him a pale, straight-lidded stare.  The man's glance
flickered and swung away.

"Who wants to know?"  Casey asked calmly.

"Oh, you can call me Jim Cassidy.  I just asked."  He removed his pipe
from his mouth and inspected it apathetically.  "He's a friend of Bill
Masters, garage man up at Lund.  Know Bill?"

"Any man says I don't, you can call 'im a liar."  Casey also inspected
his pipe.  "Bought that car off'n Kenner,"  Casey added boldly. Getting
into trouble, he discovered, carried almost the thrill of trying to
keep out of it.

"Yeah?"  The self-styled Jim Cassidy looked at the Ford more
attentively.  "And contents?"

Casey snorted.  "What do you know about goats, if anything?" he asked
mysteriously.

Jim Cassidy eyed Casey sidelong through a silence.  Then he brought his
palm down flat on his thigh and laughed.

"You pass," he stated, with a relieved sigh. "He's a dinger, ain't he?"

"You know 'im, all right." Casey also laughed and put out his hand. "If
you're a friend of Kenner's, shake hands with Casey Ryan!  He's damned
glad to meet yuh--an' you can ask anybody if that ain't the truth."

After that the acquaintance progressed more smoothly.  By the time
Casey spread his bed close alongside the car--he knew just how much
booze Jim Cassidy carried, just what Cassidy expected to make off the
load, and a good many other bits of information of no particular use to
Casey.

A strange, inner excitement held Casey awake long after Jim Cassidy was
asleep snoring.  He lay looking up into the leafy branches of the
sycamore beside him and watched a star slip slowly across an open space
between the branches.  Farther up the grove a hilarious group of young
hikers sang snatches of songs to the uncertain accompaniment of a
ukelele.  A hundred feet away on his right, occasional cars went
coasting past on the down grade, coming in off the desert, or climbed
more slowly with motors working, on their way up from the valley below.
The shifting brilliance from their headlights flicked the grove
capriciously as they went by. Now and then a car stopped.  One, a big,
high-powered car with one dazzling spotlight swung into the narrow
driveway and entered the grove.

Casey lifted his head like a desert turtle and blinked curiously at the
car as it eased past him a few feet and stopped.  A gloved hand went
out to the spotlight and turned it slowly, lighting the grove foot by
foot and pausing to dwell upon each silent, parked car. Casey sat up in
the blankets and waited.

Luck, he told himself, was grinning at him from ear to ear.  For this
was Smiling Lou himself, and none other.  He was alone,--a big, hungry,
official fish searching the grove greedily.  Casey swallowed a grin and
tried to look scared.  The light was slowly working around in his
direction.

I don't suppose Casey Ryan had ever looked really scared in his life.
His face simply refused to wear so foreign an expression. Therefore,
when the spotlight finally revealed him, Casey blinked against it with
a half-hearted grin, as if he had been caught at something foolish.
The light remained upon him, and Smiling Lou got out of the car and
came back to him slowly.

Not even Casey thought of calling Smiling Lou a fool.  He couldn't be
and play the game he was playing.  Smiling Lou said nothing whatever
until he had looked the car over carefully (giving the license number a
second sharp glance) and had regarded Casey fixedly while he made up
his mind.

"Hullo!  Where's your pardner?" he demanded then.

"I'm in pardnerships with myself this trip," Casey retorted. He waited
while Smiling Lou looked him over again, more carefully this time.

"Where did you get that car?"

"From Kenner--for sixteen-hundred and seventeen dollars and five
cents."  Casey fumbled in the blankets--Smiling Lou following his
movements suspiciously--and got out the makings of a cigarette.

"Got any booze in that car?"  Smiling Lou might have been a traffic
cop, for all the trace of humanity there was in his voice.

Casey cocked an eye up at him, sent a quick glance toward the Ford, and
looked back into Smiling Lou's face.  He hunched his shoulders and
finished the making of his cigarette.

"I wisht you wouldn't look," he said glumly.  "I got half my outfit in
there an' I hate to have it tore up."

Smiling Lou continued to look at him, seeming slightly puzzled. But
indecision was not one of his characteristics, evidently. He stepped up
to the car, pulled a flashlight from his pocket and looked in.

Casey was up and into his clothes by the time Smiling Lou had uncovered
a box or two.  Smiling Lou turned toward him, his lips twitching.

"Lift this stuff out of here and put it in my car," he commanded,
elation creeping into his voice in spite of himself.  "My Lord! The
chances you fellows take!  Think a dab of paint is going to cover up a
brand burnt into the wood?"

Casey looked startled, glancing down into the car to where Smiling Lou
pointed.

"The boards is turned over on all the rest," he muttered
confidentially.  "I dunno how that darned Canadian Club sign got right
side up."

"What all have you got?"  Smiling Lou lowered his voice when he asked
the question.  Casey tried not to grin when he replied. Smiling Lou
gasped,

"Well, get it into my car, and make it snappy."

Casey made it as snappy as he could, and kept his face straight until
Smiling Lou spoke to him sharply.

"I won't take you in to-night with me.  I want that car.  You drive it
into headquarters first thing in the morning.  And don't think you can
beat it, either.  I'll have the road posted.  You can knock a good deal
off your sentence if you crank up and come in right after breakfast.
And make it an early breakfast, too."

His manner was stern, his voice perfectly official.  But Casey, eyeing
him grimly, saw distinctly the left eyelid lower and lift again.

"All right--I'm the goat," he surrendered and sat down again on his
canvas-covered bed.  He did not immediately crawl between the blankets,
however, because interesting things were happening over at Jim
Cassidy's car.

Casey watched Jim Cassidy go picking his way amongst the tree roots and
camp litter, his back straightened under the load of hootch he was
carrying to Smiling Lou's car.  With Jim Cassidy also, Smiling Lou was
crisply official.  When the last of the hootch had been transferred,
Casey heard Smiling Lou tell Jim Cassidy to drive in to headquarters
after breakfast next morning--but he did not see Smiling Lou wink when
he said it.

After that, Smiling Lou started his motor and drove slowly up through
the grove, halting to scan each car as he passed.  He swung out through
the upper driveway, turned sharply there and came back down the highway
speeding up on the downhill grade to San Bernardino.

Jim Cassidy came furtively over and settle down for a whispered
conference on Casey's bed.

"How much did he get off'n YOU?" he asked inquisitively.  "Did he clean
yuh out?"

"Clean as a last year's bone in a kioty den," Casey declared, hiding
his satisfaction as best he could.  "Never got my roll though."

"He wouldn't--not with you workin' on the inside.  Guess it must be
kinda touchy around here right now.  New officers, mebby. He wouldn't
a' cleaned us out if we'd a' been safe.  He never came into camp
before--not when I've been here.  Made that same play to you, didn't
he--about givin' yourself up in the morning?  Uh course yuh know what
that means--DON'T!"

"He shore is foxy, all right," Casey commented with absolute sincerity.
"You can ask anybody if he didn't pull it off like the pleasure was all
his'n.  No L. A. traffic cop ever pinched me an I looked like he
enjoyed it more."

"Oh, Lou's cute, all right.  They don't any of 'em put anything over on
Lou.  You must be new at the business, ain't yuh?"

"Second trip," Casey informed him with an air of importance--which he
really felt, by the way.  "What Casey's studyin' on now, is the next
move.  No use hangin' around here empty.  What do YOU figger on doin'?"

"Well, Lou didn't give no tip--not to me, anyway.  So I guess it'll be
safe to drive on in to the city and load up again.  I got a feller with
me--he caught a ride in to San Berdoo; left just before you drove in.
Know where to go in the city?  'Cause I can ride in with you, an' let
him foller."

"That'll suit me fine," Casey declared.  And so they left it for the
time being, and Cassidy went back to bed.

A great load had dropped from Casey's shoulders, and he was asleep
before Jim Cassidy had ceased to turn restlessly in his blankets.
Getting the White Mule out of his car and into the car of Smiling Lou
had been the task which Nolan had set for him. What was to happen
thereafter Casey could only guess, for Nolan had not told him. And such
was the Casey Ryan nature that he made no attempt to solve the problems
which Mack Nolan had calmly reserved for himself.

He did not dream, for instance, that Mack Nolan had watched him load
the stuff into Smiling Lou's car.  He did know that an unobtrusive
Cadillac roadster was parked at the next campfire. It had come in half
an hour behind him, but the driver had not made any move toward camping
until after dark.  Casey had glanced his way when the car was parked
and the driver got out and began fussing around the car, but he had not
been struck with any sense of familiarity in the figure.

There was no reason why he should.  Thousands and thousands of men are
of Mack Nolan's height and general build.  This man looked like a
doctor or a dentist perhaps.  Beyond the matter of size, similarity to
Mack Nolan ceased.  The Cadillac man wore a vandyke beard and colored
glasses, and a panama and light gray business suit.  Casey set him down
in his mental catalog as "some town feller" and assumed that they had
nothing in common.

Yet Mack Nolan heard nearly every word spoken by Smiling Lou, Casey and
Jim Cassidy.  (Readers are so inquisitive about these things that I
felt I ought to tell you--else you'll be worrying as hard as Casey Ryan
did later on.  I'm soft-hearted, myself; I never like to worry a reader
more than is absolutely necessary. So I'm letting you in, hoping you'll
get an added kick out of Casey's further maneuvers).

The Cadillac car, I should explain, was only one of Mack Nolan's little
secrets.  There is a very good garage at Goffs, not many miles from
Juniper Wells.  A matter of an hour's driving was sufficient at any
time for Mack Nolan to make the exchange. And no man at Goffs would
think it very strange that the owner of a Cadillac should prefer to
drive a Ford over rough, desert trails to his prospect in the
mountains.  Mack Nolan, as I have told you before, had a way with him.



CHAPTER TWENTY

With a load of booze in the car and Jim Cassidy by his side, Casey Ryan
drove down the long, eucalyptus-shaded avenue that runs past the
balloon school at Arcadia and turned into the Foothill Boulevard.  Half
a mile farther on a Cadillac roadster honked and slid past them,
speeding away toward Monrovia.  But Casey Ryan was busy talking
chummily with Jim Cassidy, and he scarcely knew that a car had passed.

The money he had been given for Smiling Lou had been used to pay for
this new load of whisky, and Casey found himself wishing that he could
get word of it to Mack Nolan.  Still, Nolan's oversight in the matter
of arranging for communication between them did not bother Casey much.
He was doing his part; if Mack Nolan failed to do his, that was no
fault of Casey Ryan's.

At Fontana, where young Kenner had stopped for gas on that eventful
first trip of Casey's, Casey slowed down also, for the same purpose,
half tempted to call up the Little Woman on long distance while the gas
tank was being filled.  But presently the matter went clean from his
mind--and this was the reason:

A speed cop whose motorcycle stood inconspicuously around the corner of
the garage, came forward and eyed the Ford sharply.  He drew his little
book from his pocket, turned a few leaves, found what he was looking
for and eyed again the car.  The garage man, slowly turning the crank
of the gasoline pump, looked at him inquiringly; but the speed cop
ignored the look and turned to Casey.

"Where'd you get this car?" he demanded, in much the same tone which
Smiling Lou had used the night before.

"Bought it," Casey told him gruffly.

"Where did you buy it?"

"Over at Goffs, just this side of Needles."

"Got a bill of sale?"

"You got Casey Ryan's word fer it," Casey retorted, with a growing heat
inside, where he kept his temper when he wasn't using it.

"Are you Casey Ryan?"  The speed cop's eyes hardened just a bit.

"Anybody says I ain't, you send 'em to me--an' then come around in
about ten minutes an' look 'em over."

"What's YOUR name?"  The officer turned to Jim Cassidy.

"Tom Smith.  I was just ketchin' a ride with this feller.  Don't go an'
mix ME in--I ain't no ways concerned; just ketchin' a ride is all. If
I'd 'a' knowed--"

"You can explain that to the judge.  Get in there, you, and drive in to
San Berdoo.  I'll be right with you, so you needn't forget the road!"
He stepped back to his motorcycle and pushed it forward.

"Hey!  Don't I git paid fer my gas?" the garage man wailed, pulling a
dripping nozzle from Casey's gas tank.

"Aw, go tahell!" Casey grunted, and threw a wadded bank note in his
direction.  "Take that an' shut up.  What yuh cryin' around about a
gallon uh gas, fer?  YOU ain't pinched!"

The money landed near the motorcycle and the officer picked it up,
smoothed out the bill, glanced at it and looked through tightened lids
at Casey.

"Throwin' money around like a hootch-runner!" he sneered.  "I guess you
birds need lookn' after, all right.  Git goin'!"

Casey "got going."  Twice on the way in the officer spurted up
alongside and waved him down for speeding.  Casey had not intended to
speed, either.  He was merely keeping pace unconsciously with his
thoughts.

He had been told just what he must do if he were arrested for
bootlegging, but he was not at all certain that his instructions would
cover an arrest for stealing an automobile.  Nolan had forgotten about
that, he guessed.  But Casey's optimism carried him jauntily to jail in
San Bernardino, and while he was secretly a bit uneasy, he was not half
so worried as Jim Cassidy appeared to be.

Casey was booked--along with "Tom Smith"--on two charges: theft of one
Ford car, motor number so-and-so, serial number this-and-that, model,
touring, year, whatever-it-was.  And, unlawful transportation of
spirituous liquor.  He tried to give the judge the wink, but without
any happy result.  So he eventually found himself locked in a cell with
Jim Cassidy.

Just at first, Casey Ryan was proud of the part he was playing. He
could look with righteous toleration upon the limpness of his fellow
prisoner.  He could feel secure in the knowledge that he, Casey Ryan,
was an agent of the government engaged in helping to uphold the laws of
his country.

He waited for an hour or two, listening with a superior kind of
patience to Jim Cassidy's panicky unbraidings of his luck.  At first
Jim was inclined to blame Casey rather bitterly for the plight he was
in.  But Casey soon stopped that.  Young Kenner was the  responsible
party in this mishap, as Casey very soon made plain to Jim.

"Well, I dunno but what you're right.  It WAS kind of a dirty
trick--workin' a stole car off onto you.  Why didn't he pick some
sucker on the outside?  Don't line up with Kenner, somehow. Well, I
guess mebby Smilin' Lou can see us out uh this hole all right--only I
don't like that car-stealin' charge.  Mebby Kenner an' Lou can
straighten it up, though."

Casey wondered if they could.  He wondered, too, how Nolan was going to
find out about Smiling Lou getting the camouflaged White Mule. Nolan
had not explained that to Casey--but Casey was not worrying yet.  His
faith in Mack Nolan was firm.

Came bedtime, however, with no sign of official favor toward Casey
Ryan.  Casey began to wonder.  But probably, he consoled himself with
thinking, they meant to wait until Jim Cassidy was asleep before they
turned Casey loose.  He lay on the hard bunk and waited hopefully,
listening to the stertorous breathing of Jim Cassidy, who had forgotten
his troubles in sleep.



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

At noon the next day Casey was still waiting--but not hopefully.
"Patience on a monument" couldn't have resembled Casey Ryan in any
particular whatever.  He was mad.  By midnight he had begun to wonder
if he was not going to be made a goat again.  By daylight, he was
positive that he was already a goat.  By the time the trusty brought
his breakfast, Casey was applying to Mack Nolan the identical words and
phrases which he had applied to young Kenner when he was the maddest.
Don't ask me to tell you what they were.

Jim Cassidy still clung desperately to his faith in Smiling Lou; but
Casey's faith hadn't so much as a finger-hold on anything. What kind of
a government was it, he asked himself bitterly, that would leave a
trusted agent twenty-four hours shut up in a cell with a whining crook
like Jim Cassidy?  If, he added pessimistically, he were an agent of
the government.  Casey doubted it.  So far as he could see, Casey Ryan
wasn't anything but the goat.

His chief desire now was to get out of there as soon as possible so
that he could hunt up Mack Nolan and lick the livin' tar wit of him--or
worse.  He wanted bail and he wanted it immediately. Not a soul bad
come near him, save the trusty, in spite of certain mysterious messages
which Casey had sent to the office, asking for an interview with the
judge or somebody; Casey didn't care who. Locked in a cell, how was he
going to do any of the things Nolan had told him to do if he happened
to find himself arrested by an honest officer?

When they hauled him before the police judge, Casey hadn't been given
the chance to explain anything to anybody.  Unless, of course, he
wanted to beller out his business before everybody; and that, he told
himself fiercely, was not Casey Ryan's idea of the way to keep a
secret.  Moreover, that damned speed cop was standing right there, just
waiting for a chance to wind his fingers in Casey's collar and choke
him off if he tried to say a word.  And how the hell, Casey would like
to know, was a man going to explain himself when he couldn't get a word
in edgeways?

So Casey wanted bail.  There were just two ways of getting it, and it
went against the grain of his pride to take either one. That is why
Casey waited until noon before his Irish stubbornness yielded a bit and
he decided to wire me to come.  He had to slip the wire out by the
underground method--meaning the good will of the trusty.  It cost Casey
ten dollars, but he didn't grudge that.

He spent that afternoon and most of the night mentally calling the
trusty a liar and a thief because there was no reply to the message. As
a matter of fact, the trusty sent the wire through as quickly as
possible and the fault was mine if any one's.  I was too busy hurrying
to the rescue to think about sending Casey word that I was coming.
Casey said afterwards that my thoughtlessness would be cured for life
if I were ever locked in jail and waiting for news.

As it happened, I wired the Little Woman that Casey was in jail again,
and caught the first train to San "Berdoo"--coming down by way of
Barstow.  I could save two or three hours that way, I found, so I told
the Little Woman to meet me there and bring all the money she could get
her hands on.  Not knowing just what Casey was in for this time, it
seemed well to be prepared for a good, stiff bail.  She beat me by
several hours, and between us we had ten thousand dollars.

At that it was a fool's errand.  Casey was out of jail and gone before
either of us arrived.  So there we were, holding the bag, as you might
say, and our ten thousand dollars' bail money.

"It's no use asking questions, Jack," the Little Woman told me
pensively when we had finished our salad in the best cafe in town, and
were waiting for the fish.  "I've asked questions of every uniform in
this town, from the district judge down to the courthouse janitor.
Nobody knows a thing.  I DID find that Casey was booked yesterday for
having a stolen car and a load of booze in his possession, but he isn't
in jail--or if he is, they're keeping him down in some dungeon and have
thrown away the key. It was hinted in the police court that he was
dismissed for want of evidence; but they wouldn't SAY anything, and so
there you are!"

We finished our fish in a thoughtful silence.  Then, when the waiter
had removed the plates, the Little Woman looked at me with a twinkle in
her eyes.

"Well-sir, there's something I want to tell you, Jack.  I believe Casey
has put this town on the run.  They can't tell ME! Something's
happened, over around the courthouse.  A lot of the men I talked with
had a scared look in their eyes, and they were nervous when doors
opened, and looked around when people came walking along.  I don't know
what he's been doing--but Casey Ryan's been up to something. You can't
tell ME!  I know how our laundry boy looks when Casey's home."

"And didn't you get any line at all on his whereabouts?" I asked her.
Given three hours the start of me, I knew perfectly well that the
Little Woman had found out all there was to know about Casey.

"Well-sir--I've got this to go on," the Little Woman drawled and held a
telegram across the table.  "You'll notice that was sent from Goffs.
It's ten days old, but I've been getting ready ever since it arrived.
I've put Babe in a boarding-school, and I leased the apartment house.
I kept three dressmakers ruining their eyes with nightwork, Jack,
making up some nifty sports clothes.  If Casey's bound to stay in the
desert--well, I'm his wife--and Casey does kind of like to have me
around.  You can't tell ME.

"So I've got the twin-six packed with the niftiest camp outfit you ever
saw, Jack.  I've got a yellow and red beach umbrella, and two reclining
chairs, and--well-sir, I'm going to rough it de luxe.  I don't expect
to keep Casey in hand--I happen to know him.  But it's just possible,
Jack, that I can keep him in sight!"

Of course I told her--as I've told her often enough before--that she
was a brick.  I added that I would go along, if she liked; which she
did.  Not even the Little Woman should ever attempt to drive across the
Mojave alone.

We started out as soon as we had finished the meal.  A Cadillac
roadster came up behind us and honked for clear passing as we swung
into the long, straight stretch that leads up the Cajon. The Little
Woman peered into the rear vision mirror and pressed the toe of her
white pump upon the accelerator.

"There's only one man in the world that can pass ME on the road," the
Little Woman drawled, "and he doesn't wear a panama!"

As we snapped around the turns of Cajon Grade, I looked back once or
twice.  The Cadillac roadster was still following pertinaciously, but
it was too far back to honk at us.  When we slid down to the
Victorville garage and stopped for gas, the Cadillac slid by. The
driver in the panama gave us one glance through his colored glasses,
but I felt, somehow, that the glance was sufficiently comprehensive to
fix us firmly in his memory.  I inquired at the garage concerning Casey
Ryan, taking it for granted he would be driving a Ford.  A man of that
description had stopped at the garage for gas that forenoon, the boy
told me. About nine o'clock, I learned from further questioning.

"Well-sir, that gives him five hours the start," the Little Woman
remarked, as she eased in the clutch and slid around the corner into
the highway to Barstow.  "But you can't tell me I can't run down a Ford
with this car.  I know to the last inch what a Jawn Henry is good for.
I drove one myself, remember.  Now we'll see."



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

At Dagget, the big, blue car with a lady driver sounded the warning
signal and passed Mack Nolan and the Cadillac roadster. Like Casey
Ryan, Nolan is rather proud of his driving, and with sufficient reason.
He was already hurrying, not to overhaul Casey, but to arrive soon
after him.

Women drivers loved to pass other cars with a sudden spurt of speed, he
had found by experience.  They were not, however, consistently fast
drivers.  Mack Nolan was conscious of a slight irritation when the
twin-six took the lead.  Somewhere ahead--probably in one of the rough,
sandy stretches--he would either have to pass that car or lag behind.
Your expert driver likes a clear road ahead.

So Mack Nolan drove a bit harder, and succeeded in getting most of the
dust kicked up by the big, blue car.  He counted on passing before they
reached Ludlow, but he could never quite make it. In that ungodly
stretch of sand and rocks and chuck-holes that lies between Ludlow and
Amboy, Nolan was sure that the woman driver would have to slow down.
He swore a little, too, because she would probably slow down just where
passing was impossible. They always did.

They went through Amboy like one party, the big, blue car leading by
twenty-five yards.  It was a long drive for a woman to make; a hard
drive to boot.  He wondered if the two in the big car ever ate.

Five miles east of Amboy, when a red sunset was darkening to starlight,
the blue car, fifty yards in the lead, overhauled a Ford in trouble.
In the loose, sandy trail the big car slowed and stopped abreast of the
Ford.  There was no passing now, unless Mack Nolan wanted to risk
smashing his crank-case on a lava rock, millions of which peppered that
particular portion of the Mojave Desert.  He stopped perforce.

A pair of feet with legs attached to them, protruded from beneath the
running board of the Ford.  The Little Woman in the big car leaned over
the side and studied the feet critically.

"Casey Ryan, are those the best pair of shoes you own?" she drawled at
last.  "If you wouldn't wear such rundown heels, you know, you wouldn't
look so bow-legged.  I've told you and TOLD you that your legs aren't
so bad when you wear straight heels."

Casey Ryan crawled out and looked up at her grinning sheepishly.

"They was all right when I left home, ma'am," he defended his shoes
mildly.  "Desert plays hell with shoe leather--you can ask anybody."
Then he added, "Hullo, Jack!  What you two think you're doin', anyway.
Tryin' t' elope?"

"Why, hello, Ryan!"  Mack Nolan greeted, coming up from the Cadillac.
"Having trouble with your car?"  Casey whirled and eyed Nolan dubiously.

"Naw.  This ain't no trouble," he granted. "I only been here four hours
or so--this is pastime!"

There was an awkward silence.  We in the blue car wanted to know (not
at that time knowing) who was the man in the Cadillac roadster, and how
he happened to know Casey so well.  Nolan, no doubt, wanted to know who
we were.  And there was so much that Casey wanted to know and needed to
know that he couldn't seem to think of anything. However, Casey was the
hardest to down.  He came up to the side of the blue car, reached in
with his hands all greasy black, and took the Little Woman's hand from
the wheel and kissed it.  The Little Woman made a caressing sound and
leaned out to him--and Nolan and I felt that we mustn't look.  So our
eyes met.

He came around to my side of the car and put out his hand.

"I'm pretty good at guessing," he smiled.  "I guess you're Jack
Gleason.  Casey has talked of you to me.  I'm right glad to meet you,
too.  My name is Mack Nolan, and I'm Irish.  I'm Casey Ryan's partner.
We have a good--prospect."

Casey looked past the Little Woman and me, straight into Mack Nolan's
eyes.  I felt something of an electric quality in the air while their
gaze held.

"I'm just getting back from a trip down in the valley," Nolan observed
easily.  "You never did see me in town duds, did you, Casey?"  His eyes
went to the Little Woman's face and then to me. "I suppose you know
what this wild Irishman has just pulled off back there," he said,
tilting his head toward San Bernardino, many a mile away to the
southwest.  "You wouldn't think it to look at him, but he surely has
thrown a monkey wrench into as pretty a bootlegging machine as there is
in the country.  It's such confidential stuff, of course, that you may
call it absolutely secret. But for once I'm telling the truth about it.

"Your husband, Mrs. Casey Ryan, holds a commission from headquarters as
a prohibition officer.  A deputy, it is true,--but commissioned
nevertheless.  He's just getting back from a very pretty piece of work.
A crooked officer named Smiling Lou was arrested last night. He had all
kinds of liquor cached away in his house.  Casey can tell you sometime
how he trapped him.

"Of course, I'm just an amateur mining expert on a vacation, myself."
His eyes met Casey's straight.  "I wasn't with him when he pulled the
deal, but I heard about it afterwards, and I knew he was planning
something of the sort when he left camp.  How I happened to know about
the commission," he added, reaching into his pocket, "is because he
left it with me for safe keeping.  I'm going to let you look at
it--just in case he's too proud to let it out of his hands once I give
it back.

"Now, of course, I'm talking like an old woman and telling all Casey's
secrets--and you'll probably see a real Irish fight when he gets in
reach of me.  But I knew he hadn't told you exactly what he's doing,
and--I personally feel that his wife and his best friend are entitled
to know as much as his partner knows about him."

The Little Woman nodded absently her thanks.  She was holding Casey's
commission under the dash-light to read it.

I saw Casey gulp once or twice while he stared across the car at Mack
Nolan.  He pushed his dusty, black hat forward over one eyebrow and
reached into his pocket.

"Aw, hell," he grunted, grinning queerly. "You come around here oncet,
Mr. Nolan, where I can git my hands on yuh!"

========================================
========================================

THE TRAIL OF THE WHITE MULE


by

B. M. Bower




CHAPTER ONE

Casey Ryan, hunched behind the wheel of a large, dark blue touring car
with a kinked front fender and the glass gone from the left  headlight,
slid out from the halted traffic, shied sharply away from a
hysterically clanging street car, crossed the path of a huge red truck
coming in from his right, missed it with two inches to spare and was
halfway down the block before the traffic officer overtook him.

The traffic officer was Irish too, and bigger than Casey, and madder.
For all that, Casey offered to lick the livin' tar outa him before
accepting a pale, expensive ticket which he crumbled and put into his
pocket without looking at it.

"What I know about these here fancy city rules ain't sufficient to give
a horn-toad a headache--but it's a darn sight more'n I care," Casey
declaimed hotly.  "I never was asked what I thought of them tin signs
you stick up on the end of a telegraft pole, to tell folks when to go
an' when to quit goin'.  Mebby it's all right fer these here city
drivers--"

"This'll mean thirty days for you," spluttered the officer.  "I ought
to call the patrol right now--"

"Get the undertaker on the line first!"  Casey advised him ominously.

Traffic was piling up behind them, and horns were honking a blatant
chorus that extended two blocks up the street.  The traffic officer
glanced into the troubled gray eyes of the Little Woman beside Casey
and took his foot off the running board.

"Better go put up your bail and then forfeit it," he advised in a
milder tone.  "The judge will probably remember you; I do, and my
memory ain't the best in the world.  Twice you've been hooked for
speeding through traffic; and parking by fire-plugs and in front of the
No Park signs and after four, seems to be your big outdoor sport.
Forfeit your bail, old boy--or it's thirty days for you, sure."

Casey Ryan made bitter retort, but the traffic cop had gone to untangle
two furious Fords from a horse-drawn mail wagon, so he did not hear.
Which was good luck for Casey.

"Why do you persist in making trouble for yourself?" the Little Woman
beside him exclaimed. "It can't be so hard to obey the rules; other
drivers do.  I know that I have driven this car all over town without
any trouble whatever."

Casey hogged the next safety-zone line to the deep disgust of a young
movie star in a cream-and-silver racer, and pulled in to the curb just
where he could not be passed.

"All right, ma'am.  You can drive, then."  He slid out of the driver's
seat to the pavement, his face a deeper shade of red than usual.

"For pity's sake, Casey!  Don't be silly," his wife cried sharply, a
bit of panic in her voice.

"You was in a hurry to git home," Casey pointed out to her with that
mildness of manner which is not mild.  "I was hurryin', wasn't I?"

"You aren't hurrying now--you're delaying the traffic again.  Do be
reasonable!  You know it costs money to argue with the police."

"Police be damned!  I'm tryin' to please a woman, an' I'm up agin a
hard proposition.  You can ask anybody if I'm the unreasonable one. You
hustled me out of the show soon as the huggin' commenced.  You wouldn't
even let me stay to see the first of Mutt and Jeff.  You said you was
in a hurry.  I leaves the show without seein' the best part, gits the
car an' drills through the traffic tryin' to git yuh home quick.  Now
you're kickin' because I did hurry."

"Hey!  Whadda yuh mean, blockin' the traffic?" a domineering voice
behind him bellowed.  "This ain't any reception hall, and it ain't no
free auto park neither."

Another traffic officer with another pencil and another pad of tickets
such as drivers dread to see began to write down the number of Casey's
car.  This man did not argue.  He finished his work briskly, presented
another notice which advised Casey Ryan to report immediately to police
headquarters, waved Casey peremptorily to proceed, and returned to his
little square platform to the chorus of blatting automobile horns.

"The cops in this town hands out tickets like they was Free Excursion
peddlers!" snorted Casey, his eyes a pale glitter behind his
half-closed lids.  "They can go around me, or they can honk and be
darned to 'em. Git behind the wheel, ma'am--Casey Ryan's drove the last
inch he'll ever drive in this darned town. If they pinch me again,
it'll have to be fer walkin'."

The Little Woman looked at him, pressed her lips together and moved
behind the wheel.  She did not say a word all the way out to the white
apartment house on Vermont which held the four rooms they called home.
She parked the car dexterously in front and led the way to their
apartment (ground floor, front) before she looked at me.

"It's coming to a show-down, Jack," she said then with a faint smile.
"He's on probation already for disobeying traffic rules of one sort and
other, and his fines cost more than the entire upkeep of the car. I
think he really will have to go to jail this time.  It just isn't in
Casey Ryan to take orders from any one, especially when his own
personal habits of driving a car are concerned."

"Town life is getting on his nerves," I tried to defend Casey, and at
the same time to comfort the Little Woman.  "I didn't think it would
work, his coming here to live, with nothing to do but spend money.
This is the inevitable result of too much money and too much leisure."

"It sounds much better, putting it that way," murmured Mrs. Casey. "I
think you're right--though he did behave back there as if it were too
much matrimony.  Jack, he's been looking forward to your visit.  I'm
sorry this has happened to spoil it."

"It isn't spoiled," I grinned. "Casey Ryan is, always and ever shall be
Casey Ryan.  He's running true to form, though tamer than one would
expect.  When do you think he'll show up?"

Mrs. Casey did not know.  She ventured a guess or two, but there was no
conviction in her tone.  With two nominal arrests in five minutes
chalked against him, and with his first rebellion against the Little
Woman to rankle in his conscience and memory, she owned herself at a
loss.

With a cheerfulness that was only conversation deep, we waited for
Casey and finally ate supper without him.  The evening was enlivened
somewhat by Babe's chatter of kindergarten doings; and was punctuated
by certain pauses while steps on the sidewalk passed on or ended with
the closing of another door than the Ryans'.  I fought the impulse to
call up the police station, and I caught the eyes of the Little Woman
straying unconsciously to the telephone in the hall while she talked of
things remote from our inner thoughts.  Margaret Ryan is game, I'll say
that.  We played cribbage for an hour or two, and the Little Woman beat
me until finally I threw up my hands and quit.

"I can't stand it any longer, Mrs. Casey.  Do you think he's in jail,
or just sulking at a movie somewhere?" I blurted.  "Forgive my butting
in, but I wish you'd talk about it.  You know you can, to me.  Casey
Ryan is a friend and more than a friend: he's a pet theory of mine--a
fad, if you prefer to call him that.

"I consider him a perfect example of human nature in its unhampered,
unbiased state, going straight through life without deviating a hair's
breadth from the viewpoint of youth.  A fighter and a castle builder; a
sort of rough-edged Peter Pan. Till he gums soft food and hobbles with
a stick because the years have warped his back and his legs, Casey Ryan
will keep that indefinable, bubbling optimism of spiritual youth.  So
tell me all about him.  I want to know who has licked, so far; luxury
or Casey Ryan."

The Little Woman laughed and picked up the cards, evening their edges
with sensitive fingers that had not been manicured so beautifully when
first I saw them.

"Well-sir," she drawled, making one word of the two and failing to keep
a little twitching from her lips, "I think it's been about a tie, so
far.  As a husband--Casey's a darned good bachelor."  Her chuckle
robbed that statement of anything approaching criticism.  "Aside from
his insisting on cooking breakfast every morning and feeding me in bed,
forcing me to eat fried eggs and sour-dough hotcakes swimming in butter
and honey--when I crave grapefruit and thin toast and one French lamb
chop with a white paper frill on the handle and garnished with fresh
parsley--he's the soul of consideration.  He wants four kinds of jam on
the table every meal, when fresh fruit is going to waste.  He's bullied
the laundryman until the poor fellow's reached the point where he won't
stop if the car's parked in front and Casey's liable to be home; but
aside from that, Casey's all right.

"After serving time in the desert and rustling my own wood and living
on bacon and beans and sour-dough bread,  I'm perfectly willing to
spend the rest of my life doing painless housekeeping with all the
modern built-in features ever invented; and buying my bread and cakes
and salads from the delicatessen around the corner.  I never want to
see a sagebush again as long as I live, or feel the crunch of gravel
under my feet.  I expect to die in French-heeled pumps and embroidered
silk stockings and the finest, silliest silk things ever put in a show
window to tempt the soul of a woman.  But it took just two weeks and
three days to drive Casey back to his sour-dough can."

"He craved luxury more than you seemed to do," I remembered aloud.

"He did, yes.  But his idea of luxury is sitting down in the kitchen to
a real meal of beans and biscuits and all the known varieties of jam
and those horrible whitewashed store cookies and having the noise of
the phonograph drowned every five minutes by a passing street car.
Casey wants four movies a day, and he wants them all funny.  He brings
home silk shirts with the stripes fairly shrieking when he unwraps
them--and he has to be thrown and tied to get a collar on him.

"He will get up at any hour of the night to chase after a fire engine,
and every whipstitch he gets pinched for doing something which is
perfectly lawful and right in the desert and perfectly awful in the
city.  You saw him," said the Little Woman, "to-day."  And she added
wistfully, "It's the first time since we were married that he has ever
talked back--to me.

"And you know," she went on, shuffling the cards and stopping to regard
the joker attentively (though I am sure she didn't know what card she
was looking at), "just chasing around town and doing nothing but square
yourself for not playing according to the rules costs money without
getting you anywhere.  Fifty-five thousand dollars isn't so much just
to play with, in this town. Casey's highest ambition now seems to be
nickel disk wheels on a new racing car that can make the speed cops go
some to catch him. His idea of economy is to put six or seven thousand
dollars into a car that will enable him to outrun a twenty-dollar fine!

"We have some money invested," she went on.  "We own this apartment
house--and fortunately it's in my name.  So long as the housing problem
continues critical, I think I can keep Casey going without spending our
last cent."

"He did one good stroke of business," I ventured, "when he bought this
place.  Apartment houses are good as gold mines these days."

The Little Woman laughed. "Well-sir, it wasn't so much a stroke as it
was a wallop.  Casey bought it just to show who was boss, he or the
landlord.  The first thing he did when we moved in was to take down the
nicely framed rules that said we must not cook cabbage nor onions nor
fish, nor play music after ten o'clock at night, nor do any loud
talking in the halls.

"Every day for a week Casey cooked cabbage, onions and fish.  He sat up
nights to play the graphophone.  He stayed home to talk loudly and play
bucking bronk with Babe all up and down the stairs and in the halls.
Our rent was paid for a month in advance, and the landlord was too
little and old to fight.  So he sold out cheap--and it really was a
good stroke of business for us, though not deliberate.

"Well-sir, at first we lost tenants who didn't enjoy the freedom of
their neighbors' homes.  But really, Jack, you'd be surprised to know
how many people in this city just LOVE cabbage and onions and fish, and
to have children they needn't disown whenever they go house-hunting. I
had ventilator hoods put over every gas range in the house, and turned
the back yard into a playground with plenty of sand piles and swings.
I raised the price, too, and made the place look very select, with a
roof garden for the grown-ups.  We have the house filled now with
really nice families--avoiding the garlic brand--and as an investment I
wouldn't ask for anything better.

"Casey enjoyed himself hugely while he was whipping things into shape,
but the last month he's been going stale.  The tenants are all so
thankful to do as they please that they're excruciatingly polite to
him, no matter what he does or says.  He's tired of the beaches and he
has begun to cuss the long, smooth roads that are signed so that he
couldn't get lost if he tried.  It does seem as if there's no interest
left in anything, unless he can get a kick out of going to jail.  And,
Jack, I do believe he's gone there."

The telephone rang and the Little Woman excused herself and went into
the hall, closing the door softly behind her.

I'm not greatly given to reminiscence, but while I sat and watched the
flames of civilization licking tamely at the impregnable iron bark of
the gas logs, the eyes of my memory looked upon a picture:

Desert, empty and with the mountains standing back against the sky, the
great dipper uptilted over a peak and the stars bending close for very
friendliness.  The licking flames of dry greasewood burning, with a
pungent odor in my nostrils when the wind blew the smoke my way. The
far-off hooting of an owl, perched somewhere on a juniper branch
watching for mice; and Casey Ryan sitting cross-legged in the sand,
squinting humorously at me across the fire while he talked.

I saw him, too, bolting a hurried breakfast under a mesquite tree in
the chill before sunrise, his mind intent upon the trail; facing the
desert and its hardships as a matter of course, with never a thought
that other men would shrink from the ordeal.

I saw him kneeling before a solid face of rock in a shallow cut in the
hillside, swinging his "single-jack" with tireless rhythm; a tap and a
turn of the steel, a tap and a turn--chewing tobacco industriously and
stopping now and then to pry off a fresh bit from the plug in his hip
pocket before he reached for the "spoon" to muck out the hole he was
drilling.

I saw him larruping in his Ford along a sandy, winding trail it would
break a snake's back to follow, hot on the heels of his next adventure,
dreaming of the fortune that finally came. . . .

The Little Woman came in looking as if she had been talking with
Destiny and was still dazed and unsteady from the meeting.

"Well-sir, he's gone!" she announced, and stopped and tried to smile.
But her eyes looked hurt and sorry.  "He has bought a Ford and a tent
and outfit since he left us down on Seventh and Broadway, and he just
called me up on long-distance from San Bernardino.  He's going out on a
prospecting trip, he says.  I'll say he's been going some!  A speed cop
overhauled him just the other side of Claremont, he told me, and he was
delayed for a few minutes while he licked the cop and kicked him and
his motorcycle into a ditch.  He says he's sorry he sassed me, and if I
can drive a car in this darned town and not spend all my loose change
paying fines, I'm a better man than he is.  He doesn't know when he'll
be back--and there you are."

She sat down wearily on the arm of an over-stuffed armchair and looked
up at the gilt-and-onyx clock which I suspected Casey of having bought.
"If he isn't lynched before morning," she sighed whimsically, "he'll
probably make it to the Nevada line all right."

I rose, also glancing at the clock.  But the Little Woman put up a hand
to forbid the plan she read in my mind.

"Let him alone, Jack," she advised.  "Let him go and be just as wild
and devilish as he wants to be.  I'm only thankful he can take it out
on a Ford and a pick and shovel.  There really isn't any trouble
between us two.  Casey knows I can look out for myself for awhile.
He's got to have a vacation from loafing and matrimony. I'm so thankful
he isn't taking it in jail!"

I told her somewhat bluntly that she was a brick, and that if I could
get in touch with Casey I'd try to keep an eye on him. It would
probably be a good thing, I told her, if he did stay away long enough
to let this collection of complaints against him be forgotten at the
police station.

I went away, hoping fervently that Casey would break even his own
records that night.  I really intended to find him and keep an eye on
him.  But keeping an eye on Casey Ryan is a more complicated affair
than it sounds.

Wherefore, much of this story must be built upon my knowledge of Casey
and a more or less complete report of events in which I took no part,
welded together with a bit of healthy imagination.



CHAPTER TWO

Casey Ryan knew his desert.  Also, from long and not so happy
experience, he knew Fords, or thought he did.  He made the mistake,
however, of buying a nearly new one and asking it to accomplish the
work of a twin six from the moment he got behind the wheel.

He was fortunate in buying a demonstrator's car with a hundred miles or
so to its credit.  He arrived in Barstow before the proprietor of a
supply store had gone to bed--for which he was grateful to the Ford. He
loaded up there with such necessities for desert prospecting as he had
not waited to buy in Los Angeles, turned short off the main highway
where traffic officers might be summoned by telephone to lie in wait
for him, and took the steeper and less used trail north. He was still
mad and talking bitterly to himself in an undertone while he
drove--telling the new Ford what he thought of city rules and city
ways, and driving it as no Ford was ever meant by its maker to be
driven.

The country north of Barstow is not to be taken casually in the middle
of a dark night, even by Casey Ryan and a Ford.  The roads, once you
are well away from help, are all pretty much alike, and all bad.  And
although the white, diamond-shaped signs of a beneficent automobile
club are posted here and there, where wrong turnings are most likely to
prove disastrous to travelers, Casey Ryan was in the mood to lick any
man who pointed out a sign to him.  He did see one or two in spite of
himself and gave a grunt of contempt.  So, where he should have turned
to the east (his intention being to reach Nevada by way of Silver Lake)
he continued traveling north and didn't know it.

Driving across the desert on a dark night is confusing to the most
observant wayfarer.  On either side, beyond the light of the car,
illusory forest stands for mile upon mile.  Up hill or down or across
the level it is the same--a narrow, winding trail through dimly seen
woods.  The most familiar road grows strange; the miles are longer; you
drive through mystery and silence and the world around you is a
formless void.

Dawn and a gorgeous sunrise painted out the woods and revealed barren
hilltops which Casey did not know.  Because he did not know them, he
guessed shrewdly that he was on his way to the wilderness of mountains
and sand which lies west of Death Valley. Small chance he had of
hearing the shop whistles blow in Las Vegas at noon, as he had expected.

He was telling himself that he didn't care where he went, when the car,
laboring more and more reluctantly up a long, sandy hill, suddenly
stopped.  In Casey's heart was a thrill at the sheer luxury of stopping
in the middle of the road without having some thick-necked cop stride
toward him bawling insults.  That he was obliged to stop, and that a
hill uptilted before him, and the sand was a foot deep outside the ruts
failed to impress him with foreboding.  He gloried in his freedom and
thought not at all of the Ford.

He climbed stiffly out, squinted at the sky line, which was jagged, and
at his immediate surroundings, which were barren and lonely and
soothing to his soul that hungered for these things. Great, gaunt
"Joshua" trees stood in grotesque groups all up and down the narrow
valley, hiding the way he had come from the way he would go.  It was as
if the desert had purposely dropped a curtain before his past and would
show him none of his future. Whereat Casey Ryan grinned, took a chew of
tobacco and was himself again.

"If they wanta come pinch me here, I'll meet 'em man to man. Back in
town no man's got a show.  They pile in four deep and gang a feller.
Out here it's lick er git licked.  They can all go t' thunder. Tahell
with town!"

The odor of coffee boiling in a new pot which the sagebrush fire was
fast blackening; the salty, smoky smell of bacon frying in a new frying
pan that turned bluish with the heat; the sizzle of bannock batter
poured into hot grease--these things made the smiling mouth of Casey
Ryan water with desire.

"Hell!" said Casey, breathing deep when, stomach full and resentment
toward the past blurred by satisfaction with his present, he filled his
pipe and fingered his vest pocket for a match.  "Gas stoves can't cook
nothin' so there's any taste to it.  That there's the first real meal
I've et in six months. Light a match and turn on the gas and call that
a fire!  Hunh! Good old sage er greasewood fer Casey Ryan, from here
on!"

He laid back against the sandy sidehill, tilted his hat over his eyes
and crossed his legs luxuriously.  He was in no hurry to continue his
journey.  Now that he and the desert were alone together, haste and
Casey Ryan held nothing in common.  For awhile he watched a Joshua palm
that looked oddly like a giant man with one arm hanging loose at its
side and another pointing fixedly at a distant, black-capped butte
standing aloof from its fellows.  Casey was tired after his night on
the trail.  Easy living in town had softened his muscles and slowed a
little that untiring energy which had balked at no hardship.  He was
drowsy, and his brain stopped thinking logically and slipped into
half-waking fancy.

The Joshua seemed to move, to lift its arm and point more imperatively
toward the peak.  Its ungainly head seemed to turn and nod at Casey.
What did the darned thing want?  Casey would go when he, got good and
ready.  Perhaps he would go that way, and perhaps he would not. Right
here was good enough for Casey Ryan at present; and you could ask
anybody if he were the man to follow another man's pointing, much less
a Joshua tree.

Battering rain woke Casey some hours later and drove him to the shelter
of the Ford.  Thunder and lightning came with the rain, and a bellowing
wind that rocked the car and threatened once or twice to overturn it.
With some trouble Casey managed to button down the curtains and sat
huddled on the front seat, watching through a streaming windshield the
buffeted wilderness.  He was glad he had not unloaded his outfit;
gladder still that the storm had not struck which he was traveling.
Down the trail toward him a small river galloped, washing deep gullies
where the wheels of his car offered obstruction to its boisterousness.

"She's a tough one," grinned Casey, in spite of the chattering of his
teeth.  "Looks like all the water in the world is bein' poured down
this pass.  Keeps on, I'll have to gouge out a couple of Joshuays an'
turn the old Ford into a boat--but Casey'll keep agoin'!"

Until inky dark it rained like the deluge.  Casey remained perched in
his one-man ark and tried hard to enjoy himself and his hard-won
freedom.  He stabbed open a can of condensed milk, poured it into a
cup, and drank it and ate what was left of his breakfast bannock, which
he had fortunately put away in the car out of the reach of a hill of
industrious red ants.

He thought vaguely of cranking the car and going on, but gave up the
notion.  One sidehill, he decided, was as good as another sidehill for
the present.

That night Casey slept fitfully in the car and discovered that even a
wall bed in a despised apartment house may be more comfortable than the
front seat of a Ford.  His bones ached by morning, and he was hungry
enough to eat raw bacon and relish it. But the sun was fighting through
the piled clouds and shone cheerfully upon the draggled pass, and Casey
boiled coffee and fried bacon and bannock beside the trail, and for a
little while was happy again.

From breakfast until noon he was busy as a beaver repairing the washout
beneath the car and on to the top of the hill. She was going to have to
get down and dig in her toes to make it, he told the Ford, when at last
he heaved pick and shovel into the tonneau, packed in his cooking
outfit and made ready to crank up.

From then until supper time he wore a trail around the car, looking to
see what was wrong and why he could not crank.  He removed
hootin'-annies and dingbats (using Casey's mechanical terms) looked
them over dissatisfiedly, and put them back without having done them ny
good whatever.  Sometimes they were returned to a different place, I
imagine, since I know too well how impartial Casey is with the
mechanical parts of a Ford.

He made camp there that night, pitching his little tent in the trail
for pure cussedness, and defying aloud a traveling world to make him
move until he got good and ready.  He might have saved his vocabulary,
for the road was impassable before him and behind; and had Casey
managed to start the car, he could not have driven a mile in either
direction.

Since he did not know that, the next day he painstakingly cleaned the
spark plugs and tried again to crank the Ford; couldn't, and removed
more hootin'-annies and dingbats than he had touched the day before.
That night he once more pitched his tent in the trail, hoping in his
heart that some one would drive along and dispute his right to camp
there; when he would lick the doggone cuss.

On the fourth day, after a long, fatiguing session with the vitals of a
Ford that refused to be cranked, Casey was busy gathering brush, for
his supper fire when Fate came walking up' the trail.  Fate appears in
many forms.  In this instance it assumed the shape of a packed burro
that poked its nose around a group of Joshuas, stopped abruptly and
backed precipitately into another burro which swung out of the trail
and went careening awkwardly down the slope.  The stampeding burro had
not seen the Ford at all, but accepted the testimony of its leader that
something was radically wrong with the trail ahead. His pack bumped
against the yuccas as he went; after him lurched a large man, heavy to
the point of fatness, yelling hoarse threats and incoherent
objurgations.

Casey threw down his armful of dead brush and went after the lead burro
which was blazing itself a trail in an entirely different direction.
The lead burro had four large canteens strapped outside its pack, and
Casey was growing so short of water that he had begun to debate
seriously the question of draining the radiator on the morrow.

I don't suppose many of you would believe the innate cussedness of a
burro when it wants to be that way.  Casey hazed this one to the hills
and back down the trail for half a mile before he rushed it into a
clump of greasewood and sneaked up on it when it thought itself hidden
from all mortal eyes.  After that he dug heels into the sand and hung
on.  Memory resurrected for his need certain choice phrases coined in
times of stress for the ears of burros alone.  Luxury and civilization
and fifty-five thousand dollars and a wife were as if they had never
been.  He was Casey Ryan, the prospector, fighting a stubborn donkey
all over a desert slope. He led it conquered back to the Ford, tied it
to a wheel and lifted off the four canteens, gratified with their
weight and hoping there were more on the other burro.  He had quite
forgotten that he had meant to lick the first man he saw, and grinned
when the fat man came toiling back with the other animal.

By the time their coffee was boiled and their bacon fried, each one
knew the other's past history and tentative plans for the future,
censored and glossed somewhat by the teller but received without
question or criticism.

The fat man's name was Barney Oakes, and he had heard of Casey Ryan and
was glad to meet him.  Though Casey had never heard of Barney Oakes, he
discovered that they both knew Bill Masters, the garage man at Lund;
and further gossip revealed the amazing fact that Barney Oakes had once
been the husband of the woman whom Casey had very nearly married, the
widow who cooked for the Lucky Lode.

"Boy, you're sure lucky she turned loose on yuh before yuh went an'
married her!"  Barney congratulated Casey, slapping his great thigh and
laughing loudly.  "She shore is handy with her tongue--that old girl.
Ever hear a sawmill workin' overtime? That's her--rippin' through knots
an' never blowin' the whistle fer quittin' time. I never knowed a man
could have as many faults as what she used t' name over fer me."  He
drained his cup and sighed with great content.  "At that, I stayed with
her seven months and fourteen days," he boasted.  "I admit, two of them
months I was laid up with a busted ankle an' shoulder blade. Tunnel
caved in on me."

They talked late that night and were comrades, brothers, partners share
and share alike before they slept.  Next morning Casey tried again to
start the Ford; couldn't; and yielded to Barney's argument that burros
were better than a car for prospectin' in that rough country.  They
overhauled Casey's outfit, took all the grub and as much else as the
burros could carry and debated seriously what point in the Panamints
they should aim for.

"Where's that there Joshuay tree pointin' to?" Casey asked finally.
"She's the biggest and oldest in the bunch, and ever since I've been
here she's looked like she's got somethin' on 'er mind. Whadda yuh
think, Barney?"

Barney walked around the yucca, stood behind the extended arm, squinted
at the sharp-peaked butte with the black capping, toward which the
gaunt tree seemed to point.  He spat out a stale quid of tobacco and
took a fresh one, squinted again toward the butte and looked at Casey.

"She's country I never prospected in, back in there.  I've follered
poorer advice than a Joshuay.  Le's try it a whirl."

Thus it came to pass that Casey Ryan forsook his Ford for a strange
partner with two burros and a clouded past, and fared forth across the
barren foothills with no better guidance than the rigid, outstretched
limb of a great, gaunt Joshua tree.



CHAPTER THREE

In a still sunny gulch which shadows would presently fill to the brim,
Casey Ryan was reaching, soiled bandanna in his hand, to pull a pot of
bubbling coffee from the coals,--a pot now blackened with the smoke of
many campfires to prove how thoroughly a part of the open land it had
become.  Something nipped at his right shoulder, and at the same
instant ticked the coffeepot and overturned it into a splutter of steam
and hot ashes.  The spiteful crack of a rifle shot followed close.
Casey ducked behind a nose of rock, and big Barney Oakes scuttled for
cover, spilling bacon out of the frying pan as he went.

For a week the two had been camped in this particular gulch, which drew
in to a mere wrinkle on the southwestern slope of the black-topped
butte, toward which the Joshua tree in the pass had directed them.
Nearly a week they had spent toiling across the hilly, waterless waste,
with two harrowing days when their canteens flopped empty on the burros
and big Barney stumbled oftener than Casey liked to see.  Casey himself
had gone doggedly ahead, his body bent forward, his square shoulders
sagging a bit, but with never a thought of doing anything but go on.

A red splotch high up on the side of this gulch promised "water
formation" as prospectors have a way of putting it.  They had found the
water, else adventure would have turned to tragedy. Near the water they
had also found a promising outcropping of silver-bearing quartz.
Barney's blowpipe had this very day shown them silver in
castle-building quantities.

Just at this moment, however, they were not thinking of mines. They
were eyeing a round hole in the coffeepot from which a brown rivulet
ran spitting into the blackening coals.

Casey was the more venturesome.  He raised himself to see if he could
discover where the bullet had come from, and very nearly met the fate
of the coffeepot.  He felt the wind of a second bullet that spatted
against a boulder near Barney.  Barney burrowed deeper into his covert.

Casey went down on all fours and crawled laboriously toward a
concealing bank covered thick with brush.  A third bullet clipped a
twig of sage just about three inches above the middle of his back, and
Casey flattened on his stomach and swore.  Some one on the peak of the
hill had good eyesight, he decided.  Neither spoke, other than to swear
in undertones; for voices carried far in that clear atmosphere, and
nothing could be gained by conversation.

Darkness never had poured so slowly into that gulch since the world was
young.  The campfire had died to black embers before Casey ventured
from his covert, and Barney Oakes seemed to have holed up for the
season.  Unless you have lived for a long while in a land altogether
empty of any human life save your own, you cannot realize the effect of
having mysterious bullets zip past your ears and ruin your supper for
you.

"Somebody's gunnin' fer us, looks like t' me," Barney observed
belatedly in a hoarse whisper, from his covert.

"Found that out, did yuh?  Well, it ain't the first time Casey's been
shot at and missed," Casey retorted peevishly in the lee of the bank.
"Say! I knowed the sing of bullets before I was old enough to carry a
tune."

"So'd I," boasted Barney, "but that ain't sayin' I learned t' like the
song."

"What I'm figurin' out now," said Casey, "is how to get up there an' AT
'am.  An' how we kin do it without him seein' us.  Goin' t' be kinda
ticklish--but it ain't the first ticklish job Casey Ryan ever tackled."

"It can't be did," Barney stated flatly.  "An' if it could be did, I
wouldn't do it.  I ain't as easy t' miss as what you be. I got bulk."

"A hole bored through your tallow might mebbe do you good," Casey
suggested harshly.  "Might let in a little sand.  You can't never
tell--"

"My vitals," said Barney with dignity, "is just as close to the surface
as what your vitals be.  I ain't so fat--I'm big.  An' I got all the
sand I need.  I also have got sense, which some men lacks."

"What yuh figurin' on doin'?" Casey wanted to know.  "Set here under a
bush an' let 'em pick yuh up same as they would a cottontail, mebbe? We
got a hull night to work in, an' Casey's eyes is as good as anybody's
in the dark.  More'n that, Casey's six-gun kin shoot just as hard an'
fast as a rifle--let 'im git close enough."

Barney did not want to be left alone and said so frankly. Neither did
he want to climb the butte.  He could see no possible gain in climbing
to meet an enemy or enemies who could hear the noise of approach. It
was plain suicide, he declared, and Barney Oakes was not ready to die.

But Casey could never listen to argument when a fight was in prospect.
He filled a canteen, emptied a box of cartridges into his pocket, stuck
his old, Colt six-shooter inside his trousers belt, and gave Barney
some parting instruction under his breath.

Barney was to move camp down under the bank by the spring, and dig
himself in there, so that the only approach would be up the narrow
gulch.  He would then wait until Casey returned.

"Somebody's after our outfit, most likely," Casey reasoned. "It ain't
the first time I've knowed it to happen.  So you put the hull outfit
outa sight down there an' stand guard over it.  If we'd 'a' run when
they opened up, they'd uh cleaned us out and left us flat.  They's two
of us, an' we'll git 'em from two sides."

He stuffed cold bannock into the pocket that did not hold the
cartridges and disappeared, climbing the side of the gulch opposite the
point which held their ambitious marksman.

To Barney's panicky expostulations he had given little heed. "If yore
vitals is as close to your hide as what you claim," Casey had said
impatiently, "an' you don't want any punctures in 'em, git to work an'
git that hide of yourn outa sight. It'll take some diggin'; they's a
lot of yuh to cover."

Barney, therefore, dug like a badger with a dog snuffing at its tail.
Casey, on the other hand, climbed laboriously in the darkness a bluff
he had not attempted to climb by daylight.  It was hard work and slow,
for he felt the need of going quietly. What lay over the rim-rock he
did not know, though he meant to find out.

Daylight found him leaning against a smooth ledge which formed a part
of the black capping he had seen from the road.  He had spent the night
toiling over boulders and into small gulches and out again, trying to
find some crevice through which he might climb to the top. Now he was
just about where he had been several hours before, and even Casey Ryan
could not help realizing what a fine target he would make if he
attempted to climb back down the bluff to camp before darkness again
hid his movements.

Standing there puffing and wondering what to do next, he saw the two
burros come picking their way toward the spring for their morning drink
and a handful apiece of rolled oats which Barney kept to bait them into
camp.  The lead burro was within easy flinging distance of a rock, from
camp, when the thin, unmistakable crack of a rifle-shot came from the
right, high up on the rim somewhere beyond Casey.  The lead burro
pitched forward, struggled to get up, fell again and rolled over,
lodging against a rock with its four feet sticking up at awkward angles
in the air.

The second burro, always quick to take alarm, wheeled and went
galloping away down the draw.  But he couldn't outgallop the bullet
that sent him in a complete somersault down the slope. Barney might
keep the rest of his rolled oats, for the burros were through wanting
them.

Casey squinted along the rim of black rock that crested the peak
irregularly like a stiff, ragged frill of mourning stuff the gods had
thrown away.  He could not see the man who had shot the burros. By the
intervals between shots, Casey guessed that one man was doing the
shooting, though it was probable there were others in the gang. And now
that the burros were dead, it became more than ever necessary to locate
the gang and have it out with them.  That necessity did not worry Casey
in the least.  The only thing that troubled him now was getting up on
the rim without being seen.

It was characteristic of Casey Ryan that, though he moved with caution,
he nevertheless moved toward their unseen enemy.  Not for a long, long
while had Casey been cautious in his behavior, and the necessity galled
him.  If the hidden marksman had missed that last burro, Casey would
probably have taken a longer chance. But to date, every bullet had gone
straight to its destination; which was enough to make any man think
twice.

Once during the forenoon, while Casey was standing against the rim-rock
staring glumly down upon the camp, Barney's hat, perched on a pick
handle, lifted its crown above the edge of his hiding place; an old,
old trick Barney was playing to see if the rifle were still there and
working.  The rifle worked very well indeed, for Barney was presently
flattened into his retreat, swearing and poking his finger through a
round hole in his hat.

Casey seized the opportunity created by the diversion and scurried like
a lizard across a bare, gravelly slide that had been bothering him for
half an hour.  By mid-afternoon he reached a crevice that looked
promising enough when he craned up it, but which nearly broke his neck
when he had climbed halfway up. Never before had he been compelled to
measure so exactly his breadth and thickness.  It was drawing matters
down rather fine when he was compelled to back down to where he had
elbow room, and remove his coat before he could squeeze his body
through that crack.  But he did it, with his six-shooter inside his
shirt and the extra ammunition weighting his trousers pockets.

In spite of his long experience with desert scenery, Casey was somewhat
astonished to find himself in a new land, fairly level and with thick
groves of pinon cedar and juniper trees scattered here and there.  Far
away stood other barren hills with deep canyons between.  He knew now
that the black-capped butte was less a butte than the uptilted nose of
a high plateau not half so barren as the lower country.  From the
pointing Joshua tree it had seemed a peak, but contours are never so
deceptive as in the high, broken barrens of Nevada.

He looked down into the gulch where Barney was holed up with their
outfit.  He could scarcely distinguish the place, it had dwindled so
with the distance.  He had small hope of seeing Barney.  After that
last leaden bee had buzzed through his hat crown, you would have to dig
faster than Barney if you wanted a look at him. Casey grinned when he
thought of it.

When he had gotten his breath and had scraped some loose dirt out of
his shirt collar, Casey crouched down behind a juniper and examined his
surroundings carefully, his pale, straight-lidded eyes moving slowly as
the white, pointing finger of a searchlight while he took in every
small detail within view.  Midway in the arc of his vision was a ledge,
ending in a flat-topped boulder.

The ledge blocked his view, except that he could see trees and a higher
peak of rocks beyond it.  He made his way cautiously toward the ledge,
his eyes fixed upon the boulder.  A huge, sloping slab of the granite
outcropping it seemed, scaly with gray-green fungus in the cracks where
moisture longest remained; granite ledge banked with low junipers
warped and stunted and tangled with sage. The longer Casey looked at
the boulder, the less he saw that seemed unnatural in a country filled
with boulders and outcroppings and stunted vegetation.

But the longer he looked at it, the stronger grew his animal instinct
that something was wrong.  He waited for a time--a long time indeed for
Casey Ryan to wait.  There was no stir anywhere save the sweep of the
wind blowing steadily from the west.

He crept forward, halting often, eyeing the boulder and its neighboring
ledge, distrust growing within him, though he saw nothing, heard
nothing but the wind sweeping through branches and bush.  Casey Ryan
was never frightened in his life.  But he was Irish born--and there's
something in Irish blood that will not out; something that goes beyond
reason into the world of unknown wisdom.

It's a tricksy world, that realm of intuitions.  For this is what
befell Casey Ryan, and you may account for it as best pleases you.

He circled the rock as a wolf will circle a coiled rattler which it
does not see.  Beyond the rock, built close against it so that the rear
wall must have been the face of the ledge, a little rock cabin squatted
secretively.  One small window, with two panes of glass was set high
under the eaves on the side toward Casey. Cleverly concealed it was,
built to resemble the ledge.  Visible from one side only, and that was
the side where Casey stood. At the back the sloping boulder, untouched,
impregnable; at the north and west, a twist of the ledge that hid the
cabin completely in a niche.  It was the window on the south side that
betrayed it.

So here was what the boulder concealed,--and yet, Casey was not
satisfied with the discovery.  Unconsciously he reached for his gun.
This, he told himself, must be the secret habitation of the fiend who
shot from rim-rocks with terrible precision at harmless prospectors and
their burros.

Casey squinted up at the sun and turned his level gaze again upon the
cabin.  Reason told him that the man with the rifle was still watching
for a pot shot at him and Barney, and that there was nothing whatever
to indicate the presence of only one man in the camp below. Had he been
glimpsed once during the climb, he would have been fired upon; he would
never have been given the chance to gain the top and find this cabin.

The place looked deserted.  His practical, everyday mind told him it
was empty for the time being.  But he felt queer and uncomfortable,
nevertheless.  He sneaked along the ledge to the cabin, flattened
himself against the corner next the gray boulder and waited there for a
minute.  He felt the flesh stiffening on his jaws as he crept up to the
window to look in.  By standing on his toes, Casey's eyes came on a
level with the lowest inch of glass,--the window was so high.

Just at first Casey could not see much.  Then, when his eyes had
adjusted themselves to the half twilight within, his mind at first
failed to grasp what he saw.  Gradually a dimly sensed dread took hold
of him, and grew while he stood there peering in at commonplace things
which should have given him no feeling save perhaps a faint surprise.

A fairly clean, tiny room he saw, with a rough, narrow bed in one
corner and a box table at its head.  From the ceiling hung a lantern
with the chimney smoked on one side and the warped, pole rafter above
it slightly blackened to show how long the lantern had hung there
lighted.  A door opposite the tiny window was closed, and there was no
latch or fastening on the inner side. An Indian blanket covered half
the floor space, and in the corner opposite the bed was a queer,
drumlike thing of sheet iron with a pipe running through the wall; some
heating arrangement, Casey guessed.

In the center of the room, facing the window, a woman sat in a wooden
rocking chair and rocked.  A pale old woman with dark hollows under her
eyes that were fixed upon the pattern of the Indian rug. Her hair was
white.  Her thin, white hands rested limply on the arms of the chair,
and she was rocking back and forth, back and forth, steadily,
quietly,--just rocking and staring at the Indian rug.

Casey has since told me that she was the creepiest thing he ever saw in
his life.  Yet he could not explain why it was so. The woman's face was
not so old, though it was lined and without color.  There was a
terrible quiet in her features, but he felt, somehow, that her thoughts
were not quiet.  It was as if her thoughts were reaching out to him,
telling him things too awful for her thin, hushed lips to let pass.

But after all, Casey's main object was to locate the man with the
rifle, and to do it before he himself was seen on the butte.  He
watched a little longer the woman who rocked and rocked. Never once did
her eyes move from that fixed point on the rug.  Never once did her
fingers move on the arm of the chair.  Her mouth remained immobile as
the lips of a dead woman.  He had to force himself to leave the window;
and when he did, he felt guilty, as if he had somehow deserted some one
helpless and needing him.  He sneaked back, lifted himself and took
another long look.  The old woman was rocking back and forth, her face
quiet with that terrible, pent placidity which Casey could not
understand.

Away from the cabin a pebble's throw, he shook his shoulders and pulled
his mind away from her, back to the man with the rifle--and to Barney.
Rocking in a chair never hurt anybody that he ever heard of.  And
shooting from rim-rocks did.  And Barney was down there, holed up and
helpless, though he had grub and water. Casey was up here in a mighty
dangerous place without much grub or water but--he hoped--not quite
helpless.  His immediate, pressing job was not to peek through a
high-up window at an old woman rocking back and forth in a chair, but
to round up the man who was interfering with Casey's peaceful quest
for--well, he called it wealth; but I think that adventure meant more
to him.

He picked his way carefully along the edge of the rim-rock, keeping
under cover when he could and watching always the country ahead.  And
without any artful description of his progress, I will simply say that
Casey Ryan combed the edge of that rampart for two miles before dark,
and found himself at last on the side farthest from Barney without
having discovered the faintest trace of any living soul save the woman
who rocked back and forth in the little, secret cabin.

Casey sat down on a rock, took a restrained drink from his canteen, and
said everything he knew or could invent that was profane and
condemnatory of his luck, of the unseen assassin, of the country and
his present predicament.  He got up, looked all around him, sniffed
unavailingly for some tang of smoke in the thin, crisp air, reseated
himself and said everything all over again.

Presently he rose and made his way straight across the butte, going
slowly to lessen his chance of making a noise for unfriendly ears to
hear, and with the stars for guidance.



CHAPTER FOUR

The night was growing cold, and Casey had no coat.  At least he could
go down and tell Barney what he had discovered and had failed to
discover, and get something to eat.  Barney would probably be worrying
about him, though there was a chance that a bullet had found Barney
before dark.  Casey was uneasy, and once he was down the fissure again,
he hurried as much as possible.

He managed to reach the camp by the little spring without being shot at
and without breaking a leg.  But Barney was not there. Just at first
Casey believed he was dead; but a brief search told Casey that two of
the largest canteens were gone, together with a side of bacon, some
flour and all of the tobacco.  White assassins would have made a more
thorough job of robbing the camp.  Barney, it was evident, had fled the
fate of the burros.

Casey told the stars what he thought of a partner like Barney.
Afterward he ate what was easiest to swallow without cooking,
overhauled what was left of their outfit, cached the remainder in a
clump of bushes, and wearily climbed the bluff again under a capacity
load.  He concealed himself in the bottom of the fissure to sleep,
since he could search no farther.

If he thought wistfully of the palled comfort of his apartment in Los
Angeles, and of the Little Woman there, he still did not think strongly
enough to send him back to them.  For with a canteen or two of water,
some food and his two capable legs to carry him, Casey Ryan could have
made it to Barstow easily enough.  But because he was Casey Ryan, and
Irish, and because he was always on the hunt for trouble without
recognizing it when he met it in the trail, it never occurred to him to
follow Barney down to safer country.

"That there Joshuay tree meant a lot more'n what it let on, pointin' up
this way!"  Casey muttered, staring down upon a somnolent wilderness
blanketed with hushed midnight.  "If it thinks it's got Casey whipped,
it better think agin and think quick.  I'll give it somethin' to point
at, 'fore I leave this here butte.

"Funny, the way it kept pointin' up this way.  I've saw Joshuays
before--miles of 'em. But I never seen one that looked so kinda human
and so kinda like it was tryin' to talk.  Seems kinda funny; an' that
old lady rockin' an' lookin'--seems like her an' the Joshuay has kinda
throwed in together, hopin' somebody might come along with savvy enough
to kinda--aw, hell!"  So did Casey and his Irish belief in the
supernatural fall plump against the limitations of his vocabulary.

Against the limitations proscribed by his material predicament,
however, Casey Ryan set his face with a grin.  Somebody was going to
get the big jolt of his life before long, he told himself over a
careful breakfast fire built cunningly far back in the crevice where a
current of air sucked into the rock capping of the butte. Something was
going on up here that shouldn't go on.  He did not know what it was,
but he meant to stop it.  He did not know who was making Indian war on
peaceful prospectors, but Casey felt that they were already as good as
licked, since he was here with breakfast under his belt and his
six-shooter tucked handily inside his waistband.

He squinted up the crack in the ledge, made certain mental alterations
in its narrow, jagged walls, and reached for the tough-handled,
efficient prospector's pick he had thoughtfully included in his meagre
equipment.  Slowly and methodically he worked up the crevice, knocking
off certain sharp points of rock, and knowing all the while what would
probably happen to him if he were overheard.

He was not discovered, however.  When he laid elbows on the upper level
of the rim and pulled himself up, his coat was on his back where it
belonged, and even Barney could have followed him.  Yet the top showed
no evidence of a widening of the fissure.  The bushy junipers hid him
completely while he reconnoitred and considered what he should do.

Because the place was close and the invisible call was strong, Casey
went first to the rock hut, circled it carefully and found that it was
exactly what it had seemed at first sight; a hidden place with no
evident opening save that high, small window under the eaves.  There
was no sign of pathway leading to it, no trace of life outside its
wall.  But when he crept close and peeked in again, there sat the old
woman rocking back and forth.  But to-day she stared at the wall before
her.

Casey felt a distinct sensation of relief just in knowing that she was,
after all, capable of moving.  Now her head was not bent, but rested
against the back of her chair.  She was rocking steadily, quietly, with
never a halt.

Casey rapped on the window and waited, fighting a nameless dread of the
mystery of her.  But she continued to rock and to stare at the wall; if
she heard the tapping she gave no sign whatever. So presently he turned
away and set himself to the work of finding the man with the rifle.

To that end he first of all climbed the tallest pinon tree in sight; a
tree that stood on a rise of ground apart from its brothers. From the
concealment of its branches, he surveyed his surroundings carefully,
noting especially the notched unevenness of the butte's rim and how
just behind him it narrowed unexpectedly to a thin ridge not more than
a couple of hundred yards in breadth.  A jagged outcropping cut
straight across and Casey saw how yesterday he had mistaken that ledge
for the rim of the butte.  His man must have been out on the point
beyond him all the while.  He was out there now, very likely; there, or
down in the camp he had watched yesterday like a vulture.

His search having narrowed to an area easily covered in an hour or two,
Casey turned his head and examined as well as he could the deep canyon
that had bitten into the butte and caused that narrow peak. Trees
blocked his view there, and he was feeling about for a lower foothold
so that he could make the descent when a voice from the ground startled
him considerably.

"Come down outa there, before I shoot yuh down!"

Casey looked down and saw what he afterwards declared was the meanest
looking man on earth, pointing straight at him the widest muzzled
shotgun he had ever seen in his life.

Casey came down.  The last ten feet of the distance he made in a clean
jump, planting his feet full in the old man's stomach. The meanest
looking man on earth gave a grunt and crumpled, with Casey's fingers
digging into his throat.

Whether Casey would have killed him or not will never be known. For
just as the man was falling limp in his hands, another heavy body
landed upon Casey's back.  Casey felt a hard, chill circle pressed
against his perspiring temple.  His hands relaxed and fall away from
the throat, leaving finger marks there in the flesh.

"Git up off'n him!" a new voice commanded harshly, and Casey obeyed.
His captor shifted the gun muzzle to the back of Casey's neck and poked
the gasping, bearded old man with his toe.

"Git up, Paw, you old fool, you!  What'd you let 'im light on yuh fer?
Why couldn't you a stood back a piece, outa reach?  You like to got
croaked."

Casey found it prudent to hold his head rather still, as a man does
when he carries a boil on his neck.  The muzzle of a six-shooter has a
quieting effect, when applied to the person by an unfriendly hand.
Casey did not at once see the intruder.  But presently "Paw" recovered
himself and his shotgun, and swung it menacingly toward Casey.
Whereupon the cold circle left Casey's medulla oblongata and a
long-faced, long-legged youth stepped somewhat hastily to one side.

"Paw, you ol' fool, you, get your finger off'n that trigger whilst
you're aimin' at me!" he exclaimed pettishly.

"I wa'n't aimin' at you.  I was aimin' at this 'ere--" Casey heard
himself called many names, any one of which was good for a fight when
Casey was free.

"Aw, you shut up, Paw.  You ain't gittin' nobody nowhere," the son
interrupted.  "You can't cuss 'im t' death--he looks like he could cut
loose a few of them pet names hisself if he got a chancet. Yuh might
tell us what you was doin' up that there tree, mister. An' what you're
doin' on this here butte, anyhow."

Casey looked at him.  Knowing Casey, I should say that his eyes were
not pleasant.  "Talk to Paw," he advised contemptuously. "The two of
yuh may possibly be able to stand each other without gittin' sick; but
me, I never did git used to skunks!"

That remark very nearly got him a through ticket to Land Beyond. But,
being very nearly what Casey had called them, they contented themselves
with mouthing vile epithets.

"Better take 'im down to the mine an' keep 'im till Mart gets back,
Paw," the long-jawed youth suggested, when he ran short of
objurgations. "Mart'll fix 'im when he comes."

"I'd fix 'im, here an', now," threatened Paw, "but Mart, he's so damned
techy lately--what we oughta do is bust 'is head with a rock an' pitch
'im over the rim.  That'd fix 'im."

They wrangled over the suggestion, and finally decided to take him down
and turn him over to one whom they called Joe.  Casey went along
peaceably, hopeful that he would later have a chance to fight back. He
told himself that they both had heads like peanuts, and whenever they
moved, he swore, he could hear their brains rattle in their skulls. It
doesn't take brains to shoot straight, and he decided that the lanky
young man was the one who had shot from the rim-rock. They drove him
down into the narrow, deep gulch, following a steep trail that Casey
had not seen the day before.  The trail led them to the mouth of a
tunnel; and by the size of the dump Casey judged that the workings were
of a considerable extent.  They were getting out silver ore, he
guessed, after a glance or two at stray pieces of rock.

Joe was a big, glum-looking individual with his left hand bandaged. He
chewed tobacco industriously and maintained a complete silence while
Hank, frequently telling Paw to shut up, told how and where they had
found Casey spying up on the butte.

"We don't fancy stray desert rats prowlin' around without no reason,"
said Joe.  "Our boss that we're workin' for ain't at home.  We're
lookin' for 'im back any day now, an' we'll just hold yuh till he
comes.  He can do as he likes about yuh.  You'll have to work fer your
board--c'm on an' I'll show yuh how."

Hank followed Casey and Joe into the tunnel.  Casey made no objections
whatever to going.  The tunnel was a fairly long one, he noticed, with
drifts opening out of it to left and right. At the end of the main
tunnel, Joe turned, took Casey's candle from him and stuck it into a
seam in the wall, as he had done with his own.

"Ever drill in rock?" he asked shortly.

"Mebbe I have an' mebbe I ain't," Casey returned defiantly.

"Here's a drill, an' here's your single-jack.  Now git t' work. There
ain't any loafin' around this camp, and spies never meant good to
nobody.  Yuh needn't expect to be popular with us--but you'll git your
grub if yuh earn it."

Casey looked at the drill, took the double-headed, four-pound hammer
and hesitated.  He has said that it was pretty hard to resist braining
the two of them at once.  But there would still be the old man with the
shotgun, and he admitted that he was curious about the old woman who
rocked and rocked.  He decided to wait awhile and see, why these miners
found it necessary to shoot harmless prospectors who came near the
butte.  So he spat into the dust of the tunnel floor, squinted at Joe
for a minute and went to work.

That day Casey was kept underground except during the short interval of
"shooting" and waiting for the dynamite smoke to clear out of the
tunnel; which process Casey assisted by operating a hand blower much
against his will.  Joe remained always on guard, eyeing Casey
suspiciously.  When at last he was permitted to pick up his coat and
leave the tunnel, night had fallen so that the gulch was dim and
shadowy.  Casey was conducted to a dugout cabin where bacon was frying
too fast and smoking suffocatingly.  Paw was there, in a vile temper
which seemed to be directed toward the three impartially and to have
been caused chiefly by his temporary occupation as camp cook.

Casey watched the old man place food for one person in little dishes
which he set in a bake pan for want of a tray.  He added a small tin
teapot of tea and disappeared from the dugout.

"Two of us waitin' to see your boss, huh?"  Casey inquired boldly of
Joe.  "Can't we eat together?"

"You can call yourself lucky if you eat at all," Joe retorted glumly.
"The old man's pretty sore at the way you handled him. He's runnin'
this camp; I ain't."

Casey let it go at that, chiefly because he was hungry and tired and
did not want to risk losing his supper altogether.  Hounds like these,
he told himself bitterly, were capable of any crime--from smashing a
man's skull and throwing him off the rim-rock to starving him to death.
He was Casey Ryan, ready always to fight whether his chance of winning
was even or merely microscopical; but even so, Casey was not inclined
toward suicide.

When the old man presently returned and the three sat down to the
table, Casey obeyed a gesture and sat down with them.  In spite of
Joe's six-shooter laid handily upon the table beside his plate, Casey
ate heartily, though the food was neither well cooked nor over
plentiful.

After supper he rose and filled his pipe which they had permitted him
to keep.  A stranger coming into the cabin might not have guessed that
Casey was a prisoner.  When the table was cleared and Hank set about
washing the dishes, Casey picked up a grimy dish towel branded black in
places where it had rubbed sooty kettles, and grinned cheerfully at Paw
while he dried a tin plate.  Paw eyed him dubiously over a stinking
pipe, spat reflectively into the woodbox and crossed his legs the other
way, loosely swinging an ill-shod foot.

"Y'ain't told us yet what brung yuh up on the butte," Paw observed
suddenly.  "Yuh wa'n't lost--yuh ain't got the mark uh no tenderfoot.
What was yuh doin' up in that tree?"

"Mebbe I mighta been huntin' mountain sheep," Casey retorted calmly.

"Huntin' mountain sheep up a tree is a new one," tittered Hank. "Wish
you'd give me a swaller uh that brand.  Must have a kick like a brindle
mule."

"More likely 'White Mule.'" Casey cocked a knowing eye at Hank. "You're
too late, young feller.  I chewed the cork day before yesterday," he
declared.

While he fished another plate out of the pan, Casey observed that Paw
looked at Joe inquiringly, and that Joe moved his head sidewise a
careful inch, and back again.

"Moonshine, huh?" Paw hazarded hopefully.  "Yuh peddlin' it, er makin'
it?"

Casey grinned secretively.  "A man can't be pinched without the goods,"
he observed shrewdly.  "I was raised in a country where they took fools
out an' brained 'em with an axe.  You fellers ain't been none too
friendly, recollect.  When's your boss expected home, did yuh say?  I'd
kinda like to meet 'im."

"He'll kinda like to meet you," Joe returned darkly. "Your actions has
been plumb suspicious.

"Nothin' suspicious about MY actions," Casey stated truculently,
throwing discretion behind him.  "The suspiciousness lays up here
somewheres on this butte.  If yuh want to know what brung me up here,
Casey Ryan's the man that can tell yuh to your faces.  I come up here
to find out who's been gittin' busy with a high-power on my camp down
below.  Ain't it natural a man'd want to know who'd shot his two
burros--an' 'is pardner?"  Casey had impulsively decided to throw in
Barney for good measure.  "Casey Ryan ain't the man to set under a bush
an' be shot at like a rabbit.  You can ask anybody if Casey ever backed
up fer man er beast.  I come up here huntin'. Shore I did.  It wasn't
sheep I was after--that there's my mistake. It was goats."

"Guess I got yourn," Hank leered "when stuck my gun in your back hair."

"If any one's 'been usin' a high-power it wasn't on this butte," Joe
growled.  "None uh this bunch done any shootin'.  Pap an' Hank, they
was up here huntin' burros an I caught yuh up a tree spyin'. We got a
little band uh antelope up here we're pertectin'.  Our boss got himself
made a deppity fer just such cases as yourn appears t' be--pervidin'
your case ain't worse.

"Now you say your pardner was shot down below in your camp. That shore
looks bad fer you, old-timer.  The boss'll shore have t' look into it
when he gits here.  Lucky we made up our minds t' hold yuh--a murderer,
like as not."  He filled his pipe with deliberation, while Casey, his
jaw sagging, stared from one to the other.

Casey had meant to accuse them to their faces of shooting Barney and
the burros from the rim-rock.  It had occurred to him that if they
believed Barney dead, they might reveal something of their purpose in
the attack.  Concealment, he felt vaguely, would serve merely to
sharpen their suspicion of him.  It had seemed very important to Casey
that these three should not know that Barney was probably well on his
way to Barstow by now.

Barney in Barstow would mean Barney bearing news that Casey Ryan was
undoubtedly murdered by outlaws in the Panamints; which would mean a
few officers on the trail, with Barney to guide them to the spot.  Paw
and Hank and Joe--outlaws all, he would have sworn would get what Casey
called their needin's.  His jaw muscles tightened when he thought of
that, and the prospect held him quiet under Joe's injustice.

"I can prove anything I'm asked to prove when the time comes," he said
sourly, and began to roll himself a cigarette, since his pipe had gone
out.  "But I ain't in any courtroom yet, an' you fellers ain't any
judge an' jury."

"We got to hold ye,"  Paw spoke up unctiously, as if the decision had
been his.  "Ef a crime's been committed, like you say it has, we got to
do our duty an' hold ye.  The boss'll know what to do with ye--like I
said all along; when I hauled ye down outa that tree, for instance.

"Aw, shut up, Paw, you ol' fool, you," Hank commanded again with filial
gentleness.  "He had yore tongue hangin' out a foot when I come along
an' captured 'im.  Don't go takin' no credit to yourself--you ain't got
none comin'.  Mart'll know what to do with 'im, all right.  But yuh
needn't go an' try to let on to Mart that you was the one that caught
'im.  He had you caught. An' he'd a killed yuh if I hadn't showed up
an' pulled 'im off'n yuh."

"Well now, when it comes to KILLIN'," Casey interjected spitefully, "I
guess I coulda put the two of yuh away if I'd a wanted to right bad.
Casey Ryan ain't no killer, because he don't have to be.  G'wan an'
hold me if yuh feel that way.  Grub ain't none too good, but I can
stand it till your boss comes.  I want a man-to-man talk with him,
anyway."



CHAPTER FIVE

That night Casey slept soundly in a bunk built above Joe's bed in the
dugout, with Hank and Paw on the opposite side of the room with their
guns handy.  In the morning he thought well enough of his stomach to
get up and start breakfast when Hank had built the fire. He was aware
of Joe's suspicious gaze from the lower bunk, and of the close presence
of Joe's six-shooter eyeing him balefully from underneath the top
blanket.  Hank, too, was watchful as a coyote, which he much resembled,
in Casey's opinion.  But Casey did not mind trifles of that kind, once
his mind was at ease about the breakfast and he was free to slice bacon
the right thickness, and mix the hot-cake batter himself. For the first
time in many weeks he sang--if you could call it singing--over his work.

When Casey Ryan sings over a breakfast fire, you may expect the bacon
fried exactly right.  You may be sure the hot-cakes will be browned
correctly with no uncooked dough inside, and that the coffee will give
you heart for whatever hardship the day may hold.

Even Paw's surliness lightened a bit by the time he had speared his
tenth cake and walloped it in the bacon grease before sprinkling it
thick with sugar and settling the eleventh cake on top.  Casey was
eyeing the fourteenth cake on Hank's plate when Joe looked up at him
over a loaded fork.

"Save out enough dough for three good uns," Joe ordered, "an' fill that
little coffee pot an' set it to keep hot, before Hank hogs the hull
thing.  Dad, seems like you're, too busy t' think uh some things Mart
wouldn't want forgot."  Paw looked quickly at Casey; but Casey Ryan had
played poker all his life, and his weathered face showed no expression
beyond a momentary interest, which was natural.

"Other feller hurt bad?" he inquired carelessly,  looking at Joe's
bandaged hand.  He almost grinned when he saw the relieved glances
exchanged between Joe and Paw.

"Leg broke," Joe mumbled over a mouthful.  "Dad, he set it an' it's
doin' all right.  He's up in another cabin."  Through Hank's brainless
titter, Joe added carefully, "Bad ground in the first right-hand drift.
We had to abandon it.  Rocks big as your head comin' in on yuh
onexpected.  None uh them right-hand drifts is safe fer a man t' walk
in, much less work."

Thereupon Casey related a thrilling story of a cave-in, and assured Joe
that he and his partner were lucky to get off with mere broken bones.
Casey, you will observe, was running contrary to his nature and leaning
to diplomacy.

For himself, I am sure he would never have troubled to placate them. He
would have taken the first slim chance that offered--or made one--and
fought the three to a finish.

But there was the old woman in the rock hut above them, rocking back
and forth and staring at a wall that had no visible opening save one
small window to let in the light of outdoors.  Prisoner she must
be--though why, Casey could only guess.

Perhaps she was some desert woman, the widow of some miner who had been
shot as these three had tried to shoot him and Barney Oakes. Mean,
malevolent as they were, they would still lack the brutishness
necessary to shoot an old woman.  So they had shut her up there in the
rock hut, not daring to take her back to civilization where she would
tell of the crime.  It was all plain enough to Casey.  The story of the
crippled miner made him curl his lip contemptuously when his back was
safely turned from Joe.

That day Casey thought much of the old woman in the hut, and of Paw's
worse than inferior cooking.  Though he did not realize the change in
himself, six months of close companionship with the Little Woman had
changed Casey Ryan considerably.  Time was when even his
soft-heartedness would not have impelled him to patient scheming that
he might help an old woman whose sole claim upon his sympathy consisted
of four rock walls and a look of calm despair in her eyes.  Now, Casey
was thinking and planning for the old woman more than for himself.

Wherefore, Casey chose the time when he was "putting in an upper"
(which is miner's parlance for drilling a hole in the upper face of the
tunnel).  He gritted his teeth when he swung back the single-jack and
landed a glancing blow on the knuckles of his left hand instead of the
drill end.  No man save Casey Ryan or a surgeon could have told
positively whether the metacarpal bones were broken or whether the hand
was merely skinned and bruised.

Joe came up, regarded the bleeding hand sourly, led Casey out to the
dugout and bandaged the hand for him.  There would be no more tunnel
work for Casey until the hand had healed; that was accepted without
comment.

That night Casey proved to Paw that, with one hand in a sling much
resembling Joe's, he could nevertheless cook a meal that made eating a
pleasure to look forward to.  After that the old woman in the little
stone hut had pudding, sometimes, and cake made without eggs, and pie;
and the potatoes were mashed or baked instead of plain boiled. Casey
had the satisfaction of seeing the dishes return empty to the dugout,
and know that he was permitted to add something to her comfort and
well-being. The Little Woman would be glad of that, Casey thought with
a glow.  She might never hear of it, but Casey liked to feel that he
was doing something that would please the Little Woman.

For the first few days after Casey was installed as cook, one of the
three remained always with him, making it plain that he was under
guard.  Two were always busy elsewhere.  Casey saw that he was expected
to believe that they were at work in the tunnel, driving it in to a
certain contact of which they spoke frequently and at length.

At supper they would mention their footage for that day's work, and
Casey would hide a grin of derision.  Casey knew rock as he knew bacon
and beans and his sour-dough can.  To make the footage they claimed to
be making in that tunnel, they would need to shoot twice a day, with a
round of, say, five holes to a shot.

As a matter of fact, two holes a day, one shot at noon and one at
night, were the most Casey ever heard fired in the tunnel or elsewhere
about the mine.  But he did not tell them any of the things he thought;
not even Joe, who had intelligence far above Paw and Hank, ever guessed
that Casey listened every day for their shots and could tell, almost to
an inch what progress they were actually making in the tunnel.  Nor did
he guess that Casey Ryan with his mouth shut was more unsafe than
"giant powder" laid out in the sun until it sweated destruction.

Persistent effort, directed by an idea based solely upon an abstract
theory, must be driven by a trained intelligence.  In this case the
abstract theory that every prisoner must be watched must support itself
unaided by Casey's behavior.  Not even Joe's intelligence was trained
to a degree where the theory in itself was sufficient to hold him to
the continuous effort of watching Casey.

Wherefore Paw, Hank and Joe presently slipped into the habit of leaving
Casey alone for an hour or so; being careful to keep the guns out of
his reach, and returning to the dugout at unexpected intervals to make
sure that all was well.

Casey Ryan knew his pots and pans, and how to make them fill his days
if need be.  With savory suppers and his care-free, Casey Ryan grin, he
presently lulled them into accepting him as a handy man around camp,
and into forgetting that he was at least a potential enemy.  Afoot and
alone in that unfriendly land, with his left hand smashed and carried
in a sling, and on his tongue an Irish joke that implied content with
his captivity, Casey Ryan would not have looked dangerous to more
intelligent men than these three.

They should have looked one night under the bedding in Casey's bunk.
More important still would have been the safeguarding of their "giant
powder" and caps and fuse.  They should not have left it in a gouged,
open hollow under a boulder near the dugout. They were not burdened by
the weight of their brains, I imagine.

Just here I should like to say a few words to those who are wholly
ignorant of the devastating power contained in "giant powder"--which is
dynamite.  If you have never had any experience with the stuff, you are
likely to go out with a bang and a puff of bluish-brown smoke when you
go.  On the other hand, you may believe the weird tales one reads now
and then, of how whole mountainsides have been thrown down by the
discharge of a few sticks of dynamite.  Or of one man striking terror
to the very souls of a group of mutinous miners by threatening to throw
a piece at them.  Very well, now this is the truth without any frills
of exaggeration or any belittlement:

Dynamite MAY go off by being thrown so that it lands with a jar, but it
is not likely to be so hasty as all that.  Whole boxes of it have been
dropped off wagons traveling over rough trails, with no worse effect
than a nervous chill down the spine of the driver of the wagon.  It is
true that old stuff, after lying around for months and months through
varying degrees of temperature, may perform erratically, exploding when
it shouldn't and refusing to explode when it should.  The average miner
refuses to take a chance with stale "giant" if he can get hold of fresh.

One stick the size of an ordinary candle, and from that to a maximum
amount of four sticks, may be used to "load" a hole eighteen to
twenty-four inches long, drilled into living rock. The amount of
dynamite used depends upon the quality of rock to be broken and the
skill and good judgment of the miner.  In average hard-rock mining,
from three to five of these holes are drilled in a space four-by-six
feet in area.

A stick of dynamite is exploded by inserting in one end of the stick a
high-power detonating cap which will deliver a twenty-pound blow per
X--whatever that means.  From three- to six-X caps are used in ordinary
mining.  Three-X caps sometimes fail to explode a stick of dynamite.  A
six-X cap, delivering a one-hundred-and-twenty-pound blow, may be
counted upon to do the work without fail.

The cap itself is exploded by a spark running through a length of fuse,
the length depending altogether upon the time required to reach a point
of safety after the fuse is lighted.  The cap is really more dangerous
to handle than is the dynamite itself.  The cap is a tricky thing that
may go off at any jar or scratch or at a spark from pipe or cigarette.
You can, if you are sufficiently careless of possible results, light
the twisted paper end of a stick of dynamite and watch the dynamite
burn like wax in your fingers; it MAY go off and set your friends to
work retrieving portions of your body.  More likely, it will do nothing
but burn harmlessly.

Well, then, a piece of fuse is inserted in the open end of the cap, and
the metal pressed tight against the fuse to hold it in place. Pressed
down by the miner's teeth, sometimes, if he has been long in the
business and has grown careless about his head; otherwise he crimps the
cap on with a small pair of pliers or the back of his knife blade--and
feels a bit easier when it is done without losing a hand.

You would think, unless you are accustomed to the stuff, that when five
holes are loaded with, probably, ten or twelve sticks of dynamite to
the lot, each hole containing a six-X exploding cap as well, that the
first shot would likewise be the last shot and that the whole tunnel
would cave in and the mountain behind it would shake. Nothing like that
occurs.  If there are five loaded holes in the tunnel face, and you do
not hear, one after the other, five muffled BOOMS, you will know that
one hole failed to go off--and that the miner is worried.  It happens
sometimes that four holes loaded with eight sticks of dynamite explode
within a foot or so of the fifth hole and yet the fifth hole remains
"dead" and a menace to the miner until it is discharged.

So please don't swallow those wild tales of a stick of dynamite that
threw down a mountainside.  I once read a story--it was not so long
ago--of a Chinaman who wiped out a mine with a little piece of dynamite
which he carried in his pocket.  I laughed.

Casey Ryan, on the first day when he was left alone with his crippled
hand and his pots and pans for company, did nothing whatever that he
would not have done had one of the three been present.  He was
suspicious of their going and thought it was a trap set to catch him in
an attempted escape.

On the second day when the three went off together and left him alone,
Casey went out gathering wood and discovered just where the "powder,"
fuse and caps were kept under a huge, black boulder between the tunnel
portal and the dugout.  On the third day he also gathered wood and
helped himself to two sticks of dynamite, three caps and eighteen
inches of fuse.  Not enough to be missed unless they checked their
supply more carefully than Casey believed they did; but enough for
Casey's purpose nevertheless.

That night, while the moon shone in through the dingy window at the
head of his bunk and gave him a little light to work by, Casey sat up
in bed and snored softly and with a soothing rhythm while he cut a
stick of dynamite in two, capped five inches of fuse for each piece
working awkwardly with his one good hand and pinching the caps tight
with his teeth, which might have sent him with a bang into Kingdom
Come--and very carefully worked the caps into the powder until no more
than three inches of fuse protruded from the end of the half stick.  It
would have been less dangerous to land with a yell in the middle of the
floor and fight the three men with one bare hand, but Casey's courage
never turned a hair.

Still snoring mildly, he held up to the moonlight two deadly weapons
and surveyed them with much satisfaction.  They would not be so quick,
as fiction would have them, but if his aim was accurate in throwing,
they would be deadly enough.  Moreover, he could count with a good deal
of certainty upon a certain degree of terror which the sight of them in
his hand would produce.

When Casey Ryan cooked breakfast next morning, he carried two
half-sticks of loaded dynamite under his hand in the sling. Can you
wonder that even he shied at standing over the stove cooking hot cakes
and complained that his broken hand pained him a lot and that the heat
made it worse?  But a shrewd observer would have noticed on his face
the expression of a cat that has been shut in the pantry over night.

Joe volunteered to take another look at the hand and see if blood
poison was "setting in"; but Casey said it didn't feel like blood
poison.  He had knocked it against the bunk edge in his sleep, he
declared.  He'd dose 'er with iodine after a while, and she'd be all
right.

Joe let it go at that, being preoccupied with other matters at which
Casey could only guess.  He conferred with Paw outside the dugout after
breakfast, called Hank away from the dish-washing and the three set off
toward the tunnel with a brisker air than usually accompanied them to
work.  Casey watched them go and felt reasonably sure of at least two
hours to himself.

The first thing Casey did after he had made sure that he was actually
alone was to remove the deadly stuff from the sling and lay it on a
shadowed shelf where it would be safe but convenient to his hand. Then,
going to his bunk, he reached under the blankets and found the other
stick of dynamite which he had not yet loaded.  This he laid on the
kitchen table and cut it in two as he had done last night with the
other stick.  With his remaining cap he loaded a half and carried it
back to his bunk. He was debating in his mind whether it was worth
while purloining another cap from a box under the boulder when another
fancy took him and set him grinning.

Four separate charges of dynamite, he reasoned, would not be necessary.
It was an even chance that the sight of a piece with the fuse in his
hand would be sufficient to tame Paw or Hank or Joe--or the three
together, for that matter--without going further than to give them a
sight of it.

With that idea uppermost, Casey split the paper carefully down the side
of the remaining half-stick, took out the contents in a tin plate and
carried it outside where he buried it in the sand beneath a bush.
Returning to the dugout he made a thick dough of leftover pancake
batter and molded it into the dynamite wrapping with a fragment of
harmless fuse protruding from the opened end. When the thing was dry,
Casey thought it would look very deadly and might be useful.  After
several days of helplessness for want of a weapon, Casey was in a mood
to supply himself generously.

He finished the dish-washing, working awkwardly with one hand. After
that he put a kettle of beans on to boil, filled the stove with pinon
sticks and closed the drafts.  He armed himself with the two loaded
pieces of dynamite from the cupboard, filled his pockets with such
other things as he thought he might need, and went prospecting on his
own account.

At the portal of the tunnel he stopped and listened for the ping-g,
ping-g of a single-jack striking steadily upon steel. But the tunnel
was silent, the ore car uptilted at the end of its track on the dump.
Yet the three men were supposedly at work in the mine, had talked at
breakfast about wanting to show a certain footage when the boss
returned, and of needing to hurry.

Casey went into the tunnel, listening and going silently; sounds travel
far in underground workings.  At the mouth of the first right-hand
drift he stopped again and listened.  This, if he would believe Joe,
was the drift where the bad ground had caused the accident to Joe and
his partner whose leg had been broken. Casey found the drift as silent
as the main tunnel.  He went in ten feet or so and lighted the candle
he had pulled from inside his shirt. With the candle held in the
swollen fingers of his injured hand, and a prospector's pick taken from
the portal in his other, Casey went on cautiously, keeping an eye upon
the roof which, to his wise, squinting eyes, looked perfectly solid and
safe.

If a track had ever been laid in this drift it had long since been
removed.  But a well-defined path led along its center with boot tracks
going and coming, blurring one another with much passing. Casey grinned
and went on, his ears cocked for any sound before or behind, his shoes
slung over his arm by their tied laces.

So he came, in the course of a hundred feet or so, to a crude door of
split cedar slabs, the fastening padlocked on his side. Casey had
vaguely expected some such bar to his path, and he merely gave a grunt
of satisfaction that the lock was old and on his side of the door.

With his jackknife Casey speedily took off one side of the lock and
opened it.  Making the door appear locked behind him when he had passed
through was a different matter, and Casey did not attempt it.  Instead,
he merely closed the door behind him, carrying the padlock in with him.

As Casey reviewed his situation, being on the butte at all was a risk
in itself.  One detail more or less could not matter so much. Besides,
he was a bold Casey Ryan with two loaded half-sticks of dynamite in his
sling.

A crude ladder against the wall of a roomy stope beyond the door did
not in the least surprise him.  He had expected something of this sort.
When he had topped the ladder and found himself in a chamber that
stretched away into blackness, he grunted again his mental confirmation
of a theory working out beautifully in fact. His candle held close to
the wall, he moved forward along the well-trodden path, looking for a
door.  Mechanically he noticed also the formation of the wall and the
vein of ore--probably high-grade in pockets, at least--that had caused
this chamber to be dug.  The ore, he judged, had long since been taken
out and down through the stope into the tunnel and so out through the
main portal. These workings were old and for mining purposes abandoned.
But just now Casey was absorbed in solving the one angle of the mystery
which he had stumbled upon at first, and he gave no more than a glance
and a thought to the silent testimony of the rock walls.

He found the door, fastened also on the outside just as he had expected
it would be.  Beside it stood a rather clever heating apparatus which
Casey did not examine in detail.  His Irish heart was beating rather
fast while he unfastened the door.  Beyond that door his thoughts went
questing eagerly but he hesitated nevertheless before he lifted his
knuckles and rapped.

There was no reply.  Casey waited a minute, knocked again, then pulled
the door open a crack and looked in.  The old woman sat there rocking
back and forth, steadily, quietly.  But her thin fingers were rolling a
corner of her apron hem painstakingly, as if she meant to hem it again.
Her eyes were fixed absently upon the futile task.  Casey watched her
as long as he dared and cleared his throat twice in the hope that she
would notice him. But the old woman rocked back and forth and rolled
her apron hem; unrolled it and carefully rolled it again.

"Good morning, ma'am," said Casey, clearing his throat for the third
time and coming a step into the room with his candle dripping wax on
the floor.

For just an instant the uneasy fingers paused in their rolling of the
apron hem.  For just so long the rockers hesitated in their motion.
But the old woman did not reply nor turn her face toward him; and Casey
pushed the door shut behind him and took two more steps toward her.

"I come to see if yuh needed anything, ma'am; a friend, mebbe." Casey
grinned amiably, wanting to reassure her if it were possible to make
her aware of his presence.  "They had yuh locked in, ma'am. That don't
look good to Casey Ryan.  If yuh wanta get out--if they got yuh held a
prisoner here, or anything like 'that, you can trust Casey Ryan any old
time. Is--can I do anything for yuh, ma'am?" The old woman dropped her
hands to her lap and held them there, closely clasped.  Her head swung
slowly round until she was looking at Casey with that awful, fixed
stare she had heretofore directed at the wall or the floor.

"Tell those hell-hounds they have a thousand years to burn--every one
of them!" she said in a deep, low voice that had in it a singing
resonance like a chant.  "Every cat, every rat, every mouse, every
louse, has a thousand year's to burn.  Tell Mart the hounds of hell
must burn!"  Her voice carried a terrible condemnation far beyond the
meaning of the words themselves.  It was as if she were pronouncing the
doom of the whole world. "Every cat, every rat, every mouse, every
louse--"

Casey Ryan's jaw dropped an inch.  He backed until he was against the
door.  He had to swallow twice before he could find his voice, and
those of you who know Casey Ryan will appreciate that. He waited until
she had finished her declaration.

"No, ma'am, you're wrong.  I come up here to see if I could help yuh."

"Hounds of hell--black as the bottomless pit that spewed you forth to
prey upon mankind!  The world will have to burn.  Tell those hounds of
hell that bay at the gibbous moon the world will have to burn.  Every
cat, every rat, every mouse, every louse has a thousand years to burn!"

Casey Ryan, with his mouth half open and his eyes rather wild,
furtively opened the door behind him.  Still meeting fixedly the dull
glare of the old woman's eyes, Casey slid out through the door and
fastened it hastily behind him.  With an uneasy glance now and then
over his shoulder as if he feared the old woman might be in pursuit of
him, he hurried back down the ladder to the closed door in the drift,
pulled the door shut behind him and put the padlock in place before he
breathed naturally.

He stopped then to put on his shoes, made his way to the drift opening
and listened again for voices or footsteps.  When he found the way
clear he hurried out and back to the dugout.  The first thing he did
was to fill his pipe and light it.  Even then the sonorous voice of the
old woman intoning her dreadful proclamation against the world rang in
his ears and sent occasional ripples of horror down his spine.  Seen
through the window, she had looked a sad, lonely old lady who needed
sympathy and help.  At closer range she was terrible.  Casey was trying
to forget her by busying himself about the stove when Joe walked in
unexpectedly.

Joe stood just inside the door, staring at Casey with a glassy look in
his eyes.  Something in Joe's face warned Casey of impending events;
but with that terrible old woman still fresh in his mind, Casey was in
the mood to welcome distraction of any sort.  He shifted his hand in
the sling so that his concealed weapons lay more comfortably therein,
secure from detection, and waited.

Joe leaned forward, lifted an arm slowly and aimed a finger at Casey
accusingly.

"Pap says that you're a Federal officer!" he began, waggling his finger
at Casey.  "Pap thinks you come here spyin' around t' see what we're up
to on this here butte.  Now, you can't pull nothin' like that!  You
can't get away with it.

"Hank, he wants t' bump yuh off an' say nothin' to anybody.  Now, I
come t' have it out with yuh.  If you're a Federal officer we're goin'
t' settle with yuh an' take no chances.  Mart, he's more easy-goin' in
some ways, on account of havin' his crazy ol' mother on 'is hands t'
take care of.  Mart don't want no killin'--on account of his mother
goin' loony when 'is dad got killed.  But Mart ain't here. Pap an'
Hank, they been at me all mornin' t' let 'em bump yuh off.

"But Pap an' Hank, they're drunk, see?  I'm the only sober man left on
the job.  So I come up here t' settle with yuh myself. Takes a sober
man with a level head t' settle these things.  Now, if you come up here
spyin' an' snoopin', you git bumped off an' no argument about it.
Mart's got his mother t' take care of--an' we aim t' pertect Mart.  If
you're a Federal officer, I want t' know it here an' now.  If yuh
ain't, I want yuh t' sample some uh the out-kickin'est 'White Mule' yuh
ever swallered.  Now which are yuh, and what yuh goin' t' do?  I want
my answer here an' now, an' no argument an' no foolin'!"

Casey blinked but his mouth widened in a grin.  "Me, I never went
lookin' fer nothin, I wouldn't put under my vest, Joe," he declared
convincingly.  So that was it!  He was thinking against time.
Moonshiners as well as would-be murderers they were--and Joe drunk and
giving them away like a fool.  Casey wished that he knew where Hank and
Paw were at this moment.  He hoped, too, that Joe was right--that Hank
and Paw were drunk.  He'd have the three of them tied in a row before
dark, in any case.  The thing to do now was to humor Joe along--leave
it to Casey Ryan!

Joe was uncorking a small, flat bottle of pale liquor.  Now he held it
out to Casey.  Casey took it, thinking he would pretend to drink, would
urge Joe to take a drink; it would be simple, once he got Joe started.
But Joe had a few ideas of his own concerning the celebration.  He
pulled a gun unexpectedly, leaned against the closed door to steady
himself and aimed it full at Casey.

"In just two minutes I'm goin' t' shoot if that there bottle ain't
empty," he stated gravely, nodding his head with intense pride in his
ability to handle the situation.  "If you're a Federal officer, yuh
won't dast t' drink.  If yuh ain't, you'll be almighty glad to. Anyway,
it'll be settled one way or t'other. Drink 'er down!"

Casey blinked again, but this time he did not grin.  He debated swiftly
his chance of scaring Joe with the dynamite before Joe would shoot.
But Joe had his finger crooked with drunken solemnity upon the trigger.
The time for dynamite was not now.

"Pap an' Hank, they lap up anything an' call it good.  I claim that's
got a back-action kick to it.  Drink 'er down!"

Casey drank 'er down.  It was like swallowing flames. It was a
half-pint flask, and it was full when Casey, with Joe's eyes fixed upon
him, tilted it and began to drink.  Under Joe's baleful glare Casey
emptied the flask before he stopped.

Joe settled his shoulders comfortably against the doorway and watched
Casey make for the water bucket.

"I claim that's the out-kickin'est stuff that ever was made on Black
Butte.  How'd yuh like it?"

"All right," Casey bore witness, keeping his eyes fixed on Joe and the
gun and trying his best to maintain a nonchalant manner. "I'd call it
purty fair hootch."

"It's GOOD hootch!" Joe declared impressively, apparently quite
convinced that Casey was not a Federal officer.  "Can yuh feel the
kick'to it?"

Casey backed until he sat on the edge of the table his good right hand
supporting his left elbow outside the sling.  He grinned at Joe and
while he still keenly realized that he was playing a part for the sole
purpose of gaining somehow an advantage over Joe, he was conscious of a
slight giddiness.  An unprejudiced observer would have noticed that his
grin was not quite the old, Casey Ryan grin.  It was a shade foolish.

"Bet your life I can feel the kick!" he agreed, nodding his head. "You
can ask anybody."  Then Casey discovered something strange in Joe's
appearance.  He lifted his head, held it very still and regarded Joe
attentively.

"Say, Joe, what yuh tryin' to do with that six-gun?  Tryin' to write
your name in the air with it?"

Joe looked inquiringly down at the gun, eyeing it as if it were a new
and absolutely unknown object.  He satisfied himself apparently beyond
all doubt that the gun was doing nothing it should not do, and finally
turned his attention to Casey sitting on the table and grinning at him
meaninglessly.

"Ain't writin' nothin'," Joe stated solemnly.  "It's yore eyes. Gun's
all right--yo'r seein' crooked.  It's the hootch. Back-action kick to
it.  Ain't that right?"

"That's right," nodded Casey and he added, grinning more foolishly,
"Darn right, that's right!  Back-action kick--bet your life."

Joe pushed the gun inside his waistband and crooked his finger at
Casey, beckoning mysteriously.  "C'mon an' I'll show yuh how it's
made," he invited with heavy enthusiasm.  "Yore a judge uh hootch all
right--I can see that.  I'll show yuh how we do it.  Best White Mule in
Nevada.  Ain't that right?  Ain't that the real hootch?"

"'S right, all right," Casey agreed earnestly.  "Puttin' the hoot in
hootch--you fellers.  You can ask anybody if that ain't right."

Joe laughed hoarsely.  "Puttin' the hoot in hootch--that's right. I
knowed you was all right.  Didn't I say you was?  I told Hank an' Pap
you wasn't no Federal officer.  They know it, too. I was foolin' back
there.  I knowed you didn't need no gun pulled on yuh t' make yuh put
away the hootch.  Lapped it up like a thirsty hound. I knowed yuh
would--I was kiddin' yuh, runnin' that razoo with the gun.  Ain't that
right?"

"Darn right, that's right! I knew you was foolin' all along. You knew
Casey Ryan's all right--sure, you knowed it!"  Casey laid his good hand
investigatively against his stomach.  "Pretty hot hootch--you can ask
anybody if it ain't!  Workin' like an air drill a'ready."

He blinked inquisitively at Joe, who stared back inquiringly. "Who's
your friend?"  Casey demanded pugnaciously.  "He sneaked in on yuh.  I
never seen 'im come in."

Joe turned slowly and looked behind him at the blank boards of the
unpainted door.  Just as slowly he turned back to Casey.  A slow grin
split his leathery face.

"Ain't nobody.  It's the hootch. Told yuh, didn't I?  Gittin' the best
of yuh, ain't it?  C'mon--I'll show yuh how it's made."

"Take a barr'l t' git the besta--Casey Ry'n," Casey boasted, his words
blurring noticeably.  "Where's y'r White Mule?  Let 'er kick--Casey
Ry'n can lead 'er an' tame 'er--an' make'r eat outa 's hand!"
Following Joe, Casey stepped high over a rock no bigger than his fist.

With a lurch he straightened and tried to pull his muddled wits out of
the fog that was fast enveloping them.  Dimly he sensed the importance
of this discovery which Joe had forced upon him. In flashes of normalcy
he knew that he must see all he could of their moonshine operations.
He must let them think he was drunk until he knew all their secrets.
He assured himself vaguely that he must, above all things, keep his
head.

But it was all pretty hazy and rapidly growing hazier. Casey Ryan, you
must know, was not what is informally termed a drinking man. In his
youth he might have been able to handle a sudden half-pint of moonshine
whisky and keep as level a head as he now strove valiantly to retain.
But Casey's later years had been more temperate than most desert men
would believe.  Unfortunately virtue is not always it own reward; at
least Casey now found himself the worse for past abstinences.

Joe led him into the tunnel, laughing sardonically because Casey found
it scarcely wide enough for his oscillating progress. They turned into
a drift.  Casey did not know which drift it was, though he tried
foggily to remember.  He was still, you must know, trying to keep a
level head and gain valuable information for the sheriff who he hoped
would return to the butte with Barney.

Paw and Hank were wrangling somewhere ahead.  Casey could hear their
raised voices mingled in a confused rumbling in the pent walls of the
drift.  Casey thought they passed through a doorway, and that Joe
closed a heavy door behind them, but he was not sure.

Memory of the old woman intoning her horrible anathema surged back upon
Casey with the closing of the door.  The voices of Hank and Paw he now
mistook for the ravings of the woman in the stone hut. Casey balked
there, and would not go on.  He did not want to face the old woman
again, and he said so repeatedly--or believed that he did.

Joe caught him by the arm and pulled him forward by main strength. The
voices of Paw and Hank came closer and clarified into words; or did
Casey and Joe walk farther and come into their presence?

They were all standing together somewhere, in a large, underground
chamber with a hole letting in the sunlight high up on one side. Casey
was positive there was a hole up there, because the sun shone in his
eyes and to avoid it he moved aside and fell over a bucket or a keg or
something.  Hank laughed loudly at the spectacle, and Paw swore because
the fall startled him; but it was Joe who helped Casey up.

Casey knew that he was sitting on a barrel--or something--and telling a
funny story.  He thought it must be very funny indeed, because every
one was laughing and bending double and slapping legs while he talked.
Casey realized that here at last were men who appreciated Casey Ryan as
he deserved to be appreciated. Tears ran down his own weathered
cheeks--tears of mirth.  He had never laughed so much before in all his
life, he thought.  Every one, even Paw, who was normally a mean,
cantankerous old cuss, was having the time of his life.

They attempted to show Casey certain intricacies of their still, which
made it better than other stills and put a greater kick in the White
Mule it bred.  Somewhere back in the dim recesses of Casey's mind, he
felt that he ought to listen and remember what they told him.  Vaguely
he knew that he must not take another drink, no matter how insistent
they were.  In the brief glow of that resolution Casey protested that
he could hoot without any more hootch.  But he hated to hurt Paw's
feelings, or Hank's or Joe's. They had made the hootch with a new and
different twist, and they were honestly anxious for his judgment and
approval.  He decided that perhaps he really ought to take a little
more just to please them; not much--a couple of drinks maybe.
Wherefore, he graciously consented to taste the "run" of the day
before. Thereafter Casey Ryan hooted to the satisfaction of everybody,
himself most of all.

After an indeterminate interval the four left the still, taking a
bottle with them so that it might be had without delay, should they
meet a snake or a hydrophobia skunk or some other venomous reptile. It
was Casey who made the suggestion, and he became involved in
difficulties when he attempted the word venomous. Once started Casey
was determined to pronounce the word and pronounce it correctly,
because Casey Ryan never backed up when he once started. The result was
a peculiar humming which accompanied his reeling progress down the
drift (now so narrow that Casey scraped both shoulders frequently) to
the portal.

They stopped on the flat of the dump and argued over the advisability
of taking a drink apiece before going farther, as a sort of preventive.
Joe told them solemnly that they couldn't afford to get drunk on the
darn' stuff.  It had too hard a back-action kick, he explained, and
they might forget themselves if they took too much.  It was important,
Joe explained at great length, that they should not forget themselves.
The boss had always impressed upon them the grim necessity of remaining
sober whatever happened.

"We never HAVE got drunk," Joe reiterated, "and we can't afford t' git
drunk now.  We've got t' keep level heads, snakes or no snakes."

Casey Ryan's head was level.  He wabbled up to Joe and told him so to
his face, repeating the statement many times and in many forms.  He
declaimed it all the way up the path to the dugout, and when they were
standing outside.  Beyond all else, Casey was anxious that Joe should
feel perfectly certain that he, Casey Ryan, knew what he was doing,
knew what he was saying, and that his head was and always had been
perr-rf'c'ly level-l-l.

"Jus' t' prove-it--I c'n kill that jack-over-there--without-no-gun!"
Casey bragged bubblingly, running his words together as if they were
being poured in muddy liquid from his mouth.  "B'lieve it?
Think-I-can't?"

The three turned circumspectly and stared solemnly at a gray burro with
a crippled front leg that had limped to the dump heap within easy
throwing distance from the cabin door.  Hobbling on three legs it went
nosing painfully amongst a litter of tin cans and bent paper cartons,
hunting garbage.  As if conscious that it was being talked about, the
burro lifted its head and eyed the four mournfully, its ears loosely
flopping.

"How?" questioned Paw, waggling his beard disparagingly.  "Spit 'n 'is
eye?"

"Talk 'm t' death," Hank guessed with imbecile shrewdness.

"Think-I-can't?  What'll--y'bet?"

They disputed the point with drunken insistence and mild imprecations,
Hank and Paw and Joe at various times siding impartially for and
against Casey.  Casey gathered the impression that none of them
believed him.  They seemed to think he didn't know what he was talking
about.  They even questioned the fact that his head was level.  He felt
that his honor was at stake and that his reputation as a truthful man
and a level-headed man was threatened.

While they wrangled, the fingers of Casey's right hand fumbled
unobserved in the sling on his left, twisting together the two short
lengths of fuse so that he might light both as one piece. Even in his
drunkenness Casey knew dynamite and how best to handle it.  Judgment
might be dethroned, but the mechanical details of his profession were
grooved deep into habit and were observed automatically and without the
aid of conscious thought.

He braced himself against the dugout wall and raised his hand to the
cigarette he had with some trouble rolled and lighted. A spitting
splutter arose, that would have claimed the attention of the three, had
they not been unanimously engaged in trying to out-talk one another
upon the subject of Casey's ability to kill a burro seventy-five feet
away without a gun.

Casey glanced at them cunningly, drew back his right hand and pitched
something at the burro.

"Y' watch 'im!" he barked, and the three turned around to look, with no
clear conception of what it was they were expected to watch.

The burro jerked its head up, then bent to sniff at the thin curl of
powder smoke rising from amongst the cans.  Paw and Hank and Joe were
lifted some inches from the ground with the explosion. They came down
in a hail of gravel, tin cans and fragments of burro. Casey, flattened
against the wall in preparation for the blast, laughed exultantly.

Paw and Hank and Joe picked themselves up and clung together for mutual
support and comfort.  They craned necks forward, goggling incredulously
at what little was left of the burro and the pile of tin cans.

"'Z that a bumb?"  Paw cackled nervously at last, clawing gravel out of
his uncombed beard.  "'Z got me all shuck up. Whar's that 'r bottle?"

"'Z goin' t' eat a bumb--ol' fool burro!"  Hank chortled weakly,
feeling tenderly certain nicks on his cheeks where gravel had landed.
"Paw, you ol' fool, you, don't hawg the hull thing--gimme a drink!"

"Casey's sure all right," came Joe's official O.K. of the performance.
"Casey said 'e c'd do it--'n' Casey done it!"  He turned and slapped
Casey somewhat uncertainly on the back, which toppled him against the
wall again.  "Good'n on us, Casey!  Darn' good joke on us--'n' on the
burro!"

Whereupon they drank to Casey solemnly, and one and all, they
proclaimed that it was a VERY good joke on the burro.  A merciful joke,
certainly; as you would agree had you seen the poor brute hungry and
hobbling painfully, hunting scraps of food amongst the litter of tin
cans.

After that, Casey wanted to sleep.  He forced admissions from the three
that he, Casey Ryan, was all right and that he knew exactly what he was
doing and kept a level head.  He crawled laboriously into his bunk,
shoes, hat and all; and, convinced that he had defended his honor and
preserved the Casey Ryan reputation untarnished, he blissfully skipped
the next eighteen hours.



CHAPTER SIX

Casey awoke under the vivid impression that some one was driving a
gadget into his skull with a "double-jack."  The smell of bacon
scorching filled his very soul with the loathing of food.  The sight of
Joe calmly filling his pipe roused Casey to the fighting mood--with no
power to fight.  He was a sick man; and to remain alive was agony.

The squalid disorder and the stale aroma of a drunken orgy still
pervaded the dugout and made it a nightmare hole to Casey.  Hank came
tittering to the bunk and offered him a cup of coffee, muddy from too
long boiling, and Joe grinned over his pipe at the colorful language
with which Casey refused the offering.

"Better take a brace uh hootch," Joe suggested with no more than his
normal ill nature.  "I got some over at the still we made awhile back
that, ain't quite so kicky.  Been agin' it in wood an' charcoal. That
tones 'er down.  I'll go git yuh some after we eat.  Kinda want a
brace, myself.  That new hootch shore is a kickin' fool."

Paw accepted this remark, as high praise, and let three hot cakes burn
until their edges curled while he bragged of his skill as a maker of
moonshine.  Paw himself was red-eyed and loose-lipped from yesterday's
debauch.  Hank's whole face, especially in the region of his eyes, was
puffed unbecomingly.  Casey, squinting an angry eye at Hank and the cup
of coffee, spared a thought from his own misery to acknowledge surprise
that anything on earth could make Hank more unpleasant to look upon.
Joe had a sickly pallor to prove the potency of the brew.

For such is the way of moonshine when fusel oil abounds, as it does
invariably in new whisky distilled by furtive amateurs working in
secret and with neither the facilities nor the knowledge for its
scientific manufacture.  There is grim significance in the sardonic
humor of the man who first named it White Mule.  The kick is certain
and terrific; frequently it is fatal as well.  The worst of it is, you
never know what the effect will be until you have drunk the stuff; and
after you have drunk it, you are in no condition to resist the effect
or to refrain from courting further disaster.

That is what happened to Casey.  The poison in the first half-pint,
swallowed under the eye of Joe's six-shooter, upset his judgment. The
poison in his further potations made a wholly different man of Casey
Ryan; and the after effect was so terrific that he would have swallowed
cyanide if it promised relief.

He gritted his teeth and suffered tortures until Joe returned and gave
him a drink of whisky in a chipped granite cup.  Almost immediately he
felt better.  The pounding agony in his head eased perceptibly and his
nerves ceased to quiver.  After a while he sat up, gazed longingly at
the water bucket and crawled down from the bunk. He drank largely in
great gulps.  His bloodshot eyes strayed meditatively to the coffee
pot.  After an undecided moment he walked uncertainly to the stove and
poured himself a cup of coffee.

Casey lifted the cup to drink, but the smell of it under his nose
sickened him.  He weaved uncertainly to the door, opened it and threw
out the coffee--cup and all.  Which was nature flying a storm flag, had
any one with a clear head been there to observe the action and the look
on Casey's face.

"Gimme another shot uh that damn' hootch," he growled.  Joe pushed the
bottle toward Casey, eyeing him curiously.

"That stuff they run yesterday shore is kicky," Joe ruminated
sympathetically.  "Pap's proud as pups over it.  He thinks it's the
real article--but I dunno.  Shore laid yuh out, Casey, an' yuh never
got much, neither.  Not enough t' lay yuh out the way it did. Y' look
sick."

"I AM sick!"  Casey snarled, and poured himself a drink more generous
than was wise.  "When Casey Ryan says he's sick, you can put it down
he's SICK!  He don't want nobody tellin' 'im whether 'e's sick 'r
not.--he KNOWS 'e's sick!"  He drank, and swore that it was rotten
stuff not fit for a hawg (which was absolute truth).  Then he staggered
to the stove, picked up the coffee pot, carried it to the door and
flung it savagely outside because the odor offended him.

"Mart got back last night," Joe announced casually. "You was dead t'
the world.  But we told 'im you was all right, an' I guess he aims t'
give yuh steady work an' a cut-in on the deal.  We been cleanin' up
purty good money--but Mart says the market ain't what it was; too many
gone into the business.  You're a good cook an' a good miner an' a
purty good feller all around--only the boss says you'll have t' cut out
the booze."

"'J you tell 'im you MADE me drink it?"  Casey halted in the middle of
the floor, facing Joe indignantly.

"I told 'im I put it up t' yuh straight--what your business is, an'
all.  You got no call t' kick--didn't I go swipe this bottle uh booze
for yuh t' sober up on, soon as the boss's back was turned? I knowed
yuh needed it; that's why.  We all needed it. I'm just tellin' yuh the
boss don't approve of no celebrations like we had yest'day.  I got up
early an' hauled that burro outa sight 'fore he seen it.  That's how
much a friend I be, an' it wouldn't hurt yuh none to show a little
gratitude!"

"Gratitude, hell!  A lot I got in life t' be grateful for!" Casey
slumped down on the nearest bench, laid his injured hand carefully on
the table and leaned his aching head on the other while he discoursed
bitterly on the subject of his wrongs.

His muddled memory fumbled back to his grievance against traffic cops,
distorting and magnifying the injustice he had received at their hands.
He had once had a home, a wife and a fortune, he declared, and what had
happened?  Laws and cops had driven him out, had robbed him of his home
and his family and sent him out in the hills like a damned kiotey,
hopin' he'd starve to death. And where, he asked defiantly, was the
gratitude in that?

He told Joe ramblingly but more or less truthfully how he had been
betrayed and deserted by a man he had befriended; one Barney Oakes,
upon whom Casey would like to lay his hands for a minute.

"What I done to the burro ain't nothin' t' what I'd do t' that hound uh
hell!" he declared, pounding the table with his good fist.

Homeless, friendless; but Joe was his friend, and Paw and Hank were his
friends--and besides them there was in all the world not one friend of
Casey Ryan's.  They were good friends and good fellows, even if they
did put too much hoot in their hootch. Casey Ryan liked his hootch with
a hoot in it.

He was still hooting (somewhat incoherently it is true, with recourse
now and then to the bottle because he was sick and he didn't give a
darn who knew it) when the door opened and he whom they called Mart
walked in.  Joe introduced him to Casey, who sat still upon the bench
and looked him over with drunken disparagement.  Casey had a hazy
recollection of wanting to see the boss and have it out with him, but
he could not recall what it was that he had been so anxious to quarrel
about.

Mart was a slender man of middle height, with thin, intelligent face
and a look across the eyes like the old woman who rocked in the stone
hut.  He glanced from the bottle to Casey, eyeing him sharply.  Drunk
or sober, Casey was not the man to be stared down; nevertheless his
fingers strayed involuntarily to his shirt collar and pulled fussily at
the wrinkles.

"So you're the man they've been holding here for my inspection," Mart
said coolly, with a faint smile at Casey's evident discomfort. "You're
still hitting it up, I see. Joe, take that bottle away from him.  When
he's sober enough to talk straight, I'll give him the third degree and
see what he really is, anyway. Guess he's all right--but he sure can
lap up the booze.  That's a point against him."

Casey's hand went to the bottle, beating Joe's by three inches. He did
not particularly want the whisky, but it angered him to hear Mart order
it taken from him.  Away back in his mind where reason had gone into
hiding, Casey knew that some great injustice was being done him; that
he, Casey Ryan, was not the man they were calmly taking it for granted
that he was.

With the bottle in his hand he rose and walked unsteadily to his bunk.
He did not like this man they called the boss.  He remembered that in
his bunk, under the bedding, he had concealed something that would make
him the equal of them all.  He fumbled under the blankets, found what
he sought and with his back turned to the others he slipped the thing
into his sling out of sight.

Mart and Joe were talking together by the table, paying no attention to
Casey, who was groggily making up his mind to crawl into his bunk and
take another sleep.  He still meant to have it out with Mart, but he
did not feel like tackling the job just now.

Mart turned to the door and Joe got up to follow him, with a careless
glance over his shoulder at Casey, who was lifting a foot as if it
weighed a great deal, and was groping with it in the air trying to
locate the edge of the lower bunk.  Joe laughed, but the laugh died in
his throat, choked off suddenly by what he saw when Mart pulled open
the door.

Casey turned suspiciously at the laugh and the sound of the door
opening.  He swung round and steadied himself with his back against the
bunk when he saw Mart and Joe lift their hands and hold them there,
palms outward, a bit higher than their heads. Something in the sight
enraged Casey unreasoningly.  A flick of the memory may have carried
him back to the old days in the mining camps when Casey drove stage and
hold-ups were frequent.

"What 'r yuh tryin' to pull on me now?" he bawled, and rushed headlong
toward them, pushing them forcibly out into the open with a collision
of his body against Joe.  Outside, a voice harshly commanded him to
throw up his hands--and it was then that Casey Ryan's Irish fighting
blood boiled and bubbled over. Unconsciously he pushed his hat forward
over one eye, drew back his lips in a fighting grin, stepped down off
the low doorsill with a lurch that nearly sent him sprawling and went
weaving belligerently toward a group of five men whose attitude was
anything but conciliatory.

"Casey Ryan!  I'm dogged if it ain't Casey!" exclaimed a familiar voice
in the group, whereat the others looked astonished. Through his slits
of swollen lids Casey glared toward the voice and recognized Barney
Oakes, grinning at him with what Casey considered a Judas treachery.
He saw two men step away from Joe and the boss, leaving them in
handcuffs.

"Take them irons off'n my friends!" bellowed Casey as he charged.
"Whadda yuh think you're doin', anyway?  Take 'em off!  It's Casey Ryan
that's tellin' yuh, an' yuh better heed what he says, before you're
tore from limb to limb!"

"B-but, Casey!  This 'ere's a shurf's possy!"  The voice of Barney rose
in a protesting 'squawk.  "I brung 'em all the way over here to your
rescue!  They brung a cor'ner to view your remains!  Don't you know
your pardner, BARNEY OAKES?

"Ah-h--I know yuh think I don't?  I know yuh to a fare-yuh-well! Brung
a cor'ner, did yuh?  Tha's all right--goin' t' need a cor'ner-but he
won't set on Casey Ryan's remains--you c'n ask anybody if any cor'ners
ever set on Casey Ryan yit!  Naw." Casey snarled as contemptuously as
was possible to a man in his condition. "No cor'ner ever set on Casey
Ryan, an' he ain't goin' to!"

The men glanced questioningly at one another.  One laughed. He was a
large, smooth-jowled man inclined to portliness, and his laugh vibrated
his entire front contagiously so that the others grinned and took it
for granted that Casey Ryan was a comedy element introduced
unexpectedly where they had thought to find him a tragedy.

"No, you're a pretty lively man for me to sit on; I admit it," the
portly man remarked.  "I'm the  coroner, and it looks as if I wouldn't
sit, this trip."

Casey eyed him blearily, not in the least mollified but instead
swinging to a certain degree of lucidity that was nevertheless governed
largely by the hoot he had swallowed in the hootch.

"There's part of a burro 'round here some'er's you c'n set on," Casey
informed him grimly, and fumbled in his coat pocket for his pipe.  He
drew it out empty, looked at it and returned it to his pocket.  One who
knew Casey intimately would have detected a hidden purpose in his
manner.  The warning was faint, indefinable at best, and difficult to
picture in words.  One might say that an intimate acquaintance would
have detected a false note in Casey's defiance. His manner was
restrained just when violence would have been more natural.

"Damn a pipe," Casey grumbled with drunken petulance.  "Anybody got a
cigarette?  I'm single-handed an' I ain't able t' roll 'em."

It was the coroner himself who handed Casey a "tailor-made." Casey
nodded glumly, accepted a match and lighted the cigarette almost as if
he were sober.  He looked the group over noncommittally, eyed again the
handcuffs on Mart and Joe, sent a veiled glance toward Barney Oakes and
turned away.  He still held the center of the stage.  Fully expecting
to find him dead, the sheriff and his men were slow to adjust
themselves to the fact that he was very much alive and very drunk and
apparently not greatly interested in his rescue.

Casey halted in his unsteady progress toward the dugout.  The sheriff
was already questioning his two prisoners about other members of the
gang; but he looked up when Casey lifted up his voice and spoke his
mind of the moment.

"Brung a cor'ner, did yuh, lookin' for some one to set on! Barney Oakes
is the man that'll need a cor'ner in a minute. You're all goin' to need
'im.  Casey Ryan never stood around yit whilst his friends was hobbled
up by a shurf--turn 'em loose an' turn 'em loose quick!  An' git back
away from Barney Oakes so he won't drop on yuh in chunks--I'll fix 'im
for yuh to set on!"

His hand had gone up to his cigarette, but only Joe knew what was
likely to follow.  Joe gave a yell of warning, ducked and ran straight
away from the group.  The sheriff yelled also and gave chase.  The
group was broken--luckily--just as Casey heaved something in that
direction.

"I blowed up a jackass yesterday when they thought I couldn't--I'll
blow up a bunch of 'em to-day!  Yuh c'n set on what's left uh Barney
Oakes!"

The explosion scattered dirt and small stones--and the sheriff's posse.
Casey sent one malevolent glance over his shoulder as he stumbled into
the dugout.

"Missed 'im!" he grumbled disgustedly to himself when he saw no
fragments of Barney falling.  His ferociousness, like the dynamite,
annihilated itself with the explosion.  "Missed 'im! Casey Ryan's
gittin' old; old an' sick an' a damn' fool.  Missed 'im with the last
shot--drunk--drunk an' don't give a darn!"

He slammed the door shut behind him, pushed his hat forward so
violently that it rested on the bridge of his nose, and wabbled over to
his bunk.  This time his foot found the edge of the lower bunk, and he
scratched and clawed his way up and rolled in upon the blankets.

He was asleep and snoring when the sheriff, edging his way in as if he
were an animal trainer's apprentice entering the lion's cage, sneaked
on his toes to the bunk and slipped the handcuffs on Casey.



CHAPTER SEVEN

Casey awoke almost sober and considerably surprised when he discovered
the handcuffs.  His injured hand was throbbing from the poison in his
system and the steel band on his swollen wrist. His head still ached
frightfully and his tongue felt thick and dry as flannel in his mouth.

He rolled over and sat up, staring uncomprehendingly at the cabin full
of men.  The sight of Barney Oakes recalled in a measure his
performance with the dynamite; at least, he felt a keen disappointment
that Barney was alive and whole and grinning. Casey could not see what
there was to grin about, and he took it as a direct insult to himself.

Mart and Joe sat sullenly on a bench against the wall, and Paw reclined
in his bunk at the farther end of the room.  A blood-stained bandage
wrapped Paw's head turbanwise, and his little, deep-set eyes gleamed
wickedly in his pallid face.  Casey looked for Hank, but he was not
there.

A strange man was cooking supper, and Casey wanted to tell him that he
was slicing the bacon twice as thick as it should be. The corpulent
man, whom he dimly remembered as a coroner, was talking with a big,
burly individual whom Casey guessed was the sheriff.  A man came in and
announced to the big man that the car was fixed and they could go any
time.  Mart, who had been staring morosely down at his shackled wrists,
lifted his head and spoke to the sheriff.

"You'll have to do something about my mother," he said, and bit his lip
at the manner in which every head swung his way.

"What about your mother?" the sheriff asked moving toward him. "Is she
here?"  His eyes sent a quick glance around the room which obviously
had four outside walls.

Mart swallowed.  "She has a cabin to herself," he explained
constrainedly.  "She--she isn't quite right.  Strangers excite her.
She--hasn't been well since my father was killed in the mine; she's
quiet enough with us--she knows us.  I don't know how she'll be now.
I'm afraid--but she can't be left here alone; all I ask is, be as
gentle as you can."

The sheriff looked from him to Joe.  Joe nodded confirmation. "Plumb
harmless," he said gruffly.  "It IS kinda--pitiful. Thinks everybody in
the world is damned and going to hell on a long lope."  He gave a snort
that resembled neither mirth nor disgust.  "Mebbe she's right at that,"
he added grimly.

The sheriff asked more questions, and Mart stood up.  "I'll show you
where she is, sure.  But can't you leave her be till we're ready to
start?  She--it ain't right to bring her here."

"She'll want her supper," the sheriff reminded Mart. "We'll be driving
all night. Is she sick abed?"

Casey lay down again and turned his face to the wall.  He remembered
the old woman now, and he hoped sincerely they would not bring her into
the cabin.  But whatever they did, Casey wanted no part in it whatever.
He wanted to be left alone, and he wanted to think. More than all else
he wanted not to see again the old woman who chanted horrible things
while she rocked and rocked.

He was roused from uneasy slumber by two officious souls, one of whom
was Barney Oakes.  Their intentions were kindly enough, they only
wanted to give him his supper.  But Casey wanted neither supper nor
kindly intentions, and he was still unregenerately regretful that
Barney Oakes was not lying out on the garbage heap in a more or less
fragmentary condition.  They raised him to a sitting posture, and Casey
swung his legs over the edge of the bunk and delivered a ferocious kick
at Barney Oakes.

He caught Barney under the chin, and Barney went down for several
counts.  After that Casey wore hobbles on his feet, and was secretly
rather proud of the fact that they considered him so dangerous as all
that.  Had his mood not been a sulky one which refused to have speech
with any one there, they would probably have found it wise to gag him
as well.

That is one night in Casey's turbulent life which he never recalled if
he could help it.  Two cars had brought the sheriff's party, and one
was a seven-passenger.  In the roomy rear seat of this car, Casey,
shackled and savage, was made to ride with Mart and his mother. Two
deputies occupied the folding seats and never relaxed their
watchfulness.

Casey's head still ached splittingly, and the jolting of the car did
not serve to ease the pain.  The old woman sat in the middle, with a
blanket wound round and round her to hold her quiet; which it failed to
do.  Into Casey's ear rolled the full volume of her rich contralto
voice as she monotonously intoned the doom of all mankind--together
with every cat, every rat, etc. Mart's fear had proved well-founded.
Strangers had excited the woman and it was not until sheer exhaustion
silenced her that she ceased for one moment her horrible chant.

I read the story in the morning paper, and made a flying trip to San
Bernardino.  Casey was in jail, naturally; but he didn't care much
about that so long as he owned a head with an air-drill going inside.
At least, that is what he told me when I was let in to see him.  I was
working to get him out of there on bail if possible before I sent word
to the Little Woman, hoping she had not read the papers.  I had some
trouble piecing the facts together and trying to get the straight of
things before I sent word to the Little Woman. I went out and got him
some medicine guaranteed, by the doctor who wrote the prescription, to
take the hoot out of the hootch Casey had swallowed.  That afternoon
Casey left off glaring at me, sat up, accepted a cigarette and
consented to talk.

"--an' all I got to say is, Barney Oakes is a liar an' the father uh
liars.  I never was in cahoots with him at no time.  When he says I got
'im to foller a Joshuay palm jest to git 'im out in the hills an' kill
'im off, he lies.  Let 'im come an' tell me that there story!"

Casey was still slightly abnormal, I noticed, so I calmed him as best I
could and left him alone for a time.  There was some hesitancy about
the bail, too, which I wished to overcome. Throwing that half-stick of
dynamite might be construed as an attempt at wholesale murder.  I did
not want the county officials to think too long and harshly about the
matter.

I explained later to Casey that Barney Oakes had reported his
disappearance to the officials in Barstow.  The sheriff's office had
long suspected a nest of moonshiners somewhere near Black Butte, and it
was rumored that one Mart Hanson, who owned a mine up there, was
banking more money than was reasonable, these hard times, for a miner,
who ships no ore.  Casey's disappearance had crystallized the
suspicions into an immediate investigation.  And Barney's assertion
that Casey had been murdered took the coroner along with the posse.

It had all been straight and fairly simple until they reached the mine
and discovered Casey uproariously one of the gang.  Throwing loaded
dynamite at sheriffs is frowned upon nowadays in the best official
circles, I told Casey; he would have to explain that in court, I was
afraid.

Then Barney, after Casey had kicked him in the chin, had reversed his
first report of the trouble and was now declaiming to all who would
listen that he had been decoyed to Black Butte by Casey Ryan and there
ambushed and nearly killed.  Casey, as Barney now interpreted the
incident, had joined his confederates under the very thin pretense of
climbing the butte to come at them from behind. Barney now remembered
that he had been shot at from three different angles, and that the
burros had been killed by pistol shots fired at close range--presumably
by Casey Ryan.

It was like taming tigers to make Casey sit still and listen to all
this, but I had to do it so that he would know what to disprove.
Afterwards I had a talk with Joe and Paw, separately, and so got at the
whole truth.  They bore no malice toward Casey and were perfectly
willing to see him out of the scrape.  They were a sobered pair; Hank,
like a fool, had fired at the posse and was killed.

The next day came the Little Woman to the rescue.  I told her the whole
story, not even omitting the burro, before she went to the jail to see
Casey.  It was a pretty mess--take it all around--and I was secretly
somewhat doubtful of the outcome.

The Little Woman is game as women are made.  She went with me to the
jail, and she met Casey with a whimsical smile.  We found him sitting
on the side of his bunk with his legs stretched out and his feet
crossed, his good hand thrust in his trousers pocket and a cigarette in
one corner of his mouth, which turned sourly downward. He cocked an eye
up at us and rose, as the Little Woman had maybe taught him was proper.
But he did not say a word until the Little Woman walked up and kissed
him on both cheeks, turning his face this way and that with her hand
under his chin.

Casey grinned sheepishly then and hugged her with his good arm. I wish
you could have seen the look in his eyes when they dwelt on the Little
Woman!

"Casey Ryan, you need a shave.  And your shirt collar is a disgrace to
a Piute," she drawled reprovingly.

Casey looked at me over her shoulder and grinned.  He hadn't a word to
say for himself, which was unusual in Casey Ryan.

"It's lucky for you, Casey Ryan, that I remembered to go down to the
police station and get the proof that you were pinched twice on
Broadway just five days before Barney Oakes says he found you stalled
in the trail north of Barstow; and that you had been pinched pretty
regularly every whip-stitch for the last six months, and were a
familiar and unwelcome figure in downtown traffic and elsewhere.

"The sheriff who raided Black Butte admitted to me that it is utterly
impossible for the world to hold more than one Casey Ryan at a time;
and that he, for one, is willing to accept the word of the city police
that you were there raising the record for traffic trouble and not
moonshining at Black Butte.  He doesn't approve of throwing dynamite at
people, but--well, I talked with the prosecuting attorney, too, and
they both seem to be mighty nice men and reasonable.  I'm afraid Barney
Oakes will see his beautiful story all spoiled."

"He'll forget it when he feels the ruin to his face I'm goin' t' create
for him if I ever meet up with 'im again," Casey commented grimly.

"Babe sent you a pincushion she made in school.  I think she made
beautiful, neat stitches in that C," went on the Little Woman in a
placid, gossipy tone invented especially for domestic conversation.
"And--oh, yes!  There's a new laundryman on our route, and he PERSISTS
in running across the lawn and dumping the laundry in the front hall,
though I've told him and TOLD him to deliver it at the back.  And
there's a new tenant in Number Six, and they hadn't been in more than
three days before he came home drunk and kept everybody in the house
awake, bellowing up and down the hall and abusing his wife and all.  I
told him held have to go when his month is up, but he says he'll be
damned if he will. He says he won't and I can't make him."

"He won't, hey?"  A familiar, pale glitter came into Casey's eyes. "You
watch and see whether he goes or not!  He better tell Casey Ryan he
won't go!  Who'd, they think's runnin' the place? Lemme ketch that
laundry driver oncet, runnin' across our lawn; I'll run 'im across
it--on his nose!  They take advantage of you quick as my back's turned.
I'll learn 'em they got Casey Ryan to reckon with!"

The Little Woman gave me a smiling glance over Casey's shoulder, and
lowered a cautious eyelid.  I left them then and went away to have a
satisfying talk with the sheriff and the prosecuting attorney.



CHAPTER EIGHT

In the desert, where roads are fewer and worse than they should be, a
man may travel wherever he can negotiate the rocks and sand, and none
may say him nay.  If any man objects, the traveler is by custom
privileged to whip the objector if he is big enough, and afterwards go
on his way with the full approval of public opinion.  He may blaze a
trail of his own, return that way a year later and find his trail an
established thoroughfare.

In the desert Casey gave trail to none nor asked reprisals if he
suffered most in a sudden meeting.  In Los Angeles Casey was halted and
rebuked on every corner, so he complained; hampered and annoyed by
rules and regulations which desert dwellers never dreamed of.

Since he kept the optimistic viewpoint of a child, experience seemed to
teach him little. Like the boy he was at heart, he was perfectly
willing to make good resolutions--all of which were more or less
theoretical and left to a kindly Providence to keep intact for him.

So here he was, after we had pried him loose from his last predicament,
perfectly optimistic under his fresh haircut, and thinking the traffic
cops would not remember him.  Thinking, too--as he confided to the
Little Woman--that Los Angeles looked pretty good, after all. He was
resolved to lead henceforth a blameless life. It was time he settled
down, Casey declared virtuously.  His last trip into the desert was all
wrong, and he wanted you to ask anybody if Casey Ryan wasn't ready at
any and all times to admit his mistakes, if he ever happened to make
any. He was starting in fresh now, with a new deal all around from a
new deck.  He had got up and walked around his chair, he told us, and
had thrown the ash of a left-handed cigarette over his right shoulder;
he'd show the world that Casey Ryan could and would keep out of gunshot
of trouble.

He was rehearsing all this and feeling very self-righteous while he
drove down West Washington Street.  True, he was doing twenty-five
where he shouldn't, but so far no officer had yelled at him and he
hadn't so much as barked a fender.  Down across Grand Avenue he
larruped, never noticing the terrific bounce when he crossed the water
drains there (being still fresh from desert roads).  He was still doing
twenty-five when he turned into Hill Street.

Busy with his good resolutions and the blameless life he was about to
lead, Casey forgot to signal the left-hand turn.  In the desert you
don't signal, because the nearest car is probably forty or fifty miles
behind you and collisions are not imminent.
West-Washington-and-Hill-Street crossing is not desert, however. A car
was coming behind Casey much closer than fifty miles; one of those
scuttling Ford delivery trucks.  It locked fenders with Casey when he
swung to the left.  The two cars skidded as one toward the right-hand
curb; caught amidships a bright yellow, torpedo-tailed runabout coming
up from Main Street, and turned it neatly on its back, its four wheels
spinning helplessly in the quiet, sunny morning.  Casey himself was
catapulted over the runabout, landing abruptly in a sitting position on
the corner of the vacant lot beyond, his self-righteousness
considerably jarred.

A new traffic officer had been detailed to watch that intersection and
teach a driving world that it must not cut corners.  A bright, new
traffic button had been placed in the geographical center of the
crossing; and woe be unto the right-hand pocket of any man who failed
to drive circumspectly around it.  New traffic officers are apt to be
keenly conscientious in their work.  At twenty-five dollars per cut,
sixteen unhappy drivers had been taught where the new button was
located and had been informed that twelve miles per hour at that
crossing would be tolerated, and that more would be expensive.

Not all drivers take their teaching meekly, and the new traffic officer
near the end of his shift had pessimistically decided that the driving
world is composed mostly of blamed idiots and hardened criminals.

He gritted his teeth ominously when Casey Ryan came down upon the
crossing at double the legal speed.  He held his breath for an instant
during the crash that resounded for blocks.  When the dust had settled,
he ran over and yanked off the dented sand of the vacant lot a dazed
and hardened malefactor who had committed three traffic crimes in three
seconds: he had exceeded the speed limit outrageously, cut fifteen feet
inside the red button, and failed to signal the turn.

"You damned, drunken boob!" shouted the new traffic cop and shook Casey
Ryan (not knowing him).

Shaking Casey will never be safe until he is in his coffin with a lily
in his hand.  He was considerably jolted, but he managed a fourth crime
in the next five minutes.  He licked the traffic cop rather
thoroughly--I suppose because his onslaught was wholly
unexpected--kicked an expostulating minister in the pit of the stomach,
and was profanely volunteering to lick the whole darned town when he
was finally overwhelmed by numbers and captured alive; which speaks
well for the L. A. P.

Wherefore Casey Ryan continued his ride down town in a dark car that
wears a clamoring bell the size of a breakfast plate under the driver's
foot, and a dark red L. A. Police Patrol sign painted on the sides.
Two uniformed, stern-lipped cops rode with him and didn't seem to care
if Casey's nose WAS bleeding all over his vest. A uniformed cop stood
on the steps behind, and another rode beside the driver and kept his
eye peeled over his shoulder, thinking he would be justified in
shooting if anything started inside.  Boys on bicycles pedaled
furiously to keep up, and many an automobile barely escaped the curb
because the driver was goggling at the mussed-up prisoner in the "Black
Maria."

The Little Woman telegraphed me at San Francisco that night. The wire
was brief but disquieting. It merely said,  "CASEY IN JAIL SERIOUS NEED
HELP."  But I caught the Lark an hour later and thanked God it was
running on time.

The Little Woman and I spent two frantic days getting Casey out of
jail.  The traffic cop's defeat had been rather public; and just as
soon as he could stand up straight in the pulpit, the minister meant to
preach a series of sermons against the laxity of a police force that
permits such outrages to occur in broad daylight.  More than that, the
thing was in the papers, and people were reading and giggling on the
street cars and in restaurants. Wherefore, the L. A. P. was on its tin
ear.

Even so, much may be accomplished for a man so wholesomely human as
Casey Ryan.  On the third day the charge against him was changed from
something worse to  "Reckless driving and disturbing the peace." Casey
was persuaded to plead guilty to that charge, which was harder to
accomplish than mollifying the L. A. P.

He paid two fifty-dollar fines and was forbidden to drive a car "in the
County of Los Angeles, State of California, during the next succeeding
period of two years."  He was further advised (unofficially but
nevertheless with complete sincerity) to pay all damages to the two
cars he had wrecked and to ask the minister's doctor what was his fee;
a new uniform for the traffic cop was also suggested, since Casey had
thrust his foot violently into the cop's pocket which was not tailored
to resist the strain.  The judge also observed, in the course of the
conversation, that desert air was peculiarly invigorating and that
Casey should not jeopardize his health and well-being by filling his
lungs with city smoke.

I couldn't blame Casey much for the mood he was in after a setback like
that to his good resolutions.  I was inclined to believe with Casey
that Providence had lain down on the job.



CHAPTER NINE

At the corner of the Plaza where traffic is heaviest, a dingy Ford
loaded with camp outfit stalled on the street-car track just as the
traffic officer spread-eagled his arms and turned with majestic
deliberation to let the East-and-West traffic through. The motorman
slid open his window and shouted insults at the driver, and the traffic
cop left his little platform and strode heavily toward the Ford,
pulling his book out of his pocket with the mechanical motion born of
the grief of many drivers.

Casey Ryan, clinging to the front step of the street car on his way to
the apartment house he once more called home, swung off and beat the
traffic officer to the Ford.  He stooped and gave a heave on the crank,
obeyed a motion of the driver's head when the car started, and stepped
upon the running board.  The traffic officer paused, waved his book
warningly and said something.  The motorman drew in his head, clanged
the bell, and the afternoon traffic proceeded to untangle.

"Get in, old-timer," invited the driver whom Casey had assisted. Casey
did not ask whether the driver was going in his direction, but got in
chuckling at the small triumph over his enemies, the police.

"Fords are mean cusses," he observed sympathetically.  "They like
nothing better than to get a feller in bad.  But they can't pull
nothin' on me.  I know 'em to a fare-you-well.  Notice how this one
changed 'er mind about gettin' you tagged, soon as Casey Ryan took 'er
by the nose?"

"Are you Casey Ryan?"  The driver took his eyes off the traffic long
enough to give Casey an appraising look that measured him mentally and
physically.  "Say, I've heard quite a lot about you. Bill Masters, up
at Lund, has spoke of you often.  He knows you, don't he?"

"Bill Masters sure had ought t' know me," Casey grinned. In a big,
roaring, unfriendly city, here sounded a friendly, familiar tone; a
voice straight from the desert, as it were.  Casey forgot what had
happened when Barney Oakes crossed his path claiming acquaintance with
Bill Masters, of Lund.  He bit off a chew of tobacco, hunched down
lower in the seat, and prepared himself for a real conflab with the man
who spoke the language of his tribe.

He forgot that he had just bought tickets to that evening's performance
at the Orpheum, as a sort of farewell offering to his domestic goddess
before once more going into voluntary exile as advised by the judge.
Pasadena Avenue heard conversational fragments such as, "Say!  Do you
know--?  Was you in Lund when--?"

Casey's new friend drove as fast as the law permitted.  He talked of
many places and men familiar to Casey, who was in a mood that hungered
for those places and men in a spiritual revulsion against the city and
all its ways.

Pasadena, Lamanda Park, Monrovia--it was not until the car slowed for
the Glendora speed-limit sign that Casey lifted himself off his
shoulder blades, and awoke to the fact that he was some distance from
home and that the shadows were growing rather long.

"Say!  I better get out here and 'phone to the missus," he exclaimed
suddenly.  "Pull up at a drug store or some place, will yuh?  I got to
talkin' an' forgot I was on my way home when I throwed in with yuh."

"Aw, you can 'phone any time.  There is street cars running back to
town all the time I or you can catch a bus anywhere's along here. I got
pinched once for drivin' through here without a tail-light; and twice
I've had blowouts right along here.  This town's a jinx for me and I
want to slip it behind me."

Casey nodded appreciatively.  "Every darn' town's a jinx for me," he
confided resentfully.  "Towns an' Casey Ryan don't agree. Towns is
harder on me than sour beans."

"Yeah--I guess L. A.'s a jinx for you all right.  I heard about your
latest run-in with the cops.  I wish t' heck you'd of cleaned up a few
for me.  I love them saps the way I like rat poison.  I've got no use
for the clowns nor for towns that actually hands 'em good jack for
dealin' misery to us guys.  The bird never lived that got a square deal
from 'em.  They grab yuh and dust yuh off--"

"They won't grab Casey Ryan no more.  Why, lemme tell yuh what they
done!"

Glendora slipped behind and was forgotten while Casey told the story of
his wrongs.  In no particular, according to his version, had he been
other than law-abiding.  Nobody, he declaimed heatedly, had ever taken
HIM by the scruff of the neck and shaken him like a pup, and got away
with it, and nobody ever would. Casey was Irish and his father had been
Irish, and the Ryan never lived that took sass and said thank-yuh.

His new friend listened with just that degree of sympathy which
encourages the unburdening of the soul.  When Casey next awoke to the
fact that he was getting farther and farther away from home, they were
away past Claremont and still going to the full extent of the speed
limit.  His friend had switched on the lights.

"I GOT to telephone my wife!" Casey exclaimed uneasily.  "I'll gamble
she's down to the police station right now, lookin' for me. An' I want
the cops t' kinda forgit about me.  I got to talkin' along an' plumb
forgot I wasn't headed home."

"Aw, you can 'phone from Fontana.  I'll have to stop there anyway for
gas.  Say, why don't yuh stall 'er off till morning?  You couldn't get
home for supper now if yuh went by wireless. I guess yuh wouldn't hate
a mouthful of desert air after swallowing smoke and insults, like yuh
done in L. A.  Tell her you're takin' a ride to Barstow.  You can catch
a train out of there and be home to breakfast, easy.  If you ain't got
the change in your clothes for carfare," he added generously, "Why,
I'll stake yuh just for your company on the trip.  Whadda yuh say?"

Casey looked at the orange and the grapefruit and lemon orchards that
walled the Foothill Boulevard.  All trees looked alike to Casey, and
these reminded him disagreeably of the fruit stalls in Los Angeles.

"Well, mebby I might go on to Barstow.  Too late now to take the missus
to the show, anyway.  I guess I can dig up the price uh carfare from
Barstow back."  He chuckled with a sinful pride in his prosperity,
which was still new enough to be novel.  "Yuh don't catch Casey Ryan
goin' around no more without a dime in his hind pocket. I've felt the
lack of 'em too many times when they was needed. Casey Ryan's going to
carry a jingle louder'n a lead burro from now on.  You can ask anybody."

"You bet it's wise for a feller to go heeled," the friend of Bill
Masters responded easily.  "You never know when yuh might need it.
Well, there's a Bell sign over there.  You can be askin' your wife's
consent while I gas up."

Innocent pleasure; the blameless joy of riding in a Ford toward the
desert, with a prince of a fellow for company, was not so easily made
to sound logical and a perfectly commonplace incident over a
long-distance telephone.  The Little Woman seemed struck with a sense
of the unusual; her voice betrayed trepidation and she asked questions
which Casey found it difficult to answer. That he was merely riding as
far as Barstow with a desert acquaintance and would catch the first
train back, she apparently failed to find convincing.

"Casey Ryan, tell me the truth.  If you're in a scrape again, you know
perfectly well that Jack and I will have to come and get you out of it.
San Bernardino sounds bad to me, Casey, and you're pretty close to the
place.  Do you really want me to believe that you're coming back on the
next train?"

"Sure as I'm standin' here!  What makes yuh think I'm in a scrape?
Didn't I tell yuh I'm goin' to walk around trouble from now on? When
Casey tells you a thing like that, yuh got a right to put it down for
the truth. I'm going to Barstow for a breath uh fresh air. This is a
feller that knows Bill Masters.  I'll be home to breakfast. I ain't in
no trouble an' I ain't goin' to be. You can believe that or you can set
there callin' Casey Ryan a liar till I git back. G'by."

Whatever the Little Woman thought of it, Casey really meant to do
exactly what he said he would do.  And he really did not believe that
trouble was within a hundred miles of him.



CHAPTER TEN

"Wanta drive?"  Casey's friend was rolling a smoke before he cranked
up.  "They tell me up in Lund that no man livin' ever got the chance to
look back and see Casey Ryan swallowing dust.  I've heard of some
that's tried.  But I reckon," he added pensively, while he rubbed the
damp edge of the paper down carefully with a yellowed thumb, "Fords is
out of your line, now.  Maybe you don't toy with nothin' cheaper than a
twin-six."

"Well, you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan's the man to git big-headed!
Money don't spoil ME none.  There ain't anybody c'n say it does. Casey
Ryan is Casey Ryan wherever an' whenever yuh meet up with him. Yuh
might mebby see me next, hazin' a burro over a ridge.  Or yuh might see
me with ten pounds uh flour, a quart uh beans an' a sour-dough bucket
on my back.  Whichever way the game breaks--you'll be seein' Casey
Ryan; an' you'll see 'im settin' in the game an' ready t' push his last
white chip to the center."

"I believe it, Casey.  Darned if I don't.  Well, you drive 'er awhile;
till yuh get tired, anyway."  He bent to the crank, gave a heave and
climbed in, with Casey behind the wheel, looking pleased to be there
and quite ready to show the world he could drive.

"Say, if I drive till I'm TIRED," he retorted, "I'm liable to soak 'er
hubs in the Atlantic Ocean before I quit.  And then, mebby I'll back
'er out an' drive 'er to the end of Venice Pier just for pastime."

"Up in Lund they're talkin' yet about your drivin'," his new friend
flattered him.  "They say there's no stops when you get the wheel
cuddled up to your chest.  No quittin' an' no passin' yuh by with a
merry laugh an' a cloud of alkali dust.  I guess it's right. I've been
wantin' to meet yuh."

"That there last remark sounds like a traffic cop I had a run-in with
once!"  Casey snorted--merely to hide his gratification. "You sound
good, just to listen to, but you ain't altogether believable.  There's
men in Lund that'd give an ear to meet me in a narrow trail with a
hairpin turn an' me on the outside an' drunk.

"They'd like it to be about a four-thousand-foot drop, straight down.
Lund as a town ain't so crazy about me that they'd close up whilst I
was bein' planted, an' stop all traffic for five minutes.  A show
benefit was sprung on Lund once, to help Casey Ryan that was supposed
to be crippled.  An' I had to give a good Ford--a DARN' good Ford!--to
the benefitters, so is they could git outa town ahead uh the howlin'
mob.  That's how I know the way Lund loves Casey Ryan. Yuh can't kid
ME, young feller."

Meanwhile, Casey swung north into Cajon Pass; up that long, straight,
cement-paved highway to the hills he showed his new friend how a Ford
could travel when Casey Ryan juggled the wheel. The full moon was
pushing up into a cloud bank over a high peak beyond the Pass. The few
cars they met were gone with a whistle of wind as Casey shot by.

He raced a passenger train from the mile whistling-post to the
crossing, made the turn and crossed the track with the white finger of
the headlight bathing the Ford blindingly.  He completed that S turn
and beat the train to the next crossing half a mile farther on; where
he "spiked 'er tail", as he called it, stopping dead still and waiting
jeeringly for the train to pass.  The engineer leaned far out of the
cab window to bellow his opinion of such driving; which was unfavorable
to the full extent of his vocabulary.

"Nothin' the matter with a Ford, as I can see," Casey observed
carelessly, when he was under way again.

"You sure are some driver," his new friend praised him, letting go the
edge of the car and easing down again into the seat. "Give yuh a Ford
and all the gas yuh can burn and I can't see that you'd need to worry
none about any of them saps that makes it their business to interfere
with travelin'.  I'm glad that moon's quit the job. Gives the
headlights a show.  Hit 'er up now, fast as yuh like. After that
crossin' back there I ain't expectin' to tremble on no curves.  I see
you're qualified to spin 'er on a plate if need be.  And for a Ford,
she sure can travel."

Casey therefore "let 'er out", and the Ford went like a scared lizard
up the winding highway through the Pass.  At Cajon Camp he slowed,
thinking they would need to fill the radiator before attempting to
climb the steep grade to the summit.  But the young man shook his head
and gave the "highball."  (Which, if you don't already know it, is the
signal for full speed ahead.)

Full speed ahead Casey gave him, and they roared on up the steep,
twisting grade to the summit of the Pass.  Casey began to feel a
distinct admiration for this particular Ford.  The car was heavily
loaded--he could gauge the weight by the "feel" of the car as he drove
yet it made the grade at twenty-five miles an hour and reached the top
without boiling the radiator; which is better than many a more
pretentious car could do.

"Too bad you've made your pile already," the young man broke a long
silence.  "I'd like to have a guy like you for my pardner. The desert
ain't talkative none when you're out in the middle of it, and you know
there ain't another human in a day's drive. I've been going it alone.
Nine-tenths of these birds that are eager to throw in with yuh thinks
that fifty-fifty means you do the work and they take the jack.  I'm
plumb fed upon them pardnerships.  But if you didn't have your jack
stored away--a hull mountain of it, I reckon--I'd invite yuh to set
into the game with me; I sure would."

Casey spat into the dark beside the car.  "They's never a pile so big a
feller ain't willin' to make it bigger," he replied sententiously.
"Fer, as I'm concerned, Casey's never backed up from a dollar yet.  But
I ain't no wild colt no more, runnin' loose an' never a halter mark on
me.  I'm bein' broke to harness, and it's stable an' corral from now
on, an' no more open range fer Casey.  The missus hopes to high-school
me in time.  She's a good hand--gentle but firm, as the preacher says.
And I guess it's time fer Casey Ryan to quit hellin' around the country
an' settle down an' behave himself."

"I could put you in the way of adding some easy money to your bank
roll," the other suggested tentatively.

But Casey shook his head.  "Twenty years ago yuh needn't have asked me
twice, young feller. I'd 'a' drawed my chair right up and stacked my
chips a mile high.  Any game that come along, I played 'er down to the
last chip.  Twenty years ago--yes, er ten!--Casey Ryan woulda tore that
L. A. jail down rock by rock an' give the roof t' the kids to make a
playhouse.  Them L. A. cops never woulda hauled me t' jail in no wagon.
I mighta loaded 'em in behind, and dropped 'em off at the first morgue
an' drove on a-whistlin'.  That there woulda been Casey Ryan's gait a
few years back.  Take me now, married to a good woman an' gettin'
gray--" Casey sighed, gazing wishfully back at the Casey Ryan he had
been and might never be again.

"No, sir, I ain't so darned rich I ain't willin' to add a few more iron
men to the bunch.  But on account of the missus I've got to kinda pick
my chances.  I ain't had money so long but what it feels good to remind
myself I got it.  I carry a thousand dollars or so in my inside pocket,
just to count over now an' then to convince myself I needn't worry
about a grubstake.  I've got to soak it into my bones gradual that I
can afford to settle down and live tame, like the missus wants.
Stand-up collars every day, an' step into a chiny bathtub every night
an' scrub--when you ain't doin' nothin' to git dirt under your finger
nails even!  Funny, the way city folks act.  The less they do to git
dirty, the more soap they wear out. You can ask anybody if that ain't
right.

"Can't chew tobacco in the house, even, 'cause there's no place yuh
dast to spit.  I stuck m' head out of the bedroom window oncet, an I
let fly an' it landed on a lady; an' the missus went an' bought her a
new hat an took my plug away from me.  I had to keep my chewin' tobacco
in the tool-box of my car, after that, an' sneak out to the beach now
an' then an' chew where I could spit in the ocean.  That's city life
for yuh!"

"When I git to thinkin' about hittin' out into the hills prospectin, or
somethin', that roll uh dough I pack stands right on its hind legs an'
says I got no excuse.  I've got enough to keep me in bacon an' beans,
anyway.  An' the missus gits down in the mouth when I so much as
mention minin'."

"A guy grows old fast when he quits the game and sets down to do the
grandpa-by-the-fire.  First you know, a clown that thinks it's time he
took it easy is gummin' 'is grub, and shiverin' when yuh open the door,
an' takin' naps in the daytime same as babies. Let a guy once preach
he's gettin' old--"

Casey jerked the gas lever and jumped the car ahead viciously. "Well,
now, any time yuh see CASEY RYAN gummin' 'is grub an' needin' a nap
after dinner--"

"A clown GITS that way once he pulls out of the game.  I've saw it
happen time an' again."  The young man laughed rather irritatingly.
"Say, when I tell it to Bill Masters that Casey Ryan has plumb played
out his string an' laid down an' QUIT, by hock, and can be seen
hereafter SETTIN' WITH A SHAWL OVER HIS SHOULDERS--"

Casey nearly turned the Ford over at that insult.  He jerked it back
into the road and sent it ahead again at a faster pace.

"Well, now, any time yuh see CASEY RYAN settin' with a shawl over his
shoulders--"

"Well, maybe not YOU; but the bird sure comes to it that thinks he's
too old to play the game.  Why, you'll never be ready to settle down!
Take yuh twenty years from now--I'd rather bank on a pardner like you'd
be than some young clown that ain't had the experience. From the yarns
I've heard about yuh, yuh don't back down from nothing.  And you're
willing to give a pardner a chance to get away with his hide on him.
I'd rather be held up by the law than by some clown that's workin' with
me."

He paused; and when he, spoke again his tone had changed to meet a
prosaic detail of the drive.

"Stop here in Victorville, will yuh, Casey?  I'll take a look at the
radiator and maybe take on some more gas and oil.  I've been stuck on
the desert a few times with an empty tank--and that learns a guy to
keep the top of his gas tank full and never mind the bottom."

"Good idea," said Casey shortly, his own tone relaxing its tension of a
few minutes before.  "I run a garage over at Patmos once, an' the boobs
I seen creepin' in on their last spoonful uh gas--walkin' sometimes for
miles to carry gas back to where they was stalled--learnt Casey Ryan to
fill 'er up every chancet he gits."

But although the subject of age had been dropped half a mile back in
the sand, certain phrases flung at him had been barbed and had bitten
deep into Casey Ryan's self-esteem.  They stung and rankled there.  He
had squirmed at the picture his new friend had so ruthlessly drawn with
crude words, but bold, of doddering old age. Casey resented the
implication that he might one day fill that picture.

He began vaguely to resent the Little Woman's air of needing to protect
him from himself.  Casey Ryan, he told himself boastfully, had never
needed protection from anybody.  He had managed for a good many years
to get along on his own hook.  The Little Woman was all right, but she
was making a mistake--a big mistake--if she thought she had to
close-herd him to keep him out of trouble.

He rolled a smoke and wished that the Little Woman would settle down
with him somewhere in the desert, where he could keep a couple of
burros and go prospecting in the hills.  Where sagebrush could grow to
their very door if it wanted to, and the moon could show them long
stretches of mesa land shadowed with mystery, and then drop out of
sight behind high peaks.

He felt that he might indeed grow old fast, shut up in a city. It
occurred to him that the Little Woman was unreasonable to expect it of
him.  Her idea of getting him out of town for a time, as the judge had
advised, was to send him up to San Francisco to be close-herded there.
Casey had promised to go, but now the prospect jarred.  He wasn't
feeble-minded, that he knew of; it seemed natural to want to do his own
deciding now and then.  When he got back home in the morning,  Casey
meant to have a serious talk with the Little Woman, and get right down
to cases, and tell her that he was built for the desert, and that you
can't teach an old dog new tricks.

"They been tryin' to make Casey Ryan over into something he ain't," he
muttered under his breath, while his new friend was in the garage
office paying for the gas.  "Jack an' the Little Woman's all right, but
they can't drive Casey Ryan in no town herd.  Cops is cops; and they
got 'em in San Francisco same as they got 'em in L. A. If they got 'em,
I'll run agin' 'em. I'll tell 'em so, too."

The young man came out, sliding silver coins into his trousers pocket.
He glanced up and down the narrow, little street already deserted,
cranked the Ford and climbed in.

"All set," he observed cheerfully, "Let's go!"

Casey slipped his cigarette to the upper, left-hand corner of his
whimsical, Irish mouth, forced a roar out of the little engine and
whipped around the corner and across the track into the faintly lighted
road that led past shady groves and over a hill or two, and so into the
desert again.

His new friend had fallen into a meditative mood, staring out through
the windshield and whistling under his breath a pleasant little melody
of which he was probably wholly unaware.  Perhaps he felt that he had
said enough to Casey just at present concerning a possible partnership.
Perhaps he even regretted having said anything at all.

Casey himself drove mechanically, his rebellious mood slipping
gradually into optimism.  You can't keep Casey Ryan down for long; in
spite of his past unpleasant experiences he was presently weaving
optimistic plans of his own.  The young fellow beside him seemed to
return Casey's impulsive friendship.  Casey thought pleasureably of the
possibility of their driving over the desert together, sharing alike
the fortunes of the game and the adventures of the trail. Casey himself
had learned to be shy of partnerships--witness Barney Oakes!--but any
man with a drop of Irish in his blood and a bit of Irish twinkle in his
eye would turn his back on defeat and try again for a winning.

They had just passed over a hilly stretch with many turns and windings,
the moon blotted out completely now by the cloud bank. For half an hour
they had not seen any evidence that other human beings were alive in
the world.  But when they went rattling across a small mesa where the
sand was deep, a car with one brilliant spotlight suddenly showed
itself around a turn just ahead of them.

Casey slowed down automatically and gave a twist to the steering wheel.
But the sand just here was deep and loose, and the front wheels of the
Ford gouged unavailingly at the sides of the ruts. Casey honked the
horn warningly and stopped full, swearing a good, Caseyish oath.  The
other car, having made no apparent effort to turn out, also stopped
within a few feet of Casey, the spotlight fairly blinding him.

The young man beside Casey slid up straight in the seat and stopped
whistling.  He leaned out of the car and stared ahead without the dusty
interference of the windshield.

"You can back up a few lengths and make the turn-out all right," he
suggested.

"If I can back up, so can he.  He's got as much road behind him as what
I'VE got," Casey retorted stubbornly.  "He never made a try at turnin'
out.  I was watchin'.  Any time I can't lick a road hawg, he's got a
license to lick me.  Make yourself comf'table, young feller--we're
liable to set here a spell." Casey grinned.  "I spent four hours on a
hill once, out-settin, a road hawg that wanted me to back up."

The man in the other car climbed out and came toward them, walking
outside the beams cast by his own glaring spotlight.  He bulked rather
large in the shadows; but Casey Ryan, blinking at him through the
windshield, was still ready and willing to fight if necessary.  Or, if
stubbornness were to be the test, Casey could grin and feel secure.  A
little man, he reflected, can sit just as long as a big man.

The big man walked leisurely up to the car and smiled as he lifted a
foot to the running board.  He leaned forward, his eyes going past
Casey to the other man.

"I kinda thought it was you, Kenner," he drawled.  "How much liquor you
got aboard to-night?"

Casey, slanting a glance downward, glimpsed the barrel of a big
automatic looking toward them.

"What if I ain't got any?" the young man parried glumly.  "You're
taking a lot for granted."

The big man chuckled.  "If you ain't loaded with hootch, it's because
one of the boys met up with yuh before I did.  Open 'er up.  Lemme see
what you got."

The young fellow scowled, swore under his breath and climbed out,
turning toward the loaded tonneau with reluctant obedience.

"I can't argue with the law," he said, as he began to pull out a roll
of bedding wedged in tightly.  "But, for cripes sake, go as easy as you
can.  I'm plumb lame from my last fall!"

The big man chuckled again.  "The law's merciful as, it can afford to
be, and I've got a heart like an ox.  Got any jack on yuh?"

"I'm just about cleaned, and that's the Gawd's truth.  Have a heart,
can't yuh?  A man's got t' live."

"Slip me five hundred, anyway.  How much is your load?"

"Sixty gallons--bottled, most of it.  Two kegs in bulk."  Young Kenner
was proceeding stoically with the unloading.  Casey, his mouth clamped
tight shut, was glaring stupifiedly straight out through the windshield.

"Pile out thirty gallons of the bottled goods by that bush. You can
keep the kegs."  The big man's eyes shifted to Casey Ryan's
expressionless profile and dwelt there curiously.

"Seems like I know you," he said abruptly.  "Ain't you the guy that was
brought in with that Black Butte bunch of moonshiners and got off on
account of a nice wife and an L. A. alibi?  Sure you are! Casey Ryan.
I got yuh placed now."  He threw back his head and laughed.

Casey might have been an Indian making a society call for all the sign
of life he gave.  Young Kenner, having deposited his camp outfit in a
heap on the ground, began lifting out tall, round bottles, four at a
time and ricking them neatly beside the large sagebush indicated by the
officer.

Standing upon the running board at Casey's shoulder where he had a
clear view, the big man watched the unloading and at the same time kept
an eye on Casey.  It was perfectly evident that for all his easy good
nature, he was not a man who could be talked out of his purpose.

"All right, pile in your blankets," the big man ordered at last, and
young Kenner unemotionally began to reload the camp outfit. The big
man's attention shifted to Casey again.  He looked at him curiously and
grinned.

"Say, that's a good one you pulled!  You had all the county officials
bluffed into thinking you were the victim of that Black Butte bunch,
instead of being in cahoots.  That alibi of yours was a bird. Does
Kenner, here, know you hit the hootch pretty strong at times?
Bootlegging's bad business for a man that laps it up the way you do.
Where's that piece of change, Kenner?"

"Aw, can't yuh find some way to leave me jack enough to buy gas and
grub?"  Young Kenner asked sullenly, reaching into his pocket. The big
man shook his head.

"I'm doing a lot for you boys, when I let yuh get past me with the
Lizzie, to say nothing of half your load.  I'd ought to trundle yuh
back to San Berdoo; you both know that as well as I do.  I'm too
soft-hearted for this job, anyway.  Hand over the roll."

Young Kenner swore and extended his arm behind Casey.  "That leaves me
six bits," he growled, as the big man dropped something into his coat
pocket.  "You might give me back ten, anyway."

"Couldn't possibly.  I have to have something to square myself with if
this leaks out.  Just back up, till you can get around my car. Turn to
the left where the sand ain't so deep and you ain't likely to run over
the booze."

With the big man still standing at his shoulder on the running board,
Casey Ryan did what he had rashly declared he never would do; he backed
the Ford, turned it to the left as he had been commanded to do, and
drove around the other car.  It was bitter work for Casey; but even he
recognized the fact that the "settin'" was not good that evening.  Back
in the road again, he stopped when he was told to stop, and waited,
with a surface calm altogether strange to Casey, while the officer
stepped off and gave a bit of parting advice.

"Better keep right on going, boys. I'd hate to see yuh get in trouble,
so you'd better take this old road up ahead here. That'll bring yuh out
at Dagget and you'll miss Barstow altogether.  I just came from there;
there's a hard gang hanging around on the lookout for anything they can
pick up.  Don't get caught again.  On your way!"

Casey drove for half a mile still staring straight before him. Then
young Kenner laughed shortly.

"That's Smilin' Lou," he said.  "He's a mean boy to monkey with. Talk
about road hawgs--he's one yuh can't outset!"



CHAPTER ELEVEN

"So that's the kind uh game yuh asked me to set in on!"  Casey broke
another long silence.  He had felt in his bones that young Kenner was
watching him secretly, waiting for him to take his stand for or against
the proposition.

"I'd like to know who passed the word around amongst outlaws that Casey
Ryan is the only original easy mark left runnin' wild, an' that he can
be caught an' made a goat of any time it's handy! Look at the crowd of
folks bunched on that crossing this afternoon! Why didn't yuh pick some
one else for the goat?  Outa all them hundreds uh people, why'n hell
did yuh have to go an' pick on Casey Ryan?  Ain't he had trouble enough
tryin' to keep outa trouble?

"Naw!  Casey Ryan's went an' blowed hisself to show tickets, an' he's
headed home, peaceful an' on time, so's he can shave an' put on a clean
collar an' slick up to please his wife an' take 'er to the show!
Nothin' agin the law in that!  Not a damn' thing yuh can haul 'im to
jail fer!  So YOU had to come along, loaded to the guards with
hootch--stall your Ford on the car track right under m' nose, an' tell
Casey Ryan to git in!  Couldn't leave 'im to go home peaceful to 'is
wife--naw!  You had t' haul 'im away out here an' git 'im in wrong with
a cop agin!  That's a fine game you're playin'!  That's a DARNED fine
game!"

"Sure, it is!  It's better than the game you've been playing," young
Kenner stated calmly.  "Take your own story, for instance. You've been
dubbin' along, tryin' t' play the way the law tells you to.  An' the
saps has been flockin' to yuh like a bunch uh hornets--every bird
tryin' t' sink his stinger in first. Ain't that right?

"Keepin' the law has laid yuh in jail twice in the last month, by your
own tell.  Why, a clown like you, that's aimin' t' keep the law an'
live honest, is the easiest mark in the world.  Them's the guys that do
the most harm--they make graftin' so darned easy! Them's the guys the
saps lay for and dust off regular in the shape of fines an' taxes an'
the like uh that.  Oncet in awhile they'll snatch yuh fer somethin' yuh
never done at all an' lay yuh away fer a day or two, just t' keep yuh
scared and easy t' handle next time.

"Now, yuh take me, fer instance.  I play agin' the law--an' I'm
cleanin' up right along, and have yet to take my morning sunlight in
streaks.  I know as much about the inside of a jail as I know about the
White House--an' no more.  I've hauled hootch all over the country, an'
I never yet was dusted off so hard by the law that I didn't come
through with a roll uh jack they'd overlooked.

"Take this highjackin' to-night, for instance.  Look what Smilin' Lou
took off'n me!  And yet," Kenner turned and grinned impudently at
Casey, "don't never think I didn't come out a long jump ahead! I carry
nothin' cheap; nothin' but good whisky an' brandy that the liquor
houses failed to declare when the world went dry. Then there's real,
honest-to-gosh European stuff run in from Mexico; now you're in, Casey,
I'll tell yuh the snap.  When I said easy money, I was in my right mind.

"You can count on highjackers leavin' yuh half your load; mebby a
little more, if yuh set purty.  They don't aim t' force yuh out uh the
business.  They grab what the traffic'll bear, an' let yuh go on an
make a profit so you'll stay.

"Now there's a card you can slip up your sleeve for this game. Yuh load
in the best stuff first--see?  Anything real special you wanta put in
kegs with double sides an' ends which you fill with moonshine.  Yuh
never can tell--they might wanta sample it. Smilin' Lou did once--an'
you notice to-night he left the kegs be. So they get a good grade of
whisky from the liquor houses. And they pass up the best, imported
stuff that can be got to-day. We'll have regular customers for that;
and you can gamble they'll pay the price!" He laughed at some secret
joke which he straightway shared with Casey.

"You noticed I got my gas-tank behind--a twenty-gallon tank at that.
Well, what if I tell yuh that right under this front seat there's a
false bottom to the tool-box and under that--well, suppose you're
settin' on forty pints uh French champagne? More'n all that, this
cushion we're settin' on has got a concealed pocket down both
sides--for hop.  So yuh see, Casey, a man can make an honest livin' at
this game, even if he's highjacked every trip.  Now you're in, I can
show yuh all kinds uh tricks."

The muscles, along Casey's jaw had hardened until they looked bunched.
His eyes, fixed upon the winding trail in front of him, were a pale,
unwinking glitter.

"Who says I'm in?  Yuh ain't heard Casey Ryan say it yet, have yuh? Yuh
better wait till Casey says he's in b'fore yuh bank on 'im too strong.
Casey may be an easy mark--he may be the officious goat pro tem of
every darn' bootlegger an' moonshiner an' every darn' cop that crosses
his trail; but you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan don't do 'is own
decidin'!

"Before you go any further, young feller, I'll tell yuh just how fur
Casey's in your game--an' that's as fur as Barstow.  When Casey says
he'll do a thing he comes purty near doin' it.  I ain't playin' no
bootleg game, young feller; White Mule an' me ain't an' never was trail
pardners.  Make me choose between bootleggers an' cops, an' I'd have to
flip a dollar on it.  Only fer Bill Masters bein' your friend, I dunno
but what I'd take yuh right back with me t' L. A. an' let yuh sleep in
a jail oncet--seein' you've never had the pleasure!"

The young man laughed imperturbably. "Flip that dollar for me, Casey,
to see whether I shoot yuh now an' dump yuh out in the brush
somewheres, or make yuh play the hootch game an' like it. Why, you
didn't think for one minute, did yuh, that I was takin' any chance with
you?  Not a chance in the world!  Go squeal to the law--an' what would
it get yuh?

"You was drivin' this car yourself when Smilin' Lou stopped us,
recollect.  He had yuh placed as one of that Black Butte gang quick as
he lamped yuh.  Yuh think Smilin' Lou is goin' to take a chance? You
was caught with the goods t'night, old-timer, an' it's the second time
inside a month.  It'd be the third time you an' the law has tangled.
Why, you set there yourself an' told me how you was practically run
outa L. A., right this week.  You set still a minute and figure out
about how many years they'd give yuh!

"How come Smilin' Lou overlooked cleanin' yuh of your roll when he took
mine, do yuh think?  He was treatin' yuh white, an' givin' yuh a chance
to come back strong next time--that's why. They got so much on yuh now
after to-night, that he knows you got just one chance to sidestep a
stretch in the pen.  That's to play the game with pertection.  Smilin'
Lou never to my knowledge throwed down a guy that come through on
demand.

"Smilin' Lou stood there an' sized yuh up about the same as I did,
somethin' like this: 'Here Is Casey Ryan--a clown that's safe anywhere
in the desert States.  He got honest prospector wrote all over 'im.
Why, if you boarded a street car the conductor would be guessin',
wild-eyed, how much gold dust it takes to make a nickel, expectin' you
to haul out your poke an' look around fer the gold scales.  Why, you
could git by where a town guy couldn't. You've got a rep a mile long as
a fightin', squareshootin' Irishman that's a drivin' fool an' knows the
desert like he knows ham-an'-eggs. Tie on some picks an' shovels an'
put you behind the wheel, and only the guys that are in the know would
ever get wise in a thousand years.

"Why, look what he said about you havin' 'em all bluffed in San Berdoo!
Grabbed you with a bunch uh moonshiners, and you fightin' the saps
harder'n any of 'em--and then, by heck, you slips the noose an' leaves
'em thinkin' you're honest but unlucky.

"So you 'n' me is pardners till I say when.  We'll clean up some real
jack together.  Minin' ain't in it, no more, with hootch runnin'--if
yuh play it right.  The good old White Mule goes under the wire,
old-timer, an' takes the money.  Burros is extinct."

"Burros ain't any extincter than what you'll be when I git through with
yuh," gritted Casey savagely, shutting off the gas. "Bill Masters can
like it or not--I'm goin' to lick the livin' tar outa you here an' now.
When I'm through with yuh, if you're able to wiggle the wheel, yuh can
take your load uh hootch an' go tahell! I'll hoof it down here to the
next station on the railroad an' ketch a ride back to L. A."

Kenner laughed.  "An' what would I be doin', you poor nut?  Set here
meek till yuh tell me to git out an' take a lickin'?  Yuh feel that gun
proddin' yuh in the ribs, don't yuh?  I can't help wonderin' how your
wife would feel towards you if you was found with a hole drilled
through your middle, an' a carload uh booze. That'd jar the faith of
the most believin' woman on earth.  You take this cut-off road up here
an' drive till I tell yuh t' stop. As you may know, a man can't be
chickenhearted and peddle hootch--an' I'm called an expert.  So you
think that over, Casey--an' drive purty, see?"

Casey drove as "purty" as was possible with a six-shooter pressed
irritatingly against his lowest floating rib; but he did not dwell upon
the spectacle of himself found dead with a carload of booze. He wished
to heaven he hadn't let the Little Woman talk him out of packing a gun,
and waited for his chance.

Young Kenner was thoughtful, brooding through the hours of darkness
with his head slightly bent and his eyes, so far as Casey could
determine, fixed steadily on the uneven trail where the headlights
revealed every rut, every stone, every chuck-hole. But Casey was not
deceived by that quiescence.  The revolver barrel never once ceased its
pressure against his side, and he knew that young Kenner never for an
instant forgot that he was riding with Casey Ryan at the wheel, waiting
for a chance to kill him.

By daylight, such was Casey's driving, they were well down the highway
which leads to Needles and on through Arizona. Casey was just thinking
that they would soon run out of gas, and that he would then have a
fighting chance, when he was startled almost into believing that he had
spoken his plan.

"I told you there's a twenty-gallon tank on this car; well, it holds
twenty-five.  I've got a special carburetor that gives an actual
mileage of twenty-two miles to the gallon on ordinary desert roads. I
filled 'er till she run over at Victorville--and I notice you're easy
on the gas with your drivin'.  Figure it yourself, Casey, and don't be
countin' on a stop till I'm ready t' stop."

Casey grunted, more crestfallen than he would ever admit. But he hadn't
given up; the give-up quality had been completely forgotten when
Casey's personality was being put together.  He drove on, around the
rubbly base of a blackened volcano long since cold and bleak, and bored
his way through the sandy stretch that leads through Patmos.

Patmos was a place of unhappy memories, but he drove through the little
hamlet so fast that he scarcely thought of his unpleasant sojourn there
the summer before.  Young Kenner had fallen silent again and they drove
the sixty miles or so to Goffs with not a word spoken between them.

Casey spent most of that time in mentally cursing the Ford for its
efficiency.  He had prayed for blowouts, a fouled timer, for something
or anything or everything to happen that could possibly befall a Ford.
He couldn't even make the radiator boil.  Worst and most persistent of
his discomforts was the hard pressure of that six-shooter against his
side.  Casey was positive that the imprint of it would be worn as a
permanent brand upon his person for the rest of his life.  Young
Kenner's voice speaking to him came so abruptly that Casey jumped.

"I've been thinking over your case," Kenner said cheerfully. "Stop
right here while we talk it over."

Casey stopped right there.

"I've changed my mind about havin' you for a pardner," young Kenner
went on.  "You'd be a valuable man all right; but when a harp like you
gets stubborn-bitter, my hunch tells me to break away clean. You're a
mick--an' micks is all alike when they git a grudge. I can't be
bothered keepin' yuh under my eye all the time, and the way I've felt
yuh oozin' venom all this while shows me I'd have to. An' bumpin' yuh
off would be neither pleasant ner safe.

"Now, the way I've doped this out,  I'm goin' to sell yuh the outfit
fer just what jack yuh got in your clothes.  Fork it over, an' I'll
give yuh the layout just as she stands."

"Yuh better wait till Casey says he wants t' buy!"  Swallowing
resentment all night had made his voice husky; and it was bitter indeed
to sit still and hear himself called a harp and a mick.

"Why wait?  Hand over the roll, and that closes the deal. I didn't ask
yuh would yuh buy--I'm givin' yuh somethin' fer your money, is all.  I
could take it off yuh after yuh quit kickin' and drive your remains in
to this little burg, with a tale of how I'd caught a bootlegger that
resisted arrest.  So fork over the jack, old-timer. I want to catch
that train over there that's about ready to pull out." He prodded
sharply with the gun, and Casey heard a click which needed no
explanation.

Casey fumbled for a minute inside his vest and glumly "forked over."
Young Kenner inspected the folded bank notes, smiled and slipped the
flat bundle inside his shirt.

"You're stronger on the bank roll than what yuh let on," he remarked
contentedly.  "I don't stand to lose so much, after all. Sixteen
hundred, I make it.  What's in your pants pockets?"

Casey, still balefully silent, emptied first one pocket and then the
other into Kenner's cupped palm.  With heavy sarcasm he felt in his
watch pocket and produced a nickel slipped there after paying
street-car fare.  He held it out to young Kenner between his finger and
thumb, still gazing straight before him.

Young Kenner took it and grinned.  "Oh, well--you're rich!  Drive on
now, and when you get about even with that caboose, slow to twelve
miles whilst I hop off; and then hit 'er up again an' keep 'er goin'.
If yuh don't, I'll grab yuh fer a bootlegger, sure. And I'd have the
hull train crew to help me wrassle yuh down. They'd be willin' to
sample the evidence, I guess, an' be witnesses against yuh.  An' bear
in mind, Casey, that yuh got a darned good Ford and all its valuable
contents for sixteen hundred and some odd bucks.  If you meet up with
the law, you can treat 'em white an' still break even on the deal yuh
just consummated with me."

"Like hell I consummated the deal!" Casey was goaded into muttering.

He drove abreast of the caboose, and at a final prod in the ribs Casey
slowed down.  Young Kenner dropped off the running board, alighted
running with his body slanted backwards and his lips smiling
friendly-wise.

"Don't take any bad money--an' don't let 'em catch yuh!" he cried
mockingly, as he headed for the caboose.

At a crossing, two miles farther on, Casey came larruping out of the
sand hills and was forced to wait while the freight train went rattling
past, headed east on a downhill grade.

Young Kenner, up in the cupola, leaned far out and waved his hat as the
caboose flicked by.



CHAPTER TWELVE

The highway north from the Santa Fe Railroad just west of Needles
climbs an imperceptible grade across barren land to where the mesa
changes and becomes potentially fertile.  Up this road, going north, a
cloud of yellow dust rolled swiftly.  See at close range, the nose of a
dingy Ford protruded slightly in front of the enveloping cloud--and
behind it Casey Ryan, hard-eyed and with his jaw set to the fighting
mood, gripped the wheel and drove as if he had a grudge against the
road.

At the first signpost Casey canted a malevolent eye upward and went
lurching by at top speed.  The car bulked black for a moment, dimmed,
and merged into the fleeing cloud that presently seemed no more than a
dust-devil whirling across the mesa.  At the second signpost Casey
slowed, his eyes dwelling speculatively upon the legend:

"JUNIPER WELLS 3 M"

The arrow pointed to the right where a narrow, little-used trail angled
crookedly away through the greasewood.  Casey gave a deciding twist to
the steering wheel and turned into the trail.

Juniper Wells is not nearly so nice a place as it sounds.  But it is
the first water north of the Santa Fe, and now and then a wayfarer of
the desert leaves the main highway and turns that way, driven by
necessity.  It is a secluded spot, too unattractive to tempt people to
linger; because of its very seclusion it therefore tempted Casey Ryan.

When a man has driven a Ford fifteen hours without once leaving the
wheel or taking a drink of water or a mouthful of food, however great
his trouble or his haste, his first thought will be of water, food and
rest.  Even Casey's deadly rage at the diabolical trick played upon him
could not hold his thoughts from dwelling upon bacon and coffee and a
good sleep afterwards.

Wind and rain and more wind, buffeting that trail since the last car
had passed, made "heavy going."  The Ford labored up small hills and
across gullies, dipping downward at last to Juniper Wells; there Casey
stopped close beside the blackened embers left by some forgotten
traveler of the wild.  He slid stiffly from behind the wheel to the
vacant seat beside him, and climbed out like the old man he had last
night determined never to become. He walked away a few paces, turned
and stood glaring back at the car as if familiarizing himself with an
object little known and hated much.

Fate, he felt, had played a shabby trick upon an honest man. Here he
stood, a criminal in the eyes of the law, a liar in the eyes of the
missus.  An honest man and a truthful, here he was--he, Casey
Ryan--actually afraid to face his fellow men.

"HE wasn't no friend of Bill Masters; the divil himself wouldn'ta owned
him fer a friend!" snarled Casey, thinking of Kenner. "Me--CASEY
RYAN!--with a load uh booze wished onto me--and a car that may have
been stolen fer all I know--an' not a darn' nickel to my name! They can
make a goat uh Casey Ryan once, but watch clost when they try it the
second time!  Casey MAY be gittin' old; he might possibly have
softenin' of the brain; but he'll git the skunk that done this, or
you'll find his carcass layin' alongside the trail bleachin' like a
blowed-out tire!  I'll trail 'im till my tongue hangs down to my knees!
I'll git 'im an' I'll drown 'im face down in a bucket of his own
booze!"  Whipped by emotion, his voice rose stridently until it cracked
just under a shout.

"That sounds pretty businesslike, old man," a strange voice spoke
whimsically behind Casey.  "Who's all this you're going to trail till
your tongue hangs down to your knees?  Going to need any help?"

Casey whirled belligerently upon the man who had walked quietly up
behind him.

"Where the hell did YOU come from?" he countered roughly.

"Does it matter?  I'm here," the other parried blandly.  "But by the
way!  If you've got the makings of a meal in your car--and you look too
old a hand in the desert to be without grub--I won't refuse to have a
snack with you.  I hate to invite myself to breakfast, but it's that or
go hungry--and an empty belly won't stand on ceremony."

The hard-bitten features of Casey Ryan, tanned as they were by wind and
sun to a fair imitation of leather, were never meant to portray mixed
emotions.  His face, therefore, remained impassive except for a queer,
cornered look in his eyes.  With a sick feeling at the pit of his
stomach he wondered just how much of his impassioned soliloquy the man
had overheard; who and what this man was, and how he had managed to
approach within six feet of Casey without being overheard.  With a
sicker feeling, he wondered if there were any grub in the car; and if
so, how he could get at it without revealing his contraband load to
this stranger.

But Casey Ryan was nothing if not game.  He reached for his trusty plug
of tobacco and pried off a corner with his teeth.  He lifted his left
hand mechanically to the back of his head and pushed his black felt hat
forward so that it rested over his right eyebrow at a devil-may-care
angle.  These preparations made involuntarily and unconsciously, Casey
Ryan was himself again.

"All right--if you're willin' to rustle the wood an' start a fire, I'll
see if I can dig up somethin'."  He cocked an eye up at the sun. "I et
my breakfast long enough ago so I guess it's settled. I reckon mebby I
c'd take on some bacon an' coffee myself.  Feller I had along with me I
ditched, back here at the railroad.  He done the packin' up--an' I'd
hate to swear to what he put in an' what he left out.  Onery cuss--I
wouldn't put nothin' past him.  But mebby we can make out a meal."

The stranger seemed perfectly satisfied with this arrangement and
studied preamble.  He started off to gather dead branches of
greasewood; and Casey, having prepared the way for possible
disappointment, turned toward the car.

Fear and Casey Ryan have ever been strangers; yet he was conscious of a
distinct, prickly chill down his spine.  The glance he cast over his
shoulder at the stranger betrayed uneasiness, best he could do.  He
turned over the roll of bedding and cautiously began a superficial
search which he hoped would reveal grub in plenty--without revealing
anything else.  He wished now that he had taken a look over his
shoulder when young Kenner was unloading the car at Smiling Lou's
command.  He would be better prepared now for possible emergencies.  He
remembered, with a bit of comfort, that the bootlegger had piled a good
deal of stuff upon the ground before Casey first heard the clink of
bottles.

A grunt of relief signaled his location of a box containing grub. A
moment later he lifted out a gunny sack bulging unevenly with cooking
utensils.  He fished a little deeper, turned back a folded tarp and
laid naked to his eyes the top of a whisky keg. With a grunt of
consternation he hastily replaced the tarp, his heart flopping in his
chest like a fresh-landed fish.

The stranger was kneeling beside a faintly crackling little pile of
twigs, his face turned inquiringly toward Casey.  Casey, glancing
guiltily over his shoulder, felt the chill hand of discovery reaching
for his very soul.  It was as if a dead man were hidden away beneath
that tarp.  It seemed to him that the eyes of the stranger were sharp,
suspicious eyes, and that they dwelt upon him altogether too
attentively for a perfectly justifiable interest even in the box of
grub.

Black coffee, drunk hot and strong, gave the world a brighter aspect.
Casey decided that the situation was not so desperate, after all. Easy
enough to bluff it out--easiest thing in the world!  He would just go
along as if there wasn't a thing on his mind heavier than his thinning,
sandy hair.  No man living had any right or business snooping around in
his car, unless he carried a badge of an officer of the law.  Even with
the badge, Casey told himself sternly, a man would have to show a
warrant before he could touch a finger to his outfit.

Over his third cup of coffee Casey eyed the stranger guardedly. He did
not look like an officer.  He was not big and burly, with arrogant eyes
and the hint of leashed authority in his tone. Instead, he was of
medium height, owned a pair of shrewd gray eyes and an easy drawl, and
was dressed in the half military style so popular with mining men,
surveyors and others who can afford to choose what garb they will adopt
for outdoor living.

He had shown a perfect familiarity with cooking over a campfire, and
had fried the bacon in a manner which even Casey could not criticize.
Before the coffee was boiled he had told Casey that his name was Mack
Nolan.  Immediately afterward he had grinned and added the superfluous
information that he was Irish and didn't care who knew it.

"Well, I'm Irish, meself," Casey returned approvingly and with more
than his usual brogue.  "You can ask anybody if Casey Ryan has ever
showed shame fer the blood that's in' 'im.  'Tis the Irish that never
backs up from a rough trail or a fight."  He poured a fourth cup of
coffee into a chipped enamel cup and took his courage in his two hands.
Mack Nolan, he assured himself optimistically, couldn't possibly know
what lay hidden under the camp outfit in the Ford.  Until he did know,
he was harmless as anybody, so long as Casey kept an eye on him.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN

During the companionable smoke that followed breakfast, Casey learned
that Mack Nolan had spent some time in Nevada, ambling through the
hills, examining the geologic formation of the country with a view to
possible future prospecting in districts yet undeveloped.

"The mineral possibilities of Nevada haven't been more than scratched,"
Mack Nolan observed, lying back with one arm thrown up under his head
as a makeshift pillow and the other hand negligently attending to the
cigarette he was smoking.  His gray army hat was tilted over his eyes,
shielding them from the sun while they dwelt rather studiously upon the
face of Casey Ryan.

"Every spring I like to get out and poke around through these hills
where folks as a rule don't go.  Never did much prospecting--as such.
Don't take kindly enough to a pick and shovel for that.  What I like
best is general field work.  If I run across something rich, time
enough then to locate a claim or two and hire a couple of strong backs
to do the digging.

"I've been out now for about three weeks; and night before last, just
as I stopped to make camp and before I'd started to unpack, my two
mules got scared at a rattler and quit the country.  Left me flat,
without a thing but my clothes and six-shooter, and what I had in my
pockets."  He lifted the cigarette from between his lips--thin, they
were, and curved and rather pitiless, one could guess, if the man were
sufficiently roused.

"I wasted all yesterday trying to trail 'em.  But you can't do much
tracking in these rocks back here toward the river.  I was hitting for
the highway to catch a ride if I could, when I saw you topping this
last ridge over here.  Don't blame me much for bumming a breakfast, do
you?"  And he added, with a sigh of deep physical content, "It sure-lee
was some feed!"

His lids drooped lower as if sleep were overtaking him in spite of
himself.  "I'd ask yuh if you'd seen anything of those mules--only I
don't give a damn now.  I wish this was night instead of noon; I could
sleep the clock around after that bacon and bannock of yours.  Haven't
a care in the world," he murmured drowsily. "Happy as a toad in the
sun, first warm day of spring.  How soon you going to crank up?"

Casey stared at him unwinkingly through narrowed lids.  He pushed his
hat forward with a sharp tilt over his eyebrow--which meant always that
Casey Ryan had just O. K.'d an idea--and reached for his chewing
tobacco.

"Go ahead an' take a nap if yuh want to," he urged.  "I got some
tinkerin' to do on the Ford, an' I was aimin' to lay over here an' do
it.  I'm kinda lookin' around, myself, for a likely prospect; I got all
the time there is.  I guess I'll back the car down the draw a piece
where she'll set level, an' clean up 'er dingbats whilst you take a
sleep."

Casey left the breakfast things where they were, as a silent
reassurance to Mack Nolan that the car would not go off without him. It
was a fine, psychological detail of which Casey was secretly rather
proud.  A box of grub, a smoked coffee pot and dirty breakfast dishes
left beside a dead campfire establishes evidence, admissible before any
jury, that the owner means to return.

Casey went over and cranked the Ford, grimly determined to make the
coffee pot lie for him if necessary.  He backed the car down the draw a
good seventy-five yards, to where a wrinkle in the bank hid him from
the breakfast camp.  He stopped there and left the engine running while
he straddled out over the side and went forward to the dip of the front
fender to see if the Ford were still visible to Mack Nolan.  He was
glad to find that by crouching and sighting across the fender he could
just see the campfire and the top of Nolan's hat beyond it.  The man
need only lift his head off his arm to see that the Ford was standing
just around the turn of the draw.

"The corner was never yet so tight that Casey Ryan couldn't find a
crack somewhere to crawl through," he told himself vaingloriously. "An'
I hope to thunder the feller sleeps long an' sleeps solid!"

For fifteen minutes the mind of Casey Ryan was at ease.  He had found a
shovel in the car, placed conveniently at the side where it could be
used for just such an emergency as this.  For fifteen minutes he had
been using that shovel in a shelving bank of loose gravel just under an
outcropping of rhyolite a rod or so behind the car and well out of
sight of Nolan.

He was beginning to consider his excavation almost deep enough to bury
two ten-gallon kegs and forty bottles of whisky, when the shadow of a
head and shoulders fell across the hole.  Casey did not lift the dirt
and rocks he had on his shovel.  He froze to a tense quiet, goggling at
the shadow.

"What are yuh doing, Casey?  Trying to outdig a badger?" Mack Nolan's
chuckle was friendliness itself.

Casey's head snapped around so that he could cock an eye up at Nolan.
He grinned mechanically.  "Naw.  Picked up a rich-lookin' piece uh
float. Thought I'd just see if it didn't mebby come from this ledge."

Mack Nolan stepped forward interestedly and looked at the ledge.

"Where's the piece you found?" he very naturally inquired.  "The
formation just here wouldn't lead me to expect gold-bearing rock; but
of course, anything is possible with gold.  Let's have a look at the
specimen."

Casey had once tried to bluff a stranger with two deuces and a pair of
fives, and two full stacks of blue chips pushed to the center to back
the bluff.  The stranger had called him, with three queens and a pair
of jacks.  Casey felt like that now.

He had laughed over his loss then, and he grinned now and reached
carelessly to the bank beside him as if he fully expected to lay his
hand on the specimen of gold-bearing rock.  He went so far as to utter
a surprised oath when he failed to find it.  He felt in his pockets.
He went forward and scanned the top of the ledge almost convincingly.
He turned and stood a-straddle, his hands on his hips, and gazed on the
pile of dirt he had thrown out of the hole.  Last, he pushed his hat
back so that with the next movement he could push it forward again over
his eyebrow.

"Now if that there lump uh high-grade ain't went an' slid down the bank
an' got covered up with the muck!" he exclaimed disgustedly. "I'm a son
of a gun if Fate ain't playin' agin' Casey Ryan with a flock uh aces
under its vest!"

Mack Nolan laughed, and Casey slanted a look his way.  "Thought I left
you takin, a nap," he said brazenly.  "What's the matter? Didn't your
breakfast set good?"

Mack Nolan laughed again.  It was evident that he found Casey Ryan very
amusing.

"The breakfast was fine," he replied easily.  "A couple of lizards got
to playing tag over me.  That woke me up, and the sun was so hot I just
thought I'd come down and crawl into the car and go to sleep there.  Go
ahead with your prospecting, Casey--I won't bother you."

Casey went on with his digging, but his heart was not in it. With every
laggard shovelful of dirt, he glanced over his shoulder apprehensively,
watching Mack Nolan crawl into the back of the car and settle himself,
with an audible sigh of satisfaction, on top of the load.  He had one
wild, wicked impulse to lengthen the hole and make it serve as a grave
for more than bootleg whisky; but it was an impulse born of
desperation, and it died almost before it had lived.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN

Casey left his digging and returned to the Ford, still determined to
carry on the bluff and pretend that much tinkering was necessary before
he could travel further.  With a great show of industry he rummaged for
pliers and wrenches, removed the hood from the motor and squinted down
at the little engine.

By that time Mack Nolan was snoring softly in deep slumber. Casey
listened suspiciously, knowing too well how misleading a snore could
be.  But his own eyelids were growing exceeding heavy, and the
soporific sound acted hypnotically upon his sleep-hungry brain. He
caught himself yawning, and suddenly threw down the wrench.

"Aw, hell!" he muttered disgustedly, and went and crawled under the
back of the car where it was shady.

The sun was nearly down when Casey awoke and crawled out.  Mack Nolan
was still curled comfortably in the car, his back against the bed roll.
He opened his eyes and yawned when Casey leaned and looked in upon him.

"By Jove, that was a fine sleep I had," he announced cheerfully,
lifting himself up and dangling his legs outside the car. "Strike
anything yet?"

"Naw."  Casey's grunt was eloquent of the mood he was in.

"Get the car fixed all right?"  Mack Nolan's cheerfulness seemed
nothing less than diabolical to Casey.

"Naw." Then Casey added grimly, "I'm stuck.  I dunno what ails the
damned thing.  Have to send to Vegas fer new parts, I guess. It's only
three miles out here to the road.  Mebby you better hike over to the
highway an' ketch a ride with somebody.  I might send in for a timer
an' some things, too.  No use waitin' fer me, Nolan--can't tell how
long I'll be held up here."

Mack Nolan climbed out of the car.  Casey's spirits rose instantly.
Nolan came forward and looked down at the engine as casually as he
would glance at a nickel alarm clock.

"She was hitting all right when you backed down here," Nolan remarked
easily.  "I'll just take a look at her myself.  Fords are cranky
sometimes.  But I've assembled too many of them in the factory to let
one get the best of me in the desert."

Casey could almost hear his heart when it slumped down into his boots.
But he wasn't licked yet.

"Aw, let the darned thing alone till we eat," he said, pushing his hat
forward to hurry his wits.

"Well--I can throw a Ford together in the dark, if necessary," smiled
Mack Nolan.  "Eat, it is, if you want it that way. That breakfast I put
away seems to have sharpened my appetite for supper.  Tell you what,
Ryan.  I'll do a little trouble-shooting here while you cook supper.
How'll that be?"

That wouldn't be, if Casey could prevent it.  His pale, narrow-lidded
eyes dwelt upon Nolan unwinkingly.

"Well, mebby I'm kind of a crank about my car," he hedged, with a
praiseworthy calmness.  "Fords is like horses, to me. I drove stage all
m' life till I took to prospectin'--an' I never could stand around and
let anybody else monkey with my teams.  I ain't a doubt in the world,
Mr. Nolan, but what you know as much about Fords as I do.  More, mebby.
But Casey Ryan's got 'is little ways, an' he can't seem to ditch 'em.
We'll eat; an' then mebby we'll look 'er over together.

"At the same time," he went on with rising courage, "I'm liable to
stick around here for awhile an' prospect a little.  If you wanta find
them mules an' outfit, don't bank too strong on Casey Ryan. He's liable
to change 'is mind any old time.  Day or night, you can't tell what
Casey might take a notion to do.  That there's a fact.  You can ask
anybody if it ain't."

Mack Nolan laughed and slapped Casey unexpectedly on the shoulder.
"You're a man after my own heart, Casey Ryan," he declared
enigmatically.  "I'll stick to you and take a chance. Darn the mules!
Somebody will find them and look after them until I show up."

Casey's spirits, as he admitted to himself, were rising and falling
like the hammer of a pile driver; and like the pile driver, the hammer
was driving him deeper and deeper into hopelessness.  He would have
given an ear to know for certain whether Mack Nolan were as innocent
and friendly as he seemed. Until he did know, Casey could see nothing
before him but to wait his chance to give Nolan the slip.

Sitting cross-legged in the glow of the campfire after supper, with a
huge pattern of stars drawn over the purple night sky, Casey pulled out
the old pipe with which he had solaced many an evening and stuffed it
thoughtfully with tobacco.  Across the campfire, Mack Nolan sat with
his hat tilted down over his eyes, smoking a cigarette and seeming at
peace with all the world.

Casey hoped that Nolan would forget about fixing the Ford.  He hoped
that Nolan would sleep well to-night.  Casey was perfectly willing to
sacrifice a good roll of bedding and the cooking outfit for the
privilege of traveling alone.  No man, he told himself savagely, could
ask a better deal than he was prepared to give Nolan.  He bent to reach
a burning twig for his pipe, and found Nolan watching him steadily from
under his hat brim.

"What sort of looking fellows were those, Ryan, that left a load of
booze on your hands?"  Nolan asked casually when he saw that he was
observed.

Casey burned his fingers with the blazing twig.  "Who said anything
about any fellers leavin' me booze?" he evaded sharply. "If it's a
drink you're hintin' for, you won't get it.  Casey Ryan ain't no booze
peddler, an' now's as good a time as any to let that soak into your
system."

Mack Nolan's gray eyes were still watching Casey with a steadfastness
that was disconcerting to a man in Casey's dilemma.

"It might help us both considerably," he said quietly, "if you told me
all about it.  You can't cache that booze you've got in the car--I
won't let you, for one thing; for another, that would be merely dodging
the issue, and if you'll forgive my frankness, dodging doesn't seem to
be quite in your line."

Casey puffed hard on his pipe.  "The world's gittin' so darned full uh
crooks, a man can't turn around now'days without bumpin' into a few!"
he exploded bitterly.  "What kind uh hold-up game YOU playin', Mr.
Nolan?  If that's your name," he added fiercely.

Mack Nolan laughed to himself and rubbed the ash from his cigarette
against the sole of his shoe.  "Why," he answered genially, "my game is
holding up bootleggers--and crooked cops. Speaking off-hand (which I
don't often do) I should say you have a fine chance to sit in with me.
I'm just guessing, now,"  he added dryly,  "but I'm tolerably good at
guessing; a man's got to be, these days."

"A man's got to do better than guess--with Casey Ryan," Casey remarked
ominously.  "The last man that guessed Casey Ryan, guessed 'im plumb
wrong."

"Meaning that you'd refuse to help me round up bootleggers and the
officers that protect them?" A steel edge crept into Mack Nolan's
voice.  He leaned forward, his elbows on his knees, his eyes boring
into Casey's mind.

"Man, don't stall with me!  You've got brains enough to know that if I
were a crook I'd have held you up long before now.  You gave me three
splendid opportunities to stick a gun in your back--and I could have
made others.  And," he added with a smile, "if I had thought that you
were a bootlegger or a crook of any other kind, I'd have had you in Las
Vegas jail by this time.  You're no more a crook than I am.  You've got
neither the looks nor the actions of a slicker.  I may say I know you
pretty well--"

Casey thrust out a pugnacious chin.  "Say!  D' you know Bill Masters,
too?  That's all I wanta know!"

"Bill Masters?  Why, is he the fellow who stepped out from under this
load of hootch?  If he is, he must have picked himself a new name; I
never heard it."

Casey glared suspiciously for twenty seconds before he settled back
glumly into his mental corner.

"Ryan, I've been all day sizing you up.  I'm going to be perfectly
honest with you and tell you why I think you're straight--although you
must admit the evidence is rather against you.

"I happened to be right close when you drove down in here and stopped.
As a matter of fact, I was behind that little clump of junipers. Had
you driven around them instead of stopping this side, you couldn't have
failed to see me.

"You came down here mad at the trick that had been played you. You were
so mad, you started talking to yourself as a safety valve--blowing off
mental steam.  You've spent a lot of time in the desert--alone.  Men
like that frequently talk aloud their thoughts, just to hear a human
voice.  You made matters pretty plain to me before you knew there was
any one within miles of you.  For instance, you're not at all sure this
car you've got wasn't stolen.  You're inclined to think it was.  You're
broke--robbed, I take it, by the men who somehow managed to leave you
with the car and a load of booze on your hands.  The trick must have
been turned this morning; down at the railroad,  I imagine--because you
hadn't taken time to stop and size up the predicament you were in until
you got here.

"Your main idea was to get off somewhere out of sight.  You were
scared. You didn't hear me behind you until I spoke--which proves
you're a green hand at dodging.  And that, Ryan, is a very good
recommendation to a man in my line of work.  But you're shrewd, and
you're game--dead game.  You're a peach at thinking up schemes to get
yourself out of a hole.  Of course, being new at it, you don't think
quite far enough.  For instance, because you found me afoot it never
occurred to you that I might know something about a car; but the rest
of your plan was a dandy.

"Your idea of backing down there around the turn and burying the booze
was all right.  With almost any other man it would have worked. Once
you got that hootch off your mind, I rather think you'd have been glad
to have me along with you, instead of giving me broad hints to leave.
But you haven't got the booze buried yet, and you've been figuring all
the evening.  You don't see how the devil you're going to manage it
with me around.

"I'll do a little more guessing, now: I guess you've doped it out that
you'll pack the bedroll up here, tuck me in and pray to the Lord I'll
sleep sound.  You're hoping you can cache the booze and make your
getaway while I've gone bye-low.  Or possibly, if you got the booze put
away safe from my prying eyes, you might come back to bed and I'd find
you here in the morning just as if nothing had happened.  How Is that
for guesswork?"

"You go tahell!" growled Casey, swallowing a sickly grin.  He pressed
down the tobacco in his pipe, eyeing Nolan queerly.  "If them damn'
lizards had uh let yuh alone, I wouldn't have nothin' on m' mind now
but my hat."  He looked across the fire and grinned again.

"Keep on; you'll be tellin' me what the missus an' I was arguin' about
last night over long-distance.  I've heard tell uh this four-bit mind
reading an' forecastin' your horrorscope fer a dime; but I never met up
with it before.  If you're aimin' to take up a collection after the
show, you'll fare slim.  I've been what a feller called 'dusted off'."
He added, after a pause that was eloquent, "They done it thorough!"

Mack Nolan laughed.  "They usually are thorough, when they're 'dusting
off a chump', as I believe they call it."

Casey grunted.  "'Chump' is right, mebby.  But anyways, you're too
late, Mr. Nolan. I'm cleaned."

Mack Nolan rolled another cigarette, lighted it and flipped the match
into the campfire.  He smoked it down to the last inch, staring into
the fire and saying nothing the while.  When the cigarette stub
followed the match, he leaned back upon one elbow and began tracing a
geometrical figure in the sand with a stick.

"Ryan," he said abruptly, "you're square and I know it.  The very
nature of my business makes me cautious about trusting men--but I'm
going to trust you."  He stopped again, taking great pains with the
point of a triangle he was drawing.

Casey knocked the ashes out of his pipe against a rock.  "Puttin' it
that way, Mr. Nolan, the man's yet to live that Casey Ryan ever
double-crossed.  Cops I got no use for; nor yet bootleggers. Whether I
got any use for you, Mr. Nolan, I can say better when I've heard yuh
out.  A goat I've been for the last time.  But I'm willin' to HEAR yuh
out--and that there's more'n what I'd uh said this morning."

"And that's fair enough, Ryan.  If you jumped into things with your
eyes shut, I don't think I'd want you with me."

Casey squirmed, remembering certain times when he had gone too headlong
into things.

"I'm going to ask you, Ryan, to tell me the whole story of this car and
its load of whisky.  Before you do that, I'll tell you this much to
show good faith and prove to you how much I trust you: I'm an officer,
and my special work right now is to clean up a gang of bootleggers and
the crooked officers who are protecting them. What I know about your
case leads me to believe that you've run afoul of them and that you're
the man I've been looking for that can help me set a trap for them.
Would you like to do that?"

"If it's that bunch you're after, Mr. Nolan, I'd ruther land 'em in
jail than to find a ledge of solid gold ten feet thick an' a mile long.
One thing I'd like to know first.  Are yuh or ain't yuh huntin' mules?"

Mack Nolan laughed.  "I am, yes.  But the mule I'm hunting is white!"

Casey studied that until he had the fresh pipeful of tobacco going
well.  Then he looked up and grinned understandingly.

"So it's White Mule you're trailin'."  He kicked a stub of greasewood
branch back into the flames and laughed.  "Well, the tracks is deep an'
plenty, and if that's the trail you're takin', I'm with yuh. You ain't
a cop--leastways you don't spread your arms every time you turn around.
Gosh, I hate them wing-floppin' kind!  They's one thing an' one only
that I hate worse--an' that's bootleggers an' moonshiners.  If you got
a scheme to give them cusses their needin's, you can ask anybody if
Casey Ryan ain't the feller you can bank on."

"Yes.  That's what I've been thinking.  Now, I wish you'd tell me
exactly what you've been up against.  Don't leave out anything, however
trivial it might seem to you."

Wherefore, Casey sat with the firelight flickering across his seamed,
Irish face and told the story of his wrongs.  Trivial details Nolan had
asked for--and he got them with the full Casey Ryan flavor. Even the
old woman who rocked, Casey pictured--from his particular angle.  Mack
Nolan sat up and listened, his eyes steady and his mouth, that had
curved to laughter many times during the recital, once more firm and
somewhat pitiless when Casey finished.

"This Smiling Lou; you'd know him again, of course?"

"Know him!  Say, I'd know him after he'd fried a week in hell!" Casey's
tone left no doubt of his meaning.

"And I suppose you could tell this man Kenner a mile off and around a
corner.  Now, I'll tell you what I want you to do, Casey.  This may jar
you a little--until I explain.  I want you--"  Mack Nolan paused, his
lips twitching in a faint smile--"to do a little bootlegging yourself."

"Yuh--WHAT?" In the firelight Casey's eyes were seen to bulge.

"I want you to bootleg this whisky you've got in the car." Nolan's eyes
twinkled.  "I want you to go back and peddle this booze, and I want you
to do it so that Smiling Lou or one of his bunch will hold you up and
highjack you.  Do you see what I mean? You don't--so I'll tell you.
We'll put it in marked bottles.  I have the bottles and the seals and
labels for every brand of liquor to be had in the country to-day.  With
marked money and marked bottles, we ought to be able to get the goods
on that gang."

Casey thought of something quite suddenly and held out an imperative,
pointing finger.

"There's something else that feller told me was in the car!" he cried
agitatedly.  "He said he had forty pints of French champagne cached in
a false bottom under the front seat.  And he said the front cushion had
a blind pocket around the edges that was full uh dope.  Hop, he called
it."

Mack Nolan whistled under his breath.

"And he turned the whole outfit over to you for sixteen hundred dollars
or so?"  He stared thoughtfully into the fire.  Abruptly he looked at
Casey.

"What the deuce had you done to him, Ryan?" he asked, with a quizzical
intentness.  "He must have been scared stiff, to let go of all that
stuff for sixteen hundred.  Why, man, the 'junk'--that's dope--alone
must be worth more than that.  And the champagne--forty pints, you say?
He ought to get twenty dollars a pint for that.  Figure it yourself.  I
hope," he added seriously, "the fellow wasn't too scared to show up
again."

"Well," Casey said grimly, "I dunno how scart he is--but he knows darn'
well I'll kill 'im. I told im I would."

Again Mack Nolan laughed.  "Catching's much better than killing, Ryan.
It hurts a man worse, and it lasts a heap longer.  What do you say to
turning in?  To-morrow we'll have a full day at my private bottling
works."

They moved their cooking outfit down near the Ford for safety's sake.
While it was wholly improbable that the car would be robbed in the
night, Mack Nolan was a man who took as few chances as possible. It
happened that the excavation Casey had so hopefully made that morning
formed a convenient level for their bed; wherefore they spread it
there, talking in low tones of their plans until they went to sleep.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN

Dawn was just thinning the curtain of darkness when Nolan woke Casey
with a shake of the shoulder.

"I think we'd better be moving from here before the world's astir. You
can back on down this draw, Ryan, and strike an old trail that cuts
over the ridge and up the next gulch to an old, deserted mine where
I've made headquarters.  It isn't far, and we can have breakfast at my
camp."

Casey swallowed his astonishment, and for once in his life he did as he
was told without argument.

Mack Nolan's camp was fairly accessible by roundabout trail with a few
tire tracks to point the way for Casey.  Straight across the ridges, it
would not have been more than two miles to Juniper Wells. Nevertheless
not one man in a year would be tempted to come this way, unless it were
definitely known that some one lived here.

As the camp of a man who was prospecting for pastime rather than for a
grubstake, the place was perfect.  Mack Nolan had taken possession of a
cabin dug into the hill at the head of a long draw. A brush-covered
shed of makeshift construction sheltered a car of the ubiquitous Ford
make.  Fifty yards away and in full sight of the cabin, the mouth of a
tunnel yawned blackly under a rhyolite ledge.

Casey swept the camp with an observant glance and nodded approval as
and stopped before the cabin.

"As a prospector, Mr. Nolan, I'll say 'tis a fine layout you got here.
An' tain't the first time an honest-lookin' mine has been made to cover
things far off from minin'.  Like the Black Butte bunch, f'r instance.
But if any one was to ride up on yuh unexpected here, I'll say yuh
could meet 'em with a grin an' feel easy about your secrets."

"That's praise indeed, coming from an old hand like you," Nolan
declared.  "Now I'll tell you something else.  With Casey Ryan in the
camp the whole thing's twice as convincing.  Come in.  I want to show
you what I call an artistic interior."

Grinning, Casey followed him inside and exclaimed profanely in
admiration of Mack Nolan's genius.  The cabin showed every mark of the
owner's interest in the geologic formation of that immediate district.

On the floor along the wall lay specimens of mineralized rock, a couple
of prospector's picks, a single-jack and a set of drills; a sample
sack, grimed and with a hole in the corner mended by the simple process
of gathering the cloth together around it and tying it tightly with a
string, hung from a nail above the tools. On the window sill were
specimens of ore; two or three of the pieces showed a richness that
lighted Casey's eyes with the enthusiasm of an old prospector.  Mining
journals and a prospector's manual lay upon a box table at the foot of
the bunk. For the rest, the cabin looked exactly what it was--the
orderly home of a man quite accustomed to primitive living far off from
his fellows.

They had a very satisfactory breakfast cooked by Mack Nolan from his
own supplies and eaten in a leisurely manner while Nolan talked of
primary formations and secondary, and of mineral intrusions and breaks.
Casey listened and learned a few things he had not known, for all his
years of prospecting.  Mack Nolan, he decided, could pass anywhere as a
mining expert.

"And now," said Nolan briskly, when he had hung up the dishpan and
draped the dishcloth over it to dry, "I'll show you the bottling works.
We'll have to do the work by lantern-light.  There's not one chance in
fifty that any one would show up here--but you never can tell. We could
get the stuff out of sight easily enough while the car was coming up
the gulch.  But the smell is a different matter. We'll take no chances."

At the head of the bunk, a curtained space beneath a high shelf very
obviously did duty as a wardrobe.  A leather motor coat hung there, one
sleeve protruding beyond the curtain of flowered calico. Other garments
bulged the cloth here and there.  Nolan, smiling over his shoulder at
Casey, nodded and pushed the clothing aside.  A door behind opened
inward, admitting the two into a small recess from which another door
opened into a cellar dug deep into the hill.

Undoubtedly this had once been used as a frost-proof storeroom. A small
ventilator pipe opened--so Nolan told Casey--in the middle of a
greasewood clump.  Nolan lighted a gasoline lantern that shed a white
brilliance upon the room.  On the long table which extended down one
side of the room, Casey saw boxes of bottles and other supplies which
he did not at the moment recognize.

"We'll have to rebottle all the whisky," said Nolan.

"You'll see a certain mark blown into the bottom of each one of these.
The champagne, I'm afraid, I must either confiscate and destroy or run
the risk of marking the labels.  The hop we'll lay aside for further
consideration."

Casey grinned, thinking of the speedy downfall of his enemies, Smiling
Lou and Kenner--and, as a secondary consideration other crooks of their
type.

"So now we'll unload the stuff, Ryan, and get to work here." Nolan
adjusted the white flame in the mantle of the gasoline lantern and led
the way outside.  "Take in the seat-cushion, Casey.  I don't fancy
opening it outside, even in this howling wilderness."

"I think I'll just pack in the kegs first, Mr. Nolan."  For the first
time since the shock of Mr. Nolan's "mind-reading" the night before,
Casey ventured a suggestion.  "Anybody comes along, it's the kegs
they'd look at cross-eyed.  Cushions is expected in Fords--if I ain't
buttin' in," he added meekly.

"Which you're not.  You're acting as my agent now, Ryan, and it will
take two heads to put this over without a hitch.  Sure, put the kegs
out of sight first.  The bottles next--and then we'll make short work
of the dope in the cushion."

Casey carried in the kegs while Nolan kept watch for inopportune
visitors.  It was thought inadvisable to unload the camp outfit from
the car until the whisky was all removed.  The outfit effectually hid
what was below--and they were taking no chances. They both breathed
freer when the two kegs were in the cellar. Nolan was pleased; too,
when Casey came out with the sample bag and announced that he would
carry the bottles in the bag.  Then Nolan fancied he heard a car, and
walked away to where he would have a longer view down the gulch.  He
would whistle, he said, and warn Casey if someone was coming.

He had not proceeded fifty yards when Casey yelled and brought him back
at a run.  Casey was rummaging in the car, throwing things about with a
recklessness which ill-became an agent of the self-possessed Mack Nolan.

"There ain't a damn' bottle here!" he bellowed indignantly. "Them
crooks gypped me outa ten gallons uh good, bottle whisky! Now what do
you know about that, Mr. Nolan?  That feller said it was high-grade
stuff he had packed away at the bottom.  He lied. There ain't nothin'
here but a set uh skid chains an' a jack. An' the champagne, mebby,
under the front seat!"

Mack Nolan's eyes narrowed.  "I think Ryan, I'll have a look under that
front seat."

He had a look--several looks, in fact.  There was the false bottom
under the seat, but there was nothing in it.  He took his pocket knife,
opened a blade and split the edge of the seat-cushion at the bottom. He
inserted a finger and thumb and drew out a bit of hair stuffing. He
stood up and eyed Casey sharply, and Casey stared back defensively.

"He was a darned liar from start t' finish.  He said there was
champagne an' he said there was hop," Casey stated flatly.

"I wondered at his letting go of stuff as valuable as that," said
Nolan. "I think we'd better take a look at those kegs."

They went into the cellar and took a look at the kegs.  Both kegs.
Afterward they stood and looked at each other.  Casey's hands went to
his hips, and the muscles along his jaw hardened into lumps. He spat
into the dirt of the cellar floor.

"Water!"  He snorted disgustedly.  "Casey Ryan with the devil an' all
scart outa him, thinkin' he had ownership of a load uh booze an' hop
sufficient t' hang 'im!"  His hand slid into his trousers pocket,
reaching for the comforting plug of tobacco.  "Stuck up an' robbed is
what happens t' Casey.  You can ask anybody if it ain't highway
robbery!"

Nolan stopped whistling under his breath. "There's the Ford," he
reminded Casey comfortingly.

"Which I wisht it wasn't!" snarled Casey.  "You know yourself, Mr.
Nolan, it's likely stole, an' the first man I meet in the trail'll
likely take it off me, claimin' it's his'n!"

Mack Nolan started whistling again, but checked himself abruptly.
"Well, our trap's wanting bait, I see.  This leaves me still hunting
the White Mule."

"Aw, tahell with your White Mule!  Tahell with everything!" Casey
kicked the nearest keg viciously and went out into the sunshine,
swearing to himself.



CHAPTER SIXTEEN

In the shade of a juniper that grew on the highest point of the gulch's
rim, Mack Nolan lay sprawled on the flat of his back, one arm for a
pillow, and stared up into the serene blue of the sky with cottony
flakes of cloud swimming steadily to the northeast. Three feet away,
Casey Ryan rested on left hip and elbow and stared glumly down upon the
cabin directly beneath them. Whenever his pale, straight-lidded eyes
focussed upon the dusty top of the Ford car standing in front of the
cabin, Casey said something under his breath.       Miles away to the
south, pale violet, dreamlike in the distance, the jagged outline of a
small mountain range stood as if painted upon the horizon.  A wavy
ribbon of smudgy brown was drawn uncertainly across the base of the
mountains.  This, Casey knew, when his eyes lifted to look that way,
marked the line of the Sante Fe and a train moving heavily upgrade to
the west.

Toward it dipped the smooth stretch of barren mesa cut straight down
the middle with a yellow line that was the highway up which Casey had
driven the morning before.  The inimitable magic of distance and high
desert air veiled greasewood, sage and sand with the glamour of
unreality.  The mountains beyond, unspeakably desolate and forbidding
at close range, and the little black buttes standing afar, off--small
spewings of age-old volcanos dead before man was born--seemed
fascinating, unknown islets anchored in a sea of enchantment.  Across
the valley to the west nearer mountains, all amethyst and opal tinted,
stood bold and inscrutable, with jagged peaks thrust into the blue to
pierce and hold the little clouds that came floating by.  Even the
gulch at hand had been touched by the enchanter's wand and smiled
mysteriously in the vivid sunlight, the very air a-quiver with that
indescribable beauty of the high mesa land which holds desert dwellers
in thrall.

When first Casey saw the smoke smudge against the mountains to the
south, he remembered his misadventure of the lower desert and swore.
When he looked again, the majestic sweep of distance gave him a
satisfied feeling of freedom from the crowded pettinesses of the city.
For the first time since trouble met him in the trail between
Victorville and Barstow, Casey heaved a sigh of content because he was
once more out in the big land he loved. Those distant, painted
mountains, looking as impossible as the back drop of a stage, held
gulches and deep canyons he knew.  The closer hills he had prospected.
The mesa, spread all around him, seemed more familiar than the white
apartment house in Los Angeles which Casey had lately called home.  And
if the thought of the Little Woman brought with it the vague discomfort
of a schoolboy playing hookey, Casey could not have regretted being
here with Mack Nolan if he had tried.

They were lying up here in the shade--following the instinct of other
creatures of the wild to guard against surprises--while they worked out
a nice problem in moonshine.  And since the desert had never meant a
monotonously placid life to Casey--who carried his problems
philosophically as a dog bears patiently with fleas--he had every
reason now for feeling very much at home.  When he reached mechanically
into his pocket for his Bull Durham and papers, any man who knew him
well would have recognized the motion as a sign that Casey was himself
again, once more on his mental feet and ready to go boring
optimistically into his next bunch of trouble.

Mack Nolan raised his head off his arm and glanced at Casey quizzically.

"Well--we can't catch fish if we won't cut bait," he volunteered
sententiously.  "I've a nice little job staked out for you, Casey."

Casey gave a grunt that might mean one of several things, and which
probably meant them all.  He waited until he had his cigarette going.
"If it ain't a goat's job I'm fer it," he said. "Casey Ryan ain't the
man t' set in the shade whilst there's men runnin' loose he's darned
anxious t' meet."

"I've been thinking over the deal those fellows pulled on you. If the
man Kenner had left you the booze and dope he told you was in the car,
I'd say it was a straight case of a sticky-fingered officer letting a
bootlegger by with part of his load, and a later attack of cold feet on
the part of the bootlegger.  But they didn't leave you any booze.  So I
have doped it this way, Ryan.

"The thing's deeper than it looked, yesterday.  Those two were working
together, part of a gang, I should say, with a fairly well-organized
system.  By accident--and probably for a greater degree of safety in
getting out of the city, Kenner invited you to ride with him.  He
wanted no argument with that traffic cop--no record made of his name
and license number.  So he took you in. When he found out who you were,
he knew you were at outs with the law. He knew you as an experienced
desert man.  He had you placed as a valuable member of their gang, if
you could be won over and persuaded to join them.

"As soon as possible he got you behind the wheel--further protection to
himself if he should meet an officer who was straight.  He felt you out
on the subject of a partnership.  And when you met Smiling Lou--well,
this Kenner had decided to take no chance with you. He still had hopes
of pulling you in with them, but he was far from feeling sure of you.
He undoubtedly gave Smiling Lou the cue to make the thing appear an
ordinary case of highjacking while he ditched his whole load so that
there would be no evidence against him if he lost out and you turned
nasty.

"I'm absolutely certain, Casey, that if you had not been along, Smiling
Lou would not have touched that load.  They'd probably have stopped
there for a talk, exchanged news and perhaps perfected future plans,
and parted like two old cronies.  It's possible, of course, that
Smiling Lou might have taken some whisky back with him--if he had
needed it.  Otherwise, I think they split more cash than booze, as a
rule."

Casey sat up.  "Well, they coulda played me for a sucker easy enough,"
he admitted reluctantly.  "An' if it'll be any help to yuh, Mr. Nolan,
I'll say that I never seen the money passed from Kenner to Smilin' Lou,
an' I never seen a bottle unloaded from the car.  I heard 'em yes. An'
I'll say there was a bunch of 'em all right.  But what I SEEN was the
road ahead of me and that car of Smilin' Lou's standin' in the middle
of it.  He had a gun pulled on me, mind yuh--and you can ask anybody if
a feller feels like rubberin' much when there's only the click of a
trigger between him an' a six-foot hole in the ground."

"All the more reason," said Nolan, also sitting up with his hands
clasped around his knees, "why it's important to catch them with the
goods.  You'll have to peddle hootch, Casey, until we get Smiling Lou
and his outfit."

"And where, Mr. Nolan, do I git the booze to peddle?" asked Casey
practically.

Nolan laughed to himself.  "It can be bought," he said, "but I'd rather
not.  Since you've never monkeyed with the stuff, it might make you
conspicuous if you went around buying up a load of hootch. And of
course I can't appear in this thing at all.  But I have what I think is
a very good plan."

Casey looked at him inquiringly, and again Nolan laughed.

"Nothing for it, Casey,--we'll have to locate a still and rob it. That,
or make some of our own, which takes time.  And it's an unpleasant,
messy job anyway."

Casey stared dubiously down into the gulch.  "That'd be fine, Mr.
Nolan, if we knew where was the still.  Or mebby yuh do know."

Mack Nolan shook his head.  "No, I don't, worse luck. I haven't been
long enough in the district to know as much about it as I hope to know
later on.  Prospecting for this headquarters took a little time; and
getting my stuff moved in here secretly took more time.  A week ago,
Casey, I shouldn't have been quite ready to use you.  But you came when
you were needed, and so--I feel sure the White Mule will presently show
up."

Casey lifted his head and stared meditatively out across the immensity
of the empty land around them.

"She's a damn' big country, Mr. Nolan. I dunno," he remarked
doubtfully.  "But Casey Ryan has yet t' go after a thing an' fail t'
git it.  I guess if it's hootch we want, it ought t' be easy enough t'
find; it shore has been hard t' dodge it lately! If yuh want White
Mule, Mr. Nolan, you send Casey out travelin' peaceful an' meanin' harm
t' nobody.  Foller Casey and you'll find 'im tangled up with a mess uh
hootch b'fore he gits ten miles from camp."

"You could go out and highjack some one." Nolan agreed, taking him
seriously--which Casey had not intended.  "I think we'll go down and
load the camp outfit into my car, Ryan, and I'll start you out.  Go up
into your old stamping ground where people know you. If you're careful
in picking your men, you could locate some hootch, couldn't you,
without attracting attention?"

Casey studied the matter.  "Bill Masters could mebby help me out," he
said finally.  "Only I don't like the friends Bill's been wishin' onto
me lately.  This man Kenner, that held me up, knowed Bill Masters
intimate.  I'm kinda losin' my taste fer Bill lately."

Mack Nolan seized upon the clue avidly.  Before Casey quite realized
what he had done, he found himself hustled away from camp in Mack
Nolan's car, headed for Lund in the service of his government. Since
young Kenner had been able to talk so intimately of Bill Masters, Mack
Nolan argued that Bill Masters should likewise be able to give some
useful information concerning young Kenner. Moreover, a man in Bill
Masters' position would probably know at least a few of the hidden
trails of the White Mule near Lund.

"If you can bring back a load of moonshine Ryan, by all means do so,"
Nolan instructed Casey at the last moment.  "Here's money to buy it
with.  We should have enough to make a good haul for Smiling Lou.
Twenty gallons at least--forty, if you can get them. Keep your weather
eye open, and whatever happens, don't mention my name or say that you
are working with the law.  In five days, if you are not here, I shall
drive to Las Vegas.  Get word to me there if anything goes wrong.  Just
write or wire to General Delivery. But I look for you back, Ryan, not
later than Friday midnight. Take no unnecessary risk; this is more
important than you know."

Nolan's crisp tone of authority remained with Casey mile upon mile. And
such was the Casey Ryan driving that midnight found him coasting into
Bill Masters' garage in Lund with the motor shut off and a grin on the
Casey Ryan face.



CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

Mack Nolan had just crawled into his bunk on Wednesday night when he
thought he heard a car laboring up the gulch.  He sat up in bed to
listen and then got hurriedly into his clothes.  He was standing just
around the corner of the dugout where the headlights could not reach
him, when Casey killed the engine and stopped before the door. Steam
was rising in a small cloud from the radiator cap, and the sound of
boiling water was distinctly audible some distance away.

Mack Nolan waited until Casey had climbed out from behind the wheel and
headed for the door.  Then he stepped out and hailed him.  Casey
started perceptibly, whirling as if to face an enemy. When he saw that
it was Nolan he apparently lost his desire to enter the cabin. Instead
he came close to Nolan and spoke in a hoarse whisper.

"We better run 'er under the shed, Mr. Nolan, and drain the darned
radiator.  I dunno am I follered or not, but I was awhile back. But the
man that catches Casey Ryan when he's on the trail an' travelin, has
yet t' be born.  An' you can ask anybody if that ain't so."

Mack Nolan's eyes narrowed.  "And who followed you then?" he asked
quietly. "Did you bring any hootch?"

"Did yuh send Casey Ryan after hootch, or was it mebby spuds er
somethin'?"  Casey retorted with heavy dignity.  "Will yuh pack it in,
Mr. Nolan, whilst I back the car in the shed, or shall I bring it when
I come?  It ain't so much," he added drily,  "but it cost the trouble
of a trainload."

"I'll take it in," said Nolan.  "If any one does come we want no
evidence in reach."

Casey turned to the car, clawed at his camp outfit and lifted out a
demijohn which he grimly handed to Nolan.  "Fer many a mile it rode on
the seat with me so I could drink 'er down if they got me cornered," he
grinned.  "One good swaller is about the size of it, Mr. Nolan."

Nolan grinned in sympathy and turned into the cabin, bearing the
three-gallon, wicker-covered glass bottle in his arms.  Presently he
returned to the doorway and stood there listening down the gulch until
Casey came up, walking from the shed.

"'Tis a good thing yuh left this other car standin' here cold an'
peaceful, Mr. Nolan," Casey, observed, after he also had stood for a
minute listening.  "If they're follerin' they'll be here darn' soon. If
they ain't I've ditched 'em.  Let's git t' bed an' I'll tell yuh my
tale uh woe."

Without a word Nolan led the way into the cabin.  In the dark they
undressed and got into the bed which was luckily wide enough for two.

"Had your supper?" Nolan asked belatedly when they were settled.

"I did not," Casey grunted.  "I will say, Mr. Nolan, there's few times
in my life when you'd see Casey Ryan missin' 'is supper whilst layin'
tracks away from a fight.  But if it was light enough you could gaze
upon 'im now.  And I must hand it t' the Gallopin' Gussie yuh give me
the loan of fer the trip.  She brung me home ahead of the sheriff--and
you can ask anybody if Casey Ryan himself can't be proud uh that!"

"The sheriff?" Nolan's voice was puzzled.  He seemed to be considering
something for a minute, before he spoke again.  "You could have
explained to the sheriff, couldn't you, your reason for having booze in
the car?"

Casey raised to one elbow.  "When yuh told Casey Ryan 'twas not many
men you'd trust, and that you trusted me an' the business was t' be
secret--Mr. Nolan, you 'was talkin' t' CASEY RYAN!" He lay down again
as if that precluded further argument.

"Good! I thought I hadn't made a mistake in my man," Nolan approved, in
a tone that gave Casey an inner glow of pride in himself.  "Let's have
the story, old man.  Did you see Bill Masters?"

"Bill Masters," said Casey grimly, "was not in Lund.  His garage is
sold an' Bill's in Denver--which is a long drive for a Ford t' git
there an' back before Friday midnight.  Yuh put a time limit me, Mr.
Nolan, an' nobody had Bill's address.  I didn't foller Bill t' Denver.
I asked some others in Lund if they knowed a man named Kenner, and they
did not.  So then I went huntin' booze that I could git without the
hull of Nevada knowin' it in fifteen minutes.  An' Casey's got this t'
say: When yuh WANT hootch, it's hard t' find as free gold in granite.
When yuh DON'T want it, it's forced on yuh at the point of a gun.  This
jug I stole--seein' your business is private, Mr. Nolan.

"I grabbed it off some fellers I knowed in Lund an' never had no use
for, anyway.  They're mean enough when they're sober, an' when they're
jagged they're not t' be mentioned on a Sunday.  I mighta paid 'em for
it, but money's no good t' them fellers an' there's no call t' waste
it.  So they made a holler and I sets the jug down an' licks them both,
an' comes along home mindin' my own business.

"So I guess they 'phoned the sheriff in Vegas that here comes a
bootlegger and land 'im quick.  Anyway, I was goin' t' stop there an'
take on a beefsteak an' a few cups uh coffee, but I never done it.  I
was slowin' down in front uh Sam's Place when a friend uh mine gives me
the high sign t' put 'er in high an' keep 'er goin'. Which I done.

"Down by Ladd's, Casey looks back an' here comes the sheriff's car hell
bent fer 'lection (anyway it looked like the sheriff's car). An' I
wanta say right here, Mr. Nolan, that's a darn' good Ford yuh got!  I
was follered, and 'I was follered hard.  But I'm here an' they'
ain't--an' you can ask anybody if that didn't take some going'!"

In the darkness of the cabin Casey turned over and heaved a great sigh.
On the heels of that came a chuckle.

"I got t' hand it t' the L. A. traffic cops, Mr. Nolan.  They shore
learned me a lot about dodgin'.  So now yuh got the hull story. If it
was the sheriff behind me an' if he trails me here, they got no
evidence an' you can mebby square it with 'im.  You'd know what t' tell
'im--which is more'n what Casey Ryan can say."

Casey fell asleep immediately afterward, but Mack Nolan lay for a long
while with his eyes wide open and his ears alert for strange sounds in
the gulch.  He was a new man in this district, working independently of
sheriff's offices.  Casey Ryan was the first man he had confided in;
all others were fair game for Nolan to prove honest or dishonest with
the government.  The very nature of his business made it so.  For when
whisky runners drove openly in broad daylight through the country with
their unlawful loads, somewhere along the line officers of the law were
sharing the profits. Nolan knew none of them,--by sight.  If he carried
the records of some safely memorized and pigeonholed for future use,
that was his own business. Mack Nolan's thoughts were his own and he
guarded them jealously and slept with his lips tightly closed. He
wanted no sheriff coming to him for explanation of his movements.
Wherefore he listened long, and when he slept his slumber was light.

At daylight he was up and abroad.  Two hours after sunrise Casey awoke
with the smell of breakfast in his nostrils.  He rolled over and
blinked at Mack Nolan standing with his hat on the back of his head and
a cigarette between his lips, calmly turning three hot-cakes with a
kitchen knife.  Casey grinned condescendingly.  He himself turned his
cakes by the simple process of tossing them in the air a certain kind
of flip, and catching them dexterously as they came down.  Right there
he decided that Mack Nolan was not after all a real outdoors man.

"Well, the sheriff didn't arrive last night," Nolan observed
cheerfully, when he saw that Casey was awake.  "I don't much look for
him, either.  Your driving on past the turn to Juniper Wells and coming
up that other old road very likely threw him off the track.  You must
have been close to the State line then and he gave you up as a bad job."

"It was a GOOD job!"  Casey maintained reaching for his clothes. "I
made 'em think I was headed clean outa the country.  If they knowed who
it was at all, they'd know I belong in L. A., and I figured they'd
guess I was headed there.  They stopped for something this side of
Searchlight an' so I pulls away from 'em a couple of miles.  They never
seen where I went to."

While he washed for breakfast, Casey began to take stock of certain
minor injuries.

"That darned Pete Gibson has got tushes in his mouth like a wild hawg;
the kind that sticks out," he grumbled, touching certain skinned places
on his knuckles.  "Every time I landed on 'im yesterday I run against
them tushes uh his'n."  But he added with a grin, "They ain't so solid
as they was when I met up with 'im. I felt one of 'em give 'fore I got
through."

"Brings the price of moonshine up a bit, doesn't it?"  Nolan suggested
drily.  "I rather think you might better have paid the men their price.
A fight is well enough in its way--I'm Irish myself.  But as my agent,
Ryan, the main idea is to let the law fight for you.  Our work is
merely to give the law a chance.  I like your not wanting to explain to
the sheriff.  Prohibition officers do not explain, as a rule. The law
behind them does that.

"And since the price seems to be rather hard on the knuckles--" He
glanced down at Casey's hands and grinned.  "--I think it may come
cheaper to make the stuff ourselves.  Licking two men for three
gallons, and getting the officers at your tail light into the bargain,
is all right as an experiment; but I don't believe, Ryan, we ought to
adopt that as a habit."

Casey cocked an eye up at him.  "Did yuh ever make White Mule, Mr.
Nolan?" he asked grimly.

Nolan laughed his easy little chuckle. "Why, no, Ryan, I never did. Did
you?"

"Naw.  I seen some made once, but I had too much of it inside me at the
time to learn the receipt for it.  I'd rather steal it, if it's all the
same to you, Mr. Nolan."  His hand went up to the back of his head and
moved forward, although there was no hat to push. "I've lived honest
all these years--an', dammit, it's kinda tough to break out with
stealin I what yuh don't want!  Couldn't we fill them bottles with
somethin' that LOOKS like hootch?  Cold tea should get by, Mr. Nolan.
It'd be a fine joke on Smilin' Lou."

"A good joke, maybe--but no evidence.  It isn't against the law, Ryan,
to have cold tea in your possession.  No, it's got to be whisky, and
there's got to be a load of it.  Enough to look like business and tempt
him or any other member of the gang you happen to meet.  If they caught
you with three gallons, Casey, they'd probably run you in and feel very
virtuous about it.  Nothing for it, I'm afraid.  We'll have to become
real moonshiners ourselves for awhile."

Casey ate with less appetite after that.  Making moonshine did not
appeal to him at all.  Given his choice, I think he would even prefer
drinking it, unhappy as the effect had been on him.

"We'll need a still, and we'll need the stuff.  I'm going to leave you
in charge of the camp, Ryan, while I make a trip to Needles. I'll
deputize you to assist me in cleaning up this district. And this
district, Ryan, touches salt water.  So if revenge looks good to you,
you'll have a fine chance to get even with the bootleggers.  And in the
meantime, just kill time around camp here while I'm gone.  If any one
shows up, you're prospecting."

That day, doubt-devils took hold of Casey Ryan and plucked at his
belief.  How did he know that Mack Nolan wasn't another bootlegger,
wanting to rope Casey in on a job for some fell purpose of his own?  He
had Mack Nolan's word and nothing more. For that matter, he had also
had young Kenner's word.  Kenner had fooled him completely.  Mack Nolan
could also fool him--perhaps.

"Well, anyhow, he never claimed to know Bill Masters, and that's a
point in 'is favor.  And if it's some dirty work he's up to, he coulda
made it shorter than what he's doin'.  An' if he's double-crossin'
Casey Ryan--well, anyway, Casey Ryan 'll be present at the time an'
place when he does it!"

Upon that comforting thought, Casey decided to trust Mack Nolan until
he caught him playing crooked; and proceeded to kill time as best he
could.



CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

It was noon the next day when Nolan returned, and he did not explain
why he was eighteen hours overdue.  Casey eyed him expectantly, but
Nolan's manner was brisk and preoccupied.

"Help me unload this stuff, Ryan," he said, "and put it out of sight in
the cellar.  We won't have to go through the process of making
moonshine, after all."

Casey looked into the car, pulling aside the tarp.  Four kegs he
counted, and lifted out one.

"An' how many did YOU lick, Mr. Nolan?" he grinned over his shoulder as
he started for the door.

Nolan laughed noncommittally.

"Perhaps I'm luckier at picking my bootleggers," he retorted. "If you
carry the right brand of bluff, you can keep the skin on your knuckles,
Ryan.  This beats making it, at any rate."

That afternoon and the next day, Casey Ryan did what he never dreamed
was possible.  With Mack Nolan to show him how, Casey performed
miracles.  While he did not, literally change water into wine, he did
give forty-three gallons of White Mule a most imposing pedigree.

He turned kegs of crude, moonshine whisky into Canadian Club, Garnkirk,
Tom Pepper, Three Star Hennessey and Cognac--if you were to believe the
bottles, labels and government seals.  Under Mack Nolan's instruction
and with his expert assistance, the forgery was perfect.  While the
cellar reeked with the odor of White Mule when they had finished, the
bottled array on the table whispered of sybaritic revelings to glisten
the eyes of the most dissipated man about town.

"When it's as easy done as that, Mr. Nolan, the feller's a fool that
drinks it.  You've learnt Casey Ryan somethin' that mighta done 'im
some good a few years back."  He picked up a flat, pint bottle and
caressed its label with reminiscent finger tips.

"Many's the time me an' old Tommy Pepper drove stage together," he
mused.  "Throwed 'im at a bear once that I met in the trail over in
Colorado when I hadn't no gun on me.  Busted a pint on his nose--man!
Then I never waited to see what happened. I was a wild divil them days
when me an' Tommy Pepper was side pardners. But a yaller snake with a
green head crawled out of a bottle of 'im once--and that there was
where Casey Ryan says good-by to booze. If I hadn't quit 'im then, I'd
sure as hell quit 'im now. After this performance, Mr. Nolan, Casey
Ryan's goin' to look twice into his coffee pot.  I wouldn't believe in
cow's milk, if I done the milkin' myself!"

"Most of the stuff that's peddled nowadays is doctored,"  Nolan
replied, with the air of one who knows.  "When it isn't White Mule,
it's likely to be something worse.  That's one of the chief reasons why
I'm fighting it.  If they only peddled decent whisky it wouldn't be so
bad, Ryan.  But it's rank poison.  I've seen so many go stone blind--or
die--that it makes me pretty savage sometimes.  So now I'll coach you
in the part you're to play as hootch runner; and to-morrow you can
start for Los Angeles."

Casey did not answer.  He felt absently for his pipe, filled and
lighted it and went out to sit on the doorstep in gloomy meditation
while he smoked.

Returning to Los Angeles, even without a bootlegger's load, was not a
matter which Casey liked to contemplate.  He would have to face the
Little Woman if he went back; either as a deliberate liar, who lied to
his wife to gain the freedom he might have had without resorting to
deceit, or as the victim once more of crooks.  Casey thought he would
prefer the accusation of lying deliberately to the Little Woman, though
it made him squirm to think of it.  He wished she had not openly
taunted him with getting into trouble and needing her always to get him
out.

He would like to tell her that he was now working for the government.
The secrecy of his mission, the danger it involved, would impress even
her amused cynicism.  But the very secrecy of his mission in itself
made it impossible for him to tell her anything about it. Casey would
not admit it, but it was a real disappointment to him that he could not
wear a star on his coat.

All that day and evening he was glum, a strange mood for Casey Ryan.
But if Mack Nolan noticed his silence, he gave no sign. Nolan himself
was wholly absorbed by the business in hand.  The success of this plan
meant a good deal to him, and he told Casey so very frankly; which
lightened Casey's gloom perceptibly.

Casey was to drive to Los Angeles--even to San Diego if necessary--and
return within a week, unless Nolan's hopes were fulfilled and Casey was
held up and highjacked.  If he were apprehended by officers who were
honestly discharging their duty, Casey was to do thus-and-so, and
presently be free to drive on with his load.  If he were highjacked
(Casey gritted his teeth and said he hoped the highjacker would be
Smiling Lou), he was to permit himself to be robbed, worm himself as
far as possible into their confidence and return for further orders.

If Mack Nolan should chance to be absent from the cabin, then Casey was
to wait until he returned.  And Nolan intimated that hereafter the
making of moonshine might be a part of Casey's duties. Then, without
warning, Mack Nolan struck at the heart of Casey's worry.

"I don't want to dictate to any man in family affairs, Ryan. But I've
got to speak of one other matter," he said diffidently. "I suppose
naturally you'll want to go home and let your wife know you're still
alive, anyway.  But if you can manage to keep your present business a
secret for the time being, I think you'd better do it.  You said you
were planning to be away on a trip for some time, I remember.  If you
can just let it go that way, or say that you are prospecting over here,
I wish you would. Think you can manage that all right?"

"I'd rather manage a six-horse team of bronk mules," Casey admitted.
"But after the way the missus thinks I lied to 'er about takin' the
next train home from Barstow, anything I say 'll be used agin' me. My
wife's got brains.  She ain't put it down that the trains have quit
runnin'.  Accordin' to her figures, Casey's lied and he's in a hole
again, an' it'll be up to her an' Jack to run windlass an' pull 'im
out.  Don't matter what I say she won't believe me anyhow--so Casey
won't say nothin'.  Can't lie with your mouth shut, can yuh?"

"Oh, yes, it's been done," Mack Nolan chuckled.  "Now we'll set down
the serial numbers and the bank name of this 'jack',--and here's your
expense money separate.  And if there's anything that isn't clear to
you, Ryan, speak up.  You won't hear from me again, probably, until
you're back from this fishing trip."

Casey thought that everything was perfectly clear, and rashly he said
so, as he started off.

From Barstow to Victorville, from Victorville to Camp Cajon Casey drove
expectantly, hoping to meet Smiling Lou.  He scanned each car that
approached and slowed for every meeting like a searching party or a man
who is lost and wishes to inquire the way.  His pace would have been
law-abiding in Los Angeles at five o'clock on Broadway between Fourth
and Eighth streets.  Goggled women tourists eyed him curiously, and one
car stopped full to see what he wanted. But his "Tom Pepper" rode safe
under the tarp behind him, and the "Three Star Hennessey" beaded
daintily with the joggling it got, and Casey was neither halted nor
questioned as he passed.

At Camp Cajon Casey stopped and cooked an early supper, because the
summer crowd was there and a real bootlegger would have considered
stopping rather unsafe.  Casey boiled coffee over one of the camp
fireplaces and watched furtively the sunburned holiday group nearest.
He placed his supper on one of the round, cement tables near the car,
and every man who passed that way Casey watched unblinkingly while he
ate.

He succeeded in making three different parties swallow their supper in
a hurry and pack up and leave, glancing back uneasily at Casey as they
drove away.  But Casey himself was unmolested, and no one asked about
his load.

From Camp Cajon to San Bernardino Casey drove furiously, remembering
young Kenner's desire for speed.  He stopped there for the night, and
nearly had a fight with the garage man where he put up, because he
showed undue caution concerning the safety of his car from prowlers
during the night.

He left the car there that day and returned furtively after dark,
asking the night man if he had seen any saps around his car. The night
man looked at him uncomprehendingly.

"I dunno--nothin's been picked up since I come on at six.  We ain't
responsible for lost articles, anyway.  See that sign?"

Casey grunted, cranked up and drove away, wondering whether the night
man was as innocent as he tried to act.

From San Bernardino to Los Angeles Casey drove placidly as a load of
oranges in February.  He put up at a cheap place on San Pedro Street,
with his car in the garage next door and a five-dollar tip in the palm
of a rat-faced mechanic with Casey's injunction to clean 'er dingbats
and keep other people away.

He did not go out to see the Little Woman, after all.  He had sent her
a wire from Goffs the day before, saying that he was prospecting with a
fellow and he hoped she was well.  This, after long pondering, had
seemed to him the easiest way out of an argument with the Little Woman.
The wire had given no address whereby she might reach him, but the
omission was not the oversight Casey hoped she would consider it.  He
wanted to be reassuring without starting anything.

Los Angeles with no Little Woman at his elbow was a dismal hole, and
Casey got out of it as soon as possible.  As per instructions, he drove
down to San Diego, ventured perilously close to the Mexico line, fooled
around there for a day looking for trouble, failed to find so much as a
frown and drove back.

He headed straight for San Bernardino, which was Smiling Lou's
headquarters.  He killed time there and met the sheriff on the street
the day he arrived.  The sheriff had a memory trained to hold faces
indefinitely.  He smiled a little, made a polite gesture in the general
direction of his hat and passed on.  Casey swore to himself and
resolved to duck guiltily around the nearest corner if he saw the
sheriff coming his way again.

On the day when his time limit expired Casey drove up the gulch to
Nolan's camp.  In the car behind him rode undisturbed his Canadian
Club, Garnkirk, Three-Star Hennessey, Cognac and Tom Pepper; bottles,
labels, government seals and all.  Nolan was walking over from the
tunnel when Casey arrived.  He smiled inquiringly as he shook hands,--a
ceremony to which Casey was plainly unaccustomed.

"What luck, Ryan?  I beat you back by about two hours.  Getting things
ready to begin making it. Did they catch you all right?"

"Naw!" Casey spat disgustedly.  "Never seen a booze peddler, never seen
a cop look my way.  I went around actin' like I just killed a man an'
stole a lady's diamonds, and the sheriff at San Berdoo TIPS 'IS HAT TO
ME, by golly!  Drove through L. A. hella-whoopin' an' not a darned
traffic cop knowed it was Casey Ryan.  You can ask anybody if I didn't
do every thing possible to git in bad or give bootleggers a tip I was
one of 'em.

"You can't git Casey Ryan up agin' the gang you're after, Mr. Nolan.
Only way Casey Ryan can git up agin' the law is to go along peaceable
tryin' to please the missus an' mindin' his own business.  I coulda
peddled that damn' hootch on a hangin' tray like circus lemonade. I
coulda stood on the corner in any uh them damned towns with the hull
works piled out on a table in front of me, an' I coulda hollered my
damn' head off; an' Smilin' Lou woulda passed me by like I was sellin'
chewin' gum and shoe strings."

Mack Nolan looked at Casey, turned and went into the cabin, sat down on
the edge of the bed and laughed until the tears dripped over his
lashes.  Casey Ryan followed him, and sat on the edge of the table with
his arms folded.  Whenever Mack Nolan lifted his face from his palms
and looked at Casey, Casey swore.  Whereat Mack Nolan would give
another whoop.

You can't wonder if relations were somewhat strained, between them for
the rest of that day.



CHAPTER NINETEEN

Nature had made Casey Ryan an optimist.  The blood of Ireland had made
him pugnacious.  And Mack Nolan had a way with him. Wherefore, Casey
Ryan once more came larruping down the grade to Camp Cajon and turned
in there with a dogged purpose in his eyes and with his jaw set
stubbornly.  History has it that whenever Casey Ryan gets that look in
his face, the man underneath might just as well holler and crawl out;
because holler he must, before Casey would ever let him up.

Behind him, stowed under the bedding, grub and camp dishes, rode his
eight cases of bootlegger's bait, packed convincingly in the sawdust,
straw and cardboard of the wet old days when Uncle Sam himself O. K.'d
the job.  A chain of tiny beads at the top of each bottle lied and said
it was good liquor.  The boxes themselves said, "This side up"--when
any side up would thrill the soul of the man who owned a wet appetite
and a dry throat.

It was a good job Mack Nolan had made of the bottling.  Uncle Sam
himself must needs polish his spectacles and take another look to
detect the fraud.  It was a marvelous job of bottling,--and the proof
lay only in the drinking.  "Tommy" Pepper rode in pint flasks designed
to slip safely into a man's coat pocket.  Beside him two cases of
Canadian Club (if you were satisfied with the evidence of your eyes)
sat serene in round-shouldered bottles--conventional, secure in its
reputation.  Cognac and Garnkirk, a case for each, rode in tall, slim
bottles with no shoulders at all.  Plumper than they, Three Star
Hennessey sat smugly waiting until the joke was turned upon its victim.
A tempting load it was, to men of certain minds and morals.  Casey
grinned sardonically when he thought of it.

Casey drove deep into the grove of sycamores and made camp there, away
from the chattering picnic parties at the cement tables. By Mack
Nolan's advice he was adopting a slightly different policy. He no
longer shunned his fellow men or glared suspiciously when strangers
approached.  Instead he was very nearly the old Casey Ryan, except that
he failed to state his name and business to all and sundry with the old
Casey Ryan candor, but instead avoided the subject altogether or evaded
questions with vague generalities.

But as an understudy for Ananias, Casey Ryan would have been a failure.
In two hours or less he had made easy trail acquaintance with six
different men, and he had unconsciously managed to vary his vague
account of himself six different times.  Wherefore he was presently
asked cautiously concerning his thirst.

"They's times," said Casey, hopefully lowering an eyelid, "when a
feller dassent take a nip, no matter how thirsty he gits."

The questioner stared at him for a minute and slowly nodded. "You're
darn' right," he assented.  "I scursely ever touch anything, myself."
And he added vaguely, "Quite a lot of it peddled out here in this camp,
I guess.  Tourists comin' through are scared to pack it themselves--but
they sure don't overlook any chances to take a snort."

"Yeah?"  Casey cocked a knowing eye at the speaker.  "They must pay a
pretty fair price fer it, too.  Don't the cops bother folks none?"

"Some--I guess."

Casey filled his pipe and offered his tobacco sack to the man. The
fellow took it, nodding listless thanks, and filled his own pipe. The
two sat down together on the knee of a deformed sycamore and smoked in
circumspect silence.

"Arizona, I see."  The man nodded toward the license plates on Casey's
car.

"Uh-huh."  Casey glanced that way.  "Know a man name of Kenner?" He
asked abruptly.

The fellow looked at Casey sidelong, without turning his head.

"Some. Do you?"

"Some."  Casey felt that he was making headway, though it was a good
deal like playing checkers with the king row wide open and only two
crowned heads to defend his men.

"Friend uh yours?"  The fellow turned his head and looked straight at
Casey.

Casey returned him a pale, straight-lidded stare.  The man's glance
flickered and swung away.

"Who wants to know?"  Casey asked calmly.

"Oh, you can call me Jim Cassidy.  I just asked."  He removed his pipe
from his mouth and inspected it apathetically.  "He's a friend of Bill
Masters, garage man up at Lund.  Know Bill?"

"Any man says I don't, you can call 'im a liar."  Casey also inspected
his pipe.  "Bought that car off'n Kenner,"  Casey added boldly. Getting
into trouble, he discovered, carried almost the thrill of trying to
keep out of it.

"Yeah?"  The self-styled Jim Cassidy looked at the Ford more
attentively.  "And contents?"

Casey snorted.  "What do you know about goats, if anything?" he asked
mysteriously.

Jim Cassidy eyed Casey sidelong through a silence.  Then he brought his
palm down flat on his thigh and laughed.

"You pass," he stated, with a relieved sigh. "He's a dinger, ain't he?"

"You know 'im, all right." Casey also laughed and put out his hand. "If
you're a friend of Kenner's, shake hands with Casey Ryan!  He's damned
glad to meet yuh--an' you can ask anybody if that ain't the truth."

After that the acquaintance progressed more smoothly.  By the time
Casey spread his bed close alongside the car--he knew just how much
booze Jim Cassidy carried, just what Cassidy expected to make off the
load, and a good many other bits of information of no particular use to
Casey.

A strange, inner excitement held Casey awake long after Jim Cassidy was
asleep snoring.  He lay looking up into the leafy branches of the
sycamore beside him and watched a star slip slowly across an open space
between the branches.  Farther up the grove a hilarious group of young
hikers sang snatches of songs to the uncertain accompaniment of a
ukelele.  A hundred feet away on his right, occasional cars went
coasting past on the down grade, coming in off the desert, or climbed
more slowly with motors working, on their way up from the valley below.
The shifting brilliance from their headlights flicked the grove
capriciously as they went by. Now and then a car stopped.  One, a big,
high-powered car with one dazzling spotlight swung into the narrow
driveway and entered the grove.

Casey lifted his head like a desert turtle and blinked curiously at the
car as it eased past him a few feet and stopped.  A gloved hand went
out to the spotlight and turned it slowly, lighting the grove foot by
foot and pausing to dwell upon each silent, parked car. Casey sat up in
the blankets and waited.

Luck, he told himself, was grinning at him from ear to ear.  For this
was Smiling Lou himself, and none other.  He was alone,--a big, hungry,
official fish searching the grove greedily.  Casey swallowed a grin and
tried to look scared.  The light was slowly working around in his
direction.

I don't suppose Casey Ryan had ever looked really scared in his life.
His face simply refused to wear so foreign an expression. Therefore,
when the spotlight finally revealed him, Casey blinked against it with
a half-hearted grin, as if he had been caught at something foolish.
The light remained upon him, and Smiling Lou got out of the car and
came back to him slowly.

Not even Casey thought of calling Smiling Lou a fool.  He couldn't be
and play the game he was playing.  Smiling Lou said nothing whatever
until he had looked the car over carefully (giving the license number a
second sharp glance) and had regarded Casey fixedly while he made up
his mind.

"Hullo!  Where's your pardner?" he demanded then.

"I'm in pardnerships with myself this trip," Casey retorted. He waited
while Smiling Lou looked him over again, more carefully this time.

"Where did you get that car?"

"From Kenner--for sixteen-hundred and seventeen dollars and five
cents."  Casey fumbled in the blankets--Smiling Lou following his
movements suspiciously--and got out the makings of a cigarette.

"Got any booze in that car?"  Smiling Lou might have been a traffic
cop, for all the trace of humanity there was in his voice.

Casey cocked an eye up at him, sent a quick glance toward the Ford, and
looked back into Smiling Lou's face.  He hunched his shoulders and
finished the making of his cigarette.

"I wisht you wouldn't look," he said glumly.  "I got half my outfit in
there an' I hate to have it tore up."

Smiling Lou continued to look at him, seeming slightly puzzled. But
indecision was not one of his characteristics, evidently. He stepped up
to the car, pulled a flashlight from his pocket and looked in.

Casey was up and into his clothes by the time Smiling Lou had uncovered
a box or two.  Smiling Lou turned toward him, his lips twitching.

"Lift this stuff out of here and put it in my car," he commanded,
elation creeping into his voice in spite of himself.  "My Lord! The
chances you fellows take!  Think a dab of paint is going to cover up a
brand burnt into the wood?"

Casey looked startled, glancing down into the car to where Smiling Lou
pointed.

"The boards is turned over on all the rest," he muttered
confidentially.  "I dunno how that darned Canadian Club sign got right
side up."

"What all have you got?"  Smiling Lou lowered his voice when he asked
the question.  Casey tried not to grin when he replied. Smiling Lou
gasped,

"Well, get it into my car, and make it snappy."

Casey made it as snappy as he could, and kept his face straight until
Smiling Lou spoke to him sharply.

"I won't take you in to-night with me.  I want that car.  You drive it
into headquarters first thing in the morning.  And don't think you can
beat it, either.  I'll have the road posted.  You can knock a good deal
off your sentence if you crank up and come in right after breakfast.
And make it an early breakfast, too."

His manner was stern, his voice perfectly official.  But Casey, eyeing
him grimly, saw distinctly the left eyelid lower and lift again.

"All right--I'm the goat," he surrendered and sat down again on his
canvas-covered bed.  He did not immediately crawl between the blankets,
however, because interesting things were happening over at Jim
Cassidy's car.

Casey watched Jim Cassidy go picking his way amongst the tree roots and
camp litter, his back straightened under the load of hootch he was
carrying to Smiling Lou's car.  With Jim Cassidy also, Smiling Lou was
crisply official.  When the last of the hootch had been transferred,
Casey heard Smiling Lou tell Jim Cassidy to drive in to headquarters
after breakfast next morning--but he did not see Smiling Lou wink when
he said it.

After that, Smiling Lou started his motor and drove slowly up through
the grove, halting to scan each car as he passed.  He swung out through
the upper driveway, turned sharply there and came back down the highway
speeding up on the downhill grade to San Bernardino.

Jim Cassidy came furtively over and settle down for a whispered
conference on Casey's bed.

"How much did he get off'n YOU?" he asked inquisitively.  "Did he clean
yuh out?"

"Clean as a last year's bone in a kioty den," Casey declared, hiding
his satisfaction as best he could.  "Never got my roll though."

"He wouldn't--not with you workin' on the inside.  Guess it must be
kinda touchy around here right now.  New officers, mebby. He wouldn't
a' cleaned us out if we'd a' been safe.  He never came into camp
before--not when I've been here.  Made that same play to you, didn't
he--about givin' yourself up in the morning?  Uh course yuh know what
that means--DON'T!"

"He shore is foxy, all right," Casey commented with absolute sincerity.
"You can ask anybody if he didn't pull it off like the pleasure was all
his'n.  No L. A. traffic cop ever pinched me an I looked like he
enjoyed it more."

"Oh, Lou's cute, all right.  They don't any of 'em put anything over on
Lou.  You must be new at the business, ain't yuh?"

"Second trip," Casey informed him with an air of importance--which he
really felt, by the way.  "What Casey's studyin' on now, is the next
move.  No use hangin' around here empty.  What do YOU figger on doin'?"

"Well, Lou didn't give no tip--not to me, anyway.  So I guess it'll be
safe to drive on in to the city and load up again.  I got a feller with
me--he caught a ride in to San Berdoo; left just before you drove in.
Know where to go in the city?  'Cause I can ride in with you, an' let
him foller."

"That'll suit me fine," Casey declared.  And so they left it for the
time being, and Cassidy went back to bed.

A great load had dropped from Casey's shoulders, and he was asleep
before Jim Cassidy had ceased to turn restlessly in his blankets.
Getting the White Mule out of his car and into the car of Smiling Lou
had been the task which Nolan had set for him. What was to happen
thereafter Casey could only guess, for Nolan had not told him. And such
was the Casey Ryan nature that he made no attempt to solve the problems
which Mack Nolan had calmly reserved for himself.

He did not dream, for instance, that Mack Nolan had watched him load
the stuff into Smiling Lou's car.  He did know that an unobtrusive
Cadillac roadster was parked at the next campfire. It had come in half
an hour behind him, but the driver had not made any move toward camping
until after dark.  Casey had glanced his way when the car was parked
and the driver got out and began fussing around the car, but he had not
been struck with any sense of familiarity in the figure.

There was no reason why he should.  Thousands and thousands of men are
of Mack Nolan's height and general build.  This man looked like a
doctor or a dentist perhaps.  Beyond the matter of size, similarity to
Mack Nolan ceased.  The Cadillac man wore a vandyke beard and colored
glasses, and a panama and light gray business suit.  Casey set him down
in his mental catalog as "some town feller" and assumed that they had
nothing in common.

Yet Mack Nolan heard nearly every word spoken by Smiling Lou, Casey and
Jim Cassidy.  (Readers are so inquisitive about these things that I
felt I ought to tell you--else you'll be worrying as hard as Casey Ryan
did later on.  I'm soft-hearted, myself; I never like to worry a reader
more than is absolutely necessary. So I'm letting you in, hoping you'll
get an added kick out of Casey's further maneuvers).

The Cadillac car, I should explain, was only one of Mack Nolan's little
secrets.  There is a very good garage at Goffs, not many miles from
Juniper Wells.  A matter of an hour's driving was sufficient at any
time for Mack Nolan to make the exchange. And no man at Goffs would
think it very strange that the owner of a Cadillac should prefer to
drive a Ford over rough, desert trails to his prospect in the
mountains.  Mack Nolan, as I have told you before, had a way with him.



CHAPTER TWENTY

With a load of booze in the car and Jim Cassidy by his side, Casey Ryan
drove down the long, eucalyptus-shaded avenue that runs past the
balloon school at Arcadia and turned into the Foothill Boulevard.  Half
a mile farther on a Cadillac roadster honked and slid past them,
speeding away toward Monrovia.  But Casey Ryan was busy talking
chummily with Jim Cassidy, and he scarcely knew that a car had passed.

The money he had been given for Smiling Lou had been used to pay for
this new load of whisky, and Casey found himself wishing that he could
get word of it to Mack Nolan.  Still, Nolan's oversight in the matter
of arranging for communication between them did not bother Casey much.
He was doing his part; if Mack Nolan failed to do his, that was no
fault of Casey Ryan's.

At Fontana, where young Kenner had stopped for gas on that eventful
first trip of Casey's, Casey slowed down also, for the same purpose,
half tempted to call up the Little Woman on long distance while the gas
tank was being filled.  But presently the matter went clean from his
mind--and this was the reason:

A speed cop whose motorcycle stood inconspicuously around the corner of
the garage, came forward and eyed the Ford sharply.  He drew his little
book from his pocket, turned a few leaves, found what he was looking
for and eyed again the car.  The garage man, slowly turning the crank
of the gasoline pump, looked at him inquiringly; but the speed cop
ignored the look and turned to Casey.

"Where'd you get this car?" he demanded, in much the same tone which
Smiling Lou had used the night before.

"Bought it," Casey told him gruffly.

"Where did you buy it?"

"Over at Goffs, just this side of Needles."

"Got a bill of sale?"

"You got Casey Ryan's word fer it," Casey retorted, with a growing heat
inside, where he kept his temper when he wasn't using it.

"Are you Casey Ryan?"  The speed cop's eyes hardened just a bit.

"Anybody says I ain't, you send 'em to me--an' then come around in
about ten minutes an' look 'em over."

"What's YOUR name?"  The officer turned to Jim Cassidy.

"Tom Smith.  I was just ketchin' a ride with this feller.  Don't go an'
mix ME in--I ain't no ways concerned; just ketchin' a ride is all. If
I'd 'a' knowed--"

"You can explain that to the judge.  Get in there, you, and drive in to
San Berdoo.  I'll be right with you, so you needn't forget the road!"
He stepped back to his motorcycle and pushed it forward.

"Hey!  Don't I git paid fer my gas?" the garage man wailed, pulling a
dripping nozzle from Casey's gas tank.

"Aw, go tahell!" Casey grunted, and threw a wadded bank note in his
direction.  "Take that an' shut up.  What yuh cryin' around about a
gallon uh gas, fer?  YOU ain't pinched!"

The money landed near the motorcycle and the officer picked it up,
smoothed out the bill, glanced at it and looked through tightened lids
at Casey.

"Throwin' money around like a hootch-runner!" he sneered.  "I guess you
birds need lookn' after, all right.  Git goin'!"

Casey "got going."  Twice on the way in the officer spurted up
alongside and waved him down for speeding.  Casey had not intended to
speed, either.  He was merely keeping pace unconsciously with his
thoughts.

He had been told just what he must do if he were arrested for
bootlegging, but he was not at all certain that his instructions would
cover an arrest for stealing an automobile.  Nolan had forgotten about
that, he guessed.  But Casey's optimism carried him jauntily to jail in
San Bernardino, and while he was secretly a bit uneasy, he was not half
so worried as Jim Cassidy appeared to be.

Casey was booked--along with "Tom Smith"--on two charges: theft of one
Ford car, motor number so-and-so, serial number this-and-that, model,
touring, year, whatever-it-was.  And, unlawful transportation of
spirituous liquor.  He tried to give the judge the wink, but without
any happy result.  So he eventually found himself locked in a cell with
Jim Cassidy.

Just at first, Casey Ryan was proud of the part he was playing. He
could look with righteous toleration upon the limpness of his fellow
prisoner.  He could feel secure in the knowledge that he, Casey Ryan,
was an agent of the government engaged in helping to uphold the laws of
his country.

He waited for an hour or two, listening with a superior kind of
patience to Jim Cassidy's panicky unbraidings of his luck.  At first
Jim was inclined to blame Casey rather bitterly for the plight he was
in.  But Casey soon stopped that.  Young Kenner was the  responsible
party in this mishap, as Casey very soon made plain to Jim.

"Well, I dunno but what you're right.  It WAS kind of a dirty
trick--workin' a stole car off onto you.  Why didn't he pick some
sucker on the outside?  Don't line up with Kenner, somehow. Well, I
guess mebby Smilin' Lou can see us out uh this hole all right--only I
don't like that car-stealin' charge.  Mebby Kenner an' Lou can
straighten it up, though."

Casey wondered if they could.  He wondered, too, how Nolan was going to
find out about Smiling Lou getting the camouflaged White Mule. Nolan
had not explained that to Casey--but Casey was not worrying yet.  His
faith in Mack Nolan was firm.

Came bedtime, however, with no sign of official favor toward Casey
Ryan.  Casey began to wonder.  But probably, he consoled himself with
thinking, they meant to wait until Jim Cassidy was asleep before they
turned Casey loose.  He lay on the hard bunk and waited hopefully,
listening to the stertorous breathing of Jim Cassidy, who had forgotten
his troubles in sleep.



CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

At noon the next day Casey was still waiting--but not hopefully.
"Patience on a monument" couldn't have resembled Casey Ryan in any
particular whatever.  He was mad.  By midnight he had begun to wonder
if he was not going to be made a goat again.  By daylight, he was
positive that he was already a goat.  By the time the trusty brought
his breakfast, Casey was applying to Mack Nolan the identical words and
phrases which he had applied to young Kenner when he was the maddest.
Don't ask me to tell you what they were.

Jim Cassidy still clung desperately to his faith in Smiling Lou; but
Casey's faith hadn't so much as a finger-hold on anything. What kind of
a government was it, he asked himself bitterly, that would leave a
trusted agent twenty-four hours shut up in a cell with a whining crook
like Jim Cassidy?  If, he added pessimistically, he were an agent of
the government.  Casey doubted it.  So far as he could see, Casey Ryan
wasn't anything but the goat.

His chief desire now was to get out of there as soon as possible so
that he could hunt up Mack Nolan and lick the livin' tar wit of him--or
worse.  He wanted bail and he wanted it immediately. Not a soul bad
come near him, save the trusty, in spite of certain mysterious messages
which Casey had sent to the office, asking for an interview with the
judge or somebody; Casey didn't care who. Locked in a cell, how was he
going to do any of the things Nolan had told him to do if he happened
to find himself arrested by an honest officer?

When they hauled him before the police judge, Casey hadn't been given
the chance to explain anything to anybody.  Unless, of course, he
wanted to beller out his business before everybody; and that, he told
himself fiercely, was not Casey Ryan's idea of the way to keep a
secret.  Moreover, that damned speed cop was standing right there, just
waiting for a chance to wind his fingers in Casey's collar and choke
him off if he tried to say a word.  And how the hell, Casey would like
to know, was a man going to explain himself when he couldn't get a word
in edgeways?

So Casey wanted bail.  There were just two ways of getting it, and it
went against the grain of his pride to take either one. That is why
Casey waited until noon before his Irish stubbornness yielded a bit and
he decided to wire me to come.  He had to slip the wire out by the
underground method--meaning the good will of the trusty.  It cost Casey
ten dollars, but he didn't grudge that.

He spent that afternoon and most of the night mentally calling the
trusty a liar and a thief because there was no reply to the message. As
a matter of fact, the trusty sent the wire through as quickly as
possible and the fault was mine if any one's.  I was too busy hurrying
to the rescue to think about sending Casey word that I was coming.
Casey said afterwards that my thoughtlessness would be cured for life
if I were ever locked in jail and waiting for news.

As it happened, I wired the Little Woman that Casey was in jail again,
and caught the first train to San "Berdoo"--coming down by way of
Barstow.  I could save two or three hours that way, I found, so I told
the Little Woman to meet me there and bring all the money she could get
her hands on.  Not knowing just what Casey was in for this time, it
seemed well to be prepared for a good, stiff bail.  She beat me by
several hours, and between us we had ten thousand dollars.

At that it was a fool's errand.  Casey was out of jail and gone before
either of us arrived.  So there we were, holding the bag, as you might
say, and our ten thousand dollars' bail money.

"It's no use asking questions, Jack," the Little Woman told me
pensively when we had finished our salad in the best cafe in town, and
were waiting for the fish.  "I've asked questions of every uniform in
this town, from the district judge down to the courthouse janitor.
Nobody knows a thing.  I DID find that Casey was booked yesterday for
having a stolen car and a load of booze in his possession, but he isn't
in jail--or if he is, they're keeping him down in some dungeon and have
thrown away the key. It was hinted in the police court that he was
dismissed for want of evidence; but they wouldn't SAY anything, and so
there you are!"

We finished our fish in a thoughtful silence.  Then, when the waiter
had removed the plates, the Little Woman looked at me with a twinkle in
her eyes.

"Well-sir, there's something I want to tell you, Jack.  I believe Casey
has put this town on the run.  They can't tell ME! Something's
happened, over around the courthouse.  A lot of the men I talked with
had a scared look in their eyes, and they were nervous when doors
opened, and looked around when people came walking along.  I don't know
what he's been doing--but Casey Ryan's been up to something. You can't
tell ME!  I know how our laundry boy looks when Casey's home."

"And didn't you get any line at all on his whereabouts?" I asked her.
Given three hours the start of me, I knew perfectly well that the
Little Woman had found out all there was to know about Casey.

"Well-sir--I've got this to go on," the Little Woman drawled and held a
telegram across the table.  "You'll notice that was sent from Goffs.
It's ten days old, but I've been getting ready ever since it arrived.
I've put Babe in a boarding-school, and I leased the apartment house.
I kept three dressmakers ruining their eyes with nightwork, Jack,
making up some nifty sports clothes.  If Casey's bound to stay in the
desert--well, I'm his wife--and Casey does kind of like to have me
around.  You can't tell ME.

"So I've got the twin-six packed with the niftiest camp outfit you ever
saw, Jack.  I've got a yellow and red beach umbrella, and two reclining
chairs, and--well-sir, I'm going to rough it de luxe.  I don't expect
to keep Casey in hand--I happen to know him.  But it's just possible,
Jack, that I can keep him in sight!"

Of course I told her--as I've told her often enough before--that she
was a brick.  I added that I would go along, if she liked; which she
did.  Not even the Little Woman should ever attempt to drive across the
Mojave alone.

We started out as soon as we had finished the meal.  A Cadillac
roadster came up behind us and honked for clear passing as we swung
into the long, straight stretch that leads up the Cajon. The Little
Woman peered into the rear vision mirror and pressed the toe of her
white pump upon the accelerator.

"There's only one man in the world that can pass ME on the road," the
Little Woman drawled, "and he doesn't wear a panama!"

As we snapped around the turns of Cajon Grade, I looked back once or
twice.  The Cadillac roadster was still following pertinaciously, but
it was too far back to honk at us.  When we slid down to the
Victorville garage and stopped for gas, the Cadillac slid by. The
driver in the panama gave us one glance through his colored glasses,
but I felt, somehow, that the glance was sufficiently comprehensive to
fix us firmly in his memory.  I inquired at the garage concerning Casey
Ryan, taking it for granted he would be driving a Ford.  A man of that
description had stopped at the garage for gas that forenoon, the boy
told me. About nine o'clock, I learned from further questioning.

"Well-sir, that gives him five hours the start," the Little Woman
remarked, as she eased in the clutch and slid around the corner into
the highway to Barstow.  "But you can't tell me I can't run down a Ford
with this car.  I know to the last inch what a Jawn Henry is good for.
I drove one myself, remember.  Now we'll see."



CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

At Dagget, the big, blue car with a lady driver sounded the warning
signal and passed Mack Nolan and the Cadillac roadster. Like Casey
Ryan, Nolan is rather proud of his driving, and with sufficient reason.
He was already hurrying, not to overhaul Casey, but to arrive soon
after him.

Women drivers loved to pass other cars with a sudden spurt of speed, he
had found by experience.  They were not, however, consistently fast
drivers.  Mack Nolan was conscious of a slight irritation when the
twin-six took the lead.  Somewhere ahead--probably in one of the rough,
sandy stretches--he would either have to pass that car or lag behind.
Your expert driver likes a clear road ahead.

So Mack Nolan drove a bit harder, and succeeded in getting most of the
dust kicked up by the big, blue car.  He counted on passing before they
reached Ludlow, but he could never quite make it. In that ungodly
stretch of sand and rocks and chuck-holes that lies between Ludlow and
Amboy, Nolan was sure that the woman driver would have to slow down.
He swore a little, too, because she would probably slow down just where
passing was impossible. They always did.

They went through Amboy like one party, the big, blue car leading by
twenty-five yards.  It was a long drive for a woman to make; a hard
drive to boot.  He wondered if the two in the big car ever ate.

Five miles east of Amboy, when a red sunset was darkening to starlight,
the blue car, fifty yards in the lead, overhauled a Ford in trouble.
In the loose, sandy trail the big car slowed and stopped abreast of the
Ford.  There was no passing now, unless Mack Nolan wanted to risk
smashing his crank-case on a lava rock, millions of which peppered that
particular portion of the Mojave Desert.  He stopped perforce.

A pair of feet with legs attached to them, protruded from beneath the
running board of the Ford.  The Little Woman in the big car leaned over
the side and studied the feet critically.

"Casey Ryan, are those the best pair of shoes you own?" she drawled at
last.  "If you wouldn't wear such rundown heels, you know, you wouldn't
look so bow-legged.  I've told you and TOLD you that your legs aren't
so bad when you wear straight heels."

Casey Ryan crawled out and looked up at her grinning sheepishly.

"They was all right when I left home, ma'am," he defended his shoes
mildly.  "Desert plays hell with shoe leather--you can ask anybody."
Then he added, "Hullo, Jack!  What you two think you're doin', anyway.
Tryin' t' elope?"

"Why, hello, Ryan!"  Mack Nolan greeted, coming up from the Cadillac.
"Having trouble with your car?"  Casey whirled and eyed Nolan dubiously.

"Naw.  This ain't no trouble," he granted. "I only been here four hours
or so--this is pastime!"

There was an awkward silence.  We in the blue car wanted to know (not
at that time knowing) who was the man in the Cadillac roadster, and how
he happened to know Casey so well.  Nolan, no doubt, wanted to know who
we were.  And there was so much that Casey wanted to know and needed to
know that he couldn't seem to think of anything. However, Casey was the
hardest to down.  He came up to the side of the blue car, reached in
with his hands all greasy black, and took the Little Woman's hand from
the wheel and kissed it.  The Little Woman made a caressing sound and
leaned out to him--and Nolan and I felt that we mustn't look.  So our
eyes met.

He came around to my side of the car and put out his hand.

"I'm pretty good at guessing," he smiled.  "I guess you're Jack
Gleason.  Casey has talked of you to me.  I'm right glad to meet you,
too.  My name is Mack Nolan, and I'm Irish.  I'm Casey Ryan's partner.
We have a good--prospect."

Casey looked past the Little Woman and me, straight into Mack Nolan's
eyes.  I felt something of an electric quality in the air while their
gaze held.

"I'm just getting back from a trip down in the valley," Nolan observed
easily.  "You never did see me in town duds, did you, Casey?"  His eyes
went to the Little Woman's face and then to me. "I suppose you know
what this wild Irishman has just pulled off back there," he said,
tilting his head toward San Bernardino, many a mile away to the
southwest.  "You wouldn't think it to look at him, but he surely has
thrown a monkey wrench into as pretty a bootlegging machine as there is
in the country.  It's such confidential stuff, of course, that you may
call it absolutely secret. But for once I'm telling the truth about it.

"Your husband, Mrs. Casey Ryan, holds a commission from headquarters as
a prohibition officer.  A deputy, it is true,--but commissioned
nevertheless.  He's just getting back from a very pretty piece of work.
A crooked officer named Smiling Lou was arrested last night. He had all
kinds of liquor cached away in his house.  Casey can tell you sometime
how he trapped him.

"Of course, I'm just an amateur mining expert on a vacation, myself."
His eyes met Casey's straight.  "I wasn't with him when he pulled the
deal, but I heard about it afterwards, and I knew he was planning
something of the sort when he left camp.  How I happened to know about
the commission," he added, reaching into his pocket, "is because he
left it with me for safe keeping.  I'm going to let you look at
it--just in case he's too proud to let it out of his hands once I give
it back.

"Now, of course, I'm talking like an old woman and telling all Casey's
secrets--and you'll probably see a real Irish fight when he gets in
reach of me.  But I knew he hadn't told you exactly what he's doing,
and--I personally feel that his wife and his best friend are entitled
to know as much as his partner knows about him."

The Little Woman nodded absently her thanks.  She was holding Casey's
commission under the dash-light to read it.

I saw Casey gulp once or twice while he stared across the car at Mack
Nolan.  He pushed his dusty, black hat forward over one eyebrow and
reached into his pocket.

"Aw, hell," he grunted, grinning queerly. "You come around here oncet,
Mr. Nolan, where I can git my hands on yuh!"

========================================
