========================================

THE TIN WOODMAN OF OZ


by

L. Frank Baum



  A Faithful Story of the Astonishing Adventure
     Undertaken by the Tin Woodman, assisted
       by Woot the Wanderer, the Scarecrow
           of Oz, and Polychrome, the
               Rainbow's Daughter

                      by
                 L. FRANK BAUM
            "Royal historian of Oz"

                  This Book
                is dedicated
                to the son of
                    my son
               Frank Alden Baum




TO MY READERS

I know that some of you have been waiting for this story of the Tin
Woodman, because many of  my correspondents have asked me, time and
again what ever became of the "pretty Munchkin girl" whom Nick Chopper
was engaged to marry before the Wicked Witch enchanted his axe and he
traded his flesh for tin. I, too, have wondered what became of her, but
until Woot the Wanderer interested himself in the matter the Tin
Woodman knew no more than we did. However, he found her, after many
thrilling adventures, as you will discover when you have read this
story.

I am delighted at the continued interest of both young and old in the
Oz stories. A learned college professor recently wrote me to ask: "For
readers of what age are your books intended?" It puzzled me to answer
that properly, until I had looked over some of the letters I have
received. One says: "I'm a little boy 5 years old, and I Just love your
Oz stories. My sister, who is writing this for me, reads me the Oz
books, but I wish I could read them myself." Another letter says: "I'm
a great girl 13 years old, so you'll be surprised when I tell you I am
not too old yet for the Oz stories."  Here's another letter: "Since I
was a young girl I've never missed getting a Baum book for Christmas.
I'm married, now, but am as eager to get and read the Oz stories as
ever." And still another writes: "My good wife and I, both more than 70
years of age, believe that we find more real enjoyment in your Oz books
than in any other books we read." Considering these statements, I wrote
the college professor that my books are intended for all those whose
hearts are young, no matter what their ages may be.

I think I am justified in promising that there will be some astonishing
revelations about The Magic of Oz in my book for 1919. Always your
loving and grateful friend,

L. FRANK BAUM.
  Royal Historian of Oz.

"OZCOT"
  at HOLLYWOOD
    in CALIFORNIA
      1918.




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1  Woot the Wanderer
   2  The Heart of the Tin Woodman
   3  Roundabout
   4  The Loons of Loonville
   5  Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess
   6  The Magic of a Yookoohoo
   7  The Lace Apron
   8  The Menace of the Forest
   9  The Quarrelsome Dragons
  10  Tommy Kwikstep
  11  Jinjur's Ranch
  12  Ozma and Dorothy
  13  The Restoration
  14  The Green Monkey
  15  The Man of Tin
  16  Captain Fyter
  17  The Workshop of Ku-Klip
  18  The Tin Woodman Talks to Himself
  19  The Invisible Country
  20  Over Night
  21  Polychrome's Magic
  22  Nimmie Amee
  23  Through the Tunnel
  24  The Curtain Falls




Chapter One

Woot the Wanderer


The Tin Woodman sat on his glittering tin throne in the handsome tin
hall of his splendid tin castle in the Winkie Country of the Land of
Oz. Beside him, in a chair of woven straw, sat his best friend, the
Scarecrow of Oz. At times they spoke to one another of curious things
they had seen and strange adventures they had known since first they
two had met and become comrades. But at times they were silent, for
these things had been talked over many times between them, and they
found themselves contented in merely being together, speaking now and
then a brief sentence to prove they were wide awake and attentive. But
then, these two quaint persons never slept. Why should they sleep, when
they never tired?

And now, as the brilliant sun sank low over the Winkie Country of Oz,
tinting the glistening tin towers and tin minarets of the tin castle
with glorious sunset hues, there approached along a winding pathway
Woot the Wanderer, who met at the castle entrance a Winkie servant.

The servants of the Tin Woodman all wore tin helmets and tin
breastplates and uniforms covered with tiny tin discs sewed closely
together on silver cloth, so that their bodies sparkled as beautifully
as did the tin castle--and almost as beautifully as did the Tin Woodman
himself.

Woot the Wanderer looked at the man servant--all bright and
glittering--and at the magnificent castle--all bright and
glittering--and as he looked his eyes grew big with wonder. For Woot
was not very big and not very old and, wanderer though he was, this
proved the most gorgeous sight that had ever met his boyish gaze.

"Who lives here?" he asked.

"The Emperor of the Winkies, who is the famous Tin Woodman of Oz,"
replied the servant, who had been trained to treat all strangers with
courtesy.

"A Tin Woodman?  How queer!" exclaimed the little wanderer.

"Well, perhaps our Emperor is queer," admitted the servant; "but he is
a kind master and as honest and true as good tin can make him; so we,
who gladly serve him, are apt to forget that he is not like other
people."

"May I see him?" asked Woot the Wanderer, after a moment's thought.

"If it please you to wait a moment, I will go and ask him," said the
servant, and then he went into the hall where the Tin Woodman sat with
his friend the Scarecrow. Both were glad to learn that a stranger had
arrived at the castle, for this would give them something new to talk
about, so the servant was asked to admit the boy at once.

By the time Woot the Wanderer had passed through the grand
corridors--all lined with ornamental tin--and under stately tin
archways and through the many tin rooms all set with beautiful tin
furniture, his eyes had grown bigger than ever and his whole little
body thrilled with amazement. But, astonished though he was, he was
able to make a polite bow before the throne and to say in a respectful
voice: "I salute your Illustrious Majesty and offer you my humble
services."

"Very good!" answered the Tin Woodman in his accustomed cheerful
manner. "Tell me who you are, and whence you come."

"I am known as Woot the Wanderer," answered the boy, "and I have come,
through many travels and by roundabout ways, from my former home in a
far corner of the Gillikin Country of Oz."

"To wander from one's home," remarked the Scarecrow, "is to encounter
dangers and hardships, especially if one is made of meat and bone. Had
you no friends in that corner of the Gillikin Country? Was it not
homelike and comfortable?"

To hear a man stuffed with straw speak, and speak so well, quite
startled Woot, and perhaps he stared a bit rudely at the Scarecrow. But
after a moment he replied:

"I had home and friends, your Honorable Strawness, but they were so
quiet and happy and comfortable that I found them dismally stupid.
Nothing in that corner of Oz interested me, but I believed that in
other parts of the country I would find strange people and see new
sights, and so I set out upon my wandering journey. I have been a
wanderer for nearly a full year, and now my wanderings have brought me
to this splendid castle."

"I suppose," said the Tin Woodman, "that in this year you have seen so
much that you have become very wise."

"No," replied Woot, thoughtfully, "I am not at all wise, I beg to
assure your Majesty. The more I wander the less I find that I know, for
in the Land of Oz much wisdom and many things may be learned."

"To learn is simple. Don't you ask questions?" inquired the Scarecrow.

"Yes; I ask as many questions as I dare; but some people refuse to
answer questions."

"That is not kind of them," declared the Tin Woodman. "If one does not
ask for information he seldom receives it; so I, for my part, make it a
rule to answer any civil question that is asked me."

"So do I," added the Scarecrow, nodding.

"I am glad to hear this," said the Wanderer, "for it makes me bold to
ask for something to eat."

"Bless the boy!" cried the Emperor of the Winkies; "how careless of me
not to remember that wanderers are usually hungry. I will have food
brought you at once."

Saying this he blew upon a tin whistle that was suspended from his tin
neck, and at the summons a servant appeared and bowed low. The Tin
Woodman ordered food for the stranger, and in a few minutes the servant
brought in a tin tray heaped with a choice array of good things to eat,
all neatly displayed on tin dishes that were polished till they shone
like mirrors. The tray was set upon a tin table drawn before the
throne, and the servant placed a tin chair before the table for the boy
to seat himself.

"Eat, friend Wanderer," said the Emperor cordially, "and I trust the
feast will be to your liking. I, myself, do not eat, being made in such
manner that I require no food to keep me alive. Neither does my friend
the Scarecrow. But all my Winkie people eat, being formed of flesh, as
you are, and so my tin cupboard is never bare, and strangers are always
welcome to whatever it contains."

The boy ate in silence for a time, being really hungry, but after his
appetite was somewhat satisfied, he said:

"How happened your Majesty to be made of tin, and still be alive?"

"That," replied the tin man, "is a long story."

"The longer the better," said the boy. "Won't you please tell me the
story?"

"If you desire it," promised the Tin Woodman, leaning back in his tin
throne and crossing his tin legs. "I haven't related my history in a
long while, because everyone here knows it nearly as well as I do. But
you, being a stranger, are no doubt curious to learn how I became so
beautiful and prosperous, so I will recite for your benefit my strange
adventures."

"Thank you," said Woot the Wanderer, still eating.

"I was not always made of tin," began the Emperor, "for in the
beginning I was a man of flesh and bone and blood and lived in the
Munchkin Country of Oz. There I was, by trade, a woodchopper, and
contributed my share to the comfort of the Oz people by chopping up the
trees of the forest to make firewood, with which the women would cook
their meals while the children warmed themselves about the fires. For
my home I had a little hut by the edge of the forest, and my life was
one of much content until I fell in love with a beautiful Munchkin girl
who lived not far away."

"What was the Munchkin girl's name?" asked Woot.

"Nimmie Amee. This girl, so fair that the sunsets blushed when their
rays fell upon her, lived with a powerful witch who wore silver shoes
and who had made the poor child her slave. Nimmie Amee was obliged to
work from morning till night for the old Witch of the East, scrubbing
and sweeping her hut and cooking her meals and washing her dishes. She
had to cut firewood, too, until I found her one day in the forest and
fell in love with her. After that, I always brought plenty of firewood
to Nimmie Amee and we became very friendly. Finally I asked her to
marry me, and she agreed to do so, but the Witch happened to overhear
our conversation and it made her very angry, for she did not wish her
slave to be taken away from her. The Witch commanded me never to come
near Nimmie Amee again, but I told her I was my own master and would do
as I pleased, not realizing that this was a careless way to speak to a
Witch.

"The next day, as I was cutting wood in the forest, the cruel Witch
enchanted my axe, so that it slipped and cut off my right leg."

"How dreadful!" cried Woot the Wanderer.

"Yes, it was a seeming misfortune," agreed the Tin Man, "for a
one-legged woodchopper is of little use in his trade. But I would not
allow the Witch to conquer me so easily. I knew a very skillful
mechanic at the other side of the forest, who was my friend, so I
hopped on one leg to him and asked him to help me. He soon made me a
new leg out of tin and fastened it cleverly to my meat body. It had
joints at the knee and at the ankle and was almost as comfortable as
the leg I had lost."

"Your friend must have been a wonderful workman!" exclaimed Woot.

"He was, indeed," admitted the Emperor. "He was a tinsmith by trade and
could make anything out of tin. When I returned to Nimmie Amee, the
girl was delighted and threw her arms around my neck and kissed me,
declaring she was proud of me. The Witch saw the kiss and was more
angry than before. When I went to work in the forest, next day, my axe,
being still enchanted, slipped and cut off my other leg. Again I
hopped--on my tin leg--to my friend the tinsmith, who kindly made me
another tin leg and fastened it to my body. So I returned joyfully to
Nimmie Amee, who was much pleased with my glittering legs and promised
that when we were wed she would always keep them oiled and polished.
But the Witch was more furious than ever, and as soon as I raised my
axe to chop, it twisted around and cut off one of my arms. The tinsmith
made me a tin arm and I was not much worried, because Nimmie Amee
declared she still loved me."




Chapter Two

The Heart of the Tin Woodman


The Emperor of the Winkies paused in his story to reach for an oil-can,
with which he carefully oiled the joints in his tin throat, for his
voice had begun to squeak a little. Woot the Wanderer, having satisfied
his hunger, watched this oiling process with much curiosity, but begged
the Tin Man to go on with his tale.

"The Witch with the Silver Shoes hated me for having defied her,"
resumed the Emperor, his voice now sounding clear as a bell, "and she
insisted that Nimmie Amee should never marry me.  Therefore she made
the enchanted axe cut off my other arm, and the tinsmith also replaced
that member with tin, including these finely-jointed hands that you see
me using. But, alas! after that, the axe, still enchanted by the cruel
Witch, cut my body in two, so that I fell to the ground. Then the
Witch, who was watching from a near-by bush, rushed up and seized the
axe and chopped my body into several small pieces, after which,
thinking that at last she had destroyed me, she ran away laughing in
wicked glee.

"But Nimmie Amee found me. She picked up my arms and legs and head, and
made a bundle of them and carried them to the tinsmith, who set to work
and made me a fine body of pure tin. When he had joined the arms and
legs to the body, and set my head in the tin collar, I was a much
better man than ever, for my body could not ache or pain me, and I was
so beautiful and bright that I had no need of clothing. Clothing is
always a nuisance, because it soils and tears and has to be replaced;
but my tin body only needs to be oiled and polished.

"Nimmie Amee still declared she would marry me, as she still loved me
in spite of the Witch's evil deeds. The girl declared I would make the
brightest husband in all the world, which was quite true. However, the
Wicked Witch was not yet defeated. When I returned to my work the axe
slipped and cut off my head, which was the only meat part of me then
remaining. Moreover, the old woman grabbed up my severed head and
carried it away with her and hid it. But Nimmie Amee came into the
forest and found me wandering around helplessly, because I could not
see where to go, and she led me to my friend the tinsmith. The faithful
fellow at once set to work to make me a tin head, and he had just
completed it when Nimmie Amee came running up with my old head, which
she had stolen from the Witch. But, on reflection, I considered the tin
head far superior to the meat one--I am wearing it yet, so you can see
its beauty and grace of outline--and the girl agreed with me that a man
all made of tin was far more perfect than one formed of different
materials. The tinsmith was as proud of his workmanship as I was, and
for three whole days, all admired me and praised my beauty. Being now
completely formed of tin, I had no more fear of the Wicked Witch, for
she was powerless to injure me. Nimmie Amee said we must be married at
once, for then she could come to my cottage and live with me and keep
me bright and sparkling.

"'I am sure, my dear Nick,' said the brave and beautiful girl--my name
was then Nick Chopper, you should be told--'that you will make the best
husband any girl could have. I shall not be obliged to cook for you,
for now you do not eat; I shall not have to make your bed, for tin does
not tire or require sleep; when we go to a dance, you will not get
weary before the music stops and say you want to go home. All day long,
while you are chopping wood in the forest, I shall be able to amuse
myself in my own way--a privilege few wives enjoy. There is no temper
in your new head, so you will not get angry with me. Finally, I shall
take pride in being the wife of the only live Tin Woodman in all the
world!' Which shows that Nimmie Amee was as wise as she was brave and
beautiful."

"I think she was a very nice girl," said Woot the Wanderer. "But, tell
me, please, why were you not killed when you were chopped to pieces?"

"In the Land of Oz," replied the Emperor, "no one can ever be killed. A
man with a wooden leg or a tin leg is still the same man; and, as I
lost parts of my meat body by degrees, I always remained the same
person as in the beginning, even though in the end I was all tin and no
meat."

"I see," said the boy, thoughtfully. "And did you marry Nimmie Amee?"

"No," answered the Tin Woodman, "I did not. She said she still loved
me, but I found that I no longer loved her. My tin body contained no
heart, and without a heart no one can love. So the Wicked Witch
conquered in the end, and when I left the Munchkin Country of Oz, the
poor girl was still the slave of the Witch and had to do her bidding
day and night."

"Where did you go?" asked Woot.

"Well, I first started out to find a heart, so I could love Nimmie Amee
again; but hearts are more scarce than one would think. One day, in a
big forest that was strange to me, my joints suddenly became rusted,
because I had forgotten to oil them. There I stood, unable to move hand
or foot. And there I continued to stand--while days came and
went--until Dorothy and the Scarecrow came along and rescued me. They
oiled my joints and set me free, and I've taken good care never to rust
again."

"Who was this Dorothy?" questioned the Wanderer.

"A little girl who happened to be in a house when it was carried by a
cyclone all the way from Kansas to the Land of Oz. When the house fell,
in the Munchkin Country, it fortunately landed on the Wicked Witch and
smashed her flat. It was a big house, and I think the Witch is under it
yet."

"No," said the Scarecrow, correcting him, "Dorothy says the Witch
turned to dust, and the wind scattered the dust in every direction."

"Well," continued the Tin Woodman, "after meeting the Scarecrow and
Dorothy, I went with them to the Emerald City, where the Wizard of Oz
gave me a heart. But the Wizard's stock of hearts was low, and he gave
me a Kind Heart instead of a Loving Heart, so that I could not love
Nimmie Amee any more than I did when I was heartless."

"Couldn't the Wizard give you a heart that was both Kind and Loving?"
asked the boy.

"No; that was what I asked for, but he said he was so short on hearts,
just then, that there was but one in stock, and I could take that or
none at all. So I accepted it, and I must say that for its kind it is a
very good heart indeed."

"It seems to me," said Woot, musingly, "that the Wizard fooled you. It
can't be a very Kind Heart, you know."

"Why not?" demanded the Emperor.

"Because it was unkind of you to desert the girl who loved you, and who
had been faithful and true to you when you were in trouble. Had the
heart the Wizard gave you been a Kind Heart, you would have gone back
home and made the beautiful Munchkin girl your wife, and then brought
her here to be an Empress and live in your splendid tin castle."

The Tin Woodman was so surprised at this frank speech that for a time
he did nothing but stare hard at the boy Wanderer. But the Scarecrow
wagged his stuffed head and said in a positive tone:

"This boy is right. I've often wondered, myself, why you didn't go back
and find that poor Munchkin girl."

Then the Tin Woodman stared hard at his friend the Scarecrow. But
finally he said in a serious tone of voice:

"I must admit that never before have I thought of such a thing as
finding Nimmie Amee and making her Empress of the Winkies. But it is
surely not too late, even now, to do this, for the girl must still be
living in the Munchkin Country. And, since this strange Wanderer has
reminded me of Nimmie Amee, I believe it is my duty to set out and find
her. Surely it is not the girl's fault that I no longer love her, and
so, if I can make her happy, it is proper that I should do so, and in
this way reward her for her faithfulness."

"Quite right, my friend!" agreed the Scarecrow.

"Will you accompany me on this errand?" asked the Tin Emperor.

"Of course," said the Scarecrow.

"And will you take me along?" pleaded Woot the Wanderer in an eager
voice.

"To be sure," said the Tin Woodman, "if you care to join our party. It
was you who first told me it was my duty to find and marry Nimmie Amee,
and I'd like you to know that Nick Chopper, the Tin Emperor of the
Winkies, is a man who never shirks his duty, once it is pointed out to
him."

"It ought to be a pleasure, as well as a duty, if the girl is so
beautiful," said Woot, well pleased with the idea of the adventure.

"Beautiful things may be admired, if not loved," asserted the Tin Man.
"Flowers are beautiful, for instance, but we are not inclined to marry
them. Duty, on the contrary, is a bugle call to action, whether you are
inclined to act, or not. In this case, I obey the bugle call of duty."

"When shall we start?" inquired the Scarecrow, who was always glad to
embark upon a new adventure. "I don't hear any bugle, but when do we
go?"

"As soon as we can get ready," answered the Emperor. "I'll call my
servants at once and order them to make preparations for our journey."




Chapter Three

Roundabout


Woot the Wanderer slept that night in the tin castle of the Emperor of
the Winkies and found his tin bed quite comfortable. Early the next
morning he rose and took a walk through the gardens, where there were
tin fountains and beds of curious tin flowers, and where tin birds
perched upon the branches of tin trees and sang songs that sounded like
the notes of tin whistles. All these wonders had been made by the
clever Winkie tinsmiths, who wound the birds up every morning so that
they would move about and sing.

After breakfast the boy went into the throne room, where the Emperor
was having his tin joints carefully oiled by a servant, while other
servants were stuffing sweet, fresh straw into the body of the
Scarecrow.

Woot watched this operation with much interest, for the Scarecrow's
body was only a suit of clothes filled with straw. The coat was
buttoned tight to keep the packed straw from falling out and a rope was
tied around the waist to hold it in shape and prevent the straw from
sagging down. The Scarecrow's head was a gunnysack filled with bran, on
which the eyes, nose and mouth had been painted. His hands were white
cotton gloves stuffed with fine straw. Woot noticed that even when
carefully stuffed and patted into shape, the straw man was awkward in
his movements and decidedly wobbly on his feet, so the boy wondered if
the Scarecrow would be able to travel with them all the way to the
forests of the Munchkin Country of Oz.

The preparations made for this important journey were very simple. A
knapsack was filled with food and given Woot the Wanderer to carry upon
his back, for the food was for his use alone. The Tin Woodman
shouldered an axe which was sharp and brightly polished, and the
Scarecrow put the Emperor's oil-can in his pocket, that he might oil
his friend's joints should they need it.

"Who will govern the Winkie Country during your absence?" asked the boy.

"Why, the Country will run itself," answered the Emperor. "As a matter
of fact, my people do not need an Emperor, for Ozma of Oz watches over
the welfare of all her subjects, including the Winkies. Like a good
many kings and emperors, I have a grand title, but very little real
power, which allows me time to amuse myself in my own way. The people
of Oz have but one law to obey, which is: 'Behave Yourself,' so it is
easy for them to abide by this Law, and you'll notice they behave very
well. But it is time for us to be off, and I am eager to start because
I suppose that that poor Munchkin girl is anxiously awaiting my coming."

"She's waited a long time already, seems to me," remarked the
Scarecrow, as they left the grounds of the castle and followed a path
that led eastward.

"True," replied the Tin Woodman; "but I've noticed that the last end of
a wait, however long it has been, is the hardest to endure; so I must
try to make Nimmie Amee happy as soon as possible."

"Ah; that proves you have a Kind heart," remarked the Scarecrow,
approvingly.

"It's too bad he hasn't a Loving Heart," said Woot. "This Tin Man is
going to marry a nice girl through kindness, and not because he loves
her, and somehow that doesn't seem quite right."

"Even so, I am not sure it isn't best for the girl," said the
Scarecrow, who seemed very intelligent for a straw man, "for a loving
husband is not always kind, while a kind husband is sure to make any
girl content."

"Nimmie Amee will become an Empress!" announced the Tin Woodman,
proudly. "I shall have a tin gown made for her, with tin ruffles and
tucks on it, and she shall have tin slippers, and tin earrings and
bracelets, and wear a tin crown on her head. I am sure that will
delight Nimmie Amee, for all girls are fond of finery."

"Are we going to the Munchkin Country by way of the Emerald City?"
inquired the Scarecrow, who looked upon the Tin Woodman as the leader
of the party.

"I think not," was the reply. "We are engaged upon a rather delicate
adventure, for we are seeking a girl who fears her former lover has
forgotten her. It will be rather hard for me, you must admit, when I
confess to Nimmie Amee that I have come to marry her because it is my
duty to do so, and therefore the fewer witnesses there are to our
meeting the better for both of us. After I have found Nimmie Amee and
she has managed to control her joy at our reunion, I shall take her to
the Emerald City and introduce her to Ozma and Dorothy, and to Betsy
Bobbin and Tiny Trot, and all our other friends; but, if I remember
rightly, poor Nimmie Amee has a sharp tongue when angry, and she may be
a trifle angry with me, at first, because I have been so long in coming
to her."

"I can understand that," said Woot gravely. "But how can we get to that
part of the Munchkin Country where you once lived without passing
through the Emerald City?"

"Why, that is easy," the Tin Man assured him.

"I have a map of Oz in my pocket," persisted the boy, "and it shows
that the Winkie Country, where we now are, is at the west of Oz, and
the Munchkin Country at the east, while directly between them lies the
Emerald City."

"True enough; but we shall go toward the north, first of all, into the
Gillikin Country, and so pass around the Emerald City," explained the
Tin Woodman.

"That may prove a dangerous journey," replied the boy. "I used to live
in one of the top corners of the Gillikin Country, near to Oogaboo, and
I have been told that in this northland country are many people whom it
is not pleasant to meet. I was very careful to avoid them during my
journey south."

"A Wanderer should have no fear," observed the Scarecrow, who was
wobbling along in a funny, haphazard manner, but keeping pace with his
friends.

"Fear does not make one a coward," returned Woot, growing a little red
in the face, "but I believe it is more easy to avoid danger than to
overcome it. The safest way is the best way, even for one who is brave
and determined."

"Do not worry, for we shall not go far to the north," said the Emperor.
"My one idea is to avoid the Emerald City without going out of our way
more than is necessary. Once around the Emerald City we will turn south
into the Munchkin Country, where the Scarecrow and I are well
acquainted and have many friends."

"I have traveled some in the Gillikin Country," remarked the Scarecrow,
"and while I must say I have met some strange people there at times, I
have never yet been harmed by them."

"Well, it's all the same to me," said Woot, with assumed carelessness.
"Dangers, when they cannot be avoided, are often quite interesting, and
I am willing to go wherever you two venture to go."

So they left the path they had been following and began to travel
toward the northeast, and all that day they were in the pleasant Winkie
Country, and all the people they met saluted the Emperor with great
respect and wished him good luck on his journey. At night they stopped
at a house where they were well entertained and where Woot was given a
comfortable bed to sleep in.

"Were the Scarecrow and I alone," said the Tin Woodman, "we would
travel by night as well as by day; but with a meat person in our party,
we must halt at night to permit him to rest."

"Meat tires, after a day's travel," added the Scarecrow, "while straw
and tin never tire at all. Which proves," said he, "that we are
somewhat superior to people made in the common way."

Woot could not deny that he was tired, and he slept soundly until
morning, when he was given a good breakfast, smoking hot.

"You two miss a great deal by not eating," he said to his companions.

"It is true," responded the Scarecrow. "We miss suffering from hunger,
when food cannot be had, and we miss a stomachache, now and then."

As he said this, the Scarecrow glanced at the Tin Woodman, who nodded
his assent.

All that second day they traveled steadily, entertaining one another
the while with stories of adventures they had formerly met and
listening to the Scarecrow recite poetry. He had learned a great many
poems from Professor Wogglebug and loved to repeat them whenever
anybody would listen to him. Of course Woot and the Tin Woodman now
listened, because they could not do otherwise--unless they rudely ran
away from their stuffed comrade. One of the Scarecrow's recitations was
like this:

    "What sound is so sweet
    As the straw from the wheat
  When it crunkles so tender and low?
    It is yellow and bright,
    So it gives me delight
  To crunkle wherever I go.

    "Sweet, fresh, golden Straw!
    There is surely no flaw
  In a stuffing so clean and compact.
    It creaks when I walk,
    And it thrills when I talk,
  And its fragrance is fine, for a fact.
    "To cut me don't hurt,

    For I've no blood to squirt,
  And I therefore can suffer no pain;
    The straw that I use
    Doesn't lump up or bruise,
  Though it's pounded again and again!

    "I know it is said
    That my beautiful head
  Has brains of mixed wheat-straw and bran,
    But my thoughts are so good
    I'd not change, if I could,
  For the brains of a common meat man.

    "Content with my lot,
    I'm glad that I'm not
  Like others I meet day by day;
    If my insides get musty,
    Or mussed-up, or dusty,
  I get newly stuffed right away."




Chapter Four

The Loons of Loonville


Toward evening, the travelers found there was no longer a path to guide
them, and the purple hues of the grass and trees warned them that they
were now in the Country of the Gillikins, where strange peoples dwelt
in places that were quite unknown to the other inhabitants of Oz. The
fields were wild and uncultivated and there were no houses of any sort
to be seen. But our friends kept on walking even after the sun went
down, hoping to find a good place for Woot the Wanderer to sleep; but
when it grew quite dark and the boy was weary with his long walk, they
halted right in the middle of a field and allowed Woot to get his
supper from the food he carried in his knapsack. Then the Scarecrow
laid himself down, so that Woot could use his stuffed body as a pillow,
and the Tin Woodman stood up beside them all night, so the dampness of
the ground might not rust his joints or dull his brilliant polish.
Whenever the dew settled on his body he carefully wiped it off with a
cloth, and so in the morning the Emperor shone as brightly as ever in
the rays of the rising sun.

They wakened the boy at daybreak, the Scarecrow saying to him:

"We have discovered something queer, and therefore we must counsel
together what to do about it."

"What have you discovered?" asked Woot, rubbing the sleep from his eyes
with his knuckles and giving three wide yawns to prove he was fully
awake.

"A Sign," said the Tin Woodman. "A Sign, and another path."

"What does the Sign say?" inquired the boy.

"It says that 'All Strangers are Warned not to Follow this Path to
Loonville,'" answered the Scarecrow, who could read very well when his
eyes had been freshly painted.

"In that case," said the boy, opening his knapsack to get some
breakfast, "let us travel in some other direction."

But this did not seem to please either of his companions.

"I'd like to see what Loonville looks like," remarked the Tin Woodman.

"When one travels, it is foolish to miss any interesting sight," added
the Scarecrow.

"But a warning means danger," protested Woot the Wanderer, "and I
believe it sensible to keep out of danger whenever we can."

They made no reply to this speech for a while. Then said the Scarecrow:

"I have escaped so many dangers, during my lifetime, that I am not much
afraid of anything that can happen."

"Nor am I!" exclaimed the Tin Woodman, swinging his glittering axe
around his tin head, in a series of circles. "Few things can injure
tin, and my axe is a powerful weapon to use against a foe. But our boy
friend," he continued, looking solemnly at Woot, "might perhaps be
injured if the people of Loonville are really dangerous; so I propose
he waits here while you and I, Friend Scarecrow, visit the forbidden
City of Loonville."

"Don't worry about me," advised Woot, calmly. "Wherever you wish to go,
I will go, and share your dangers. During my wanderings I have found it
more wise to keep out of danger than to venture in, but at that time I
was alone, and now I have two powerful friends to protect me."

So, when he had finished his breakfast, they all set out along the path
that led to Loonville.

"It is a place I have never heard of before," remarked the Scarecrow,
as they approached a dense forest. "The inhabitants may be people, of
some sort, or they may be animals, but whatever they prove to be, we
will have an interesting story to relate to Dorothy and Ozma on our
return."

The path led into the forest, but the big trees grew so closely
together and the vines and underbrush were so thick and matted that
they had to clear a path at each step in order to proceed. In one or
two places the Tin Man, who went first to clear the way, cut the
branches with a blow of his axe. Woot followed next, and last of the
three came the Scarecrow, who could not have kept the path at all had
not his comrades broken the way for his straw-stuffed body.

Presently the Tin Woodman pushed his way through some heavy underbrush,
and almost tumbled headlong into a vast cleared space in the forest.
The clearing was circular, big and roomy, yet the top branches of the
tall trees reached over and formed a complete dome or roof for it.
Strangely enough, it was not dark in this immense natural chamber in
the woodland, for the place glowed with a soft, white light that seemed
to come from some unseen source.

In the chamber were grouped dozens of queer creatures, and these so
astonished the Tin Man that Woot had to push his metal body aside, that
he might see, too. And the Scarecrow pushed Woot aside, so that the
three travelers stood in a row, staring with all their eyes.

The creatures they beheld were round and ball-like; round in body,
round in legs and arms, round in hands and feet and round of head.  The
only exception to the roundness was a slight hollow on the top of each
head, making it saucer-shaped instead of dome-shaped. They wore no
clothes on their puffy bodies, nor had they any hair. Their skins were
all of a light gray color, and their eyes were mere purple spots. Their
noses were as puffy as the rest of them.

"Are they rubber, do you think?" asked the Scarecrow, who noticed that
the creatures bounded, as they moved, and seemed almost as light as air.

"It is difficult to tell what they are," answered Woot, "they seem to
be covered with warts."

The Loons--for so these folks were called--had been doing many things,
some playing together, some working at tasks and some gathered in
groups to talk; but at the sound of strange voices, which echoed rather
loudly through the clearing, all turned in the direction of the
intruders.  Then, in a body, they all rushed forward, running and
bounding with tremendous speed.

The Tin Woodman was so surprised by this sudden dash that he had no
time to raise his axe before the Loons were on them. The creatures
swung their puffy hands, which looked like boxing-gloves, and pounded
the three travelers as hard as they could, on all sides. The blows were
quite soft and did not hurt our friends at all, but the onslaught quite
bewildered them, so that in a brief period all three were knocked over
and fell flat upon the ground. Once down, many of the Loons held them,
to prevent their getting up again, while others wound long tendrils of
vines about them, binding their arms and legs to their bodies and so
rendering them helpless.

"Aha!" cried the biggest Loon of all; "we've got 'em safe; so let's
carry 'em to King Bal and have 'em tried, and condemned and
perforated!" They had to drag their captives to the center of the domed
chamber, for their weight, as compared with that of the Loons,
prevented their being carried. Even the Scarecrow was much heavier than
the puffy Loons. But finally the party halted before a raised platform,
on which stood a sort of throne, consisting of a big, wide chair with a
string tied to one arm of it. This string led upward to the roof of the
dome.

Arranged before the platform, the prisoners were allowed to sit up,
facing the empty throne.

"Good!" said the big Loon who had commanded the party. "Now to get King
Bal to judge these terrible creatures we have so bravely captured."

As he spoke he took hold of the string and began to pull as hard as he
could. One or two of the others helped him and pretty soon, as they
drew in the cord, the leaves above them parted and a Loon appeared at
the other end of the string. It didn't take long to draw him down to
the throne, where he seated himself and was tied in, so he wouldn't
float upward again.

"Hello," said the King, blinking his purple eyes at his followers;
"what's up now!"

"Strangers, your Majesty--strangers and captives," replied the big
Loon, pompously.

"Dear me!  I see 'em. I see 'em very plainly," exclaimed the King, his
purple eyes bulging out as he looked at the three prisoners. "What
curious animals! Are they dangerous, do you think, my good Panta?"

"I'm 'fraid so, your Majesty. Of course, they may not be dangerous, but
we mustn't take chances. Enough accidents happen to us poor Loons as it
is, and my advice is to condemn and perforate 'em as quickly as
possible."

"Keep your advice to yourself," said the monarch, in a peeved tone.
"Who's King here, anyhow? You or Me?"

"We made you our King because you have less common sense than the rest
of us," answered Panta Loon, indignantly. "I could have been King
myself, had I wanted to, but I didn't care for the hard work and
responsibility."

As he said this, the big Loon strutted back and forth in the space
between the throne of King Bal and the prisoners, and the other Loons
seemed much impressed by his defiance. But suddenly there came a sharp
report and Panta Loon instantly disappeared, to the great astonishment
of the Scarecrow, the Tin Woodman and Woot the Wanderer, who saw on the
spot where the big fellow had stood a little heap of flabby, wrinkled
skin that looked like a collapsed rubber balloon.

"There!" exclaimed the King; "I expected that would happen. The
conceited rascal wanted to puff himself up until he was bigger than the
rest of you, and this is the result of his folly. Get the pump working,
some of you, and blow him up again."

"We will have to mend the puncture first, your Majesty," suggested one
of the Loons, and the prisoners noticed that none of them seemed
surprised or shocked at the sad accident to Panta.

"All right," grumbled the King. "Fetch Til to mend him."

One or two ran away and presently returned, followed by a lady Loon
wearing huge, puffed-up rubber skirts. Also she had a purple feather
fastened to a wart on the top of her head, and around her waist was a
sash of fibre-like vines, dried and tough, that looked like strings.

"Get to work, Til," commanded King Bal. "Panta has just exploded."

The lady Loon picked up the bunch of skin and examined it carefully
until she discovered a hole in one foot. Then she pulled a strand of
string from her sash, and drawing the edges of the hole together, she
tied them fast with the string, thus making one of those curious warts
which the strangers had noticed on so many Loons. Having done this, Til
Loon tossed the bit of skin to the other Loons and was about to go away
when she noticed the prisoners and stopped to inspect them.

"Dear me!" said Til; "what dreadful creatures. Where did they come
from?"

"We captured them," replied one of the Loons.

"And what are we going to do with them?" inquired the girl Loon.

"Perhaps we'll condemn 'em and puncture 'em," answered the King.

"Well," said she, still eyeing the  "I'm not sure they'll puncture.
Let's try it, and see."

One of the Loons ran to the forest's edge and quickly returned with a
long, sharp thorn. He glanced at the King, who nodded his head in
assent, and then he rushed forward and stuck the thorn into the leg of
the Scarecrow. The Scarecrow merely smiled and said nothing, for the
thorn didn't hurt him at all.

Then the Loon tried to prick the Tin Woodman's leg, but the tin only
blunted the point of the thorn.

"Just as I thought," said Til, blinking her purple eyes and shaking her
puffy head; but just then the Loon stuck the thorn into the leg of Woot
the Wanderer, and while it had been blunted somewhat, it was still
sharp enough to hurt.

"Ouch!" yelled Woot, and kicked out his leg with so much energy that
the frail bonds that tied him burst apart. His foot caught the
Loon--who was leaning over him--full on his puffy stomach, and sent him
shooting up into the air. When he was high over their heads he exploded
with a loud "pop" and his skin fell to the ground.

"I really believe," said the King, rolling his spotlike eyes in a
frightened way, "that Panta was right in claiming these prisoners are
dangerous. Is the pump ready?"

Some of the Loons had wheeled a big machine in front of the throne and
now took Panta's skin and began to pump air into it. Slowly it swelled
out until the King cried "Stop!"

"No, no!" yelled Panta, "I'm not big enough yet."

"You're as big as you're going to be," declared the King. "Before you
exploded you were bigger than the rest of us, and that caused you to
be proud and overbearing. Now you're a little smaller than the rest,
and you will last longer and be more humble."

"Pump me up--pump me up!" wailed Panta "If you don't you'll break my
heart."

"If we do we'll break your skin," replied the King.

So the Loons stopped pumping air into Panta, and pushed him away from
the pump. He was certainly more humble than before his accident, for he
crept into the background and said nothing more.

"Now pump up the other one," ordered the King. Til had already mended
him, and the Loons set to work to pump him full of air.

During these last few moments none had paid much attention to the
prisoners, so Woot, finding his legs free, crept over to the Tin
Woodman and rubbed the bonds that were still around his arms and body
against the sharp edge of the axe, which quickly cut them.

The boy was now free, and the thorn which the Loon had stuck into his
leg was lying unnoticed on the ground, where the creature had dropped
it when he exploded. Woot leaned forward and picked up the thorn, and
while the Loons were busy watching the pump, the boy sprang to his feet
and suddenly rushed upon the group.

"Pop"--"pop"--"pop!" went three of the Loons, when the Wanderer pricked
them with his thorn, and at the sounds the others looked around and saw
their danger. With yells of fear they bounded away in all directions,
scattering about the clearing, with Woot the Wanderer in full chase.
While they could run much faster than the boy, they often stumbled and
fell, or got in one another's way, so he managed to catch several and
prick them with his thorn.

It astonished him to see how easily the Loons exploded. When the air
was let out of them they were quite helpless. Til Loon was one of those
who ran against his thorn and many others suffered the same fate. The
creatures could not escape from the enclosure, but in their fright many
bounded upward and caught branches of the trees, and then climbed out
of reach of the dreaded thorn.

Woot was getting pretty tired chasing them, so he stopped and came
over, panting, to where his friends were sitting, still bound.

"Very well done, my Wanderer," said the Tin Woodman. "It is evident
that we need fear these puffed-up creatures no longer, so be kind
enough to unfasten our bonds and we will proceed upon our journey."

Woot untied the bonds of the Scarecrow and helped him to his feet. Then
he freed the Tin Woodman, who got up without help. Looking around them,
they saw that the only Loon now remaining within reach was Bal Loon,
the King, who had remained seated in his throne, watching the
punishment of his people with a bewildered look in his purple eyes.

"Shall I puncture the King?" the boy asked his companions.

King Bal must have overheard the question, for he fumbled with the cord
that fastened him to the throne and managed to release it. Then he
floated upward until he reached the leafy dome, and parting the
branches he disappeared from sight. But the string that was tied to his
body was still connected with the arm of the throne, and they knew they
could pull his Majesty down again, if they wanted to.

"Let him alone," suggested the Scarecrow. "He seems a good enough king
for his peculiar people, and after we are gone, the Loons will have
something of a job to pump up all those whom Woot has punctured."

"Every one of them ought to be exploded," declared Woot, who was angry
because his leg still hurt him.

"No," said the Tin Woodman, "that would not be just fair. They were
quite right to capture us, because we had no business to intrude here,
having been warned to keep away from Loonville. This is their country,
not ours, and since the poor things can't get out of the clearing, they
can harm no one save those who venture here out of curiosity, as we
did."

"Well said, my friend," agreed tile Scarecrow. "We really had no right
to disturb their peace and comfort; so let us go away."

They easily found the place where they had forced their way into the
enclosure, so the Tin Woodman pushed aside the underbrush and started
first along the path. The Scarecrow followed next and last came Woot,
who looked back and saw that the Loons were still clinging to their
perches on the trees and watching their former captives with frightened
eyes.

"I guess they're glad to see the last of us," remarked the boy, and
laughing at the happy ending of the adventure, he followed his comrades
along the path.




Chapter Five

Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess


When they had reached the end of the path, where they had first seen
the warning sign, they set off across the country in an easterly
direction. Before long they reached Rolling Lands, which were a
succession of hills and valleys where constant climbs and descents were
required, and their journey now became tedious, because on climbing
each hill, they found before them nothing in the valley below it except
grass, or weeds or stones.

Up and down they went for hours, with nothing to relieve the monotony
of the landscape, until finally, when they had topped a higher hill
than usual, they discovered a cup-shaped valley before them in the
center of which stood an enormous castle, built of purple stone.  The
castle was high and broad and long, but had no turrets and towers. So
far as they could see, there was but one small window and one big door
on each side of the great building.

"This is strange!" mused the Scarecrow. "I'd no idea such a big castle
existed in this Gillikin Country. I wonder who lives here?"

"It seems to me, from this distance," remarked the Tin Woodman, "that
it's the biggest castle I ever saw. It is really too big for any use,
and no one could open or shut those big doors without a stepladder."

"Perhaps, if we go nearer, we shall find out whether anybody lives
there or not," suggested Woot. "Looks to me as if nobody lived there."

On they went, and when they reached the center of the valley, where the
great stone castle stood, it was beginning to grow dark. So they
hesitated as to what to do.

"If friendly people happen to live here," said Woot. "I shall be glad
of a bed; but should enemies occupy the place, I prefer to sleep upon
the ground."

"And if no one at all lives here," added the Scarecrow, "we can enter,
and take possession, and make ourselves at home."

While speaking he went nearer to one of the great doors, which was
three times as high and broad as any he had ever seen in a house
before, and then he discovered, engraved in big letters upon a stone
over the doorway, the words:

    "YOOP CASTLE"

"Oho!" he exclaimed; "I know the place now. This was probably the home
of Mr. Yoop, a terrible giant whom I have seen confined in a cage, a
long way from here. Therefore this castle is likely to be empty and we
may use it in any way we please."

"Yes, yes," said the Tin Emperor, nodding; "I also remember Mr. Yoop.
But how are we to get into his deserted castle? The latch of the door
is so far above our heads that none of us can reach it."

They considered this problem for a while, and then Woot said to the Tin
Man:

"If I stand upon your shoulders, I think I can unlatch the door."

"Climb up, then," was the reply, and when the boy was perched upon the
tin shoulders of Nick Chopper, he was just able to reach the latch and
raise it.

At once the door swung open, its great hinges making a groaning sound
as if in protest, so Woot leaped down and followed his companions into
a big, bare hallway. Scarcely were the three inside, however, when they
heard the door slam shut behind them, and this astonished them because
no one had touched it. It had closed of its own accord, as if by magic.
Moreover, the latch was on the outside, and the thought occurred to
each one of them that they were now prisoners in this unknown castle.

"However," mumbled the Scarecrow, "we are not to blame for what cannot
be helped; so let us push bravely ahead and see what may be seen."

It was quite dark in the hallway, now that the outside door was shut,
so as they stumbled along a stone passage they kept close together, not
knowing what danger was likely to befall them.

Suddenly a soft glow enveloped them. It grew brighter, until they could
see their surroundings distinctly. They had reached the end of the
passage and before them was another huge door. This noiselessly swung
open before them, without the help of anyone, and through the doorway
they observed a big chamber, the walls of which were lined with plates
of pure gold, highly polished.

This room was also lighted, although they could discover no lamps, and
in the center of it was a great table at which sat an immense woman.
She was clad in silver robes embroidered with gay floral designs, and
wore over this splendid raiment a short apron of elaborate lace-work.
Such an apron was no protection, and was not in keeping with the
handsome gown, but the huge woman wore it, nevertheless. The table at
which she sat was spread with a white cloth and had golden dishes upon
it, so the travelers saw that they had surprised the Giantess while she
was eating her supper.

She had her back toward them and did not even turn around, but taking a
biscuit from a dish she began to butter it and said in a voice that was
big and deep but not especially unpleasant:

"Why don't you come in and allow the door to shut? You're causing a
draught, and I shall catch cold and sneeze. When I sneeze, I get cross,
and when I get cross I'm liable to do something wicked. Come in, you
foolish strangers; come in!"

Being thus urged, they entered the room and approached the table, until
they stood where they faced the great Giantess. She continued eating,
but smiled in a curious way as she looked at them. Woot noticed that
the door had closed silently after they had entered, and that didn't
please him at all.

"Well," said the Giantess, "what excuse have you to offer?"

"We didn't know anyone lived here, Madam," explained the Scarecrow;
"so, being travelers and strangers in these parts, and wishing to find
a place for our boy friend to sleep, we ventured to enter your castle."

"You knew it was private property, I suppose?" said she, buttering
another biscuit.

"We saw the words, 'Yoop Castle,' over the door, but we knew that Mr.
Yoop is a prisoner in a cage in a far-off part of the land of Oz, so we
decided there was no one now at home and that we might use the castle
for the night."

"I see," remarked the Giantess, nodding her head and smiling again in
that curious way--a way that made Woot shudder. "You didn't know that
Mr. Yoop was married, or that after he was cruelly captured his wife
still lived in his castle and ran it to suit herself."

"Who captured Mr. Yoop?" asked Woot, looking gravely at the big woman.

"Wicked enemies. People who selfishly objected to Yoop's taking their
cows and sheep for his food. I must admit, however, that Yoop had a bad
temper, and had the habit of knocking over a few houses, now and then,
when he was angry. So one day the little folks came in a great crowd
and captured Mr. Yoop, and carried him away to a cage somewhere in the
mountains. I don't know where it is, and I don't care, for my husband
treated me badly at times, forgetting the respect a giant owes to a
giantess. Often he kicked me on my shins, when I wouldn't wait on him.
So I'm glad he is gone."

"It's a wonder the people didn't capture you, too," remarked Woot.

"Well, I was too clever for them," said she, giving a sudden laugh that
caused such a breeze that the wobbly Scarecrow was almost blown off his
feet and had to grab his friend Nick Chopper to steady himself. "I saw
the people coming," continued Mrs. Yoop, "and knowing they meant
mischief I transformed myself into a mouse and hid in a cupboard. After
they had gone away, carrying my shin-kicking husband with them, I
transformed myself back to my former shape again, and here I've lived
in peace and comfort ever since."

"Are you a Witch, then?" inquired Woot.

"Well, not exactly a Witch," she replied, "but I'm an Artist in
Transformations. In other words, I'm more of a Yookoohoo than a Witch,
and of course you know that the Yookoohoos are the cleverest
magic-workers in the world."

The travelers were silent for a time, uneasily considering this
statement and the effect it might have on their future. No doubt the
Giantess had wilfully made them her prisoners; yet she spoke so
cheerfully, in her big voice, that until now they had not been alarmed
in the least.

By and by the Scarecrow, whose mixed brains had been working steadily,
asked the woman:

"Are we to consider you our friend, Mrs. Yoop, or do you intend to be
our enemy?"

"I never have friends," she said in a matter-of-fact tone, "because
friends get too familiar and always forget to mind their own business.
But I am not your enemy; not yet, anyhow. Indeed, I'm glad you've come,
for my life here is rather lonely. I've had no one to talk to since I
transformed Polychrome, the Daughter of the Rainbow, into a
canary-bird."

"How did you manage to do that?" asked the Tin Woodman, in amazement.
"Polychrome is a powerful fairy!"

"She was," said the Giantess; "but now she's a canary-bird. One day
after a rain, Polychrome danced off the Rainbow and fell asleep on a
little mound in this valley, not far from my castle. The sun came out
and drove the Rainbow away, and before Poly wakened, I stole out and
transformed her into a canary-bird in a gold cage studded with
diamonds. The cage was so she couldn't fly away. I expected she'd sing
and talk and we'd have good times together; but she has proved no
company for me at all. Ever since the moment of her transformation, she
has refused to speak a single word."

"Where is she now?" inquired Woot, who had heard tales of lovely
Polychrome and was much interested in her.

"The cage is hanging up in my bedroom," said the Giantess, eating
another biscuit. The travelers were now  more uneasy and suspicious of
the Giantess than before. If Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter, who
was a real fairy, had been transformed and enslaved by this huge woman,
who claimed to be a Yookoohoo, what was liable to happen to them? Said
the Scarecrow, twisting his stuffed head around in Mrs. Yoop's
direction:

"Do you know, Ma'am, who we are?"

"Of course," said she; "a straw man, a tin man and a boy."

"We are very important people," declared the Tin Woodman.

"All the better," she replied. "I shall enjoy your society the more on
that account. For I mean to keep you here as long as I live, to amuse
me when I get lonely. And," she added slowly, "in this Valley no one
ever dies."

They didn't like this speech at all, so the Scarecrow frowned in a way
that made Mrs. Yoop smile, while the Tin Woodman looked so fierce that
Mrs. Yoop laughed. The Scarecrow suspected she was going to laugh, so
he slipped behind his friends to escape the wind from her breath.  From
this safe position he said warningly:

"We have powerful friends who will soon come to rescue us."

"Let them come," she returned, with an accent of scorn. "When they get
here they will find neither a boy, nor a tin man, nor a scarecrow, for
tomorrow morning I intend to transform you all into other shapes, so
that you cannot be recognized."

This threat filled them with dismay. The good-natured Giantess was more
terrible than they had imagined. She could smile and wear pretty
clothes and at the same time be even more cruel than her wicked husband
had been.

Both the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman tried to think of some way to
escape from the castle before morning, but she seemed to read their
thoughts and shook her head.

"Don't worry your poor brains," said she. "You can't escape me, however
hard you try. But why should you wish to escape? I shall give you new
forms that are much better than the ones you now have. Be contented
with your fate, for discontent leads to unhappiness, and unhappiness,
in any form, is the greatest evil that can befall you."

"What forms do you intend to give us?" asked Woot earnestly.

"I haven't decided, as yet. I'll dream over it tonight, so in the
morning I shall have made up my mind how to transform you. Perhaps
you'd prefer to choose your own transformations?"

"No," said Woot, "I prefer to remain as I am."

"That's funny," she retorted. "You are little, and you're weak; as you
are, you're not much account, anyhow. The best thing about you is that
you're alive, for I shall be able to make of you some sort of live
creature which will be a great improvement on your present form."

She took another biscuit from a plate and dipped it in a pot of honey
and calmly began eating it.

The Scarecrow watched her thoughtfully.

"There are no fields of grain in your Valley," said he; "where, then,
did you get the flour to make your biscuits?"

"Mercy me! do you think I'd bother to make biscuits out of flour?" she
replied. "That is altogether too tedious a process for a Yookoohoo. I
set some traps this afternoon and caught a lot of field-mice, but as I
do not like to eat mice, I transformed them into hot biscuits for my
supper. The honey in this pot was once a wasp's nest, but since being
transformed it has become sweet and delicious. All I need do, when I
wish to eat, is to take something I don't care to keep, and transform
it into any sort of food I like, and eat it. Are you hungry?"

"I don't eat, thank you," said the Scarecrow.

"Nor do I," said the Tin Woodman.

"I have still a little natural food in my knapsack," said Woot the
Wanderer, "and I'd rather eat that than any wasp's nest."

"Every one to his taste," said the Giantess carelessly, and having now
finished her supper she rose to her feet, clapped her hands together,
and the supper table at once disappeared.




Chapter Six

The Magic of a Yookoohoo


Woot had seen very little of magic during his wanderings, while the
Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman had seen a great deal of many sorts in
their lives, yet all three were greatly impressed by Mrs. Yoop's
powers. She did not affect any mysterious airs or indulge in chants or
mystic rites, as most witches do, nor was the Giantess old and ugly or
disagreeable in face or manner. Nevertheless, she frightened her
prisoners more than any witch could have done.

"Please be seated," she said to them, as she sat herself down in a
great arm-chair and spread her beautiful embroidered skirts for them to
admire. But all the chairs in the room were so high that our friends
could not climb to the seats of them. Mrs. Yoop observed this and waved
her hand, when instantly a golden ladder appeared leaning against a
chair opposite her own.

"Climb up," said she, and they obeyed, the Tin Man and the boy
assisting the more clumsy Scarecrow. When they were all seated in a row
on the cushion of the chair, the Giantess continued: "Now tell me how
you happened to travel in this direction, and where you came from and
what your errand is."

So the Tin Woodman told her all about Nimmie Amee, and how he had
decided to find her and marry her, although he had no Loving Heart. The
story seemed to amuse the big woman, who then began to ask the
Scarecrow questions and for the first time in her life heard of Ozma of
Oz, and of Dorothy and Jack Pumpkinhead and Dr. Pipt and Tik-tok and
many other Oz people who are well known in the Emerald City. Also Woot
had to tell his story, which was very simple and did not take long. The
Giantess laughed heartily when the boy related their adventure at
Loonville, but said she knew nothing of the Loons because she never
left her Valley.

"There are wicked people who would like to capture me, as they did my
giant husband, Mr. Yoop," said she; "so I stay at home and mind my own
business."

"If Ozma knew that you dared to work magic without her consent, she
would punish you severely," declared the Scarecrow, "for this castle is
in the Land of Oz, and no persons in the Land of Oz are permitted to
work magic except Glinda the Good and the little Wizard who lives with
Ozma in the Emerald City."

"That for your Ozma!" exclaimed the Giantess, snapping her fingers in
derision. "What do I care for a girl whom I have never seen and who has
never seen me?"

"But Ozma is a fairy," said the Tin Woodman, "and therefore she is very
powerful. Also, we are under Ozma's protection, and to injure us in any
way would make her extremely angry."

"What I do here, in my own private castle in this secluded
Valley--where no one comes but fools like you--can never be known to
your fairy Ozma," returned the Giantess. "Do not seek to frighten me
from my purpose, and do not allow yourselves to be frightened, for it
is best to meet bravely what cannot be avoided. I am now going to bed,
and in the morning I will give you all new forms, such as will be more
interesting to me than the ones you now wear. Good night, and pleasant
dreams."

Saying this, Mrs. Yoop rose from her chair and walked through a doorway
into another room. So heavy was the tread of the Giantess that even the
walls of the big stone castle trembled as she stepped. She closed the
door of her bedroom behind her, and then suddenly the light went out
and the three prisoners found themselves in total darkness.

The Tin Woodman and the Scarecrow didn't mind the dark at all, but Woot
the Wanderer felt worried to be left in this strange place in this
strange manner, without being able to see any danger that might
threaten.

"The big woman might have given me a bed, anyhow," he said to his
companions, and scarcely had he spoken when he felt something press
against his legs, which were then dangling from the seat of the chair.
Leaning down, he put out his hand and found that a bedstead had
appeared, with mattress, sheets and covers, all complete. He lost no
time in slipping down upon the bed and was soon fast asleep.

During the night the Scarecrow and the Emperor talked in low tones
together, and they got out of the chair and moved all about the room,
feeling for some hidden spring that might open a door or window and
permit them to escape.

Morning found them still unsuccessful in the quest and as soon as it
was daylight Woot's bed suddenly disappeared, and he dropped to the
floor with a thump that quickly wakened him. And after a time the
Giantess came from her bedroom, wearing another dress that was quite as
elaborate as the one in which she had been attired the evening before,
and also wearing the pretty lace apron. Having seated herself in a
chair, she said:

"I'm hungry; so I'll have breakfast at once."

She clapped her hands together and instantly the table appeared before
her, spread with snowy linen and laden with golden dishes. But there
was no food upon the table, nor anything else except a pitcher of
water, a bundle of weeds and a handful of pebbles. But the Giantess
poured some water into her coffee-pot, patted it once or twice with her
hand, and then poured out a cupful of steaming hot coffee.

"Would you like some?" she asked Woot.

He was suspicious of magic coffee, but it smelled so good that he could
not resist it; so he answered: "If you please, Madam."

The Giantess poured out another cup and set it on the floor for Woot.
It was as big as a tub, and the golden spoon in the saucer beside the
cup was so heavy the boy could scarcely lift it. But Woot managed to
get a sip of the coffee and found it delicious.

Mrs. Yoop next transformed the weeds into a dish of oatmeal, which she
ate with good appetite.

"Now, then," said she, picking up the pebbles. "I'm wondering whether I
shall have fish-balls or lamb-chops to complete my meal. Which would
you prefer, Woot the Wanderer?"

"If you please, I'll eat the food in my knapsack," answered the boy.
"Your magic food might taste good, but I'm afraid of it."

The woman laughed at his fears and transformed the pebbles into
fish-balls.

"I suppose you think that after you had eaten this food it would turn
to stones again and make you sick," she remarked; "but that would be
impossible. Nothing I transform ever gets back to its former shape
again, so these fish-balls can never more be pebbles. That is why I
have to be careful of my transformations," she added, busily eating
while she talked, "for while I can change forms at will I can never
change them back again--which proves that even the powers of a clever
Yookoohoo are limited. When I have transformed you three people, you
must always wear the shapes that I have given you."

"Then please don't transform us," begged Woot, "for we are quite
satisfied to remain as we are."

"I am not expecting to satisfy you, but intend to please myself," she
declared, "and my pleasure is to give you new shapes. For, if by chance
your friends came in search of you, not one of them would be able to
recognize you."

Her tone was so positive that they knew it would be useless to protest.
The woman was not unpleasant to look at; her face was not cruel; her
voice was big but gracious in tone; but her words showed that she
possessed a merciless heart and no pleadings would alter her wicked
purpose.

Mrs. Yoop took ample time to finish her breakfast and the prisoners had
no desire to hurry her, but finally the meal was concluded and she
folded her napkin and made the table disappear by clapping her hands
together. Then she turned to her captives and said:

"The next thing on the programme is to change your forms."

"Have you decided what forms to give us?" asked the Scarecrow, uneasily.

"Yes; I dreamed it all out while I was asleep. This Tin Man seems a
very solemn person "--indeed, the Tin Woodman was looking solemn, just
then, for he was greatly disturbed--"so I shall change him into an Owl."

All she did was to point one finger at him as she spoke, but
immediately the form of the Tin Woodman began to change and in a few
seconds Nick Chopper, the Emperor of the Winkies, had been transformed
into an Owl, with eyes as big as saucers and a hooked beak and strong
claws.  But he was still tin. He was a Tin Owl, with tin legs and beak
and eyes and feathers. When he flew to the back of a chair and perched
upon it, his tin feathers rattled against one another with a tinny
clatter. The Giantess seemed  much amused by the Tin Owl's appearance,
for her laugh was big and jolly.

"You're not liable to get lost," said she, "for your wings and feathers
will make a racket wherever you go. And, on my word, a Tin Owl is so
rare and pretty that it is an improvement on the ordinary bird. I did
not intend to make you tin, but I forgot to wish you to be meat.
However, tin you were, and tin you are, and as it's too late to change
you, that settles it."

Until now the Scarecrow had rather doubted the possibility of Mrs.
Yoop's being able to transform him, or his friend the Tin Woodman, for
they were not made as ordinary people are. He had worried more over
what might happen to Woot than to himself, but now he began to worry
about himself.

"Madam," he said hastily, "I consider this action very impolite. It may
even be called rude, considering we are your guests."

"You are not guests, for I did not invite you here," she replied.

"Perhaps not; but we craved hospitality. We threw ourselves upon your
mercy, so to speak, and we now find you have no mercy. Therefore, if
you will excuse the expression, I must say it is downright wicked to
take our proper forms away from us and give us others that we do not
care for."

"Are you trying to make me angry?" she asked, frowning.

"By no means," said the Scarecrow; "I'm just trying to make you act
more ladylike."

"Oh, indeed! In my opinion, Mr. Scarecrow, you are now acting like a
bear--so a Bear you shall be!"

Again the dreadful finger pointed, this time in the Scarecrow's
direction, and at once his form began to change. In a few seconds he
had become a small Brown Bear, but he was stuffed with straw as he had
been before, and when the little Brown Bear shuffled across the floor
he was just as wobbly as the Scarecrow had been and moved just as
awkwardly.

Woot was amazed, but he was also thoroughly frightened.

"Did it hurt?" he asked the little Brown Bear.

"No, of course not," growled the Scarecrow in the Bear's form; "but I
don't like walking on four legs; it's undignified."

"Consider my humiliation!" chirped the Tin Owl, trying to settle its
tin feathers smoothly with its tin beak. "And I can't see very well,
either. The light seems to hurt my eyes."

"That's because you are an Owl," said Woot. "I think you will see
better in the dark."

"Well," remarked the Giantess, "I'm very well pleased with these new
forms, for my part, and I'm sure you will like them better when you get
used to them. So now," she added, turning to the boy, "it is your turn."

"Don't you think you'd better leave me as I am?" asked Woot in a
trembling voice.

"No," she replied, "I'm going to make a Monkey of you. I love
monkeys--they're so cute!--and I think a Green Monkey will be lots of
fun and amuse me when I am sad."

Woot shivered, for again the terrible magic finger pointed, and pointed
directly his way. He felt himself changing; not so very much, however,
and it didn't hurt him a bit. He looked down at his limbs and body and
found that his clothes were gone and his skin covered with a fine,
silk-like green fur. His hands and feet were now those of a monkey. He
realized he really was a monkey, and his first feeling was one of
anger. He began to chatter as monkeys do. He bounded to the seat of a
giant chair, and then to its back and with a wild leap sprang upon the
laughing Giantess. His idea was to seize her hair and pull it out by
the roots, and so have revenge for her wicked transformations. But she
raised her hand and said:

"Gently, my dear Monkey--gently!  You're not angry; you're happy as can
be!"

Woot stopped short. No; he wasn't a bit angry now; he felt as
good-humored and gay as ever he did when a boy. Instead of pulling Mrs.
Yoop's hair, he perched on her shoulder and smoothed her soft cheek
with his hairy paw. In return, she smiled at the funny green animal and
patted his head.

"Very good," said the Giantess. "Let us all become friends and be happy
together. How is my Tin Owl feeling?"

"Quite comfortable," said the Owl. "I don't like it, to be sure, but
I'm not going to allow my new form to make me unhappy. But, tell me,
please: what is a Tin Owl good for?"

"You are only good to make me laugh," replied the Giantess.

"Will a stuffed Bear also make you laugh?" inquired the Scarecrow,
sitting back on his haunches to look up at her.

"Of course," declared the Giantess; "and I have added a little magic to
your transformations to make you all contented with wearing your new
forms. I'm sorry I didn't think to do that when I transformed
Polychrome into a Canary-Bird. But perhaps, when she sees how cheerful
you are, she will cease to be silent and sullen and take to singing. I
will go get the bird and let you see her."

With this, Mrs. Yoop went into the next room and soon returned bearing
a golden cage in which sat upon a swinging perch a lovely yellow
Canary. "Polychrome," said the Giantess, "permit me to introduce to you
a Green Monkey, which used to be a boy called Woot the Wanderer, and a
Tin Owl, which used to be a Tin Woodman named Nick Chopper, and a
straw-stuffed little Brown Bear which used to be a live Scarecrow."

"We already know one another," declared the Scarecrow. "The bird is
Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter, and she and I used to be good
friends."

"Are you really my old friend, the Scarecrow?" asked; the bird, in a
sweet, low voice.

"There!" cried Mrs. Yoop; "that's the first time she has spoken since
she was transformed."

"I am really your old friend," answered the Scarecrow; "but you must
pardon me for appearing just now in this brutal form."

"I am a bird, as you are, dear Poly," said the Tin Woodman; "but, alas!
a Tin Owl is not as beautiful as a Canary-Bird."

"How dreadful it all is!" sighed the Canary. "Couldn't you manage to
escape from this terrible Yookoohoo?"

"No," answered the Scarecrow, "we tried to escape, but failed. She
first made us her prisoners and then transformed us. But how did she
manage to get you, Polychrome?"

"I was asleep, and she took unfair advantage of me," answered the bird
sadly. "Had I been awake, I could easily have protected myself."

"Tell me," said the Green Monkey earnestly, as he came close to the
cage, "what must we do, Daughter of the Rainbow, to escape from these
transformations? Can't you help us, being a Fairy?"

"At present I am powerless to help even myself," replied the Canary.

"That's the exact truth!" exclaimed the Giantess, who seemed pleased to
hear the bird talk, even though it complained; "you are all helpless
and in my power, so you may as well make up your minds to accept your
fate and be content. Remember that you are transformed for good, since
no magic on earth can break your enchantments. I am now going out for
my morning walk, for each day after breakfast I walk sixteen times
around my castle for exercise. Amuse yourselves while I am gone, and
when I return I hope to find you all reconciled and happy."

So the Giantess walked to the door by which our friends had entered the
great hall and spoke one word: "Open!" Then the door swung open and
after Mrs. Yoop had passed out it closed again with a snap as its
powerful bolts shot into place. The Green Monkey had rushed toward the
opening, hoping to escape, but he was too late and only got a bump on
his nose as the door slammed shut.




Chapter Seven

The Lace Apron


"Now," said the Canary, in a tone more brisk than before, "we may talk
together more freely, as Mrs. Yoop cannot hear us. Perhaps we can
figure out a way to escape."

"Open!" said Woot the Monkey, still facing the door; but his command
had no effect and he slowly rejoined the others.

"You cannot open any door or window in this enchanted castle unless you
are wearing the Magic Apron," said the Canary.

"What Magic Apron do you mean?" asked the Tin Owl, in a curious voice.

"The lace one, which the Giantess always wears. I have been her
prisoner, in this cage, for several weeks, and she hangs my cage in her
bedroom every night, so that she can keep her eye on me," explained
Polychrome the Canary. "Therefore I have discovered that it is the
Magic Apron that opens the doors and windows, and nothing else can move
them. When she goes to bed, Mrs. Yoop hangs her apron on the bedpost,
and one morning she forgot to put it on when she commanded the door to
open, and the door would not move. So then she put on the lace apron
and the door obeyed her. That was how I learned the magic power of the
apron."

"I see--I see!" said the little Brown Bear, wagging his stuffed head.
"Then, if we could get the apron from Mrs. Yoop, we could open the
doors and escape from our prison."

"That is true, and it is the plan I was about to suggest," replied
Polychrome  the  Canary-Bird. "However, I don't believe the Owl could
steal the apron, or even the Bear, but perhaps the Monkey could hide in
her room at night and get the apron while she is asleep."

"I'll try it!" cried Woot the Monkey. "I'll try it this very night, if
I can manage to steal into her bedroom."

"You mustn't think about it, though," warned the bird, "for she can
read your thoughts whenever she cares to do so. And do not forget,
before you escape, to take me with you. Once I am out of the power of
the Giantess, I may discover a way to save us all."

"We won't forget our fairy friend," promised the boy; "but perhaps you
can tell me how to get into the bedroom."

"No," declared Polychrome, "I cannot advise you as to that. You must
watch for a chance, and slip in when Mrs. Yoop isn't looking."

They talked it over for a while longer and then Mrs. Yoop returned.
When she entered, the door opened suddenly, at her command, and closed
as soon as her huge form had passed through the doorway. During that
day she entered her bedroom several times, on one errand or another,
but always she commanded the door to close behind her and her prisoners
found not the slightest chance to leave the big hall in which they were
confined.

The Green Monkey thought it would be wise to make a friend of the big
woman, so as to gain her confidence, so he sat on the back of her chair
and chattered to her while she mended her stockings and sewed silver
buttons on some golden shoes that were as big as row-boats. This
pleased the Giantess and she would pause at times to pat the Monkey's
head. The little Brown Bear curled up in a corner and lay still all
day. The Owl and the Canary found they could converse together in the
bird language, which neither the Giantess nor the Bear nor the Monkey
could understand; so at times they twittered away to each other and
passed the long, dreary day quite cheerfully.

After dinner Mrs. Yoop took a big fiddle from a big cupboard and played
such loud and dreadful music that her prisoners were all thankful when
at last she stopped and said she was going to bed.

After cautioning the Monkey and Bear and Owl to behave themselves
during the night, she picked up the cage containing the Canary and,
going to the door of her bedroom, commanded it to open. Just then,
however, she remembered she had left her fiddle lying upon a table, so
she went back for it and put it away in the cupboard, and while her
back was turned the Green Monkey slipped through the open door into her
bedroom and hid underneath the bed. The Giantess, being sleepy, did not
notice this, and entering her room she made the door close behind her
and then hung the bird-cage on a peg by the window. Then she began to
undress, first taking off the lace apron and laying it over the
bedpost, where it was within easy reach of her hand.

As soon as Mrs. Yoop was in bed the lights all went out, and Woot the
Monkey crouched under the bed and waited patiently until he heard the
Giantess snoring. Then he crept out and in the dark felt around until
he got hold of the apron, which he at once tied around his own waist.

Next, Woot tried to find the Canary, and there was just enough
moonlight showing through the window to enable him to see where the
cage hung; but it was out of his reach. At first he was tempted to
leave Polychrome and escape with his other friends, but remembering his
promise to the Rainbow's Daughter Woot tried to think how to save her.

A chair stood near the window, and this--showing dimly in the
moonlight--gave him an idea. By pushing against it with all his might,
he found he could move the giant chair a few inches at a time. So he
pushed and pushed until the chair was beneath the bird-cage, and then
he sprang noiselessly upon the seat--for his monkey form enabled him to
jump higher than he could do as a boy--and from there to the back of
the chair, and so managed to reach the cage and take it off the peg.
Then down he sprang to the floor and made his way to the door. "Open!"
he commanded, and at once the door obeyed and swung open, But his voice
wakened Mrs. Yoop, who gave a wild cry and sprang out of bed with one
bound. The Green Monkey dashed through the doorway, carrying the cage
with him, and before the Giantess could reach the door it slammed shut
and imprisoned her in her own bed-chamber!

The noise she made, pounding upon the door, and her yells of anger and
dreadful threats of vengeance, filled all our friends with terror, and
Woot the Monkey was so excited that in the dark he could not find the
outer door of the hall. But the Tin Owl could see very nicely in the
dark, so he guided his friends to the right place and when all were
grouped before the door Woot commanded it to open. The Magic Apron
proved as powerful as when it had been worn by the Giantess, so a
moment later they had rushed through the passage and were standing in
the fresh night air outside the castle, free to go wherever they willed.




Chapter Eight

The Menace of the Forest


"Quick!" cried Polychrome the Canary; "we must hurry, or Mrs. Yoop may
find some way to recapture us, even now. Let us get out of her Valley
as soon as possible."

So they set off toward the east, moving as swiftly as they could, and
for a long time they could hear the yells and struggles of the
imprisoned Giantess. The Green Monkey could run over the ground very
swiftly, and he carried with him the bird-cage containing Polychrome
the Rain-bow's Daughter. Also the Tin Owl could skip and fly along at a
good rate of speed, his feathers rattling against one another with a
tinkling sound as he moved. But the little Brown Bear, being stuffed
with straw, was a clumsy traveler and the others had to wait for him to
follow.

However, they were not very long in reaching the ridge that led out of
Mrs. Yoop's Valley, and when they had passed this ridge and descended
into the next valley they stopped to rest, for the Green Monkey was
tired.

"I believe we are safe, now," said Polychrome, when her cage was set
down and the others had all gathered around it, "for Mrs. Yoop dares
not go outside of her own Valley, for fear of being captured by her
enemies. So we may take our time to consider what to do next."

"I'm afraid poor Mrs. Yoop will starve to death, if no one lets her out
of her bedroom," said Woot, who had a heart as kind as that of the Tin
Woodman. "We've taken her Magic Apron away, and now the doors will
never open."

"Don't worry about that," advised Polychrome. "Mrs. Yoop has plenty of
magic left to console her."

"Are you sure of that?" asked the Green Monkey.

"Yes, for I've been watching her for weeks," said the Canary. "She has
six magic hairpins, which she wears in her hair, and a magic ring which
she wears on her thumb and which is invisible to all eyes except those
of a fairy, and magic bracelets on both her ankles. So I am positive
that she will manage to find a way out of her prison."

"She might transform the door into an archway," suggested the little
Brown Bear.

"That would be easy for her," said the Tin Owl; "but I'm glad she was
too angry to think of that before we got out of her Valley."

"Well, we have escaped the big woman, to be sure," remarked the Green
Monkey, "but we still wear the awful forms the cruel yookoohoo gave us.
How are we going to get rid of these shapes, and become ourselves
again?"

None could answer that question. They sat around the cage, brooding
over the problem, until the Monkey fell asleep. Seeing this, the Canary
tucked her head under her wing and also slept, and the Tin Owl and the
Brown Bear did not disturb them until morning came and it was broad
daylight.

"I'm hungry," said Woot, when he wakened, for his knapsack of food had
been left behind at the castle.

"Then let us travel on until we can find something for you to eat,"
returned the Scarecrow Bear.

"There is no use in your lugging my cage any farther," declared the
Canary. "Let me out, and throw the cage away. Then I can fly with you
and find my own breakfast of seeds. Also I can search for water, and
tell you where to find it."

So the Green Monkey unfastened the door of the golden cage and the
Canary hopped out. At first she flew high in the air and made great
circles overhead, but after a time she returned and perched beside them.

"At the east in the direction we were following," announced the Canary,
"there is a fine forest, with a brook running through it. In the forest
there may be fruits or nuts growing, or berry bushes at its edge, so
let us go that way."

They agreed to this and promptly set off, this time moving more
deliberately. The Tin Owl, which had guided their way during the night,
now found the sunshine very trying to his big eyes, so he shut them
tight and perched upon the back of the little Brown Bear, which carried
the Owl's weight with ease. The Canary sometimes perched upon the Green
Monkey's shoulder and sometimes fluttered on ahead of the party, and in
this manner they traveled in good spirits across that valley and into
the next one to the east of it.

This they found to be an immense hollow, shaped like a saucer, and on
its farther edge appeared the forest which Polychrome had seen from the
sky.

"Come to think of it," said the Tin Owl, waking up and blinking
comically at his friends, "there's no object, now, in our traveling to
the Munchkin Country. My idea in going there was to marry Nimmie Amee,
but however much the Munchkin girl may have loved a Tin Woodman, I
cannot reasonably expect her to marry a Tin Owl."

"There is some truth in that, my friend," remarked the Brown Bear. "And
to think that I, who was considered the handsomest Scarecrow in the
world, am now condemned to be a scrubby, no-account beast, whose only
redeeming feature is that he is stuffed with straw!"

"Consider my case, please," said Woot. "The cruel Giantess has made a
Monkey of a Boy, and that is the most dreadful deed of all!"

"Your color is rather pretty," said the Brown Bear, eyeing Woot
critically. "I have never seen a pea-green monkey before, and it
strikes me you are quite gorgeous."

"It isn't so bad to be a bird," asserted the Canary, fluttering from
one to another with a free and graceful motion, "but I long to enjoy my
own shape again."

"As Polychrome, you were the loveliest maiden I have ever seen--except,
of course, Ozma," said the Tin Owl; "so the Giantess did well to
transform you into the loveliest of all birds, if you were to be
transformed at all. But tell me, since you are a fairy, and have a
fairy wisdom: do you think we shall be able to break these
enchantments?"

"Queer things happen in the Land of Oz," replied the Canary, again
perching on the Green Monkey's shoulder and turning one bright eye
thoughtfully toward her questioner. "Mrs. Yoop has declared that none
of her transformations can ever be changed, even by herself, but I
believe that if we could get to Glinda the Good Sorceress, she might
find a way to restore us to our natural shapes. Glinda, as you know, is
the most powerful Sorceress in the world, and there are few things she
cannot do if she tries."

"In that case," said the Little Brown Bear, "let us return southward
and try to get to Glinda's castle. It lies in the Quadling Country, you
know, so it is a good way from here."

"First, however, let us visit the forest and search for something to
eat," pleaded Woot. So they continued on to the edge of the forest,
which consisted of many tall and beautiful trees. They discovered no
fruit trees, at first, so the Green Monkey pushed on into the forest
depths and the others followed close behind him.

They were traveling quietly along, under the shade of the trees, when
suddenly an enormous jaguar leaped upon them from a limb and with one
blow of his paw sent the little Brown Bear tumbling over and over until
he was stopped by a tree-trunk. Instantly they all took alarm. The Tin
Owl shrieked: "Hoot--hoot!" and flew straight up to the branch of a
tall tree, although he could scarcely see where he was going. The
Canary swiftly darted to a place beside the Owl, and the Green Monkey
sprang up, caught a limb, and soon scrambled to a high perch of safety.

The Jaguar crouched low and with hungry eyes regarded the little Brown
Bear, which slowly got upon its feet and asked reproachfully:

"For goodness' sake, Beast, what were you trying to do?"

"Trying to get my breakfast," answered the Jaguar with a snarl, "and I
believe I've succeeded. You ought to make a delicious meal--unless you
happen to be old and tough."

"I'm worse than that, considered as a breakfast," said the Bear, "for
I'm only a skin stuffed with straw, and therefore not fit to eat."

"Indeed!" cried the Jaguar, in a disappointed voice; "then you must be
a magic Bear, or enchanted, and I must seek my breakfast from among
your companions."

With this he raised his lean head to look up at the Tin Owl and the
Canary and the Monkey, and he lashed his tail upon the ground and
growled as fiercely as any jaguar could.

"My friends are enchanted, also," said the little Brown Bear.

"All of them?" asked the Jaguar.

"Yes. The Owl is tin, so you couldn't possibly eat him. The Canary is a
fairy--Polychrome, the Daughter of the Rainbow--and you never could
catch her because she can easily fly out of your reach."

"There still remains the Green Monkey," remarked the Jaguar hungrily.
"He is neither made of tin nor stuffed with straw, nor can he fly. I'm
pretty good at climbing trees, myself, so I think I'll capture the
Monkey and eat him for my breakfast."

Woot the Monkey, hearing this speech from his perch on the tree, became
much frightened, for he knew the nature of jaguars and realized they
could climb trees and leap from limb to limb with the agility of cats.
So he at once began to scamper through the forest as fast as he could
go, catching at a branch with his long monkey arms and swinging his
green body through space to grasp another branch in a neighboring tree,
and so on, while the Jaguar followed him from below, his eyes fixed
steadfastly on his prey. But presently Woot got his feet tangled in the
Lace Apron, which he was still wearing, and that tripped him in his
flight and made him fall to the ground, where the Jaguar placed one
huge paw upon him and said grimly:

"I've got you, now!"

The fact that the Apron had tripped him made Woot remember its magic
powers, and in his terror he cried out: "Open!" without stopping to
consider how this command might save him. But, at the word, the earth
opened at the exact spot where he lay under the Jaguar's paw, and his
body sank downward, the earth closing over it again. The last thing
Woot the Monkey saw, as he glanced upward, was the Jaguar peering into
the hole in astonishment.

"He's gone!" cried the beast, with a long-drawn sigh of disappointment;
"he's gone, and now I shall have no breakfast."

The clatter of the Tin Owl's wings sounded above him, and the little
Brown Bear came trotting up and asked:

"Where is the monkey? Have you eaten him so quickly?"

"No, indeed," answered the Jaguar. "He disappeared into the earth
before I could take one bite of him!"

And now the Canary perched upon a stump, a little way from the forest
beast, and said:

"I am glad our friend has escaped you; but, as it is natural for a
hungry beast to wish his breakfast, I will try to give you one."

"Thank you," replied the Jaguar. "You're rather small for a full meal,
but it's kind of you to sacrifice yourself to my appetite."

"Oh, I don't intend to be eaten, I assure you," said the Canary, "but
as I am a fairy I know something of magic, and though I am now
transformed into a bird's shape, I am sure I can conjure up a breakfast
that will satisfy you."

"If you can work magic, why don't you break the enchantment you are
under and return to your proper form?" inquired the beast doubtingly.

"I haven't the power to do that," answered the Canary, "for Mrs. Yoop,
the Giantess who transformed me, used a peculiar form of yookoohoo
magic that is unknown to me. However, she could not deprive me of my
own fairy knowledge, so I will try to get you a breakfast."

"Do you think a magic breakfast would taste good, or relieve the pangs
of hunger I now suffer?" asked the Jaguar.

"I am sure it would. What would you like to eat?"

"Give me a couple of fat rabbits," said the beast.

"Rabbits! No, indeed. I'd not allow you to eat the dear little things,"
declared Polychrome the Canary.

"Well, three or four squirrels, then," pleaded the Jaguar.

"Do you think me so cruel?" demanded the Canary, indignantly. "The
squirrels are my especial friends."

"How about a plump owl?" asked the beast. "Not a tin one, you know, but
a real meat owl."

"Neither beast nor bird shall you have," said Polychrome in a positive
voice.

"Give me a fish, then; there's a river a little way off," proposed the
Jaguar.

"No living thing shall be sacrificed to feed you," returned the Canary.

"Then what in the world do you expect me to eat?" said the Jaguar in a
scornful tone.

"How  would  mush-and-milk  do?"  asked  the Canary.

The Jaguar snarled in derision and lashed his tail against the ground
angrily.

"Give him some scrambled eggs on toast, Poly," suggested the Bear
Scarecrow. "He ought to like that."

"I will," responded the Canary, and fluttering her wings she made a
flight of three circles around the stump. Then she flew up to a tree
and the Bear and the Owl and the Jaguar saw that upon the stump had
appeared a great green leaf upon which was a large portion of scrambled
eggs on toast, smoking hot.

"There!" said the Bear; "eat your breakfast, friend Jaguar, and be
content."

The Jaguar crept closer to the stump and sniffed the fragrance of the
scrambled eggs. They smelled so good that he tasted them, and they
tasted so good that he ate the strange meal in a hurry, proving he had
been really hungry.

"I prefer rabbits," he muttered, licking his chops, "but I must admit
the magic breakfast has filled my stomach full, and brought me comfort.
So I'm much obliged for the kindness, little Fairy, and I'll now leave
you in peace."

Saying this, he plunged into the thick underbrush and soon disappeared,
although they could hear his great body crashing through the bushes
until he was far distant.

"That was a good way to get rid of the savage beast, Poly," said the
Tin Woodman to the Canary; "but I'm surprised that you didn't give our
friend Woot a magic breakfast, when you knew he was hungry."

"The reason for that," answered Polychrome, "was that my mind was so
intent on other things that I quite forgot my power to produce food by
magic. But where is the monkey boy?"

"Gone!" said the Scarecrow Bear, solemnly. "The earth has swallowed him
up."




Chapter Nine

The Quarrelsome Dragons


The Green Monkey sank gently into the earth for a little way and then
tumbled swiftly through space, landing on a rocky floor with a thump
that astonished him. Then he sat up, found that no bones were broken,
and gazed around him.

He seemed to be in a big underground cave, which was dimly lighted by
dozens of big round discs that looked like moons. They were not moons,
however, as Woot discovered when he had examined the place more
carefully. They were eyes. The eyes were in the heads of enormous
beasts whose bodies trailed far behind them. Each beast was bigger than
an elephant, and three times as long, and there were a dozen or more of
the creatures scattered here and there about the cavern. On their
bodies were big scales, as round as pie-plates, which were beautifully
tinted in shades of green, purple and orange. On the ends of their long
tails were clusters of jewels. Around the great, moon-like eyes were
circles of diamonds which sparkled in the subdued light that glowed
from the eyes.

Woot saw that the creatures had wide mouths and rows of terrible teeth
and, from tales he had heard of such beings, he knew he had fallen into
a cavern inhabited by the great Dragons that had been driven from the
surface of the earth and were only allowed to come out once in a
hundred years to search for food. Of course he had never seen Dragons
before, yet there was no mistaking them, for they were unlike any other
living creatures.

Woot sat upon the floor where he had fallen, staring around, and the
owners of the big eyes returned his look, silently and motionless.
Finally one of the Dragons which was farthest away from him asked, in a
deep, grave voice:

"What was that?"

And the greatest Dragon of all, who was just in front of the Green
Monkey, answered in a still deeper voice:

"It is some foolish animal from Outside."

"Is it good to eat?" inquired a smaller Dragon beside the great one.
"I'm hungry."

"Hungry!" exclaimed all the Dragons, in a reproachful chorus; and then
the great one said chidingly: "Tut-tut, my son! You've no reason to be
hungry at this time."

"Why not?" asked the little Dragon. "I haven't eaten anything in eleven
years."

"Eleven years is nothing," remarked another Dragon, sleepily opening
and closing his eyes; "I haven't feasted for eighty-seven years, and I
dare not get hungry for a dozen or so years to come. Children who eat
between meals should be broken of the habit."

"All I had, eleven years ago, was a rhinoceros, and that's not a full
meal at all," grumbled the young one. "And, before that, I had waited
sixty-two years to be fed; so it's no wonder I'm hungry."

"How old are you now?" asked Woot, forgetting his own dangerous
position in his interest in the conversation.

"Why, I'm--I'm--How old am I, Father?" asked the little Dragon.

"Goodness gracious! what a child to ask questions. Do you want to keep
me thinking all the time? Don't you know that thinking is very bad for
Dragons?" returned the big one, impatiently.

"How old am I, Father?" persisted the small Dragon.

"About six hundred and thirty, I believe. Ask your mother."

"No; don't!" said an old Dragon in the background; "haven't I enough
worries, what with being wakened in the middle of a nap, without being
obliged to keep track of my children's ages?"

"You've been fast asleep for over sixty years, Mother," said the child
Dragon. "How long a nap do you wish?"

"I should have slept forty years longer. And this strange little green
beast should be punished for falling into our cavern and disturbing us."

"I didn't know you were here, and I didn't know I was going to fall
in," explained Woot.

"Nevertheless, here you are," said the great Dragon, "and you have
carelessly wakened our entire tribe; so it stands to reason you must be
punished."

"In what way?" inquired the Green Monkey, trembling a little.

"Give me time and I'll think of a way. You're in no hurry, are you?"
asked the great Dragon.

"No, indeed," cried Woot. "Take your time. I'd much rather you'd all go
to sleep again, and punish me when you wake up in a hundred years or
so."

"Let me eat him!" pleaded the littlest Dragon.

"He is too small," said the father. "To eat this one Green Monkey would
only serve to make you hungry for more, and there are no more."

"Quit this chatter and let me get to sleep," protested another Dragon,
yawning in a fearful manner, for when he opened his mouth a sheet of
flame leaped forth from it and made Woot jump back to get out of its
way.

In his jump he bumped against the nose of a Dragon behind him, which
opened its mouth to growl and shot another sheet of flame at him. The
flame was bright, but not very hot, yet Woot screamed with terror and
sprang forward with a great bound. This time he landed on the paw of
the great Chief Dragon, who angrily raised his other front paw and
struck the Green Monkey a fierce blow. Woot went sailing through the
air and fell sprawling upon the rocky floor far beyond the place where
the Dragon Tribe was grouped.

All the great beasts were now thoroughly wakened and aroused, and they
blamed the monkey for disturbing their quiet. The littlest Dragon
darted after Woot and the others turned their unwieldy bodies in his
direction and followed, flashing from their eyes and mouths flames
which lighted up the entire cavern. Woot almost gave himself up for
lost, at that moment, but he scrambled to his feet and dashed away to
the farthest end of the cave, the Dragons following more leisurely
because they were too clumsy to move fast. Perhaps they thought there
was no need of haste, as the monkey could not escape from the cave.
But, away up at the end of the place, the cavern floor was heaped with
tumbled rocks, so Woot, with an agility born of fear, climbed from rock
to rock until he found himself crouched against the cavern roof. There
he waited, for he could go no farther, while on over the tumbled rocks
slowly crept the Dragons--the littlest one coming first because he was
hungry as well as angry.

The beasts had almost reached him when Woot, remembering his lace
apron--now sadly torn and soiled--recovered his wits and shouted:
"Open!" At the cry a hole appeared in the roof of the cavern, just over
his head, and through it the sunlight streamed full upon the Green
Monkey.

The Dragons paused, astonished at the magic and blinking at the
sunlight, and this gave Woot time to climb through the opening. As soon
as he reached the surface of the earth the hole closed again, and the
boy monkey realized, with a thrill of joy, that he had seen the last of
the dangerous Dragon family.

He sat upon the ground, still panting hard from his exertions, when the
bushes before him parted and his former enemy, the Jaguar, appeared.

"Don't run," said the woodland beast, as Woot sprang up; "you are
perfectly safe, so far as I am concerned, for since you so mysteriously
disappeared I have had my breakfast. I am now on my way home to sleep
the rest of the day."

"Oh, indeed!" returned the Green Monkey, in a tone both sorry and
startled. "Which of my friends did you manage to eat?"

"None of them," returned the Jaguar, with a sly grin "I had a dish of
magic scrambled eggs--on toast--and it wasn't a bad feast, at all.
There isn't room in me for even you, and I don't regret it because I
judge, from your green color, that you are not ripe, and would make an
indifferent meal. We jaguars have to be careful of our digestions.
Farewell, Friend Monkey. Follow the path I made through the bushes and
you will find your friends."

With this the Jaguar marched on his way and Woot took his advice and
followed the trail he had made until he came to the place where the
little Brown Bear, and the Tin Owl, and the Canary were conferring
together and wondering what had become of their comrade, the Green
Monkey.




Chapter Ten

Tommy Kwikstep


"Our best plan," said the Scarecrow Bear, when the Green Monkey had
related the story of his adventure with the Dragons, "is to get out of
this Gillikin Country as soon as we can and try to find our way to the
castle of Glinda, the Good Sorceress. There are too many dangers
lurking here to suit me, and Glinda may be able to restore us to our
proper forms."

"If we turn south now," the Tin Owl replied, "we might go straight into
the Emerald City. That's a place I wish to avoid, for I'd hate to have
my friends see me in this sad plight," and he blinked his eyes and
fluttered his tin wings mournfully.

"But I am certain we have passed beyond Emerald City," the Canary
assured him, sailing lightly around their heads. "So, should we turn
south from here, we would pass into the Munchkin Country, and
continuing south we would reach the Quadling Country where Glinda's
castle is located."

"Well, since you're sure of that, let's start right away," proposed the
Bear. "It's a long journey, at the best, and I'm getting tired of
walking on four legs."

"I thought you never tired, being stuffed with straw," said Woot.

"I mean that it annoys me, to be obliged to go on all fours, when two
legs are my proper walking equipment," replied the Scarecrow. "I
consider it beneath my dignity. In other words, my remarkable brains
can tire, through humiliation, although my body cannot tire."

"That is one of the penalties of having brains," remarked the Tin Owl
with a sigh. "I have had no brains since I was a man of meat, and so I
never worry. Nevertheless, I prefer my former manly form to this owl's
shape and would be glad to break Mrs. Yoop's enchantment as soon as
possible. I am so noisy, just now, that I disturb myself," and he
fluttered his wings with a clatter that echoed throughout the forest.

So, being all of one mind, they turned southward, traveling steadily on
until the woods were left behind and the landscape turned from purple
tints to blue tints, which assured them they had entered the Country of
the Munchkins.

"Now I feel myself more safe," said the Scarecrow Bear. "I know this
country pretty well, having been made here by a Munchkin farmer and
having wandered over these lovely blue lands many times. Seems to me,
indeed, that I even remember that group of three tall trees ahead of
us; and, if I do, we are not far from the home of my friend Jinjur."

"Who is Jinjur?" asked Woot, the Green Monkey.

"Haven't you heard of Jinjur?" exclaimed the Scarecrow, in surprise.

"No," said Woot. "Is Jinjur a man, a woman, a beast or a bird?"

"Jinjur is a girl," explained the Scarecrow Bear. "She's a fine girl,
too, although a bit restless and liable to get excited. Once, a long
time ago, she raised an army of girls and called herself 'General
Jinjur.' With her army she captured the Emerald City, and drove me out
of it, because I insisted that an army in Oz was highly improper. But
Ozma punished the rash girl, and afterward Jinjur and I became fast
friends. Now Jinjur lives peacefully on a farm, near here, and raises
fields of cream-puffs, chocolate-caramels and macaroons. They say she's
a pretty good farmer, and in addition to that she's an artist, and
paints pictures so perfect that one can scarcely tell them from nature.
She often repaints my face for me, when it gets worn or mussy, and the
lovely expression I wore when the Giantess transformed me was painted
by Jinjur only a month or so ago."

"It was certainly a pleasant expression," agreed Woot.

"Jinjur can paint anything," continued the Scarecrow Bear, with
enthusiasm, as they walked along together. "Once, when I came to her
house, my straw was old and crumpled, so that my body sagged
dreadfully. I needed new straw to replace the old, but Jinjur had no
straw on all her ranch and I was really unable to travel farther until
I had been restuffed. When I explained this to Jinjur, the girl at once
painted a straw-stack which was so natural that I went to it and
secured enough straw to fill all my body. It was a good quality of
straw, too, and lasted me a long time."

This seemed very wonderful to Woot, who knew that such a thing could
never happen in any place but a fairy country like Oz.

The Munchkin Country was much nicer than the Gillikin Country, and all
the fields were separated by blue fences, with grassy lanes and paths
of blue ground, and the land seemed well cultivated. They were on a
little hill looking down upon this favored country, but had not quite
reached the settled parts, when on turning a bend in the path they were
halted by a form that barred their way.

A more curious creature they had seldom seen, even in the Land of Oz,
where curious creatures abound. It had the head of a young
man--evidently a Munchkin--with a pleasant face and hair neatly combed.
But the body was very long, for it had twenty legs--ten legs on each
side--and this caused the body to stretch out and lie in a horizontal
position, so that all the legs could touch the ground and stand firm.
From the shoulders extended two small arms; at least, they seemed small
beside so many legs.

This odd creature was dressed in the regulation clothing of the
Munchkin people, a dark blue coat neatly fitting the long body and each
pair of legs having a pair of sky-blue trousers, with blue-tinted
stockings and blue leather shoes turned up at the pointed toes.

"I wonder who you are?" said Polychrome the Canary, fluttering above
the strange creature, who had probably been asleep on the path.

"I sometimes wonder, myself, who I am," replied the many-legged young
man; "but, in reality, I am Tommy Kwikstep, and I live in a hollow tree
that fell to the ground with age. I have polished the inside of it, and
made a door at each end, and that's a very comfortable residence for me
because it just fits my shape."

"How did you happen to have such a shape?" asked the Scarecrow Bear,
sitting on his haunches and regarding Tommy Kwikstep with a serious
look. "Is the shape natural?"

"No; it was wished on me," replied Tommy, with a sigh. "I used to be
very active and loved to run errands for anyone who needed my services.
That was how I got my name of Tommy Kwikstep. I could run an errand
more quickly than any other boy, and so I was very proud of myself. One
day, however, I met an old lady who was a fairy, or a witch, or
something of the sort, and she said if I would run an errand for
her--to carry some magic medicine to another old woman--she would grant
me just one Wish, whatever the Wish happened to be. Of course I
consented and, taking the medicine, I hurried away. It was a long
distance, mostly up hill, and my legs began to grow weary. Without
thinking what I was doing I said aloud: 'Dear me; I wish I had twenty
legs!' and in an instant I became the unusual creature you see beside
you. Twenty legs! Twenty on one man! You may count them, if you doubt
my word."

"You've got 'em, all right," said Woot the Monkey, who had already
counted them.

"After I had delivered the magic medicine to the old woman, I returned
and tried to find the witch, or fairy, or whatever she was, who had
given me the unlucky wish, so she could take it away again. I've been
searching for her ever since, but never can I find her," continued poor
Tommy Kwikstep, sadly.

"I suppose," said the Tin Owl, blinking at him, "you can travel very
fast, with those twenty legs."

"At first I was able to," was the reply; "but I traveled so much,
searching for the fairy, or witch, or whatever she was, that I soon got
corns on my toes. Now, a corn on one toe is not so bad, but when you
have a hundred toes--as I have--and get corns on most of them, it is
far from pleasant. Instead of running, I now painfully crawl, and
although I try not to be discouraged I do hope I shall find that witch
or fairy, or whatever she was, before long."

"I hope so, too," said the Scarecrow. "But, after all, you have the
pleasure of knowing you are unusual, and therefore remarkable among the
people of Oz. To be just like other persons is small credit to one,
while to be unlike others is a mark of distinction."

"That sounds very pretty," returned Tommy Kwikstep, "but if you had to
put on ten pair of trousers every morning, and tie up twenty shoes, you
would prefer not to be so distinguished."

"Was the witch, or fairy, or whatever she was, an old person, with
wrinkled skin and half her teeth gone?" inquired the Tin Owl.

"No," said Tommy Kwikstep.

"Then she wasn't Old Mombi," remarked the transformed Emperor.

"I'm not interested in who it wasn't, so much as I am in who it was,"
said the twenty-legged young man. "And, whatever or whomsoever she was,
she has managed to keep out of my way."

"If you found her, do you suppose she'd change you back into a
two-legged boy?" asked Woot.

"Perhaps so, if I could run another errand for her and so earn another
wish."

"Would you really like to be as you were before?" asked Polychrome the
Canary, perching upon the Green Monkey's shoulder to observe Tommy
Kwikstep more attentively.

"I would, indeed," was the earnest reply.

"Then I will see what I can do for you," promised the Rainbow's
Daughter, and flying to the ground she took a small twig in her bill
and with it made several mystic figures on each side of Tommy Kwikstep.

"Are you a witch, or fairy, or something of the sort?" he asked as he
watched her wonderingly.

The Canary made no answer, for she was busy, but the Scarecrow Bear
replied: "Yes; she's something of the sort, and a bird of a magician."

The twenty-legged boy's transformation happened so queerly that they
were all surprised at its method. First, Tommy Kwikstep's last two legs
disappeared; then the next two, and the next, and as each pair of legs
vanished his body shortened. All this while Polychrome was running
around him and chirping mystical words, and when all the young man's
legs had disappeared but two he noticed that the Canary was still busy
and cried out in alarm:

"Stop--stop! Leave me two of my legs, or I shall be worse off than
before."

"I know," said the Canary. "I'm only removing with my magic the corns
from your last ten toes."

"Thank you for being so thoughtful," he said gratefully, and now they
noticed that Tommy Kwikstep was quite a nice looking young fellow.

"What will you do now?" asked Woot the Monkey.

"First," he answered, "I must deliver a note which I've carried in my
pocket ever since the witch, or fairy, or whatever she was, granted my
foolish wish. And I am resolved never to speak again without taking
time to think carefully on what I am going to say, for I realize that
speech without thought is dangerous. And after I've delivered the note,
I shall run errands again for anyone who needs my services."

So he thanked Polychrome again and started away in a different
direction from their own, and that was the last they saw of Tommy
Kwikstep.




Chapter Eleven

Jinjur's Ranch


As they followed a path down the blue-grass hillside, the first house
that met the view of the travelers was joyously recognized by the
Scarecrow Bear as the one inhabited by his friend Jinjur, so they
increased their speed and hurried toward it.

On reaching the place, how ever, they found the house deserted. The
front door stood open, but no one was inside. In the garden surrounding
the house were neat rows of bushes bearing cream-puffs and macaroons,
some of which were still green, but others ripe and ready to eat.
Farther back were fields of caramels, and all the land seemed well
cultivated and carefully tended. They looked through the fields for the
girl farmer, but she was nowhere to be seen.

"Well," finally remarked the little Brown Bear, "let us go into the
house and make ourselves at home. That will be sure to please my friend
Jinjur, who happens to be away from home just now. When she returns,
she will be greatly surprised."

"Would she care if I ate some of those ripe cream-puffs?" asked the
Green Monkey.

"No, indeed; Jinjur is very generous. Help yourself to all you want,"
said the Scarecrow Bear.

So Woot gathered a lot of the cream-puffs that were golden yellow and
filled with a sweet, creamy substance, and ate until his hunger was
satisfied. Then he entered the house with his friends and sat in a
rocking-chair--just as he was accustomed to do when a boy. The Canary
perched herself upon the mantel and daintily plumed her feathers; the
Tin Owl sat on the back of another chair; the Scarecrow squatted on his
hairy haunches in the middle of the room.

"I believe I remember the girl Jinjur," remarked the Canary, in her
sweet voice. "She cannot help us very much, except to direct us on our
way to Glinda's castle, for she does not understand magic. But she's a
good girl, honest and sensible, and I'll be glad to see her."

"All our troubles," said the Owl with a deep sigh, "arose from my
foolish resolve to seek Nimmie Amee and make her Empress of the
Winkies, and while I wish to reproach no one, I must say that it was
Woot the Wanderer who put the notion into my head."

"Well, for my part, I am glad he did," responded the Canary. "Your
journey resulted in saving me from the Giantess, and had you not
traveled to the Yoop Valley, I would still be Mrs. Yoop's prisoner. It
is much nicer to be free, even though I still bear the enchanted form
of a Canary-Bird."

"Do you think we shall ever be able to get our proper forms back
again?" asked the Green Monkey earnestly.

Polychrome did not make reply at once to this important question, but
after a period of thoughtfulness she said:

"I have been taught to believe that there is an antidote for every
magic charm, yet Mrs. Yoop insists that no power can alter her
transformations. I realize that my own fairy magic cannot do it,
although I have thought that we Sky Fairies have more power than is
accorded to Earth Fairies. The yookoohoo magic is admitted to be very
strange in its workings and different from the magic usually practiced,
but perhaps Glinda or Ozma may understand it better than I. In them
lies our only hope. Unless they can help us, we must remain forever as
we are."

"A Canary-Bird on a Rainbow wouldn't be so bad," asserted the Tin Owl,
winking and blinking with his round tin eyes, "so if you can manage to
find your Rainbow again you need have little to worry about."

"That's nonsense, Friend Chopper," exclaimed Woot. "I know just how
Polychrome feels. A beautiful girl is much superior to a little yellow
bird, and a boy--such as I was--far better than a Green Monkey. Neither
of us can be happy again unless we recover our rightful forms."

"I feel the same way," announced the stuffed Bear. "What do you suppose
my friend the Patchwork Girl would think of me, if she saw me wearing
this beastly shape?"

"She'd laugh till she cried," admitted the Tin Owl. "For my part, I'll
have to give up the notion of marrying Nimmie Amee, but I'll try not to
let that make me unhappy. If it's my duty, I'd like to do my duty, but
if magic prevents my getting married I'll flutter along all by myself
and be just as contented."

Their serious misfortunes made them all silent for a time, and as their
thoughts were busy in dwelling upon the evils with which fate had
burdened them, none noticed that Jinjur had suddenly appeared in the
doorway and was looking at them in astonishment. The next moment her
astonishment changed to anger, for there, in her best rocking-chair,
sat a Green Monkey. A great shiny Owl perched upon another chair and a
Brown Bear squatted upon her parlor rug. Jinjur did not notice the
Canary, but she caught up a broomstick and dashed into the room,
shouting as she came:

"Get out of here, you wild creatures!  How dare you enter my house?"

With a blow of her broom she knocked the Brown Bear over, and the Tin
Owl tried to fly out of her reach and made a great clatter with his tin
wings. The Green Monkey was so startled by the sudden attack that he
sprang into the fireplace--where there was fortunately no fire--and
tried to escape by climbing up the chimney. But he found the opening
too small, and so was forced to drop down again. Then he crouched
trembling in the fireplace, his pretty green hair all blackened with
soot and covered with ashes. From this position Woot watched to see
what would happen next.

"Stop, Jinjur--stop!" cried the Brown Bear, when the broom again
threatened him. "Don't you know me? I'm your old friend the Scarecrow?"

"You're trying to deceive me, you naughty beast! I can see plainly that
you are a bear, and a mighty poor specimen of a bear, too," retorted
the girl.

"That's because I'm not properly stuffed," he assured her. "When Mrs.
Yoop transformed me, she didn't realize I should have more stuffing."

"Who is Mrs. Yoop?" inquired Jinjur, pausing with the broom still
upraised.

"A Giantess in the Gillikin Country."

"Oh; I begin to understand. And Mrs. Yoop transformed you? You are
really the famous Scarecrow of Oz."

"I was, Jinjur. Just now I'm as you see me--a miserable little Brown
Bear with a poor quality of stuffing. That Tin Owl is none other than
our dear Tin Woodman--Nick Chopper, the Emperor of the Winkies--while
this Green Monkey is a nice little boy we recently became acquainted
with, Woot the Wanderer."

"And I," said the Canary, flying close to Jinjur, "am Polychrome, the
Daughter of the Rainbow, in the form of a bird."

"Goodness me!" cried Jinjur, amazed; "that Giantess must be a powerful
Sorceress, and as wicked as she is powerful."

"She's a yookoohoo," said Polychrome. "Fortunately, we managed to
escape from her castle, and we are now on our way to Glinda the Good to
see if she possesses the power to restore us to our former shapes."

"Then I must beg your pardons; all of you must forgive me," said
Jinjur, putting away the broom. "I took you to be a lot of wild,
unmannerly animals, as was quite natural. You are very welcome to my
home and I'm sorry I haven't the power to help you out of your
troubles. Please use my house and all that I have, as if it were your
own."

At this declaration of peace, the Bear got upon his feet and the Owl
resumed his perch upon the chair and the Monkey crept out of the
fireplace. Jinjur looked at Woot critically, and scowled.

"For a Green Monkey," said she, "you're the blackest creature I ever
saw. And you'll get my nice clean room all dirty with soot and ashes.
Whatever possessed you to jump up the chimney?"

"I--I was scared," explained Woot, somewhat ashamed.

"Well, you need renovating, and that's what will happen to you, right
away. Come with me!" she commanded.

"What are you going to do?" asked Woot.

"Give you a good scrubbing," said Jinjur.

Now, neither boys nor monkeys relish being scrubbed, so Woot shrank
away from the energetic girl, trembling fearfully. But Jinjur grabbed
him by his paw and dragged him out to the back yard, where, in spite of
his whines and struggles, she plunged him into a tub of cold water and
began to scrub him with a stiff brush and a cake of yellow soap.

This was the hardest trial that Woot had endured since he became a
monkey, but no protest had any influence with Jinjur, who lathered and
scrubbed him in a business-like manner and afterward dried him with a
coarse towel.

The Bear and the Owl gravely watched this operation and nodded approval
when Woot's silky green fur shone clear and bright in the afternoon
sun. The Canary seemed much amused and laughed a silvery ripple of
laughter as she said:

"Very well done, my good Jinjur; I admire your energy and judgment. But
I had no idea a monkey could look so comical as this monkey did while
he was being bathed."

"I'm not a monkey!" declared Woot, resentfully; "I'm just a boy in a
monkey's shape, that's all."

"If you can explain to me the difference," said Jinjur, "I'll agree not
to wash you again--that is, unless you foolishly get into the
fireplace. All persons are usually judged by the shapes in which they
appear to the eyes of others. Look at me, Woot; what am I?"

Woot looked at her.

"You're as pretty a girl as I've ever seen," he replied.

Jinjur frowned. That is, she tried hard to frown.

"Come out into the garden with me," she said, "and I'll give you some
of the most delicious caramels you ever ate. They're a new variety,
that no one can grow but me, and they have a heliotrope flavor."




Chapter Twelve

Ozma and Dorothy


In her magnificent palace in the Emerald City, the beautiful girl Ruler
of all the wonderful Land of Oz sat in her dainty boudoir with her
friend Princess Dorothy beside her. Ozma was studying a roll of
manuscript which she had taken from the Royal Library, while Dorothy
worked at her embroidery and at times stooped to pat a shaggy little
black dog that lay at her feet. The little dog's name was Toto, and he
was Dorothy's faithful companion.

To judge Ozma of Oz by the standards of our world, you would think her
very young--perhaps fourteen or fifteen years of age--yet for years she
had ruled the Land of Oz and had never seemed a bit older. Dorothy
appeared much younger than Ozma. She had been a little girl when first
she came to the Land of Oz, and she was a little girl still, and would
never seem to be a day older while she lived in this wonderful
fairyland.

Oz was not always a fairyland, I am told. Once it was much like other
lands, except it was shut in by a dreadful desert of sandy wastes that
lay all around it, thus preventing its people from all contact with the
rest of the world. Seeing this isolation, the fairy band of Queen
Lurline, passing over Oz while on a journey, enchanted the country and
so made it a Fairyland. And Queen Lurline left one of her fairies to
rule this enchanted Land of Oz, and then passed on and forgot all about
it.

From that moment no one in Oz ever died. Those who were old remained
old; those who were young and strong did not change as years passed
them by; the children remained children always, and played and romped
to their hearts' content, while all the babies lived in their cradles
and were tenderly cared for and never grew up. So people in Oz stopped
counting how old they were in years, for years made no difference in
their appearance and could not alter their station. They did not get
sick, so there were no doctors among them. Accidents might happen to
some, on rare occasions, it is true, and while no one could die
naturally, as other people do, it was possible that one might be
totally destroyed. Such incidents, however, were very unusual, and so
seldom was there anything to worry over that the Oz people were as
happy and contented as can be.

Another strange thing about this fairy Land of Oz was that whoever
managed to enter it from the outside world came under the magic spell
of the place and did not change in appearance as long as they lived
there. So Dorothy, who now lived with Ozma, seemed just the same sweet
little girl she had been when first she came to this delightful
fairyland.

Perhaps all parts of Oz might not be called truly delightful, but it
was surely delightful in the neighborhood of the Emerald City, where
Ozma reigned. Her loving influence was felt for many miles around, but
there were places in the mountains of the Gillikin Country, and the
forests of the Quadling Country, and perhaps in far-away parts of the
Munchkin and Winkie Countries, where the inhabitants were somewhat rude
and uncivilized and had not yet come under the spell of Ozma's wise and
kindly rule. Also, when Oz first became a fairyland, it harbored
several witches and magicians and sorcerers and necromancers, who were
scattered in various parts, but most of these had been deprived of
their magic powers, and Ozma had issued a royal edict forbidding anyone
in her dominions to work magic except Glinda the Good and the Wizard of
Oz. Ozma herself, being a real fairy, knew a lot of magic, but she only
used it to benefit her subjects.

This little explanation will help you to understand better the story
you are reaching, but most of it is already known to those who are
familiar with the Oz people whose adventures they have followed in
other Oz books.

Ozma and Dorothy were fast friends and were much together. Everyone in
Oz loved Dorothy almost as well as they did their lovely Ruler, for the
little Kansas girl's good fortune had not spoiled her or rendered her
at all vain. She was just the same brave and true and adventurous child
as before she lived in a royal palace and became the chum of the fairy
Ozma.

In the room in which the two sat--which was one of Ozma's private suite
of apartments--hung the famous Magic Picture. This was the source of
constant interest to little Dorothy. One had but to stand before it and
wish to see what any person was doing, and at once a scene would flash
upon the magic canvas which showed exactly where that person was, and
like our own moving pictures would reproduce the actions of that person
as long as you cared to watch them. So today, when Dorothy tired of her
embroidery, she drew the curtains from before the Magic Picture and
wished to see what her friend Button Bright was doing. Button Bright,
she saw, was playing ball with Ojo, the Munchkin boy, so Dorothy next
wished to see what her Aunt Em was doing. The picture showed Aunt Em
quietly engaged in darning socks for Uncle Henry, so Dorothy wished to
see what her old friend the Tin Woodman was doing.

The Tin Woodman was then just leaving his tin castle in the company of
the Scarecrow and Woot the Wanderer. Dorothy had never seen this boy
before, so she wondered who he was. Also she was curious to know where
the three were going, for she noticed Woot's knapsack and guessed they
had started on a long journey. She asked Ozma about it, but Ozma did
not know.

That afternoon Dorothy again saw the travelers in the Magic Picture,
but they were merely tramping through the country and Dorothy was not
much interested in them. A couple of days later, however, the girl,
being again with Ozma, wished to see her friends, the Scarecrow and the
Tin Woodman in the Magic Picture, and on this occasion found them in
the great castle of Mrs. Yoop, the Giantess, who was at the time about
to transform them. Both Dorothy and Ozma now became greatly interested
and watched the transformations with indignation and horror.

"What a wicked Giantess!" exclaimed Dorothy.

"Yes," answered Ozma, "she must be punished for this cruelty to our
friends, and to the poor boy who is with them."

After this they followed the adventure of the little Brown Bear and the
Tin Owl and the Green Monkey with breathless interest, and were
delighted when they escaped from Mrs. Yoop. They did not know, then,
who the Canary was, but realized it must be the transformation of some
person of consequence, whom the Giantess had also enchanted.

When, finally, the day came when the adventurers headed south into the
Munchkin Country, Dorothy asked anxiously:

"Can't something be done for them, Ozma? Can't you change 'em back into
their own shapes? They've suffered enough from these dreadful
transformations, seems to me."

"I've been studying ways to help them, ever since they were
transformed," replied Ozma. "Mrs. Yoop is now the only yookoohoo in my
dominions, and the yookoohoo magic is very peculiar and hard for others
to understand, yet I am resolved to make the attempt to break these
enchantments. I may not succeed, but I shall do the best I can. From
the directions our friends are taking, I believe they are going to pass
by Jinjur's Ranch, so if we start now we may meet them there. Would you
like to go with me, Dorothy?"

"Of course," answered the little girl; "I wouldn't miss it for
anything."

"Then order the Red Wagon," said Ozma of Oz, "and we will start at
once."

Dorothy ran to do as she was bid, while Ozma went to her Magic Room to
make ready the things she believed she would need. In half an hour the
Red Wagon stood before the grand entrance of the palace, and before it
was hitched the Wooden Sawhorse, which was Ozma's favorite steed.

This Sawhorse, while made of wood, was very much alive and could travel
swiftly and without tiring. To keep the ends of his wooden legs from
wearing down short, Ozma had shod the Sawhorse with plates of pure
gold. His harness was studded with brilliant emeralds and other jewels
and so, while he himself was not at all handsome, his outfit made a
splendid appearance.

Since the Sawhorse could understand her spoken words, Ozma used no
reins to guide him. She merely told him where to go. When she came from
the palace with Dorothy, they both climbed into the Red Wagon and then
the little dog, Toto, ran up and asked:

"Are you going to leave me behind, Dorothy?" Dorothy looked at Ozma,
who smiled in return and said:

"Toto may go with us, if you wish him to."

So Dorothy lifted the little dog into the wagon, for, while he could
run fast, he could not keep up with the speed of the wonderful Sawhorse.


Away they went, over hills and through meadows, covering the ground
with astonishing speed. It is not surprising, therefore, that the Red
Wagon arrived before Jinjur's house just as that energetic young lady
had finished scrubbing the Green Monkey and was about to lead him to
the caramel patch.




Chapter Thirteen

The Restoration


The Tin Owl gave a hoot of delight when he saw the Red Wagon draw up
before Jinjur's house, and the Brown Bear grunted and growled with glee
and trotted toward Ozma as fast as he could wobble. As for the Canary,
it flew swiftly to Dorothy's shoulder and perched there, saying in her
ear:

"Thank goodness you have come to our rescue!"

"But who are you?" asked Dorothy

"Don't you know?" returned the Canary.

"No; for the first time we noticed you in the Magic Picture, you were
just a bird, as you are now. But we've guessed that the giant woman had
transformed you, as she did the others."

"Yes; I'm Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter," announced the Canary.

"Goodness me!" cried Dorothy. "How dreadful."

"Well, I make a rather pretty bird, I think," returned Polychrome, "but
of course I'm anxious to resume my own shape and get back upon my
rainbow."

"Ozma will help you, I'm sure," said Dorothy. "How does it feel,
Scarecrow, to be a Bear?" she asked, addressing her old friend.

"I don't like it," declared the Scarecrow Bear. "This brutal form is
quite beneath the dignity of a wholesome straw man."

"And think of me," said the Owl, perching upon the dashboard of the Red
Wagon with much noisy clattering of his tin feathers. "Don't I look
horrid, Dorothy, with eyes several sizes too big for my body, and so
weak that I ought to wear spectacles?"

"Well," said Dorothy critically, as she looked him over, "you're
nothing to brag of, I must confess. But Ozma will soon fix you up
again."

The Green Monkey had hung back, bashful at meeting two lovely girls
while in the form of a beast; but Jinjur now took his hand and led him
forward while she introduced him to Ozma, and Woot managed to make a
low bow, not really ungraceful, before her girlish Majesty, the Ruler
of Oz.

"You have all been forced to endure a sad experience," said Ozma, "and
so I am anxious to do all in my power to break Mrs. Yoop's
enchantments. But first tell me how you happened to stray into that
lonely Valley where Yoop Castle stands."

Between them they related the object of their journey, the Scarecrow
Bear telling of the Tin Woodman's resolve to find Nimmie Amee and marry
her, as a just reward for her loyalty to him. Woot told of their
adventures with the Loons of Loonville, and the Tin Owl described the
manner in which they had been captured and transformed by the Giantess.
Then Polychrome related her story, and when all had been told, and
Dorothy had several times reproved Toto for growling at the Tin Owl,
Ozma remained thoughtful for a while, pondering upon what she had
heard. Finally she looked up, and with one of her delightful smiles,
said to the anxious group:

"I am not sure my magic will be able to restore every one of you,
because your transformations are of such a strange and unusual
character. Indeed, Mrs. Yoop was quite justified in believing no power
could alter her enchantments. However, I am sure I can restore the
Scarecrow to his original shape. He was stuffed with straw from the
beginning, and even the yookoohoo magic could not alter that. The
Giantess was merely able to make a bear's shape of a man's shape, but
the bear is stuffed with straw, just as the man was. So I feel
confident I can make a man of the bear again."

"Hurrah!" cried the Brown Bear, and tried clumsily to dance a jig of
delight.

"As for the Tin Woodman, his case is much the same," resumed Ozma,
still smiling. "The power of the Giantess could not make him anything
but a tin creature, whatever shape she transformed him into, so it will
not be impossible to restore him to his manly form. Anyhow, I shall
test my magic at once, and see if it will do what I have promised."

She drew from her bosom a small silver Wand and, making passes with the
Wand over the head of the Bear, she succeeded in the brief space of a
moment in breaking his enchantment. The original Scarecrow of Oz again
stood before them, well stuffed with straw and with his features nicely
painted upon the bag which formed his head.

The Scarecrow was greatly delighted, as you may suppose, and he
strutted proudly around while the powerful fairy, Ozma of Oz, broke the
enchantment that had transformed the Tin Woodman and made a Tin Owl
into a Tin Man again.

"Now, then," chirped the Canary, eagerly; "I'm next, Ozma!"

"But your case is different," replied Ozma, no longer smiling but
wearing a grave expression on her sweet face. "I shall have to
experiment on you, Polychrome, and I may fail in all my attempts."

She then tried two or three different methods of magic, hoping one of
them would succeed in breaking Polychrome's enchantment, but still the
Rainbow's Daughter remained a Canary-Bird. Finally, however, she
experimented in another way. She transformed the Canary into a Dove,
and then transformed the Dove into a Speckled Hen, and then changed the
Speckled Hen into a rabbit, and then the rabbit into a Fawn. And at the
last, after mixing several powders and sprinkling them upon the Fawn,
the yookoohoo enchantment was suddenly broken and before them stood one
of the daintiest and loveliest creatures in any fairyland in the world.
Polychrome was as sweet and merry in disposition as she was beautiful,
and when she danced and capered around in delight, her beautiful hair
floated around her like a golden mist and her many-hued raiment, as
soft as cobwebs, reminded one of drifting clouds in a summer sky.

Woot was so awed by the entrancing sight of this exquisite Sky Fairy
that he quite forgot his own sad plight until be noticed Ozma gazing
upon him with an intent expression that denoted sympathy and sorrow.
Dorothy whispered in her friend's ear, but the Ruler of Oz shook her
head sadly.

Jinjur, noticing this and understanding Ozma's looks, took the paw of
the Green Monkey in her own hand and patted it softly.

"Never mind," she said to him. "You are a very beautiful color, and a
monkey can climb better than a boy and do a lot of other things no boy
can ever do."

"What's the matter?" asked Woot, a sinking feeling at his heart. "Is
Ozma's magic all used up?"

Ozma herself answered him.

"Your form of enchantment, my poor boy," she said pityingly, "is
different from that of the others. Indeed, it is a form that is
impossible to alter by any magic known to fairies or yookoohoos. The
wicked Giantess was well aware, when she gave you the form of a Green
Monkey, that the Green Monkey must exist in the Land of Oz for all
future time."

Woot drew a long sigh.

"Well, that's pretty hard luck," he said bravely, "but if it can't be
helped I must endure it; that's all. I don't like being a monkey, but
what's the use of kicking against my fate?"

They were all very sorry for him, and Dorothy anxiously asked Ozma:

"Couldn't Glinda save him?"

"No," was the reply. "Glinda's power in transformations is no greater
than my own. Before I left my palace I went to my Magic Room and
studied Woot's case very carefully. I found that no power can do away
with the Green Monkey. He might transfer, or exchange his form with
some other person, it is true; but the Green Monkey we cannot get rid
of by any magic arts known to science."

"But--see here," said the Scarecrow, who had listened intently to this
explanation, "why not put the monkey's form on some one else?"

"Who would agree to make the change?" asked Ozma. "If by force we
caused anyone else to become a Green Monkey, we would be as cruel and
wicked as Mrs. Yoop. And what good would an exchange do?" she
continued. "Suppose, for instance, we worked the enchantment, and made
Toto into a Green Monkey. At the same moment Woot would become a little
dog."

"Leave me out of your magic, please," said Toto, with a reproachful
growl. "I wouldn't become a Green Monkey for anything."

"And I wouldn't become a dog," said Woot. "A green monkey is much
better than a dog, it seems to me."

"That is only a matter of opinion," answered Toto.

"Now, here's another idea," said the Scarecrow. "My brains are working
finely today, you must admit. Why not transform Toto into Woot the
Wanderer, and then have them exchange forms? The dog would become a
green monkey and the monkey would have his own natural shape again."

"To be sure!" cried Jinjur. "That's a fine idea."

"Leave me out of it," said Toto. "I won't do it."

"Wouldn't you be willing to become a green monkey--see what a pretty
color it is--so that this poor boy could be restored to his own shape?"
asked Jinjur, pleadingly.

"No," said Toto.

"I don't like that plan the least bit," declared Dorothy, "for then I
wouldn't have any little dog."

"But you'd have a green monkey in his place," persisted Jinjur, who
liked Woot and wanted to help him.

"I don't want a green monkey," said Dorothy positively.

"Don't speak of this again, I beg of you," said Woot. "This is my own
misfortune and I would rather suffer it alone than deprive Princess
Dorothy of her dog, or deprive the dog of his proper shape. And perhaps
even her Majesty, Ozma of Oz, might not be able to transform anyone
else into the shape of Woot the Wanderer."

"Yes; I believe I might do that," Ozma returned; "but Woot is quite
right; we are not justified in inflicting upon anyone--man or dog--the
form of a green monkey. Also it is certain that in order to relieve the
boy of the form he now wears, we must give it to someone else, who
would be forced to wear it always."

"I wonder," said Dorothy, thoughtfully, "if we couldn't find someone in
the Land of Oz who would be willing to become a green monkey? Seems to
me a monkey is active and spry, and he can climb trees and do a lot of
clever things, and green isn't a bad color for a monkey--it makes him
unusual."

"I wouldn't ask anyone to take this dreadful form," said Woot; "it
wouldn't be right, you know. I've been a monkey for some time, now, and
I don't like it. It makes me ashamed to be a beast of this sort when by
right of birth I'm a boy; so I'm sure it would be wicked to ask anyone
else to take my place."

They were all silent, for they knew he spoke the truth. Dorothy was
almost ready to cry with pity and Ozma's sweet face was sad and
disturbed. The Scarecrow rubbed and patted his stuffed head to try to
make it think better, while the Tin Woodman went into the house and
began to oil his tin joints so that the sorrow of his friends might not
cause him to weep. Weeping is liable to rust tin, and the Emperor
prided himself upon his highly polished body--now doubly dear to him
because for a time he had been deprived of it.

Polychrome had danced down the garden paths and back again a dozen
times, for she was seldom still a moment, yet she had heard Ozma's
speech and understood very well Woot's unfortunate position. But the
Rainbow's Daughter, even while dancing, could think and reason very
clearly, and suddenly she solved the problem in the nicest possible
way. Coming close to Ozma, she said:

"Your Majesty, all this trouble was caused by the wickedness of Mrs.
Yoop, the Giantess. Yet even now that cruel woman is living in her
secluded castle, enjoying the thought that she has put this terrible
enchantment on Woot the Wanderer. Even now she is laughing at our
despair because we can find no way to get rid of the green monkey. Very
well, we do not wish to get rid of it. Let the woman who created the
form wear it herself, as a just punishment for her wickedness. I am
sure your fairy power can give to Mrs. Yoop the form of Woot the
Wanderer--even at this distance from her--and then it will be possible
to exchange the two forms. Mrs. Yoop will become the Green Monkey, and
Woot will recover his own form again."

Ozma's face brightened as she listened to this clever proposal.

"Thank you, Polychrome," said she. "The task you propose is not so easy
as you suppose, but I will make the attempt, and perhaps I may succeed."




Chapter Fourteen

The Green Monkey


They now entered the house, and as an interested group, watched Jinjur,
at Ozma's command, build a fire and put a kettle of water over to boil.
The Ruler of Oz stood before the fire silent and grave, while the
others, realizing that an important ceremony of magic was about to be
performed, stood quietly in the background so as not to interrupt
Ozma's proceedings. Only Polychrome kept going in and coming out,
humming softly to herself as she danced, for the Rainbow's Daughter
could not keep still for long, and the four walls of a room always made
her nervous and ill at ease. She moved so noiselessly, however, that
her movements were like the shifting of sunbeams and did not annoy
anyone.

When the water in the kettle bubbled, Ozma drew from her bosom two tiny
packets containing powders. These powders she threw into the kettle and
after briskly stirring the contents with a branch from a macaroon bush,
Ozma poured the mystic broth upon a broad platter which Jinjur had
placed upon the table. As the broth cooled it became as silver,
reflecting all objects from its smooth surface like a mirror.

While her companions gathered around the table, eagerly attentive--and
Dorothy even held little Toto in her arms that he might see--Ozma waved
her wand over the mirror-like surface. At once it reflected the
interior of Yoop Castle, and in the big hall sat Mrs. Yoop, in her best
embroidered silken robes, engaged in weaving a new lace apron to
replace the one she had lost.

The Giantess seemed rather uneasy, as if she had a faint idea that
someone was spying upon her, for she kept looking behind her and this
way and that, as though expecting danger from an unknown source.
Perhaps some yookoohoo instinct warned her. Woot saw that she had
escaped from her room by some of the magical means at her disposal,
after her prisoners had escaped her. She was now occupying the big hall
of her castle as she used to do. Also Woot thought, from the cruel
expression on the face of the Giantess, that she was planning revenge
on them, as soon as her new magic apron was finished.

But Ozma was now making passes over the platter with her silver Wand,
and presently the form of the Giantess began to shrink in size and to
change its shape. And now, in her place sat the form of Woot the
Wanderer, and as if suddenly realizing her transformation Mrs. Yoop
threw down her work and rushed to a looking-glass that stood against
the wall of her room. When she saw the boy's form reflected as her own,
she grew violently angry and dashed her head against the mirror,
smashing it to atoms.

Just then Ozma was busy with her magic Wand, making strange figures,
and she had also placed her left hand firmly upon the shoulder of the
Green Monkey. So now, as all eyes were turned upon the platter, the
form of Mrs. Yoop gradually changed again. She was slowly transformed
into the Green Monkey, and at the same time Woot slowly regained his
natural form.

It was quite a surprise to them all when they raised their eyes from
the platter and saw Woot the Wanderer standing beside Ozma. And, when
they glanced at the platter again, it reflected nothing more than the
walls of the room in Jinjur's house in which they stood. The magic
ceremonial was ended, and Ozma of Oz had triumphed over the wicked
Giantess.

"What will become of her, I wonder?" said Dorothy, as she drew a long
breath.

"She will always remain a Green Monkey," replied Ozma, "and in that
form she will be unable to perform any magical arts whatsoever. She
need not be unhappy, however, and as she lives all alone in her castle
she probably won't mind the transformation very much after she gets
used to it."

"Anyhow, it serves her right," declared Dorothy, and all agreed with
her.

"But," said the kind hearted Tin Woodman, "I'm afraid the Green Monkey
will starve, for Mrs. Yoop used to get her food by magic, and now that
the magic is taken away from her, what can she eat?"

"Why, she'll eat what other monkeys do," returned the Scarecrow. "Even
in the form of a Green Monkey, she's a very clever person, and I'm sure
her wits will show her how to get plenty to eat."

"Don't worry about her," advised Dorothy. "She didn't worry about you,
and her condition is no worse than the condition she imposed on poor
Woot. She can't starve to death in the Land of Oz, that's certain, and
if she gets hungry at times it's no more than the wicked thing
deserves. Let's forget Mrs. Yoop; for, in spite of her being a
yookoohoo, our fairy friends have broken all of her transformations."




Chapter Fifteen

The Man of Tin


Ozma and Dorothy were quite pleased with Woot the Wanderer, whom they
found modest and intelligent and very well mannered. The boy was truly
grateful for his release from the cruel enchantment, and he promised to
love, revere and defend the girl Ruler of Oz forever afterward, as a
faithful subject.

"You may visit me at my palace, if you wish," said Ozma, "where I will
be glad to introduce you to two other nice boys, Ojo the Munchkin and
Button-Bright."

"Thank your Majesty," replied Woot, and then he turned to the Tin
Woodman and inquired: "What are your further plans, Mr. Emperor? Will
you still seek Nimmie Amee and marry her, or will you abandon the quest
and return to the Emerald City and your own castle?"

The Tin Woodman, now as highly polished and well-oiled as ever,
reflected a while on this question and then answered:

"Well, I see no reason why I should not find Nimmie Amee. We are now in
the Munchkin Country, where we are perfectly safe, and if it was right
for me, before our enchantment, to marry Nimmie Amee and make her
Empress of the Winkies, it must be right now, when the enchantment has
been broken and I am once more myself. Am I correct, friend Scarecrow?"

"You are, indeed," answered the Scarecrow. "No one can oppose such
logic."

"But I'm afraid you don't love Nimmie Amee," suggested Dorothy.

"That is just because I can't love anyone," replied the Tin Woodman.
"But, if I cannot love my wife, I can at least be kind to her, and all
husbands are not able to do that."

"Do you s'pose Nimmie Amee still loves you, after all these years?"
asked Dorothy.

"I'm quite sure of it, and that is why I am going to her to make her
happy. Woot the Wanderer thinks I ought to reward her for being
faithful to me after my meat body was chopped to pieces and I became
tin. What do you think, Ozma?"

Ozma smiled as she said:

"I do not know your Nimmie Amee, and so I cannot tell what she most
needs to make her happy. But there is no harm in your going to her and
asking her if she still wishes to marry you. If she does, we will give
you a grand wedding at the Emerald City and, afterward, as Empress of
the Winkies, Nimmie Amee would become one of the most important ladies
in all Oz."

So it was decided that the Tin Woodman would continue his journey, and
that the Scarecrow and Woot the Wanderer should accompany him, as
before. Polychrome also decided to join their party, somewhat to the
surprise of all.

"I hate to be cooped up in a palace," she said to Ozma, "and of course
the first time I meet my Rainbow I shall return to my own dear home in
the skies, where my fairy sisters are even now awaiting me and my
father is cross because I get lost so often. But I can find my Rainbow
just as quickly while traveling in the Munchkin Country as I could if
living in the Emerald City--or any other place in Oz--so I shall go
with the Tin Woodman and help him woo Nimmie Amee."

Dorothy wanted to go, too, but as the Tin Woodman did not invite her to
join his party, she felt she might be intruding if she asked to be
taken. She hinted, but she found he didn't take the hint. It is quite a
delicate matter for one to ask a girl to marry him, however much she
loves him, and perhaps the Tin Woodman did not desire to have too many
looking on when he found his old sweetheart, Nimmie Amee. So Dorothy
contented herself with the thought that she would help Ozma prepare a
splendid wedding feast, to be followed by a round of parties and
festivities when the Emperor of the Winkies reached the Emerald City
with his bride.

Ozma offered to take them all in the Red Wagon to a place as near to
the great Munchkin forest as a wagon could get. The Red Wagon was big
enough to seat them all, and so, bidding good-bye to Jinjur, who gave
Woot a basket of ripe cream-puffs and caramels to take with him, Ozma
commanded the Wooden Sawhorse to start, and the strange creature moved
swiftly over the lanes and presently came to the Road of Yellow Bricks.
This road led straight to a dense forest, where the path was too narrow
for the Red Wagon to proceed farther, so here the party separated.

Ozma and Dorothy and Toto returned to the Emerald City, after wishing
their friends a safe and successful journey, while the Tin Woodman, the
Scarecrow, Woot the Wanderer and Polychrome, the Rainbow's Daughter,
prepared to push their way through the thick forest. However, these
forest paths were well known to the Tin Man and the Scarecrow, who felt
quite at home among the trees.

"I was born in this grand forest," said Nick Chopper, the tin Emperor,
speaking proudly, "and it was here that the Witch enchanted my axe and
I lost different parts of my meat body until I became all tin. Here,
also--for it is a big forest--Nimmie Amee lived with the Wicked Witch,
and at the other edge of the trees stands the cottage of my friend
Ku-Klip, the famous tinsmith who made my present beautiful form."

"He must be a clever workman," declared Woot, admiringly.

"He is simply wonderful," declared the Tin Woodman.

"I shall be glad to make his acquaintance," said Woot.

"If you wish to meet with real cleverness," remarked the Scarecrow,
"you should visit the Munchkin farmer who first made me. I won't say
that my friend the Emperor isn't all right for a tin man, but any judge
of beauty can understand that a Scarecrow is far more artistic and
refined."

"You are too soft and flimsy," said the Tin Woodman.

"You are too hard and stiff," said the Scarecrow, and this was as near
to quarreling as the two friends ever came. Polychrome laughed at them
both, as well she might, and Woot hastened to change the subject.

At night they all camped underneath the trees. The boy ate cream-puffs
for supper and offered Polychrome some, but she preferred other food
and at daybreak sipped the dew that was clustered thick on the forest
flowers. Then they tramped onward again, and presently the Scarecrow
paused and said:

"It was on this very spot that Dorothy and I first met the Tin Woodman,
who was rusted so badly that none of his joints would move. But after
we had oiled him up, he was as good as new and accompanied us to the
Emerald City."

"Ah, that was a sad experience," asserted the Tin Woodman soberly. "I
was caught in a rainstorm while chopping down a tree for exercise, and
before I realized it, I was firmly rusted in every joint. There I
stood, axe in hand, but unable to move, for days and weeks and months!
Indeed, I have never known exactly how long the time was; but finally
along came Dorothy and I was saved. See! This is the very tree I was
chopping at the time I rusted."

"You cannot be far from your old home, in that case," said Woot.

"No; my little cabin stands not a great way off, but there is no
occasion for us to visit it. Our errand is with Nimmie Amee, and her
house is somewhat farther away, to the left of us."

"Didn't you say she lives with a Wicked Witch, who makes her a slave?"
asked the boy.

"She did, but she doesn't," was the reply. "I am told the Witch was
destroyed when Dorothy's house fell on her, so now Nimmie Amee must
live all alone. I haven't seen her, of course, since the Witch was
crushed, for at that time I was standing rusted in the forest and had
been there a long time, but the poor girl must have felt very happy to
be free from her cruel mistress."

"Well," said the Scarecrow, "let's travel on and find Nimmie Amee. Lead
on, your Majesty, since you know the way, and we will follow."

So the Tin Woodman took a path that led through the thickest part of
the forest, and they followed it for some time. The light was dim here,
because vines and bushes and leafy foliage were all about them, and
often the Tin Man had to push aside the branches that obstructed their
way, or cut them off with his axe. After they had proceeded some
distance, the Emperor suddenly stopped short and exclaimed: "Good
gracious!"

The Scarecrow, who was next, first bumped into his friend and then
peered around his tin body, and said in a tone of wonder:

"Well, I declare!"

Woot the Wanderer pushed forward to see what was the matter, and cried
out in astonishment: "For goodness' sake!"

Then the three stood motionless, staring hard, until Polychrome's merry
laughter rang out behind them and aroused them from their stupor.

In the path before them stood a tin man who was the exact duplicate of
the Tin Woodman. He was of the same size, he was jointed in the same
manner, and he was made of shining tin from top to toe. But he stood
immovable, with his tin jaws half parted and his tin eyes turned
upward. In one of his hands was held a long, gleaming sword. Yes, there
was the difference, the only thing that distinguished him from the
Emperor of the Winkies. This tin man bore a sword, while the Tin
Woodman bore an axe.

"It's a dream; it must be a dream!" gasped Woot.

"That's it, of course," said the Scarecrow; "there couldn't be two Tin
Woodmen."

"No," agreed Polychrome, dancing nearer to the stranger, "this one is a
Tin Soldier. Don't you see his sword?"

The Tin Woodman cautiously put out one tin hand and felt of his
double's arm. Then he said in a voice that trembled with emotion:

"Who are you, friend?"

There was no reply

"Can't you see he's rusted, just as you were once?" asked Polychrome,
laughing again. "Here, Nick Chopper, lend me your oil-can a minute!"

The Tin Woodman silently handed her his oil-can, without which he never
traveled, and Polychrome first oiled the stranger's tin jaws and then
worked them gently to and fro until the Tin Soldier said:

"That's enough. Thank you. I can now talk. But please oil my other
joints."

Woot seized the oil-can and did this, but all the others helped wiggle
the soldier's joints as soon as they were oiled, until they moved
freely.

The Tin Soldier seemed highly pleased at his release. He strutted up
and down the path, saying in a high, thin voice:

  "The Soldier is a splendid man
    When marching on parade,
  And when he meets the enemy
    He never is afraid.

  He rights the wrongs of nations,
    His country's flag defends,
  The foe he'll fight with great delight,
    But seldom fights his friends."




Chapter Sixteen

Captain Fyter


"Are you really a soldier?" asked Woot, when they had all watched this
strange tin person parade up and down the path and proudly flourish his
sword.

"I was a soldier," was the reply, "but I've been a prisoner to Mr. Rust
so long that I don't know exactly what I am."

"But--dear me!" cried the Tin Woodman, sadly perplexed; "how came you
to be made of tin?"

"That," answered the Soldier, "is a sad, sad story I was in love with a
beautiful Munchkin girl, who lived with a Wicked Witch. The Witch did
not wish me to marry the girl, so she enchanted my sword, which began
hacking me to pieces. When I lost my legs I went to the tinsmith,
Ku-Klip, and he made me some tin legs. When I lost my arms, Ku-Klip
made me tin arms, and when I lost my head he made me this fine one out
of tin. It was the same way with my body, and finally I was all tin.
But I was not unhappy, for Ku-Klip made a good job of me, having had
experience in making another tin man before me."

"Yes," observed the Tin Woodman, "it was Ku-Klip who made me. But, tell
me, what was the name of the Munchkin girl you were in love with?"

"She is called Nimmie Amee," said the Tin Soldier.

Hearing this, they were all so astonished that they were silent for a
time, regarding the stranger with wondering looks. Finally the Tin
Woodman ventured to ask:

"And did Nimmie Amee return your love?"

"Not at first," admitted the Soldier. "When first I marched into the
forest and met her, she was weeping over the loss of her former
sweetheart, a woodman whose name was Nick Chopper."

"That is me," said the Tin Woodman.

"She told me he was nicer than a soldier, because he was all made of
tin and shone beautifully in the sun. She said a tin man appealed to
her artistic instincts more than an ordinary meat man, as I was then.
But I did not despair, because her tin sweetheart had disappeared, and
could not be found. And finally Nimmie Amee permitted me to call upon
her and we became friends. It was then that the Wicked Witch discovered
me and became furiously angry when I said I wanted to marry the girl.
She enchanted my sword, as I said, and then my troubles began. When I
got my tin legs, Nimmie Amee began to take an interest in me; when I
got my tin arms, she began to like me better than ever, and when I was
all made of tin, she said I looked like her dear Nick Chopper and she
would be willing to marry me.

"The day of our wedding was set, and it turned out to be a rainy day.
Nevertheless I started out to get Nimmie Amee, because the Witch had
been absent for some time, and we meant to elope before she got back.
As I traveled the forest paths the rain wetted my joints, but I paid no
attention to this because my thoughts were all on my wedding with
beautiful Nimmie Amee and I could think of nothing else until suddenly
my legs stopped moving. Then my arms rusted at the joints and I became
frightened and cried for help, for now I was unable to oil myself. No
one heard my calls and before long my jaws rusted, and I was unable to
utter another sound. So I stood helpless in this spot, hoping some
wanderer would come my way and save me. But this forest path is seldom
used, and I have been standing here so long that I have lost all track
of time. In my mind I composed poetry and sang songs, but not a sound
have I been able to utter. But this desperate condition has now been
relieved by your coming my way and I must thank you for my rescue."

"This is wonderful!" said the Scarecrow, heaving a stuffy, long sigh.
"I think Ku-Klip was wrong to make two tin men, just alike, and the
strangest thing of all is that both you tin men fell in love with the
same girl."

"As for that," returned the Soldier, seriously, "I must admit I lost my
ability to love when I lost my meat heart. Ku-Klip gave me a tin heart,
to be sure, but it doesn't love anything, as far as I can discover, and
merely rattles against my tin ribs, which makes me wish I had no heart
at all."

"Yet, in spite of this condition, you were going to marry Nimmie Amee?"

"Well, you see I had promised to marry her, and I am an honest man and
always try to keep my promises. I didn't like to disappoint the poor
girl, who had been disappointed by one tin man already."

"That was not my fault," declared the Emperor of the Winkies, and then
he related how he, also, had rusted in the forest and after a long time
had been rescued by Dorothy and the Scarecrow and had traveled with
them to the Emerald City in search of a heart that could love.

"If you have found such a heart, sir," said the Soldier, "I will gladly
allow you to marry Nimmie Amee in my place."

"If she loves you best, sir," answered the Woodman, "I shall not
interfere with your wedding her. For, to be quite frank with you, I
cannot yet love Nimmie Amee as I did before I became tin."

"Still, one of you ought to marry the poor girl," remarked Woot; "and,
if she likes tin men, there is not much choice between you. Why don't
you draw lots for her?"

"That wouldn't be right," said the Scarecrow.

"The girl should be permitted to choose her own husband," asserted
Polychrome. "You should both go to her and allow her to take her
choice. Then she will surely be happy."

"That, to me, seems a very fair arrangement," said the Tin Soldier.

"I agree to it," said the Tin Woodman, shaking the hand of his twin to
show the matter was settled. "May I ask your name, sir?" he continued.

"Before I was so cut up," replied the other, "I was known as Captain
Fyter, but afterward I was merely called 'The Tin Soldier.'"

"Well, Captain, if you are agreeable, let us now go to Nimmie Amee's
house and let her choose between us."

"Very well; and if we meet the Witch, we will both fight her--you with
your axe and I with my sword."

"The Witch is destroyed," announced the Scarecrow, and as they walked
away he told the Tin Soldier of much that had happened in the Land of
Oz since he had stood rusted in the forest.

"I must have stood there longer than I had imagined," he said
thoughtfully.




Chapter Seventeen

The Workshop of Ku-Klip


It was not more than a two hours' journey to the house where Nimmie
Amee had lived, but when our travelers arrived there they found the
place deserted. The door was partly off its hinges, the roof had fallen
in at the rear and the interior of the cottage was thick with dust. Not
only was the place vacant, but it was evident that no one had lived
there for a long time.

"I suppose," said the Scarecrow, as they all stood looking wonderingly
at the ruined house, "that after the Wicked Witch was destroyed, Nimmie
Amee became lonely and went somewhere else to live."

"One could scarcely expect a young girl to live all alone in a forest,"
added Woot. "She would want company, of course, and so I believe she
has gone where other people live."

"And perhaps she is still crying her poor little heart out because no
tin man comes to marry her," suggested Polychrome.

"Well, in that case, it is the clear duty of you two tin persons to
seek Nimmie Amee until you find her," declared the Scarecrow.

"I do not know where to look for the girl," said the Tin Soldier, "for
I am almost a stranger to this part of the country."

"I was born here," said the Tin Woodman, "but the forest has few
inhabitants except the wild beasts. I cannot think of anyone living
near here with whom Nimmie Amee might care to live."

"Why not go to Ku-Klip and ask him what has become of the girl?"
proposed Polychrome.

That struck them all as being a good suggestion, so once more they
started to tramp through the forest, taking the direct path to
Ku-Klip's house, for both the tin twins knew the way, having followed
it many times.

Ku-Klip lived at the far edge of the great forest, his house facing the
broad plains of the Munchkin Country that lay to the eastward. But,
when they came to this residence by the forest's edge, the tinsmith was
not at home.

It was a pretty place, all painted dark blue with trimmings of lighter
blue. There was a neat blue fence around the yard and several blue
benches had been placed underneath the shady blue trees which marked
the line between forest and plain. There was a blue lawn before the
house, which was a good sized building. Ku-Klip lived in the front part
of the house and had his work-shop in the back part, where he had also
built a lean-to addition, in order to give him more room.

Although they found the tinsmith absent on their arrival, there was
smoke coming out of his chimney, which proved that he would soon return.

"And perhaps Nimmie Amee will be with him," said the Scarecrow in a
cheerful voice.

While they waited, the Tin Woodman went to the door of the workshop
and, finding it unlocked, entered and looked curiously around the room
where he had been made.

"It seems almost like home to me," hie told his friends, who had
followed him in. "The first time I came here I had lost a leg, so I had
to carry it in my hand while I hopped on the other leg all the way from
the place in the forest where the enchanted axe cut me. I remember that
old Ku-Klip carefully put my meat leg into a barrel--I think that is
the same barrel, still standing in the corner yonder--and then at once
he began to make a tin leg for me. He worked fast and with skill, and I
was much interested in the job."

"My experience was much the same," said the Tin Soldier. "I used to
bring all the parts of me, which the enchanted sword had cut away, here
to the tinsmith, and Ku-Klip would put them into the barrel."

"I wonder," said Woot, "if those cast-off parts of you two unfortunates
are still in that barrel in the corner?"

"I suppose so." replied the Tin Woodman. "In the Land of Oz no part of
a living creature can ever be destroyed."

"If that is true, how was that Wicked Witch destroyed?" inquired Woot.

"Why, she was very old and was all dried up and withered before Oz
became a fairyland," explained the Scarecrow. "Only her magic arts had
kept her alive so long, and when Dorothy's house fell upon her she just
turned to dust, and was blown away and scattered by the wind. I do not
think, however, that the parts cut away from these two young men could
ever be entirely destroyed and, if they are still in those barrels,
they are likely to be just the same as when the enchanted axe or sword
severed them."

"It doesn't matter, however," said the Tin Woodman; "our tin bodies are
more brilliant and durable, and quite satisfy us."

"Yes, the tin bodies are best," agreed the Tin Soldier. "Nothing can
hurt them."

"Unless they get dented or rusted," said Woot, but both the tin men
frowned on him.

Scraps of tin, of all shapes and sizes, lay scattered around the
workshop. Also there were hammers and anvils and soldering irons and a
charcoal furnace and many other tools such as a tinsmith works with.
Against two of the side walls had been built stout work-benches and in
the center of the room was a long table. At the end of the shop, which
adjoined the dwelling, were several cupboards.

After examining the interior of the workshop until his curiosity was
satisfied, Woot said:

"I think I will go outside until Ku-Klip comes. It does not seem quite
proper for us to take possession of his house while he is absent."

"That is true," agreed the Scarecrow, and they were all about to leave
the room when the Tin Woodman said: "Wait a minute," and they halted in
obedience to the command.




Chapter Eighteen

The Tin Woodman Talks to Himself


The Tin Woodman had just noticed the cupboards and was curious to know
what they contained, so he went to one of them and opened the door.
There were shelves inside, and upon one of the shelves which was about
on a level with his tin chin the Emperor discovered a Head--it looked
like a doll's head, only it was larger, and he soon saw it was the Head
of some person. It was facing the Tin Woodman and as the cupboard door
swung back, the eyes of the Head slowly opened and looked at him. The
Tin Woodman was not at all surprised, for in the Land of Oz one runs
into magic at every turn.

"Dear me!" said the Tin Woodman, staring hard. "It seems as if I had
met you, somewhere, before. Good morning, sir!"

"You have the advantage of me," replied the Head. "I never saw you
before in my life."

"Still, your face is very familiar," persisted the Tin Woodman. "Pardon
me, but may I ask if you--eh--eh--if you ever had a Body?"

"Yes, at one time," answered the Head, "but that is so long ago I can't
remember it. Did you think," with a pleasant smile, "that I was born
just as I am? That a Head would be created without a Body?"

"No, of course not," said the other. "But how came you to lose your
body?"

"Well, I can't recollect the details; you'll have to ask Ku-Klip about
it," returned the Head. "For, curious as it may seem to you, my memory
is not good since my separation from the rest of me. I still possess my
brains and my intellect is as good as ever, but my memory of some of
the events I formerly experienced is quite hazy."

"How long have you been in this cupboard?" asked the Emperor.

"I don't know."

"Haven't you a name?"

"Oh, yes," said the Head; "I used to be called Nick Chopper, when I was
a woodman and cut down trees for a living."

"Good gracious!" cried the Tin Woodman in astonishment. "If you are
Nick Chopper's Head, then you are Me--or I'm You--or--or--What relation
are we, anyhow?"

"Don't ask me," replied the Head. "For my part, I'm not anxious to
claim relationship with any common, manufactured article, like you. You
may be all right in your class, but your class isn't my class. You're
tin."

The poor Emperor felt so bewildered that for a time he could only stare
at his old Head in silence. Then he said:

"I must admit that I wasn't at all bad looking before I became tin.
You're almost handsome--for meat. If your hair was combed, you'd be
quite attractive."

"How do you expect me to comb my hair without help?" demanded the Head,
indignantly. "I used to keep it smooth and neat, when I had arms, but
after I was removed from the rest of me, my hair got mussed, and old
Ku-Klip never has combed it for me."

"I'll speak to him about it," said the Tin Woodman. "Do you remember
loving a pretty Munchkin girl named Nimmie Amee?"

"No," answered the Head. "That is a foolish question. The heart in my
body--when I had a body--might have loved someone, for all I know, but
a head isn't made to love; it's made to think."

"Oh; do you think, then?"

"I used to think."

"You must have been shut up in this cupboard for years and years. What
have you thought about, in all that time?"

"Nothing. That's another foolish question. A little reflection will
convince you that I have had nothing to think about, except the boards
on the inside of the cupboard door, and it didn't take me long to think
of everything about those boards that could be thought of. Then, of
course, I quit thinking."

"And are you happy?"

"Happy? What's that?"

"Don't you know what happiness is?" inquired the Tin Woodman.

"I haven't the faintest idea whether it's round or square, or black or
white, or what it is. And, if you will pardon my lack of interest in
it, I will say that I don't care."

The Tin Woodman was much puzzled by these answers. His traveling
companions had grouped themselves at his back, and had fixed their eyes
on the Head and listened to the conversation with much interest, but
until now, they had not interrupted because they thought the Tin
Woodman had the best right to talk to his own head and renew
acquaintance with it.

But now the Tin Soldier remarked:

"I wonder if my old head happens to be in any of these cupboards," and
he proceeded to open all the cupboard doors. But no other head was to
be found on any of the shelves.

"Oh, well; never mind," said Woot the Wanderer; "I can't imagine what
anyone wants of a cast-off head, anyhow."

"I can understand the Soldier's interest," asserted Polychrome, dancing
around the grimy workshop until her draperies formed a cloud around her
dainty form. "For sentimental reasons a man might like to see his old
head once more, just as one likes to revisit an old home."

"And then to kiss it good-bye," added the Scarecrow.

"I hope that tin thing won't try to kiss me good-bye!" exclaimed the
Tin Woodman's former head. "And I don't see what right you folks have
to disturb my peace and comfort, either."

"You belong to me," the Tin Woodman declared.

"I do not!"

"You and I are one."

"We've been parted," asserted the Head. "It would be unnatural for me
to have any interest in a man made of tin. Please close the door and
leave me alone."

"I did not think that my old Head could be so disagreeable," said the
Emperor. "I--I'm quite ashamed of myself; meaning you."

"You ought to be glad that I've enough sense to know what my rights
are," retorted the Head. "In this cupboard I am leading a simple life,
peaceful and dignified, and when a mob of people in whom I am not
interested disturb me, they are the disagreeable ones; not I."

With a sigh the Tin Woodman closed and latched the cupboard door and
turned away.

"Well," said the Tin Soldier, "if my old head would have treated me as
coldly and in so unfriendly a manner as your old head has treated you,
friend Chopper, I'm glad I could not find it."

"Yes; I'm rather surprised at my head, myself," replied the Tin
Woodman, thoughtfully. "I thought I had a more pleasant disposition
when I was made of meat."

But just then old Ku-Klip the Tinsmith arrived, and he seemed surprised
to find so many visitors. Ku-Klip was a stout man and a short man. He
had his sleeves rolled above his elbows, showing muscular arms, and he
wore a leathern apron that covered all the front of him, and was so
long that Woot was surprised he didn't step on it and trip whenever he
walked. And Ku-Klip had a gray beard that was almost as long as his
apron, and his head was bald on top and his ears stuck out from his
head like two fans. Over his eyes, which were bright and twinkling, he
wore big spectacles. It was easy to see that the tinsmith was a kind
hearted man, as well as a merry and agreeable one. "Oh-ho!" he cried in
a joyous bass voice; "here are both my tin men come to visit me, and
they and their friends are welcome indeed. I'm very proud of you two
characters, I assure you, for you are so perfect that you are proof
that I'm a good workman. Sit down. Sit down, all of you--if you can
find anything to sit on--and tell me why you are here."

So they found seats and told him all of their adventures that they
thought he would like to know. Ku-Klip was glad to learn that Nick
Chopper, the Tin Woodman, was now Emperor of the Winkies and a friend
of Ozma of Oz, and the tinsmith was also interested in the Scarecrow
and Polychrome.

He turned the straw man around, examining him curiously, and patted him
on all sides, and then said:

"You are certainly wonderful, but I think you would be more durable and
steady on your legs if you were made of tin. Would you like me to--"

"No, indeed!" interrupted the Scarecrow hastily; "I like myself better
as I am."

But to Polychrome the tinsmith said:

"Nothing could improve you, my dear, for you are the most beautiful
maiden I have ever seen. It is pure happiness just to look at you."

"That is praise, indeed, from so skillful a workman," returned the
Rainbow's Daughter, laughing and dancing in and out the room.

"Then it must be this boy you wish me to help," said Ku-Klip, looking
at Woot.

"No," said Woot, "we are not here to seek your skill, but have merely
come to you for information."

Then, between them, they related their search for Nimmie Amee, whom the
Tin Woodman explained he had resolved to marry, yet who had promised to
become the bride of the Tin Soldier before he unfortunately became
rusted. And when the story was told, they asked Ku-Klip if he knew what
had become of Nimmie Amee.

"Not exactly," replied the old man, "but I know that she wept bitterly
when the Tin Soldier did not come to marry her, as he had promised to
do. The old Witch was so provoked at the girl's tears that she beat
Nimmie Amee with her crooked stick and then hobbled away to gather some
magic herbs, with which she intended to transform the girl into an old
hag, so that no one would again love her or care to marry her. It was
while she was away on this errand that Dorothy's house fell on the
Wicked Witch, and she turned to dust and blew away. When I heard this
good news, I sent Nimmie Amee to find the Silver Shoes which the Witch
had worn, but Dorothy had taken them with her to the Emerald City."

"Yes, we know all about those Silver Shoes," said the Scarecrow.

"Well," continued Ku-Klip, "after that, Nimmie Amee decided to go away
from the forest and live with some people she was acquainted with who
had a house on Mount Munch. I have never seen the girl since."

"Do you know the name of the people on Mount Munch, with whom she went
to live?" asked the Tin Woodman.

"No, Nimmie Amee did not mention her friend's name, and I did not ask
her. She took with her all that she could carry of the goods that were
in the Witch's house, and she told me I could have the rest. But when I
went there I found nothing worth taking except some magic powders that
I did not know how to use, and a bottle of Magic Glue."

"What is Magic Glue?" asked Woot.

"It is a magic preparation with which to mend people when they cut
themselves. One time, long ago, I cut off one of my fingers by
accident, and I carried it to the Witch, who took down her bottle and
glued it on again for me. See!" showing them his finger, "it is as good
as ever it was. No one else that I ever heard of had this Magic Glue,
and of course when Nick Chopper cut himself to pieces with his
enchanted axe and Captain Fyter cut himself to pieces with his
enchanted sword, the Witch would not mend them, or allow me to glue
them together, because she had herself wickedly enchanted the axe and
sword. Nothing remained but for me to make them new parts out of tin;
but, as you see, tin answered the purpose very well, and I am sure
their tin bodies are a great improvement on their meat bodies."

"Very true," said the Tin Soldier.

"I quite agree with you," said the Tin Woodman. "I happened to find my
old head in your cupboard, a while ago, and certainly it is not as
desirable a head as the tin one I now wear."

"By the way," said the Tin Soldier, "what ever became of my old head,
Ku-Klip?"

"And of the different parts of our bodies?" added the Tin Woodman.

"Let me think a minute," replied Ku-Klip. "If I remember right, you two
boys used to bring me most of your parts, when they were cut off, and I
saved them in that barrel in the corner. You must not have brought me
all the parts, for when I made Chopfyt I had hard work finding enough
pieces to complete the job. I finally had to finish him with one arm."

"Who is Chopfyt?" inquired Woot.

"Oh, haven't I told you about Chopfyt?" exclaimed Ku-Klip. "Of course
not! And he's quite a curiosity, too. You'll be interested in hearing
about Chopfyt. This is how he happened:

"One day, after the Witch had been destroyed and Nimmie Amee had gone
to live with her friends on Mount Munch, I was looking around the shop
for something and came upon the bottle of Magic Glue which I had
brought from the old Witch's house. It occurred to me to piece together
the odds and ends of you two people, which of course were just as good
as ever, and see if I couldn't make a man out of them. If I succeeded,
I would have an assistant to help me with my work, and I thought it
would be a clever idea to put to some practical use the scraps of Nick
Chopper and Captain Fyter. There were two perfectly good heads in my
cupboard, and a lot of feet and legs and parts of bodies in the barrel,
so I set to work to see what I could do.

"First, I pieced together a body, gluing it with the Witch's Magic
Glue, which worked perfectly. That was the hardest part of my job,
however, because the bodies didn't match up well and some parts were
missing. But by using a piece of Captain Fyter here and a piece of Nick
Chopper there, I finally got together a very decent body, with heart
and all the trimmings complete."

"Whose heart did you use in making the body?" asked the Tin Woodman
anxiously.

"I can't tell, for the parts had no tags on them and one heart looks
much like another. After the body was completed, I glued two fine legs
and feet onto it. One leg was Nick Chopper's and one was Captain
Fyter's and, finding one leg longer than the other, I trimmed it down
to make them match. I was much disappointed to find that I had but one
arm. There was an extra leg in the barrel, but I could find only one
arm. Having glued this onto the body, I was ready for the head, and I
had some difficulty in making up my mind which head to use. Finally I
shut my eyes and reached out my hand toward the cupboard shelf, and the
first head I touched I glued upon my new man."

"It was mine!" declared the Tin Soldier, gloomily.

"No, it was mine," asserted Ku-Klip, "for I had given you another in
exchange for it--the beautiful tin head you now wear. When the glue had
dried, my man was quite an interesting fellow. I named him Chopfyt,
using a part of Nick Chopper's name and a part of Captain Fyter's name,
because he was a mixture of both your cast-off parts. Chopfyt was
interesting, as I said, but he did not prove a very agreeable
companion. He complained bitterly because I had given him but one
arm--as if it were my fault!--and he grumbled because the suit of blue
Munchkin clothes, which I got for him from a neighbor, did not fit him
perfectly."

"Ah, that was because he was wearing my old head," remarked the Tin
Soldier. "I remember that head used to be very particular about its
clothes."

"As an assistant," the old tinsmith continued, "Chopfyt was not a
success. He was awkward with tools and was always hungry. He demanded
something to eat six or eight times a day, so I wondered if I had
fitted his insides properly. Indeed, Chopfyt ate so much that little
food was left for myself; so, when he proposed, one day, to go out into
the world and seek adventures, I was delighted to be rid of him. I even
made him a tin arm to take the place of the missing one, and that
pleased him very much, so that we parted good friends."

"What became of Chopfyt after that?" the Scarecrow inquired.

"I never heard. He started off toward the east, into the plains of the
Munchkin Country, and that was the last I ever saw of him."

"It seems to me," said the Tin Woodman reflectively, "that you did
wrong in making a man out of our cast-off parts. It is evident that
Chopfyt could, with justice, claim relationship with both of us."

"Don't worry about that," advised Ku-Klip cheerfully; "it is not likely
that you will ever meet the fellow. And, if you should meet him, he
doesn't know who he is made of, for I never told him the secret of his
manufacture. Indeed, you are the only ones who know of it, and you may
keep the secret to yourselves, if you wish to."

"Never mind Chopfyt," said the Scarecrow. "Our business now is to find
poor Nimmie Amee and let her choose her tin husband. To do that, it
seems, from the information Ku-Klip has given us, we must travel to
Mount Munch."

"If that's the programme, let us start at once," suggested Woot.

So they all went outside, where they found Polychrome dancing about
among the trees and talking with the birds and laughing as merrily as
if she had not lost her Rainbow and so been separated from all her
fairy sisters.

They told her they were going to Mount Munch, and she replied:

"Very well; I am as likely to find my Rainbow there as here, and any
other place is as likely as there. It all depends on the weather. Do
you think it looks like rain?"

They shook their heads, and Polychrome laughed again and danced on
after them when they resumed their journey.




Chapter Nineteen

The Invisible Country


They were proceeding so easily and comfortably on their way to Mount
Munch that Woot said in a serious tone of voice:

"I'm afraid something is going to happen."

"Why?" asked Polychrome, dancing around the group of travelers.

"Because," said the boy, thoughtfully, "I've noticed that when we have
the least reason for getting into trouble, something is sure to go
wrong. Just now the weather is delightful; the grass is beautifully
blue and quite soft to our feet; the mountain we are seeking shows
clearly in the distance and there is no reason anything should happen
to delay us in getting there. Our troubles all seem to be over,
and--well, that's why I'm afraid," he added, with a sigh.

"Dear me!" remarked the Scarecrow, "what unhappy thoughts you have, to
be sure. This is proof that born brains cannot equal manufactured
brains, for my brains dwell only on facts and never borrow trouble.
When there is occasion for my brains to think, they think, but I would
be ashamed of my brains if they kept shooting out thoughts that were
merely fears and imaginings, such as do no good, but are likely to do
harm."

"For my part," said the Tin Woodman, "I do not think at all, but allow
my velvet heart to guide me at all times."

"The tinsmith filled my hollow head with scraps and clippings of tin,"
said the Soldier, "and he told me they would do nicely for brains, but
when I begin to think, the tin scraps rattle around and get so mixed
that I'm soon bewildered. So I try not to think. My tin heart is almost
as useless to me, for it is hard and cold, so I'm sure the red velvet
heart of my friend Nick Chopper is a better guide."

"Thoughtless people are not unusual," observed the Scarecrow, "but I
consider them more fortunate than those who have useless or wicked
thoughts and do not try to curb them. Your oil can, friend Woodman, is
filled with oil, but you only apply the oil to your joints, drop by
drop, as you need it, and do not keep spilling it where it will do no
good. Thoughts should be restrained in the same way as your oil, and
only applied when necessary, and for a good purpose. If used carefully,
thoughts are good things to have."

Polychrome laughed at him, for the Rainbow's Daughter knew more about
thoughts than the Scarecrow did. But the others were solemn, feeling
they had been rebuked, and tramped on in silence.

Suddenly Woot, who was in the lead, looked around and found that all
his comrades had mysteriously disappeared. But where could they have
gone to? The broad plain was all about him and there were neither trees
nor bushes that could hide even a rabbit, nor any hole for one to fall
into. Yet there he stood, alone.

Surprise had caused him to halt, and with a thoughtful and puzzled
expression on his face he looked down at his feet. It startled him anew
to discover that he had no feet. He reached out his hands, but he could
not see them. He could feel his hands and arms and body; he stamped his
feet on the grass and knew they were there, but in some strange way
they had become invisible.

While Woot stood, wondering, a crash of metal sounded in his ears and
he heard two heavy bodies tumble to the earth just beside him.

"Good gracious!" exclaimed the voice of the Tin Woodman.

"Mercy me!" cried the voice of the Tin Soldier.

"Why didn't you look where you were going?" asked the Tin Woodman
reproachfully.

"I did, but I couldn't see you," said the Tin Soldier. "Something has
happened to my tin eyes. I can't see you, even now, nor can I see
anyone else!"

"It's the same way with me," admitted the Tin Woodman.

Woot couldn't see either of them, although he heard them plainly, and
just then something smashed against him unexpectedly and knocked him
over; but it was only the straw-stuffed body of the Scarecrow that fell
upon him and while he could not see the Scarecrow he managed to push
him off and rose to his feet just as Polychrome whirled against him and
made him tumble again.

Sitting upon the ground, the boy asked:

"Can you see us, Poly?"

"No, indeed," answered the Rainbow's Daughter; "we've all become
invisible."

"How did it happen, do you suppose?" inquired the Scarecrow, lying
where he had fallen.

"We have met with no enemy," answered Poly-chrome, "so it must be that
this part of the country has the magic quality of making people
invisible--even fairies falling under the charm. We can see the grass,
and the flowers, and the stretch of plain before us, and we can still
see Mount Munch in the distance; but we cannot see ourselves or one
another."

"Well, what are we to do about it?" demanded Woot.

"I think this magic affects only a small part of the plain," replied
Polychrome; "perhaps there is only a streak of the country where an
enchantment makes people become invisible. So, if we get together and
hold hands, we can travel toward Mount Munch until the enchanted streak
is passed."

"All right," said Woot, jumping up, "give me your hand, Polychrome.
Where are you?"

"Here," she answered. "Whistle, Woot, and keep whistling until I come
to you."

So Woot whistled, and presently Polychrome found him and grasped his
hand.

"Someone must help me up," said the Scarecrow, lying near them; so they
found the straw man and sat him upon his feet, after which he held fast
to Polychrome's other hand.

Nick Chopper and the Tin Soldier had managed to scramble up without
assistance, but it was awkward for them and the Tin Woodman said:

"I don't seem to stand straight, somehow. But my joints all work, so I
guess I can walk."

Guided by his voice, they reached his side, where Woot grasped his tin
fingers so they might keep together.

The Tin Soldier was standing near by and the Scarecrow soon touched him
and took hold of his arm.

"I hope you're not wobbly," said the straw man, "for if two of us walk
unsteadily we will be sure to fall."

"I'm not wobbly," the Tin Soldier assured him, "but I'm certain that
one of my legs is shorter than the other. I can't see it, to tell
what's gone wrong, but I'll limp on with the rest of you until we are
out of this enchanted territory."

They now formed a line, holding hands, and turning their faces toward
Mount Munch resumed their journey. They had not gone far, however, when
a terrible growl saluted their ears. The sound seemed to come from a
place just in front of them, so they halted abruptly and remained
silent, listening with all their ears.

"I smell straw!" cried a hoarse, harsh voice, with more growls and
snarls. "I smell straw, and I'm a Hip-po-gy-raf who loves straw and
eats all he can find. I want to eat this straw! Where is it? Where is
it?"

The Scarecrow, hearing this, trembled but kept silent. All the others
were silent, too, hoping that the invisible beast would be unable to
find them. But the creature sniffed the odor of the straw and drew
nearer and nearer to them until he reached the Tin Woodman, on one end
of the line. It was a big beast and it smelled of the Tin Woodman and
grated two rows of enormous teeth against the Emperor's tin body.

"Bah! that's not straw," said the harsh voice, and the beast advanced
along the line to Woot.

"Meat! Pooh, you're no good! I can't eat meat," grumbled the beast, and
passed on to Polychrome.

"Sweetmeats and perfume--cobwebs and dew! Nothing to eat in a fairy
like you," said the creature.

Now, the Scarecrow was next to Polychrome in the line, and he realized
if the beast devoured his straw he would be helpless for a long time,
because the last farmhouse was far behind them and only grass covered
the vast expanse of plain. So in his fright he let go of Polychrome's
hand and put the hand of the Tin Soldier in that of the Rainbow's
Daughter. Then he slipped back of the line and went to the other end,
where he silently seized the Tin Woodman's hand.

Meantime, the beast had smelled the Tin Soldier and found he was the
last of the line.

"That's funny!" growled the Hip-po-gy-raf; "I can smell straw, but I
can't find it. Well, it's here, somewhere, and I must hunt around until
I do find it, for I'm hungry."

His voice was now at the left of them, so they started on, hoping to
avoid him, and traveled as fast as they could in the direction of Mount
Munch.

"I don't like this invisible country," said Woot with a shudder. "We
can't tell how many dreadful, invisible beasts are roaming around us,
or what danger we'll come to next."

"Quit thinking about danger, please," said the Scarecrow, warningly.

"Why?" asked the boy.

"If you think of some dreadful thing, it's liable to happen, but if you
don't think of it, and no one else thinks of it, it just can't happen.
Do you see?"

"No," answered Woot. "I won't be able to see much of anything until we
escape from this enchantment."

But they got out of the invisible strip of country as suddenly as they
had entered it, and the instant they got out they stopped short, for
just before them was a deep ditch, running at right angles as far as
their eyes could see and stopping all further progress toward Mount
Munch.

"It's not so very wide," said Woot, "but I'm sure none of us can jump
across it."

Polychrome began to laugh, and the Scarecrow said: "What's the matter?"

"Look at the tin men!" she said, with another burst of merry laughter.

Woot and the Scarecrow looked, and the tin men looked at themselves.

"It was the collision," said the Tin Woodman regretfully. "I knew
something was wrong with me, and now I can see that my side is dented
in so that I lean over toward the left. It was the Soldier's fault; he
shouldn't have been so careless."

"It is your fault that my right leg is bent, making it shorter than the
other, so that I limp badly," retorted the Soldier. "You shouldn't have
stood where I was walking."

"You shouldn't have walked where I was standing," replied the Tin
Woodman.

It was almost a quarrel, so Polychrome said soothingly:

"Never mind, friends; as soon as we have time I am sure we can
straighten the Soldier's leg and get the dent out of the Woodman's
body. The Scarecrow needs patting into shape, too, for he had a bad
tumble, but our first task is to get over this ditch."

"Yes, the ditch is the most important thing, just now," added Woot.

They were standing in a row, looking hard at the unexpected barrier,
when a fierce growl from behind them made them all turn quickly. Out of
the invisible country marched a huge beast with a thick, leathery skin
and a surprisingly long neck. The head on the top of this neck was
broad and flat and the eyes and mouth were very big and the nose and
ears very small. When the head was drawn down toward the beast's
shoulders, the neck was all wrinkles, but the head could shoot up very
high indeed, if the creature wished it to.

"Dear me!" exclaimed the Scarecrow, "this must be the Hip-po-gy-raf."

"Quite right," said the beast; "and you're the straw which I'm to eat
for my dinner. Oh, how I love straw! I hope you don't resent my
affectionate appetite?"

With its four great legs it advanced straight toward the Scarecrow, but
the Tin Woodman and the Tin Soldier both sprang in front of their
friend and flourished their weapons.

"Keep off!" said the Tin Woodman, warningly, "or I'll chop you with my
axe."

"Keep off!" said the Tin Soldier, "or I'll cut you with my sword."

"Would you really do that?" asked the Hip-po-gy-raf, in a disappointed
voice.

"We would," they both replied, and the Tin Woodman added: "The
Scarecrow is our friend, and he would be useless without his straw
stuffing. So, as we are comrades, faithful and true, we will defend our
friend's stuffing against all enemies."

The Hip-po-gy-raf sat down and looked at them sorrowfully.

"When one has made up his mind to have a meal of delicious straw, and
then finds he can't have it, it is certainly hard luck," he said. "And
what good is the straw man to you, or to himself, when the ditch keeps
you from going any further?"

"Well, we can go back again," suggested Woot.

"True," said the Hip-po; "and if you do, you'll be as disappointed as I
am. That's some comfort, anyhow."

The travelers looked at the beast, and then they looked across the
ditch at the level plain beyond. On the other side the grass had grown
tall, and the sun had dried it, so there was a fine crop of hay that
only needed to be cut and stacked.

"Why don't you cross over and eat hay?" the boy asked the beast.

"I'm not fond of hay," replied the Hip-po-gy-raf; "straw is much more
delicious, to my notion, and it's more scarce in this neighborhood,
too. Also I must confess that I can't get across the ditch, for my body
is too heavy and clumsy for me to jump the distance. I can stretch my
neck across, though, and you will notice that I've nibbled the hay on
the farther edge--not because I liked it, but because one must eat, and
if one can't get the sort of food he desires, he must take what is
offered or go hungry."

"Ah, I see you are a philosopher," remarked the Scarecrow.

"No, I'm just a Hip-po-gy-raf," was the reply.

Polychrome was not afraid of the big beast. She danced close to him and
said:

"If you can stretch your neck across the ditch, why not help us over?
We can sit on your big head, one at a time, and then you can lift us
across."

"Yes; I can, it is true," answered the Hip-po; "but I refuse to do it.
Unless--" he added, and stopped short.

"Unless what?" asked Polychrome.

"Unless you first allow me to eat the straw with which the Scarecrow is
stuffed."

"No," said the Rainbow's Daughter, "that is too high a price to pay.
Our friend's straw is nice and fresh, for he was restuffed only a
little while ago."

"I know," agreed the Hip-po-gy-raf. "That's why I want it. If it was
old, musty straw, I wouldn't care for it."

"Please lift us across," pleaded Polychrome.

"No," replied the beast; "since you refuse my generous offer, I can be
as stubborn as you are."

After that they were all silent for a time, but then the Scarecrow said
bravely:

"Friends, let us agree to the beast's terms. Give him my straw, and
carry the rest of me with you across the ditch. Once on the other side,
the Tin Soldier can cut some of the hay with his sharp sword, and you
can stuff me with that material until we reach a place where there is
straw. It is true I have been stuffed with straw all my life and it
will be somewhat humiliating to be filled with common hay, but I am
willing to sacrifice my pride in a good cause. Moreover, to abandon our
errand and so deprive the great Emperor of the Winkies--or this noble
Soldier--of his bride, would be equally humiliating, if not more so."

"You're a very honest and clever man!" exclaimed the Hip-po-gy-raf,
admiringly. "When I have eaten your head, perhaps I also will become
clever."

"You're not to eat my head, you know," returned the Scarecrow hastily.
"My head isn't stuffed with straw and I cannot part with it. When one
loses his head he loses his brains."

"Very well, then; you may keep your head," said the beast.

The Scarecrow's companions thanked him warmly for his loyal sacrifice
to their mutual good, and then he laid down and permitted them to pull
the straw from his body. As fast as they did this, the Hip-po-gy-raf
ate up the straw, and when all was consumed Polychrome made a neat
bundle of the clothes and boots and gloves and hat and said she would
carry them, while Woot tucked the Scarecrow's head under his arm and
promised to guard its safety.

"Now, then," said the Tin Woodman, "keep your promise, Beast, and lift
us over the ditch."

"M-m-m-mum, but that was a fine dinner!" said the Hip-po, smacking his
thick lips in satisfaction, "and I'm as good as my word. Sit on my
head, one at a time, and I'll land you safely on the other side."

He approached close to the edge of the ditch and squatted down.
Polychrome climbed over his big body and sat herself lightly upon the
flat head, holding the bundle of the Scarecrow's raiment in her hand.
Slowly the elastic neck stretched out until it reached the far side of
the ditch, when the beast lowered his head and permitted the beautiful
fairy to leap to the ground.

Woot made the queer journey next, and then the Tin Soldier and the Tin
Woodman went over, and all were well pleased to have overcome this
serious barrier to their progress.

"Now, Soldier, cut the hay," said the Scarecrow's head, which was still
held by Woot the Wanderer.

"I'd like to, but I can't stoop over, with my bent leg, without
falling," replied Captain Fyter.

"What can we do about that leg, anyhow?" asked Woot, appealing to
Polychrome.

She danced around in a circle several times without replying, and the
boy feared she had not heard him; but the Rainbow's Daughter was merely
thinking upon the problem, and presently she paused beside the Tin
Soldier and said:

"I've been taught a little fairy magic, but I've never before been
asked to mend tin legs with it, so I'm not sure I can help you. It all
depends on the good will of my unseen fairy guardians, so I'll try, and
if I fail, you will be no worse off than you are now."

She danced around the circle again, and then laid both hands upon the
twisted tin leg and sang in her sweet voice:

  "Fairy Powers, come to my aid!
  This bent leg of tin is made;
  Make it straight and strong and true,
  And I'll render thanks to you."


"Ah!" murmured Captain Fyter in a glad voice, as she withdrew her hands
and danced away, and they saw he was standing straight as ever, because
his leg was as shapely and strong as it had been before his accident.

The Tin Woodman had watched Polychrome with much interest, and he now
said:

"Please take the dent out of my side, Poly, for I am more crippled than
was the Soldier."

So the Rainbow's Daughter touched his side lightly and sang:

  "Here's a dent by accident;
  Such a thing was never meant.
  Fairy Powers, so wondrous great,
  Make our dear Tin Woodman straight!"


"Good!" cried the Emperor, again standing erect and strutting around to
show his fine figure. "Your fairy magic may not be able to accomplish
all things, sweet Polychrome, but it works splendidly on tin. Thank you
very much."

"The hay--the hay!" pleaded the Scarecrow's head.

"Oh, yes; the hay," said Woot. "What are you waiting for, Captain
Fyter?"

At once the Tin Soldier set to work cutting hay with his sword and in a
few minutes there was quite enough with which to stuff the Scarecrow's
body. Woot and Polychrome did this and it was no easy task because the
hay packed together more than straw and as they had little experience
in such work their job, when completed, left the Scarecrow's arms and
legs rather bunchy. Also there was a hump on his back which made Woot
laugh and say it reminded him of a camel, but it was the best they
could do and when the head was fastened on to the body they asked the
Scarecrow how he felt.

"A little heavy, and not quite natural," he cheerfully replied; "but
I'll get along somehow until we reach a straw-stack. Don't laugh at me,
please, because I'm a little ashamed of myself and I don't want to
regret a good action."

They started at once in the direction of Mount Munch, and as the
Scarecrow proved very clumsy in his movements, Woot took one of his
arms and the Tin Woodman the other and so helped their friend to walk
in a straight line.

And the Rainbow's Daughter, as before, danced ahead of them and behind
them and all around them, and they never minded her odd ways, because
to them she was like a ray of sunshine.




Chapter Twenty

Over Night


The Land of the Munchkins is full of surprises, as our travelers had
already learned, and although Mount Munch was constantly growing larger
as they advanced toward it, they knew it was still a long way off and
were not certain, by any means, that they had escaped all danger or
encountered their last adventure.

The plain was broad, and as far as the eye could see, there seemed to
be a level stretch of country between them and the mountain, but toward
evening they came upon a hollow, in which stood a tiny blue Munchkin
dwelling with a garden around it and fields of grain filling in all the
rest of the hollow.

They did not discover this place until they came close to the edge of
it, and they were astonished at the sight that greeted them because
they had imagined that this part of the plain had no inhabitants.

"It's a very small house," Woot declared. "I wonder who lives there?"

"The way to find out is to knock on the door and ask," replied the Tin
Woodman. "Perhaps it is the home of Nimmie Amee."

"Is she a dwarf?" asked the boy.

"No, indeed; Nimmie Amee is a full sized woman."

"Then I'm sure she couldn't live in that little house," said Woot.

"Let's go down," suggested the Scarecrow. "I'm almost sure I can see a
straw-stack in the back yard."

They descended the hollow, which was rather steep at the sides, and
soon came to the house, which was indeed rather small. Woot knocked
upon a door that was not much higher than his waist, but got no reply.
He knocked again, but not a sound was heard.

"Smoke is coming out of the chimney," announced Polychrome, who was
dancing lightly through the garden, where cabbages and beets and
turnips and the like were growing finely.

"Then someone surely lives here," said Woot, and knocked again.

Now a window at the side of the house opened and a queer head appeared.
It was white and hairy and had a long snout and little round eyes. The
ears were hidden by a blue sunbonnet tied under the chin.

"Oh; it's a pig!" exclaimed Woot.

"Pardon me; I am Mrs. Squealina Swyne, wife of Professor Grunter Swyne,
and this is our home," said the one in the window. "What do you want?"

"What sort of a Professor is your husband?" inquired the Tin Woodman
curiously.

"He is Professor of Cabbage Culture and Corn Perfection. He is very
famous in his own family, and would be the wonder of the world if he
went abroad," said Mrs. Swyne in a voice that was half proud and half
irritable. "I must also inform you intruders that the Professor is a
dangerous individual, for he files his teeth every morning until they
are sharp as needles. If you are butchers, you'd better run away and
avoid trouble."

"We are not butchers," the Tin Woodman assured her.

"Then what are you doing with that axe?  And why has the other tin man
a sword?"

"They are the only weapons we have to defend our friends from their
enemies," explained the Emperor of the Winkies, and Woot added:

"Do not be afraid of us, Mrs. Swyne, for we are harmless travelers. The
tin men and the Scarecrow never eat anything and Polychrome feasts only
on dewdrops. As for me, I'm rather hungry, but there is plenty of food
in your garden to satisfy me."

Professor Swyne now joined his wife at the window, looking rather
scared in spite of the boy's assuring speech. He wore a blue Munchkin
hat, with pointed crown and broad brim, and big spectacles covered his
eyes. He peeked around from behind his wife and after looking hard at
the strangers, he said:

"My wisdom assures me that you are merely travelers, as you say, and
not butchers. Butchers have reason to be afraid of me, but you are
safe. We cannot invite you in, for you are too big for our house, but
the boy who eats is welcome to all the carrots and turnips he wants.
Make yourselves at home in the garden and stay all night, if you like;
but in the morning you must go away, for we are quiet people and do not
care for company."

"May I have some of your straw?" asked the Scarecrow.

"Help yourself," replied Professor Swyne.

"For pigs, they're quite respectable," remarked Woot, as they all went
toward the straw-stack.

"I'm glad they didn't invite us in," said Captain Fyter. "I hope I'm
not too particular about my associates, but I draw the line at pigs."

The Scarecrow was glad to be rid of his hay, for during the long walk
it had sagged down and made him fat and squatty and more bumpy than at
first.

"I'm not specially proud," he said, "but I love a manly figure, such as
only straw stuffing can create. I've not felt like myself since that
hungry Hip-po ate my last straw."

Polychrome and Woot set to work removing the hay and then they selected
the finest straw, crisp and golden, and with it stuffed the Scarecrow
anew. He certainly looked better after the operation, and he was so
pleased at being reformed that he tried to dance a little jig, and
almost succeeded.

"I shall sleep under the straw-stack tonight," Woot decided, after he
had eaten some of the vegetables from the garden, and in fact he slept
very well, with the two tin men and the Scarecrow sitting silently
beside him and Polychrome away somewhere in the moonlight dancing her
fairy dances.

At daybreak the Tin Woodman and the Tin Soldier took occasion to polish
their bodies and oil their joints, for both were exceedingly careful of
their personal appearance. They had forgotten the quarrel due to their
accidental bumping of one another in the invisible country, and being
now good friends the Tin Woodman polished the Tin Soldier's back for
him and then the Tin Soldier polished the Tin Woodman's back.

For breakfast the Wanderer ate crisp lettuce and radishes, and the
Rainbow's Daughter, who had now returned to her friends, sipped the
dewdrops that had formed on the petals of the wild-flowers.

As they passed the little house to renew their journey, Woot called out:

"Good-bye, Mr. and Mrs. Swyne!"

The window opened and the two pigs looked out.

"A pleasant journey," said the Professor.

"Have you any children?" asked the Scarecrow, who was a great friend of
children.

"We have nine," answered the Professor; "but they do not live with us,
for when they were tiny piglets the Wizard of Oz came here and offered
to care for them and to educate them. So we let him have our nine tiny
piglets, for he's a good Wizard and can be relied upon to keep his
promises."

"I know the Nine Tiny Piglets," said the Tin Woodman.

"So do I," said the Scarecrow. "They still live in the Emerald City,
and the Wizard takes good care of them and teaches them to do all sorts
of tricks."

"Did they ever grow up?" inquired Mrs. Squealina Swyne, in an anxious
voice.

"No," answered the Scarecrow; "like all other children in the Land of
Oz, they will always remain children, and in the case of the tiny
piglets that is a good thing, because they would not be nearly so cute
and cunning if they were bigger."

"But are they happy?" asked Mrs. Swyne.

"Everyone in the Emerald City is happy," said the Tin Woodman. "They
can't help it."

Then the travelers said good-bye, and climbed the side of the basin
that was toward Mount Munch.




Chapter Twenty-One

Polychrome's Magic


On this morning, which ought to be the last of this important journey,
our friends started away as bright and cheery as could be, and Woot
whistled a merry tune so that Polychrome could dance to the music.

On reaching the top of the hill, the plain spread out before them in
all its beauty of blue grasses and wildflowers, and Mount Munch seemed
much nearer than it had the previous evening. They trudged on at a
brisk pace, and by noon the mountain was so close that they could
admire its appearance. Its slopes were partly clothed with pretty
evergreens, and its foot-hills were tufted with a slender waving
bluegrass that had a tassel on the end of every blade. And, for the
first time, they perceived, near the foot of the mountain, a charming
house, not of great size but neatly painted and with many flowers
surrounding it and vines climbing over the doors and windows.

It was toward this solitary house that our travelers now directed their
steps, thinking to inquire of the people who lived there where Nimmie
Amee might be found.

There were no paths, but the way was quite open and clear, and they
were drawing near to the dwelling when Woot the Wanderer, who was then
in the lead of the little party, halted with such an abrupt jerk that
he stumbled over backward and lay flat on his back in the meadow. The
Scarecrow stopped to look at the boy.

"Why did you do that?" he asked in surprise.

Woot sat up and gazed around him in amazement.

"I--I don't know!" he replied.

The two tin men, arm in arm, started to pass them when both halted and
tumbled, with a great clatter, into a heap beside Woot. Polychrome,
laughing at the absurd sight, came dancing up and she, also, came to a
sudden stop, but managed to save herself from falling.

Everyone of them was much astonished, and the Scarecrow said with a
puzzled look:

"I don't see anything."

"Nor I," said Woot; "but something hit me, just the same."

"Some invisible person struck me a heavy blow," declared the Tin
Woodman, struggling to separate himself from the Tin Soldier, whose
legs and arms were mixed with his own.

"I'm not sure it was a person," said Polychrome, looking more grave
than usual. "It seems to me that I merely ran into some hard substance
which barred my way. In order to make sure of this, let me try another
place."

She ran back a way and then with much caution advanced in a different
place, but when she reached a position on a line with the others she
halted, her arms outstretched before her.

"I can feel something hard--something smooth as glass," she said, "but
I'm sure it is not glass."

"Let me try," suggested Woot, getting up; but when he tried to go
forward, he discovered the same barrier that Polychrome had encountered.

"No," he said, "it isn't glass. But what is it?"

"Air," replied a small voice beside him. "Solid air; that's all."

They all looked downward and found a sky-blue rabbit had stuck his head
out of a burrow in the ground. The rabbit's eyes were a deeper blue
than his fur, and the pretty creature seemed friendly and unafraid.

"Air!" exclaimed Woot, staring in astonishment into the rabbit's blue
eyes; "whoever heard of air so solid that one cannot push it aside?"

"You can't push this air aside," declared the rabbit, "for it was made
hard by powerful sorcery, and it forms a wall that is intended to keep
people from getting to that house yonder."

"Oh; it's a wall, is it?" said the Tin Woodman.

"Yes, it is really a wall," answered the rabbit, "and it is fully six
feet thick."

"How high is it?" inquired Captain Fyter, the Tin Soldier.

"Oh, ever so high; perhaps a mile," said the rabbit.

"Couldn't we go around it?" asked Woot.

"Of course, for the wall is a circle," explained the rabbit. "In the
center of the circle stands the house, so you may walk around the Wall
of Solid Air, but you can't get to the house."

"Who put the air wall around the house?" was the Scarecrow's question.

"Nimmie Amee did that."

"Nimmie Amee!" they all exclaimed in surprise.

"Yes," answered the rabbit. "She used to live with an old Witch, who
was suddenly destroyed, and when Nimmie Amee ran away from the Witch's
house, she took with her just one magic formula--pure sorcery it
was--which enabled her to build this air wall around her house--the
house yonder. It was quite a clever idea, I think, for it doesn't mar
the beauty of the landscape, solid air being invisible, and yet it
keeps all strangers away from the house."

"Does Nimmie Amee live there now?" asked the Tin Woodman anxiously.

"Yes, indeed," said the rabbit.

"And does she weep and wail from morning till night?" continued the
Emperor.

"No; she seems quite happy," asserted the rabbit.

The Tin Woodman seemed quite disappointed to hear this report of his
old sweetheart, but the Scarecrow reassured his friend, saying:

"Never mind, your Majesty; however happy Nimmie Amee is now, I'm sure
she will be much happier as Empress of the Winkies."

"Perhaps," said Captain Fyter, somewhat stiffly, "she will be still
more happy to become the bride of a Tin Soldier."

"She shall choose between us, as we have agreed," the Tin Woodman
promised; "but how shall we get to the poor girl?"

Polychrome, although dancing lightly back and forth, had listened to
every word of the conversation. Now she came forward and sat herself
down just in front of the Blue Rabbit, her many-hued draperies giving
her the appearance of some beautiful flower. The rabbit didn't back
away an inch. Instead, he gazed at the Rainbow's Daughter admiringly.

"Does your burrow go underneath this Wall of Air?" asked Polychrome.

"To be sure," answered the Blue Rabbit; "I dug it that way so I could
roam in these broad fields, by going out one way, or eat the cabbages
in Nimmie Amee's garden by leaving my burrow at the other end. I don't
think Nimmie Amee ought to mind the little I take from her garden, or
the hole I've made under her magic wall. A rabbit may go and come as he
pleases, but no one who is bigger than I am could get through my
burrow."

"Will you allow us to pass through it, if we are able to?" inquired
Polychrome.

"Yes, indeed," answered the Blue Rabbit. "I'm no especial friend of
Nimmie Amee, for once she threw stones at me, just because I was
nibbling some lettuce, and only yesterday she yelled 'Shoo!' at me,
which made me nervous. You're welcome to use my burrow in any way you
choose."

"But this is all nonsense!" declared Woot the Wanderer. "We are every
one too big to crawl through a rabbit's burrow."

"We are too big now," agreed the Scarecrow, "but you must remember that
Polychrome is a fairy, and fairies have many magic powers."

Woot's face brightened as he turned to the lovely Daughter of the
Rainbow.

"Could you make us all as small as that rabbit?" he asked eagerly.

"I can try," answered Polychrome, with a smile. And presently she did
it--so easily that Woot was not the only one astonished. As the now
tiny people grouped themselves before the rabbit's burrow the hole
appeared to them like the entrance to a tunnel, which indeed it was.

"I'll go first," said wee Polychrome, who had made herself grow as
small as the others, and into the tunnel she danced without hesitation.
A tiny Scarecrow went next and then the two funny little tin men.

"Walk in; it's your turn," said the Blue Rabbit to Woot the Wanderer.
"I'm coming after, to see how you get along. This will be a regular
surprise party to Nimmie Amee."

So Woot entered the hole and felt his way along its smooth sides in the
dark until he finally saw the glimmer of daylight ahead and knew the
journey was almost over. Had he remained his natural size, the distance
could have been covered in a few steps, but to a thumb-high Woot it was
quite a promenade. When he emerged from the burrow he found himself but
a short distance from the house, in the center of the vegetable garden,
where the leaves of rhubarb waving above his head seemed like trees.
Outside the hole, and waiting for him, he found all his friends.

"So far, so good!" remarked the Scarecrow cheerfully.

"Yes; so far, but no farther," returned the Tin Woodman in a plaintive
and disturbed tone of voice. "I am now close to Nimmie Amee, whom I
have come ever so far to seek, but I cannot ask the girl to marry such
a little man as I am now."

"I'm no bigger than a toy soldier!" said Captain Fyter, sorrowfully.
"Unless Polychrome can make us big again, there is little use in our
visiting Nimmie Amee at all, for I'm sure she wouldn't care for a
husband she might carelessly step on and ruin."

Polychrome laughed merrily.

"If I make you big, you can't get out of here again," said she, "and if
you remain little Nimmie Amee will laugh at you. So make your choice."

"I think we'd better go back," said Woot seriously

"No," said the Tin Woodman, stoutly, "I have decided that it's my duty
to make Nimmie Amee happy, in case she wishes to marry me."

"So have I," announced Captain Fyter. "A good soldier never shrinks
from doing his duty."

"As for that," said the Scarecrow, "tin doesn't shrink any to speak of,
under any circumstances. But Woot and I intend to stick to our
comrades, whatever they decide to do, so we will ask Polychrome to make
us as big as we were before."

Polychrome agreed to this request and in half a minute all of them,
including herself, had been enlarged again to their natural sizes. They
then thanked the Blue Rabbit for his kind assistance, and at once
approached the house of Nimme Amee.




Chapter Twenty-Two

Nimmie Amee


We may be sure that at this moment our friends were all anxious to see
the end of the adventure that had caused them so many trials and
troubles. Perhaps the Tin Woodman's heart did not beat any faster,
because it was made of red velvet and stuffed with sawdust, and the Tin
Soldier's heart was made of tin and reposed in his tin bosom without a
hint of emotion. However, there is little doubt that they both knew
that a critical moment in their lives had arrived, and that Nimmie
Amee's decision was destined to influence the future of one or the
other.

As they assumed their natural sizes and the rhubarb leaves that had
before towered above their heads now barely covered their feet, they
looked around the garden and found that no person was visible save
themselves. No sound of activity came from the house, either, but they
walked to the front door, which had a little porch built before it, and
there the two tinmen stood side by side while both knocked upon the
door with their tin knuckles.

As no one seemed eager to answer the summons they knocked again; and
then again. Finally they heard a stir from within and someone coughed.

"Who's there?" called a girl's voice.

"It's I!" cried the tin twins, together.

"How did you get there?" asked the voice.

They hesitated how to reply, so Woot answered for them:

"By means of magic."

"Oh," said the unseen girl. "Are you friends, or foes?"

"Friends!" they all exclaimed.

Then they heard footsteps approach the door, which slowly opened and
revealed a very pretty Munchkin girl standing in the doorway.

"Nimmie Amee!" cried the tin twins.

"That's my name," replied the girl, looking at them in cold surprise.
"But who can you be?"

"Don't you know me, Nimmie?" said the Tin Woodman. "I'm your old
sweetheart, Nick Chopper!"

"Don't you know me, my dear?" said the Tin Soldier. "I'm your old
sweetheart, Captain Fyter!"

Nimmie Amee smiled at them both. Then she looked beyond them at the
rest of the party and smiled again. However, she seemed more amused
than pleased.

"Come in," she said, leading the way inside. "Even sweethearts are
forgotten after a time, but you and your friends are welcome."

The room they now entered was cosy and comfortable, being neatly
furnished and well swept and dusted. But they found someone there
besides Nimmie Amee. A man dressed in the attractive Munchkin costume
was lazily reclining in an easy chair, and he sat up and turned his
eves on the visitors with a cold and indifferent stare that was almost
insolent. He did not even rise from his seat to greet the strangers,
but after glaring at them he looked away with a scowl, as if they were
of too little importance to interest him.

The tin men returned this man's stare with interest, but they did not
look away from him because neither of them seemed able to take his eyes
off this Munchkin, who was remarkable in having one tin arm quite like
their own tin arms.

"Seems to me," said Captain Fyter, in a voice that sounded harsh and
indignant, "that you, sir, are a vile impostor!"

"Gently--gently!" cautioned the Scarecrow; "don't be rude to strangers,
Captain."

"Rude?" shouted the Tin Soldier, now very much provoked; "why, he's a
scoundrel--a thief! The villain is wearing my own head!"

"Yes," added the Tin Woodman, "and he's wearing my right arm! I can
recognize it by the two warts on the little finger."

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Woot. "Then this must be the man whom old
Ku-Klip patched together and named Chopfyt."

The man now turned toward them, still scowling.

"Yes, that is my name," he said in a voice like a growl, "and it is
absurd for you tin creatures, or for anyone else, to claim my head, or
arm, or any part of me, for they are my personal property."

"You? You're a Nobody!" shouted Captain Fyter.

"You're just a mix-up," declared the Emperor.

"Now, now, gentlemen," interrupted Nimmie Amee, "I must ask you to be
more respectful to poor Chopfyt. For, being my guests, it is not polite
for you to insult my husband."

"Your husband!" the tin twins exclaimed in dismay.

"Yes," said she. "I married Chopfyt a long time ago, because my other
two sweethearts had deserted me."

This reproof embarrassed both Nick Chopper and Captain Fyter. They
looked down, shamefaced, for a moment, and then the Tin Woodman
explained in an earnest voice:

"I rusted."

"So did I," said the Tin Soldier.

"I could not know that, of course," asserted Nimmie Amee. "All I knew
was that neither of you came to marry me, as you had promised to do.
But men are not scarce in the Land of Oz. After I came here to live, I
met Mr. Chopfyt, and he was the  more interesting because he reminded
me strongly of both of you, as you were before you became tin. He even
had a tin arm, and that reminded me of you the more.

"No wonder!" remarked the Scarecrow.

"But, listen, Nimmie Amee!" said the astonished Woot; "he really is
both of them, for he is made of their cast-off parts."

"Oh, you're quite wrong," declared Polychrome, laughing, for she was
greatly enjoying the confusion of the others. "The tin men are still
themselves, as they will tell you, and so Chopfyt must be someone else."

They looked at her bewildered, for the facts in the case were too
puzzling to be grasped at once.

"It is all the fault of old Ku-Klip," muttered the Tin Woodman. "He had
no right to use our castoff parts to make another man with."

"It seems he did it, however," said Nimmie Amee calmly, "and I married
him because he resembled you both. I won't say he is a husband to be
proud of, because he has a mixed nature and isn't always an agreeable
companion. There are times when I have to chide him gently, both with
my tongue and with my broomstick. But he is my husband, and I must make
the best of him."

"If you don't like him," suggested the Tin Woodman, "Captain Fyter and
I can chop him up with our axe and sword, and each take such parts of
the fellow as belong to him. Then we are willing for you to select one
of us as your husband."

"That is a good idea," approved Captain Fyter, drawing his sword.

"No," said Nimmie Amee; "I think I'll keep the husband I now have. He
is now trained to draw the water and carry in the wood and hoe the
cabbages and weed the flower-beds and dust the furniture and perform
many tasks of a like character. A new husband would have to be
scolded--and gently chided--until he learns my ways. So I think it will
be better to keep my Chopfyt, and I see no reason why you should object
to him. You two gentlemen threw him away when you became tin, because
you had no further use for him, so you cannot justly claim him now. I
advise you to go back to your own homes and forget me, as I have
forgotten you."

"Good advice!" laughed Polychrome, dancing.

"Are you happy?" asked the Tin Soldier.

"Of course I am," said Nimmie Amee; "I'm the mistress of all I
survey--the queen of my little domain."

"Wouldn't you like to be the Empress of the Winkies?" asked the Tin
Woodman.

"Mercy, no," she answered. "That would be a lot of bother. I don't care
for society, or pomp, or posing. All I ask is to be left alone and not
to be annoyed by visitors."

The Scarecrow nudged Woot the Wanderer.

"That sounds to me like a hint," he said.

"Looks as if we'd had our journey for nothing," remarked Woot, who was
a little ashamed and disappointed because he had proposed the journey.

"I am glad, however," said the Tin Woodman, "that I have found Nimmie
Amee, and discovered that she is already married and happy. It will
relieve me of any further anxiety concerning her."

"For my part," said the Tin Soldier, "I am not sorry to be free. The
only thing that really annoys me is finding my head upon Chopfyt's
body."

"As for that, I'm pretty sure it is my body, or a part of it, anyway,"
remarked the Emperor of the Winkies. "But never mind, friend Soldier;
let us be willing to donate our cast-off members to insure the
happiness of Nimmie Amee, and be thankful it is not our fate to hoe
cabbages and draw water--and be chided--in the place of this creature
Chopfyt."

"Yes," agreed the Soldier, "we have much to be thankful for."

Polychrome, who had wandered outside, now poked her pretty head through
an open window and exclaimed in a pleased voice:

"It's getting cloudy. Perhaps it is going to rain!"




Chapter Twenty-Three

Through the Tunnel


It didn't rain just then, although the clouds in the sky grew thicker
and more threatening. Polychrome hoped for a thunder-storm, followed by
her Rainbow, but the two tin men did not relish the idea of getting
wet. They even preferred to remain in Nimmie Amee's house, although
they felt they were not welcome there, rather than go out and face the
coming storm. But the Scarecrow, who was a very thoughtful person, said
to his friends:

"If we remain here until after the storm, and Polychrome goes away on
her Rainbow, then we will be prisoners inside the Wall of Solid Air; so
it seems best to start upon our return journey at once. If I get wet,
my straw stuffing will be ruined, and if you two tin gentlemen get wet,
you may perhaps rust again, and become useless. But even that is better
than to stay here. Once we are free of the barrier, we have Woot the
Wanderer to help us, and he can oil your joints and restuff my body, if
it becomes necessary, for the boy is made of meat, which neither rusts
nor gets soggy or moldy."

"Come along, then!" cried Polychrome from the window, and the others,
realizing the wisdom of the Scarecrow's speech, took leave of Nimmie
Amee, who was glad to be rid of them, and said good-bye to her husband,
who merely scowled and made no answer, and then they hurried from the
house.

"Your old parts are not very polite, I must say," remarked the
Scarecrow, when they were in the garden.

"No," said Woot, "Chopfyt is a regular grouch. He might have wished us
a pleasant journey, at the very least."

"I beg you not to hold us responsible for that creature's actions,"
pleaded the Tin Woodman. "We are through with Chopfyt and shall have
nothing further to do with him."

Polychrome danced ahead of the party and led them straight to the
burrow of the Blue Rabbit, which they might have had some difficulty in
finding without her. There she lost no time in making them all small
again. The Blue Rabbit was busy nibbling cabbage leaves in Nimmie
Amee's garden, so they did not ask his permission but at once entered
the burrow.

Even now the raindrops were beginning to fall, but it was quite dry
inside the tunnel and by the time they had reached the other end,
outside the circular Wall of Solid Air, the storm was at its height and
the rain was coming down in torrents.

"Let us wait here," proposed Polychrome, peering out of the hole and
then quickly retreating. "The Rainbow won't appear until after the
storm and I can make you big again in a jiffy, before I join my sisters
on our bow."

"That's a good plan," said the Scarecrow approvingly. "It will save me
from getting soaked and soggy."

"It will save me from rusting," said the Tin Soldier.

"It will enable me to remain highly polished," said the Tin Woodman.

"Oh, as for that, I myself prefer not to get my pretty clothes wet,"
laughed the Rainbow's daughter.

"But while we wait I will bid you all adieu. I must also thank you for
saving me from that dreadful Giantess, Mrs. Yoop. You have been good
and patient comrades and I have enjoyed our adventures together, but I
am never so happy as when on my dear Rainbow."

"Will your father scold you for getting left on the earth?" asked Woot.

"I suppose so," said Polychrome gaily; "I'm always getting scolded for
my mad pranks, as they are called. My sisters are so sweet and lovely
and proper that they never dance off our Rainbow, and so they never
have any adventures. Adventures to me are good fun, only I never like
to stay too long on earth, because I really don't belong here. I shall
tell my Father the Rainbow that I'll try not to be so careless again,
and he will forgive me because in our sky mansions there is always joy
and happiness."

They were indeed sorry to part with their dainty and beautiful
companion and assured her of their devotion if they ever chanced to
meet again. She shook hands with the Scarecrow and the Tin Men and
kissed Woot the Wanderer lightly upon his forehead.

And then the rain suddenly ceased, and as the tiny people left the
burrow of the Blue Rabbit, a glorious big Rainbow appeared in the sky
and the end of its arch slowly descended and touched the ground just
where they stood.

Woot was so busy watching a score of lovely maidens--sisters of
Polychrome--who were leaning over the edge of the bow, and another
score who danced gaily amid the radiance of the splendid hues, that he
did not notice he was growing big again. But now Polychrome joined her
sisters on the Rainbow and the huge arch lifted and slowly melted away
as the sun burst from the clouds and sent its own white beams dancing
over the meadows.

"Why, she's gone!" exclaimed the boy, and turned to see his companions
still waving their hands in token of adieu to the vanished Polychrome.




Chapter Twenty-Four

The Curtain Falls


Well, the rest of the story is quickly told, for the return Journey of
our adventurers was without any important incident. The Scarecrow was
so afraid of meeting the Hip-po-gy-raf, and having his straw eaten
again, that he urged his comrades to select another route to the
Emerald City, and they willingly consented, so that the Invisible
Country was wholly avoided.

Of course, when they reached the Emerald City their first duty was to
visit Ozma's palace, where they were royally entertained. The Tin
Soldier and Woot the Wanderer were welcomed as warmly as any strangers
might be who had been the traveling companions of Ozma's dear old
friends, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman.

At the banquet table that evening they related the manner in which they
had discovered Nimmie Amee, and told how they had found her happily
married to Chopfyt, whose relationship to Nick Chopper and Captain
Fyter was so bewildering that they asked Ozma's advice what to do about
it.

"You need not consider Chopfyt at all," replied the beautiful girl
Ruler of Oz. "If Nimmie Amee is content with that misfit man for a
husband, we have not even just cause to blame Ku-Klip for gluing him
together."

"I think it was a very good idea," added little Dorothy, "for if
Ku-Klip hadn't used up your castoff parts, they would have been wasted.
It's wicked to be wasteful, isn't it?"

"Well, anyhow," said Woot the Wanderer, "Chopfyt, being kept a prisoner
by his wife, is too far away from anyone to bother either of you tin
men in any way. If you hadn't gone where he is and discovered him, you
would never have worried about him."

"What do you care, anyhow," Betsy Bobbin asked the Tin Woodman, "so
long as Nimmie Amee is satisfied?"

"And just to think," remarked Tiny Trot, "that any girl would rather
live with a mixture like Chopfyt, on far-away Mount Munch, than to be
the Empress of the Winkies!"

"It is her own choice," said the Tin Woodman contentedly; "and, after
all, I'm not sure the Winkies would care to have an Empress."

It puzzled Ozma, for a time, to decide what to do with the Tin Soldier.
If he went with the Tin Woodman to the Emperor's castle, she felt that
the two tin men might not be able to live together in harmony, and
moreover the Emperor would not be so distinguished if he had a double
constantly beside him. So she asked Captain Fyter if he was willing to
serve her as a soldier, and he promptly declared that nothing would
please him more. After he had been in her service for some time, Ozma
sent him into the Gillikin Country, with instructions to keep order
among the wild people who inhabit some parts of that unknown country of
Oz.

As for Woot, being a Wanderer by profession, he was allowed to wander
wherever he desired, and Ozma promised to keep watch over his future
journeys and to protect the boy as well as she was able, in case he
ever got into more trouble.

All this having been happily arranged, the Tin Woodman returned to his
tin castle, and his chosen comrade, the Scarecrow, accompanied him on
the way. The two friends were sure to pass many pleasant hours together
in talking over their recent adventures, for as they neither ate nor
slept they found their greatest amusement in conversation.





THE FAMOUS OZ BOOKS

By L. Frank Baum:

  The Wizard of Oz
  The Land of Oz
  Ozma of Oz
  Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
  The Road to Oz
  The Emerald City of Oz
  The Patchwork Girl of Oz
  Tik-Tok of Oz
  The Scarecrow of Oz
  Rinkitink in Oz
  The Lost Princess of Oz
  The Tin Woodman of Oz
  The Magic Of Oz
  Glinda of Oz

========================================
========================================

THE LOST PRINCESS OF OZ


by

L. FRANK BAUM



  This Book is Dedicated
  To My Granddaughter
  OZMA BAUM




To My Readers

Some of my youthful readers are developing wonderful imaginations. This
pleases me. Imagination has brought mankind through the Dark Ages to
its present state of civilization. Imagination led Columbus to discover
America. Imagination led Franklin to discover electricity. Imagination
has given us the steam engine, the telephone, the talking-machine and
the automobile, for these things had to be dreamed of before they
became realities. So I believe that dreams--day dreams, you know, with
your eyes wide open and your brain-machinery whizzing--are likely to
lead to the betterment of the world. The imaginative child will become
the imaginative man or woman most apt to create, to invent, and
therefore to foster civilization. A prominent educator tells me that
fairy tales are of untold value in developing imagination in the young.
I believe it.

Among the letters I receive from children are many containing
suggestions of "what to write about in the next Oz Book." Some of the
ideas advanced are mighty interesting, while others are too extravagant
to be seriously considered--even in a fairy tale. Yet I like them all,
and I must admit that the main idea in "The Lost Princess of Oz" was
suggested to me by a sweet little girl of eleven who called to see me
and to talk about the Land of Oz. Said she: "I s'pose if Ozma ever got
lost, or stolen, ev'rybody in Oz would be dreadful sorry."

That was all, but quite enough foundation to build this present story
on. If you happen to like the story, give credit to my little friend's
clever hint.

L. Frank Baum
  Royal Historian of Oz




LIST OF CHAPTERS

   1  A Terrible Loss
   2  The Troubles of Glinda the Good
   3  The Robbery of Cayke the Cookie Cook
   4  Among the Winkies
   5  Ozma's Friends Are Perplexed
   6  The Search Party
   7  The Merry-Go-Round Mountains
   8  The Mysterious City
   9  The High Coco-Lorum of Thi
  10  Toto Loses Something
  11  Button-Bright Loses Himself
  12  The Czarover of Herku
  13  The Truth Pond
  14  The Unhappy Ferryman
  15  The Big Lavender Bear
  16  The Little Pink Bear
  17  The Meeting
  18  The Conference
  19  Ugu the Shoemaker
  20  More Surprises
  21  Magic Against Magic
  22  In the Wicker Castle
  23  The Defiance of Ugu the Shoemaker
  24  The Little Pink Bear Speaks Truly
  25  Ozma of Oz
  26  Dorothy Forgives




THE LOST PRINCESS

BY L. FRANK BAUM



CHAPTER 1

A TERRIBLE LOSS


There could be no doubt of the fact: Princess Ozma, the lovely girl
ruler of the Fairyland of Oz, was lost.  She had completely
disappeared.  Not one of her subjects--not even her closest
friends--knew what had become of her.  It was Dorothy who first
discovered it.  Dorothy was a little Kansas girl who had come to the
Land of Oz to live and had been given a delightful suite of rooms in
Ozma's royal palace just because Ozma loved Dorothy and wanted her to
live as near her as possible so the two girls might be much together.

Dorothy was not the only girl from the outside world who had been
welcomed to Oz and lived in the royal palace.  There was another named
Betsy Bobbin, whose adventures had led her to seek refuge with Ozma,
and still another named Trot, who had been invited, together with her
faithful companion Cap'n Bill, to make her home in this wonderful
fairyland.  The three girls all had rooms in the palace and were great
chums; but Dorothy was the dearest friend of their gracious Ruler and
only she at any hour dared to seek Ozma in her royal apartments.  For
Dorothy had lived in Oz much longer than the other girls and had been
made a Princess of the realm.

Betsy was a year older than Dorothy and Trot was a year younger, yet
the three were near enough of an age to become great playmates and to
have nice times together.  It was while the three were talking together
one morning in Dorothy's room that Betsy proposed they make a journey
into the Munchkin Country, which was one of the four great countries of
the Land of Oz ruled by Ozma.  "I've never been there yet," said Betsy
Bobbin, "but the Scarecrow once told me it is the prettiest country in
all Oz."

"I'd like to go, too," added Trot.


"All right," said Dorothy.  "I'll go and ask Ozma.  Perhaps she will
let us take the Sawhorse and the Red Wagon, which would be much nicer
for us than having to walk all the way.  This Land of Oz is a pretty
big place when you get to all the edges of it."

So she jumped up and went along the halls of the splendid palace until
she came to the royal suite, which filled all the front of the second
floor.  In a little waiting room sat Ozma's maid, Jellia Jamb, who was
busily sewing.  "Is Ozma up yet?" inquired Dorothy.

"I don't know, my dear," replied Jellia.  "I haven't heard a word from
her this morning.  She hasn't even called for her bath or her
breakfast, and it is far past her usual time for them."

"That's strange!" exclaimed the little girl.

"Yes," agreed the maid, "but of course no harm could have happened to
her.  No one can die or be killed in the Land of Oz, and Ozma is
herself a powerful fairy, and she has no enemies so far as we know.
Therefore I am not at all worried about her, though I must admit her
silence is unusual."

"Perhaps," said Dorothy thoughtfully, "she has overslept.  Or she may
be reading or working out some new sort of magic to do good to her
people."

"Any of these things may be true," replied Jellia Jamb, "so I haven't
dared disturb our royal mistress.  You, however, are a privileged
character, Princess, and I am sure that Ozma wouldn't mind at all if
you went in to see her."

"Of course not," said Dorothy, and opening the door of the outer
chamber, she went in.  All was still here.  She walked into another
room, which was Ozma's boudoir, and then, pushing back a heavy drapery
richly broidered with threads of pure gold, the girl entered the
sleeping-room of the fairy Ruler of Oz.  The bed of ivory and gold was
vacant; the room was vacant; not a trace of Ozma was to be found.

Very much surprised, yet still with no fear that anything had happened
to her friend, Dorothy returned through the boudoir to the other rooms
of the suite.  She went into the music room, the library, the
laboratory, the bath, the wardrobe, and even into the great throne
room, which adjoined the royal suite, but in none of these places could
she find Ozma.

So she returned to the anteroom where she had left the maid, Jellia
Jamb, and said:

"She isn't in her rooms now, so she must have gone out."

"I don't understand how she could do that without my seeing her,"
replied Jellia, "unless she made herself invisible."

"She isn't there, anyhow," declared Dorothy.

"Then let us go find her," suggested the maid, who appeared to be a
little uneasy.  So they went into the corridors, and there Dorothy
almost stumbled over a queer girl who was dancing lightly along the
passage.

"Stop a minute, Scraps!" she called, "Have you seen Ozma this morning?"

"Not I!" replied the queer girl, dancing nearer.  "I lost both my eyes
in a tussle with the Woozy last night, for the creature scraped 'em
both off my face with his square paws.  So I put the eyes in my pocket,
and this morning Button-Bright led me to Aunt Em, who sewed 'em on
again.  So I've seen nothing at all today, except during the last five
minutes.  So of course I haven't seen Ozma."

"Very well, Scraps," said Dorothy, looking curiously at the eyes, which
were merely two round, black buttons sewed upon the girl's face.

There were other things about Scraps that would have seemed curious to
one seeing her for the first time.  She was commonly called "the
Patchwork Girl" because her body and limbs were made from a gay-colored
patchwork quilt which had been cut into shape and stuffed with cotton.
Her head was a round ball stuffed in the same manner and fastened to
her shoulders.  For hair, she had a mass of brown yarn, and to make a
nose for her a part of the cloth had been pulled out into the shape of
a knob and tied with a string to hold it in place. Her mouth had been
carefully made by cutting a slit in the proper place and lining it with
red silk, adding two rows of pearls for teeth and a bit of red flannel
for a tongue.

In spite of this queer make-up, the Patchwork Girl was magically alive
and had proved herself not the least jolly and agreeable of the many
quaint characters who inhabit the astonishing Fairyland of Oz. Indeed,
Scraps was a general favorite, although she was rather flighty and
erratic and did and said many things that surprised her friends. She
was seldom still, but loved to dance, to turn handsprings and
somersaults, to climb trees and to indulge in many other active sports.

"I'm going to search for Ozma," remarked Dorothy, "for she isn't in her
rooms, and I want to ask her a question."

"I'll go with you," said Scraps, "for my eyes are brighter than yours,
and they can see farther."

"I'm not sure of that," returned Dorothy.  "But come along, if you
like."

Together they searched all through the great palace and even to the
farthest limits of the palace grounds, which were quite extensive, but
nowhere could they find a trace of Ozma.  When Dorothy returned to
where Betsy and Trot awaited her, the little girl's face was rather
solemn and troubled, for never before had Ozma gone away without
telling her friends where she was going, or without an escort that
befitted her royal state.  She was gone, however, and none had seen her
go.  Dorothy had met and questioned the Scarecrow, Tik-Tok, the Shaggy
Man, Button-Bright, Cap'n Bill, and even the wise and powerful Wizard
of Oz, but not one of them had seen Ozma since she parted with her
friends the evening before and had gone to her own rooms.

"She didn't say anything las' night about going anywhere," observed
little Trot.

"No, and that's the strange part of it," replied Dorothy.  "Usually
Ozma lets us know of everything she does."

"Why not look in the Magic Picture?" suggested Betsy Bobbin.  "That
will tell us where she is in just one second."

"Of course!" cried Dorothy.  "Why didn't I think of that before?"  And
at once the three girls hurried away to Ozma's boudoir, where the Magic
Picture always hung.  This wonderful Magic Picture was one of the royal
Ozma's greatest treasures.  There was a large gold frame in the center
of which was a bluish-gray canvas on which various scenes constantly
appeared and disappeared.  If one who stood before it wished to see
what any person anywhere in the world was doing, it was only necessary
to make the wish and the scene in the Magic Picture would shift to the
scene where that person was and show exactly what he or she was then
engaged in doing.  So the girls knew it would be easy for them to wish
to see Ozma, and from the picture they could quickly learn where she
was.

Dorothy advanced to the place where the picture was usually protected
by thick satin curtains and pulled the draperies aside.  Then she
stared in amazement, while her two friends uttered exclamations of
disappointment.

The Magic Picture was gone. Only a blank space on the wall behind the
curtains showed where it had formerly hung.




CHAPTER 2

THE TROUBLES OF GLINDA THE GOOD


That same morning there was great excitement in the castle of the
powerful Sorceress of Oz, Glinda the Good.  This castle, situated in
the Quadling Country, far south of the Emerald City where Ozma ruled,
was a splendid structure of exquisite marbles and silver grilles. Here
the Sorceress lived, surrounded by a bevy of the most beautiful maidens
of Oz, gathered from all the four countries of that fairyland as well
as from the magnificent Emerald City itself, which stood in the place
where the four countries cornered.  It was considered a great honor to
be allowed to serve the good Sorceress, whose arts of magic were used
only to benefit the Oz people.  Glinda was Ozma's most valued servant,
for her knowledge of sorcery was wonderful, and she could accomplish
almost anything that her mistress, the lovely girl Ruler of Oz, wished
her to.

Of all the magical things which surrounded Glinda in her castle, there
was none more marvelous than her Great Book of Records.  On the pages
of this Record Book were constantly being inscribed, day by day and
hour by hour, all the important events that happened anywhere in the
known world, and they were inscribed in the book at exactly the moment
the events happened.  Every adventure in the Land of Oz and in the big
outside world, and even in places that you and I have never heard of,
were recorded accurately in the Great Book, which never made a mistake
and stated only the exact truth.  For that reason, nothing could be
concealed from Glinda the Good, who had only to look at the pages of
the Great Book of Records to know everything that had taken place. That
was one reason she was such a great Sorceress, for the records made her
wiser than any other living person.

This wonderful book was placed upon a big gold table that stood in the
middle of Glinda's drawing room.  The legs of the table, which were
incrusted with precious gems, were firmly fastened to the tiled floor,
and the book itself was chained to the table and locked with six stout
golden padlocks, the keys to which Glinda carried on a chain that was
secured around her own neck.  The pages of the Great Book were larger
in size than those of an American newspaper, and although they were
exceedingly thin, there were so many of them that they made an
enormous, bulky volume.  With its gold cover and gold clasps, the book
was so heavy that three men could scarcely have lifted it.  Yet this
morning when Glinda entered her drawing room after breakfast, the good
Sorceress was amazed to discover that her Great Book of Records had
mysteriously disappeared.

Advancing to the table, she found the chains had been cut with some
sharp instrument, and this must have been done while all in the castle
slept. Glinda was shocked and grieved.  Who could have done this
wicked, bold thing?  And who could wish to deprive her of her Great
Book of Records?

The Sorceress was thoughtful for a time, considering the consequences
of her loss.  Then she went to her Room of Magic to prepare a charm
that would tell her who had stolen the Record Book.  But when she
unlocked her cupboard and threw open the doors, all of her magical
instruments and rare chemical compounds had been removed from the
shelves.  The Sorceress has now both angry and alarmed.  She sat down
in a chair and tried to think how this extraordinary robbery could have
taken place.  It was evident that the thief was some person of very
great power, or the theft could not have been accomplished without her
knowledge. But who, in all the Land of Oz, was powerful and skillful
enough to do this awful thing?  And who, having the power, could also
have an object in defying the wisest and most talented Sorceress the
world has ever known?

Glinda thought over the perplexing matter for a full hour, at the end
of which time she was still puzzled how to explain it.  But although
her instruments and chemicals were gone, her KNOWLEDGE of magic had not
been stolen, by any means, since no thief, however skillful, can rob
one of knowledge, and that is why knowledge is the best and safest
treasure to acquire.  Glinda believed that when she had time to gather
more magical herbs and elixirs and to manufacture more magical
instruments, she would be able to discover who the robber was and what
had become of her precious Book of Records.

"Whoever has done this," she said to her maidens, "is a very foolish
person, for in time he is sure to be found out and will then be
severely punished."

She now made a list of the things she needed and dispatched messengers
to every part of Oz with instructions to obtain them and bring them to
her as soon as possible.  And one of her messengers met the little
Wizard of Oz, who was seated on the back of the famous live Sawhorse
and was clinging to its neck with both his arms, for the Sawhorse was
speeding to Glinda's castle with the velocity of the wind, bearing the
news that Royal Ozma, Ruler of all the great Land of Oz, had suddenly
disappeared and no one in the Emerald City knew what had become of her.

"Also," said the Wizard as he stood before the astonished Sorceress,
"Ozma's Magic Picture is gone, so we cannot consult it to discover
where she is.  So I came to you for assistance as soon as we realized
our loss.  Let us look in the Great Book of Records."

"Alas," returned the Sorceress sorrowfully, "we cannot do that, for the
Great Book of Records has also disappeared!"




CHAPTER 3

THE ROBBERY OF CAYKE THE COOKIE COOK


One more important theft was reported in the Land of Oz that eventful
morning, but it took place so far from either the Emerald City or the
castle of Glinda the Good that none of those persons we have mentioned
learned of the robbery until long afterward.

In the far southwestern corner of the Winkie Country is a broad
tableland that can be reached only by climbing a steep hill, whichever
side one approaches it.  On the hillside surrounding this tableland are
no paths at all, but there are quantities of bramble bushes with sharp
prickers on them, which prevent any of the Oz people who live down
below from climbing up to see what is on top.  But on top live the
Yips, and although the space they occupy is not great in extent, the
wee country is all their own.  The Yips had never--up to the time this
story begins--left their broad tableland to go down into the Land of
Oz, nor had the Oz people ever climbed up to the country of the Yips.

Living all alone as they did, the Yips had queer ways and notions of
their own and did not resemble any other people of the Land of Oz.
Their houses were scattered all over the flat surface; not like a city,
grouped together, but set wherever their owners' fancy dictated, with
fields here, trees there, and odd little paths connecting the houses
one with another.  It was here, on the morning when Ozma so strangely
disappeared from the Emerald City, that Cayke the Cookie Cook
discovered that her diamond-studded gold dishpan had been stolen, and
she raised such a hue and cry over her loss and wailed and shrieked so
loudly that many of the Yips gathered around her house to inquire what
was the matter.

It was a serious thing in any part of the Land of Oz to accuse one of
stealing, so when the Yips heard Cayke the Cookie Cook declare that her
jeweled dishpan had been stolen, they were both humiliated and
disturbed and forced Cayke to go with them to the Frogman to see what
could be done about it.  I do not suppose you have ever before heard of
the Frogman, for like all other dwellers on that tableland, he had
never been away from it, nor had anyone come up there to see him.  The
Frogman was in truth descended from the common frogs of Oz, and when he
was first born he lived in a pool in the Winkie Country and was much
like any other frog.  Being of an adventurous nature, however, he soon
hopped out of his pool and began to travel, when a big bird came along
and seized him in its beak and started to fly away with him to its
nest.  When high in the air, the frog wriggled so frantically that he
got loose and fell down, down, down into a small hidden pool on the
tableland of the Yips.  Now that pool, it seems, was unknown to the
Yips because it was surrounded by thick bushes and was not near to any
dwelling, and it proved to be an enchanted pool, for the frog grew very
fast and very big, feeding on the magic skosh which is found nowhere
else on earth except in that one pool.  And the skosh not only made the
frog very big so that when he stood on his hind legs he was as tall as
any Yip in the country, but it made him unusually intelligent, so that
he soon knew more than the Yips did and was able to reason and to argue
very well indeed.

No one could expect a frog with these talents to remain in a hidden
pool, so he finally got out of it and mingled with the people of the
tableland, who were amazed at his appearance and greatly impressed by
his learning.  They had never seen a frog before, and the frog had
never seen a Yip before, but as there were plenty of Yips and only one
frog, the frog became the most important.  He did not hop any more, but
stood upright on his hind legs and dressed himself in fine clothes and
sat in chairs and did all the things that people do, so he soon came to
be called the Frogman, and that is the only name he has ever had.
After some years had passed, the people came to regard the Frogman as
their adviser in all matters that puzzled them.  They brought all their
difficulties to him, and when he did not know anything, he pretended to
know it, which seemed to answer just as well.  Indeed, the Yips thought
the Frogman was much wiser than he really was, and he allowed them to
think so, being very proud of his position of authority.

There was another pool on the tableland which was not enchanted but
contained good, clear water and was located close to the dwellings.
Here the people built the Frogman a house of his own, close to the edge
of the pool so that he could take a bath or a swim whenever he wished.
He usually swam in the pool in the early morning before anyone else was
up, and during the day he dressed himself in his beautiful clothes and
sat in his house and received the visits of all the Yips who came to
him to ask his advice.  The Frogman's usual costume consisted of
knee-breeches made of yellow satin plush, with trimmings of gold braid
and jeweled knee-buckles; a white satin vest with silver buttons in
which were set solitaire rubies; a swallow-tailed coat of bright
yellow; green stockings and red leather shoes turned up at the toes and
having diamond buckles.  He wore, when he walked out, a purple silk hat
and carried a gold-headed cane.  Over his eyes he wore great spectacles
with gold rims, not because his eyes were bad, but because the
spectacles made him look wise, and so distinguished and gorgeous was
his appearance that all the Yips were very proud of him.

There was no King or Queen in the Yip Country, so the simple
inhabitants naturally came to look upon the Frogman as their leader as
well as their counselor in all times of emergency.  In his heart the
big frog knew he was no wiser than the Yips, but for a frog to know as
much as a person was quite remarkable, and the Frogman was shrewd
enough to make the people believe he was far more wise than he really
was.  They never suspected he was a humbug, but listened to his words
with great respect and did just what he advised them to do.

Now when Cayke the Cookie Cook raised such an outcry over the theft of
her diamond-studded dishpan, the first thought of the people was to
take her to the Frogman and inform him of the loss, thinking that of
course he would tell her where to find it.  He listened to the story
with his big eyes wide open behind his spectacles, and said in his
deep, croaking voice, "If the dishpan is stolen, somebody must have
taken it."

"But who?" asked Cayke anxiously.  "Who is the thief?"

"The one who took the dishpan, of course," replied the Frogman, and
hearing this all the Yips nodded their heads gravely and said to one
another, "It is absolutely true!"

"But I want my dishpan!" cried Cayke.

"No one can blame you for that wish," remarked the Frogman.

"Then tell me where I may find it," she urged.

The look the Frogman gave her was a very wise look, and he rose from
his chair and strutted up and down the room with his hands under his
coattails in a very pompous and imposing manner.  This was the first
time so difficult a matter had been brought to him, and he wanted time
to think.  It would never do to let them suspect his ignorance, and so
he thought very, very hard how best to answer the woman without
betraying himself.  "I beg to inform you," said he, "that nothing in
the Yip Country has ever been stolen before."

"We know that already," answered Cayke the Cookie Cook impatiently.

"Therefore," continued the Frogman, "this theft becomes a very
important matter."

"Well, where is my dishpan?" demanded the woman.

"It is lost, but it must be found.  Unfortunately, we have no policemen
or detectives to unravel the mystery, so we must employ other means to
regain the lost article.  Cayke must first write a Proclamation and
tack it to the door of her house, and the Proclamation must read that
whoever stole the jeweled dishpan must return it at once."

"But suppose no one returns it," suggested Cayke.

"Then," said the Frogman, "that very fact will be proof that no one has
stolen it."

Cayke was not satisfied, but the other Yips seemed to approve the plan
highly.  They all advised her to do as the Frogman had told her to, so
she posted the sign on her door and waited patiently for someone to
return the dishpan--which no one ever did.  Again she went, accompanied
by a group of her neighbors, to the Frogman, who by this time had given
the matter considerable thought.  Said he to Cayke, "I am now convinced
that no Yip has taken your dishpan, and since it is gone from the Yip
Country, I suspect that some stranger came from the world down below us
in the darkness of night when all of us were asleep and took away your
treasure.  There can be no other explanation of its disappearance.  So
if you wish to recover that golden, diamond-studded dishpan, you must
go into the lower world after it."

This was indeed a startling proposition.  Cayke and her friends went to
the edge of the flat tableland and looked down the steep hillside to
the plains below.  It was so far to the bottom of the hill that nothing
there could be seen very distinctly, and it seemed to the Yips very
venturesome, if not dangerous, to go so far from home into an unknown
land.  However, Cayke wanted her dishpan very badly, so she turned to
her friends and asked, "Who will go with me?"

No one answered the question, but after a period of silence one of the
Yips said, "We know what is here on the top of this flat hill, and it
seems to us a very pleasant place, but what is down below we do not
know.  The chances are it is not so pleasant, so we had best stay where
we are."

"It may be a far better country than this is," suggested the Cookie
Cook.

"Maybe, maybe," responded another Yip, "but why take chances?
Contentment with one's lot is true wisdom. Perhaps in some other
country there are better cookies than you cook, but as we have always
eaten your cookies and liked them--except when they are burned on the
bottom--we do not long for any better ones."

Cayke might have agreed to this argument had she not been so anxious to
find her precious dishpan, but now she exclaimed impatiently, "You are
cowards, all of you!  If none of you are willing to explore with me the
great world beyond this small hill, I will surely go alone."

"That is a wise resolve," declared the Yips, much relieved.  "It is
your dishpan that is lost, not ours.  And if you are willing to risk
your life and liberty to regain it, no one can deny you the privilege."

While they were thus conversing, the Frogman joined them and looked
down at the plain with his big eyes and seemed unusually thoughtful. In
fact, the Frogman was thinking that he'd like to see more of the world.
Here in the Yip Country he had become the most important creature of
them all, and his importance was getting to be a little tame.  It would
be nice to have other people defer to him and ask his advice, and there
seemed no reason so far as he could see why his fame should not spread
throughout all Oz.  He knew nothing of the rest of the world, but it
was reasonable to believe that there were more people beyond the
mountain where he now lived than there were Yips, and if he went among
them he could surprise them with his display of wisdom and make them
bow down to him as the Yips did.  In other words, the Frogman was
ambitious to become still greater than he was, which was impossible if
he always remained upon this mountain.  He wanted others to see his
gorgeous clothes and listen to his solemn sayings, and here was an
excuse for him to get away from the Yip Country.  So he said to Cayke
the Cookie Cook, "I will go with you, my good woman," which greatly
pleased Cayke because she felt the Frogman could be of much assistance
to her in her search.

But now, since the mighty Frogman had decided to undertake the journey,
several of the Yips who were young and daring at once made up their
minds to go along, so the next morning after breakfast the Frogman and
Cayke the Cookie Cook and nine of the Yips started to slide down the
side of the mountain.  The bramble bushes and cactus plants were very
prickly and uncomfortable to the touch, so the Frogman quickly
commanded the Yips to go first and break a path, so that when he
followed them he would not tear his splendid clothes. Cayke, too, was
wearing her best dress and was likewise afraid of the thorns and
prickers, so she kept behind the Frogman.

They made rather slow progress and night overtook them before they were
halfway down the mountainside, so they found a cave in which they
sought shelter until morning.  Cayke had brought along a basket full of
her famous cookies, so they all had plenty to eat.  On the second day
the Yips began to wish they had not embarked on this adventure. They
grumbled a good deal at having to cut away the thorns to make the path
for the Frogman and the Cookie Cook, for their own clothing suffered
many tears, while Cayke and the Frogman traveled safely and in comfort.

"If it is true that anyone came to our country to steal your diamond
dishpan," said one of the Yips to Cayke, "it must have been a bird, for
no person in the form of a man, woman or child could have climbed
through these bushes and back again."

"And, allowing he could have done so," said another Yip, "the
diamond-studded gold dishpan would not have repaid him for his troubles
and his tribulations."

"For my part," remarked a third Yip, "I would rather go back home and
dig and polish some more diamonds and mine some more gold and make you
another dishpan than be scratched from head to heel by these dreadful
bushes.  Even now, if my mother saw me, she would not know I am her
son."

Cayke paid no heed to these mutterings, nor did the Frogman.  Although
their journey was slow, it was being made easy for them by the Yips, so
they had nothing to complain of and no desire to turn back.  Quite near
to the bottom of the great hill they came upon a great gulf, the sides
of which were as smooth as glass.  The gulf extended a long
distance--as far as they could see in either direction--and although it
was not very wide, it was far too wide for the Yips to leap across it.
And should they fall into it, it was likely they might never get out
again.  "Here our journey ends," said the Yips. "We must go back again."

Cayke the Cookie Cook began to weep.

"I shall never find my pretty dishpan again, and my heart will be
broken!" she sobbed.

The Frogman went to the edge of the gulf and with his eye carefully
measured the distance to the other side.  "Being a frog," said he, "I
can leap, as all frogs do, and being so big and strong, I am sure I can
leap across this gulf with ease.  But the rest of you, not being frogs,
must return the way you came."

"We will do that with pleasure," cried the Yips, and at once they
turned and began to climb up the steep mountain, feeling they had had
quite enough of this unsatisfactory adventure.  Cayke the Cookie Cook
did not go with them, however.  She sat on a rock and wept and wailed
and was very miserable.

"Well," said the Frogman to her, "I will now bid you goodbye.  If I
find your diamond-decorated gold dishpan, I will promise to see that it
is safely returned to you."

"But I prefer to find it myself!" she said. "See here, Frogman, why
can't you carry me across the gulf when you leap it?  You are big and
strong, while I am small and thin."

The Frogman gravely thought over this suggestion. It was a fact that
Cayke the Cookie Cook was not a heavy person.  Perhaps he could leap
the gulf with her on his back.  "If you are willing to risk a fall,"
said he, "I will make the attempt."

At once she sprang up and grabbed him around his neck with both her
arms.  That is, she grabbed him where his neck ought to be, for the
Frogman had no neck at all.  Then he squatted down, as frogs do when
they leap, and with his powerful rear legs he made a tremendous jump.
Over the gulf they sailed, with the Cookie Cook on his back, and he had
leaped so hard--to make sure of not falling in--that he sailed over a
lot of bramble bushes that grew on the other side and landed in a clear
space which was so far beyond the gulf that when they looked back they
could not see it at all.

Cayke now got off the Frogman's back and he stood erect again and
carefully brushed the dust from his velvet coat and rearranged his
white satin necktie.

"I had no idea I could leap so far," he said wonderingly.  "Leaping is
one more accomplishment I can now add to the long list of deeds I am
able to perform."

"You are certainly fine at leap-frog," said the Cookie Cook admiringly,
"but, as you say, you are wonderful in many ways.  If we meet with any
people down here, I am sure they will consider you the greatest and
grandest of all living creatures."

"Yes," he replied, "I shall probably astonish strangers, because they
have never before had the pleasure of seeing me.  Also, they will
marvel at my great learning.  Every time I open my mouth, Cayke, I am
liable to say something important."

"That is true," she agreed, "and it is fortunate your mouth is so very
wide and opens so far, for otherwise all the wisdom might not be able
to get out of it."

"Perhaps nature made it wide for that very reason," said the Frogman.
"But come, let us now go on, for it is getting late and we must find
some sort of shelter before night overtakes us."




CHAPTER 4

AMONG THE WINKIES


The settled parts of the Winkie Country are full of happy and contented
people who are ruled by a tin Emperor named Nick Chopper, who in turn
is a subject of the beautiful girl Ruler, Ozma of Oz.  But not all of
the Winkie Country is fully settled.  At the east, which part lies
nearest the Emerald City, there are beautiful farmhouses and roads, but
as you travel west, you first come to a branch of the Winkie River,
beyond which there is a rough country where few people live, and some
of these are quite unknown to the rest of the world. After passing
through this rude section of territory, which no one ever visits, you
would come to still another branch of the Winkie River, after crossing
which you would find another well-settled part of the Winkie Country
extending westward quite to the Deadly Desert that surrounds all the
Land of Oz and separates that favored fairyland from the more common
outside world.  The Winkies who live in this west section have many tin
mines, from which metal they make a great deal of rich jewelry and
other articles, all of which are highly esteemed in the Land of Oz
because tin is so bright and pretty and there is not so much of it as
there is of gold and silver.

Not all the Winkies are miners, however, for some till the fields and
grow grains for food, and it was at one of these far-west Winkie farms
that the Frogman and Cayke the Cookie Cook first arrived after they had
descended from the mountain of the Yips.  "Goodness me!" cried Nellary
the Winkie wife when she saw the strange couple approaching her house.
"I have seen many queer creatures in the Land of Oz, but none more
queer than this giant frog who dresses like a man and walks on his hind
legs.  Come here, Wiljon," she called to her husband, who was eating
his breakfast, "and take a look at this astonishing freak."

Wiljon the Winkie came to the door and looked out.  He was still
standing in the doorway when the Frogman approached and said with a
haughty croak, "Tell me, my good man, have you seen a diamond-studded
gold dishpan?"

"No, nor have I seen a copper-plated lobster," replied Wiljon in an
equally haughty tone.

The Frogman stared at him and said, "Do not be insolent, fellow!"

"No," added Cayke the Cookie Cook hastily, "you must be very polite to
the great Frogman, for he is the wisest creature in all the world."

"Who says that?" inquired Wiljon.

"He says so himself," replied Cayke, and the Frogman nodded and
strutted up and down, twirling his gold-headed cane very gracefully.

"Does the Scarecrow admit that this overgrown frog is the wisest
creature in the world?" asked Wiljon.

"I do not know who the Scarecrow is," answered Cayke the Cookie Cook.

"Well, he lives at the Emerald City, and he is supposed to have the
finest brains in all Oz.  The Wizard gave them to him, you know."

"Mine grew in my head," said the Frogman pompously, "so I think they
must be better than any wizard brains.  I am so wise that sometimes my
wisdom makes my head ache.  I know so much that often I have to forget
part of it, since no one creature, however great, is able to contain so
much knowledge."

"It must be dreadful to be stuffed full of wisdom," remarked Wiljon
reflectively and eyeing the Frogman with a doubtful look.  "It is my
good fortune to know very little."

"I hope, however, you know where my jeweled dishpan is," said the
Cookie Cook anxiously.

"I do not know even that," returned the Winkie.  "We have trouble
enough in keeping track of our own dishpans without meddling with the
dishpans of strangers."

Finding him so ignorant, the Frogman proposed that they walk on and
seek Cayke's dishpan elsewhere.  Wiljon the Winkie did not seem greatly
impressed by the great Frogman, which seemed to that personage as
strange as it was disappointing.  But others in this unknown land might
prove more respectful.

"I'd like to meet that Wizard of Oz," remarked Cayke as they walked
along a path.  "If he could give a Scarecrow brains, he might be able
to find my dishpan."

"Poof!" grunted the Frogman scornfully.  "I am greater than any wizard.
Depend on ME.  If your dishpan is anywhere in the world, I am sure to
find it."

"If you do not, my heart will be broken," declared the Cookie Cook in a
sorrowful voice.

For a while the Frogman walked on in silence. Then he asked, "Why do
you attach so much importance to a dishpan?"

"It is the greatest treasure I possess," replied the woman.  "It
belonged to my mother and to all my grandmothers since the beginning of
time.  It is, I believe, the very oldest thing in all the Yip
Country--or was while it was there--and," she added, dropping her voice
to an awed whisper, "it has magic powers!"

"In what way?" inquired the Frogman, seeming to be surprised at this
statement.

"Whoever has owned that dishpan has been a good cook, for one thing. No
one else is able to make such good cookies as I have cooked, as you and
all the Yips know.  Yet the very morning after my dishpan was stolen, I
tried to make a batch of cookies and they burned up in the oven!  I
made another batch that proved too tough to eat, and I was so ashamed
of them that I buried them in the ground.  Even the third batch of
cookies, which I brought with me in my basket, were pretty poor stuff
and no better than any woman could make who does not own my
diamond-studded gold dishpan.  In fact, my good Frogman, Cayke the
Cookie Cook will never be able to cook good cookies again until her
magic dishpan is restored to her."

"In that case," said the Frogman with a sigh, "I suppose we must manage
to find it."




CHAPTER 5

OZMA'S FRIENDS ARE PERPLEXED


"Really," said Dorothy, looking solemn, "this is very s'prising.  We
can't even find a shadow of Ozma anywhere in the Em'rald City, and
wherever she's gone, she's taken her Magic Picture with her."  She was
standing in the courtyard of the palace with Betsy and Trot, while
Scraps, the Patchwork Girl, danced around the group, her hair flying in
the wind.

"P'raps," said Scraps, still dancing, "someone has stolen Ozma."

"Oh, they'd never dare do that!" exclaimed tiny Trot.

"And stolen the Magic Picture, too, so the thing can't tell where she
is," added the Patchwork Girl.

"That's nonsense," said Dorothy.  "Why, ev'ryone loves Ozma.  There
isn't a person in the Land of Oz who would steal a single thing she
owns."

"Huh!" replied the Patchwork Girl.  "You don't know ev'ry person in the
Land of Oz."

"Why don't I?"

"It's a big country," said Scraps.  "There are cracks and corners in it
that even Ozma doesn't know of."

"The Patchwork Girl's just daffy," declared Betsy.

"No, she's right about that," replied Dorothy thoughtfully.  "There are
lots of queer people in this fairyland who never come near Ozma or the
Em'rald City.  I've seen some of 'em myself, girls.  But I haven't seen
all, of course, and there MIGHT be some wicked persons left in Oz yet,
though I think the wicked witches have all been destroyed."

Just then the Wooden Sawhorse dashed into the courtyard with the Wizard
of Oz on his back.  "Have you found Ozma?" cried the Wizard when the
Sawhorse stopped beside them.

"Not yet," said Dorothy.  "Doesn't Glinda the Good know where she is?"

"No.  Glinda's Book of Records and all her magic instruments are gone.
Someone must have stolen them."

"Goodness me!" exclaimed Dorothy in alarm.  "This is the biggest steal
I ever heard of.  Who do you think did it, Wizard?"

"I've no idea," he answered.  "But I have come to get my own bag of
magic tools and carry them to Glinda.  She is so much more powerful
than I that she may be able to discover the truth by means of my magic
quicker and better than I could myself."

"Hurry, then," said Dorothy, "for we've all gotten terr'bly worried."

The Wizard rushed away to his rooms but presently came back with a
long, sad face.  "It's gone!" he said.

"What's gone?" asked Scraps.

"My black bag of magic tools. Someone must have stolen it!"

They looked at one another in amazement.

"This thing is getting desperate," continued the Wizard. "All the magic
that belongs to Ozma or to Glinda or to me has been stolen."

"Do you suppose Ozma could have taken them, herself, for some purpose?"
asked Betsy.

"No indeed," declared the Wizard.  "I suspect some enemy has stolen
Ozma and for fear we would follow and recapture her has taken all our
magic away from us."

"How dreadful!" cried Dorothy. "The idea of anyone wanting to injure
our dear Ozma!  Can't we do ANYthing to find her, Wizard?"

"I'll ask Glinda.  I must go straight back to her and tell her that my
magic tools have also disappeared.  The good Sorceress will be greatly
shocked, I know."

With this, he jumped upon the back of the Sawhorse again, and the
quaint steed, which never tired, dashed away at full speed.  The three
girls were very much disturbed in mind.  Even the Patchwork Girl seemed
to realize that a great calamity had overtaken them all.  Ozma was a
fairy of considerable power, and all the creatures in Oz as well as the
three mortal girls from the outside world looked upon her as their
protector and friend.  The idea of their beautiful girl Ruler's being
overpowered by an enemy and dragged from her splendid palace a captive
was too astonishing for them to comprehend at first.  Yet what other
explanation of the mystery could there be?

"Ozma wouldn't go away willingly, without letting us know about it,"
asserted Dorothy, "and she wouldn't steal Glinda's Great Book of
Records or the Wizard's magic, 'cause she could get them any time just
by asking for 'em.  I'm sure some wicked person has done all this."

"Someone in the Land of Oz?" asked Trot.

"Of course.  No one could get across the Deadly Desert, you know, and
no one but an Oz person could know about the Magic Picture and the Book
of Records and the Wizard's magic or where they were kept, and so be
able to steal the whole outfit before we could stop 'em.  It MUST be
someone who lives in the Land of Oz."

"But who--who--who?" asked Scraps.  "That's the question.  Who?"

"If we knew," replied Dorothy severely, "we wouldn't be standing here
doing nothing."

Just then two boys entered the courtyard and approached the group of
girls.  One boy was dressed in the fantastic Munchkin costume--a blue
jacket and knickerbockers, blue leather shoes and a blue hat with a
high peak and tiny silver bells dangling from its rim--and this was Ojo
the Lucky, who had once come from the Munchkin Country of Oz and now
lived in the Emerald City.  The other boy was an American from
Philadelphia and had lately found his way to Oz in the company of Trot
and Cap'n Bill.  His name was Button-Bright; that is, everyone called
him by that name and knew no other.  Button-Bright was not quite as big
as the Munchkin boy, but he wore the same kind of clothes, only they
were of different colors.  As the two came up to the girls, arm in arm,
Button-Bright remarked, "Hello, Dorothy.  They say Ozma is lost."

"WHO says so?" she asked.

"Ev'rybody's talking about it in the City," he replied.

"I wonder how the people found it out," Dorothy asked.

"I know," said Ojo.  "Jellia Jamb told them. She has been asking
everywhere if anyone has seen Ozma."

"That's too bad," observed Dorothy, frowning.

"Why?" asked Button-Bright.

"There wasn't any use making all our people unhappy till we were dead
certain that Ozma can't be found."

"Pshaw," said Button-Bright, "it's nothing to get lost.  I've been lost
lots of times."

"That's true," admitted Trot, who knew that the boy had a habit of
getting lost and then finding himself again, "but it's diff'rent with
Ozma.  She's the Ruler of all this big fairyland, and we're 'fraid that
the reason she's lost is because somebody has stolen her away."

"Only wicked people steal," said Ojo.  "Do you know of any wicked
people in Oz, Dorothy?"

"No," she replied.

"They're here, though," cried Scraps, dancing up to them and then
circling around the group.  "Ozma's stolen; someone in Oz stole her;
only wicked people steal; so someone in Oz is wicked!"

There was no denying the truth of this statement.  The faces of all of
them were now solemn and sorrowful.  "One thing is sure," said
Button-Bright after a time, "if Ozma has been stolen, someone ought to
find her and punish the thief."

"There may be a lot of thieves," suggested Trot gravely, "and in this
fairy country they don't seem to have any soldiers or policemen."

"There is one soldier," claimed Dorothy.

"He has green whiskers and a gun and is a Major-General, but no one is
afraid of either his gun or his whiskers, 'cause he's so tender-hearted
that he wouldn't hurt a fly."


"Well, a soldier is a soldier," said Betsy, "and perhaps he'd hurt a
wicked thief if he wouldn't hurt a fly.  Where is he?"

"He went fishing about two months ago and hasn't come back yet,"
explained Button-Bright.

"Then I can't see that he will be of much use to us in this trouble,"
sighed little Trot.  "But p'raps Ozma, who is a fairy, can get away
from the thieves without any help from anyone."

"She MIGHT be able to," answered Dorothy reflectively, "but if she had
the power to do that, it isn't likely she'd have let herself be stolen.
So the thieves must have been even more powerful in magic than our
Ozma."

There was no denying this argument, and although they talked the matter
over all the rest of that day, they were unable to decide how Ozma had
been stolen against her will or who had committed the dreadful deed.
Toward evening the Wizard came back, riding slowly upon the Sawhorse
because he felt discouraged and perplexed.  Glinda came later in her
aerial chariot drawn by twenty milk-white swans, and she also seemed
worried and unhappy.  More of Ozma's friends joined them, and that
evening they all had a big talk together.  "I think," said Dorothy, "we
ought to start out right away in search of our dear Ozma.  It seems
cruel for us to live comf'tably in her palace while she is a pris'ner
in the power of some wicked enemy."

"Yes," agreed Glinda the Sorceress, "someone ought to search for her. I
cannot go myself, because I must work hard in order to create some new
instruments of sorcery by means of which I may rescue our fair Ruler.
But if you can find her in the meantime and let me know who has stolen
her, it will enable me to rescue her much more quickly."

"Then we'll start tomorrow morning," decided Dorothy.  "Betsy and Trot
and I won't waste another minute."

"I'm not sure you girls will make good detectives," remarked the
Wizard, "but I'll go with you to protect you from harm and to give you
my advice.  All my wizardry, alas, is stolen, so I am now really no
more a wizard than any of you, but I will try to protect you from any
enemies you may meet."

"What harm could happen to us in Oz?" inquired Trot.

"What harm happened to Ozma?" returned the Wizard.

"If there is an Evil Power abroad in our fairyland, which is able to
steal not only Ozma and her Magic Picture, but Glinda's Book of Records
and all her magic, and my black bag containing all my tricks of
wizardry, then that Evil Power may yet cause us considerable injury.
Ozma is a fairy, and so is Glinda, so no power can kill or destroy
them, but you girls are all mortals and so are Button-Bright and I, so
we must watch out for ourselves."

"Nothing can kill me," said Ojo the Munchkin boy.

"That is true," replied the Sorceress, "and I think it may be well to
divide the searchers into several parties, that they may cover all the
land of Oz more quickly.  So I will send Ojo and Unc Nunkie and Dr.
Pipt into the Munchkin Country, which they are well acquainted with;
and I will send the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman into the Quadling
Country, for they are fearless and brave and never tire; and to the
Gillikin Country, where many dangers lurk, I will send the Shaggy Man
and his brother, with Tik-Tok and Jack Pumpkinhead.  Dorothy may make
up her own party and travel into the Winkie Country.  All of you must
inquire everywhere for Ozma and try to discover where she is hidden."

They thought this a very wise plan and adopted it without question. In
Ozma's absence, Glinda the Good was the most important person in Oz,
and all were glad to serve under her direction.




CHAPTER 6

THE SEARCH PARTY


Next morning as soon as the sun was up, Glinda flew back to her castle,
stopping on the way to instruct the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman, who
were at that time staying at the college of Professor H. M. Wogglebug,
T.E., and taking a course of his Patent Educational Pills.

On hearing of Ozma's loss, they started at once for the Quadling
Country to search for her.  As soon as Glinda had left the Emerald
City, Tik-Tok and the Shaggy Man and Jack Pumpkinhead, who had been
present at the conference, began their journey into the Gillikin
Country, and an hour later Ojo and Unc Nunkie joined Dr.  Pipt and
together they traveled toward the Munchkin Country.  When all these
searchers were gone, Dorothy and the Wizard completed their own
preparations.

The Wizard hitched the Sawhorse to the Red Wagon, which would seat four
very comfortably.  He wanted Dorothy, Betsy, Trot and the Patchwork
Girl to ride in the wagon, but Scraps came up to them mounted upon the
Woozy, and the Woozy said he would like to join the party.  Now this
Woozy was a most peculiar animal, having a square head, square body,
square legs and square tail.  His skin was very tough and hard,
resembling leather, and while his movements were somewhat clumsy, the
beast could travel with remarkable swiftness. His square eyes were mild
and gentle in expression, and he was not especially foolish.  The Woozy
and the Patchwork Girl were great friends, and so the Wizard agreed to
let the Woozy go with them.

Another great beast now appeared and asked to go along.  This was none
other than the famous Cowardly Lion, one of the most interesting
creatures in all Oz.  No lion that roamed the jungles or plains could
compare in size or intelligence with this Cowardly Lion, who--like all
animals living in Oz--could talk and who talked with more shrewdness
and wisdom than many of the people did.  He said he was cowardly
because he always trembled when he faced danger, but he had faced
danger many times and never refused to fight when it was necessary.
This Lion was a great favorite with Ozma and always guarded her throne
on state occasions.  He was also an old companion and friend of the
Princess Dorothy, so the girl was delighted to have him join the party.

"I'm so nervous over our dear Ozma," said the Cowardly Lion in his
deep, rumbling voice, "that it would make me unhappy to remain behind
while you are trying to find her.  But do not get into any danger, I
beg of you, for danger frightens me terribly."

"We'll not get into danger if we can poss'bly help it," promised
Dorothy, "but we shall do anything to find Ozma, danger or no danger."

The addition of the Woozy and the Cowardly Lion to the party gave Betsy
Bobbin an idea, and she ran to the marble stables at the rear of the
palace and brought out her mule, Hank by name.  Perhaps no mule you
ever saw was so lean and bony and altogether plain looking as this
Hank, but Betsy loved him dearly because he was faithful and steady and
not nearly so stupid as most mules are considered to be.  Betsy had a
saddle for Hank, and he declared she would ride on his back, an
arrangement approved by the Wizard because it left only four of the
party to ride on the seats of the Red Wagon--Dorothy and Button-Bright
and Trot and himself.

An old sailor man who had one wooden leg came to see them off and
suggested that they put a supply of food and blankets in the Red Wagon
inasmuch as they were uncertain how long they would be gone.  This
sailor man was called Cap'n Bill.  He was a former friend and comrade
of Trot and had encountered many adventures in company with the little
girl.  I think he was sorry he could not go with her on this trip, but
Glinda the Sorceress had asked Cap'n Bill to remain in the Emerald City
and take charge of the royal palace while everyone else was away, and
the one-legged sailor had agreed to do so.

They loaded the back end of the Red Wagon with everything they thought
they might need, and then they formed a procession and marched from the
palace through the Emerald City to the great gates of the wall that
surrounded this beautiful capital of the Land of Oz.  Crowds of
citizens lined the streets to see them pass and to cheer them and wish
them success, for all were grieved over Ozma's loss and anxious that
she be found again.  First came the Cowardly Lion, then the Patchwork
Girl riding upon the Woozy, then Betsy Bobbin on her mule Hank, and
finally the Sawhorse drawing the Red Wagon, in which were seated the
Wizard and Dorothy and Button-Bright and Trot.  No one was obliged to
drive the Sawhorse, so there were no reins to his harness; one had only
to tell him which way to go, fast or slow, and he understood perfectly.

It was about this time that a shaggy little black dog who had been
lying asleep in Dorothy's room in the palace woke up and discovered he
was lonesome.  Everything seemed very still throughout the great
building, and Toto--that was the little dog's name--missed the
customary chatter of the three girls.  He never paid much attention to
what was going on around him, and although he could speak, he seldom
said anything, so the little dog did not know about Ozma's loss or that
everyone had gone in search of her.  But he liked to be with people,
and especially with his own mistress, Dorothy, and having yawned and
stretched himself and found the door of the room ajar, he trotted out
into the corridor and went down the stately marble stairs to the hall
of the palace, where he met Jellia Jamb.

"Where's Dorothy?" asked Toto.

"She's gone to the Winkie Country," answered the maid.

"When?"

"A little while ago," replied Jellia.

Toto turned and trotted out into the palace garden and down the long
driveway until he came to the streets of the Emerald City.  Here he
paused to listen, and hearing sounds of cheering, he ran swiftly along
until he came in sight of the Red Wagon and the Woozy and the Lion and
the Mule and all the others.  Being a wise little dog, he decided not
to show himself to Dorothy just then, lest he be sent back home, but he
never lost sight of the party of travelers, all of whom were so eager
to get ahead that they never thought to look behind them.  When they
came to the gates in the city wall, the Guardian of the Gates came out
to throw wide the golden portals and let them pass through.

"Did any strange person come in or out of the city on the night before
last when Ozma was stolen?" asked Dorothy.

"No indeed, Princess," answered the Guardian of the Gates.

"Of course not," said the Wizard. "Anyone clever enough to steal all
the things we have lost would not mind the barrier of a wall like this
in the least.  I think the thief must have flown through the air, for
otherwise he could not have stolen from Ozma's royal palace and
Glinda's faraway castle in the same night.  Moreover, as there are no
airships in Oz and no way for airships from the outside world to get
into this country, I believe the thief must have flown from place to
place by means of magic arts which neither Glinda nor I understand."

On they went, and before the gates closed behind them, Toto managed to
dodge through them.  The country surrounding the Emerald City was
thickly settled, and for a while our friends rode over nicely paved
roads which wound through a fertile country dotted with beautiful
houses, all built in the quaint Oz fashion.  In the course of a few
hours, however, they had left the tilled fields and entered the Country
of the Winkies, which occupies a quarter of all the territory in the
Land of Oz but is not so well known as many other parts of Ozma's
fairyland.  Long before night the travelers had crossed the Winkie
River near to the Scarecrow's Tower (which was now vacant) and had
entered the Rolling Prairie where few people live.  They asked everyone
they met for news of Ozma, but none in this district had seen her or
even knew that she had been stolen.  And by nightfall they had passed
all the farmhouses and were obliged to stop and ask for shelter at the
hut of a lonely shepherd.  When they halted, Toto was not far behind.
The little dog halted, too, and stealing softly around the party, he
hid himself behind the hut.

The shepherd was a kindly old man and treated the travelers with much
courtesy.  He slept out of doors that night, giving up his hut to the
three girls, who made their beds on the floor with the blankets they
had brought in the Red Wagon.  The Wizard and Button-Bright also slept
out of doors, and so did the Cowardly Lion and Hank the Mule.  But
Scraps and the Sawhorse did not sleep at all, and the Woozy could stay
awake for a month at a time if he wished to, so these three sat in a
little group by themselves and talked together all through the night.

In the darkness, the Cowardly Lion felt a shaggy little form nestling
beside his own, and he said sleepily, "Where did you come from, Toto?"

"From home," said the dog. "If you roll over, roll the other way so you
won't smash me."

"Does Dorothy know you are here?" asked the Lion.

"I believe not," admitted Toto, and he added a little anxiously, "Do
you think, friend Lion, we are now far enough from the Emerald City for
me to risk showing myself, or will Dorothy send me back because I
wasn't invited?"

"Only Dorothy can answer that question," said the Lion.  "For my part,
Toto, I consider this affair none of my business, so you must act as
you think best."  Then the huge beast went to sleep again, and Toto
snuggled closer to the warm, hairy body and also slept.  He was a wise
little dog in his way, and didn't intend to worry when there was
something much better to do.

In the morning the Wizard built a fire, over which the girls cooked a
very good breakfast.  Suddenly Dorothy discovered Toto sitting quietly
before the fire, and the little girl exclaimed, "Goodness me, Toto!
Where did YOU come from?"

"From the place you cruelly left me," replied the dog in a reproachful
tone.

"I forgot all about you," admitted Dorothy, "and if I hadn't, I'd
prob'ly left you with Jellia Jamb, seeing this isn't a pleasure trip
but stric'ly business.  But now that you're here, Toto, I s'pose you'll
have to stay with us, unless you'd rather go back again.  We may get
ourselves into trouble before we're done, Toto."

"Never mind that," said Toto, wagging his tail.  "I'm hungry, Dorothy."

"Breakfas'll soon be ready, and then you shall have your share,"
promised his little mistress, who was really glad to have her dog with
her.  She and Toto had traveled together before, and she knew he was a
good and faithful comrade.

When the food was cooked and served, the girls invited the old shepherd
to join them in the morning meal.  He willingly consented, and while
they ate he said to them, "You are now about to pass through a very
dangerous country, unless you turn to the north or to the south to
escape its perils."

"In that case," said the Cowardly Lion, "let us turn, by all means, for
I dread to face dangers of any sort."

"What's the matter with the country ahead of us?" inquired Dorothy.

"Beyond this Rolling Prairie," explained the shepherd, "are the
Merry-Go-Round Mountains, set close together and surrounded by deep
gulfs so that no one is able to get past them.  Beyond the
Merry-Go-Round Mountains it is said the Thistle-Eaters and the Herkus
live."

"What are they like?" demanded Dorothy.

"No one knows, for no one has ever passed the Merry-Go-Round
Mountains," was the reply, "but it is said that the Thistle-Eaters
hitch dragons to their chariots and that the Herkus are waited upon by
giants whom they have conquered and made their slaves."

"Who says all that?" asked Betsy.

"It is common report," declared the shepherd. "Everyone believes it."

"I don't see how they know," remarked little Trot, "if no one has been
there."

"Perhaps the birds who fly over that country brought the news,"
suggested Betsy.

"If you escaped those dangers," continued the shepherd, "you might
encounter others still more serious before you came to the next branch
of the Winkie River.  It is true that beyond that river there lies a
fine country inhabited by good people, and if you reached there, you
would have no further trouble.  It is between here and the west branch
of the Winkie River that all dangers lie, for that is the unknown
territory that is inhabited by terrible, lawless people."

"It may be, and it may not be," said the Wizard.  "We shall know when
we get there."

"Well," persisted the shepherd, "in a fairy country such as ours, every
undiscovered place is likely to harbor wicked creatures.  If they were
not wicked, they would discover themselves and by coming among us
submit to Ozma's rule and be good and considerate, as are all the Oz
people whom we know."

"That argument," stated the little Wizard, "convinces me that it is our
duty to go straight to those unknown places, however dangerous they may
be, for it is surely some cruel and wicked person who has stolen our
Ozma, and we know it would be folly to search among good people for the
culprit.  Ozma may not be hidden in the secret places of the Winkie
Country, it is true, but it is our duty to travel to every spot,
however dangerous, where our beloved Ruler is likely to be imprisoned."

"You're right about that," said Button-Bright approvingly.  "Dangers
don't hurt us.  Only things that happen ever hurt anyone, and a danger
is a thing that might happen and might not happen, and sometimes don't
amount to shucks.  I vote we go ahead and take our chances."

They were all of the same opinion, so they packed up and said goodbye
to the friendly shepherd and proceeded on their way.




CHAPTER 7

THE MERRY-GO-ROUND MOUNTAINS


The Rolling Prairie was not difficult to travel over, although it was
all uphill and downhill, so for a while they made good progress.  Not
even a shepherd was to be met with now, and the farther they advanced
the more dreary the landscape became.  At noon they stopped for a
"picnic luncheon," as Betsy called it, and then they again resumed
their journey.  All the animals were swift and tireless, and even the
Cowardly Lion and the Mule found they could keep up with the pace of
the Woozy and the Sawhorse.

It was the middle of the afternoon when first they came in sight of a
cluster of low mountains.  These were cone-shaped, rising from broad
bases to sharp peaks at the tops.  From a distance the mountains
appeared indistinct and seemed rather small--more like hills than
mountains--but as the travelers drew nearer, they noted a most unusual
circumstance: the hills were all whirling around, some in one direction
and some the opposite way.

"I guess these are the Merry-Go-Round Mountains, all right," said
Dorothy.

"They must be," said the Wizard.

"They go 'round, sure enough," agreed Trot, "but they don't seem very
merry."

There were several rows of these mountains, extending both to the right
and to the left for miles and miles.  How many rows there might be none
could tell, but between the first row of peaks could be seen other
peaks, all steadily whirling around one way or another. Continuing to
ride nearer, our friends watched these hills attentively, until at
last, coming close up, they discovered there was a deep but narrow gulf
around the edge of each mountain, and that the mountains were set so
close together that the outer gulf was continuous and barred farther
advance.  At the edge of the gulf they all dismounted and peered over
into its depths.  There was no telling where the bottom was, if indeed
there was any bottom at all.  From where they stood it seemed as if the
mountains had been set in one great hole in the ground, just close
enough together so they would not touch, and that each mountain was
supported by a rocky column beneath its base which extended far down in
the black pit below.  From the land side it seemed impossible to get
across the gulf or, succeeding in that, to gain a foothold on any of
the whirling mountains.

"This ditch is too wide to jump across," remarked Button-Bright.

"P'raps the Lion could do it," suggested Dorothy.

"What, jump from here to that whirling hill?" cried the Lion
indignantly.  "I should say not!  Even if I landed there and could hold
on, what good would it do?  There's another spinning mountain beyond
it, and perhaps still another beyond that.  I don't believe any living
creature could jump from one mountain to another when both are whirling
like tops and in different directions."

"I propose we turn back," said the Wooden Sawhorse with a yawn of his
chopped-out mouth as he stared with his knot eyes at the Merry-Go-Round
Mountains.

"I agree with you," said the Woozy, wagging his square head.

"We should have taken the shepherd's advice," added Hank the Mule.

The others of the party, however they might be puzzled by the serious
problem that confronted them, would not allow themselves to despair.
"If we once get over these mountains," said Button-Bright, "we could
probably get along all right."

"True enough," agreed Dorothy.  "So we must find some way, of course,
to get past these whirligig hills.  But how?"

"I wish the Ork was with us," sighed Trot.

"But the Ork isn't here," said the Wizard, "and we must depend upon
ourselves to conquer this difficulty.  Unfortunately, all my magic has
been stolen, otherwise I am sure I could easily get over the mountains."

"Unfortunately," observed the Woozy, "none of us has wings.  And we're
in a magic country without any magic."

"What is that around your waist, Dorothy?" asked the Wizard.

"That?  Oh, that's just the Magic Belt I once captured from the Nome
King," she replied.

"A Magic Belt!   Why, that's fine.  I'm sure a Magic Belt would take
you over these hills."

"It might if I knew how to work it," said the little girl.  "Ozma knows
a lot of its magic, but I've never found out about it.  All I know is
that while I am wearing it, nothing can hurt me."

"Try wishing yourself across and see if it will obey you," suggested
the Wizard.

"But what good would that do?" asked Dorothy.  "If I got across, it
wouldn't help the rest of you, and I couldn't go alone among all those
giants and dragons while you stayed here."

"True enough," agreed the Wizard sadly.  And then, after looking around
the group, he inquired, "What is that on your finger, Trot?"

"A ring.  The Mermaids gave it to me," she explained, "and if ever I'm
in trouble when I'm on the water, I can call the Mermaids and they'll
come and help me.  But the Mermaids can't help me on the land, you
know, 'cause they swim, and--and--they haven't any legs."

"True enough," repeated the Wizard, more sadly.

There was a big, broad, spreading tree near the edge of the gulf, and
as the sun was hot above them, they all gathered under the shade of the
tree to study the problem of what to do next.  "If we had a long rope,"
said Betsy, "we could fasten it to this tree and let the other end of
it down into the gulf and all slide down it."

"Well, what then?" asked the Wizard.

"Then, if we could manage to throw the rope up the other side,"
explained the girl, "we could all climb it and be on the other side of
the gulf."

"There are too many 'if's' in that suggestion," remarked the little
Wizard.  "And you must remember that the other side is nothing but
spinning mountains, so we couldn't possibly fasten a rope to them, even
if we had one."

"That rope idea isn't half bad, though," said the Patchwork Girl, who
had been dancing dangerously near to the edge of the gulf.

"What do you mean?" asked Dorothy.

The Patchwork Girl suddenly stood still and cast her button eyes around
the group.  "Ha, I have it!" she exclaimed.  "Unharness the Sawhorse,
somebody.  My fingers are too clumsy."

"Shall we?" asked Button-Bright doubtfully, turning to the others.

"Well, Scraps has a lot of brains, even if she IS stuffed with cotton,"
asserted the Wizard.  "If her brains can help us out of this trouble,
we ought to use them."

So he began unharnessing the Sawhorse, and Button-Bright and Dorothy
helped him.  When they had removed the harness, the Patchwork Girl told
them to take it all apart and buckle the straps together, end to end.
And after they had done this, they found they had one very long strap
that was stronger than any rope.  "It would reach across the gulf
easily," said the Lion, who with the other animals had sat on his
haunches and watched this proceeding.  "But I don't see how it could be
fastened to one of those dizzy mountains."

Scraps had no such notion as that in her baggy head.  She told them to
fasten one end of the strap to a stout limb of the tree, pointing to
one which extended quite to the edge of the gulf.  Button-Bright did
that, climbing the tree and then crawling out upon the limb until he
was nearly over the gulf.  There he managed to fasten the strap, which
reached to the ground below, and then he slid down it and was caught by
the Wizard, who feared he might fall into the chasm.  Scraps was
delighted.  She seized the lower end of the strap, and telling them all
to get out of her way, she went back as far as the strap would reach
and then made a sudden run toward the gulf.  Over the edge she swung,
clinging to the strap until it had gone as far as its length permitted,
when she let go and sailed gracefully through the air until she
alighted upon the mountain just in front of them.

Almost instantly, as the great cone continued to whirl, she was sent
flying against the next mountain in the rear, and that one had only
turned halfway around when Scraps was sent flying to the next mountain
behind it.  Then her patchwork form disappeared from view entirely, and
the amazed watchers under the tree wondered what had become of her.
"She's gone, and she can't get back," said the Woozy.

"My, how she bounded from one mountain to another!" exclaimed the Lion.

"That was because they whirl so fast," the Wizard explained.  "Scraps
had nothing to hold on to, and so of course she was tossed from one
hill to another.  I'm afraid we shall never see the poor Patchwork Girl
again."

"I shall see her," declared the Woozy.  "Scraps is an old friend of
mine, and if there are really Thistle-Eaters and Giants on the other
side of those tops, she will need someone to protect her.  So here I
go!"  He seized the dangling strap firmly in his square mouth, and in
the same way that Scraps had done swung himself over the gulf.  He let
go the strap at the right moment and fell upon the first whirling
mountain.  Then he bounded to the next one back of it--not on his feet,
but "all mixed up," as Trot said--and then he shot across to another
mountain, disappearing from view just as the Patchwork Girl had done.

"It seems to work, all right," remarked Button-Bright.  "I guess I'll
try it."

"Wait a minute," urged the Wizard.  "Before any more of us make this
desperate leap into the beyond, we must decide whether all will go or
if some of us will remain behind."

"Do you s'pose it hurt them much to bump against those mountains?"
asked Trot.

"I don't s'pose anything could hurt Scraps or the Woozy," said Dorothy,
"and nothing can hurt ME, because I wear the Magic Belt.  So as I'm
anxious to find Ozma, I mean to swing myself across too."

"I'll take my chances," decided Button-Bright.

"I'm sure it will hurt dreadfully, and I'm afraid to do it," said the
Lion, who was already trembling, "but I shall do it if Dorothy does."

"Well, that will leave Betsy and the Mule and Trot," said the Wizard,
"for of course I shall go that I may look after Dorothy.  Do you two
girls think you can find your way back home again?" he asked,
addressing Trot and Betsy.

"I'm not afraid.  Not much, that is," said Trot.  "It looks risky, I
know, but I'm sure I can stand it if the others can."

"If it wasn't for leaving Hank," began Betsy in a hesitating voice.

But the Mule interrupted her by saying, "Go ahead if you want to, and
I'll come after you.  A mule is as brave as a lion any day."

"Braver," said the Lion, "for I'm a coward, friend Hank, and you are
not.  But of course the Sawhorse--"

"Oh, nothing ever hurts ME," asserted the Sawhorse calmly.  "There's
never been any question about my going.  I can't take the Red Wagon,
though."

"No, we must leave the wagon," said the wizard, "and also we must leave
our food and blankets, I fear.  But if we can defy these Merry-Go-Round
Mountains to stop us, we won't mind the sacrifice of some of our
comforts."

"No one knows where we're going to land!" remarked the Lion in a voice
that sounded as if he were going to cry.

"We may not land at all," replied Hank, "but the best way to find out
what will happen to us is to swing across as Scraps and the Woozy have
done."

"I think I shall go last," said the Wizard, "so who wants to go first?"

"I'll go," decided Dorothy.

"No, it's my turn first," said Button-Bright.   "Watch me!"

Even as he spoke, the boy seized the strap, and after making a run
swung himself across the gulf.  Away he went, bumping from hill to hill
until he disappeared.  They listened intently, but the boy uttered no
cry until he had been gone some moments, when they heard a faint
"Hullo-a!" as if called from a great distance.  The sound gave them
courage, however, and Dorothy picked up Toto and held him fast under
one arm while with the other hand she seized the strap and bravely
followed after Button-Bright.

When she struck the first whirling mountain, she fell upon it quite
softly, but before she had time to think, she flew through the air and
lit with a jar on the side of the next mountain.  Again she flew and
alighted, and again and still again, until after five successive bumps
she fell sprawling upon a green meadow and was so dazed and bewildered
by her bumpy journey across the Merry-Go-Round Mountains that she lay
quite still for a time to collect her thoughts.  Toto had escaped from
her arms just as she fell, and he now sat beside her panting with
excitement.  Then Dorothy realized that someone was helping her to her
feet, and here was Button-Bright on one side of her and Scraps on the
other, both seeming to be unhurt.  The next object her eyes fell upon
was the Woozy, squatting upon his square back end and looking at her
reflectively, while Toto barked joyously to find his mistress unhurt
after her whirlwind trip.

"Good!" said the Woozy.  "Here's another and a dog, both safe and
sound.  But my word, Dorothy, you flew some!  If you could have seen
yourself, you'd have been absolutely astonished."

"They say 'Time flies,'" laughed Button-Bright, "but Time never made a
quicker journey than that."

Just then, as Dorothy turned around to look at the whirling mountains,
she was in time to see tiny Trot come flying from the nearest hill to
fall upon the soft grass not a yard away from where she stood.  Trot
was so dizzy she couldn't stand at first, but she wasn't at all hurt,
and presently Betsy came flying to them and would have bumped into the
others had they not retreated in time to avoid her.  Then, in quick
succession, came the Lion, Hank and the Sawhorse, bounding from
mountain to mountain to fall safely upon the greensward.  Only the
Wizard was now left behind, and they waited so long for him that
Dorothy began to be worried.

But suddenly he came flying from the nearest mountain and tumbled heels
over head beside them.  Then they saw that he had wound two of their
blankets around his body to keep the bumps from hurting him and had
fastened the blankets with some of the spare straps from the harness of
the Sawhorse.




CHAPTER 8

THE MYSTERIOUS CITY


There they sat upon the grass, their heads still swimming from their
dizzy flights, and looked at one another in silent bewilderment.  But
presently, when assured that no one was injured, they grew more calm
and collected, and the Lion said with a sigh of relief, "Who would have
thought those Merry-Go-Round Mountains were made of rubber?"

"Are they really rubber?" asked Trot.

"They must be," replied the Lion, "for otherwise we would not have
bounded so swiftly from one to another without getting hurt."

"That is all guesswork," declared the Wizard, unwinding the blankets
from his body, "for none of us stayed long enough on the mountains to
discover what they are made of.  But where are we?"

"That's guesswork," said Scraps.  "The shepherd said the Thistle-Eaters
live this side of the mountains and are waited on by giants."

"Oh no," said Dorothy, "it's the Herkus who have giant slaves, and the
Thistle-Eaters hitch dragons to their chariots."

"How could they do that?" asked the Woozy.  "Dragons have long tails,
which would get in the way of the chariot wheels."

"And if the Herkus have conquered the giants," said Trot, "they must be
at least twice the size of giants.  P'raps the Herkus are the biggest
people in all the world!"

"Perhaps they are," assented the Wizard in a thoughtful tone of voice.
"And perhaps the shepherd didn't know what he was talking about.  Let
us travel on toward the west and discover for ourselves what the people
of this country are like."

It seemed a pleasant enough country, and it was quite still and
peaceful when they turned their eyes away from the silently whirling
mountains.  There were trees here and there and green bushes, while
throughout the thick grass were scattered brilliantly colored flowers.
About a mile away was a low hill that hid from them all the country
beyond it, so they realized they could not tell much about the country
until they had crossed the hill.  The Red Wagon having been left
behind, it was now necessary to make other arrangements for traveling.
The Lion told Dorothy she could ride upon his back as she had often
done before, and the Woozy said he could easily carry both Trot and the
Patchwork Girl.  Betsy still had her mule, Hank, and Button-Bright and
the Wizard could sit together upon the long, thin back of the Sawhorse,
but they took care to soften their seat with a pad of blankets before
they started.  Thus mounted, the adventurers started for the hill,
which was reached after a brief journey.

As they mounted the crest and gazed beyond the hill, they discovered
not far away a walled city, from the towers and spires of which gay
banners were flying.  It was not a very big city, indeed, but its walls
were very high and thick, and it appeared that the people who lived
there must have feared attack by a powerful enemy, else they would not
have surrounded their dwellings with so strong a barrier. There was no
path leading from the mountains to the city, and this proved that the
people seldom or never visited the whirling hills, but our friends
found the grass soft and agreeable to travel over, and with the city
before them they could not well lose their way.  When they drew nearer
to the walls, the breeze carried to their ears the sound of music--dim
at first, but growing louder as they advanced.

"That doesn't seem like a very terr'ble place," remarked Dorothy.

"Well, it LOOKS all right," replied Trot from her seat on the Woozy,
"but looks can't always be trusted."

"MY looks can," said Scraps.  "I LOOK patchwork, and I AM patchwork,
and no one but a blind owl could ever doubt that I'm the Patchwork
Girl."  Saying which, she turned a somersault off the Woozy and,
alighting on her feet, began wildly dancing about.

"Are owls ever blind?" asked Trot.

"Always, in the daytime," said Button-Bright.   "But Scraps can see
with her button eyes both day and night.  Isn't it queer?"

"It's queer that buttons can see at all," answered Trot.  "But good
gracious!  What's become of the city?"

"I was going to ask that myself," said Dorothy. "It's gone!"

"It's gone!"

The animals came to a sudden halt, for the city had really disappeared,
walls and all, and before them lay the clear, unbroken sweep of the
country.  "Dear me!" exclaimed the Wizard.  "This is rather
disagreeable.  It is annoying to travel almost to a place and then find
it is not there."

"Where can it be, then?" asked Dorothy.  "It cert'nly was there a
minute ago."

"I can hear the music yet," declared Button-Bright, and when they all
listened, the strains of music could plainly be heard.

"Oh!  There's the city over at the left," called Scraps, and turning
their eyes, they saw the walls and towers and fluttering banners far to
the left of them.

"We must have lost our way," suggested Dorothy.

"Nonsense," said the Lion.

"I, and all the other animals, have been tramping straight toward the
city ever since we first saw it."

"Then how does it happen--"

"Never mind," interrupted the Wizard, "we are no farther from it than
we were before.  It is in a different direction, that's all, so let us
hurry and get there before it again escapes us."

So on they went directly toward the city, which seemed only a couple of
miles distant.  But when they had traveled less than a mile, it
suddenly disappeared again.  Once more they paused, somewhat
discouraged, but in a moment the button eyes of Scraps again discovered
the city, only this time it was just behind them in the direction from
which they had come.  "Goodness gracious!" cried Dorothy.  "There's
surely something wrong with that city.  Do you s'pose it's on wheels,
Wizard?"

"It may not be a city at all," he replied, looking toward it with a
speculative glance.

"What COULD it be, then?"

"Just an illusion."

"What's that?" asked Trot.

"Something you think you see and don't see."

"I can't believe that," said Button-Bright.  "If we only saw it, we
might be mistaken, but if we can see it and hear it, too, it must be
there."

"Where?" asked the Patchwork Girl.

"Somewhere near us," he insisted.

"We will have to go back, I suppose," said the Woozy with a sigh.

So back they turned and headed for the walled city until it disappeared
again, only to reappear at the right of them.  They were constantly
getting nearer to it, however, so they kept their faces turned toward
it as it flitted here and there to all points of the compass.
Presently the Lion, who was leading the procession, halted abruptly and
cried out, "Ouch!"

"What's the matter?" asked Dorothy.

"Ouch--Ouch!" repeated the Lion, and leaped backward so suddenly that
Dorothy nearly tumbled from his back. At the same time Hank the Mule
yelled "Ouch!"

"Ouch!  Ouch!" repeated the Lion and leaped backward so suddenly that
Dorothy nearly tumbled from his back.  At the same time, Hank the Mule
yelled "Ouch!" almost as loudly as the Lion had done, and he also
pranced backward a few paces.

"It's the thistles," said Betsy.  "They prick their legs."

Hearing this, all looked down, and sure enough the ground was thick
with thistles, which covered the plain from the point where they stood
way up to the walls of the mysterious city.  No pathways through them
could be seen at all; here the soft grass ended and the growth of
thistles began.  "They're the prickliest thistles I ever felt,"
grumbled the Lion.  "My legs smart yet from their stings, though I
jumped out of them as quickly as I could."

"Here is a new difficulty," remarked the Wizard in a grieved tone. "The
city has stopped hopping around, it is true, but how are we to get to
it over this mass of prickers?"

"They can't hurt ME," said the thick-skinned Woozy, advancing
fearlessly and trampling among the thistles.

"Nor me," said the Wooden Sawhorse.

"But the Lion and the Mule cannot stand the prickers," asserted
Dorothy, "and we can't leave them behind."

"Must we all go back?" asked Trot.

"Course not!" replied Button-Bright scornfully. "Always when there's
trouble, there's a way out of it if you can find it."

"I wish the Scarecrow was here," said Scraps, standing on her head on
the Woozy's square back.  "His splendid brains would soon show us how
to conquer this field of thistles."

"What's the matter with YOUR brains?" asked the boy.

"Nothing," she said, making a flip-flop into the thistles and dancing
among them without feeling their sharp points.  "I could tell you in
half a minute how to get over the thistles if I wanted to."

"Tell us, Scraps!" begged Dorothy.

"I don't want to wear my brains out with overwork," replied the
Patchwork Girl.

"Don't you love Ozma?  And don't you want to find her?" asked Betsy
reproachfully.

"Yes indeed," said Scraps, walking on her hands as an acrobat does at
the circus.

"Well, we can't find Ozma unless we get past these thistles," declared
Dorothy.

Scraps danced around them two or three times without reply.  Then she
said, "Don't look at me, you stupid folks.  Look at those blankets."

The Wizard's face brightened at once.

"Why didn't we think of those blankets before?"

"Because you haven't magic brains," laughed Scraps.   "Such brains as
you have are of the common sort that grow in your heads, like weeds in
a garden.  I'm sorry for you people who have to be born in order to be
alive."

But the Wizard was not listening to her.  He quickly removed the
blankets from the back of the Sawhorse and spread one of them upon the
thistles, just next the grass.  The thick cloth rendered the prickers
harmless, so the Wizard walked over this first blanket and spread the
second one farther on, in the direction of the phantom city.  "These
blankets," said he, "are for the Lion and the Mule to walk upon.  The
Sawhorse and the Woozy can walk on the thistles."

So the Lion and the Mule walked over the first blanket and stood upon
the second one until the Wizard had picked up the one they had passed
over and spread it in front of them, when they advanced to that one and
waited while the one behind them was again spread in front.  "This is
slow work," said the Wizard, "but it will get us to the city after a
while."

"The city is a good half mile away yet," announced Button-Bright.

"And this is awful hard work for the Wizard," added Trot.

"Why couldn't the Lion ride on the Woozy's back?" asked Dorothy. "It's
a big, flat back, and the Woozy's mighty strong. Perhaps the Lion
wouldn't fall off."

"You may try it if you like," said the Woozy to the Lion.  "I can take
you to the city in a jiffy and then come back for Hank."

"I'm--I'm afraid," said the Cowardly Lion.  He was twice as big as the
Woozy.

"Try it," pleaded Dorothy.

"And take a tumble among the thistles?" asked the Lion reproachfully.

But when the Woozy came close to him, the big beast suddenly bounded
upon its back and managed to balance himself there, although forced to
hold his four legs so close together that he was in danger of toppling
over.  The great weight of the monster Lion did not seem to affect the
Woozy, who called to his rider, "Hold on tight!" and ran swiftly over
the thistles toward the city.

The others stood on the blanket and watched the strange sight
anxiously.  Of course, the Lion couldn't "hold on tight" because there
was nothing to hold to, and he swayed from side to side as if likely to
fall off any moment.  Still, he managed to stick to the Woozy's back
until they were close to the walls of the city, when he leaped to the
ground.  Next moment the Woozy came dashing back at full speed.

"There's a little strip of ground next the wall where there are no
thistles," he told them when he had reached the adventurers once more.
"Now then, friend Hank, see if you can ride as well as the Lion did."

"Take the others first," proposed the Mule.  So the Sawhorse and the
Woozy made a couple of trips over the thistles to the city walls and
carried all the people in safety, Dorothy holding little Toto in her
arms.  The travelers then sat in a group on a little hillock just
outside the wall and looked at the great blocks of gray stone and
waited for the Woozy to bring Hank to them.  The Mule was very awkward,
and his legs trembled so badly that more than once they thought he
would tumble off, but finally he reached them in safety, and the entire
party was now reunited.  More than that, they had reached the city that
had eluded them for so long and in so strange a manner.

"The gates must be around the other side," said the Wizard.  "Let us
follow the curve of the wall until we reach an opening in it."

"Which way?" asked Dorothy.

"We must guess that," he replied.  "Suppose we go to the left.  One
direction is as good as another."  They formed in marching order and
went around the city wall to the left.  It wasn't a big city, as I have
said, but to go way around it outside the high wall was quite a walk,
as they became aware.  But around it our adventurers went without
finding any sign of a gateway or other opening.  When they had returned
to the little mound from which they had started, they dismounted from
the animals and again seated themselves on the grassy mound.

"It's mighty queer, isn't it?" asked Button-Bright.

"There must be SOME way for the people to get out and in," declared
Dorothy.  "Do you s'pose they have flying machines, Wizard?"

"No," he replied, "for in that case they would be flying all over the
Land of Oz, and we know they have not done that.  Flying machines are
unknown here.  I think it more likely that the people use ladders to
get over the walls."

"It would be an awful climb over that high stone wall," said Betsy.

"Stone, is it?" Scraps, who was again dancing wildly around, for she
never tired and could never keep still for long.

"Course it's stone," answered Betsy scornfully.  "Can't you see?"

"Yes," said Scraps, going closer.  "I can SEE the wall, but I can't
FEEL it."  And then, with her arms outstretched, she did a very queer
thing.  She walked right into the wall and disappeared.

"For goodness sake!" Dorothy, amazed, as indeed they all were.




CHAPTER 9

THE HIGH COCO-LORUM OF THI


And now the Patchwork Girl came dancing out of the wall again.

"Come on!" she called.   "It isn't there.  There isn't any wall at all."

"What?  No wall?" exclaimed the Wizard.

"Nothing like it," said Scraps.  "It's a make-believe.  You see it, but
it isn't.  Come on into the city; we've been wasting our time."

With this, she danced into the wall again and once more disappeared.
Button-Bright, who was rather venture-some, dashed away after her and
also became invisible to them.  The others followed more cautiously,
stretching out their hands to feel the wall and finding, to their
astonishment, that they could feel nothing because nothing opposed
them.  They walked on a few steps and found themselves in the streets
of a very beautiful city.  Behind them they again saw the wall, grim
and forbidding as ever, but now they knew it was merely an illusion
prepared to keep strangers from entering the city.

But the wall was soon forgotten, for in front of them were a number of
quaint people who stared at them in amazement as if wondering where
they had come from.  Our friends forgot their good manners for a time
and returned the stares with interest, for so remarkable a people had
never before been discovered in all the remarkable Land of Oz.

Their heads were shaped like diamonds, and their bodies like hearts.
All the hair they had was a little bunch at the tip top of their
diamond-shaped heads, and their eyes were very large and round, and
their noses and mouths very small.  Their clothing was tight fitting
and of brilliant colors, being handsomely embroidered in quaint designs
with gold or silver threads; but on their feet they wore sandals with
no stockings whatever.  The expression of their faces was pleasant
enough, although they now showed surprise at the appearance of
strangers so unlike themselves, and our friends thought they seemed
quite harmless.

"I beg your pardon," said the Wizard, speaking for his party, "for
intruding upon you uninvited, but we are traveling on important
business and find it necessary to visit your city.  Will you kindly
tell us by what name your city is called?"

They looked at one another uncertainly, each expecting some other to
answer.  Finally, a short one whose heart-shaped body was very broad
replied, "We have no occasion to call our city anything.  It is where
we live, that is all."

"But by what name do others call your city?" asked the Wizard.

"We know of no others except yourselves," said the man.  And then he
inquired, "Were you born with those queer forms you have, or has some
cruel magician transformed you to them from your natural shapes?"

"These are our natural shapes," declared the Wizard, "and we consider
them very good shapes, too."

The group of inhabitants was constantly being enlarged by others who
joined it.  All were evidently startled and uneasy at the arrival of
strangers.

"Have you a King?" asked Dorothy, who knew it was better to speak with
someone in authority.

But the man shook his diamond-like head.  "What is a King?" he asked.

"Isn't there anyone who rules over you?" inquired the Wizard.

"No," was the reply, "each of us rules himself, or at least tries to do
so.  It is not an easy thing to do, as you probably know."

The Wizard reflected.

"If you have disputes among you," said he after a little thought, "who
settles them?"

"The High Coco-Lorum," they answered in a chorus.

"And who is he?"

"The judge who enforces the laws," said the man who had first spoken.

"Then he is the principal person here?" continued the Wizard.

"Well, I would not say that," returned the man in a puzzled way.  "The
High Coco-Lorum is a public servant.  However, he represents the laws,
which we must all obey."

"I think," said the Wizard, "we ought to see your High Coco-Lorum and
talk with him.  Our mission here requires us to consult one high in
authority, and the High Coco-Lorum ought to be high, whatever else he
is."

The inhabitants seemed to consider this proposition reasonable, for
they nodded their diamond-shaped heads in approval.  So the broad one
who had been their spokesman said, "Follow me," and turning led the way
along one of the streets.  The entire party followed him, the natives
falling in behind.  The dwellings they passed were quite nicely planned
and seemed comfortable and convenient.  After leading them a few
blocks, their conductor stopped before a house which was neither better
nor worse than the others.  The doorway was shaped to admit the
strangely formed bodies of these people, being narrow at the top, broad
in the middle and tapering at the bottom.  The windows were made in
much the same way, giving the house a most peculiar appearance.  When
their guide opened the gate, a music box concealed in the gatepost
began to play, and the sound attracted the attention of the High
Coco-Lorum, who appeared at an open window and inquired, "What has
happened now?"

But in the same moment his eyes fell upon the strangers and he hastened
to open the door and admit them--all but the animals, which were left
outside with the throng of natives that had now gathered. For a small
city there seemed to be a large number of inhabitants, but they did not
try to enter the house and contented themselves with staring curiously
at the strange animals.  Toto followed Dorothy.

Our friends entered a large room at the front of the house, where the
High Coco-Lorum asked them to be seated.  "I hope your mission here is
a peaceful one," he said, looking a little worried, "for the Thists are
not very good fighters and object to being conquered."

"Are your people called Thists?" asked Dorothy.

"Yes.   I thought you knew that.  And we call our city Thi."

"Oh!"

"We are Thists because we eat thistles, you know," continued the High
Coco-Lorum.

"Do you really eat those prickly things?" inquired Button-Bright
wonderingly.

"Why not?" replied the other.  "The sharp points of the thistles cannot
hurt us, because all our insides are gold-lined."

"Gold-lined!"

"To be sure.  Our throats and stomachs are lined with solid gold, and
we find the thistles nourishing and good to eat.  As a matter of fact,
there is nothing else in our country that is fit for food.  All around
the City of Thi grow countless thistles, and all we need do is to go
and gather them.  If we wanted anything else to eat, we would have to
plant it, and grow it, and harvest it, and that would be a lot of
trouble and make us work, which is an occupation we detest."

"But tell me, please," said the Wizard, "how does it happen that your
city jumps around so, from one part of the country to another?"

"The city doesn't jump.  It doesn't move at all," declared the High
Coco-Lorum.  "However, I will admit that the land that surrounds it has
a trick of turning this way or that, and so if one is standing upon the
plain and facing north, he is likely to find himself suddenly facing
west or east or south.  But once you reach the thistle fields, you are
on solid ground."

"Ah, I begin to understand," said the Wizard, nodding his head.  "But I
have another question to ask: How does it happen that the Thists have
no King to rule over them?"

"Hush!" whispered the High Coco-Lorum, looking uneasily around to make
sure they were not overheard.  "In reality, I am the King, but the
people don't know it.  They think they rule themselves, but the fact is
I have everything my own way.  No one else knows anything about our
laws, and so I make the laws to suit myself.  If any oppose me or
question my acts, I tell them it's the law and that settles it.  If I
called myself King, however, and wore a crown and lived in royal style,
the people would not like me and might do me harm.  As the High
Coco-Lorum of Thi, I am considered a very agreeable person."

"It seems a very clever arrangement," said the Wizard.  "And now, as
you are the principal person in Thi, I beg you to tell us if the Royal
Ozma is a captive in your city."

"No," answered the diamond-headed man.  "We have no captives.  No
strangers but yourselves are here, and we have never before heard of
the Royal Ozma."

"She rules over all of Oz," said Dorothy, "and so she rules your city
and you, because you are in the Winkie Country, which is a part of the
Land of Oz."

"It may be," returned the High Coco-Lorum, "for we do not study
geography and have never inquired whether we live in the Land of Oz or
not.  And any Ruler who rules us from a distance and unknown to us is
welcome to the job.  But what has happened to your Royal Ozma?"

"Someone has stolen her," said the Wizard.  "Do you happen to have any
talented magician among your people, one who is especially clever, you
know?"

"No, none especially clever.  We do some magic, of course, but it is
all of the ordinary kind.  I do not think any of us has yet aspired to
stealing Rulers, either by magic or otherwise."

"Then we've come a long way for nothing!" exclaimed Trot regretfully.

"But we are going farther than this," asserted the Patchwork Girl,
bending her stuffed body backward until her yarn hair touched the floor
and then walking around on her hands with her feet in the air.

The High Coco-Lorum watched Scraps admiringly.

"You may go farther on, of course," said he, "but I advise you not to.
The Herkus live back of us, beyond the thistles and the twisting lands,
and they are not very nice people to meet, I assure you."

"Are they giants?" asked Betsy.

"They are worse than that," was the reply. "They have giants for their
slaves and they are so much stronger than giants that the poor slaves
dare not rebel for fear of being torn to pieces."

"How do you know?" asked Scraps.

"Everyone says so," answered the High Coco-Lorum.

"Have you seen the Herkus yourself?" inquired Dorothy.

"No, but what everyone says must be true, otherwise what would be the
use of their saying it?"

"We were told before we got here that you people hitch dragons to your
chariots," said the little girl.

"So we do," declared the High Coco-Lorum. "And that reminds me that I
ought to entertain you as strangers and my guests by taking you for a
ride around our splendid City of Thi."  He touched a button, and a band
began to play.  At least, they heard the music of a band, but couldn't
tell where it came from.  "That tune is the order to my charioteer to
bring around my dragon-chariot," said the High Coco-Lorum.  "Every time
I give an order, it is in music, which is a much more pleasant way to
address servants than in cold, stern words."

"Does this dragon of yours bite?" asked Button-Bright.

"Mercy no!  Do you think I'd risk the safety of my innocent people by
using a biting dragon to draw my chariot?  I'm proud to say that my
dragon is harmless, unless his steering gear breaks, and he was
manufactured at the famous dragon factory in this City of Thi.  Here he
comes, and you may examine him for yourselves."

They heard a low rumble and a shrill squeaking sound, and going out to
the front of the house, they saw coming around the corner a car drawn
by a gorgeous jeweled dragon, which moved its head to right and left
and flashed its eyes like headlights of an automobile and uttered a
growling noise as it slowly moved toward them.  When it stopped before
the High Coco-Lorum's house, Toto barked sharply at the sprawling
beast, but even tiny Trot could see that the dragon was not alive. Its
scales were of gold, and each one was set with sparkling jewels, while
it walked in such a stiff, regular manner that it could be nothing else
than a machine.  The chariot that trailed behind it was likewise of
gold and jewels, and when they entered it, they found there were no
seats.  Everyone was supposed to stand up while riding. The charioteer
was a little, diamond-headed fellow who straddled the neck of the
dragon and moved the levers that made it go.

"This," said the High Coco-Lorum pompously, "is a wonderful invention.
We are all very proud of our auto-dragons, many of which are in use by
our wealthy inhabitants.  Start the thing going, charioteer!"

The charioteer did not move.

"You forgot to order him in music," suggested Dorothy.

"Ah, so I did."

He touched a button and a music box in the dragon's head began to play
a tune.  At once the little charioteer pulled over a lever, and the
dragon began to move, very slowly and groaning dismally as it drew the
clumsy chariot after it.  Toto trotted between the wheels.  The
Sawhorse, the Mule, the Lion and the Woozy followed after and had no
trouble in keeping up with the machine.  Indeed, they had to go slow to
keep from running into it.  When the wheels turned, another music box
concealed somewhere under the chariot played a lively march tune which
was in striking contrast with the dragging movement of the strange
vehicle, and Button-Bright decided that the music he had heard when
they first sighted this city was nothing else than a chariot plodding
its weary way through the streets.

All the travelers from the Emerald City thought this ride the most
uninteresting and dreary they had ever experienced, but the High
Coco-Lorum seemed to think it was grand.  He pointed out the different
buildings and parks and fountains in much the same way that the
conductor does on an American "sightseeing wagon" does, and being
guests they were obliged to submit to the ordeal.  But they became a
little worried when their host told them he had ordered a banquet
prepared for them in the City Hall.

"What are we going to eat?" asked Button-Bright suspiciously.

"Thistles," was the reply.  "Fine, fresh thistles, gathered this very
day."

Scraps laughed, for she never ate anything, but Dorothy said in a
protesting voice, "OUR insides are not lined with gold, you know."

"How sad!" exclaimed the High Coco-Lorum, and then he added as an
afterthought, "but we can have the thistles boiled, if you prefer."

"I'm 'fraid they wouldn't taste good even then," said little Trot.
"Haven't you anything else to eat?"

The High Coco-Lorum shook his diamond-shaped head.

"Nothing that I know of," said he.  "But why should we have anything
else when we have so many thistles?  However, if you can't eat what we
eat, don't eat anything.  We shall not be offended, and the banquet
will be just as merry and delightful."

Knowing his companions were all hungry, the Wizard said, "I trust you
will excuse us from the banquet, sir, which will be merry enough
without us, although it is given in our honor.  For, as Ozma is not in
your city, we must leave here at once and seek her elsewhere."

"Sure we must!" Dorothy, and she whispered to Betsy and Trot, "I'd
rather starve somewhere else than in this city, and who knows, we may
run across somebody who eats reg'lar food and will give us some."

So when the ride was finished, in spite of the protests of the High
Coco-Lorum, they insisted on continuing their journey.  "It will soon
be dark," he objected.

"We don't mind the darkness," replied the Wizard.

"Some wandering Herku may get you."

"Do you think the Herkus would hurt us?" asked Dorothy.

"I cannot say, not having had the honor of their acquaintance.  But
they are said to be so strong that if they had any other place to stand
upon they could lift the world."

"All of them together?" asked Button-Bright wonderingly.

"Any one of them could do it," said the High Coco-Lorum.

"Have you heard of any magicians being among them?" asked the Wizard,
knowing that only a magician could have stolen Ozma in the way she had
been stolen.

"I am told it is quite a magical country," declared the High
Coco-Lorum, "and magic is usually performed by magicians.  But I have
never heard that they have any invention or sorcery to equal our
wonderful auto-dragons."

They thanked him for his courtesy, and mounting their own animals rode
to the farther side of the city and right through the Wall of Illusion
out into the open country.  "I'm glad we got away so easily," said
Betsy.  "I didn't like those queer-shaped people."

"Nor did I," agreed Dorothy. "It seems dreadful to be lined with sheets
of pure gold and have nothing to eat but thistles."

"They seemed happy and contented, though," remarked the Wizard, "and
those who are contented have nothing to regret and nothing more to wish
for."




CHAPTER 10

TOTO LOSES SOMETHING


For a while the travelers were constantly losing their direction, for
beyond the thistle fields they again found themselves upon the
turning-lands, which swung them around one way and then another.  But
by keeping the City of Thi constantly behind them, the adventurers
finally passed the treacherous turning-lands and came upon a stony
country where no grass grew at all.  There were plenty of bushes,
however, and although it was now almost dark, the girls discovered some
delicious yellow berries growing upon the bushes, one taste of which
set them all to picking as many as they could find.  The berries
relieved their pangs of hunger for a time, and as it now became too
dark to see anything, they camped where they were.

The three girls lay down upon one of the blankets--all in a row--and
the Wizard covered them with the other blanket and tucked them in.
Button-Bright crawled under the shelter of some bushes and was asleep
in half a minute.  The Wizard sat down with his back to a big stone and
looked at the stars in the sky and thought gravely upon the dangerous
adventure they had undertaken, wondering if they would ever be able to
find their beloved Ozma again.  The animals lay in a group by
themselves, a little distance from the others.

"I've lost my growl!" said Toto, who had been very silent and sober all
that day.  "What do you suppose has become of it?"

"If you had asked me to keep track of your growl, I might be able to
tell you," remarked the Lion sleepily.  "But frankly, Toto, I supposed
you were taking care of it yourself."

"It's an awful thing to lose one's growl," said Toto, wagging his tail
disconsolately.  "What if you lost your roar, Lion?  Wouldn't you feel
terrible?"

"My roar," replied the Lion, "is the fiercest thing about me.  I depend
on it to frighten my enemies so badly that they won't dare to fight me."

"Once," said the Mule, "I lost my bray so that I couldn't call to Betsy
to let her know I was hungry.  That was before I could talk, you know,
for I had not yet come into the Land of Oz, and I found it was
certainly very uncomfortable not to be able to make a noise."

"You make enough noise now," declared Toto.  "But none of you have
answered my question: Where is my growl?"

"You may search ME," said the Woozy.  "I don't care for such things,
myself."

"You snore terribly," asserted Toto.

"It may be," said the Woozy.  "What one does when asleep one is not
accountable for.  I wish you would wake me up sometime when I'm snoring
and let me hear the sound.  Then I can judge whether it is terrible or
delightful."

"It isn't pleasant, I assure you," said the Lion, yawning.

"To me it seems wholly unnecessary," declared Hank the Mule.

"You ought to break yourself of the habit," said the Sawhorse.  "You
never hear me snore, because I never sleep.  I don't even whinny as
those puffy meat horses do.  I wish that whoever stole Toto's growl had
taken the Mule's bray and the Lion's roar and the Woozy's snore at the
same time."

"Do you think, then, that my growl was stolen?"

"You have never lost it before, have you?" inquired inquired the
Sawhorse.

"Only once, when I had a sore throat from barking too long at the moon."

"Is your throat sore now?" asked the Woozy.

"No," replied the dog.

"I can't understand," said Hank, "why dogs bark at the moon.  They
can't scare the moon, and the moon doesn't pay any attention to the
bark.  So why do dogs do it?"

"Were you ever a dog?" asked Toto.

"No indeed," replied Hank.  "I am thankful to say I was created a
mule--the most beautiful of all beasts--and have always remained one."

The Woozy sat upon his square haunches to examine Hank with care.
"Beauty," he said, "must be a matter of taste.  I don't say your
judgment is bad, friend Hank, or that you are so vulgar as to be
conceited.  But if you admire big, waggy ears and a tail like a
paintbrush and hoofs big enough for an elephant and a long neck and a
body so skinny that one can count the ribs with one eye shut--if that's
your idea of beauty, Hank, then either you or I must be much mistaken."

"You're full of edges," sneered the Mule. "If I were square as you are,
I suppose you'd think me lovely."

"Outwardly, dear Hank, I would," replied the Woozy. "But to be really
lovely, one must be beautiful without and within."

The Mule couldn't deny this statement, so he gave a disgusted grunt and
rolled over so that his back was toward the Woozy.  But the Lion,
regarding the two calmly with his great, yellow eyes, said to the dog,
"My dear Toto, our friends have taught us a lesson in humility.  If the
Woozy and the Mule are indeed beautiful creatures as they seem to
think, you and I must be decidedly ugly."

"Not to ourselves," protested Toto, who was a shrewd little dog.  "You
and I, Lion, are fine specimens of our own races.  I am a fine dog, and
you are a fine lion.  Only in point of comparison, one with another,
can we be properly judged, so I will leave it to the poor old Sawhorse
to decide which is the most beautiful animal among us all. The Sawhorse
is wood, so he won't be prejudiced and will speak the truth."

"I surely will," responded the Sawhorse, wagging his ears, which were
chips set in his wooden head.  "Are you all agreed to accept my
judgment?"

"We are!" they declared, each one hopeful.

"Then," said the Sawhorse, "I must point out to you the fact that you
are all meat creatures, who tire unless they sleep and starve unless
they eat and suffer from thirst unless they drink.  Such animals must
be very imperfect, and imperfect creatures cannot be beautiful.  Now, I
am made of wood."

"You surely have a wooden head," said the Mule.

"Yes, and a wooden body and wooden legs, which are as swift as the wind
and as tireless.  I've heard Dorothy say that 'handsome is as handsome
does,' and I surely perform my duties in a handsome manner. Therefore,
if you wish my honest judgment, I will confess that among us all I am
the most beautiful."

The Mule snorted, and the Woozy laughed; Toto had lost his growl and
could only look scornfully at the Sawhorse, who stood in his place
unmoved.  But the Lion stretched himself and yawned, saying quietly,
"Were we all like the Sawhorse, we would all be Sawhorses, which would
be too many of the kind.  Were we all like Hank, we would be a herd of
mules; if like Toto, we would be a pack of dogs; should we all become
the shape of the Woozy, he would no longer be remarkable for his
unusual appearance.  Finally, were you all like me, I would consider
you so common that I would not care to associate with you.  To be
individual, my friends, to be different from others, is the only way to
become distinguished from the common herd.  Let us be glad, therefore,
that we differ from one another in form and in disposition. Variety is
the spice of life, and we are various enough to enjoy one another's
society; so let us be content."

"There is some truth in that speech," remarked Toto reflectively. "But
how about my lost growl?"

"The growl is of importance only to you," responded the Lion, "so it is
your business to worry over the loss, not ours.  If you love us, do not
afflict your burdens on us; be unhappy all by yourself."

"If the same person stole my growl who stole Ozma," said the little
dog, "I hope we shall find him very soon and punish him as he deserves.
He must be the most cruel person in all the world, for to prevent a dog
from growling when it is his nature to growl is just as wicked, in my
opinion, as stealing all the magic in Oz."




CHAPTER 11

BUTTON-BRIGHT LOSES HIMSELF


The Patchwork Girl, who never slept and who could see very well in the
dark, had wandered among the rocks and bushes all night long, with the
result that she was able to tell some good news the next morning. "Over
the crest of the hill before us," she said, "is a big grove of trees of
many kinds on which all sorts of fruits grow.  If you will go there,
you will find a nice breakfast awaiting you."  This made them eager to
start, so as soon as the blankets were folded and strapped to the back
of the Sawhorse, they all took their places on the animals and set out
for the big grove Scraps had told them of.

As soon as they got over the brow of the hill, they discovered it to be
a really immense orchard, extending for miles to the right and left of
them.  As their way led straight through the trees, they hurried
forward as fast as possible.  The first trees they came to bore
quinces, which they did not like.  Then there were rows of citron trees
and then crab apples and afterward limes and lemons.  But beyond these
they found a grove of big, golden oranges, juicy and sweet, and the
fruit hung low on the branches so they could pluck it easily.

They helped themselves freely and all ate oranges as they continued on
their way.  Then, a little farther along, they came to some trees
bearing fine, red apples, which they also feasted on, and the Wizard
stopped here long enough to tie a lot of the apples in one end of a
blanket.

"We do not know what will happen to us after we leave this delightful
orchard," he said, "so I think it wise to carry a supply of apples with
us.  We can't starve as long as we have apples, you know."

Scraps wasn't riding the Woozy just now.  She loved to climb the trees
and swing herself by the branches from one tree to another.  Some of
the choicest fruit was gathered by the Patchwork Girl from the very
highest limbs and tossed down to the others.  Suddenly, Trot asked,
"Where's Button-Bright?" and when the others looked for him, they found
the boy had disappeared.

"Dear me!" cried Dorothy.  "I guess he's lost again, and that will mean
our waiting here until we can find him."

"It's a good place to wait," suggested Betsy, who had found a plum tree
and was eating some of its fruit.

"How can you wait here and find Button-Bright at one and the same
time?" inquired the Patchwork Girl, hanging by her toes on a limb just
over the heads of the three mortal girls.

"Perhaps he'll come back here," answered Dorothy.

"If he tries that, he'll prob'ly lose his way," said Trot.  "I've known
him to do that lots of times.  It's losing his way that gets him lost."

"Very true," said the Wizard.  "So all the rest of you must stay here
while I go look for the boy."

"Won't YOU get lost, too?" asked Betsy.

"I hope not, my dear."

"Let ME go," said Scraps, dropping lightly to the ground.  "I can't get
lost, and I'm more likely to find Button-Bright than any of you."
Without waiting for permission, she darted away through the trees and
soon disappeared from their view.

"Dorothy," said Toto, squatting beside his little mistress, "I've lost
my growl."

"How did that happen?" she asked.

"I don't know," replied Toto.  "Yesterday morning the Woozy nearly
stepped on me, and I tried to growl at him and found I couldn't growl a
bit."

"Can you bark?" inquired Dorothy.

"Oh, yes indeed."

"Then never mind the growl," said she.

"But what will I do when I get home to the Glass Cat and the Pink
Kitten?" asked the little dog in an anxious tone.

"They won't mind if you can't growl at them, I'm sure," said Dorothy.
"I'm sorry for you, of course, Toto, for it's just those things we
can't do that we want to do most of all; but before we get back, you
may find your growl again."

"Do you think the person who stole Ozma stole my growl?"

Dorothy smiled.

"Perhaps, Toto."

"Then he's a scoundrel!" cried the little dog.

"Anyone who would steal Ozma is as bad as bad can be," agreed Dorothy,
"and when we remember that our dear friend, the lovely Ruler of Oz, is
lost, we ought not to worry over just a growl."

Toto was not entirely satisfied with this remark, for the more he
thought upon his lost growl, the more important his misfortune became.
When no one was looking, he went away among the trees and tried his
best to growl--even a little bit--but could not manage to do so.  All
he could do was bark, and a bark cannot take the place of a growl, so
he sadly returned to the others.

Now Button-Bright had no idea that he was lost at first.  He had merely
wandered from tree to tree seeking the finest fruit until he discovered
he was alone in the great orchard.  But that didn't worry him just
then, and seeing some apricot trees farther on, he went to them.  Then
he discovered some cherry trees; just beyond these were some
tangerines.  "We've found 'most ev'ry kind of fruit but peaches," he
said to himself, "so I guess there are peaches here, too, if I can find
the trees."

He searched here and there, paying no attention to his way, until he
found that the trees surrounding him bore only nuts.  He put some
walnuts in his pockets and kept on searching, and at last--right among
the nut trees--he came upon one solitary peach tree.  It was a
graceful, beautiful tree, but although it was thickly leaved, it bore
no fruit except one large, splendid peach, rosy-cheeked and fuzzy and
just right to eat.

In his heart he doubted this statement, for this was a solitary peach
tree, while all the other fruits grew upon many trees set close to one
another; but that one luscious bite made him unable to resist eating
the rest of it, and soon the peach was all gone except the pit.
Button-Bright was about to throw this peach pit away when he noticed
that it was of pure gold.  Of course, this surprised him, but so many
things in the Land of Oz were surprising that he did not give much
thought to the golden peach pit.  He put it in his pocket, however, to
show to the girls, and five minutes afterward had forgotten all about
it.

For now he realized that he was far separated from his companions, and
knowing that this would worry them and delay their journey, he began to
shout as loud as he could.  His voice did not penetrate very far among
all those trees, and after shouting a dozen times and getting no
answer, he sat down on the ground and said, "Well, I'm lost again. It's
too bad, but I don't see how it can be helped."

As he leaned his back against a tree, he looked up and saw a Bluefinch
fly down from the sky and alight upon a branch just before him.  The
bird looked and looked at him.  First it looked with one bright eye and
then turned its head and looked at him with the other eye.  Then,
fluttering its wings a little, it said, "Oho!  So you've eaten the
enchanted peach, have you?"

"Was it enchanted?" asked Button-Bright.

"Of course," replied the Bluefinch. "Ugu the Shoemaker did that."

"But why?  And how was it enchanted?  And what will happen to one who
eats it?" questioned the boy.

"Ask Ugu the Shoemaker.  He knows," said the bird, preening its
feathers with its bill.

"And who is Ugu the Shoemaker?"

"The one who enchanted the peach and placed it here--in the exact
center of the Great Orchard--so no one would ever find it.  We birds
didn't dare to eat it; we are too wise for that.  But you are
Button-Bright from the Emerald City, and you, YOU, YOU ate the
enchanted peach!  You must explain to Ugu the Shoemaker why you did
that."

And then, before the boy could ask any more questions, the bird flew
away and left him alone.

Button-Bright was not much worried to find that the peach he had eaten
was enchanted.  It certainly had tasted very good, and his stomach
didn't ache a bit.  So again he began to reflect upon the best way to
rejoin his friends.  "Whichever direction I follow is likely to be the
wrong one," he said to himself, "so I'd better stay just where I am and
let THEM find ME--if they can."

A White Rabbit came hopping through the orchard and paused a little way
off to look at him.  "Don't be afraid," said Button-Bright.  "I won't
hurt you."

"Oh, I'm not afraid for myself," returned the White Rabbit.  "It's you
I'm worried about."

"Yes, I'm lost," said the boy.

"I fear you are, indeed," answered the Rabbit.  "Why on earth did you
eat the enchanted peach?"

The boy looked at the excited little animal thoughtfully.  "There were
two reasons," he explained.  "One reason was that I like peaches, and
the other reason was that I didn't know it was enchanted."

"That won't save you from Ugu the Shoemaker," declared the White
Rabbit, and it scurried away before the boy could ask any more
questions.

"Rabbits and birds," he thought, "are timid creatures and seem afraid
of this shoemaker, whoever he may be.  If there was another peach half
as good as that other, I'd eat it in spite of a dozen enchantments or a
hundred shoemakers!"

Just then, Scraps came dancing along and saw him sitting at the foot of
the tree.  "Oh, here you are!" she said.   "Up to your old tricks, eh?
Don't you know it's impolite to get lost and keep everybody waiting for
you?  Come along, and I'll lead you back to Dorothy and the others."

Button-Bright rose slowly to accompany her.

"That wasn't much of a loss," he said cheerfully.  "I haven't been gone
half a day, so there's no harm done."

Dorothy, however, when the boy rejoined the party, gave him a good
scolding.  "When we're doing such an important thing as searching for
Ozma," said she, "it's naughty for you to wander away and keep us from
getting on.  S'pose she's a pris'ner in a dungeon cell!  Do you want to
keep our dear Ozma there any longer than we can help?"

"If she's in a dungeon cell, how are you going to get her out?"
inquired the boy.

"Never you mind.  We'll leave that to the Wizard.  He's sure to find a
way."

The Wizard said nothing, for he realized that without his magic tools
he could do no more than any other person.  But there was no use
reminding his companions of that fact; it might discourage them.  "The
important thing just now," he remarked, "is to find Ozma, and as our
party is again happily reunited, I propose we move on."

As they came to the edge of the Great Orchard, the sun was setting and
they knew it would soon be dark.  So it was decided to camp under the
trees, as another broad plain was before them.  The Wizard spread the
blankets on a bed of soft leaves, and presently all of them except
Scraps and the Sawhorse were fast asleep.  Toto snuggled close to his
friend the Lion, and the Woozy snored so loudly that the Patchwork Girl
covered his square head with her apron to deaden the sound.




CHAPTER 12

THE CZAROVER OF HERKU


Trot wakened just as the sun rose, and slipping out of the blankets,
went to the edge of the Great Orchard and looked across the plain.
Something glittered in the far distance.  "That looks like another
city," she said half aloud.

"And another city it is," declared Scraps, who had crept to Trot's side
unheard, for her stuffed feet made no sound.  "The Sawhorse and I made
a journey in the dark while you were all asleep, and we found over
there a bigger city than Thi.  There's a wall around it, too, but it
has gates and plenty of pathways."

"Did you get in?" asked Trot.

"No, for the gates were locked and the wall was a real wall.  So we
came back here again.  It isn't far to the city.  We can reach it in
two hours after you've had your breakfasts."

Trot went back, and finding the other girls now awake, told them what
Scraps had said.  So they hurriedly ate some fruit--there were plenty
of plums and fijoas in this part of the orchard--and then they mounted
the animals and set out upon the journey to the strange city.  Hank the
Mule had breakfasted on grass, and the Lion had stolen away and found a
breakfast to his liking; he never told what it was, but Dorothy hoped
the little rabbits and the field mice had kept out of his way.  She
warned Toto not to chase birds and gave the dog some apple, with which
he was quite content.  The Woozy was as fond of fruit as of any other
food except honey, and the Sawhorse never ate at all.

Except for their worry over Ozma, they were all in good spirits as they
proceeded swiftly over the plain.  Toto still worried over his lost
growl, but like a wise little dog kept his worry to himself. Before
long, the city grew nearer and they could examine it with interest.

In outward appearance the place was more imposing than Thi, and it was
a square city, with a square, four-sided wall around it, and on each
side was a square gate of burnished copper.  Everything about the city
looked solid and substantial; there were no banners flying, and the
towers that rose above the city wall seemed bare of any ornament
whatever.

A path led from the fruit orchard directly to one of the city gates,
showing that the inhabitants preferred fruit to thistles.  Our friends
followed this path to the gate, which they found fast shut.  But the
Wizard advanced and pounded upon it with his fist, saying in a loud
voice, "Open!"

At once there rose above the great wall a row of immense heads, all of
which looked down at them as if to see who was intruding.  The size of
these heads was astonishing, and our friends at once realized that they
belonged to giants who were standing within the city.  All had thick,
bushy hair and whiskers, on some the hair being white and on others
black or red or yellow, while the hair of a few was just turning gray,
showing that the giants were of all ages.  However fierce the heads
might seem, the eyes were mild in expression, as if the creatures had
been long subdued, and their faces expressed patience rather than
ferocity.

"What's wanted?" asked one old giant in a low, grumbling voice.

"We are strangers, and we wish to enter the city," replied the Wizard.

"Do you come in war or peace?" asked another.

"In peace, of course," retorted the Wizard, and he added impatiently,
"Do we look like an army of conquest?"

"No," said the first giant who had spoken, "you look like innocent
tramps; but you never can tell by appearances.  Wait here until we
report to our masters.  No one can enter here without the permission of
Vig, the Czarover."

"Who's that?" inquired Dorothy.

But the heads had all bobbed down and disappeared behind the walls, so
there was no answer.  They waited a long time before the gate rolled
back with a rumbling sound, and a loud voice cried, "Enter!"  But they
lost no time in taking advantage of the invitation.

On either side of the broad street that led into the city from the gate
stood a row of huge giants, twenty of them on a side and all standing
so close together that their elbows touched.  They wore uniforms of
blue and yellow and were armed with clubs as big around as treetrunks.
Each giant had around his neck a broad band of gold, riveted on, to
show he was a slave.

As our friends entered riding upon the Lion, the Woozy, the Sawhorse
and the Mule, the giants half turned and walked in two files on either
side of them, as if escorting them on their way.  It looked to Dorothy
as if all her party had been made prisoners, for even mounted on their
animals their heads scarcely reached to the knees of the marching
giants.  The girls and Button-Bright were anxious to know what sort of
a city they had entered, and what the people were like who had made
these powerful creatures their slaves.  Through the legs of the giants
as they walked, Dorothy could see rows of houses on each side of the
street and throngs of people standing on the sidewalks, but the people
were of ordinary size and the only remarkable thing about them was the
fact that they were dreadfully lean and thin.  Between their skin and
their bones there seemed to be little or no flesh, and they were mostly
stoop-shouldered and weary looking, even to the little children.

More and more, Dorothy wondered how and why the great giants had ever
submitted to become slaves of such skinny, languid masters, but there
was no chance to question anyone until they arrived at a big palace
located in the heart of the city.  Here the giants formed lines to the
entrance and stood still while our friends rode into the courtyard of
the palace.  Then the gates closed behind them, and before them was a
skinny little man who bowed low and said in a sad voice, "If you will
be so obliging as to dismount, it will give me pleasure to lead you
into the presence of the World's Most Mighty Ruler, Vig the Czarover."

"I don't believe it!" said Dorothy indignantly.

"What don't you believe?" asked the man.

"I don't believe your Czarover can hold a candle to our Ozma."

"He wouldn't hold a candle under any circumstances, or to any living
person," replied the man very seriously, "for he has slaves to do such
things and the Mighty Vig is too dignified to do anything that others
can do for him.  He even obliges a slave to sneeze for him, if ever he
catches cold.  However, if you dare to face our powerful ruler, follow
me."

"We dare anything," said the Wizard, "so go ahead."

Through several marble corridors having lofty ceilings they passed,
finding each corridor and doorway guarded by servants.  But these
servants of the palace were of the people and not giants, and they were
so thin that they almost resembled skeletons.  Finally, they entered a
great circular room with a high, domed ceiling, where the Czarover sat
on a throne cut from a solid block of white marble and decorated with
purple silk hangings and gold tassels.

The ruler of these people was combing his eyebrows when our friends
entered the throne room and stood before him, but he put the comb in
his pocket and examined the strangers with evident curiosity.  Then he
said, "Dear me, what a surprise!  You have really shocked me.  For no
outsider has ever before come to our City of Herku, and I cannot
imagine why you have ventured to do so."

"We are looking for Ozma, the Supreme Ruler of the Land of Oz," replied
the Wizard.

"Do you see her anywhere around here?" asked the Czarover.

"Not yet, Your Majesty, but perhaps you may tell us where she is."

"No, I have my hands full keeping track of my own people.  I find them
hard to manage because they are so tremendously strong."

"They don't look very strong," said Dorothy. "It seems as if a good
wind would blow 'em way out of the city if it wasn't for the wall."

"Just so, just so," admitted the Czarover.  "They really look that way,
don't they?  But you must never trust to appearances, which have a way
of fooling one.  Perhaps you noticed that I prevented you from meeting
any of my people.  I protected you with my giants while you were on the
way from the gates to my palace so that not a Herku got near you."

"Are your people so dangerous, then?" asked the Wizard.

"To strangers, yes.  But only because they are so friendly.  For if
they shake hands with you, they are likely to break your arms or crush
your fingers to a jelly."

"Why?" asked Button-Bright.

"Because we are the strongest people in all the world."

"Pshaw!" exclaimed the boy.  "That's bragging.  You prob'ly don't know
how strong other people are.  Why, once I knew a man in Philadelphi'
who could bend iron bars with just his hands!"

"But mercy me, it's no trick to bend iron bars," said His Majesty.
"Tell me, could this man crush a block of stone with his bare hands?"

"No one could do that," declared the boy.

"If I had a block of stone, I'd show you," said the Czarover, looking
around the room.  "Ah, here is my throne.  The back is too high,
anyhow, so I'll just break off a piece of that."  He rose to his feet
and tottered in an uncertain way around the throne.  Then he took hold
of the back and broke off a piece of marble over a foot thick. "This,"
said he, coming back to his seat, "is very solid marble and much harder
than ordinary stone.  Yet I can crumble it easily with my fingers, a
proof that I am very strong."

Even as he spoke, he began breaking off chunks of marble and crumbling
them as one would a bit of earth.  The Wizard was so astonished that he
took a piece in his own hands and tested it, finding it very hard
indeed.

Just then one of the giant servants entered and exclaimed, "Oh, Your
Majesty, the cook has burned the soup!  What shall we do?"

"How dare you interrupt me?" asked the Czarover, and grasping the
immense giant by one of his legs, he raised him in the air and threw
him headfirst out of an open window.  "Now, tell me," he said, turning
to Button-Bright, "could your man in Philadelphia crumble marble in his
fingers?"

"I guess not," said Button-Bright, much impressed by the skinny
monarch's strength.

"What makes you so strong?" inquired Dorothy.

"It's the zosozo," he explained, "which is an invention of my own.  I
and all my people eat zosozo, and it gives us tremendous strength.
Would you like to eat some?"

"No thank you," replied the girl.  "I--I don't want to get so thin."

"Well, of course one can't have strength and flesh at the same time,"
said the Czarover.  "Zosozo is pure energy, and it's the only compound
of its sort in existence.  I never allow our giants to have it, you
know, or they would soon become our masters, since they are bigger that
we; so I keep all the stuff locked up in my private laboratory. Once a
year I feed a teaspoonful of it to each of my people--men, women and
children--so every one of them is nearly as strong as I am. Wouldn't
YOU like a dose, sir?" he asked, turning to the Wizard.

"Well," said the Wizard, "if you would give me a little zosozo in a
bottle, I'd like to take it with me on my travels.  It might come in
handy on occasion."

"To be sure.  I'll give you enough for six doses," promised the
Czarover.

"But don't take more than a teaspoonful at a time.  Once Ugu the
Shoemaker took two teaspoonsful, and it made him so strong that when he
leaned against the city wall, he pushed it over, and we had to build it
up again."

"Who is Ugu the Shoemaker?"

Button-Bright curiously, for he now remembered that the bird and the
rabbit had claimed Ugu the Shoemaker had enchanted the peach he had
eaten.

"Why, Ugu is a great magician who used to live here.  But he's gone
away now," replied the Czarover.

"Where has he gone?" asked the Wizard quickly.

"I am told he lives in a wickerwork castle in the mountains to the west
of here.  You see, Ugu became such a powerful magician that he didn't
care to live in our city any longer for fear we would discover some of
his secrets.  So he went to the mountains and built him a splendid
wicker castle which is so strong that even I and my people could not
batter it down, and there he lives all by himself."

"This is good news," declared the Wizard, "for I think this is just the
magician we are searching for.  But why is he called Ugu the Shoemaker?"

"Once he was a very common citizen here and made shoes for a living,"
replied the monarch of Herku.  "But he was descended from the greatest
wizard and sorcerer who ever lived in this or in any other country, and
one day Ugu the Shoemaker discovered all the magical books and recipes
of his famous great-grandfather, which had been hidden away in the
attic of his house.  So he began to study the papers and books and to
practice magic, and in time he became so skillful that, as I said, he
scorned our city and built a solitary castle for himself."

"Do you think," asked Dorothy anxiously, "that Ugu the Shoemaker would
be wicked enough to steal our Ozma of Oz?"

"And the Magic Picture?" asked Trot.

"And the Great Book of Records of Glinda the Good?" asked Betsy.

"And my own magic tools?" asked the Wizard.

"Well," replied the Czarover, "I won't say that Ugu is wicked, exactly,
but he is very ambitious to become the most powerful magician in the
world, and so I suppose he would not be too proud to steal any magic
things that belonged to anybody else--if he could manage to do so."

"But how about Ozma?  Why would he wish to steal HER?" questioned
Dorothy.

"Don't ask me, my dear.  Ugu doesn't tell me why he does things, I
assure you."

"Then we must go and ask him ourselves," declared the little girl.

"I wouldn't do that if I were you," advised the Czarover, looking first
at the three girls and then at the boy and the little Wizard and
finally at the stuffed Patchwork Girl.  "If Ugu has really stolen your
Ozma, he will probably keep her a prisoner, in spite of all your
threats or entreaties.  And with all his magical knowledge he would be
a dangerous person to attack.  Therefore, if you are wise, you will go
home again and find a new Ruler for the Emerald City and the Land of
Oz.  But perhaps it isn't Ugu the Shoemaker who has stolen your Ozma."

"The only way to settle that question," replied the Wizard, "is to go
to Ugu's castle and see if Ozma is there.  If she is, we will report
the matter to the great Sorceress Glinda the Good, and I'm pretty sure
she will find a way to rescue our darling ruler from the Shoemaker."

"Well, do as you please," said the Czarover, "but if you are all
transformed into hummingbirds or caterpillars, don't blame me for not
warning you."

They stayed the rest of that day in the City of Herku and were fed at
the royal table of the Czarover and given sleeping rooms in his palace.
The strong monarch treated them very nicely and gave the Wizard a
little golden vial of zosozo to use if ever he or any of his party
wished to acquire great strength.

Even at the last, the Czarover tried to persuade them not to go near
Ugu the Shoemaker, but they were resolved on the venture, and the next
morning bade the friendly monarch a cordial goodbye and, mounting upon
their animals, left the Herkus and the City of Herku and headed for the
mountains that lay to the west.




CHAPTER 13

THE TRUTH POND


It seems a long time since we have heard anything of the Frogman and
Cayke the Cookie Cook, who had left the Yip Country in search of the
diamond-studded dishpan which had been mysteriously stolen the same
night that Ozma had disappeared from the Emerald City. But you must
remember that while the Frogman and the Cookie Cook were preparing to
descend from their mountaintop, and even while on their way to the
farmhouse of Wiljon the Winkie, Dorothy and the Wizard and their
friends were encountering the adventures we have just related.

So it was that on the very morning when the travelers from the Emerald
City bade farewell to the Czarover of the City of Herku, Cayke and the
Frogman awoke in a grove in which they had passed the night sleeping on
beds of leaves.  There were plenty of farmhouses in the neighborhood,
but no one seemed to welcome the puffy, haughty Frogman or the little
dried-up Cookie Cook, and so they slept comfortably enough underneath
the trees of the grove.  The Frogman wakened first on this morning, and
after going to the tree where Cayke slept and finding her still wrapped
in slumber, he decided to take a little walk and seek some breakfast.
Coming to the edge of the grove, he observed half a mile away a pretty
yellow house that was surrounded by a yellow picket fence, so he walked
toward this house and on entering the yard found a Winkie woman picking
up sticks with which to build a fire to cook her morning meal.

"For goodness sake!" she exclaimed on seeing the Frogman.  "What are
you doing out of your frog-pond?"

"I am traveling in search of a jeweled gold dishpan, my good woman," he
replied with an air of great dignity.

"You won't find it here, then," said she.  "Our dishpans are tin, and
they're good enough for anybody.  So go back to your pond and leave me
alone."  She spoke rather crossly and with a lack of respect that
greatly annoyed the Frogman.

"Allow me to tell you, madam," said he, "that although I am a frog, I
am the Greatest and Wisest Frog in all the world.  I may add that I
possess much more wisdom than any Winkie--man or woman--in this land.
Wherever I go, people fall on their knees before me and render homage
to the Great Frogman!  No one else knows so much as I; no one else is
so grand, so magnificent!"

"If you know so much," she retorted, "why don't you know where your
dishpan is instead of chasing around the country after it?"

"Presently," he answered, "I am going where it is, but just now I am
traveling and have had no breakfast.  Therefore I honor you by asking
you for something to eat."

"Oho!  The Great Frogman is hungry as any tramp, is he?  Then pick up
these sticks and help me to build the fire," said the woman
contemptuously.

"Me!   The Great Frogman pick up sticks?" he exclaimed in horror.  "In
the Yip Country where I am more honored and powerful than any King
could be, people weep with joy when I ask them to feed me."

"Then that's the place to go for your breakfast," declared the woman.

"I fear you do not realize my importance," urged the Frogman.
"Exceeding wisdom renders me superior to menial duties."

"It's a great wonder to me," remarked the woman, carrying her sticks to
the house, "that your wisdom doesn't inform you that you'll get no
breakfast here."  And she went in and slammed the door behind her.

The Frogman felt he had been insulted, so he gave a loud croak of
indignation and turned away.  After going a short distance, he came
upon a faint path which led across a meadow in the direction of a grove
of pretty trees, and thinking this circle of evergreens must surround a
house where perhaps he would be kindly received, he decided to follow
the path.  And by and by he came to the trees, which were set close
together, and pushing aside some branches he found no house inside the
circle, but instead a very beautiful pond of clear water.

Now the Frogman, although he was so big and well educated and now aped
the ways and customs of human beings, was still a frog.  As he gazed at
this solitary, deserted pond, his love for water returned to him with
irresistible force.  "If I cannot get a breakfast, I may at least have
a fine swim," said he, and pushing his way between the trees, he
reached the bank.  There he took off his fine clothing, laying his
shiny purple hat and his gold-headed cane beside it.  A moment later,
he sprang with one leap into the water and dived to the very bottom of
the pond.

The water was deliciously cool and grateful to his thick, rough skin,
and the Frogman swam around the pond several times before he stopped to
rest.  Then he floated upon the surface and examined the pond. The
bottom and sides were all lined with glossy tiles of a light pink
color; just one place in the bottom where the water bubbled up from a
hidden spring had been left free.  On the banks, the green grass grew
to the edge of the pink tiling.  And now, as the Frogman examined the
place, he found that on one side of the pool, just above the water
line, had been set a golden plate on which some words were deeply
engraved.  He swam toward this plate, and on reaching it read the
following inscription:

      _This is_
    THE TRUTH POND
  _Whoever bathes in this
    water must always
    afterward tell_
      THE TRUTH.


This statement startled the Frogman.  It even worried him, so that he
leaped upon the bank and hurriedly began to dress himself.  "A great
misfortune has befallen me," he told himself, "for hereafter I cannot
tell people I am wise, since it is not the truth.  The truth is that my
boasted wisdom is all a sham, assumed by me to deceive people and make
them defer to me.  In truth, no living creature can know much more than
his fellows, for one may know one thing, and another know another
thing, so that wisdom is evenly scattered throughout the world.
But--ah me!--what a terrible fate will now be mine.  Even Cayke the
Cookie Cook will soon discover that my knowledge is no greater than her
own, for having bathed in the enchanted water of the Truth Pond, I can
no longer deceive her or tell a lie."

More humbled than he had been for many years, the Frogman went back to
the grove where he had left Cayke and found the woman now awake and
washing her face in a tiny brook.  "Where has Your Honor been?" she
asked.

"To a farmhouse to ask for something to eat," said he, "but the woman
refused me."

"How dreadful!" she exclaimed.  "But never mind, there are other houses
where the people will be glad to feed the Wisest Creature in all the
World."

"Do you mean yourself?" he asked.

"No, I mean you."

The Frogman felt strongly impelled to tell the truth, but struggled
hard against it.  His reason told him there was no use in letting Cayke
know he was not wise, for then she would lose much respect for him, but
each time he opened his mouth to speak, he realized he was about to
tell the truth and shut it again as quickly as possible.  He tried to
talk about something else, but the words necessary to undeceive the
woman would force themselves to his lips in spite of all his struggles.
Finally, knowing that he must either remain dumb or let the truth
prevail, he gave a low groan of despair and said, "Cayke, I am NOT the
Wisest Creature in all the World; I am not wise at all."

"Oh, you must be!" she protested. "You told me so yourself, only last
evening."

"Then last evening I failed to tell you the truth," he admitted,
looking very shamefaced for a frog.  "I am sorry I told you this lie,
my good Cayke, but if you must know the truth, the whole truth and
nothing but the truth, I am not really as wise as you are."

The Cookie Cook was greatly shocked to hear this, for it shattered one
of her most pleasing illusions.  She looked at the gorgeously dressed
Frogman in amazement.  "What has caused you to change your mind so
suddenly?" she inquired.

"I have bathed in the Truth Pond," he said, "and whoever bathes in that
water is ever afterward obliged to tell the truth."

"You were foolish to do that," declared the woman.

"It is often very embarrassing to tell the truth.  I'm glad I didn't
bathe in that dreadful water!"

The Frogman looked at his companion thoughtfully.  "Cayke," said he, "I
want you to go to the Truth Pond and take a bath in its water.  For if
we are to travel together and encounter unknown adventures, it would
not be fair that I alone must always tell you the truth, while you
could tell me whatever you pleased.  If we both dip in the enchanted
water, there will be no chance in the future of our deceiving one
another."

"No," she asserted, shaking her head positively, "I won't do it, Your
Honor.  For if I told you the truth, I'm sure you wouldn't like me. No
Truth Pond for me.  I'll be just as I am, an honest woman who can say
what she wants to without hurting anyone's feelings."

With this decision the Frogman was forced to be content, although he
was sorry the Cookie Cook would not listen to his advice.




CHAPTER 14

THE UNHAPPY FERRYMAN


Leaving the grove where they had slept, the Frogman and the Cookie Cook
turned to the east to seek another house, and after a short walk came
to one where the people received them very politely.  The children
stared rather hard at the big, pompous Frogman, but the woman of the
house, when Cayke asked for something to eat, at once brought them food
and said they were welcome to it.  "Few people in need of help pass
this way," she remarked, "for the Winkies are all prosperous and love
to stay in their own homes.  But perhaps you are not a Winkie," she
added.

"No," said Cayke, "I am a Yip, and my home is on a high mountain at the
southeast of your country."

"And the Frogman, is he also a Yip?"

"I do not know what he is, other than a very remarkable and highly
educated creature," replied the Cookie Cook.  "But he has lived many
years among the Yips, who have found him so wise and intelligent that
they always go to him for advice."

"May I ask why you have left your home and where you are going?" said
the Winkie woman.

Then Cayke told her of the diamond-studded gold dishpan and how it had
been mysteriously stolen from her house, after which she had discovered
that she could no longer cook good cookies.  So she had resolved to
search until she found her dishpan again, because a Cookie cook who
cannot cook good cookies is not of much use.  The Frogman, who had
wanted to see more of the world, had accompanied her to assist in the
search.  When the woman had listened to this story, she asked, "Then
you have no idea as yet who has stolen your dishpan?"

"I only know it must have been some mischievous fairy, or a magician,
or some such powerful person, because none other could have climbed the
steep mountain to the Yip Country.  And who else could have carried
away my beautiful magic dishpan without being seen?"

The woman thought about this during the time that Cayke and the Frogman
ate their breakfast.  When they had finished, she said, "Where are you
going next?"

"We have not decided," answered the Cookie cook.

"Our plan," explained the Frogman in his important way, "is to travel
from place to place until we learn where the thief is located and then
to force him to return the dishpan to its proper owner."

"The plan is all right," agreed the woman, "but it may take you a long
time before you succeed, your method being sort of haphazard and
indefinite.  However, I advise you to travel toward the east."

"Why?" asked the Frogman.

"Because if you went west, you would soon come to the desert, and also
because in this part of the Winkie Country no one steals, so your time
here would be wasted.  But toward the east, beyond the river, live many
strange people whose honesty I would not vouch for.  Moreover, if you
journey far enough east and cross the river for a second time, you will
come to the Emerald City, where there is much magic and sorcery. The
Emerald City is ruled by a dear little girl called Ozma, who also rules
the Emperor of the Winkies and all the Land of Oz.  So, as Ozma is a
fairy, she may be able to tell you just who has taken your precious
dishpan.  Provided, of course, you do not find it before you reach her."

"This seems to be to be excellent advice," said the Frogman, and Cayke
agreed with him.

"The most sensible thing for you to do," continued the woman, "would be
to return to your home and use another dishpan, learn to cook cookies
as other people cook cookies, without the aid of magic.  But if you
cannot be happy without the magic dishpan you have lost, you are likely
to learn more about it in the Emerald City than at any other place in
Oz."

They thanked the good woman, and on leaving her house faced the east
and continued in that direction all the way.  Toward evening they came
to the west branch of the Winkie River and there, on the riverbank,
found a ferryman who lived all alone in a little yellow house.  This
ferryman was a Winkie with a very small head and a very large body. He
was sitting in his doorway as the travelers approached him and did not
even turn his head to look at them.

"Good evening," said the Frogman.

The ferryman made no reply.

"We would like some supper and the privilege of sleeping in your house
until morning," continued the Frogman.  "At daybreak, we would like
some breakfast, and then we would like to have you row us across the
river."

The ferryman neither moved nor spoke.  He sat in his doorway and looked
straight ahead.  "I think he must be deaf and dumb," Cayke whispered to
her companion.  Then she stood directly in front of the ferryman, and
putting her mouth close to his ear, she yelled as loudly as she could,
"Good evening!"

The ferryman scowled.

"Why do you yell at me, woman?" he asked.

"Can you hear what I say?" asked in her ordinary tone of voice.

"Of course," replied the man.

"Then why didn't you answer the Frogman?"

"Because," said the ferryman, "I don't understand the frog language."

"He speaks the same words that I do and in the same way," declared
Cayke.

"Perhaps," replied the ferryman, "but to me his voice sounded like a
frog's croak.  I know that in the Land of Oz animals can speak our
language, and so can the birds and bugs and fishes; but in MY ears,
they sound merely like growls and chirps and croaks."

"Why is that?" asked the Cookie Cook in surprise.

"Once, many years ago, I cut the tail off a fox which had taunted me,
and I stole some birds' eggs from a nest to make an omelet with, and
also I pulled a fish from the river and left it lying on the bank to
gasp for lack of water until it died.  I don't know why I did those
wicked things, but I did them.  So the Emperor of the Winkies--who is
the Tin Woodman and has a very tender tin heart--punished me by denying
me any communication with beasts, birds or fishes.  I cannot understand
them when they speak to me, although I know that other people can do
so, nor can the creatures understand a word I say to them.  Every time
I meet one of them, I am reminded of my former cruelty, and it makes me
very unhappy."

"Really," said Cayke, "I'm sorry for you, although the Tin Woodman is
not to blame for punishing you."

"What is he mumbling about?" asked the Frogman.

"He is talking to me, but you don't understand him," she replied.  And
then she told him of the ferryman's punishment and afterward explained
to the ferryman that they wanted to stay all night with him and be fed.

He gave them some fruit and bread, which was the only sort of food he
had, and he allowed Cayke to sleep in a room of his cottage. But the
Frogman he refused to admit to his house, saying that the frog's
presence made him miserable and unhappy.  At no time would he look
directly at the Frogman, or even toward him, fearing he would shed
tears if he did so; so the big frog slept on the riverbank where he
could hear little frogs croaking in the river all the night through.
But that did not keep him awake; it merely soothed him to slumber, for
he realized how much superior he was to them.

Just as the sun was rising on a new day, the ferryman rowed the two
travelers across the river--keeping his back to the Frogman all the
way--and then Cayke thanked him and bade him goodbye and the ferryman
rowed home again.

On this side of the river, there were no paths at all, so it was
evident they had reached a part of the country little frequented by
travelers.  There was a marsh at the south of them, sandhills at the
north, and a growth of scrubby underbrush leading toward a forest at
the east.  So the east was really the least difficult way to go, and
that direction was the one they had determined to follow.

Now the Frogman, although he wore green patent-leather shoes with ruby
buttons, had very large and flat feet, and when he tramped through the
scrub, his weight crushed down the underbrush and made a path for Cayke
to follow him.  Therefore they soon reached the forest, where the tall
trees were set far apart but were so leafy that they shaded all the
spaces between them with their branches.  "There are no bushes here,"
said Cayke, much pleased, "so we can now travel faster and with more
comfort."




CHAPTER 15

THE BIG LAVENDER BEAR


It was a pleasant place to wander, and the two travelers were
proceeding at a brisk pace when suddenly a voice shouted, "Halt!"

They looked around in surprise, seeing at first no one at all.  Then
from behind a tree there stepped a brown, fuzzy bear whose head came
about as high as Cayke's waist--and Cayke was a small woman.  The bear
was chubby as well as fuzzy; his body was even puffy, while his legs
and arms seemed jointed at the knees and elbows and fastened to his
body by pins or rivets.  His ears were round in shape and stuck out in
a comical way, while his round, black eyes were bright and sparkling as
beads.  Over his shoulder the little brown bear bore a gun with a tin
barrel.  The barrel had a cork in the end of it, and a string was
attached to the cork and to the handle of the gun.  Both the Frogman
and Cayke gazed hard at this curious bear, standing silent for some
time.  But finally the Frogman recovered from his surprise and
remarked, "It seems to me that you are stuffed with sawdust and ought
not to be alive."

"That's all you know about it," answered the little Brown Bear in a
squeaky voice.  "I am stuffed with a very good quality of curled hair,
and my skin is the best plush that was ever made.  As for my being
alive, that is my own affair and cannot concern you at all, except that
it gives me the privilege to say you are my prisoners."

"Prisoners!  Why do you speak such nonsense?" the Frogman angrily.  "Do
you think we are afraid of a toy bear with a toy gun?"

"You ought to be," was the confident reply, "for I am merely the sentry
guarding the way to Bear Center, which is a city containing hundreds of
my race, who are ruled by a very powerful sorcerer known as the
Lavender Bear.  He ought to be a purple color, you know, seeing he is a
King, but he's only light lavender, which is, of course, second cousin
to royal purple.  So unless you come with me peaceably as my prisoners,
I shall fire my gun and bring a hundred bears of all sizes and colors
to capture you."

"Why do you wish to capture us?" inquired the Frogman, who had listened
to his speech with much astonishment.

"I don't wish to, as a matter of fact," replied the little Brown Bear,
"but it is my duty to, because you are now trespassing on the domain of
His Majesty, the King of Bear Center.  Also, I will admit that things
are rather quiet in our city just now, and the excitement of your
capture, followed by your trial and execution, should afford us much
entertainment."

"We defy you!" said the Frogman.

"Oh no, don't do that," pleaded Cayke, speaking to her companion.  "He
says his King is a sorcerer, so perhaps it is he or one of his bears
who ventured to steal my jeweled dishpan.  Let us go to the City of the
Bears and discover if my dishpan is there."

"I must now register one more charge against you," remarked the little
Brown Bear with evident satisfaction.  "You have just accused us of
stealing, and that is such a dreadful thing to say that I am quite sure
our noble King will command you to be executed."

"But how could you execute us?" inquired the Cookie Cook.

"I've no idea. But our King is a wonderful inventor, and there is no
doubt he can find a proper way to destroy you.  So tell me, are you
going to struggle, or will you go peaceably to meet your doom?"

It was all so ridiculous that Cayke laughed aloud, and even the
Frogman's wide mouth curled in a smile.  Neither was a bit afraid to go
to the Bear City, and it seemed to both that there was a possibility
they might discover the missing dishpan.  So the Frogman said, "Lead
the way, little Bear, and we will follow without a struggle."

"That's very sensible of you, very sensible indeed," declared the Brown
Bear.  "So for-ward, MARCH!" And with the command he turned around and
began to waddle along a path that led between the trees.

Cayke and the Frogman, as they followed their conductor, could scarce
forbear laughing at his stiff, awkward manner of walking, and although
he moved his stuffy legs fast, his steps were so short that they had to
go slowly in order not to run into him. But after a time they reached a
large, circular space in the center of the forest, which was clear of
any stumps or underbrush.  The ground was covered by a soft, gray moss,
pleasant to tread upon.  All the trees surrounding this space seemed to
be hollow and had round holes in their trunks, set a little way above
the ground, but otherwise there was nothing unusual about the place and
nothing, in the opinion of the prisoners, to indicate a settlement.
But the little Brown Bear said in a proud and impressive voice
(although it still squeaked), "This is the wonderful city known to fame
as Bear Center!"

"But there are no houses, there are no bears living here at all!"
exclaimed Cayke.

"Oh indeed!" retorted their captor, and raising his gun he pulled the
trigger.  The cork flew out of the tin barrel with a loud "pop!" and at
once from every hole in every tree within view of the clearing appeared
the head of a bear.  They were of many colors and of many sizes, but
all were made in the same manner as the bear who had met and captured
them.

At first a chorus of growls arose, and then a sharp voice cried, "What
has happened, Corporal Waddle?"

"Captives, Your Majesty!" answered the Brown Bear.  "Intruders upon our
domain and slanderers of our good name."

"Ah, that's important," answered the voice.

Then from out the hollow trees tumbled a whole regiment of stuffed
bears, some carrying tin swords, some popguns and others long spears
with gay ribbons tied to the handles.  There were hundreds of them,
altogether, and they quietly formed a circle around the Frogman and the
Cookie Cook, but kept at a distance and left a large space for the
prisoners to stand in.  Presently, this circle parted, and into the
center of it stalked a huge toy bear of a lovely lavender color.  He
walked upon his hind legs, as did all the others, and on his head he
wore a tin crown set with diamonds and amethysts, while in one paw he
carried a short wand of some glittering metal that resembled silver but
wasn't.

"His Majesty the King!" Corporal Waddle, and all the bears bowed low.
Some bowed so low that they lost their balance and toppled over, but
they soon scrambled up again, and the Lavender King squatted on his
haunches before the prisoners and gazed at them steadily with his
bright, pink eyes.




CHAPTER 16

THE LITTLE PINK BEAR


"One Person and one Freak," said the big Lavender Bear when he had
carefully examined the strangers.

"I am sorry to hear you call poor Cayke the Cookie Cook a Freak,"
remonstrated the Frogman.

"She is the Person," asserted the King.  "Unless I am mistaken, it is
you who are the Freak."

The Frogman was silent, for he could not truthfully deny it.

"Why have you dared intrude in my forest?" demanded the Bear King.

"We didn't know it was your forest," said Cayke, "and we are on our way
to the far east, where the Emerald City is."

"Ah, it's a long way from here to the Emerald City," remarked the King.
"It is so far away, indeed, that no bear among us has even been there.
But what errand requires you to travel such a distance?"

"Someone has stolen my diamond-studded gold dishpan," explained Cayke,
"and as I cannot be happy without it, I have decided to search the
world over until I find it again.  The Frogman, who is very learned and
wonderfully wise, has come with me to give me his assistance. Isn't it
kind of him?"

The King looked at the Frogman.

"What makes you so wonderfully wise?" he asked.

"I'm not," was the candid reply.  "The Cookie Cook and some others in
the Yip Country think because I am a big frog and talk and act like a
man that I must be very wise.  I have learned more than a frog usually
knows, it is true, but I am not yet so wise as I hope to become at some
future time."

The King nodded, and when he did so, something squeaked in his chest.

"Did Your Majesty speak?" asked Cayke.

"Not just then," answered the Lavender Bear, seeming to be somewhat
embarrassed.  "I am so built, you must know, that when anything pushes
against my chest, as my chin accidentally did just then, I make that
silly noise.  In this city it isn't considered good manners to notice.
But I like your Frogman.  He is honest and truthful, which is more than
can be said of many others.  As for your late lamented dishpan, I'll
show it to you."

With this he waved three times the metal wand which he held in his paw,
and instantly there appeared upon the ground midway between the King
and Cayke a big, round pan made of beaten gold.  Around the top edge
was a row of small diamonds; around the center of the pan was another
row of larger diamonds; and at the bottom was a row of exceedingly
large and brilliant diamonds.  In fact, they all sparkled
magnificently, and the pan was so big and broad that it took a lot of
diamonds to go around it three times.

Cayke stared so hard that her eyes seemed about to pop out of her head.
"O-o-o-h!" she exclaimed, drawing a deep breath of delight.

"Is this your dishpan?" inquired the King.

"It is, it is!" cried the Cookie Cook, and rushing forward, she fell on
her knees and threw her arms around the precious pan.  But her arms
came together without meeting any resistance at all.  Cayke tried to
seize the edge, but found nothing to grasp.  The pan was surely there,
she thought, for she could see it plainly; but it was not solid; she
could not feel it at all.  With a moan of astonishment and despair, she
raised her head to look at the Bear King, who was watching her actions
curiously.  Then she turned to the pan again, only to find it had
completely disappeared.

"Poor creature!" murmured the King pityingly.  "You must have thought,
for the moment, that you had actually recovered your dishpan.  But what
you saw was merely the image of it, conjured up by means of my magic.
It is a pretty dishpan, indeed, though rather big and awkward to
handle.  I hope you will some day find it."

Cayke was grievously disappointed.  She began to cry, wiping her eyes
on her apron.  The King turned to the throng of toy bears surrounding
him and asked, "Has any of you ever seen this golden dishpan before?"

"No," they answered in a chorus.

The King seemed to reflect.  Presently he inquired, "Where is the
Little Pink Bear?"

"At home, Your Majesty," was the reply.

"Fetch him here," commanded the King.

Several of the bears waddled over to one of the trees and pulled from
its hollow a tiny pink bear, smaller than any of the others. A big,
white bear carried the pink one in his arms and set it down beside the
King, arranging the joints of its legs so that it would stand upright.

This Pink Bear seemed lifeless until the King turned a crank which
protruded from its side, when the little creature turned its head
stiffly from side to side and said in a small, shrill voice, "Hurrah
for the King of Bear Center!"

"Very good," said the big Lavender Bear.  "He seems to be working very
well today.  Tell me, my Pink Pinkerton, what has become of this lady's
jeweled dishpan?"

"U-u-u," said the Pink Bear, and then stopped short.

The King turned the crank again.

"U-g-u the Shoemaker has it," said the Pink Bear.

"Who is Ugu the Shoemaker?" demanded the King, again turning the crank.

"A magician who lives on a mountain in a wickerwork castle," was the
reply.

"Where is the mountain?" was the next question.

"Nineteen miles and three furlongs from Bear Center to the northeast."

"And is the dishpan still at the castle of Ugu the Shoemaker?" asked
the King.

"It is."

The King turned to Cayke.

"You may rely on this information," said he.  "The Pink Bear can tell
us anything we wish to know, and his words are always words of truth."

"Is he alive?" asked the Frogman, much interested in the Pink Bear.

"Something animates him when you turn his crank," replied the King. "I
do not know if it is life or what it is or how it happens that the
Little Pink Bear can answer correctly every question put to him.  We
discovered his talent a long time ago, and whenever we wish to know
anything--which is not very often--we ask the Pink Bear.  There is no
doubt whatever, madam, that Ugu the Magician has your dishpan, and if
you dare to go to him, you may be able to recover it.  But of that I am
not certain."

"Can't the Pink Bear tell?" asked Cayke anxiously.

"No, for that is in the future.  He can tell anything that HAS
happened, but nothing that is going to happen.  Don't ask me why, for I
don't know."

"Well," said the Cookie Cook after a little thought, "I mean to go to
this magician, anyhow, and tell him I want my dishpan.  I wish I knew
what Ugu the Shoemaker is like."

"Then I'll show him to you," promised the King.  "But do not be
frightened.  It won't be Ugu, remember, but only his image."  With
this, he waved his metal wand, and in the circle suddenly appeared a
thin little man, very old and skinny, who was seated on a wicker stool
before a wicker table.  On the table lay a Great Book with gold clasps.
The Book was open, and the man was reading in it.  He wore great
spectacles which were fastened before his eyes by means of a ribbon
that passed around his head and was tied in a bow at the neck. His hair
was very thin and white; his skin, which clung fast to his bones, was
brown and seared with furrows; he had a big, fat nose and little eyes
set close together.

On no account was Ugu the Shoemaker a pleasant person to gaze at.  As
his image appeared before them, all were silent and intent until
Corporal Waddle, the Brown Bear, became nervous and pulled the trigger
of his gun.  Instantly, the cork flew out of the tin barrel with a loud
"pop!" that made them all jump.  And at this sound, the image of the
magician vanished.

"So THAT'S the thief, is it?" said Cayke in an angry voice. "I should
think he'd be ashamed of himself for stealing a poor woman's diamond
dishpan!  But I mean to face him in his wicker castle and force him to
return my property."

"To me," said the Bear King reflectively, "he looked like a dangerous
person.  I hope he won't be so unkind as to argue the matter with you."

The Frogman was much disturbed by the vision of Ugu the Shoemaker, and
Cayke's determination to go to the magician filled her companion with
misgivings.  But he would not break his pledged word to assist the
Cookie Cook, and after breathing a deep sigh of resignation, he asked
the King, "Will Your Majesty lend us this Pink Bear who answers
questions that we may take him with us on our journey?  He would be
very useful to us, and we will promise to bring him safely back to you."

The King did not reply at once.  He seemed to be thinking.

"PLEASE let us take the Pink Bear," begged Cayke.  "I'm sure he would
be a great help to us."

"The Pink Bear," said the King, "is the best bit of magic I possess,
and there is not another like him in the world.  I do not care to let
him out of my sight, nor do I wish to disappoint you; so I believe I
will make the journey in your company and carry my Pink Bear with me.
He can walk when you wind the other side of him, but so slowly and
awkwardly that he would delay you.  But if I go along, I can carry him
in my arms, so I will join your party.  Whenever you are ready to
start, let me know."

"But Your Majesty!" exclaimed Corporal Waddle in protest, "I hope you
do not intend to let these prisoners escape without punishment."

"Of what crime do you accuse them?" inquired the King.

"Why, they trespassed on your domain, for one thing," said the Brown
Bear.

"We didn't know it was private property, Your Majesty," said the Cookie
Cook. "And they asked if any of us had stolen the dishpan!" continued
Corporal Waddle indignantly.  "That is the same thing as calling us
thieves and robbers and bandits and brigands, is it not?"

"Every person has the right to ask questions," said the Frogman.

"But the Corporal is quite correct," declared the Lavender Bear.  "I
condemn you both to death, the execution to take place ten years from
this hour."

"But we belong in the Land of Oz, where no one ever dies," Cayke
reminded him.

"Very true," said the King.  "I condemn you to death merely as a matter
of form.  It sounds quite terrible, and in ten years we shall have
forgotten all about it.  Are you ready to start for the wicker castle
of Ugu the Shoemaker?"

"Quite ready, Your Majesty."

"But who will rule in your place while you are gone?" asked a big
Yellow Bear.

"I myself will rule while I am gone," was the reply.

"A King isn't required to stay at home forever, and if he takes a
notion to travel, whose business is it but his own?  All I ask is that
you bears behave yourselves while I am away.  If any of you is naughty,
I'll send him to some girl or boy in America to play with."

This dreadful threat made all the toy bears look solemn.  They assured
the King in a chorus of growls that they would be good.  Then the big
Lavender Bear picked up the little Pink Bear, and after tucking it
carefully under one arm, he said, "Goodbye till I come back!" and
waddled along the path that led through the forest.  The Frogman and
Cayke the Cookie Cook also said goodbye to the bears and then followed
after the King, much to the regret of the little Brown Bear, who pulled
the trigger of his gun and popped the cork as a parting salute.




CHAPTER 17

THE MEETING


While the Frogman and his party were advancing from the west, Dorothy
and her party were advancing from the east, and so it happened that on
the following night they all camped at a little hill that was only a
few miles from the wicker castle of Ugu the Shoemaker. But the two
parties did not see one another that night, for one camped on one side
of the hill while the other camped on the opposite side.  But the next
morning, the Frogman thought he would climb the hill and see what was
on top of it, and at the same time Scraps, the Patchwork Girl, also
decided to climb the hill to find if the wicker castle was visible from
its top.  So she stuck her head over an edge just as the Frogman's head
appeared over another edge, and both, being surprised, kept still while
they took a good look at one another.

Scraps recovered from her astonishment first, and bounding upward, she
turned a somersault and landed sitting down and facing the big Frogman,
who slowly advanced and sat opposite her.  "Well met, Stranger!" cried
the Patchwork Girl with a whoop of laughter.  "You are quite the
funniest individual I have seen in all my travels."

"Do you suppose I can be any funnier than you?" asked the Frogman,
gazing at her in wonder.

"I'm not funny to myself, you know," returned Scraps.  "I wish I were.
And perhaps you are so used to your own absurd shape that you do not
laugh whenever you see your reflection in a pool or in a mirror."

"No," said the Frogman gravely, "I do not.  I used to be proud of my
great size and vain of my culture and education, but since I bathed in
the Truth Pond, I sometimes think it is not right that I should be
different from all other frogs."

"Right or wrong," said the Patchwork Girl, "to be different is to be
distinguished.  Now in my case, I'm just like all other Patchwork Girls
because I'm the only one there is.  But tell me, where did you come
from?"

"The Yip Country," said he.

"Is that in the Land of Oz?"

"Of course," replied the Frogman.

"And do you know that your Ruler, Ozma of Oz, has been stolen?"

"I was not aware that I had a Ruler, so of course I couldn't know that
she was stolen."

"Well, you have. All the people of Oz," explained Scraps, "are ruled by
Ozma, whether they know it or not.  And she has been stolen. Aren't you
angry?  Aren't you indignant?  Your Ruler, whom you didn't know you
had, has positively been stolen!"

"That is queer," remarked the Frogman thoughtfully. "Stealing is a
thing practically unknown in Oz, yet this Ozma has been taken, and a
friend of mine has also had her dishpan stolen. With her I have
traveled all the way from the Yip Country in order to recover it."

"I don't see any connection between a Royal Ruler of Oz and a dishpan!"
declared Scraps.

"They've both been stolen, haven't they?"

"True.  But why can't your friend wash her dishes in another dishpan?"
asked Scraps.

"Why can't you use another Royal Ruler?  I suppose you prefer the one
who is lost, and my friend wants her own dishpan, which is made of gold
and studded with diamonds and has magic powers."

"Magic, eh?" exclaimed Scraps. "THERE is a link that connects the two
steals, anyhow, for it seems that all the magic in the Land of Oz was
stolen at the same time, whether it was in the Emerald City of in
Glinda's castle or in the Yip Country.  Seems mighty strange and
mysterious, doesn't it?"

"It used to seem that way to me," admitted the Frogman, "but we have
now discovered who took our dishpan.  It was Ugu the Shoemaker."

"Ugu?  Good gracious!  That's the same magician we think has stolen
Ozma.  We are now on our way to the castle of this Shoemaker."

"So are we," said the Frogman.

"Then follow me, quick!  And let me introduce you to Dorothy and the
other girls and to the Wizard of Oz and all the rest of us."

She sprang up and seized his coatsleeve, dragging him off the hilltop
and down the other side from that whence he had come.  And at the foot
of the hill, the Frogman was astonished to find the three girls and the
Wizard and Button-Bright, who were surrounded by a wooden Sawhorse, a
lean Mule, a square Woozy, and a Cowardly Lion.  A little black dog ran
up and smelled at the Frogman, but couldn't growl at him.

"I've discovered another party that has been robbed," shouted Scraps as
she joined them.  "This is their leader, and they're all going to Ugu's
castle to fight the wicked Shoemaker!"

They regarded the Frogman with much curiosity and interest, and finding
all eyes fixed upon him, the newcomer arranged his necktie and smoothed
his beautiful vest and swung his gold-headed cane like a regular dandy.
The big spectacles over his eyes quite altered his froglike countenance
and gave him a learned and impressive look.  Used as she was to seeing
strange creatures in the Land of Oz, Dorothy was amazed at discovering
the Frogman.  So were all her companions. Toto wanted to growl at him,
but couldn't, and he didn't dare bark.  The Sawhorse snorted rather
contemptuously, but the Lion whispered to the wooden steed, "Bear with
this strange creature, my friend, and remember he is no more
extraordinary than you are.  Indeed, it is more natural for a frog to
be big than for a Sawhorse to be alive."

On being questioned, the Frogman told them the whole story of the loss
of Cayke's highly prized dishpan and their adventures in search of it.
When he came to tell of the Lavender Bear King and of the Little Pink
Bear who could tell anything you wanted to know, his hearers became
eager to see such interesting animals.

"It will be best," said the Wizard, "to unite our two parties and share
our fortunes together, for we are all bound on the same errand, and as
one band we may more easily defy this shoemaker magician than if
separate. Let us be allies."

"I will ask my friends about that," replied the Frogman, and he climbed
over the hill to find Cayke and the toy bears.  The Patchwork Girl
accompanied him, and when they came upon the Cookie Cook and the
Lavender Bear and the Pink Bear, it was hard to tell which of the lot
was the most surprised.

"Mercy me!" cried Cayke, addressing the Patchwork Girl.  "However did
you come alive?"

Scraps stared at the bears.

"Mercy me!" she echoed, "You are stuffed, as I am, with cotton, and you
appear to be living.  That makes me feel ashamed, for I have prided
myself on being the only live cotton-stuffed person in Oz."

"Perhaps you are," returned the Lavender Bear, "for I am stuffed with
extra-quality curled hair, and so is the Little Pink Bear."

"You have relieved my mind of a great anxiety," declared the Patchwork
Girl, now speaking more cheerfully.  "The Scarecrow is stuffed with
straw and you with hair, so I am still the Original and Only
Cotton-Stuffed!"

"I hope I am too polite to criticize cotton as compared with curled
hair," said the King, "especially as you seem satisfied with it."

Then the Frogman told of his interview with the party from the Emerald
City and added that the Wizard of Oz had invited the bears and Cayke
and himself to travel in company with them to the castle of Ugu the
Shoemaker.  Cayke was much pleased, but the Bear King looked solemn. He
set the Little Pink Bear on his lap and turned the crank in its side
and asked, "Is it safe for us to associate with those people from the
Emerald City?"

And the Pink Bear at once replied,

  "Safe for you and safe for me;
  Perhaps no others safe will be."


"That 'perhaps' need not worry us," said the King, "so let us join the
others and offer them our protection."

Even the Lavender Bear was astonished, however, when on climbing over
the hill he found on the other side the group of queer animals and the
people from the Emerald City.  The bears and Cayke were received very
cordially, although Button-Bright was cross when they wouldn't let him
play with the Little Pink Bear.  The three girls greatly admired the
toy bears, and especially the pink one, which they longed to hold.

"You see," explained the Lavender King in denying them this privilege,
"he's a very valuable bear, because his magic is a correct guide on all
occasions, and especially if one is in difficulties.  It was the Pink
Bear who told us that Ugu the Shoemaker had stolen the Cookie Cook's
dishpan."

"And the King's magic is just as wonderful," added Cayke, "because it
showed us the Magician himself."

"What did he look like?" inquired Dorothy.

"He was dreadful!"

"He was sitting at a table and examining an immense Book which had
three golden clasps," remarked the King.

"Why, that must have been Glinda's Great Book of Records!" exclaimed
Dorothy.  "If it is, it proves that Ugu the Shoemaker stole Ozma, and
with her all the magic in the Emerald City."

"And my dishpan," said Cayke.

And the Wizard added, "It also proves that he is following our
adventures in the Book of Records, and therefore knows that we are
seeking him and that we are determined to find him and reach Ozma at
all hazards."

"If we can," added the Woozy, but everybody frowned at him.

The Wizard's statement was so true that the faces around him were very
serious until the Patchwork Girl broke into a peal of laughter.

"Wouldn't it be a rich joke if he made prisoners of us, too?" she said.

"No one but a crazy Patchwork Girl would consider that a joke,"
grumbled Button-Bright.

And then the Lavender Bear King asked, "Would you like to see this
magical shoemaker?"

"Wouldn't he know it?" Dorothy inquired.

"No, I think not."

Then the King waved his metal wand and before them appeared a room in
the wicker castle of Ugu.  On the wall of the room hung Ozma's Magic
Picture, and seated before it was the Magician.  They could see the
Picture as well as he could, because it faced them, and in the Picture
was the hillside where they were now sitting, all their forms being
reproduced in miniature.  And curiously enough, within the scene of the
Picture was the scene they were now beholding, so they knew that the
Magician was at this moment watching them in the Picture, and also that
he saw himself and the room he was in become visible to the people on
the hillside.  Therefore he knew very well that they were watching him
while he was watching them.

In proof of this, Ugu sprang from his seat and turned a scowling face
in their direction; but now he could not see the travelers who were
seeking him, although they could still see him.  His actions were so
distinct, indeed, that it seemed he was actually before them.  "It is
only a ghost," said the Bear King.  "It isn't real at all except that
it shows us Ugu just as he looks and tells us truly just what he is
doing."

"I don't see anything of my lost growl, though," said Toto as if to
himself.

Then the vision faded away, and they could see nothing but the grass
and trees and bushes around them.




CHAPTER 18

THE CONFERENCE


"Now then," said the Wizard, "let us talk this matter over and decide
what to do when we get to Ugu's wicker castle.  There can be no doubt
that the Shoemaker is a powerful Magician, and his powers have been
increased a hundredfold since he secured the Great Book of Records, the
Magic Picture, all of Glinda's recipes for sorcery, and my own black
bag, which was full of tools of wizardry.  The man who could rob us of
those things and the man with all their powers at his command is one
who may prove somewhat difficult to conquer, therefore we should plan
our actions well before we venture too near to his castle."

"I didn't see Ozma in the Magic Picture," said Trot. "What do you
suppose Ugu has done with her?"

"Couldn't the Little Pink Bear tell us what he did with Ozma?" asked
Button-Bright.

"To be sure," replied the Lavender King.  "I'll ask him."  So he turned
the crank in the Little Pink Bear's side and inquired, "Did Ugu the
Shoemaker steal Ozma of Oz?"

"Yes," answered the Little Pink Bear.

"Then what did he do with her?" asked the King.

"Shut her up in a dark place," answered the Little Pink Bear.

"Oh, that must be a dungeon cell!" cried Dorothy, horrified.  "How
dreadful!"

"Well, we must get her out of it," said the Wizard. "That is what we
came for, and of course we must rescue Ozma.  But how?"

Each one looked at some other one for an answer, and all shook their
heads in a grave and dismal manner.  All but Scraps, who danced around
them gleefully.  "You're afraid," said the Patchwork Girl, "because so
many things can hurt your meat bodies. Why don't you give it up and go
home?  How can you fight a great magician when you have nothing to
fight with?"

Dorothy looked at her reflectively.

"Scraps," said she, "you know that Ugu couldn't hurt you a bit,
whatever he did, nor could he hurt ME, 'cause I wear the Gnome King's
Magic Belt.  S'pose just we two go on together and leave the others
here to wait for us."

"No, no!" said the Wizard positively. "That won't do at all.  Ozma is
more powerful than either of you, yet she could not defeat the wicked
Ugu, who has shut her up in a dungeon.  We must go to the Shoemaker in
one mighty band, for only in union is there strength."

"That is excellent advice," said the Lavender Bear approvingly.

"But what can we do when we get to Ugu?" inquired the Cookie Cook
anxiously.

"Do not expect a prompt answer to that important question," replied the
Wizard, "for we must first plan our line of conduct.  Ugu knows, of
course, that we are after him, for he has seen our approach in the
Magic Picture, and he has read of all we have done up to the present
moment in the Great Book of Records.  Therefore we cannot expect to
take him by surprise."

"Don't you suppose Ugu would listen to reason?" asked Betsy.  "If we
explained to him how wicked he has been, don't you think he'd let poor
Ozma go?"

"And give me back my dishpan?" added the Cookie Cook eagerly.

"Yes, yes, won't he say he's sorry and get on his knees and beg our
pardon?" cried Scraps, turning a flip-flop to show her scorn of the
suggestion.  "When Ugu the Shoemaker does that, please knock at the
front door and let me know."

The Wizard sighed and rubbed his bald head with a puzzled air.  "I'm
quite sure Ugu will not be polite to us," said he, "so we must conquer
this cruel magician by force, much as we dislike to be rude to anyone.
But none of you has yet suggested a way to do that.  Couldn't the
Little Pink Bear tell us how?" he asked, turning to the Bear King.

"No, for that is something that is GOING to happen," replied the
Lavender Bear.  "He can only tell us what already HAS happened."

Again, they were grave and thoughtful.  But after a time, Betsy said in
a hesitating voice, "Hank is a great fighter.  Perhaps HE could conquer
the magician."

The Mule turned his head to look reproachfully at his old friend, the
young girl.  "Who can fight against magic?" he asked.

"The Cowardly Lion could," said Dorothy.

The Lion, who was lying with his front legs spread out, his chin on his
paws, raised his shaggy head.  "I can fight when I'm not afraid," said
he calmly, "but the mere mention of a fight sets me to trembling."

"Ugu's magic couldn't hurt the Sawhorse," suggested tiny Trot.

"And the Sawhorse couldn't hurt the Magician," declared that wooden
animal.

"For my part," said Toto, "I am helpless, having lost my growl."

"Then," said Cayke the Cookie Cook, "we must depend upon the Frogman.
His marvelous wisdom will surely inform him how to conquer the wicked
Magician and restore to me my dishpan."

All eyes were now turned questioningly upon the Frogman.  Finding
himself the center of observation, he swung his gold-headed cane,
adjusted his big spectacles, and after swelling out his chest, sighed
and said in a modest tone of voice:

"Respect for truth obliges me to confess that Cayke is mistaken in
regard to my superior wisdom.  I am not very wise.  Neither have I had
any practical experience in conquering magicians.  But let us consider
this case. What is Ugu, and what is a magician?  Ugu is a renegade
shoemaker, and a magician is an ordinary man who, having learned how to
do magical tricks, considers himself above his fellows.  In this case,
the Shoemaker has been naughty enough to steal a lot of magical tools
and things that did not belong to him, and he is more wicked to steal
than to be a magician.  Yet with all the arts at his command, Ugu is
still a man, and surely there are ways in which a man may be conquered.
How, do you say, how?  Allow me to state that I don't know.  In my
judgment, we cannot decide how best to act until we get to Ugu's castle.
So let us go to it and take a look at it. After that, we may discover
an idea that will guide us to victory."

"That may not be a wise speech, but it sounds good," said Dorothy
approvingly.  "Ugu the Shoemaker is not only a common man, but he's a
wicked man and a cruel man and deserves to be conquered.  We mustn't
have any mercy on him till Ozma is set free.  So let's go to his castle
as the Frogman says and see what the place looks like."

No one offered any objection to this plan, and so it was adopted. They
broke camp and were about to start on the journey to Ugu's castle when
they discovered that Button-Bright was lost again.  The girls and the
Wizard shouted his name, and the Lion roared and the Donkey brayed and
the Frogman croaked and the Big Lavender Bear growled (to the envy of
Toto, who couldn't growl but barked his loudest), yet none of them
could make Button-Bright hear.  So after vainly searching for the boy a
full hour, they formed a procession and proceeded in the direction of
the wicker castle of Ugu the Shoemaker.

"Button-Bright's always getting lost," said Dorothy.  "And if he wasn't
always getting found again, I'd prob'ly worry.  He may have gone ahead
of us, and he may have gone back, but wherever he is, we'll find him
sometime and somewhere, I'm almost sure."




CHAPTER 19

UGU THE SHOEMAKER


A curious thing about Ugu the Shoemaker was that he didn't suspect in
the least that he was wicked.  He wanted to be powerful and great, and
he hoped to make himself master of all the Land of Oz that he might
compel everyone in that fairy country to obey him, His ambition blinded
him to the rights of others, and he imagined anyone else would act just
as he did if anyone else happened to be as clever as himself.

When he inhabited his little shoemaking shop in the City of Herku, he
had been discontented, for a shoemaker is not looked upon with high
respect, and Ugu knew that his ancestors had been famous magicians for
many centuries past and therefore his family was above the ordinary.
Even his father practiced magic when Ugu was a boy, but his father had
wandered away from Herku and had never come back again.  So when Ugu
grew up, he was forced to make shoes for a living, knowing nothing of
the magic of his forefathers. But one day, in searching through the
attic of his house, he  discovered all the books of magical recipes and
many magical instruments which had formerly been in use in his family.
From that day, he stopped making shoes and began to study magic.
Finally, he aspired to become the greatest magician in Oz, and for days
and weeks and months he thought on a plan to render all the other
sorcerers and wizards, as well as those with fairy powers, helpless to
oppose him.

From the books of his ancestors, he learned the following facts:

(1) That Ozma of Oz was the fairy ruler of the Emerald City and the
Land of Oz and that she could not be destroyed by any magic ever
devised.  Also, by means of her Magic Picture she would be able to
discover anyone who approached her royal palace with the idea of
conquering it.

(2) That Glinda the Good was the most powerful Sorceress in Oz, among
her other magical possessions being the Great Book of Records, which
told her all that happened anywhere in the world.  This Book of Records
was very dangerous to Ugu's plans, and Glinda was in the service of
Ozma and would use her arts of sorcery to protect the girl Ruler.

(3) That the Wizard of Oz, who lived in Ozma's palace, had been taught
much powerful magic by Glinda and had a bag of magic tools with which
he might be able to conquer the Shoemaker.

(4) That there existed in Oz--in the Yip Country--a jeweled dishpan
made of gold, which dishpan would grow large enough for a man to sit
inside it.  Then, when he grasped both the golden handles, the dishpan
would transport him in an instant to any place he wished to go within
the borders of the Land of Oz.

No one now living except Ugu knew of the powers of the Magic Dishpan,
so after long study, the shoemaker decided that if he could manage to
secure the dishpan, he could by its means rob Ozma and Glinda and the
Wizard of Oz of all their magic, thus becoming himself the most
powerful person in all the land.  His first act was to go away from the
City of Herku and build for himself the Wicker Castle in the hills.
Here he carried his books and instruments of magic, and here for a full
year he diligently practiced all the magical arts learned from his
ancestors.  At the end of that time, he could do a good many wonderful
things.

Then, when all his preparations were made, he set out for the Yip
Country, and climbing the steep mountain at night he entered the house
of Cayke the Cookie Cook and stole her diamond-studded gold dishpan
while all the Yips were asleep, Taking his prize outside, he set the
pan upon the ground and uttered the required magic word.  Instantly,
the dishpan grew as large as a big washtub, and Ugu seated himself in
it and grasped the two handles.  Then he wished himself in the great
drawing room of Glinda the Good.

He was there in a flash.  First he took the Great Book of Records and
put it in the dishpan.  Then he went to Glinda's laboratory and took
all her rare chemical compounds and her instruments of sorcery, placing
these also in the dishpan, which he caused to grow large enough to hold
them.  Next he seated himself amongst the treasures he had stolen and
wished himself in the room in Ozma's palace which the Wizard occupied
and where he kept his bag of magic tools.  This bag Ugu added to his
plunder and then wished himself in the apartments of Ozma.

Here he first took the Magic Picture from the wall and then seized all
the other magical things which Ozma possessed.  Having placed these in
the dishpan, he was about to climb in himself when he looked up and saw
Ozma standing beside him.  Her fairy instinct had warned her that
danger was threatening her, so the beautiful girl Ruler rose from her
couch and leaving her bedchamber at once confronted the thief.

Ugu had to think quickly, for he realized that if he permitted Ozma to
rouse the inmates of her palace, all his plans and his present
successes were likely to come to naught.  So he threw a scarf over the
girl's head so she could not scream, and pushed her into the dishpan
and tied her fast so she could not move.  Then he climbed in beside her
and wished himself in his own wicker castle.  The Magic Dishpan was
there in an instant, with all its contents, and Ugu rubbed his hands
together in triumphant joy as he realized that he now possessed all the
important magic in the Land of Oz and could force all the inhabitants
of that fairyland to do as he willed.

So quickly had his journey been accomplished that before daylight the
robber magician had locked Ozma in a room, making her a prisoner, and
had unpacked and arranged all his stolen goods.  The next day he placed
the Book of Records on his table and hung the Magic Picture on his wall
and put away in his cupboards and drawers all the elixirs and magic
compounds he had stolen.  The magical instruments he polished and
arranged, and this was fascinating work and made him very happy.

By turns the imprisoned Ruler wept and scolded the Shoemaker, haughtily
threatening him with dire punishment for the wicked deeds he had done.
Ugu became somewhat afraid of his fairy prisoner, in spite of the fact
that he believed he had robbed her of all her powers; so he performed
an enchantment that quickly disposed of her and placed her out of his
sight and hearing. After that, being occupied with other things, he
soon forgot her.

But now, when he looked into the Magic Picture and read the Great Book
of Records, the Shoemaker learned that his wickedness was not to go
unchallenged.  Two important expeditions had set out to find him and
force him to give up his stolen property.  One was the party headed by
the Wizard and Dorothy, while the other consisted of Cayke and the
Frogman.  Others were also searching, but not in the right places.
These two groups, however, were headed straight for the wicker castle,
and so Ugu began to plan how best to meet them and to defeat their
efforts to conquer him.




CHAPTER 20

MORE SURPRISES


All that first day after the union of the two parties, our friends
marched steadily toward the wicker castle of Ugu the Shoemaker.  When
night came, they camped in a little grove and passed a pleasant evening
together, although some of them were worried because Button-Bright was
still lost.

"Perhaps," said Toto as the animals lay grouped together for the night,
"this Shoemaker who stole my growl and who stole Ozma has also stolen
Button-Bright."

"How do you know that the Shoemaker stole your growl?" demanded the
Woozy.

"He has stolen about everything else of value in Oz, hasn't he?"
replied the dog.

"He has stolen everything he wants, perhaps," agreed the Lion, "but
what could anyone want with your growl?"

"Well," said the dog, wagging his tail slowly, "my recollection is that
it was a wonderful growl, soft and low and--and--"

"And ragged at the edges," said the Sawhorse.

"So," continued Toto, "if that magician hadn't any growl of his own, he
might have wanted mine and stolen it."

"And if he has, he will soon wish he hadn't," remarked the Mule. "Also,
if he has stolen Button-Bright, he will be sorry."

"Don't you like Button-Bright, then?" asked the Lion in surprise.

"It isn't a question of liking him," replied the Mule.  "It's a
question of watching him and looking after him.  Any boy who causes his
friends so much worry isn't worth having around. I never get lost."

"If you did," said Toto, "no one would worry a bit.  I think
Button-Bright is a very lucky boy because he always gets found."

"See here," said the Lion, "this chatter is keeping us all awake, and
tomorrow is likely to be a busy day.  Go to sleep and forget your
quarrels."

"Friend Lion," retorted the dog, "if I hadn't lost my growl, you would
hear it now.  I have as much right to talk as you have to sleep."

The Lion sighed.

"If only you had lost your voice when you lost your growl," said he,
"you would be a more agreeable companion."

But they quieted down after that, and soon the entire camp was wrapped
in slumber.  Next morning they made an early start, but had hardly
proceeded on their way an hour when, on climbing a slight elevation,
they beheld in the distance a low mountain on top of which stood Ugu's
wicker castle.  It was a good-sized building and rather pretty because
the sides, roofs and domes were all of wicker, closely woven as it is
in fine baskets.

"I wonder if it is strong?" said Dorothy musingly as she eyed the queer
castle.

"I suppose it is, since a magician built it," answered the Wizard.
"With magic to protect it, even a paper castle might be as strong as if
made of stone.  This Ugu must be a man of ideas, because he does things
in a different way from other people."

"Yes.  No one else would steal our dear Ozma," sighed tiny Trot.

"I wonder if Ozma is there?" said Betsy, indicating the castle with a
nod of her head.

"Where else could she be?" asked Scraps.

"Suppose we ask the Pink Bear," suggested Dorothy.

That seemed a good idea, so they halted the procession, and the Bear
King held the little Pink Bear on his lap and turned the crank in its
side and asked, "Where is Ozma of Oz?"

And the little Pink Bear answered, "She is in a hole in the ground a
half mile away at your left."

"Good gracious!" cried Dorothy.

"Then she is not in Ugu's castle at all."

"It is lucky we asked that question," said the Wizard, "for if we can
find Ozma and rescue her, there will be no need for us to fight that
wicked and dangerous magician."

"Indeed!" said Cayke.   "Then what about my dishpan?"

The Wizard looked puzzled at her tone of remonstrance, so she added,
"Didn't you people from the Emerald City promise that we would all
stick together, and that you would help me to get my dishpan if I would
help you to get your Ozma?  And didn't I bring to you the little Pink
Bear, which has told you where Ozma is hidden?"

"She's right," said Dorothy to the Wizard.

"We must do as we agreed."

"Well, first of all, let us go and rescue Ozma," proposed the Wizard.
"Then our beloved Ruler may be able to advise us how to conquer Ugu the
Shoemaker."  So they turned to the left and marched for half a mile
until they came to a small but deep hole in the ground.  At once, all
rushed to the brim to peer into the hole, but instead of finding there
Princess Ozma of Oz, all that they saw was Button-Bright, who was lying
asleep on the bottom.

Their cries soon wakened the boy, who sat up and rubbed his eyes. When
he recognized his friends, he smiled sweetly, saying, "Found again!"

"Where is Ozma?" inquired Dorothy anxiously.

"I don't know," answered Button-Bright from the depths of the hole. "I
got lost yesterday, as you may remember, and in the night while I was
wandering around in the moonlight trying to find my way back to you, I
suddenly fell into this hole."

"And wasn't Ozma in it then?"

"There was no one in it but me, and I was sorry it wasn't entirely
empty.  The sides are so steep I can't climb out, so there was nothing
to be done but sleep until someone found me.  Thank you for coming. If
you'll please let down a rope, I'll empty this hole in a hurry."

"How strange!" said Dorothy, greatly disappointed.

"It's evident the Pink Bear didn't tell the truth."

"He never makes a mistake," declared the Lavender Bear King in a tone
that showed his feelings were hurt.  And then he turned the crank of
the little Pink Bear again and asked, "Is this the hole that Ozma of Oz
is in?"

"Yes," answered the Pink Bear.

"That settles it," said the King positively.  "Your Ozma is in this
hole in the ground."

"Don't be silly," returned Dorothy impatiently. "Even your beady eyes
can see there is no one in the hole but Button-Bright."

"Perhaps Button-Bright is Ozma," suggested the King.

"And perhaps he isn't!  Ozma is a girl, and Button-Bright is a boy."

"Your Pink Bear must be out of order," said the Wizard, "for, this time
at least, his machinery has caused him to make an untrue statement."

The Bear King was so angry at this remark that he turned away, holding
the Pink Bear in his paws, and refused to discuss the matter in any
further way.

"At any rate," said the Frogman, "the Pink Bear has led us to your boy
friend and so enabled you to rescue him."

Scraps was leaning so far over the hole trying to find Ozma in it that
suddenly she lost her balance and pitched in head foremost.  She fell
upon Button-Bright and tumbled him over, but he was not hurt by her
soft, stuffed body and only laughed at the mishap.  The Wizard buckled
some straps together and let one end of them down into the hole, and
soon both Scraps and the boy had climbed up and were standing safely
beside the others.  They looked once more for Ozma, but the hole was
now absolutely vacant.  It was a round hole, so from the top they could
plainly see every part of it.  Before they left the place, Dorothy went
to the Bear King and said, "I'm sorry we couldn't believe what the
little Pink Bear said, 'cause we don't want to make you feel bad by
doubting him.  There must be a mistake, somewhere, and we prob'ly don't
understand just what the little Pink Bear said.  Will you let me ask
him one more question?"

The Lavender Bear King was a good-natured bear, considering how he was
made and stuffed and jointed, so he accepted Dorothy's apology and
turned the crank and allowed the little girl to question his wee Pink
Bear.

"Is Ozma REALLY in this hole?" asked Dorothy.

"No," said the little Pink Bear.

This surprised everybody.  Even the Bear King was now puzzled by the
contradictory statements of his oracle.

"Where IS she?" asked the King.

"Here, among you," answered the little Pink Bear.

"Well," said Dorothy, "this beats me entirely!  I guess the little Pink
Bear has gone crazy."

"Perhaps," called Scraps, who was rapidly turning "cartwheels" all
around the perplexed group, "Ozma is invisible."

"Of course!" cried Betsy. "That would account for it."

"Well, I've noticed that people can speak, even when they've been made
invisible," said the Wizard.  And then he looked all around him and
said in a solemn voice, "Ozma, are you here?"

There was no reply. Dorothy asked the question, too, and so did
Button-Bright and Trot and Betsy, but none received any reply at all.

"It's strange, it's terrible strange!" muttered Cayke the Cookie Cook.
"I was sure that the little Pink Bear always tells the truth."

"I still believe in his honesty," said the Frogman, and this tribute so
pleased the Bear King that he gave these last speakers grateful looks,
but still gazed sourly on the others.

"Come to think of it," remarked the Wizard, "Ozma couldn't be
invisible, for she is a fairy, and fairies cannot be made invisible
against their will.  Of course, she could be imprisoned by the magician
or enchanted or transformed, in spite of her fairy powers, but Ugu
could not render her invisible by any magic at his command."

"I wonder if she's been transformed into Button-Bright?" said Dorothy
nervously.  Then she looked steadily at the boy and asked, "Are you
Ozma?  Tell me truly!"

Button-Bright laughed.

"You're getting rattled, Dorothy," he replied. "Nothing ever enchants
ME.  If I were Ozma, do you think I'd have tumbled into that hole?"

"Anyhow," said the Wizard, "Ozma would never try to deceive her friends
or prevent them from recognizing her in whatever form she happened to
be.  The puzzle is still a puzzle, so let us go on to the wicker castle
and question the magician himself.  Since it was he who stole our Ozma,
Ugu is the one who must tell us where to find her."




CHAPTER 21

MAGIC AGAINST MAGIC


The Wizard's advice was good, so again they started in the direction of
the low mountain on the crest of which the wicker castle had been
built.  They had been gradually advancing uphill, so now the elevation
seemed to them more like a round knoll than a mountaintop.  However,
the sides of the knoll were sloping and covered with green grass, so
there was a stiff climb before them yet.

Undaunted, they plodded on and had almost reached the knoll when they
suddenly observed that it was surrounded by a circle of flame.  At
first, the flames barely rose above the ground, but presently they grew
higher and higher until a circle of flaming tongues of fire taller than
any of their heads quite surrounded the hill on which the wicker castle
stood.  When they approached the flames, the heat was so intense that
it drove them back again.

"This will never do for me!" exclaimed the Patchwork Girl.  "I catch
fire very easily."

"It won't do for me either," grumbled the Sawhorse, prancing to the
rear.

"I also strongly object to fire," said the Bear King, following the
Sawhorse to a safe distance and hugging the little Pink Bear with his
paws.

"I suppose the foolish Shoemaker imagines these blazes will stop us,"
remarked the Wizard with a smile of scorn for Ugu.  "But I am able to
inform you that this is merely a simple magic trick which the robber
stole from Glinda the Good, and by good fortune I know how to destroy
these flames as well as how to produce them.  Will some one of you
kindly give me a match?"

You may be sure the girls carried no matches, nor did the Frogman or
any of the animals.  But Button-Bright, after searching carefully
through his pockets, which contained all sorts of useful and useless
things, finally produced a match and handed it to the Wizard, who tied
it to the end of a branch which he tore from a small tree growing near
them.  Then the little Wizard carefully lighted the match, and running
forward thrust it into the nearest flame.  Instantly, the circle of
fire began to die away, and soon vanished completely leaving the way
clear for them to proceed.

"That was funny!" laughed Button-Bright.

"Yes," agreed the Wizard, "it seems odd that a little match could
destroy such a great circle of fire, but when Glinda invented this
trick, she believed no one would ever think of a match being a remedy
for fire.  I suppose even Ugu doesn't know how we managed to quench the
flames of his barrier, for only Glinda and I know the secret. Glinda's
Book of Magic which Ugu stole told how to make the flames, but not how
to put them out."

They now formed in marching order and proceeded to advance up the slope
of the hill, but had not gone far when before them rose a wall of
steel, the surface of which was thickly covered with sharp, gleaming
points resembling daggers.  The wall completely surrounded the wicker
castle, and its sharp points prevented anyone from climbing it.  Even
the Patchwork Girl might be ripped to pieces if she dared attempt it.
"Ah!" exclaimed the Wizard cheerfully, "Ugu is now using one of my own
tricks against me.  But this is more serious than the Barrier of Fire,
because the only way to destroy the wall is to get on the other side of
it."

"How can that be done?" asked Dorothy.

The Wizard looked thoughtfully around his little party, and his face
grew troubled.  "It's a pretty high wall," he sadly remarked.   "I'm
pretty sure the Cowardly Lion could not leap over it."

"I'm sure of that, too!" said the Lion with a shudder of fear.  "If I
foolishly tried such a leap, I would be caught on those dreadful
spikes."

"I think I could do it, sir," said the Frogman with a bow to the
Wizard.  "It is an uphill jump as well as being a high jump, but I'm
considered something of a jumper by my friends in the Yip Country, and
I believe a good, strong leap will carry me to the other side."

"I'm sure it would," agreed the Cookie Cook.

"Leaping, you know, is a froglike accomplishment," continued the
Frogman modestly, "but please tell me what I am to do when I reach the
other side of the wall."

"You're a brave creature," said the Wizard admiringly.  "Has anyone a
pin?"

Betsy had one, which she gave him.  "All you need do," said the Wizard
to the Frogman, giving him the pin, "is to stick this into the other
side of the wall."

"But the wall is of steel!" exclaimed the big frog.

"I know.  At least, it SEEMS to be steel, but do as I tell you.  Stick
the pin into the wall, and it will disappear."

The Frogman took off his handsome coat and carefully folded it and laid
it on the grass.  Then he removed his hat and laid it together with his
gold-headed cane beside the coat.  He then went back a way and made
three powerful leaps in rapid succession.  The first two leaps took him
to the wall, and the third leap carried him well over it, to the
amazement of all.  For a short time, he disappeared from their view,
but when he had obeyed the Wizard's injunction and had thrust the pin
into the wall, the huge barrier vanished and showed them the form of
the Frogman, who now went to where his coat lay and put it on again.

"We thank you very much," said the delighted Wizard.

"That was the most wonderful leap I ever saw, and it has saved us from
defeat by our enemy.  Let us now hurry on to the castle before Ugu the
Shoemaker thinks up some other means to stop us."

"We must have surprised him so far," declared Dorothy.

"Yes indeed.  The fellow knows a lot of magic--all of our tricks and
some of his own," replied the Wizard.  "So if he is half as clever as
he ought to be, we shall have trouble with him yet."

He had scarcely spoken these words when out from the gates of the
wicker castle marched a regiment of soldiers, clad in gay uniforms and
all bearing long, pointed spears and sharp battle axes.  These soldiers
were girls, and the uniforms were short skirts of yellow and black
satin, golden shoes, bands of gold across their foreheads and necklaces
of glittering jewels.  Their jackets were scarlet, braided with silver
cords.  There were hundreds of these girl-soldiers, and they were more
terrible than beautiful, being strong and fierce in appearance.  They
formed a circle all around the castle and faced outward, their spears
pointed toward the invaders, and their battle axes held over their
shoulders, ready to strike.  Of course, our friends halted at once, for
they had not expected this dreadful array of soldiery.  The Wizard
seemed puzzled, and his companions exchanged discouraged looks.

"I'd no idea Ugu had such an army as that," said Dorothy.  "The castle
doesn't look big enough to hold them all."

"It isn't," declared the Wizard.

"But they all marched out of it."

"They seemed to, but I don't believe it is a real army at all.  If Ugu
the Shoemaker had so many people living with him, I'm sure the Czarover
of Herku would have mentioned the fact to us."

"They're only girls!" laughed Scraps.

"Girls are the fiercest soldiers of all," declared the Frogman.  "They
are more brave than men, and they have better nerves.  That is probably
why the magician uses them for soldiers and has sent them to oppose us."

No one argued this statement, for all were staring hard at the line of
soldiers, which now, having taken a defiant position, remained
motionless.

"Here is a trick of magic new to me," admitted the Wizard after a time.
"I do not believe the army is real, but the spears may be sharp enough
to prick us, nevertheless, so we must be cautious.  Let us take time to
consider how to meet this difficulty."

While they were thinking it over, Scraps danced closer to the line of
girl soldiers.  Her button eyes sometimes saw more than did the natural
eyes of her comrades, and so after staring hard at the magician's army,
she boldly advanced and danced right through the threatening line! On
the other side, she waved her stuffed arms and called out, "Come on,
folks.  The spears can't hurt you." said the Wizard gaily.  "An optical
illusion, as I thought.  Let us all follow the Patchwork Girl."  The
three little girls were somewhat nervous in attempting to brave the
spears and battle axes, but after the others had safely passed the
line, they ventured to follow.  And when all had passed through the
ranks of the girl army, the army itself magically disappeared from view.

All this time our friends had been getting farther up the hill and
nearer to the wicker castle.  Now, continuing their advance, they
expected something else to oppose their way, but to their astonishment
nothing happened, and presently they arrived at the wicker gates, which
stood wide open, and boldly entered the domain of Ugu the Shoemaker.




CHAPTER 22

IN THE WICKER CASTLE


No sooner were the Wizard of Oz and his followers well within the
castle entrance when the big gates swung to with a clang and heavy bars
dropped across them.  They looked at one another uneasily, but no one
cared to speak of the incident.   If they were indeed prisoners in the
wicker castle, it was evident they must find a way to escape, but their
first duty was to attend to the errand on which they had come and seek
the Royal Ozma, whom they believed to be a prisoner of the magician,
and rescue her.

They found they had entered a square courtyard, from which an entrance
led into the main building of the castle.  No person had appeared to
greet them so far, although a gaudy peacock perched upon the wall
cackled with laughter and said in its sharp, shrill voice, "Poor fools!
Poor fools!"

"I hope the peacock is mistaken," remarked the Frogman, but no one else
paid any attention to the bird.  They were a little awed by the
stillness and loneliness of the place.  As they entered the doors of
the castle, which stood invitingly open, these also closed behind them
and huge bolts shot into place.  The animals had all accompanied the
party into the castle because they felt it would be dangerous for them
to separate.  They were forced to follow a zigzag passage, turning this
way and that, until finally they entered a great central hall, circular
in form and with a high dome from which was suspended an enormous
chandelier.

The Wizard went first, and Dorothy, Betsy and Trot followed him, Toto
keeping at the heels of his little mistress.  Then came the Lion, the
Woozy and the Sawhorse, then Cayke the Cookie Cook and Button-Bright,
then the Lavender Bear carrying the Pink Bear, and finally the Frogman
and the Patchwork Girl, with Hank the Mule tagging behind.  So it was
the Wizard who caught the first glimpse of the big, domed hall, but the
others quickly followed and gathered in a wondering group just within
the entrance.

Upon a raised platform at one side was a heavy table on which lay
Glinda's Great Book of Records, but the platform was firmly fastened to
the floor and the table was fastened to the platform and the Book was
chained fast to the table, just as it had been when it was kept in
Glinda's palace.  On the wall over the table hung Ozma's Magic Picture.
On a row of shelves at the opposite side of the hall stood all the
chemicals and essences of magic and all the magical instruments that
had been stolen from Glinda and Ozma and the Wizard, with glass doors
covering the shelves so that no one could get at them.

And in a far corner sat Ugu the Shoemaker, his feet lazily extended,
his skinny hands clasped behind his head.  He was leaning back at his
ease and calmly smoking a long pipe.  Around the magician was a sort of
cage, seemingly made of golden bars set wide apart, and at his feet,
also within the cage, reposed the long-sought diamond-studded dishpan
of Cayke the Cookie Cook.  Princess Ozma of Oz was nowhere to be seen.

"Well, well," said Ugu when the invaders had stood in silence for a
moment, staring about them.  "This visit is an unexpected pleasure, I
assure you.  I knew you were coming, and I know why you are here.  You
are not welcome, for I cannot use any of you to my advantage, but as
you have insisted on coming, I hope you will make the afternoon call as
brief as possible.  It won't take long to transact your business with
me.  You will ask me for Ozma, and my reply will be that you may find
her--if you can."

"Sir," answered the Wizard in a tone of rebuke, "you are a very wicked
and cruel person.  I suppose you imagine, because you have stolen this
poor woman's dishpan and all the best magic in Oz, that you are more
powerful than we are and will be able to triumph over us."

"Yes," said Ugu the Shoemaker, slowly filling his pipe with fresh
tobacco from a silver bowl that stood beside him, "that is exactly what
I imagine.  It will do you no good to demand from me the girl who was
formerly the Ruler of Oz, because I will not tell you where I have
hidden her, and you can't guess in a thousand years.  Neither will I
restore to you any of the magic I have captured.  I am not so foolish.
But bear this in mind: I mean to be the Ruler of Oz myself, hereafter,
so I advise you to be careful how you address your future Monarch."

"Ozma is still Ruler of Oz, wherever you may have hidden her," declared
the Wizard.  "And bear this in mind, miserable Shoemaker: we intend to
find her and to rescue her in time, but our first duty and pleasure
will be to conquer you and then punish you for your misdeeds."

"Very well, go ahead and conquer," said Ugu.  "I'd really like to see
how you can do it."

Now although the little Wizard had spoken so boldly, he had at the
moment no idea how they might conquer the magician.  He had that
morning given the Frogman, at his request, a dose of zosozo from his
bottle, and the Frogman had promised to fight a good fight if it was
necessary, but the Wizard knew that strength alone could not avail
against magical arts.  The toy Bear King seemed to have some pretty
good magic, however, and the Wizard depended to an extent on that. But
something ought to be done right away, and the Wizard didn't know what
it was.

While he considered this perplexing question and the others stood
looking at him as their leader, a queer thing happened.  The floor of
the great circular hall on which they were standing suddenly began to
tip.  Instead of being flat and level, it became a slant, and the slant
grew steeper and steeper until none of the party could manage to stand
upon it.  Presently they all slid down to the wall, which was now under
them, and then it became evident that the whole vast room was slowly
turning upside down!  Only Ugu the Shoemaker, kept in place by the bars
of his golden cage, remained in his former position, and the wicked
magician seemed to enjoy the surprise of his victims immensely.

First they all slid down to the wall back of them, but as the room
continued to turn over, they next slid down the wall and found
themselves at the bottom of the great dome, bumping against the big
chandelier which, like everything else, was now upside down.  The
turning movement now stopped, and the room became stationary.  Looking
far up, they saw Ugu suspended in his cage at the very top, which had
once been the floor.

"Ah," said he, grinning down at them, "the way to conquer is to act,
and he who acts promptly is sure to win.  This makes a very good
prison, from which I am sure you cannot escape.  Please amuse
yourselves in any way you like, but I must beg you to excuse me, as I
have business in another part of my castle."

Saying this, he opened a trap door in the floor of his cage (which was
now over his head) and climbed through it and disappeared from their
view.  The diamond dishpan still remained in the cage, but the bars
kept it from falling down on their heads.

"Well, I declare," said the Patchwork Girl, seizing one of the bars of
the chandelier and swinging from it, "we must peg one for the
Shoemaker, for he has trapped us very cleverly."

"Get off my foot, please," said the Lion to the Sawhorse.

"And oblige me, Mr.  Mule," remarked the Woozy, "by taking your tail
out of my left eye."

"It's rather crowded down here," explained Dorothy, "because the dome
is rounding and we have all slid into the middle of it.  But let us
keep as quiet as possible until we can think what's best to be done."

"Dear, dear!" wailed Cayke, "I wish I had my darling dishpan," and she
held her arms longingly toward it.

"I wish I had the magic on those shelves up there," sighed the Wizard.

"Don't you s'pose we could get to it?" asked Trot anxiously.

"We'd have to fly," laughed the Patchwork Girl.

But the Wizard took the suggestion seriously, and so did the Frogman.
They talked it over and soon planned an attempt to reach the shelves
where the magical instruments were.  First the Frogman lay against the
rounding dome and braced his foot on the stem of the chandelier; then
the Wizard climbed over him and lay on the dome with his feet on the
Frogman's shoulders; the Cookie Cook came next; then Button-Bright
climbed to the woman's shoulders; then Dorothy climbed up and Betsy and
Trot, and finally the Patchwork Girl, and all their lengths made a long
line that reached far up the dome, but not far enough for Scraps to
touch the shelves.

"Wait a minute.  Perhaps I can reach the magic," called the Bear King,
and began scrambling up the bodies of the others.  But when he came to
the Cookie Cook, his soft paws tickled her side so that she squirmed
and upset the whole line.  Down they came, tumbling in a heap against
the animals, and although no one was much hurt, it was a bad mix-up,
and the Frogman, who was at the bottom, almost lost his temper before
he could get on his feet again.

Cayke positively refused to try what she called "the pyramid act"
again, and as the Wizard was now convinced they could not reach the
magic tools in that manner, the attempt was abandoned.  "But SOMETHING
must be done," said the Wizard, and then he turned to the Lavender Bear
and asked, "Cannot Your Majesty's magic help us to escape from here?"

"My magic powers are limited," was the reply. "When I was stuffed, the
fairies stood by and slyly dropped some magic into my stuffing.
Therefore I can do any of the magic that's inside me, but nothing else.
You, however, are a wizard, and a wizard should be able to do anything."

"Your Majesty forgets that my tools of magic have been stolen," said
the Wizard sadly, "and a wizard without tools is as helpless as a
carpenter without a hammer or saw."

"Don't give up," pleaded Button-Bright, "'cause if we can't get out of
this queer prison, we'll all starve to death."

"Not I!" laughed the Patchwork Girl, now standing on top of the
chandelier at the place that was meant to be the bottom of it.

"Don't talk of such dreadful things," said Trot, shuddering.  "We came
here to capture the Shoemaker, didn't we?"

"Yes, and to save Ozma," said Betsy.

"And here we are, captured ourselves, and my darling dishpan up there
in plain sight!" wailed the Cookie Cook, wiping her eyes on the tail of
the Frogman's coat.

"Hush!" called the Lion with a low, deep growl.  "Give the Wizard time
to think."

"He has plenty of time," said Scraps. "What he needs is the Scarecrow's
brains."

After all, it was little Dorothy who came to their rescue, and her
ability to save them was almost as much a surprise to the girl as it
was to her friends.  Dorothy had been secretly testing the powers of
her Magic Belt, which she had once captured from the Nome King, and
experimenting with it in various ways ever since she had started on
this eventful journey.  At different times she had stolen away from the
others of her party and in solitude had tried to find out what the
Magic Belt could do and what it could not do.  There were a lot of
things it could not do, she discovered, but she learned some things
about the Belt which even her girl friends did not suspect she knew.

For one thing, she had remembered that when the Nome King owned it, the
Magic Belt used to perform transformations, and by thinking hard she
had finally recalled the way in which such transformations had been
accomplished.  Better than this, however, was the discovery that the
Magic Belt would grant its wearer one wish a day.  All she need do was
close her right eye and wiggle her left toe and then draw a long breath
and make her wish.  Yesterday she had wished in secret for a box of
caramels, and instantly found the box beside her.  Today she had saved
her daily wish in case she might need it in an emergency, and the time
had now come when she must use the wish to enable her to escape with
her friends from the prison in which Ugu had caught them.

So without telling anyone what she intended to do--for she had only
used the wish once and could not be certain how powerful the Magic Belt
might be--Dorothy closed her right eye and wiggled her left big toe and
drew a long breath and wished with all her might.  The next moment the
room began to revolve again, as slowly as before, and by degrees they
all slid to the side wall and down the wall to the floor--all but
Scraps, who was so astonished that she still clung to the chandelier.
When the big hall was in its proper position again and the others stood
firmly upon the floor of it, they looked far up the dome and saw the
Patchwork girl swinging from the chandelier.

"Good gracious!" cried Dorothy.  "How ever will you get down?"

"Won't the room keep turning?" asked Scraps.

"I hope not.  I believe it has stopped for good," said Princess Dorothy.

"Then stand from under, so you won't get hurt!" shouted the Patchwork
Girl, and as soon as they had obeyed this request, she let go the
chandelier and came tumbling down heels over head and twisting and
turning in a very exciting manner.  Plump!  She fell on the tiled
floor, and they ran to her and rolled her and patted her into shape
again.




CHAPTER 23

THE DEFIANCE OF UGU THE SHOEMAKER


The delay caused by Scraps had prevented anyone from running to the
shelves to secure the magic instruments so badly needed.  Even Cayke
neglected to get her diamond-studded dishpan because she was watching
the Patchwork Girl.  And now the magician had opened his trap door and
appeared in his golden cage again, frowning angrily because his
prisoners had been able to turn their upside-down prison right side up.
"Which of you has dared defy my magic?" he shouted in a terrible voice.

"It was I," answered Dorothy calmly.

"Then I shall destroy you, for you are only an Earth girl and no
fairy," he said, and began to mumble some magic words.

Dorothy now realized that Ugu must be treated as an enemy, so she
advanced toward the corner in which he sat, saying as she went, "I am
not afraid of you, Mr.  Shoemaker, and I think you'll be sorry, pretty
soon, that you're such a bad man.  You can't destroy me, and I won't
destroy you, but I'm going to punish you for your wickedness."

Ugu laughed, a laugh that was not nice to hear, and then he waved his
hand.  Dorothy was halfway across the room when suddenly a wall of
glass rose before her and stopped her progress.  Through the glass she
could see the magician sneering at her because she was a weak little
girl, and this provoked her.  Although the glass wall obliged her to
halt, she instantly pressed both hands to her Magic Belt and cried in a
loud voice, "Ugu the Shoemaker, by the magic virtues of the Magic Belt,
I command you to become a dove!"

The magician instantly realized he was being enchanted, for he could
feel his form changing.  He struggled desperately against the
enchantment, mumbling magic words and making magic passes with his
hands.  And in one way he succeeded in defeating Dorothy's purpose, for
while his form soon changed to that of a gray dove, the dove was of an
enormous size, bigger even than Ugu had been as a man, and this feat he
had been able to accomplish before his powers of magic wholly deserted
him.

And the dove was not gentle, as doves usually are, for Ugu was terribly
enraged at the little girl's success.  His books had told him nothing
of the Nome King's Magic Belt, the Country of the Nomes being outside
the Land of Oz.  He knew, however, that he was likely to be conquered
unless he made a fierce fight, so he spread his wings and rose in the
air and flew directly toward Dorothy.  The Wall of Glass had
disappeared the instant Ugu became transformed.

Dorothy had meant to command the Belt to transform the magician into a
Dove of Peace, but in her excitement she forgot to say more than
"dove," and now Ugu was not a Dove of Peace by any means, but rather a
spiteful Dove of War. His size made his sharp beak and claws very
dangerous, but Dorothy was not afraid when he came darting toward her
with his talons outstretched and his sword-like beak open.  She knew
the Magic Belt would protect its wearer from harm.

But the Frogman did not know that fact and became alarmed at the little
girl's seeming danger.  So he gave a sudden leap and leaped full upon
the back of the great dove.  Then began a desperate struggle.  The dove
was as strong as Ugu had been, and in size it was considerably bigger
than the Frogman.  But the Frogman had eaten the zosozo, and it had
made him fully as strong as Ugu the Dove.  At the first leap he bore
the dove to the floor, but the giant bird got free and began to bite
and claw the Frogman, beating him down with its great wings whenever he
attempted to rise.  The thick, tough skin of the big frog was not
easily damaged, but Dorothy feared for her champion, and by again using
the transformation power of the Magic Belt, she made the dove grow
small until it was no larger than a canary bird.  Ugu had not lost his
knowledge of magic when he lost his shape as a man, and he now realized
it was hopeless to oppose the power of the Magic Belt and knew that his
only hope of escape lay in instant action.  So he quickly flew into the
golden jeweled dishpan he had stolen from Cayke the Cookie Cook, and as
birds can talk as well as beasts or men in the Fairyland of Oz, he
muttered the magic word that was required and wished himself in the
Country of the Quadlings, which was as far away from the wicker castle
as he believed he could get.

Our friends did not know, of course, what Ugu was about to do.  They
saw the dishpan tremble an instant and then disappear, the dove
disappearing with it, and although they waited expectantly for some
minutes for the magician's return, Ugu did not come back again. "Seems
to me," said the Wizard in a cheerful voice, "that we have conquered
the wicked magician more quickly than we expected to."

"Don't say 'we.'  Dorothy did it!" cried the Patchwork Girl, turning
three somersaults in succession and then walking around on her hands.
"Hurrah for Dorothy!"

"I thought you said you did not know how to use the magic of the Nome
King's Belt," said the Wizard to Dorothy.

"I didn't know at that time," she replied, "but afterward I remembered
how the Nome King once used the Magic Belt to enchant people and
transform 'em into ornaments and all sorts of things, so I tried some
enchantments in secret, and after a while I transformed the Sawhorse
into a potato masher and back again, and the Cowardly Lion into a
pussycat and back again, and then I knew the thing would work all
right."

"When did you perform those enchantments?" asked the Wizard, much
surprised.

"One night when all the rest of you were asleep but Scraps, and she had
gone chasing moonbeams."

"Well," remarked the Wizard, "your discovery has certainly saved us a
lot of trouble, and we must all thank the Frogman, too, for making such
a good fight.  The dove's shape had Ugu's evil disposition inside it,
and that made the monster bird dangerous."

The Frogman was looking sad because the bird's talons had torn his
pretty clothes, but he bowed with much dignity at this well-deserved
praise.  Cayke, however, had squatted on the floor and was sobbing
bitterly.  "My precious dishpan is gone!" she wailed. "Gone, just as I
had found it again!"

"Never mind," said Trot, trying to comfort her, "it's sure to be
SOMEWHERE, so we'll cert'nly run across it some day."

"Yes indeed," added Betsy, "now that we have Ozma's Magic Picture, we
can tell just where the Dove went with your dishpan.  They all
approached the Magic Picture, and Dorothy wished it to show the
enchanted form of Ugu the Shoemaker, wherever it might be.  At once
there appeared in the frame of the Picture a scene in the far Quadling
Country, where the Dove was perched disconsolately on the limb of a
tree and the jeweled dishpan lay on the ground just underneath the limb.

"But where is the place?  How far or how near?" asked Cayke anxiously.

"The Book of Records will tell us that," answered the Wizard.  So they
looked in the Great Book and read the following:

"Ugu the Magician, being transformed into a dove by Princess Dorothy of
Oz, has used the magic of the golden dishpan to carry him instantly to
the northeast corner of the Quadling Country."

"Don't worry, Cayke, for the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman are in that
part of the country looking for Ozma, and they'll surely find your
dishpan."

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Button-Bright.  "We've forgot all about
Ozma.  Let's find out where the magician hid her."

Back to the Magic Picture they trooped, but when they wished to see
Ozma wherever she might be hidden, only a round black spot appeared in
the center of the canvas.  "I don't see how THAT can be Ozma!" said
Dorothy, much puzzled.

"It seems to be the best the Magic Picture can do, however," said the
Wizard, no less surprised.  "If it's an enchantment, looks as if the
magician had transformed Ozma into a chunk of pitch."




CHAPTER 24

THE LITTLE PINK BEAR SPEAKS TRULY


For several minutes they all stood staring at the black spot on the
canvas of the Magic Picture, wondering what it could mean.  "P'r'aps
we'd better ask the little Pink Bear about Ozma," suggested Trot.

"Pshaw!" said Button-Bright. "HE don't know anything."

"He never makes a mistake," declared the King.

"He did once, surely," said Betsy. "But perhaps he wouldn't make a
mistake again."

"He won't have the chance," grumbled the Bear King.

"We might hear what he has to say," said Dorothy.  "It won't do any
harm to ask the Pink Bear where Ozma is."

"I will not have him questioned," declared the King in a surly voice.
"I do not intend to allow my little Pink Bear to be again insulted by
your foolish doubts.  He never makes a mistake."

"Didn't he say Ozma was in that hole in the ground?" asked Betsy.

"He did, and I am certain she was there," replied the Lavender Bear.

Scraps laughed jeeringly, and the others saw there was no use arguing
with the stubborn Bear King, who seemed to have absolute faith in his
Pink Bear.  The Wizard, who knew that magical things can usually be
depended upon and that the little Pink Bear was able to answer
questions by some remarkable power of magic, thought it wise to
apologize to the Lavender Bear for the unbelief of his friends, at the
same time urging the King to consent to question the Pink Bear once
more.  Cayke and the Frogman also pleaded with the big Bear, who
finally agreed, although rather ungraciously, to put the little Bear's
wisdom to the test once more.  So he sat the little one on his knee and
turned the crank, and the Wizard himself asked the questions in a very
respectful tone of voice.  "Where is Ozma?" was his first query.

"Here in this room," answered the little Pink Bear.

They all looked around the room, but of course did not see her.  "In
what part of the room is she?" was the Wizard's next question.

"In Button-Bright's pocket," said the little Pink Bear.

This reply amazed them all, you may be sure, and although the three
girls smiled and Scraps yelled "Hoo-ray!" in derision, the Wizard
turned to consider the matter with grave thoughtfulness.  "In which one
of Button-Bright's pockets is Ozma?" he presently inquired.

"In the left-hand jacket pocket," said the little Pink Bear.

"The pink one has gone crazy!" exclaimed Button-Bright, staring hard at
the little bear on the big bear's knee.

"I am not so sure of that," declared the Wizard. "If Ozma proves to be
really in your pocket, then the little Pink Bear spoke truly when he
said Ozma was in that hole in the ground.  For at that time you were
also in the hole, and after we had pulled you out of it, the little
Pink Bear said Ozma was not in the hole."

"He never makes a mistake," asserted the Bear King stoutly.

"Empty that pocket, Button-Bright, and let's see what's in it,"
requested Dorothy.

So Button-Bright laid the contents of his left jacket pocket on the
table.  These proved to be a peg top, a bunch of string, a small rubber
ball and a golden peach pit.  "What's this?" asked the Wizard, picking
up the peach pit and examining it closely.

"Oh," said the boy, "I saved that to show to the girls, and then forgot
all about it.  It came out of a lonesome peach that I found in the
orchard back yonder, and which I ate while I was lost.  It looks like
gold, and I never saw a peach pit like it before."

"Nor I," said the Wizard, "and that makes it seem suspicious."

All heads were bent over the golden peach pit.  The Wizard turned it
over several times and then took out his pocket knife and pried the pit
open.  As the two halves fell apart, a pink, cloud-like haze came
pouring from the golden peach pit, almost filling the big room, and
from the haze a form took shape and settled beside them.  Then, as the
haze faded away, a sweet voice said, "Thank you, my friends!" and there
before them stood their lovely girl Ruler, Ozma of Oz.

With a cry of delight, Dorothy rushed forward and embraced her. Scraps
turned gleeful flipflops all around the room.  Button-Bright gave a low
whistle of astonishment.  The Frogman took off his tall hat and bowed
low before the beautiful girl who had been freed from her enchantment
in so startling a manner.  For a time, no sound was heard beyond the
low murmur of delight that came from the amazed group, but presently
the growl of the big Lavender Bear grew louder, and he said in a tone
of triumph, "He never makes a mistake!"




CHAPTER 25

OZMA OF OZ


"It's funny," said Toto, standing before his friend the Lion and
wagging his tail, "but I've found my growl at last!  I am positive now
that it was the cruel magician who stole it."

"Let's hear your growl," requested the Lion.

"G-r-r-r-r-r!" said Toto.

"That is fine," declared the big beast.  "It isn't as loud or as deep
as the growl of the big Lavender Bear, but it is a very respectable
growl for a small dog.  Where did you find it, Toto?"

"I was smelling in the corner yonder," said Toto, "when suddenly a
mouse ran out--and I growled."

The others were all busy congratulating Ozma, who was very happy at
being released from the confinement of the golden peach pit, where the
magician had placed her with the notion that she never could be found
or liberated.

"And only to think," cried Dorothy, "that Button-Bright has been
carrying you in his pocket all this time, and we never knew it!"

"The little Pink Bear told you," said the Bear King, "but you wouldn't
believe him."

"Never mind, my dears," said Ozma graciously, "all is well that ends
well, and you couldn't be expected to know I was inside the peach pit.
Indeed, I feared I would remain a captive much longer than I did, for
Ugu is a bold and clever magician, and he had hidden me very securely."

"You were in a fine peach," said Button-Bright, "the best I ever ate."

"The magician was foolish to make the peach so tempting," remarked the
Wizard, "but Ozma would lend beauty to any transformation."

"How did you manage to conquer Ugu the Shoemaker?" inquired the girl
Ruler of Oz.

Dorothy started to tell the story, and Trot helped her, and
Button-Bright wanted to relate it in his own way, and the Wizard tried
to make it clear to Ozma, and Betsy had to remind them of important
things they left out, and all together there was such a chatter that it
was a wonder that Ozma understood any of it.  But she listened
patiently, with a smile on her lovely face at their eagerness, and
presently had gleaned all the details of their adventures.

Ozma thanked the Frogman very earnestly for his assistance, and she
advised Cayke the Cookie Cook to dry her weeping eyes, for she promised
to take her to the Emerald City and see that her cherished dishpan was
restored to her.  Then the beautiful Ruler took a chain of emeralds
from around her own neck and placed it around the neck of the little
Pink Bear.

"Your wise answers to the questions of my friends," said she, "helped
them to rescue me.   Therefore I am deeply grateful to you and to your
noble King."

The bead eyes of the little Pink Bear stared unresponsive to this
praise until the Big Lavender Bear turned the crank in its side, when
it said in its squeaky voice, "I thank Your Majesty."

"For my part," returned the Bear King, "I realize that you were well
worth saving, Miss Ozma, and so I am much pleased that we could be of
service to you.  By means of my Magic Wand I have been creating exact
images of your Emerald City and your Royal Palace, and I must confess
that they are more attractive than any places I have ever seen--not
excepting Bear Center."

"I would like to entertain you in my palace," returned Ozma sweetly,
"and you are welcome to return with me and to make me a long visit, if
your bear subjects can spare you from your own kingdom."

"As for that," answered the King, "my kingdom causes me little worry,
and I often find it somewhat tame and uninteresting.  Therefore I am
glad to accept your kind invitation.  Corporal Waddle may be trusted to
care for my bears in my absence."

"And you'll bring the little Pink Bear?" asked Dorothy eagerly.

"Of course, my dear.  I would not willingly part with him."

They remained in the wicker castle for three days, carefully packing
all the magical things that had been stolen by Ugu and also taking
whatever in the way of magic the shoemaker had inherited from his
ancestors.  "For," said Ozma, "I have forbidden any of my subjects
except Glinda the Good and the Wizard of Oz to practice magical arts,
because they cannot be trusted to do good and not harm.  Therefore Ugu
must never again be permitted to work magic of any sort."

"Well," remarked Dorothy cheerfully, "a dove can't do much in the way
of magic, anyhow, and I'm going to keep Ugu in the form of a dove until
he reforms and becomes a good and honest shoemaker."

When everything was packed and loaded on the backs of the animals, they
set out for the river, taking a more direct route than that by which
Cayke and the Frogman had come.  In this way they avoided the Cities of
Thi and Herku and Bear Center and after a pleasant journey reached the
Winkie River and found a jolly ferryman who had a fine, big boat and
was willing to carry the entire party by water to a place quite near to
the Emerald City.

The river had many windings and many branches, and the journey did not
end in a day, but finally the boat floated into a pretty lake which was
but a short distance from Ozma's home.  Here the jolly ferryman was
rewarded for his labors, and then the entire party set out in a grand
procession to march to the Emerald City.  News that the Royal Ozma had
been found spread quickly throughout the neighborhood, and both sides
of the road soon became lined with loyal subjects of the beautiful and
beloved Ruler.  Therefore Ozma's ears heard little but cheers, and her
eyes beheld little else than waving handkerchiefs and banners during
all the triumphal march from the lake to the city's gates.

And there she met a still greater concourse, for all the inhabitants of
the Emerald City turned out to welcome her return, and all the houses
were decorated with flags and bunting, and never before were the people
so joyous and happy as at this moment when they welcomed home their
girl Ruler.  For she had been lost and was now found again, and surely
that was cause for rejoicing.  Glinda was at the royal palace to meet
the returning party, and the good Sorceress was indeed glad to have her
Great Book of Records returned to her, as well as all the precious
collection of magic instruments and elixirs and chemicals that had been
stolen from her castle.  Cap'n Bill and the Wizard at once hung the
Magic Picture upon the wall of Ozma's boudoir, and the Wizard was so
light-hearted that he did several tricks with the tools in his black
bag to amuse his companions and prove that once again he was a powerful
wizard.

For a whole week there was feasting and merriment and all sorts of
joyous festivities at the palace in honor of Ozma's safe return.  The
Lavender Bear and the little Pink Bear received much attention and were
honored by all, much to the Bear King's satisfaction.  The Frogman
speedily became a favorite at the Emerald City, and the Shaggy Man and
Tik-Tok and Jack Pumpkinhead, who had now returned from their search,
were very polite to the big frog and made him feel quite at home.  Even
the Cookie Cook, because she was quite a stranger and Ozma's guest, was
shown as much deference as if she had been a queen.

"All the same, Your Majesty," said Cayke to Ozma, day after day with
tiresome repetition, "I hope you will soon find my jeweled dishpan, for
never can I be quite happy without it."




CHAPTER 26

DOROTHY FORGIVES


The gray dove which had once been Ugu the Shoemaker sat on its tree in
the far Quadling Country and moped, chirping dismally and brooding over
its misfortunes.  After a time, the Scarecrow and the Tin Woodman came
along and sat beneath the tree, paying no heed to the mutterings of the
gray dove.  The Tin Woodman took a small oilcan from his tin pocket and
carefully oiled his tin joints with it.

While he was thus engaged, the Scarecrow remarked, "I feel much better,
dear comrade, since we found that heap of nice, clean straw and you
stuffed me anew with it."

"And I feel much better now that my joints are oiled," returned the Tin
Woodman with a sigh of pleasure.  "You and I, friend Scarecrow, are
much more easily cared for than those clumsy meat people, who spend
half their time dressing in fine clothes and who must live in splendid
dwellings in order to be contented and happy.  You and I do not eat,
and so we are spared the dreadful bother of getting three meals a day.
Nor do we waste half our lives in sleep, a condition that causes the
meat people to lose all consciousness and become as thoughtless and
helpless as logs of wood."

"You speak truly," responded the Scarecrow, tucking some wisps of straw
into his breast with his padded fingers.  "I often feel sorry for the
meat people, many of whom are my friends.  Even the beasts are happier
than they, for they require less to make them content.  And the birds
are the luckiest creatures of all, for they can fly swiftly where they
will and find a home at any place they care to perch. Their food
consists of seeds and grains they gather from the fields, and their
drink is a sip of water from some running brook.  If I could not be a
Scarecrow or a Tin Woodman, my next choice would be to live as a bird
does."

The gray dove had listened carefully to this speech and seemed to find
comfort in it, for it hushed its moaning.  And just then the Tin
Woodman discovered Cayke's dishpan, which was on the ground quite near
to him.  "Here is a rather pretty utensil," he said, taking it in his
tin hand to examine it, "but I would not care to own it.  Whoever
fashioned it of gold and covered it with diamonds did not add to its
usefulness, nor do I consider it as beautiful as the bright dishpans of
tin one usually sees.  No yellow color is ever so handsome as the
silver sheen of tin," and he turned to look at his tin legs and body
with approval.

"I cannot quite agree with you there," replied the Scarecrow.  "My
straw stuffing has a light yellow color, and it is not only pretty to
look at, but it crunkles most delightfully when I move."

"Let us admit that all colors are good in their proper places," said
the Tin Woodman, who was too kind-hearted to quarrel, "but you must
agree with me that a dishpan that is yellow is unnatural.  What shall
we do with this one, which we have just found?"

"Let us carry it back to the Emerald City," suggested the Scarecrow.
"Some of our friends might like to have it for a foot-bath, and in
using it that way, its golden color and sparkling ornaments would not
injure its usefulness."

So they went away and took the jeweled dishpan with them.  And after
wandering through the country for a day or so longer, they learned the
news that Ozma had been found.  Therefore they straightway returned to
the Emerald City and presented the dishpan to Princess Ozma as a token
of their joy that she had been restored to them.  Ozma promptly gave
the diamond-studded gold dishpan to Cayke the Cookie Cook, who was
delighted at regaining her lost treasure that she danced up and down in
glee and then threw her skinny arms around Ozma's neck and kissed her
gratefully.  Cayke's mission was now successfully accomplished, but she
was having such a good time at the Emerald City that she seemed in no
hurry to go back to the Country of the Yips.

It was several weeks after the dishpan had been restored to the Cookie
Cook when one day, as Dorothy was seated in the royal gardens with Trot
and Betsy beside her, a gray dove came flying down and alighted at the
girl's feet.

"I am Ugu the Shoemaker," said the dove in a soft, mourning voice, "and
I have come to ask you to forgive me for the great wrong I did in
stealing Ozma and the magic that belonged to her and to others."

"Are you sorry, then?" asked Dorothy, looking hard at the bird.

"I am VERY sorry," declared Ugu.  "I've been thinking over my misdeeds
for a long time, for doves have little else to do but think, and I'm
surprised that I was such a wicked man and had so little regard for the
rights of others.  I am now convinced that even had I succeeded in
making myself ruler of all Oz, I should not have been happy, for many
days of quiet thought have shown me that only those things one acquires
honestly are able to render one content."

"I guess that's so," said Trot.

"Anyhow," said Betsy, "the bad man seems truly sorry, and if he has now
become a good and honest man, we ought to forgive him."

"I fear I cannot become a good MAN again," said Ugu, "for the
transformation I am under will always keep me in the form of a dove.
But with the kind forgiveness of my former enemies, I hope to become a
very good dove and highly respected."

"Wait here till I run for my Magic Belt," said Dorothy, "and I'll
transform you back to your reg'lar shape in a jiffy."

"No, don't do that!" pleaded the dove, fluttering its wings in an
excited way.  "I only want your forgiveness.  I don't want to be a man
again.  As Ugu the Shoemaker I was skinny and old and unlovely.  As a
dove I am quite pretty to look at.  As a man I was ambitious and cruel,
while as a dove I can be content with my lot and happy in my simple
life.  I have learned to love the free and independent life of a bird,
and I'd rather not change back."

"Just as you like, Ugu," said Dorothy, resuming her seat.  "Perhaps you
are right, for you're certainly a better dove than you were a man, and
if you should ever backslide an' feel wicked again, you couldn't do
much harm as a gray dove."

"Then you forgive me for all the trouble I caused you?" he asked
earnestly.

"Of course.  Anyone who's sorry just has to be forgiven."

"Thank you," said the gray dove, and flew away again.



THE END



The Wonderful Oz Books by L. Frank Baum

  The Wizard of Oz
  The Land of Oz
  Ozma of Oz
  Dorothy and the Wizard in Oz
  The Road to Oz
  The Emerald City of Oz
  The Patchwork Girl of Oz
  Tik-Tok of Oz
  The Scarecrow of Oz
  Rinkitink in Oz
  The Lost Princess of Oz
  The Tin Woodman of Oz
  The Magic of Oz
  Glinda of Oz

========================================
