========================================

IN THE CARQUINEZ WOODS

By Bret Harte




CHAPTER I.


The sun was going down on the Carquinez Woods. The few shafts of
sunlight that had pierced their pillared gloom were lost in unfathomable
depths, or splintered their ineffectual lances on the enormous trunks
of the redwoods. For a time the dull red of their vast columns, and the
dull red of their cast-off bark which matted the echoless aisles, still
seemed to hold a faint glow of the dying day. But even this soon passed.
Light and color fled upwards. The dark interlaced treetops, that had all
day made an impenetrable shade, broke into fire here and there; their
lost spires glittered, faded, and went utterly out. A weird twilight
that did not come from the outer world, but seemed born of the wood
itself, slowly filled and possessed the aisles. The straight, tall,
colossal trunks rose dimly like columns of upward smoke. The few fallen
trees stretched their huge length into obscurity, and seemed to lie on
shadowy trestles. The strange breath that filled these mysterious vaults
had neither coldness nor moisture; a dry, fragrant dust arose from the
noiseless foot that trod their bark-strewn floor; the aisles might have
been tombs, the fallen trees enormous mummies; the silence the solitude
of a forgotten past.

And yet this silence was presently broken by a recurring sound like
breathing, interrupted occasionally by inarticulate and stertorous
gasps. It was not the quick, panting, listening breath of some stealthy
feline or canine animal, but indicated a larger, slower, and more
powerful organization, whose progress was less watchful and guarded, or
as if a fragment of one of the fallen monsters had become animate.
At times this life seemed to take visible form, but as vaguely, as
misshapenly, as the phantom of a nightmare. Now it was a square object
moving sideways, endways, with neither head nor tail and scarcely
visible feet; then an arched bulk rolling against the trunks of the
trees and recoiling again, or an upright cylindrical mass, but always
oscillating and unsteady, and striking the trees on either hand. The
frequent occurrence of the movement suggested the figures of some weird
rhythmic dance to music heard by the shape alone. Suddenly it either
became motionless or faded away.

There was the frightened neighing of a horse, the sudden jingling of
spurs, a shout and outcry, and the swift apparition of three dancing
torches in one of the dark aisles; but so intense was the obscurity
that they shed no light on surrounding objects, and seemed to advance
of their own volition without human guidance, until they disappeared
suddenly behind the interposing bulk of one of the largest trees. Beyond
its eighty feet of circumference the light could not reach, and the
gloom remained inscrutable. But the voices and jingling spurs were heard
distinctly.

"Blast the mare! She's shied off that cursed trail again."

"Ye ain't lost it again, hev ye?" growled a second voice.

"That's jist what I hev. And these blasted pine-knots don't give light
an inch beyond 'em. D--d if I don't think they make this cursed hole
blacker."

There was a laugh--a woman's laugh--hysterical, bitter, sarcastic,
exasperating. The second speaker, without heeding it, went on:--

"What in thunder skeert the hosses? Did you see or hear anything?"

"Nothin'. The wood is like a graveyard."

The woman's voice again broke into a hoarse, contemptuous laugh. The man
resumed angrily:--

"If you know anything, why in h-ll don't you say so, instead of cackling
like a d--d squaw there? P'raps you reckon you ken find the trail too."

"Take this rope off my wrist," said the woman's voice, "untie my hands,
let me down, and I'll find it." She spoke quickly and with a Spanish
accent.

It was the men's turn to laugh. "And give you a show to snatch that
six-shooter and blow a hole through me, as you did to the Sheriff of
Calaveras, eh? Not if this court understands itself," said the first
speaker dryly.

"Go to the devil, then," she said curtly.

"Not before a lady," responded the other. There was another laugh from
the men, the spurs jingled again, the three torches reappeared from
behind the tree, and then passed away in the darkness.

For a time silence and immutability possessed the woods; the great
trunks loomed upwards, their fallen brothers stretched their slow length
into obscurity. The sound of breathing again became audible; the shape
reappeared in the aisle, and recommenced its mystic dance. Presently
it was lost in the shadow of the largest tree, and to the sound of
breathing succeeded a grating and scratching of bark. Suddenly, as if
riven by lightning, a flash broke from the center of the tree-trunk,
lit up the woods, and a sharp report rang through it. After a pause
the jingling of spurs and the dancing of torches were revived from the
distance.

"Hallo?"

No answer.

"Who fired that shot?"

But there was no reply. A slight veil of smoke passed away to the right,
there was the spice of gunpowder in the air, but nothing more.

The torches came forward again, but this time it could be seen they were
held in the hands of two men and a woman. The woman's hands were tied
at the wrist to the horse-hair reins of her mule, while a riata, passed
around her waist and under the mule's girth, was held by one of the men,
who were both armed with rifles and revolvers. Their frightened horses
curveted, and it was with difficulty they could be made to advance.

"Ho! stranger, what are you shooting at?"

The woman laughed and shrugged her shoulders. "Look yonder at the roots
of the tree. You're a d--d smart man for a sheriff, ain't you?"

The man uttered an exclamation and spurred his horse forward, but the
animal reared in terror. He then sprang to the ground and approached the
tree. The shape lay there, a scarcely distinguishable bulk.

"A grizzly, by the living Jingo! Shot through the heart."

It was true. The strange shape lit up by the flaring torches seemed more
vague, unearthly, and awkward in its dying throes, yet the small shut
eyes, the feeble nose, the ponderous shoulders, and half-human foot
armed with powerful claws were unmistakable. The men turned by a common
impulse and peered into the remote recesses of the wood again.

"Hi, Mister! come and pick up your game. Hallo there!"

The challenge fell unheeded on the empty woods.

"And yet," said he whom the woman had called the sheriff, "he can't be
far off. It was a close shot, and the bear hez dropped in his tracks.
Why, wot's this sticking in his claws?"

The two men bent over the animal. "Why, it's sugar, brown sugar--look!"
There was no mistake. The huge beast's fore paws and muzzle were
streaked with the unromantic household provision, and heightened the
absurd contrast of its incongruous members. The woman, apparently
indifferent, had taken that opportunity to partly free one of her
wrists.

"If we hadn't been cavorting round this yer spot for the last half
hour, I'd swear there was a shanty not a hundred yards away," said the
sheriff.

The other man, without replying, remounted his horse instantly.

"If there is, and it's inhabited by a gentleman that kin make centre
shots like that in the dark, and don't care to explain how, I reckon I
won't disturb him."

The sheriff was apparently of the same opinion, for he followed his
companion's example, and once more led the way. The spurs tinkled, the
torches danced, and the cavalcade slowly reentered the gloom. In another
moment it had disappeared.

The wood sank again into repose, this time disturbed by neither shape
nor sound. What lower forms of life might have crept close to its
roots were hidden in the ferns, or passed with deadened tread over the
bark-strewn floor. Towards morning a coolness like dew fell from above,
with here and there a dropping twig or nut, or the crepitant awakening
and stretching-out of cramped and weary branches. Later a dull, lurid
dawn, not unlike the last evening's sunset, filled the aisles. This
faded again, and a clear gray light, in which every object stood out in
sharp distinctness, took its place. Morning was waiting outside in all
its brilliant, youthful coloring, but only entered as the matured and
sobered day.

Seen in that stronger light, the monstrous tree near which the dead bear
lay revealed its age in its denuded and scarred trunk, and showed in
its base a deep cavity, a foot or two from the ground, partly hidden by
hanging strips of bark which had fallen across it. Suddenly one of these
strips was pushed aside, and a young man leaped lightly down.

But for the rifle he carried and some modern peculiarities of dress, he
was of a grace so unusual and unconventional that he might have passed
for a faun who was quitting his ancestral home. He stepped to the side
of the bear with a light elastic movement that was as unlike customary
progression as his face and figure were unlike the ordinary types
of humanity. Even as he leaned upon his rifle, looking down at the
prostrate animal, he unconsciously fell into an attitude that in any
other mortal would have been a pose, but with him was the picturesque
and unstudied relaxation of perfect symmetry.

"Hallo, Mister!"

He raised his head so carelessly and listlessly that he did not
otherwise change his attitude. Stepping from behind the tree, the woman
of the preceding night stood before him. Her hands were free except for
a thong of the riata, which was still knotted around one wrist, the end
of the thong having been torn or burnt away. Her eyes were bloodshot,
and her hair hung over her shoulders in one long black braid.

"I reckoned all along it was YOU who shot the bear," she said; "at least
some one hiding yer," and she indicated the hollow tree with her hand.
"It wasn't no chance shot." Observing that the young man, either from
misconception or indifference, did not seem to comprehend her, she
added, "We came by here, last night, a minute after you fired."

"Oh, that was YOU kicked up such a row, was it?" said the young man,
with a shade of interest.

"I reckon," said the woman, nodding her head, "and them that was with
me."

"And who are they?"

"Sheriff Dunn, of Yolo, and his deputy."

"And where are they now?"

"The deputy--in h-ll, I reckon; I don't know about the sheriff."

"I see," said the young man quietly; "and you?"

"I--got away," she said savagely. But she was taken with a sudden
nervous shiver, which she at once repressed by tightly dragging her
shawl over her shoulders and elbows, and folding her arms defiantly.

"And you're going?"

"To follow the deputy, may be," she said gloomily. "But come, I say,
ain't you going to treat? It's cursed cold here."

"Wait a moment." The young man was looking at her, with his arched brows
slightly knit and a half smile of curiosity. "Ain't you Teresa?"

She was prepared for the question, but evidently was not certain whether
she would reply defiantly or confidently. After an exhaustive scrutiny
of his face she chose the latter, and said, "You can bet your life on
it, Johnny."

"I don't bet, and my name isn't Johnny. Then you're the woman who
stabbed Dick Curson over at Lagrange's?"

She became defiant again.

"That's me, all the time. What are you going to do about it?"

"Nothing. And you used to dance at the Alhambra?" She whisked the shawl
from her shoulders, held it up like a scarf, and made one or two steps
of the sembicuacua. There was not the least gayety, recklessness, or
spontaneity in the action; it was simply mechanical bravado. It was so
ineffective, even upon her own feelings, that her arms presently dropped
to her side, and she coughed embarrassedly. "Where's that whiskey,
pardner?" she asked.

The young man turned toward the tree he had just quitted, and
without further words assisted her to mount to the cavity. It was an
irregular-shaped vaulted chamber, pierced fifty feet above by a shaft or
cylindrical opening in the decayed trunk, which was blackened by smoke,
as if it had served the purpose of a chimney. In one corner lay a
bearskin and blanket; at the side were two alcoves or indentations, one
of which was evidently used as a table, and the other as a cupboard.
In another hollow, near the entrance, lay a few small sacks of flour,
coffee, and sugar, the sticky contents of the latter still strewing
the floor. From this storehouse the young man drew a wicker flask of
whiskey, and handed it, with a tin cup of water, to the woman. She waved
the cup aside, placed the flask to her lips, and drank the undiluted
spirit. Yet even this was evidently bravado, for the water started
to her eyes, and she could not restrain the paroxysm of coughing that
followed.

"I reckon that's the kind that kills at forty rods," she said, with a
hysterical laugh. "But I say, pardner, you look as if you were fixed
here to stay," and she stared ostentatiously around the chamber. But she
had already taken in its minutest details, even to observing that the
hanging strips of bark could be disposed so as to completely hide the
entrance.

"Well, yes," he replied; "it wouldn't be very easy to pull up the stakes
and move the shanty further on."

Seeing that either from indifference or caution he had not accepted her
meaning, she looked at him fixedly, and said,--

"What is your little game?"

"Eh?"

"What are you hiding for--here, in this tree?"

"But I'm not hiding."

"Then why didn't you come out when they hailed you last night?"

"Because I didn't care to."

Teresa whistled incredulously. "All right--then if you're not hiding,
I'm going to." As he did not reply, she went on: "If I can keep out of
sight for a couple of weeks, this thing will blow over here, and I can
get across into Yolo. I could get a fair show there, where the boys
know me. Just now the trails are all watched, but no one would think of
lookin' here."

"Then how did you come to think of it?" he asked carelessly.

"Because I knew that bear hadn't gone far for that sugar; because I know
he hadn't stole it from a cache--it was too fresh, and we'd have seen
the torn-up earth; because we had passed no camp; and because I knew
there was no shanty here. And, besides," she added in a low voice,
"maybe I was huntin' a hole myself to die in--and spotted it by
instinct."

There was something in this suggestion of a hunted animal that, unlike
anything she had previously said or suggested, was not exaggerated, and
caused the young man to look at her again. She was standing under the
chimney-like opening, and the light from above illuminated her head and
shoulders. The pupils of her eyes had lost their feverish prominence,
and were slightly suffused and softened as she gazed abstractedly before
her. The only vestige of her previous excitement was in her left-hand
fingers, which were incessantly twisting and turning a diamond ring upon
her right hand, but without imparting the least animation to her rigid
attitude. Suddenly, as if conscious of his scrutiny, she stepped aside
out of the revealing light and by a swift feminine instinct raised her
hand to her head as if to adjust her straggling hair. It was only for
a moment, however, for, as if aware of the weakness, she struggled to
resume her aggressive pose.

"Well," she said. "Speak up. Am I goin' to stop here, or have I got to
get up and get?"

"You can stay," said the young man quietly; "but as I've got my
provisions and ammunition here, and haven't any other place to go to
just now, I suppose we'll have to share it together."

She glanced at him under her eyelids, and a half-bitter,
half-contemptuous smile passed across her face. "All right, old man,"
she said, holding out her hand, "it's a go. We'll start in housekeeping
at once, if you like."

"I'll have to come here once or twice a day," he said, quite composedly,
"to look after my things, and get something to eat; but I'll be away
most of the time, and what with camping out under the trees every night
I reckon my share won't incommode you."

She opened her black eyes upon him, at this original proposition. Then
she looked down at her torn dress. "I suppose this style of thing ain't
very fancy, is it?" she said, with a forced laugh.

"I think I know where to beg or borrow a change for you, if you can't
get any," he replied simply.

She stared at him again. "Are you a family man?"

"No."

She was silent for a moment. "Well," she said, "you can tell your girl
I'm not particular about its being in the latest fashion."

There was a slight flush on his forehead as he turned toward the little
cupboard, but no tremor in his voice as he went on: "You'll find tea
and coffee here, and, if you're bored, there's a book or two. You read,
don't you--I mean English?"

She nodded, but cast a look of undisguised contempt upon the two worn,
coverless novels he held out to her. "You haven't got last week's
'Sacramento Union,' have you? I hear they have my case all in; only them
lying reporters made it out against me all the time."

"I don't see the papers," he replied curtly.

"They say there's a picture of me in the 'Police Gazette,' taken in the
act," and she laughed.

He looked a little abstracted, and turned as if to go. "I think you'll
do well to rest a while just now, and keep as close hid as possible
until afternoon. The trail is a mile away at the nearest point, but
some one might miss it and stray over here. You're quite safe if you're
careful, and stand by the tree. You can build a fire here," he stepped
under the chimney-like opening, "without its being noticed. Even the
smoke is lost and cannot be seen so high."

The light from above was falling on his head and shoulders, as it had on
hers. She looked at him intently.

"You travel a good deal on your figure, pardner, don't you?" she said,
with a certain admiration that was quite sexless in its quality; "but
I don't see how you pick up a living by it in the Carquinez Woods. So
you're going, are you? You might be more sociable. Good-by."

"Good-by!" He leaped from the opening.

"I say pardner!"

He turned a little impatiently. She had knelt down at the entrance, so
as to be nearer his level, and was holding out her hand. But he did not
notice it, and she quietly withdrew it.

"If anybody dropped in and asked for you, what name will they say?"

He smiled. "Don't wait to hear."

"But suppose I wanted to sing out for you, what will I call you?"

He hesitated. "Call me--Lo."

"Lo, the poor Indian?"*

"Exactly."

     * The first word of Pope's familiar apostrophe is humorously
     used in the Far West as a distinguishing title for the
     Indian.

It suddenly occurred to the woman, Teresa, that in the young man's
height, supple, yet erect carriage, color, and singular gravity of
demeanor there was a refined, aboriginal suggestion. He did not look
like any Indian she had ever seen, but rather as a youthful chief might
have looked. There was a further suggestion in his fringed buckskin
shirt and moccasins; but before she could utter the half-sarcastic
comment that rose to her lips he had glided noiselessly away, even as an
Indian might have done.

She readjusted the slips of hanging bark with feminine ingenuity,
dispersing them so as to completely hide the entrance. Yet this did not
darken the chamber, which seemed to draw a purer and more vigorous light
through the soaring shaft that pierced the roof than that which came
from the dim woodland aisles below. Nevertheless, she shivered, and
drawing her shawl closely around her began to collect some half-burnt
fragments of wood in the chimney to make a fire. But the preoccupation
of her thoughts rendered this a tedious process, as she would from time
to time stop in the middle of an action and fall into an attitude of
rapt abstraction, with far-off eyes and rigid mouth. When she had at
last succeeded in kindling a fire and raising a film of pale blue smoke,
that seemed to fade and dissipate entirely before it reached the top of
the chimney shaft, she crouched beside it, fixed her eyes on the darkest
corner of the cavern, and became motionless.

What did she see through that shadow?

Nothing at first but a confused medley of figures and incidents of the
preceding night; things to be put away and forgotten; things that
would not have happened but for another thing--the thing before which
everything faded! A ball-room; the sounds of music; the one man she
had cared for insulting her with the flaunting ostentation of his
unfaithfulness; herself despised, put aside, laughed at, or worse,
jilted. And then the moment of delirium, when the light danced; the one
wild act that lifted her, the despised one, above them all--made her
the supreme figure, to be glanced at by frightened women, stared at by
half-startled, half-admiring men! "Yes," she laughed; but struck by the
sound of her own voice, moved twice round the cavern nervously, and then
dropped again into her old position.

As they carried him away he had laughed at her--like a hound that he
was; he who had praised her for her spirit, and incited her revenge
against others; he who had taught her to strike when she was insulted;
and it was only fit he should reap what he had sown. She was what he,
what other men, had made her. And what was she now? What had she been
once?

She tried to recall her childhood: the man and woman who might have
been her father and mother; who fought and wrangled over her precocious
little life; abused or caressed her as she sided with either; and then
left her with a circus troupe, where she first tasted the power of her
courage, her beauty, and her recklessness. She remembered those flashes
of triumph that left a fever in her veins--a fever that when it failed
must be stimulated by dissipation, by anything, by everything that would
keep her name a wonder in men's mouths, an envious fear to women. She
recalled her transfer to the strolling players; her cheap pleasures, and
cheaper rivalries and hatred--but always Teresa! the daring Teresa! the
reckless Teresa! audacious as a woman, invincible as a boy; dancing,
flirting, fencing, shooting, swearing, drinking, smoking, fighting
Teresa! "Oh, yes; she had been loved, perhaps--who knows?--but always
feared. Why should she change now? Ha, he should see."

She had lashed herself in a frenzy, as was her wont, with gestures,
ejaculations, oaths, adjurations, and passionate apostrophes, but with
this strange and unexpected result. Heretofore she had always been
sustained and kept up by an audience of some kind or quality, if only
perhaps a humble companion; there had always been some one she could
fascinate or horrify, and she could read her power mirrored in their
eyes. Even the half-abstracted indifference of her strange host had been
something. But she was alone now. Her words fell on apathetic solitude;
she was acting to viewless space. She rushed to the opening, dashed the
hanging bark aside, and leaped to the ground.

She ran forward wildly a few steps, and stopped.

"Hallo!" she cried. "Look, 'tis I, Teresa!"

The profound silence remained unbroken. Her shrillest tones were lost
in an echoless space, even as the smoke of her fire had faded into pure
ether. She stretched out her clenched fists as if to defy the pillared
austerities of the vaults around her.

"Come and take me if you dare!"

The challenge was unheeded. If she had thrown herself violently against
the nearest tree-trunk, she could not have been stricken more breathless
than she was by the compact, embattled solitude that encompassed her.
The hopelessness of impressing these cold and passive vaults with
her selfish passion filled her with a vague fear. In her rage of the
previous night she had not seen the wood in its profound immobility.
Left alone with the majesty of those enormous columns, she trembled and
turned faint. The silence of the hollow tree she had just quitted seemed
to her less awful than the crushing presence of these mute and monstrous
witnesses of her weakness. Like a wounded quail with lowered crest and
trailing wing, she crept back to her hiding place.

Even then the influence of the wood was still upon her. She picked up
the novel she had contemptuously thrown aside, only to let it fall again
in utter weariness. For a moment her feminine curiosity was excited
by the discovery of an old book, in whose blank leaves were pressed a
variety of flowers and woodland grasses. As she could not conceive
that these had been kept for any but a sentimental purpose, she was
disappointed to find that underneath each was a sentence in an unknown
tongue, that even to her untutored eye did not appear to be the language
of passion. Finally she rearranged the couch of skins and blankets, and,
imparting to it in three clever shakes an entirely different character,
lay down to pursue her reveries. But nature asserted herself, and ere
she knew it she was asleep.

So intense and prolonged had been her previous excitement that, the
tension once relieved, she passed into a slumber of exhaustion so deep
that she seemed scarce to breathe. High noon succeeded morning, the
central shaft received a single ray of upper sunlight, the afternoon
came and went, the shadows gathered below, the sunset fires began to eat
their way through the groined roof, and she still slept. She slept even
when the bark hangings of the chamber were put aside, and the young man
reentered.

He laid down a bundle he was carrying and softly approached the sleeper.
For a moment he was startled from his indifference; she lay so still and
motionless. But this was not all that struck him; the face before him
was no longer the passionate, haggard visage that confronted him that
morning; the feverish air, the burning color, the strained muscles of
mouth and brow, and the staring eyes were gone; wiped away, perhaps, by
the tears that still left their traces on cheek and dark eyelash. It
was the face of a handsome woman of thirty, with even a suggestion of
softness in the contour of the cheek and arching of her upper lip, no
longer rigidly drawn down in anger, but relaxed by sleep on her white
teeth.

With the lithe, soft tread that was habitual to him, the young man moved
about, examining the condition of the little chamber and its stock
of provisions and necessaries, and withdrew presently, to reappear as
noiselessly with a tin bucket of water. This done, he replenished the
little pile of fuel with an armful of bark and pine cones, cast an
approving glance about him, which included the sleeper, and silently
departed.

It was night when she awoke. She was surrounded by a profound darkness,
except where the shaft-like opening made a nebulous mist in the corner
of her wooden cavern. Providentially she struggled back to consciousness
slowly, so that the solitude and silence came upon her gradually, with
a growing realization of the events of the past twenty-four hours, but
without a shock. She was alone here, but safe still, and every hour
added to her chances of ultimate escape. She remembered to have seen a
candle among the articles on the shelf, and she began to grope her way
towards the matches. Suddenly she stopped. What was that panting?

Was it her own breathing, quickened with a sudden nameless terror? or
was there something outside? Her heart seemed to stop beating while
she listened. Yes! it was a panting outside--a panting now increased,
multiplied, redoubled, mixed with the sounds of rustling, tearing,
craunching, and occasionally a quick, impatient snarl. She crept on
her hands and knees to the opening and looked out. At first the ground
seemed to be undulating between her and the opposite tree. But a second
glance showed her the black and gray, bristling, tossing backs of
tumbling beasts of prey, charging the carcass of the bear that lay at
its roots, or contesting for the prize with gluttonous, choked breath,
sidelong snarls, arched spines, and recurved tails. One of the boldest
had leaped upon a buttressing root of her tree within a foot of the
opening. The excitement, awe, and terror she had undergone culminated in
one wild, maddened scream, that seemed to pierce even the cold depths of
the forest, as she dropped on her face, with her hands clasped over her
eyes in an agony of fear.

Her scream was answered, after a pause, by a sudden volley of firebrands
and sparks into the midst of the panting, crowding pack; a few smothered
howls and snaps, and a sudden dispersion of the concourse. In another
moment the young man, with a blazing brand in either hand, leaped upon
the body of the bear.

Teresa raised her head, uttered a hysterical cry, slid down the tree,
flew wildly to his side, caught convulsively at his sleeve, and fell on
her knees beside him.

"Save me! save me!" she gasped, in a voice broken by terror. "Save me
from those hideous creatures. No, no!" she implored, as he endeavored
to lift her to her feet. "No--let me stay here close beside you. So,"
clutching the fringe of his leather hunting-shirt, and dragging herself
on her knees nearer him--"so--don't leave me, for God's sake!"

"They are gone," he replied, gazing down curiously at her, as she wound
the fringe around her hand to strengthen her hold; "they're only a lot
of cowardly coyotes and wolves, that dare not attack anything that lives
and can move."

The young woman responded with a nervous shudder. "Yes, that's it," she
whispered, in a broken voice; "it's only the dead they want. Promise
me--swear to me, if I'm caught, or hung, or shot, you won't let me be
left here to be torn and--ah! my God! what's that?"

She had thrown her arms around his knees, completely pinioning him to
her frantic breast. Something like a smile of disdain passed across his
face as he answered, "It's nothing. They will not return. Get up!"

Even in her terror she saw the change in his face. "I know, I know!"
she cried. "I'm frightened--but I cannot bear it any longer. Hear me!
Listen! Listen--but don't move! I didn't mean to kill Curson--no! I
swear to God, no! I didn't mean to kill the sheriff--and I didn't. I was
only bragging--do you hear? I lied! I lied--don't move, I swear to God I
lied. I've made myself out worse than I was. I have. Only don't leave
me now--and if I die--and it's not far off, may be--get me away from
here--and from THEM. Swear it!"

"All right," said the young man, with a scarcely concealed movement of
irritation. "But get up now, and go back to the cabin."

"No; not THERE alone." Nevertheless, he quietly but firmly released
himself.

"I will stay here," he replied. "I would have been nearer to you, but
I thought it better for your safety that my camp-fire should be further
off. But I can build it here, and that will keep the coyotes off."

"Let me stay with you--beside you," she said imploringly.

She looked so broken, crushed, and spiritless, so unlike the woman of
the morning that, albeit with an ill grace, he tacitly consented, and
turned away to bring his blankets. But in the next moment she was at his
side, following him like a dog, silent and wistful, and even offering
to carry his burden. When he had built the fire, for which she had
collected the pine-cones and broken branches near them, he sat down,
folded his arms, and leaned back against the tree in reserved and
deliberate silence.

Humble and submissive, she did not attempt to break in upon a reverie
she could not help but feel had little kindliness to herself. As the
fire snapped and sparkled, she pillowed her head upon a root, and lay
still to watch it.

It rose and fell, and dying away at times to a mere lurid glow, and
again, agitated by some breath scarcely perceptible to them, quickening
into a roaring flame. When only the embers remained, a dead silence
filled the wood. Then the first breath of morning moved the tangled
canopy above, and a dozen tiny sprays and needles detached from the
interlocked boughs winged their soft way noiselessly to the earth. A few
fell upon the prostrate woman like a gentle benediction, and she slept.
But even then, the young man, looking down, saw that the slender fingers
were still aimlessly but rigidly twisted in the leather fringe of his
hunting-shirt.




CHAPTER II.


It was a peculiarity of the Carquinez Wood that it stood apart and
distinct in its gigantic individuality. Even where the integrity of its
own singular species was not entirely preserved, it admitted no inferior
trees. Nor was there any diminishing fringe on its outskirts; the
sentinels that guarded the few gateways of the dim trails were as
monstrous as the serried ranks drawn up in the heart of the forest.
Consequently, the red highway that skirted the eastern angle was bare
and shadeless, until it slipped a league off into a watered valley and
refreshed itself under lesser sycamores and willows. It was here the
newly born city of Excelsior, still in its cradle, had, like an infant
Hercules, strangled the serpentine North Fork of the American river,
and turned its life current into the ditches and flumes of the Excelsior
mines.

Newest of the new houses that seemed to have accidentally formed its
single, straggling street was the residence of the Rev. Winslow Wynn,
not unfrequently known as "Father Wynn," pastor of the First Baptist
church. The "pastorage," as it was cheerfully called, had the glaring
distinction of being built of brick, and was, as had been wickedly
pointed out by idle scoffers, the only "fireproof" structure in town.
This sarcasm was not, however, supposed to be particularly distasteful
to "Father Wynn," who enjoyed the reputation of being "hail fellow, well
met" with the rough mining element, who called them by their Christian
names, had been known to drink at the bar of the Polka Saloon while
engaged in the conversion of a prominent citizen, and was popularly said
to have no "gospel starch" about him. Certain conscious outcasts and
transgressors were touched at this apparent unbending of the spiritual
authority. The rigid tenets of Father Wynn's faith were lost in the
supposed catholicity of his humanity. "A preacher that can jine a man
when he's histin' liquor into him, without jawin' about it, ought to be
allowed to wrestle with sinners and splash about in as much cold water
as he likes," was the criticism of one of his converts. Nevertheless,
it was true that Father Wynn was somewhat loud and intolerant in his
tolerance. It was true that he was a little more rough, a little more
frank, a little more hearty, a little more impulsive than his disciples.
It was true that often the proclamation of his extreme liberality and
brotherly equality partook somewhat of an apology. It is true that a few
who might have been most benefited by this kind of gospel regarded
him with a singular disdain. It is true that his liberality was of an
ornamental, insinuating quality, accompanied with but little sacrifice;
his acceptance of a collection taken up in a gambling saloon for the
rebuilding of his church, destroyed by fire, gave him a popularity
large enough, it must be confessed, to cover the sins of the gamblers
themselves, but it was not proven that HE had ever organized any form
of relief. But it was true that local history somehow accepted him as
an exponent of mining Christianity, without the least reference to the
opinions of the Christian miners themselves.

The Rev. Mr. Wynn's liberal habits and opinions were not, however,
shared by his only daughter, a motherless young lady of eighteen.
Nellie Wynn was in the eye of Excelsior an unapproachable divinity,
as inaccessible and cold as her father was impulsive and familiar. An
atmosphere of chaste and proud virginity made itself felt even in
the starched integrity of her spotless skirts, in her neatly gloved
finger-tips, in her clear amber eyes, in her imperious red lips, in her
sensitive nostrils. Need it be said that the youth and middle age of
Excelsior were madly, because apparently hopelessly, in love with her?
For the rest, she had been expensively educated, was profoundly ignorant
in two languages, with a trained misunderstanding of music and painting,
and a natural and faultless taste in dress.

The Rev. Mr. Wynn was engaged in a characteristic hearty parting with
one of his latest converts, upon his own doorstep, with admirable
al fresco effect. He had just clapped him on the shoulder. "Good-by,
good-by, Charley, my boy, and keep in the right path; not up, or down,
or round the gulch, you know--ha, ha!--but straight across lots to
the shining gate." He had raised his voice under the stimulus of a few
admiring spectators, and backed his convert playfully against the wall.
"You see! we're goin' in to win, you bet. Good-by! I'd ask you to step
in and have a chat, but I've got my work to do, and so have you. The
gospel mustn't keep us from that, must it, Charley? Ha, ha!"

The convert (who elsewhere was a profane expressman, and had become
quite imbecile under Mr. Wynn's active heartiness and brotherly
horse-play before spectators) managed, however, to feebly stammer with a
blush something about "Miss Nellie."

"Ah, Nellie. She, too, is at her tasks--trimming her lamp--you know,
the parable of the wise virgins," continued Father Wynn hastily,
fearing that the convert might take the illustration literally. "There,
there--good-by. Keep in the right path." And with a parting shove he
dismissed Charley and entered his own house.

That "wise virgin," Nellie, had evidently finished with the lamp, and
was now going out to meet the bridegroom, as she was fully dressed and
gloved, and had a pink parasol in her hand, as her father entered the
sitting-room. His bluff heartiness seemed to fade away as he removed
his soft, broad-brimmed hat and glanced across the too fresh-looking
apartment. There was a smell of mortar still in the air, and a faint
suggestion that at any moment green grass might appear between the
interstices of the red-brick hearth. The room, yielding a little in the
point of coldness, seemed to share Miss Nellie's fresh virginity, and,
barring the pink parasol, set her off as in a vestal's cell.

"I supposed you wouldn't care to see Brace, the expressman, so I got
rid of him at the door," said her father, drawing one of the new chairs
towards him slowly, and sitting down carefully, as if it were a hitherto
untried experiment.

Miss Nellie's face took a tint of interest. "Then he doesn't go with the
coach to Indian Spring to-day?"

"No; why?"

"I thought of going over myself to get the Burnham girls to come to
choir-meeting," replied Miss Nellie carelessly, "and he might have been
company."

"He'd go now, if he knew you were going," said her father; "but it's
just as well he shouldn't be needlessly encouraged. I rather think that
Sheriff Dunn is a little jealous of him. By the way, the sheriff is
much better. I called to cheer him up to-day" (Mr. Wynn had in fact
tumultuously accelerated the sick man's pulse), "and he talked of you,
as usual. In fact, he said he had only two things to get well for. One
was to catch and hang that woman Teresa, who shot him; the other--can't
you guess the other?" he added archly, with a faint suggestion of his
other manner.

Miss Nellie coldly could not.

The Rev. Mr. Wynn's archness vanished. "Don't be a fool," he said dryly.
"He wants to marry you, and you know it."

"Most of the men here do," responded Miss Nellie, without the least
trace of coquetry. "Is the wedding or the hanging to take place first,
or together, so he can officiate at both?"

"His share in the Union Ditch is worth a hundred thousand dollars,"
continued her father; "and if he isn't nominated for district judge this
fall, he's bound to go to the legislature, anyway. I don't think a girl
with your advantages and education can afford to throw away the chance
of shining in Sacramento, San Francisco, or, in good time, perhaps even
Washington."

Miss Nellie's eyes did not reflect entire disapproval of this
suggestion, although she replied with something of her father's
practical quality.

"Mr. Dunn is not out of his bed yet, and they say Teresa's got away to
Arizona, so there isn't any particular hurry."

"Perhaps not; but see here, Nellie, I've some important news for you.
You know your young friend of the Carquinez Woods--Dorman, the botanist,
eh? Well, Brace knows all about him. And what do you think he is?"

Miss Nellie took upon herself a few extra degrees of cold, and didn't
know.

"An Injin! Yes, an out-and-out Cherokee. You see he calls himself
Dorman--Low Dorman. That's only French for 'Sleeping Water,' his Injin
name!--'Low Dorman.'"

"You mean 'L'Eau Dormante,'" said Nellie.

"That's what I said. The chief called him 'Sleeping Water' when he was a
boy, and one of them French Canadian trappers translated it into French
when he brought him to California to school. But he's an Injin, sure. No
wonder he prefers to live in the woods."

"Well?" said Nellie.

"Well," echoed her father impatiently, "he's an Injin, I tell you, and
you can't of course have anything to do with him. He mustn't come here
again."

"But you forget," said Nellie imperturbably, "that it was you who
invited him here, and were so much exercised over him. You remember
you introduced him to the Bishop and those Eastern clergymen as a
magnificent specimen of a young Californian. You forget what an occasion
you made of his coming to church on Sunday, and how you made him come in
his buckskin shirt and walk down the street with you after service!"

"Yes, yes," said the Rev. Mr. Wynn, hurriedly.

"And," continued Nellie carelessly, "how you made us sing out of the
same book 'Children of our Father's Fold,' and how you preached at him
until he actually got a color!"

"Yes," said her father; "but it wasn't known then he was an Injin, and
they are frightfully unpopular with those Southwestern men among whom we
labor. Indeed, I am quite convinced that when Brace said 'the only good
Indian was a dead one' his expression, though extravagant, perhaps,
really voiced the sentiments of the majority. It would be only kindness
to the unfortunate creature to warn him from exposing himself to their
rude but conscientious antagonism."

"Perhaps you'd better tell him, then, in your own popular way, which
they all seem to understand so well," responded the daughter. Mr. Wynn
cast a quick glance at her, but there was no trace of irony in her
face--nothing but a half-bored indifference as she walked toward the
window.

"I will go with you to the coach-office," said her father, who generally
gave these simple paternal duties the pronounced character of a public
Christian example.

"It's hardly worth while," replied Miss Nellie. "I've to stop at the
Watsons', at the foot of the hill, and ask after the baby; so I shall go
on to the Crossing and pick up the coach when it passes. Good-by."

Nevertheless, as soon as Nellie had departed, the Rev. Mr. Wynn
proceeded to the coach-office, and publicly grasping the hand of Yuba
Bill, the driver, commended his daughter to his care in the name of the
universal brotherhood of man and the Christian fraternity. Carried away
by his heartiness, he forgot his previous caution, and confided to
the expressman Miss Nellie's regrets that she was not to have that
gentleman's company. The result was that Miss Nellie found the coach
with its passengers awaiting her with uplifted hats and wreathed smiles
at the Crossing, and the box seat (from which an unfortunate stranger,
who had expensively paid for it, had been summarily ejected) at her
service beside Yuba Bill, who had thrown away his cigar and donned a new
pair of buckskin gloves to do her honor. But a more serious result to
the young beauty was the effect of the Rev. Mr. Wynn's confidences upon
the impulsive heart of Jack Brace, the expressman. It has been already
intimated that it was his "day off." Unable to summarily reassume his
usual functions beside the driver without some practical reason, and
ashamed to go so palpably as a mere passenger, he was forced to let
the coach proceed without him. Discomfited for the moment, he was not,
however, beaten. He had lost the blissful journey by her side, which
would have been his professional right, but--she was going to Indian
Spring! could he not anticipate her there? Might they not meet in the
most accidental manner? And what might not come from that meeting away
from the prying eyes of their own town? Mr. Brace did not hesitate, but
saddling his fleet Buckskin, by the time the stage-coach had passed the
Crossing in the high-road he had mounted the hill and was dashing along
the "cutoff" in the same direction, a full mile in advance. Arriving at
Indian Spring, he left his horse at a Mexican posada on the confines of
the settlement, and from the piled debris of a tunnel excavation awaited
the slow arrival of the coach. On mature reflection he could give no
reason why he had not boldly awaited it at the express office, except
a certain bashful consciousness of his own folly, and a belief that it
might be glaringly apparent to the bystanders. When the coach arrived
and he had overcome this consciousness, it was too late. Yuba Bill had
discharged his passengers for Indian Spring and driven away. Miss
Nellie was in the settlement, but where? As time passed he became more
desperate and bolder. He walked recklessly up and down the main street,
glancing in at the open doors of shops, and even in the windows of
private dwellings. It might have seemed a poor compliment to Miss
Nellie, but it was an evidence of his complete preoccupation, when the
sight of a female face at a window, even though it was plain or perhaps
painted, caused his heart to bound, or the glancing of a skirt in the
distance quickened his feet and his pulses. Had Jack contented himself
with remaining at Excelsior he might have vaguely regretted, but as soon
become as vaguely accustomed to, Miss Nellie's absence. But it was not
until his hitherto quiet and passive love took this first step of action
that it fully declared itself. When he had made the tour of the town
a dozen times unsuccessfully, he had perfectly made up his mind that
marriage with Nellie or the speedy death of several people, including
possibly himself, was the only alternative. He regretted he had not
accompanied her; he regretted he had not demanded where she was going;
he contemplated a course of future action that two hours ago would
have filled him with bashful terror. There was clearly but one thing to
do--to declare his passion the instant he met her, and return with her
to Excelsior an accepted suitor, or not to return at all.

Suddenly he was vexatiously conscious of hearing his name lazily called,
and looking up found that he was on the outskirts of the town, and
interrogated by two horsemen.

"Got down to walk, and the coach got away from you, Jack, eh?"

A little ashamed of his preoccupation, Brace stammered something about
"collections." He did not recognize the men, but his own face, name,
and business were familiar to everybody for fifty miles along the
stage-road.

"Well, you can settle a bet for us, I reckon. Bill Dacre thar bet me
five dollars and the drinks that a young gal we met at the edge of the
Carquinez Woods, dressed in a long brown duster and half muffled up in a
hood, was the daughter of Father Wynn of Excelsior. I did not get a fair
look at her, but it stands to reason that a high-toned young lady like
Nellie Wynn don't go trap'sing along the wood like a Pike County tramp.
I took the bet. May be you know if she's here or in Excelsior?"

Mr. Brace felt himself turning pale with eagerness and excitement. But
the near prospect of seeing her presently gave him back his caution, and
he answered truthfully that he had left her in Excelsior, and that in
his two hours' sojourn in Indian Spring he had not met her once. "But,"
he added, with a Californian's reverence for the sanctity of a bet, "I
reckon you'd better make it a stand-off for twenty-four hours, and I'll
find out and let you know." Which, it is only fair to say, he honestly
intended to do.

With a hurried nod of parting, he continued in the direction of the
Woods. When he had satisfied himself that the strangers had entered
the settlement, and would not follow him for further explanation,
he quickened his pace. In half an hour he passed between two of the
gigantic sentinels that guarded the entrance to a trail. Here he paused
to collect his thoughts. The Woods were vast in extent, the trail dim
and uncertain--at times apparently breaking off, or intersecting another
trail as faint as itself. Believing that Miss Nellie had diverged from
the highway only as a momentary excursion into the shade, and that she
would not dare to penetrate its more sombre and unknown recesses, he
kept within sight of the skirting plain. By degrees the sedate influence
of the silent vaults seemed to depress him. The ardor of the chase began
to flag. Under the calm of their dim roof the fever of his veins began
to subside; his pace slackened; he reasoned more deliberately. It was by
no means probable that the young woman in a brown duster was Nellie;
it was not her habitual traveling dress; it was not like her to walk
unattended in the road; there was nothing in her tastes and habits to
take her into this gloomy forest, allowing that she had even entered
it; and on this absolute question of her identity the two witnesses were
divided. He stopped irresolutely, and cast a last, long, half-despairing
look around him. Hitherto he had given that part of the wood nearest the
plain his greatest attention. His glance now sought its darker recesses.
Suddenly he became breathless. Was it a beam of sunlight that had
pierced the groined roof above, and now rested against the trunk of one
of the dimmer, more secluded giants? No, it was moving; even as he gazed
it slipped away, glanced against another tree, passed across one of the
vaulted aisles, and then was lost again. Brief as was the glimpse, he
was not mistaken--it was the figure of a woman.

In another moment he was on her track, and soon had the satisfaction of
seeing her reappear at a lesser distance. But the continual intervention
of the massive trunks made the chase by no means an easy one, and as he
could not keep her always in sight he was unable to follow or understand
the one intelligent direction which she seemed to invariably keep.
Nevertheless, he gained upon her breathlessly, and, thanks to the
bark-strewn floor, noiselessly. He was near enough to distinguish and
recognize the dress she wore, a pale yellow, that he had admired when he
first saw her. It was Nellie, unmistakably; if it were she of the brown
duster, she had discarded it, perhaps for greater freedom. He was near
enough to call out now, but a sudden nervous timidity overcame him; his
lips grew dry. What should he say to her? How account for his presence?
"Miss Nellie, one moment!" he gasped. She darted forward and--vanished.

At this moment he was not more than a dozen yards from her. He rushed
to where she had been standing, but her disappearance was perfect and
complete. He made a circuit of the group of trees within whose radius
she had last appeared, but there was neither trace of her, nor a
suggestion of her mode of escape. He called aloud to her; the vacant
Woods let his helpless voice die in their unresponsive depths. He gazed
into the air and down at the bark-strewn carpet at his feet. Like most
of his vocation, he was sparing of speech, and epigrammatic after his
fashion. Comprehending in one swift but despairing flash of intelligence
the existence of some fateful power beyond his own weak endeavor, he
accepted its logical result with characteristic grimness, threw his hat
upon the ground, put his hands in his pockets, and said--

"Well, I'm d--d!"




CHAPTER III.


Out of compliment to Miss Nellie Wynn, Yuba Bill, on reaching Indian
Spring, had made a slight detour to enable him to ostentatiously set
down his fair passenger before the door of the Burnhams. When it had
closed on the admiring eyes of the passengers and the coach had rattled
away, Miss Nellie, without any undue haste or apparent change in
her usual quiet demeanor, managed, however, to dispatch her business
promptly, and, leaving an impression that she would call again before
her return to Excelsior, parted from her friends and slipped away
through a side street to the General Furnishing Store of Indian Spring.
In passing this emporium, Miss Nellie's quick eye had discovered a cheap
brown linen duster hanging in its window. To purchase it, and put it
over her delicate cambric dress, albeit with a shivering sense that she
looked like a badly folded brown-paper parcel, did not take long. As she
left the shop it was with mixed emotions of chagrin and security that
she noticed that her passage through the settlement no longer turned
the heads of its male inhabitants. She reached the outskirts of Indian
Spring and the high-road at about the time Mr. Brace had begun his
fruitless patrol of the main street. Far in the distance a faint
olive-green table mountain seemed to rise abruptly from the plain.
It was the Carquinez Woods. Gathering her spotless skirts beneath her
extemporized brown domino, she set out briskly towards them.

But her progress was scarcely free or exhilarating. She was not
accustomed to walking in a country where "buggy-riding" was considered
the only genteel young-lady-like mode of progression, and its regular
provision the expected courtesy of mankind. Always fastidiously booted,
her low-quartered shoes were charming to the eye, but hardly adapted
to the dust and inequalities of the highroad. It was true that she had
thought of buying a coarser pair at Indian Spring, but once face to face
with their uncompromising ugliness, she had faltered and fled. The sun
was unmistakably hot, but her parasol was too well known and offered
too violent a contrast to the duster for practical use. Once she stopped
with an exclamation of annoyance, hesitated, and looked back. In half
an hour she had twice lost her shoe and her temper; a pink flush took
possession of her cheeks, and her eyes were bright with suppressed rage.
Dust began to form grimy circles around their orbits; with cat-like
shivers she even felt it pervade the roots of her blond hair. Gradually
her breath grew more rapid and hysterical, her smarting eyes became
humid, and at last, encountering two observant horsemen in the road, she
turned and fled, until, reaching the wood, she began to cry.

Nevertheless she waited for the two horsemen to pass, to satisfy herself
that she was not followed; then pushed on vaguely, until she reached a
fallen tree, where, with a gesture of disgust, she tore off her hapless
duster and flung it on the ground. She then sat down sobbing, but after
a moment dried her eyes hurriedly and started to her feet. A few paces
distant, erect, noiseless, with outstretched hand, the young solitary
of the Carquinez Woods advanced towards her. His hand had almost touched
hers, when he stopped.

"What has happened?" he asked gravely.

"Nothing," she said, turning half away, and searching the ground with
her eyes, as if she had lost something. "Only I must be going back now."

"You shall go back at once, if you wish it," he said, flushing slightly.
"But you have been crying; why?"

Frank as Miss Nellie wished to be, she could not bring herself to
say that her feet hurt her, and the dust and heat were ruining her
complexion. It was therefore with a half-confident belief that
her troubles were really of a moral quality that she answered,
"Nothing--nothing, but--but--it's wrong to come here."

"But you did not think it was wrong when you agreed to come, at our
last meeting," said the young man, with that persistent logic which
exasperates the inconsequent feminine mind. "It cannot be any more wrong
to-day."

"But it was not so far off," murmured the young girl, without looking
up.

"Oh, the distance makes it more improper, then," he said abstractedly;
but after a moment's contemplation of her half-averted face, he asked
gravely, "Has anyone talked to you about me?"

Ten minutes before, Nellie had been burning to unburthen herself of her
father's warning, but now she felt she would not. "I wish you wouldn't
call yourself Low," she said at last.

"But it's my name," he replied quietly.

"Nonsense! It's only a stupid translation of a stupid nickname. They
might as well call you 'Water' at once."

"But you said you liked it."

"Well, so I do. But don't you see--I--oh dear! you don't understand."

Low did not reply, but turned his head with resigned gravity towards the
deeper woods. Grasping the barrel of his rifle with his left hand, he
threw his right arm across his left wrist and leaned slightly upon it
with the habitual ease of a Western hunter--doubly picturesque in his
own lithe, youthful symmetry. Miss Nellie looked at him from under her
eyelids, and then half defiantly raised her head and her dark lashes.
Gradually an almost magical change came over her features; her eyes grew
larger and more and more yearning, until they seemed to draw and absorb
in their liquid depths the figure of the young man before her; her cold
face broke into an ecstasy of light and color; her humid lips parted
in a bright, welcoming smile, until, with an irresistible impulse, she
arose, and throwing back her head stretched towards him two hands full
of vague and trembling passion.

In another moment he had seized them, kissed them, and, as he drew her
closer to his embrace, felt them tighten around his neck. "But what name
do you wish to call me?" he asked, looking down into her eyes.

Miss Nellie murmured something confidentially to the third button of his
hunting shirt. "But that," he replied, with a smile, "THAT wouldn't be
any more practical, and you wouldn't want others to call me dar--" Her
fingers loosened around his neck, she drew her head back, and a singular
expression passed over her face, which to any calmer observer than
a lover would have seemed, however, to indicate more curiosity than
jealousy.

"Who else DOES call you so?" she added earnestly. "How many, for
instance?"

Low's reply was addressed not to her ear, but her lips. She did not
avoid it, but added, "And do you kiss them all like that?" Taking him by
the shoulders, she held him a little way from her, and gazed at him from
head to foot. Then drawing him again to her embrace, she said, "I don't
care, at least no woman has kissed you like that." Happy, dazzled, and
embarrassed, he was beginning to stammer the truthful protestation that
rose to his lips, but she stopped him: "No, don't protest! say nothing!
Let ME love YOU--that is all. It is enough." He would have caught her
in his arms again, but she drew back. "We are near the road," she said
quietly. "Come! You promised to show me where you camped. Let US make
the most of our holiday. In an hour I must leave the woods."

"But I shall accompany you, dearest."

"No, I must go as I came--alone."

"But Nellie--"

"I tell you no," she said, with an almost harsh practical decision,
incompatible with her previous abandonment. "We might be seen together."

"Well, suppose we are; we must be seen together eventually," he
remonstrated.

The young girl made an involuntary gesture of impatient negation, but
checked herself. "Don't let us talk of that now. Come, while I am here
under your own roof--" she pointed to the high interlaced boughs above
them--"you must be hospitable. Show me your home; tell me, isn't it a
little gloomy sometimes?"

"It never has been; I never thought it WOULD be until the moment you
leave it to-day."

She pressed his hand briefly and in a half-perfunctory way, as if her
vanity had accepted and dismissed the compliment. "Take me somewhere,"
she said inquisitively, "where you stay most; I do not seem to see you
HERE," she added, looking around her with a slight shiver. "It is so big
and so high. Have you no place where you eat and rest and sleep?"

"Except in the rainy season, I camp all over the place--at any spot
where I may have been shooting or collecting."

"Collecting?" queried Nellie.

"Yes; with the herbarium, you know."

"Yes," said Nellie dubiously. "But you told me once--the first time we
ever talked together," she added, looking in his eyes--"something about
your keeping your things like a squirrel in a tree. Could we not
go there? Is there not room for us to sit and talk without being
brow-beaten and looked down upon by these supercilious trees?"

"It's too far away," said Low truthfully, but with a somewhat pronounced
emphasis, "much too far for you just now; and it lies on another trail
that enters the wood beyond. But come, I will show you a spring known
only to myself, the wood ducks, and the squirrels. I discovered it the
first day I saw you, and gave it your name. But you shall christen it
yourself. It will be all yours, and yours alone, for it is so hidden and
secluded that I defy any feet but my own or whoso shall keep step with
mine to find it. Shall that foot be yours, Nellie?"

Her face beamed with a bright assent. "It may be difficult to track it
from here," he said, "but stand where you are a moment, and don't move,
rustle, nor agitate the air in any way. The woods are still now." He
turned at right angles with the trail, moved a few paces into the ferns
and underbrush, and then stopped with his finger on his lips. For an
instant both remained motionless; then with his intent face bent forward
and both arms extended, he began to sink slowly upon one knee and one
side, inclining his body with a gentle, perfectly-graduated movement
until his ear almost touched the ground. Nellie watched his graceful
figure breathlessly, until, like a bow unbent, he stood suddenly erect
again, and beckoned to her without changing the direction of his face.

"What is it?" she asked eagerly.

"All right; I have found it," he continued, moving forward without
turning his head.

"But how? What did you kneel for?" He did not reply, but taking her hand
in his continued to move slowly on through the underbrush, as if
obeying some magnetic attraction. "How did you find it?" again asked
the half-awed girl, her voice unconsciously falling to a whisper. Still
silent, Low kept his rigid face and forward tread for twenty yards
further; then he stopped and released the girl's half-impatient hand.
"How did you find it?" she repeated sharply.

"With my ears and nose," replied Low gravely.

"With your nose?"

"Yes; I smelt it."

Still fresh with the memory of his picturesque attitude, the young man's
reply seemed to involve something more irritating to her feelings than
even that absurd anticlimax. She looked at him coldly and critically,
and appeared to hesitate whether to proceed. "Is it far?" she asked.

"Not more than ten minutes now, as I shall go."

"And you won't have to smell your way again?"

"No; it is quite plain now," he answered seriously, the young girl's
sarcasm slipping harmlessly from his Indian stolidity. "Don't you smell
it yourself?"

But Miss Nellie's thin, cold nostrils refused to take that vulgar
interest.

"Nor hear it? Listen!"

"You forget I suffer the misfortune of having been brought up under a
roof," she replied coldly.

"That's true," repeated Low, in all seriousness; "it's not your fault.
But do you know, I sometimes think I am peculiarly sensitive to water; I
feel it miles away. At night, though I may not see it or even know where
it is, I am conscious of it. It is company to me when I am alone, and
I seem to hear it in my dreams. There is no music as sweet to me as
its song. When you sang with me that day in church, I seemed to hear it
ripple in your voice. It says to me more than the birds do, more than
the rarest plants I find. It seems to live with me and for me. It is my
earliest recollection; I know it will be my last, for I shall die in its
embrace. Do you think, Nellie," he continued, stopping short and gazing
earnestly in her face--"do you think that the chiefs knew this when they
called me 'Sleeping Water'?"

To Miss Nellie's several gifts I fear the gods had not added poetry. A
slight knowledge of English verse of a select character, unfortunately,
did not assist her in the interpretation of the young man's speech, nor
relieve her from the momentary feeling that he was at times deficient
in intellect. She preferred, however, to take a personal view of the
question, and expressed her sarcastic regret that she had not known
before that she had been indebted to the great flume and ditch at
Excelsior for the pleasure of his acquaintance. This pert remark
occasioned some explanation, which ended in the girl's accepting a kiss
in lieu of more logical argument. Nevertheless, she was still conscious
of an inward irritation--always distinct from her singular and perfectly
material passion--which found vent as the difficulties of their
undeviating progress through the underbrush increased. At last she lost
her shoe again, and stopped short. "It's a pity your Indian friends
did not christen you 'Wild Mustard' or 'Clover,'" she said satirically,
"that you might have had some sympathies and longings for the open
fields instead of these horrid jungles! I know we will not get back in
time."

Unfortunately, Low accepted this speech literally and with his
remorseless gravity. "If my name annoys you, I can get it changed by the
legislature, you know, and I can find out what my father's name was, and
take that. My mother, who died in giving me birth, was the daughter of a
chief."

"Then your mother was really an Indian?" said Nellie, "and you are--"
She stopped short.

"But I told you all this the day we first met," said Low, with grave
astonishment. "Don't you remember our long talk coming from church?"

"No," said Nellie coldly, "you didn't tell me." But she was obliged to
drop her eyes before the unwavering, undeniable truthfulness of his.

"You have forgotten," he said calmly; "but it is only right you should
have your own way in disposing of a name that I have cared little for;
and as you're to have a share of it--"

"Yes, but it's getting late, and if we are not going forward--"
interrupted the girl impatiently.

"We ARE going forward," said Low imperturbably; "but I wanted to tell
you, as we were speaking on THAT subject" (Nellie looked at her watch),
"I've been offered the place of botanist and naturalist in Professor
Grant's survey of Mount Shasta, and if I take it--why, when I come back,
darling--well--"

"But you're not going just yet," broke in Nellie, with a new expression
in her face.

"No."

"Then we need not talk of it now," she said, with animation.

Her sudden vivacity relieved him. "I see what's the matter," he said
gently, looking down at her feet; "these little shoes were not made to
keep step with a moccasin. We must try another way." He stooped as if
to secure the erring buskin, but suddenly lifted her like a child to his
shoulder. "There," he continued, placing her arm round his neck, "you
are clear of the ferns and brambles now, and we can go on. Are you
comfortable?" He looked up, read her answer in her burning eyes and
the warm lips pressed to his forehead at the roots of his straight dark
hair, and again moved onward as in a mesmeric dream. But he did not
swerve from his direct course, and with a final dash through the
undergrowth parted the leafy curtain before the spring.

At first the young girl was dazzled by the strong light that came from a
rent in the interwoven arches of the wood. The breach had been caused by
the huge bulk of one of the great giants that had half fallen, and was
lying at a steep angle against one of its mightiest brethren, having
borne down a lesser tree in the arc of its downward path. Two of the
roots, as large as younger trees, tossed their blackened and bare
limbs high in the air. The spring--the insignificant cause of this vast
disruption--gurgled, flashed, and sparkled at the base; the limpid baby
fingers that had laid bare the foundations of that fallen column played
with the still clinging rootlets, laved the fractured and twisted limbs,
and, widening, filled with sleeping water the graves from which they had
been torn.

"It had been going on for years, down there," said Low, pointing to a
cavity from which the fresh water now slowly welled, "but it had been
quickened by the rising of the subterranean springs and rivers which
always occurs at a certain stage of the dry season. I remember that
on that very night--for it happened a little after midnight, when all
sounds are more audible--I was troubled and oppressed in my sleep by
what you would call a nightmare; a feeling as if I was kept down by
bonds and pinions that I longed to break. And then I heard a crash in
this direction, and the first streak of morning brought me the sound and
scent of water. Six months afterwards I chanced to find my way here, as
I told you, and gave it your name. I did not dream that I should ever
stand beside it with you, and have you christen it yourself."

He unloosened the cup from his flask, and filling it at the spring
handed it to her. But the young girl leant over the pool, and pouring
the water idly back said, "I'd rather put my feet in it. Mayn't I?"

"I don't understand you," he said wonderingly.

"My feet are SO hot and dusty. The water looks deliciously cool. May I?"

"Certainly."

He turned away as Nellie, with apparent unconsciousness, seated herself
on the bank, and removed her shoes and stockings. When she had dabbled
her feet a few moments in the pool, she said over her shoulder--

"We can talk just as well, can't we?"

"Certainly."

"Well, then, why didn't you come to church more often, and why didn't
you think of telling father that you were convicted of sin and wanted to
be baptized?"

"I don't know," hesitated the young man.

"Well, you lost the chance of having father convert you, baptize you,
and take you into full church fellowship."

"I never thought--" he began.

"You never thought. Aren't you a Christian?"

"I suppose so."

"He supposes so! Have you no convictions--no profession?"

"But, Nellie, I never thought that you--"

"Never thought that I--what? Do you think that I could ever be anything
to a man who did not believe in justification by faith, or in the
covenant of church fellowship? Do you think father would let me?"

In his eagerness to defend himself he stepped to her side. But seeing
her little feet shining through the dark water, like outcroppings of
delicately veined quartz, he stopped embarrassed. Miss Nellie, however,
leaped to one foot, and, shaking the other over the pool, put her hand
on his shoulder to steady herself. "You haven't got a towel--or," she
said dubiously, looking at her small handkerchief, "anything to dry them
on?"

But Low did not, as she perhaps expected, offer his own handkerchief.

"If you take a bath after our fashion," he said gravely, "you must learn
to dry yourself after our fashion."

Lifting her again lightly in his arms, he carried her a few steps to the
sunny opening, and bade her bury her feet in the dried mosses and baked
withered grasses that were bleaching in a hollow. The young girl uttered
a cry of childish delight, as the soft ciliated fibres touched her
sensitive skin.

"It is healing, too," continued Low; "a moccasin filled with it after a
day on the trail makes you all right again."

But Miss Nellie seemed to be thinking of something else.

"Is that the way the squaws bathe and dry themselves?"

"I don't know; you forget I was a boy when I left them."

"And you're sure you never knew any?"

"None."

The young girl seemed to derive some satisfaction in moving her feet
up and down for several minutes among the grasses in the hollow; then,
after a pause, said, "You are quite certain I am the first woman that
ever touched this spring?"

"Not only the first woman, but the first human being, except myself."

"How nice!"

They had taken each other's hands; seated side by side, they leaned
against a curving elastic root that half supported, half encompassed,
them. The girl's capricious, fitful manner succumbed as before to the
near contact of her companion. Looking into her eyes, Low fell into a
sweet, selfish lover's monologue, descriptive of his past and present
feelings towards her, which she accepted with a heightened color, a
slight exchange of sentiment, and a strange curiosity. The sun had
painted their half-embraced silhouettes against the slanting tree-trunk,
and began to decline unnoticed; the ripple of the water mingling with
their whispers came as one sound to the listening ear; even their
eloquent silences were as deep, and, I wot, perhaps as dangerous, as the
darkened pool that filled so noiselessly a dozen yards away. So quiet
were they that the tremor of invading wings once or twice shook the
silence, or the quick scamper of frightened feet rustled the dead grass.
But in the midst of a prolonged stillness the young man sprang up so
suddenly that Nellie was still half clinging to his neck as he stood
erect. "Hush!" he whispered; "some one is near!"

He disengaged her anxious hands gently, leaped upon the slanting
tree-trunk, and running half-way up its incline with the agility of a
squirrel, stretched himself at full length upon it and listened.

To the impatient, inexplicably startled girl, it seemed an age before he
rejoined her.

"You are safe," he said; "he is going by the western trail towards
Indian Spring."

"Who is HE?" she asked, biting her lips with a poorly restrained gesture
of mortification and disappointment.

"Some stranger," replied Low.

"As long as he wasn't coming here, why did you give me such a fright?"
she said pettishly. "Are you nervous because a single wayfarer happens
to stray here?"

"It was no wayfarer, for he tried to keep near the trail," said Low. "He
was a stranger to the wood, for he lost his way every now and then. He
was seeking or expecting some one, for he stopped frequently and waited
or listened. He had not walked far, for he wore spurs that tinkled and
caught in the brush; and yet he had not ridden here, for no horse's
hoofs passed the road since we have been here. He must have come from
Indian Spring."

"And you heard all that when you listened just now?" asked Nellie, half
disdainfully.

Impervious to her incredulity Low turned his calm eyes on her face.
"Certainly, I'll bet my life on what I say. Tell me: do you know anybody
in Indian Spring who would likely spy upon you?"

The young girl was conscious of a certain ill-defined uneasiness, but
answered, "No."

"Then it was not YOU he was seeking," said Low thoughtfully. Miss Nellie
had not time to notice the emphasis, for he added, "You must go at once,
and lest you have been followed I will show you another way back to
Indian Spring. It is longer, and you must hasten. Take your shoes and
stockings with you until we are out of the bush."

He raised her again in his arms and strode once more out through the
covert into the dim aisles of the wood. They spoke but little; she could
not help feeling that some other discordant element, affecting him more
strongly than it did her, had come between them, and was half perplexed
and half frightened. At the end of ten minutes he seated her upon a
fallen branch, and telling her he would return by the time she had
resumed her shoes and stockings glided from her like a shadow. She would
have uttered an indignant protest at being left alone, but he was gone
ere she could detain him. For a moment she thought she hated him. But
when she had mechanically shod herself once more, not without nervous
shivers at every falling needle, he was at her side.

"Do you know anyone who wears a frieze coat like that?" he asked,
handing her a few torn shreds of wool affixed to a splinter of bark.

Miss Nellie instantly recognized the material of a certain sporting
coat worn by Mr. Jack Brace on festive occasions, but a strange yet
infallible instinct that was part of her nature made her instantly
disclaim all knowledge of it.

"No," she said.

"Not anyone who scents himself with some doctor's stuff like cologne?"
continued Low, with the disgust of keen olfactory sensibilities.

Again Miss Nellie recognized the perfume with which the gallant
expressman was wont to make redolent her little parlor, but again she
avowed no knowledge of its possessor. "Well," returned Low with some
disappointment, "such a man has been here. Be on your guard. Let us go
at once."

She required no urging to hasten her steps, but hurried breathlessly at
his side. He had taken a new trail by which they left the wood at right
angles with the highway, two miles away. Following an almost effaced
mule track along a slight depression of the plain, deep enough, however,
to hide them from view, he accompanied her, until, rising to the level
again, she saw they were beginning to approach the highway and the
distant roofs of Indian Spring. "Nobody meeting you now," he
whispered, "would suspect where you had been. Good night! until next
week--remember."

They pressed each other's hands, and standing on the slight ridge
outlined against the paling sky, in full view of the highway, parting
carelessly, as if they had been chance met travelers. But Nellie could
not restrain a parting backward glance as she left the ridge. Low
had descended to the deserted trail, and was running swiftly in the
direction of the Carquinez Woods.




CHAPTER IV


Teresa awoke with a start. It was day already, but how far advanced the
even, unchanging, soft twilight of the woods gave no indication.
Her companion had vanished, and to her bewildered senses so had the
camp-fire, even to its embers and ashes. Was she awake, or had she
wandered away unconsciously in the night? One glance at the tree above
her dissipated the fancy. There was the opening of her quaint retreat
and the hanging strips of bark, and at the foot of the opposite tree
lay the carcass of the bear. It had been skinned, and, as Teresa thought
with an inward shiver, already looked half its former size.

Not yet accustomed to the fact that a few steps in either direction
around the circumference of those great trunks produced the sudden
appearance or disappearance of any figure, Teresa uttered a slight
scream as her young companion unexpectedly stepped to her side. "You
see a change here," he said; "the stamped-out ashes of the camp-fire lie
under the brush," and he pointed to some cleverly scattered boughs
and strips of bark which completely effaced the traces of last night's
bivouac. "We can't afford to call the attention of any packer or hunter
who might straggle this way to this particular spot and this particular
tree; the more naturally," he added, "as they always prefer to camp over
an old fire." Accepting this explanation meekly, as partly a reproach
for her caprice of the previous night, Teresa hung her head.

"I'm very sorry," she said, "but wouldn't that," pointing to the carcass
of the bear, "have made them curious?"

But Low's logic was relentless.

"By this time there would have been little left to excite curiosity, if
you had been willing to leave those beasts to their work."

"I'm very sorry," repeated the woman, her lips quivering.

"They are the scavengers of the wood," he continued in a lighter tone;
"if you stay here you must try to use them to keep your house clean."

Teresa smiled nervously.

"I mean that they shall finish their work to-night," he added, "and I
shall build another camp-fire for us a mile from here until they do."

But Teresa caught his sleeve.

"No," she said hurriedly, "don't, please, for me. You must not take the
trouble, nor the risk. Hear me; do, please. I can bear it, I WILL
bear it--to-night. I would have borne it last night, but it was so
strange--and"--she passed her hands over her forehead--"I think I must
have been half mad. But I am not so foolish now."

She seemed so broken and despondent that he replied reassuringly:
"Perhaps it would be better that I should find another hiding-place for
you, until I can dispose of that carcass so that it will not draw dogs
after the wolves, and men after THEM. Besides, your friend the sheriff
will probably remember the bear when he remembers anything, and try to
get on its track again."

"He's a conceited fool," broke in Teresa in a high voice, with a slight
return of her old fury, "or he'd have guessed where that shot came from;
and," she added in a lower tone, looking down at her limp and nerveless
fingers, "he wouldn't have let a poor, weak, nervous wretch like me get
away."

"But his deputy may put two and two together, and connect your escape
with it."

Teresa's eyes flashed. "It would be like the dog, just to save his
pride, to swear it was an ambush of my friends, and that he was
overpowered by numbers. Oh yes! I see it all!" she almost screamed,
lashing herself into a rage at the bare contemplation of this diminution
of her glory. "That's the dirty lie he tells everywhere, and is telling
now."

She stamped her feet and glanced savagely around, as if at any risk to
proclaim the falsehood. Low turned his impassive, truthful face towards
her.

"Sheriff Dunn," he began gravely, "is a politician, and a fool when he
takes to the trail as a hunter of man or beast. But he is not a coward
nor a liar. Your chances would be better if he were--if he laid your
escape to an ambush of your friends, than if his pride held you alone
responsible."

"If he's such a good man, why do you hesitate?" she replied bitterly.
"Why don't you give me up at once, and do a service to one of your
friends?"

"I do not even know him," returned Low opening his clear eyes upon her.
"I've promised to hide you here, and I shall hide you as well from him
as from anybody."

Teresa did not reply, but suddenly dropping down upon the ground
buried her face in her hands and began to sob convulsively. Low turned
impassively away, and putting aside the bark curtain climbed into the
hollow tree. In a few moments he reappeared, laden with provisions and
a few simple cooking utensils, and touched her lightly on the shoulder.
She looked up timidly; the paroxysm had passed, but her lashes yet
glittered.

"Come," he said, "come and get some breakfast. I find you have eaten
nothing since you have been here--twenty-four hours."

"I didn't know it," she said, with a faint smile. Then seeing his
burden, and possessed by a new and strange desire for some menial
employment, she said hurriedly, "Let me carry something--do, please,"
and even tried to disencumber him.

Half annoyed, Low at last yielded, and handing his rifle said, "There,
then, take that; but be careful--it's loaded!"

A cruel blush burnt the woman's face to the roots of her hair as she
took the weapon hesitatingly in her hand.

"No!" she stammered, hurriedly lifting her shame-suffused eyes to his;
"no! no!"

He turned away with an impatience which showed her how completely
gratuitous had been her agitation and its significance, and said,
"Well, then, give it back if you are afraid of it." But she as suddenly
declined to return it; and shouldering it deftly, took her place by his
side. Silently they moved from the hollow tree together.

During their walk she did not attempt to invade his taciturnity.
Nevertheless she was as keenly alive and watchful of his every movement
and gesture as if she had hung enchanted on his lips. The unerring
way with which he pursued a viewless, undeviating path through those
trackless woods, his quick reconnaissance of certain trees or openings,
his mute inspection of some almost imperceptible footprint of bird or
beast, his critical examination of certain plants which he plucked and
deposited in his deerskin haversack, were not lost on the quick-witted
woman. As they gradually changed the clear, unencumbered aisles of the
central woods for a more tangled undergrowth, Teresa felt that subtle
admiration which culminates in imitation, and simulating perfectly the
step, tread, and easy swing of her companion, followed so accurately his
lead that she won a gratified exclamation from him when their goal
was reached--a broken, blackened shaft, splintered by long-forgotten
lightning, in the centre of a tangled carpet of wood-clover.

"I don't wonder you distanced the deputy," he said cheerfully, throwing
down his burden, "if you can take the hunting-path like that. In a few
days, if you stay here, I can venture to trust you alone for a little
pasear when you are tired of the tree."

Teresa looked pleased, but busied herself with arrangements for the
breakfast, while he gathered the fuel for the roaring fire which soon
blazed beside the shattered tree.

Teresa's breakfast was a success. It was a revelation to the young
nomad, whose ascetic habits and simple tastes were usually content with
the most primitive forms of frontier cookery. It was at least a surprise
to him to know that without extra trouble kneaded flour, water, and
saleratus need not be essentially heavy; that coffee need not be boiled
with sugar to the consistency of syrup; that even that rarest delicacy,
small shreds of venison covered with ashes and broiled upon the end of
a ramrod boldly thrust into the flames, would be better and even more
expeditiously cooked upon burning coals. Moved in his practical nature,
he was surprised to find this curious creature of disorganized nerves
and useless impulses informed with an intelligence that did not preclude
the welfare of humanity or the existence of a soul. He respected her
for some minutes, until in the midst of a culinary triumph a big tear
dropped and spluttered in the saucepan. But he forgave the irrelevancy
by taking no notice of it, and by doing full justice to that particular
dish.

Nevertheless, he asked several questions based upon these recently
discovered qualities. It appeared that in the old days of her wanderings
with the circus troupe she had often been forced to undertake this
nomadic housekeeping. But she "despised it," had never done it since,
and always had refused to do it for "him"--the personal pronoun
referring, as Low understood, to her lover, Curson. Not caring to revive
these memories further, Low briefly concluded: "I don't know what you
were, or what you may be, but from what I see of you you've got all the
sabe of a frontierman's wife."

She stopped and looked at him, and then with an impulse of imprudence
that only half concealed a more serious vanity, asked, "Do you think I
might have made a good squaw?"

"I don't know," he replied quietly. "I never saw enough of them to
know."

Teresa, confident from his clear eyes that he spoke the truth, but
having nothing ready to follow this calm disposal of her curiosity,
relapsed into silence.

The meal finished, Teresa washed their scant table equipage in a little
spring near the camp-fire; where, catching sight of her disordered dress
and collar, she rapidly threw her shawl, after the national fashion,
over her shoulder and pinned it quickly. Low cached the remaining
provisions and the few cooking utensils under the dead embers and ashes,
obliterating all superficial indication of their camp-fire as deftly and
artistically as he had before.

"There isn't the ghost of a chance," he said in explanation, "that
anybody but you or I will set foot here before we come back to supper,
but it's well to be on guard. I'll take you back to the cabin now,
though I bet you could find your way there as well as I can."

On their way back Teresa ran ahead of her companion, and plucking a few
tiny leaves from a hidden oasis in the bark-strewn trail brought them to
him.

"That's the kind you're looking for, isn't it?" she said, half timidly.

"It is," responded Low, in gratified surprise; "but how did you know it?
You're not a botanist, are you?"

"I reckon not," said Teresa; "but you picked some when we came, and I
noticed what they were."

Here was indeed another revelation. Low stopped and gazed at her with
such frank, open, utterly unabashed curiosity that her black eyes fell
before him.

"And do you think," he asked with logical deliberation, "that you could
find any plant from another I should give you?"

"Yes."

"Or from a drawing of it"

"Yes; perhaps even if you described it to me."

A half-confidential, half-fraternal silence followed.

"I tell you what. I've got a book--"

"I know it," interrupted Teresa; "full of these things."

"Yes. Do you think you could--"

"Of course I could," broke in Teresa, again.

"But you don't know what I mean," said the imperturbable Low.

"Certainly I do. Why, find 'em, and preserve all the different ones for
you to write under--that's it, isn't it?"

Low nodded his head, gratified but not entirely convinced that she had
fully estimated the magnitude of the endeavor.

"I suppose," said Teresa, in the feminine postscriptum voice which it
would seem entered even the philosophical calm of the aisles they were
treading--"I suppose that SHE places great value on them?"

Low had indeed heard Science personified before, nor was it at all
impossible that the singular woman walking by his side had also. He
said "Yes;" but added, in mental reference to the Linnean Society of San
Francisco, that "THEY were rather particular about the rarer kinds."

Content as Teresa had been to believe in Low's tender relations with
some favored ONE of her sex, this frank confession of a plural devotion
staggered her.

"They?" she repeated.

"Yes," he continued calmly. "The Botanical Society I correspond with are
more particular than the Government Survey."

"Then you are doing this for a society?" demanded Teresa, with a stare.

"Certainly. I'm making a collection and classification of specimens. I
intend--but what are you looking at?"

Teresa had suddenly turned away. Putting his hand lightly on her
shoulder, the young man brought her face to face him again.

She was laughing.

"I thought all the while it was for a girl," she said; "and--" But
here the mere effort of speech sent her off into an audible and genuine
outburst of laughter. It was the first time he had seen her even smile
other than bitterly. Characteristically unconscious of any humor in
her error, he remained unembarrassed. But he could not help noticing
a change in the expression of her face, her voice, and even her
intonation. It seemed as if that fit of laughter had loosed the last
ties that bound her to a self-imposed character, had swept away the last
barrier between her and her healthier nature, had dispossessed a painful
unreality, and relieved the morbid tension of a purely nervous attitude.
The change in her utterance and the resumption of her softer Spanish
accent seemed to have come with her confidences, and Low took leave
of her before their sylvan cabin with a comrade's heartiness, and a
complete forgetfulness that her voice had ever irritated him.

When he returned that afternoon he was startled to find the cabin empty.
But instead of bearing any appearance of disturbance or hurried flight,
the rude interior seemed to have magically assumed a decorous order
and cleanliness unknown before. Fresh bark hid the inequalities of
the floor. The skins and blankets were folded in the corners, the rude
shelves were carefully arranged, even a few tall ferns and bright but
quickly fading flowers were disposed around the blackened chimney. She
had evidently availed herself of the change of clothing he had brought
her, for her late garments were hanging from the hastily-devised wooden
pegs driven in the wall. The young man gazed around him with mixed
feelings of gratification and uneasiness. His presence had been
dispossessed in a single hour; his ten years of lonely habitation had
left no trace that this woman had not effaced with a deft move of her
hand. More than that, it looked as if she had always occupied it; and
it was with a singular conviction that even when she should occupy it no
longer it would only revert to him as her dwelling that he dropped the
bark shutters athwart the opening, and left it to follow her.

To his quick ear, fine eye, and abnormal senses, this was easy enough.
She had gone in the direction of this morning's camp. Once or twice he
paused with a half-gesture of recognition and a characteristic "Good!"
at the place where she had stopped, but was surprised to find that her
main course had been as direct as his own. Deviating from this direct
line with Indian precaution, he first made a circuit of the camp,
and approached the shattered trunk from the opposite direction. He
consequently came upon Teresa unawares. But the momentary astonishment
and embarrassment were his alone.

He scarcely recognized her. She was wearing the garments he had brought
her the day before--a certain discarded gown of Miss Nellie Wynn, which
he had hurriedly begged from her under the pretext of clothing the wife
of a distressed overland emigrant then on the way to the mines. Although
he had satisfied his conscience with the intention of confessing the
pious fraud to her when Teresa was gone and safe from pursuit, it
was not without a sense of remorse that he witnessed the sacrilegious
transformation. The two women were nearly the same height and size; and
although Teresa's maturer figure accented the outlines more strongly, it
was still becoming enough to increase his irritation.

Of this becomingness she was doubtless unaware at the moment that he
surprised her. She was conscious of having "a change," and this had
emboldened her to "do her hair" and otherwise compose herself. After
their greeting she was the first to allude to the dress, regretting that
it was not more of a rough disguise, and that, as she must now discard
the national habit of wearing her shawl "manta" fashion over her head,
she wanted a hat. "But you must not," she said, "borrow any more dresses
for me from your young woman. Buy them for me at some shop. They left me
enough money for that." Low gently put aside the few pieces of gold she
had drawn from her pocket, and briefly reminded her of the suspicion
such a purchase by him would produce. "That's so," she said, with a
laugh. "Caramba! what a mule I'm becoming! Ah! wait a moment. I have it!
Buy me a common felt hat--a man's hat--as if for yourself, as a change
to that animal," pointing to the fox-tailed cap he wore summer and
winter, "and I'll show you a trick. I haven't run a theatrical wardrobe
for nothing." Nor had she, for the hat thus procured, a few days later,
became, by the aid of a silk handkerchief and a bluejay's feather, a
fascinating "pork pie."

Whatever cause of annoyance to Low still lingered in Teresa's dress,
it was soon forgotten in a palpable evidence of Teresa's value as a
botanical assistant. It appeared that during the afternoon she had not
only duplicated his specimens, but had discoverd one or two rare
plants as yet unclassified in the flora of the Carquinez Woods. He was
delighted, and in turn, over the campfire, yielded up some details of
his present life and some of his earlier recollections.

"You don't remember anything of your father?" she asked. "Did he ever
try to seek you out?"

"No! Why should he?" replied the imperturbable Low; "he was not a
Cherokee."

"No, he was a beast," responded Teresa promptly. "And your mother--do
you remember her?"

"No, I think she died."

"You THINK she died? Don't you know?"

"No!"

"Then you're another!" said Teresa. Notwithstanding this frankness, they
shook hands for the night: Teresa nestling like a rabbit in a hollow by
the side of the campfire; Low with his feet towards it, Indian-wise,
and his head and shoulders pillowed on his haversack, only half
distinguishable in the darkness beyond.

With such trivial details three uneventful days slipped by. Their
retreat was undisturbed, nor could Low detect, by the least evidence
to his acute perceptive faculties, that any intruding feet had since
crossed the belt of shade. The echoes of passing events at Indian Spring
had recorded the escape of Teresa as occurring at a remote and purely
imaginative distance, and her probable direction the county of Yolo.

"Can you remember," he one day asked her, "what time it was when you cut
the riata and got away?"

Teresa pressed her hands upon her eyes and temples.

"About three, I reckon."

"And you were here at seven; you could have covered some ground in four
hours?"

"Perhaps--I don't know," she said, her voice taking up its old quality
again. "Don't ask me--I ran all the way."

Her face was quite pale as she removed her hands from her eyes, and her
breath came as quickly as if she had just finished that race for life.

"Then you think I am safe here?" she added, after a pause.

"Perfectly--until they find you are NOT in Yolo. Then they'll look here.
And THAT'S the time for you to go THERE." Teresa smiled timidly.

"It will take them some time to search Yolo--unless," she added, "you're
tired of me here." The charming non sequitur did not, however, seem to
strike the young man. "I've got time yet to find a few more plants for
you," she suggested.

"Oh, certainly!"

"And give you a few more lessons in cooking."

"Perhaps."

The conscientious and literal Low was beginning to doubt if she were
really practical. How otherwise could she trifle with such a situation?

It must be confessed that that day and the next she did trifle with it.
She gave herself up to a grave and delicious languor that seemed to flow
from shadow and silence and permeate her entire being. She passed hours
in a thoughtful repose of mind and spirit that seemed to fall like balm
from those steadfast guardians, and distill their gentle ether in her
soul; or breathed into her listening ear immunity from the forgotten
past, and security for the present. If there was no dream of the future
in this calm, even recurrence of placid existence, so much the better.
The simple details of each succeeding day, the quaint housekeeping, the
brief companionship and coming and going of her young host--himself
at best a crystallized personification of the sedate and hospitable
woods--satisfied her feeble cravings. She no longer regretted the
inferior position that her fears had obliged her to take the first night
she came; she began to look up to this young man--so much younger than
herself--without knowing what it meant; it was not until she found
that this attitude did not detract from his picturesqueness that
she discovered herself seeking for reasons to degrade him from this
seductive eminence.

A week had elapsed with little change. On two days he had been absent
all day, returning only in time to sup in the hollow tree, which,
thanks to the final removal of the dead bear from its vicinity, was now
considered a safer retreat than the exposed camp-fire. On the first of
these occasions she received him with some preoccupation, paying but
little heed to the scant gossip he brought from Indian Spring, and
retiring early under the plea of fatigue, that he might seek his own
distant camp-fire, which, thanks to her stronger nerves and regained
courage, she no longer required so near. On the second occasion, he
found her writing a letter more or less blotted with her tears. When it
was finished, she begged him to post it at Indian Spring, where in two
days an answer would be returned, under cover, to him.

"I hope you will be satisfied then," she added.

"Satisfied with what?" queried the young man.

"You'll see," she replied, giving him her cold hand. "Good-night."

"But can't you tell me now?" he remonstrated, retaining her hand.

"Wait two days longer--it isn't much," was all she vouchsafed to answer.

The two days passed. Their former confidence and good fellowship were
fully restored when the morning came on which he was to bring the
answer from the post-office at Indian Spring. He had talked again of
his future, and had recorded his ambition to procure the appointment of
naturalist to a Government Surveying Expedition. She had even jocularly
proposed to dress herself in man's attire and "enlist" as his assistant.

"But you will be safe with your friends, I hope, by that time,"
responded Low.

"Safe with my friends," she repeated in a lower voice. "Safe with my
friends--yes!" An awkward silence followed; Teresa broke it gayly: "But
your girl, your sweetheart, my benefactor--will SHE let you go?"

"I haven't told her yet," said Low, gravely, "but I don't see why she
should object."

"Object, indeed!" interrupted Teresa in a high voice and a sudden and
utterly gratuitous indignation; "how should she? I'd like to see her do
it!"

She accompanied him some distance to the intersection of the trail,
where they parted in good spirits. On the dusty plain without a gale
was blowing that rocked the high tree-tops above her, but, tempered and
subdued, entered the low aisles with a fluttering breath of morning and
a sound like the cooing of doves. Never had the wood before shown so
sweet a sense of security from the turmoil and tempest of the world
beyond; never before had an intrusion from the outer life--even in
the shape of a letter--seemed so wicked a desecration. Tempted by the
solicitation of air and shade, she lingered, with Low's herbarium slung
on her shoulder.

A strange sensation, like a shiver, suddenly passed across her nerves,
and left them in a state of rigid tension. With every sense morbidly
acute, with every faculty strained to its utmost, the subtle instincts
of Low's woodcraft transformed and possessed her. She knew it now! A
new element was in the wood--a strange being--another life--another
man approaching! She did not even raise her head to look about her, but
darted with the precision and fleetness of an arrow in the direction
of her tree. But her feet were arrested, her limbs paralzyed, her very
existence suspended, by the sound of a voice:--

"Teresa!"

It was a voice that had rung in her ears for the last two years in all
phases of intensity, passion, tenderness, and anger; a voice upon whose
modulations, rude and unmusical though they were, her heart and soul had
hung in transport or anguish. But it was a chime that had rung its last
peal to her senses as she entered the Carquinez Woods, and for the last
week had been as dead to her as a voice from the grave. It was the voice
of her lover--Dick Curson!




CHAPTER V


The wind was blowing towards the stranger, so that he was nearly upon
her when Teresa first took the alarm. He was a man over six feet in
height, strongly built, with a slight tendency to a roundness of bulk
which suggested reserved rather than impeded energy. His thick beard
and mustache were closely cropped around a small and handsome mouth that
lisped except when he was excited, but always kept fellowship with his
blue eyes in a perpetual smile of half-cynical good-humor. His dress was
superior to that of the locality; his general expression that of a
man of the world, albeit a world of San Francisco, Sacramento, and
Murderer's Bar. He advanced towards her with a laugh and an outstretched
hand.

"YOU here!" she gasped, drawing back.

Apparently neither surprised nor mortified at this reception, he
answered frankly, "Yeth. You didn't expect me, I know. But Doloreth
showed me the letter you wrote her, and--well--here I am, ready to help
you, with two men and a thpare horthe waiting outside the woodth on the
blind trail."

"You--YOU--here?" she only repeated.

Curson shrugged his shoulders. "Yeth. Of courth you never expected
to thee me again, and leatht of all HERE. I'll admit that; I'll thay
I wouldn't if I'd been in your plathe. I'll go further, and thay you
didn't want to thee me again--anywhere. But it all cometh to the thame
thing; here I am. I read the letter you wrote Doloreth. I read how you
were hiding here, under Dunn'th very nothe, with his whole pothe out,
cavorting round and barkin' up the wrong tree. I made up my mind to
come down here with a few nathty friends of mine and cut you out under
Dunn'th nothe, and run you over into Yuba--that'th all."

"How dared she show you my letter--YOU of all men? How dared she ask
YOUR help?" continued Teresa, fiercely.

"But she didn't athk my help," he responded coolly. "D--d if I don't
think she jutht calculated I'd be glad to know you were being hunted
down and thtarving, that I might put Dunn on your track."

"You lie!" said Teresa, furiously; "she was my friend. A better friend
than those who professed--more," she added, with a contemptuous drawing
away of her skirt as if she feared Curson's contamination.

"All right. Thettle that with her when you go back," continued Curson
philosophically. "We can talk of that on the way. The thing now ith to
get up and get out of thethe woods. Come!"

Teresa's only reply was a gesture of scorn.

"I know all that," continued Curson half soothingly, "but they're
waiting."

"Let them wait. I shall not go."

"What will you do?"

"Stay here--till the wolves eat me."

"Teresa, listen. D--- it all--Teresa--Tita! see here," he said with
sudden energy. "I swear to God it's all right. I'm willing to let
by-gones be by-gones and take a new deal. You shall come back as if
nothing had happened, and take your old place as before. I don't mind
doing the square thing, all round. If that's what you mean, if that's
all that stands in the way, why, look upon the thing as settled. There,
Tita, old girl, come."

Careless or oblivious of her stony silence and starting eyes, he
attempted to take her hand. But she disengaged herself with a quick
movement, drew back, and suddenly crouched like a wild animal about to
spring. Curson folded his arms as she leaped to her feet; the little
dagger she had drawn from her garter flashed menacingly in the air, but
she stopped.

The man before her remained erect, impassive, and silent; the great
trees around and beyond her remained erect, impassive, and silent; there
was no sound in the dim aisles but the quick panting of her mad passion,
no movement in the calm, motionless shadow but the trembling of her
uplifted steel. Her arm bent and slowly sank, her fingers relaxed, the
knife fell from her hand.

"That'th quite enough for a thow," he said, with a return to his former
cynical ease and a perceptible tone of relief in his voice. "It'th the
thame old Theretha. Well, then, if you won't go with me, go without me;
take the led horthe and cut away. Dick Athley and Petereth will follow
you over the county line. If you want thome money, there it ith." He
took a buckskin purse from his pocket. "If you won't take it from me"--he
hesitated as she made no reply--"Athley'th flush and ready to lend you
thome."

She had not seemed to hear him, but had stooped in some embarrassment,
picked up the knife and hastily hid it, then with averted face and
nervous fingers was beginning to tear strips of loose bark from the
nearest trunk.

"Well, what do you thay?"

"I don't want any money, and I shall stay here." She hesitated, looked
around her, and then added, with an effort, "I suppose you meant well.
Be it so! Let by-gones be by-gones. You said just now, 'It's the same
old Teresa.' So she is, and seeing she's the same she's better here than
anywhere else."

There was enough bitterness in her tone to call for Curson's
half-perfunctory sympathy.

"That be d--d," he responded quickly. "Jutht thay you'll come, Tita,
and--"

She stopped his half-spoken sentence with a negative gesture. "You don't
understand. I shall stay here."

"But even if they don't theek you here, you can't live here forever. The
friend that you wrote about who wath tho good to you, you know, can't
keep you here alwayth; and are you thure you can alwayth trutht her?"

"It isn't a woman; it's a man." She stopped short, and colored to the
line of her forehead. "Who said it was a woman?" she continued fiercely,
as if to cover her confusion with a burst of gratuitous anger. "Is that
another of your lies?"

Curson's lips, which for a moment had completely lost their smile, were
now drawn together in a prolonged whistle. He gazed curiously at her
gown, at her hat, at the bow of bright ribbon that tied her black hair,
and said, "Ah!"

"A poor man who has kept my secret," she went on hurriedly--"a man as
friendless and lonely as myself. Yes," disregarding Curson's cynical
smile, "a man who has shared everything--"

"Naturally," suggested Curson.

"And turned himself out of his only shelter to give me a roof and
covering," she continued mechanically, struggling with the new and
horrible fancy that his words awakened.

"And thlept every night at Indian Thpring to save your reputation," said
Curson. "Of courthe."

Teresa turned very white. Curson was prepared for an outburst of
fury--perhaps even another attack. But the crushed and beaten woman only
gazed at him with frightened and imploring eyes. "For God's sake, Dick,
don't say that!"

The amiable cynic was staggered. His good-humor and a certain chivalrous
instinct he could not repress got the better of him. He shrugged his
shoulders. "What I thay, and what you DO, Teretha, needn't make us
quarrel. I've no claim on you--I know it. Only--" a vivid sense of the
ridiculous, powerful in men of his stamp, completed her victory--"only
don't thay anything about my coming down here to cut you out from
the--the--THE SHERIFF." He gave utterance to a short but unaffected
laugh, made a slight grimace, and turned to go.

Teresa did not join in his mirth. Awkward as it would have been if he
had taken a severer view of the subject, she was mortified even amidst
her fears and embarrassment at his levity. Just as she had become
convinced that his jealousy had made her over-conscious, his apparent
good-humored indifference gave that over-consciousness a guilty
significance. Yet this was lost in her sudden alarm as her companion,
looking up, uttered an exclamation, and placed his hand upon his
revolver. With a sinking conviction that the climax had come, Teresa
turned her eyes. From the dim aisles beyond, Low was approaching. The
catastrophe seemed complete.

She had barely time to utter an imploring whisper: "In the name of God,
not a word to him." But a change had already come over her companion. It
was no longer a parley with a foolish woman; he had to deal with a man
like himself. As Low's dark face and picturesque figure came nearer, Mr.
Curson's proposed method of dealing with him was made audible.

"Ith it a mulatto or a Thircuth, or both?" he asked, with affected
anxiety.

Low's Indian phlegm was impervious to such assault. He turned to Teresa,
without apparently noticing her companion. "I turned back," he said
quietly, "as soon as I knew there were strangers here; I thought you
might need me." She noticed for the first time that, in addition to his
rifle, he carried a revolver and hunting knife in his belt.

"Yeth," returned Curson, with an ineffectual attempt to imitate Low's
phlegm; "but ath I didn't happen to be a sthranger to this lady, perhaps
it wathn't nethethary, particularly ath I had two friends--"

"Waiting at the edge of the wood with a led horse," interrupted Low,
without addressing him, but apparently continuing his explanation to
Teresa. But she turned to Low with feverish anxiety.

"That's so--he is an old friend--" she gave a quick, imploring glance at
Curson--"an old friend who came to help me away--he is very kind," she
stammered, turning alternately from the one to the other; "but I told
him there was no hurry--at least to-day--that you--were--very good--too,
and would hide me a little longer, until your plan--you know YOUR plan,"
she added, with a look of beseeching significance to Low--"could be
tried." And then, with a helpless conviction that her excuses, motives,
and emotions were equally and perfectly transparent to both men, she
stopped in a tremble.

"Perhapth it 'th jutht ath well, then, that the gentleman came thtraight
here, and didn't tackle my two friendth when he pathed them," observed
Curson, half sarcastically.

"I have not passed your friends, nor have I been near them," said Low,
looking at him for the first time, with the same exasperating calm, "or
perhaps I should not be HERE or they THERE. I knew that one man entered
the wood a few moments ago, and that two men and four horses remained
outside."

"That's true," said Teresa to Curson excitedly--"that's true. He knows
all. He can see without looking, hear without listening. He--he--" she
stammered, colored, and stopped.

The two men had faced each other. Curson, after his first good-natured
impulse, had retained no wish to regain Teresa, whom he felt he no
longer loved, and yet who, for that very reason perhaps, had awakened
his chivalrous instincts. Low, equally on his side, was altogether
unconscious of any feeling which might grow into a passion, and prevent
him from letting her go with another if for her own safety. They were
both men of a certain taste and refinement. Yet, in spite of all this,
some vague instinct of the baser male animal remained with them, and
they were moved to a mutually aggressive attitude in the presence of the
female.

One word more, and the opening chapter of a sylvan Iliad might have
begun. But this modern Helen saw it coming, and arrested it with an
inspiration of feminine genius. Without being observed, she disengaged
her knife from her bosom and let it fall as if by accident. It struck
the ground with the point of its keen blade, bounded and rolled between
them. The two men started and looked at each other with a foolish air.
Curson laughed.

"I reckon she can take care of herthelf," he said, extending his hand to
Low. "I'm off. But if I'm wanted SHE'LL know where to find me." Low took
the proffered hand, but neither of the two men looked at Teresa. The
reserve of antagonism once broken, a few words of caution, advice, and
encouragement passed between them, in apparent obliviousness of her
presence or her personal responsibility. As Curson at last nodded
a farewell to her, Low insisted upon accompanying him as far as the
horses, and in another moment she was again alone.

She had saved a quarrel between them at the sacrifice of herself, for
her vanity was still keen enough to feel that this exhibition of her
old weakness had degraded her in their eyes, and, worse, had lost the
respect her late restraint had won from Low. They had treated her like a
child or a crazy woman, perhaps even now were exchanging criticisms
upon her--perhaps pitying her! Yet she had prevented a quarrel, a fight;
possibly the death of either one or the other of these men who despised
her, for none better knew than she the trivial beginning and desperate
end of these encounters. Would they--would Low ever realize it, and
forgive her? Her small, dark hands went up to her eyes and she sank
upon the ground. She looked through tear-veiled lashes upon the mute and
giant witnesses of her deceit and passion, and tried to draw, from their
immovable calm, strength and consolation as before. But even they seemed
to stand apart, reserved and forbidding.

When Low returned she hoped to gather from his eyes and manner what
had passed between him and her former lover. But beyond a mere gentle
abstraction at times he retained his usual calm. She was at last forced
to allude to it herself with simulated recklessness.

"I suppose I didn't get a very good character from my last place?" she
said, with a laugh.

"I don't understand you," he replied, in evident sincerity.

She bit her lip and was silent. But as they were returning home, she
said gently, "I hope you were not angry with me for the lie I told
when I spoke of 'your plan.' I could not give the real reason for
not returning with--with--that man. But it's not all a lie. I have a
plan--if you haven't. When you are ready to go to Sacramento to take
your place, dress me as an Indian boy, paint my face, and let me go with
you. You can leave me--there--you know."

"It's not a bad idea," he responded gravely. "We will see."

On the next day, and the next, the rencontre seemed to be forgotten.
The herbarium was already filled with rare specimens. Teresa had even
overcome her feminine repugnance to "bugs" and creeping things so far
as to assist in his entomological collection. He had drawn from a sacred
cache in the hollow of a tree the few worn text-books from which he had
studied.

"They seem very precious," she said, with a smile.

"Very," he replied gravely. "There was one with plates that the ants ate
up, and it will be six months before I can afford to buy another."

Teresa glanced hurriedly over his well-worn buckskin suit, at his calico
shirt with its pattern almost obliterated by countless washings, and
became thoughtful.

"I suppose you couldn't buy one at Indian Spring?" she said innocently.

For once Low was startled out of his phlegm. "Indian Spring!" he
ejaculated; "perhaps not even in San Francisco. These came from the
States."

"How did you get them?" persisted Teresa.

"I bought them for skins I got over the ridge."

"I didn't mean that--but no matter. Then you mean to sell that bearskin,
don't you?" she added.

Low had, in fact, already sold it, the proceeds having been invested in
a gold ring for Miss Nellie, which she scrupulously did not wear except
in his presence. In his singular truthfulness he would have frankly
confessed it to Teresa, but the secret was not his own. He contented
himself with saying that he had disposed of it at Indian Spring.

Teresa started, and communicated unconsciously some of her nervousness
to her companion. They gazed in each other's eyes with a troubled
expression.

"Do you think it was wise to sell that particular skin, which might be
identified?" she asked timidly.

Low knitted his arched brows, but felt a strange sense of relief.
"Perhaps not," he said carelessly; "but it's too late now to mend
matters."

That afternoon she wrote several letters, and tore them up. One,
however, she retained, and handed it to Low to post at Indian Spring,
whither he was going. She called his attention to the superscription,
being the same as the previous letter, and added, with affected gayety,
"But if the answer isn't as prompt, perhaps it will be pleasanter than
the last." Her quick feminine eye noticed a little excitement in his
manner and a more studious attention to his dress. Only a few days
before she would not have allowed this to pass without some mischievous
allusion to his mysterious sweetheart; it troubled her greatly now to
find that she could not bring herself to this household pleasantry, and
that her lip trembled and her eye grew moist as he parted from her.

The afternoon passed slowly; he had said he might not return to supper
until late, nevertheless a strange restlessness took possession of
her as the day wore on. She put aside her work, the darning of his
stockings, and rambled aimlessly through the woods. She had wandered she
knew not how far, when she was suddenly seized with the same vague sense
of a foreign presence which she had felt before. Could it be Curson
again, with a word of warning? No! she knew it was not he; so subtle
had her sense become that she even fancied that she detected in the
invisible aura projected by the unknown no significance or relation to
herself or Low, and felt no fear. Nevertheless she deemed it wisest to
seek the protection of her sylvan bower, and hurried swiftly thither.

But not so quickly nor directly that she did not once or twice pause in
her flight to examine the new-comer from behind a friendly trunk. He was
a stranger--a young fellow with a brown mustache, wearing heavy Mexican
spurs in his riding-boots, whose tinkling he apparently did not care to
conceal. He had perceived her, and was evidently pursuing her, but
so awkwardly and timidly that she eluded him with ease. When she had
reached the security of the hollow tree and pulled the curtain of bark
before the narrow opening, with her eye to the interstices, she waited
his coming. He arrived breathlessly in the open space before the tree
where the bear once lay; the dazed, bewildered, and half-awed expression
of his face, as he glanced around him and through the openings of the
forest aisles, brought a faint smile to her saddened face. At last he
called in a half-embarrassed voice:--

"Miss Nellie!"

The smile faded from Teresa's cheek. Who was "Miss Nellie?" She pressed
her ear to the opening. "Miss Wynn!" the voice again called, but was
lost in the echoless woods. Devoured with a new gratuitous curiosity, in
another moment Teresa felt she would have disclosed herself at any risk,
but the stranger rose and began to retrace his steps. Long after his
tinkling spurs were lost in the distance, Teresa remained like a statue,
staring at the place where he had stood. Then she suddenly turned like
a mad woman, glanced down at the gown she was wearing, tore it from
her back as if it had been a polluted garment, and stamped upon it in
a convulsion of rage. And then, with her beautiful bare arms clasped
together over her head, she threw herself upon her couch in a tempest of
tears.




CHAPTER VI


When Miss Nellie reached the first mining extension of Indian Spring,
which surrounded it like a fosse, she descended for one instant into one
of its trenches, opened her parasol, removed her duster, hid it under a
bowlder, and with a few shivers and cat-like strokes of her soft
hands not only obliterated all material traces of the stolen cream of
Carquinez Woods, but assumed a feline demureness quite inconsistent with
any moral dereliction. Unfortunately, she forgot to remove at the same
time a certain ring from her third finger, which she had put on with her
duster and had worn at no other time. With this slight exception, the
benignant fate which always protected that young person brought her
in contact with the Burnham girls at one end of the main street as the
returning coach to Excelsior entered the other, and enabled her to take
leave of them before the coach office with a certain ostentation of
parting which struck Mr. Jack Brace, who was lingering at the doorway,
into a state of utter bewilderment.

Here was Miss Nellie Wynn, the belle of Excelsior, calm, quiet,
self-possessed, her chaste cambric skirts and dainty shoes as fresh as
when she had left her father's house; but where was the woman of the
brown duster, and where the yellow-dressed apparition of the woods? He
was feebly repeating to himself his mental adjuration of a few hours
before when he caught her eye, and was taken with a blush and a fit
of coughing. Could he have been such an egregious fool, and was it not
plainly written on his embarrassed face for her to read?

"Are we going down together?" asked Miss Nellie with an exceptionally
gracious smile.

There was neither affectation nor coquetry in this advance. The girl
had no idea of Brace's suspicion of her, nor did any uneasy desire to
placate or deceive a possible rival of Low's prompt her graciousness.
She simply wished to shake off in this encounter the already stale
excitement of the past two hours, as she had shaken the dust of the
woods from her clothes. It was characteristic of her irresponsible
nature and transient susceptibilities that she actually enjoyed
the relief of change; more than that, I fear, she looked upon this
infidelity to a past dubious pleasure as a moral principle. A mild, open
flirtation with a recognized man like Brace, after her secret passionate
tryst with a nameless nomad like Low, was an ethical equipoise that
seemed proper to one of her religious education.

Brace was only too happy to profit by Miss Nellie's condescension; he at
once secured the seat by her side, and spent the four hours and a half
of their return journey to Excelsior in blissful but timid communion
with her. If he did not dare to confess his past suspicions, he was
equally afraid to venture upon the boldness he had premeditated a
few hours before. He was therefore obliged to take a middle course of
slightly egotistical narration of his own personal adventures, with
which he beguiled the young girl's ear. This he only departed from once,
to describe to her a valuable grizzly bearskin which he had seen that
day for sale at Indian Spring, with a view to divining her possible
acceptance of it for a "buggy robe;" and once to comment upon a ring
which she had inadvertently disclosed in pulling off her glove.

"It's only an old family keepsake," she added, with easy mendacity; and
affecting to recognize in Mr. Brace's curiosity a not unnatural excuse
for toying with her charming fingers, she hid them in chaste and
virginal seclusion in her lap, until she could recover the ring and
resume her glove.

A week passed--a week of peculiar and desiccating heat for even those
dry Sierra table-lands. The long days were filled with impalpable
dust and acrid haze suspended in the motionless air; the nights were
breathless and dewless; the cold wind which usually swept down from the
snow line was laid to sleep over a dark monotonous level, whose horizon
was pricked with the eating fires of burning forest crests. The lagging
coach of Indian Spring drove up at Excelsior, and precipitated its
passengers with an accompanying cloud of dust before the Excelsior
Hotel. As they emerged from the coach, Mr. Brace, standing in the
doorway, closely scanned their begrimed and almost unrecognizable faces.
They were the usual type of travelers: a single professional man in
dusty black, a few traders in tweeds and flannels, a sprinkling of
miners in red and gray shirts, a Chinaman, a negro, and a Mexican packer
or muleteer. This latter for a moment mingled with the crowd in the
bar-room, and even penetrated the corridor and dining-room of the hotel,
as if impelled by a certain semi-civilized curiosity, and then strolled
with a lazy, dragging step--half impeded by the enormous leather
leggings, chains, and spurs, peculiar to his class--down the main
street. The darkness was gathering, but the muleteer indulged in the
same childish scrutiny of the dimly lighted shops, magazines, and
saloons, and even of the occasional groups of citizens at the street
corners. Apparently young, as far as the outlines of his figure could
be seen, he seemed to show even more than the usual concern of masculine
Excelsior in the charms of womankind. The few female figures about
at that hour, or visible at window or veranda, received his marked
attention; he respectfully followed the two auburn-haired daughters of
Deacon Johnson on their way to choir meeting to the door of the church.
Not content with that act of discreet gallantry, after they had entered
he managed to slip unperceived behind them.

The memorial of the Excelsior gamblers' generosity was a modern
building, large and pretentious, for even Mr. Wynn's popularity, and
had been good-humoredly known, in the characteristic language of the
generous donors, as one of the "biggest religious bluffs" on record. Its
groined rafters, which were so new and spicy that they still suggested
their native forest aisles, seldom covered more than a hundred devotees,
and in the rambling choir, with its bare space for the future organ,
the few choristers, gathered round a small harmonium, were lost in the
deepening shadow of that summer evening. The muleteer remained hidden
in the obscurity of the vestibule. After a few moments' desultory
conversation, in which it appeared that the unexpected absence of
Miss Nellie Wynn, their leader, would prevent their practicing, the
choristers withdrew. The stranger, who had listened eagerly, drew back
in the darkness as they passed out, and remained for a few moments a
vague and motionless figure in the silent church. Then coming cautiously
to the window, the flapping broad-brimmed hat was put aside, and the
faint light of the dying day shone in the black eyes of Teresa! Despite
her face, darkened with dye and disfigured with dust, the matted hair
piled and twisted around her head, the strange dress and boyish figure,
one swift glance from under her raised lashes betrayed her identity.

She turned aside mechanically into the first pew, picked up and opened a
hymn-book. Her eyes became riveted on a name written on the title-page,
"Nellie Wynn." HER name, and HER book. The instinct that had guided her
here was right; the slight gossip of her fellow-passengers was right;
this was the clergyman's daughter, whose praise filled all mouths. This
was the unknown girl the stranger was seeking, but who in turn perhaps
had been seeking Low--the girl who absorbed his fancy--the secret of
his absences, his preoccupation, his coldness! This was the girl whom to
see, perhaps in his arms, she was now periling her liberty and her life
unknown to him! A slight odor, some faint perfume of its owner, came
from the book; it was the same she had noticed in the dress Low had
given her. She flung the volume to the ground, and, throwing her arms
over the back of the pew before her, buried her face in her hands.

In that light and attitude she might have seemed some rapt acolyte
abandoned to self-communion. But whatever yearning her soul might have
had for higher sympathy or deeper consolation, I fear that the spiritual
Tabernacle of Excelsior and the Reverend Mr. Wynn did not meet that
requirement. She only felt the dry, oven-like heat of that vast shell,
empty of sentiment and beauty, hollow in its pretense and dreary in its
desolation. She only saw in it a chief altar for the glorification of
this girl who had absorbed even the pure worship of her companion, and
converted and degraded his sublime paganism to her petty creed. With a
woman's withering contempt for her own art displayed in another woman,
she thought how she herself could have touched him with the peace that
the majesty of their woodland aisles--so unlike this pillared sham--had
taught her own passionate heart, had she but dared. Mingling with this
imperfect theology, she felt she could have proved to him also that
a brunette and a woman of her experience was better than an immature
blonde. She began to loathe herself for coming hither, and dreaded to
meet his face. Here a sudden thought struck her. What if he had not come
here? What if she had been mistaken? What if her rash interpretation
of his absence from the wood that night was simple madness? What if
he should return--if he had already returned? She rose to her feet,
whitening yet joyful with the thought. She could return at once; what
was the girl to her now? Yet there was time to satisfy herself if he
were at HER house. She had been told where it was; she could find it in
the dark; an open door or window would betray some sign or sound of
the occupants. She rose, replaced her hat over her eyes, knotted her
flaunting scarf around her throat, groped her way to the door, and
glided into the outer darkness.




CHAPTER VII


It was quite dark when Mr. Jack Brace stopped before Father Wynn's open
door. The windows were also invitingly open to the wayfarer, as were
the pastoral counsels of Father Wynn, delivered to some favored guest
within, in a tone of voice loud enough for a pulpit. Jack Brace paused.
The visitor was the convalescent sheriff, Jim Dunn, who had publicly
commemorated his recovery by making his first call upon the father
of his inamorata. The Reverend Mr. Wynn had been expatiating upon the
unremitting heat of a possible precursor of forest fires, and exhibiting
some catholic knowledge of the designs of a Deity in that regard, and
what should be the policy of the Legislature, when Mr. Brace concluded
to enter. Mr. Wynn and the wounded man, who occupied an arm-chair by
the window, were the only occupants of the room. But in spite of the
former's ostentatious greeting, Brace could see that his visit was
inopportune and unwelcome. The sheriff nodded a quick, impatient
recognition, which, had it not been accompanied by an anathema on the
heat, might have been taken as a personal insult. Neither spoke of
Miss Nellie, although it was patent to Brace that they were momentarily
expecting her. All of which went far to strengthen a certain wavering
purpose in his mind.

"Ah, ha! strong language, Mr. Dunn," said Father Wynn, referring to the
sheriff's adjuration, "but 'out of the fullness of the heart the mouth
speaketh.' Job, sir, cursed, we are told, and even expressed himself in
vigorous Hebrew regarding his birthday. Ha, ha! I'm not opposed to that.
When I have often wrestled with the spirit I confess I have sometimes
said, 'D--n you.' Yes, sir, 'D--n you.'"

There was something so unutterably vile in the reverend gentleman's
utterance and emphasis of this oath that the two men, albeit both easy
and facile blasphemers, felt shocked; as the purest of actresses is apt
to overdo the rakishness of a gay Lothario, Father Wynn's immaculate
conception of an imprecation was something terrible. But he added, "The
law ought to interfere with the reckless use of camp-fires in the woods
in such weather by packers and prospectors."

"It isn't so much the work of white men," broke in Brace, "as it is
of Greasers, Chinamen, and Diggers, especially Diggers. There's that
blasted Low, ranges the whole Carquinez Woods as if they were his. I
reckon he ain't particular just where he throws his matches."

"But he's not a Digger; he's a Cherokee, and only a half-breed at that,"
interpolated Wynn. "Unless," he added, with the artful suggestion of the
betrayed trust of a too credulous Christian, "he deceived me in this as
in other things."

In what other things Low had deceived him he did not say; but, to the
astonishment of both men, Dunn growled a dissent to Brace's proposition.
Either from some secret irritation with that possible rival, or
impatience at the prolonged absence of Nellie, he had "had enough of
that sort of hog-wash ladled out to him for genuine liquor." As to the
Carquinez Woods, he [Dunn] "didn't know why Low hadn't as much right
there as if he'd grabbed it under a preemption law and didn't live
there." With this hint at certain speculations of Father Wynn in public
lands for a homestead, he added that "If they [Brace and Wynn] could
bring him along any older American settler than an Indian, they
might rake down his [Dunn's] pile." Unprepared for this turn in the
conversation, Wynn hastened to explain that he did not refer to the pure
aborigine, whose gradual extinction no one regretted more than himself,
but to the mongrel, who inherited only the vices of civilization. "There
should be a law, sir, against the mingling of races. There are men, sir,
who violate the laws of the Most High by living with Indian women--squaw
men, sir, as they are called."

Dunn rose with a face livid with weakness and passion. "Who dares say
that? They are a d--d sight better than sneaking Northern Abolitionists,
who married their daughters to buck niggers like--" But a spasm of pain
withheld this Parthian shot at the politics of his two companions, and
he sank back helplessly in his chair.

An awkward silence ensued. The three men looked at each other in
embarrassment and confusion. Dunn felt that he had given way to a
gratuitous passion; Wynn had a vague presentiment that he had said
something that imperiled his daughter's prospects; and Brace was divided
between an angry retort and the secret purpose already alluded to.

"It's all the blasted heat," said Dunn, with a forced smile, pushing
away the whisky which Wynn had ostentatiously placed before him.

"Of course," said Wynn hastily; "only it's a pity Nellie ain't here to
give you her smelling-salts. She ought to be back now," he added, no
longer mindful of Brace's presence; "the coach is over-due now, though I
reckon the heat made Yuba Bill take it easy at the up grade."

"If you mean the coach from Indian Spring," said Brace quietly, "it's in
already; but Miss Nellie didn't come on it."

"May be she got out at the Crossing," said Wynn cheerfully; "she
sometimes does."

"She didn't take the coach at Indian Spring," returned Brace, "because
I saw it leave, and passed it on Buckskin ten minutes ago, coming up the
hills."

"She's stopped over at Burnham's," said Wynn reflectively. Then, in
response to the significant silence of his guests, he added, in a tone
of chagrin which his forced heartiness could not disguise, "Well, boys,
it's a disappointment all round; but we must take the lesson as it
comes. I'll go over to the coach office and see if she's sent any word.
Make yourselves at home until I return."

When the door had closed behind him, Brace arose and took his hat as
if to go. With his hand on the lock, he turned to his rival, who, half
hidden in the gathering darkness, still seemed unable to comprehend his
ill-luck.

"If you're waiting for that bald-headed fraud to come back with the
truth about his daughter," said Brace coolly, "you'd better send for
your things and take up your lodgings here."

"What do you mean?" said Dunn sternly.

"I mean that she's not at the Burnhams'; I mean that he either does or
does not know WHERE she is, and that in either case he is not likely to
give you information. But I can."

"You can?"

"Yes."

"Then, where is she?"

"In the Carquinez Woods, in the arms of the man you were just
defending--Low, the half-breed."

The room had become so dark that from the road nothing could be
distinguished. Only the momentary sound of struggling feet was heard.

"Sit down," said Brace's voice, "and don't be a fool. You're too weak,
and it ain't a fair fight. Let go your hold. I'm not lying--I wish to
God I was!"

There was silence, and Brace resumed, "We've been rivals, I know. May be
I thought my chance as good as yours. If what I say ain't truth, we'll
stand as we stood before; and if you're on the shoot, I'm your man when
you like, where you like, or on sight if you choose. But I can't bear to
see another man played upon as I've been played upon--given dead away as
I've been. It ain't on the square.

"There," he continued, after a pause, "that's right, now steady. Listen.
A week ago that girl went down just like this to Indian Spring. It
was given out, like this, that she went to the Burnhams'. I don't mind
saying, Dunn, that I went down myself, all on the square, thinking I
might get a show to talk to her, just as YOU might have done, you know,
if you had my chance. I didn't come across her anywhere. But two men
that I met thought they recognized her in a disguise going into the
woods. Not suspecting anything, I went after her; saw her at a distance
in the middle of the woods in another dress that I can swear to, and was
just coming up to her when she vanished--went like a squirrel up a tree,
or down like a gopher in the ground, but vanished."

"Is that all?" said Dunn's voice. "And just because you were a d--d
fool, or had taken a little too much whisky, you thought--"

"Steady. That's just what I said to myself," interrupted Brace coolly,
"particularly when I saw her that same afternoon in another dress,
saying 'Good-by' to the Burnhams, as fresh as a rose and as cold as
those snow-peaks. Only one thing--she had a ring on her finger she never
wore before, and didn't expect me to see."

"What if she did? She might have bought it. I reckon she hasn't to
consult you," broke in Dunn's voice sternly.

"She didn't buy it," continued Brace quietly. "Low gave that Jew trader
a bearskin in exchange for it, and presented it to her. I found that
out two days afterwards. I found out that out of the whole afternoon she
spent less than an hour with the Burnhams. I found out that she bought
a duster like the disguise the two men saw her in. I found the yellow
dress she wore that day hanging up in Low's cabin--the place where I saw
her go--THE RENDEZVOUS WHERE SHE MEETS HIM. Oh, you're listenin', are
you? Stop! SIT DOWN!

"I discovered it by accident," continued the voice of Brace when all was
again quiet; "it was hidden as only a squirrel or an Injin can hide when
they improve upon nature. When I was satisfied that the girl had been
in the woods, I was determined to find out where she vanished, and went
there again. Prospecting around, I picked up at the foot of one of the
biggest trees this yer old memorandum-book, with grasses and herbs stuck
in it. I remembered that I'd heard old Wynn say that Low, like the d--d
Digger that he was, collected these herbs; only he pretended it was for
science. I reckoned the book was his and that he mightn't be far away. I
lay low and waited. Bimeby I saw a lizard running down the root. When he
got sight of me he stopped."

"D--n the lizard! What's that got to do with where she is now?"

"Everything. That lizard had a piece of sugar in his mouth. Where did it
come from? I made him drop it, and calculated he'd go back for more. He
did. He scooted up that tree and slipped in under some hanging strips of
bark. I shoved 'em aside, and found an opening to the hollow where they
do their housekeeping."

"But you didn't see her there--and how do you know she is there now?"

"I determined to make it sure. When she left to-day, I started an hour
ahead of her, and hid myself at the edge of the woods. An hour after the
coach arrived at Indian Spring, she came there in a brown duster and was
joined by him. I'd have followed them, but the d--d hound has the ears
of a squirrel, and though I was five hundred yards from him he was on
his guard."

"Guard be blessed! Wasn't you armed? Why didn't you go for him?" said
Dunn, furiously.

"I reckoned I'd leave that for you," said Brace coolly. "If he'd killed
me, and if he'd even covered me with his rifle, he'd been sure to let
daylight through me at double the distance. I shouldn't have been any
better off, nor you either. If I'd killed HIM, it would have been your
duty as sheriff to put me in jail; and I reckon it wouldn't have broken
your heart, Jim Dunn, to have got rid of TWO rivals instead of one.
Hullo! Where are you going?"

"Going?" said Dunn hoarsely. "Going to the Carquinez Woods, by God! to
kill him before her. I'LL risk it, if you daren't. Let me succeed, and
you can hang ME and take the girl yourself."

"Sit down, sit down. Don't be a fool, Jim Dunn! You wouldn't keep the
saddle a hundred yards. Did I say I wouldn't help you? No. If you're
willing, we'll run the risk together, but it must be in my way. Hear me.
I'll drive you down there in a buggy before daylight, and we'll surprise
them in the cabin or as they leave the wood. But you must come as if
to arrest him for some offense--say, as an escaped Digger from the
Reservation, a dangerous tramp, a destroyer of public property in the
forests, a suspected road agent, or anything to give you the right
to hunt him. The exposure of him and Nellie, don't you see, must be
accidental. If he resists, kill him on the spot, and nobody'll blame
you; if he goes peaceably with you, and you once get him in Excelsior
jail, when the story gets out that he's taken the belle of Excelsior for
his squaw, if you'd the angels for your posse you couldn't keep the boys
from hanging him to the first tree. What's that?"

He walked to the window, and looked out cautiously.

"If it was the old man coming back and listening," he said, after a
pause, "it can't he helped. He'll hear it soon enough, if he don't
suspect something already."

"Look yer, Brace," broke in Dunn hoarsely. "D--d if I understand you or
you me. That dog Low has got to answer to ME, not to the LAW! I'll take
my risk of killing him, on sight and on the square. I don't reckon to
handicap myself with a warrant, and I am not going to draw him out with
a lie. You hear me? That's me all the time!"

"Then you calkilate to go down thar," said Brace contemptuously, "yell
out for him and Nellie, and let him line you on a rest from the first
tree as if you were a grizzly."

There was a pause. "What's that you were saying just now about a
bearskin he sold?" asked Dunn slowly, as if reflecting.

"He exchanged a bearskin," replied Brace, "with a single hole right over
the heart. He's a dead shot, I tell you."

"D--n his shooting," said Dunn. "I'm not thinking of that. How long ago
did he bring in that bearskin?"

"About two weeks, I reckon. Why?"

"Nothing! Look yer, Brace, you mean well--thar's my hand. I'll go down
with you there, but not as the sheriff. I'm going there as Jim Dunn, and
you can come along as a white man, to see things fixed on the square.
Come!"

Brace hesitated. "You'll think better of my plan before you get there;
but I've said I'd stand by you, and I will. Come, then. There's no time
to lose."

They passed out into the darkness together.

"What are you waiting for?" said Dunn impatiently, as Brace, who was
supporting him by the arm, suddenly halted at the corner of the house.

"Some one was listening--did you not see him? Was it the old man?" asked
Brace hurriedly.

"Blast the old man! It was only one of them Mexican packers chock-full
of whisky, and trying to hold up the house. What are you thinking of? We
shall be late."

In spite of his weakness, the wounded man hurriedly urged Brace forward,
until they reached the latter's lodgings. To his surprise, the horse
and buggy were already before the door.

"Then you reckoned to go, any way?" said Dunn, with a searching look at
his companion.

"I calkilated SOMEBODY would go," returned Brace, evasively, patting the
impatient Buckskin; "but come in and take a drink before we leave."

Dunn started out of a momentary abstraction, put his hand on his hip,
and mechanically entered the house. They had scarcely raised the glasses
to their lips when a sudden rattle of wheels was heard in the street.
Brace set down his glass and ran to the window.

"It's the mare bolted," he said, with an oath. "We've kept her too long
standing. Follow me," and he dashed down the staircase into the street.
Dunn followed with difficulty; when he reached the door he was already
confronted by his breathless companion. "She's gone off on a run, and
I'll swear there was a man in the buggy!" He stopped and examined the
halter-strap, still fastened to the fence. "Cut! by God!"

Dunn turned pale with passion. "Who's got another horse and buggy?" he
demanded.

"The new blacksmith in Main Street; but we won't get it by borrowing,"
said Brace.

"How then?" asked Dunn savagely.

"Seize it, as the sheriff of Yuba and his deputy, pursuing a confederate
of the Injin Low--THE HORSE THIEF!"




CHAPTER VIII


The brief hour of darkness that preceded the dawn was that night
intensified by a dense smoke, which, after blotting out horizon and sky,
dropped a thick veil on the high road and the silent streets of Indian
Spring. As the buggy containing Sheriff Dunn and Brace dashed through
the obscurity, Brace suddenly turned to his companion.

"Some one ahead!"

The two men bent forward over the dashboard. Above the steady plunging
of their own horse-hoofs they could hear the quicker irregular beat of
other hoofs in the darkness before them.

"It's that horse thief!" said Dunn, in a savage whisper. "Bear to the
right, and hand me the whip."

A dozen cuts of the cruel lash, and their maddened horse, bounding at
each stroke, broke into a wild canter. The frail vehicle swayed from
side to side at each spring of the elastic shafts. Steadying himself by
one hand on the low rail, Dunn drew his revolver with the other. "Sing
out to him to pull up, or we'll fire. My voice is clean gone," he added,
in a husky whisper.

They were so near that they could distinguish the bulk of a vehicle
careering from side to side in the blackness ahead. Dunn deliberately
raised his weapon. "Sing out!" he repeated impatiently. But Brace, who
was still keeping in the shadow, suddenly grasped his companion's arm.

"Hush! It's NOT Buckskin," he whispered hurriedly.

"Are you sure?"

"DON'T YOU SEE WE'RE GAINING ON HIM?" replied the other contemptuously.
Dunn grasped his companion's hand and pressed it silently. Even in
that supreme moment this horseman's tribute to the fugitive Buckskin
forestalled all baser considerations of pursuit and capture!

In twenty seconds they were abreast of the stranger, crowding his horse
and buggy nearly into the ditch; Brace keenly watchful, Dunn suppressed
and pale. In half a minute they were leading him a length; and when
their horse again settled down to his steady work, the stranger was
already lost in the circling dust that followed them. But the victors
seemed disappointed. The obscurity had completely hidden all but the
vague outlines of the mysterious driver.

"He's not our game, anyway," whispered Dunn. "Drive on."

"But if it was some friend of his," suggested Brace uneasily, "what
would you do?"

"What I SAID I'd do," responded Dunn savagely. "I don't want five
minutes to do it in, either; we'll be half an hour ahead of that d--d
fool, whoever he is. Look here; all you've got to do is to put me in the
trail to that cabin. Stand back of me, out of gun-shot, alone, if you
like, as my deputy, or with any number you can pick up as my posse.
If he gets by me as Nellie's lover, you may shoot him or take him as a
horse thief, if you like."

"Then you won't shoot him on sight?"

"Not till I've had a word with him."

"But--"

"I've chirped," said the sheriff gravely. "Drive on."

For a few moments only the plunging hoofs and rattling wheels were
heard. A dull, lurid glow began to define the horizon. They were silent
until an abatement of the smoke, the vanishing of the gloomy horizon
line, and a certain impenetrability in the darkness ahead showed them
they were nearing the Carquinez Woods. But they were surprised on
entering them to find the dim aisles alight with a faint mystic Aurora.
The tops of the towering spires above them had caught the gleam of the
distant forest fires, and reflected it as from a gilded dome.

"It would be hot work if the Carquinez Woods should conclude to take a
hand in this yer little game that's going on over on the Divide yonder,"
said Brace, securing his horse and glancing at the spires overhead.
"I reckon I'd rather take a back seat at Injin Spring when the show
commences."

Dunn did not reply, but, buttoning his coat, placed one hand on his
companion's shoulder, and sullenly bade him "lead the way." Advancing
slowly and with difficulty the desperate man might have been taken for a
peaceful invalid returning from an early morning stroll. His right hand
was buried thoughtfully in the side pocket of his coat. Only Brace knew
that it rested on the handle of his pistol.

From time to time the latter stopped and consulted the faint trail with
a minuteness that showed recent careful study. Suddenly he paused. "I
made a blaze hereabouts to show where to leave the trail. There it is,"
he added, pointing to a slight notch cut in the trunk of an adjoining
tree.

"But we've just passed one," said Dunn, "if that's what you are looking
after, a hundred yards back."

Brace uttered an oath, and ran back in the direction signified by his
companion. Presently he returned with a smile of triumph.

"They've suspected something. It's a clever trick, but it won't hold
water. That blaze which was done to muddle you was cut with an axe; this
which I made was done with a bowie-knife. It's the real one. We're not
far off now. Come on."

They proceeded cautiously, at right angles with the "blazed" tree, for
ten minutes more. The heat was oppressive; drops of perspiration rolled
from the forehead of the sheriff, and at times, when he attempted to
steady his uncertain limbs, his hands shrank from the heated, blistering
bark he touched with ungloved palms.

"Here we are," said Brace, pausing at last. "Do you see that biggest
tree, with the root stretching out halfway across to the opposite one?"

"No, it's further to the right and abreast of the dead brush,"
interrupted Dunn quickly, with a sudden revelation that this was the
spot where he had found the dead bear in the night Teresa escaped.

"That's so," responded Brace, in astonishment.

"And the opening is on the other side, opposite the dead brush," said
Dunn.

"Then you know it?" said Brace suspiciously.

"I reckon!" responded Dunn, grimly. "That's enough! Fall back!"

To the surprise of his companion, he lifted his head erect, and with a
strong, firm step walked directly to the tree. Reaching it, he planted
himself squarely before the opening.

"Halloo!" he said.

There was no reply. A squirrel scampered away close to his feet. Brace,
far in the distance, after an ineffectual attempt to distinguish his
companion through the intervening trunks, took off his coat, leaned
against a tree, and lit a cigar.

"Come out of that cabin!" continued Dunn, in a clear, resonant voice.
"Come out before I drag you out!"

"All right, 'Captain Scott.' Don't shoot, and I'll come down," said a
voice as clear and as high as his own. The hanging strips of bark were
dashed aside, and a woman leaped lightly to the ground.

Dunn staggered back. "Teresa! by the Eternal!"

It was Teresa! the old Teresa! Teresa, a hundred times more vicious,
reckless, hysterical, extravagant, and outrageous than before. Teresa,
staring with tooth and eye, sunburnt and embrowned, her hair hanging
down her shoulders, and her shawl drawn tightly around her neck.

"Teresa it is! the same old gal! Here we are again! Return of the
favorite in her original character! For two weeks only! Houp la! Tshk!"
and, catching her yellow skirt with her fingers, she pirouetted before
the astounded man, and ended in a pose. Recovering himself with an
effort, Dunn dashed forward and seized her by the wrist.

"Answer me, woman! Is that Low's cabin?"

"It is."

"Who occupies it besides?"

"I do."

"And who else?"

"Well," drawled Teresa slowly, with an extravagant affectation of
modesty, "nobody else but us, I reckon. Two's company, you know, and
three's none."

"Stop! Will you swear that there isn't a young girl, his--his
sweetheart--concealed there with you?"

The fire in Teresa's eye was genuine as she answered steadily, "Well,
it ain't my style to put up with that sort of thing; at least, it wasn't
over at Yolo, and you know it, Jim Dunn, or I wouldn't be here."

"Yes, yes," said Dunn hurriedly. "But I'm a d--d fool, or worse, the
fool of a fool. Tell me, Teresa, is this man Low your lover?"

Teresa lowered her eyes as if in maidenly confusion. "Well, if I'd known
that YOU had any feeling of your own about it--if you'd spoken sooner--"

"Answer me, you devil!"

"He is."

"And he has been with you here--yesterday--to-night?"

"He has."

"Enough." He laughed a weak, foolish laugh, and, turning pale, suddenly
lapsed against a tree. He would have fallen, but with a quick instinct
Teresa sprang to his side, and supported him gently to a root. The
action over, they both looked astounded.

"I reckon that wasn't much like either you or me," said Dunn slowly,
"was it? But if you'd let me drop then you'd have stretched out the
biggest fool in the Sierras." He paused, and looked at her curiously.
"What's come over you; blessed if I seem to know you now."

She was very pale again, and quiet; that was all.

"Teresa! d--n it, look here! When I was laid up yonder in Excelsior I
said I wanted to get well for only two things. One was to hunt you down,
the other to marry Nellie Wynn. When I came here I thought that last
thing could never be. I came here expecting to find her here with Low,
and kill him--perhaps kill her too. I never once thought of you; not
once. You might have risen up before me--between me and him--and I'd
have passed you by. And now that I find it's all a mistake, and it was
you, not her, I was looking for, why--"

"Why," she interrupted bitterly, "you'll just take me, of course, to
save your time and earn your salary. I'm ready."

"But I'M not, just yet," he said faintly. "Help me up."

She mechanically assisted him to his feet.

"Now stand where you are," he added, "and don't move beyond this tree
till I return."

He straightened himself with an effort, clenched his fists until the
nails were nearly buried in his palms, and strode with a firm, steady
step in the direction he had come. In a few moments he returned and
stood before her.

"I've sent away my deputy--the man who brought me here, the fool who
thought you were Nellie. He knows now he made a mistake. But who it was
he mistook for Nellie he does not know, nor shall ever know, nor shall
any living being know, other than myself. And when I leave the wood
to-day I shall know it no longer. You are safe here as far as I am
concerned, but I cannot screen you from others prying. Let Low take you
away from here as soon as he can."

"Let him take me away? Ah, yes. For what?"

"To save you," said Dunn. "Look here, Teresa! Without knowing it, you
lifted me out of hell just now, and because of the wrong I might have
done her--for HER sake, I spare you and shirk my duty."

"For her sake!" gasped the woman--"for her sake! Oh, yes! Go on."

"Well," said Dunn gloomily, "I reckon perhaps you'd as lieve left me in
hell, for all the love you bear me. And may be you've grudge enough agin
me still to wish I'd found her and him together."

"You think so?" she said, turning her head away.

"There, d--n it! I didn't mean to make you cry. May be you wouldn't,
then. Only tell that fellow to take you out of this, and not run away
the next time he sees a man coming."

"He didn't run," said Teresa, with flashing eyes. "I--I--I sent him
away," she stammered. Then, suddenly turning with fury upon him, she
broke out, "Run! Run from you! Ha, ha! You said just now I'd a grudge
against you. Well, listen, Jim Dunn. I'd only to bring you in range of
that young man's rifle, and you'd have dropped in your tracks like--"

"Like that bar, the other night," said Dunn, with a short laugh. "So
THAT was your little game?" He checked his laugh suddenly--a cloud
passed over his face. "Look here, Teresa," he said, with an assumption
of carelessness that was as transparent as it was utterly incompatible
with his frank, open selfishness. "What became of that bar? The
skin--eh? That was worth something?"

"Yes," said Teresa quietly. "Low exchanged it and got a ring for me from
that trader Isaacs. It was worth more, you bet. And the ring didn't fit
either--"

"Yes," interrupted Dunn, with an almost childish eagerness.

"And I made him take it back, and get the value in money. I hear that
Isaacs sold it again and made another profit; but that's like those
traders." The disingenuous candor of Teresa's manner was in exquisite
contrast to Dunn. He rose and grasped her hand so heartily she was
forced to turn her eyes away.

"Good-by!" he said.

"You look tired," she murmured, with a sudden gentleness that surprised
him; "let me go with you a part of the way."

"It isn't safe for you just now," he said, thinking of the possible
consequences of the alarm Brace had raised.

"Not the way YOU came," she replied; "but one known only to myself."

He hesitated only a moment. "All right, then," he said finally, "let
us go at once. It's suffocating here, and I seem to feel this dead bark
crinkle under my feet."

She cast a rapid glance around her, and then seemed to sound with her
eyes the far-off depths of the aisles, beginning to grow pale with the
advancing day, but still holding a strange quiver of heat in the air.
When she had finished her half-abstracted scrutiny of the distance, she
cast one backward glance at her own cabin and stopped.

"Will you wait a moment for me?" she asked gently.

"Yes--but--no tricks, Teresa! It isn't worth the time."

She looked him squarely in the eyes without a word.

"Enough," he said; "go!"

She was absent for some moments. He was beginning to become uneasy, when
she made her appearance again, clad in her old faded black dress. Her
face was very pale, and her eyes were swollen, but she placed his hand
on her shoulder, and bidding him not to fear to lean upon her, for she
was quite strong, led the way.

"You look more like yourself now, and yet--blast it all!--you don't
either," said Dunn, looking down upon her. "You've changed in some way.
What is it? Is it on account of that Injin? Couldn't you have found a
white man in his place?"

"I reckon he's neither worse nor better for that," she replied bitterly;
"and perhaps he wasn't as particular in his taste as a white man might
have been. But," she added, with a sudden spasm of her old rage, "it's
a lie; he's NOT an Indian, no more than I am. Not unless being born of
a mother who scarcely knew him, of a father who never even saw him, and
being brought up among white men and wild beasts--less cruel than they
were--could make him one!"

Dunn looked at her in surprise not unmixed with admiration. "If Nellie,"
he thought, "could but love ME like that!" But he only said:

"For all that, he's an Injin. Why, look at his name. It ain't Low. It's
L'Eau Dormante, Sleeping Water, an Injin name."

"And what does that prove?" returned Teresa. "Only that Indians clap a
nick-name on any stranger, white or red, who may camp with them. Why,
even his own father, a white man, the wretch who begot him and abandoned
him,--HE had an Indian name--Loup Noir."

"What name did you say?"

"Le Loup Noir, the Black Wolf. I suppose you'd call him an Indian, too?
Eh! What's the matter? We're walking too fast. Stop a moment and rest.
There--there, lean on me!"

She was none too soon; for, after holding him upright a moment, his
limbs failed, and stooping gently she was obliged to support him half
reclining against a tree.

"Its the heat!" he said. "Give me some whisky from my flask. Never mind
the water," he added faintly, with a forced laugh, after he had taken a
draught at the strong spirit. "Tell me more about the other water--the
Sleeping Water--you know. How do you know all this about him and
his--father?"

"Partly from him and partly from Curson, who wrote to me about him," she
answered with some hesitation.

But Dunn did not seem to notice this incongruity of correspondence with
a former lover. "And HE told you?"

"Yes; and I saw the name on an old memorandum book he has, which he says
belonged to his father. It's full of old accounts of some trading post
on the frontier. It's been missing for a day or two, but it will turn
up. But I can swear I saw it."

Dunn attempted to rise to his feet. "Put your hand in my pocket," he
said in a hurried whisper. "No, there!--bring out a book. There, I
haven't looked at it yet. Is that it?" he added, handing her the book
Brace had given him a few hours before.

"Yes," said Teresa, in surprise. "Where did you find it?"

"Never mind! Now let me see it, quick. Open it, for my sight is failing.
There--thank you--that's all!"

"Take more whisky," said Teresa, with a strange anxiety creeping over
her. "You are faint again."

"Wait! Listen, Teresa--lower--put your ear lower. Listen! I came near
killing that chap Low to-day. Wouldn't it have been ridiculous?"

He tried to smile, but his head fell back. He had fainted.




CHAPTER IX


For the first time in her life Teresa lost her presence of mind in an
emergency. She could only sit staring at the helpless man, scarcely
conscious of his condition, her mind filled with a sudden prophetic
intuition of the significance of his last words. In the light of
that new revelation she looked into his pale, haggard face for some
resemblance to Low, but in vain. Yet her swift feminine instinct met the
objection. "It's the mother's blood that would show," she murmured, "not
this man's."

Recovering herself, she began to chafe his hands and temples, and
moistened his lips with the spirit. When his respiration returned with a
faint color to his cheeks, she pressed his hands eagerly and leaned over
him.

"Are you sure?" she asked.

"Of what?" he whispered faintly.

"That Low is really your son?"

"Who said so?" he asked, opening his round eyes upon her.

"You did yourself, a moment ago," she said quickly. "Don't you
remember?"

"Did I?"

"You did. Is it not so?"

He smiled faintly. "I reckon."

She held her breath in expectation. But only the ludicrousness of the
discovery seemed paramount to his weakened faculties. "Isn't it just
about the ridiculousest thing all round?" he said, with a feeble
chuckle. "First YOU nearly kill me before you know I am Low's father;
then I'm just spoilin' to kill him before I know he's my son; then that
god-forsaken fool Jack Brace mistakes you for Nellie and Nellie for you.
Ain't it just the biggest thing for the boys to get hold of? But we must
keep it dark until after I marry Nellie, don't you see? Then we'll have
a good time all round, and I'll stand the drinks. Think of it, Teresha!
You don' no me, I do' no you, nobody knowsh anybody elsh. I try kill
Lo'. Lo' wants kill Nellie. No thath no ri--'" but the potent liquor,
overtaking his exhausted senses, thickened, impeded, and at last stopped
his speech. His head slipped to her shoulder, and he became once more
unconscious.

Teresa breathed again. In that brief moment she had abandoned herself to
a wild inspiration of hope which she could scarcely define. Not that it
was entirely a wild inspiration; she tried to reason calmly. What if she
revealed the truth to him? What if she told the wretched man before her
that she had deceived him; that she had overheard his conversation with
Brace; that she had stolen Brace's horse to bring Low warning; that,
failing to find Low in his accustomed haunts, or at the campfire, she
had left a note for him pinned to the herbarium, imploring him to fly
with his companion from the danger that was coming; and that, remaining
on watch, she had seen them both--Brace and Dunn--approaching, and had
prepared to meet them at the cabin? Would this miserable and
maddened man understand her self-abnegation? Would he forgive Low and
Nellie?--she did not ask for herself. Or would the revelation turn his
brain, if it did not kill him outright? She looked at the sunken orbits
of his eyes and hectic on his cheek, and shuddered.

Why was this added to the agony she already suffered? She had been
willing to stand between them with her life, her liberty, and even--the
hot blood dyed her cheek at the thought--with the added shame of being
thought the cast-off mistress of that man's son. Yet all this she had
taken upon herself in expiation of something--she knew not clearly what;
no, for nothing--only for HIM. And yet this very situation offered
her that gleam of hope which had thrilled her; a hope so wild in its
improbability, so degrading in its possibility, that at first she knew
not whether despair was not preferable to its shame. And yet was it
unreasonable? She was no longer passionate; she would be calm and think
it out fairly.

She would go to Low at once. She would find him somewhere--and even if
with that girl, what mattered?--and she would tell him all. When he knew
that the life and death of his father lay in the scale, would he let his
brief, foolish passion for Nellie stand in the way? Even if he were not
influenced by filial affection or mere compassion, would his pride let
him stoop to a rivalry with the man who had deserted his youth? Could
he take Dunn's promised bride, who must have coquetted with him to have
brought him to this miserable plight? Was this like the calm, proud
young god she knew? Yet she had an uneasy instinct that calm, proud
young gods and goddesses did things like this, and felt the weakness of
her reasoning flush her own conscious cheek.

"Teresa!"

She started. Dunn was awake, and was gazing at her curiously.

"I was reckoning it was the only square thing for Low to stop this
promiscuous picnicking here and marry you out and out."

"Marry me!" said Teresa in a voice that, with all her efforts, she could
not make cynical.

"Yes," he repeated, "after I've married Nellie; tote you down to
San Angeles, and there take my name like a man, and give it to you.
Nobody'll ask after TERESA, sure--you bet your life. And if they do,
and he can't stop their jaw, just you call on the old man. It's mighty
queer, ain't it, Teresa, to think of your being my daughter-in-law?"

It seemed here as if he was about to lapse again into unconsciousness
over the purely ludicrous aspect of the subject, but he haply recovered
his seriousness. "He'll have as much money from me as he wants to go
into business with. What's his line of business, Teresa?" asked this
prospective father-in-law, in a large, liberal way.

"He is a botanist!" said Teresa, with a sudden childish animation that
seemed to keep up the grim humor of the paternal suggestion; "and oh,
he is too poor to buy books! I sent for one or two for him myself, the
other day--" she hesitated--"it was all the money I had, but it wasn't
enough for him to go on with his studies."

Dunn looked at her sparkling eyes and glowing cheeks, and became
thoughtful. "Curson must have been a d--d fool," he said finally.

Teresa remained silent. She was beginning to be impatient and uneasy,
fearing some mischance that might delay her dreaded, yet longed-for
meeting with Low. Yet she could not leave this sick and exhausted man,
HIS FATHER, now bound to her by more than mere humanity.

"Couldn't you manage," she said gently, "to lean on me a few
steps further, until I could bring you to a cooler spot and nearer
assistance?"

He nodded. She lifted him almost like a child to his feet. A spasm of
pain passed over his face. "How far is it?" he asked.

"Not more than ten minutes," she replied.

"I can make a spurt for that time," he said coolly, and began to walk
slowly but steadily on. Only his face, which was white and set, and the
convulsive grip of his hand on her arm betrayed the effort. At the
end of ten minutes she stopped. They stood before the splintered,
lightning-scarred shaft in the opening of the woods, where Low had built
her first camp-fire. She carefully picked up the herbarium, but her
quick eye had already detected in the distance, before she had allowed
Dunn to enter the opening with her, that her note was gone. Low had been
there before them; he had been warned, as his absence from the cabin
showed; he would not return there. They were free from interruption--but
where had he gone?

The sick man drew a long breath of relief as she seated him in the
clover-grown hollow where she had slept the second night of her stay.
"It's cooler than those cursed woods," he said. "I suppose it's because
it's a little like a grave. What are you going to do now?" he added, as
she brought a cup of water and placed it at his side.

"I am going to leave you here for a little while," she said cheerfully,
but with a pale face and nervous hands. "I'm going to leave you while I
seek Low."

The sick man raised his head. "I'm good for a spurt, Teresa, like that
I've just got through, but I don't think I'm up to a family party.
Couldn't you issue cards later on?"

"You don't understand," she said. "I'm going to get Low to send some one
of your friends to you here. I don't think he'll begrudge leaving HER a
moment for that," she added to herself bitterly.

"What's that you're saying?" he queried, with the nervous quickness of
an invalid.

"Nothing--but that I'm going now." She turned her face aside to hide her
moistened eyes. "Wish me good luck, won't you?" she asked, half sadly,
half pettishly.

"Come here!"

She came and bent over him. He suddenly raised his hands, and, drawing
her face down to his own, kissed her forehead.

"Give that to HIM," he whispered, "from ME."

She turned and fled, happily for her sentiment, not hearing the feeble
laugh that followed, as Dunn, in sheer imbecility, again referred to
the extravagant ludicrousness of the situation. "It is about the biggest
thing in the way of a sell all round," he repeated, lying on his back,
confidentially to the speck of smoke-obscured sky above him. He pictured
himself repeating it, not to Nellie--her severe propriety might at last
overlook the fact, but would not tolerate the joke--but to her father!
It would be one of those characteristic Californian jokes Father Wynn
would admire.

To his exhaustion fever presently succeeded, and he began to grow
restless. The heat too seemed to invade his retreat, and from time to
time the little patch of blue sky was totally obscured by clouds of
smoke. He amused himself with watching a lizard who was investigating a
folded piece of paper, whose elasticity gave the little creature lively
apprehensions of its vitality. At last he could stand the stillness of
his retreat and his supine position no longer, and rolled himself out of
the bed of leaves that Teresa had so carefully prepared for him. He rose
to his feet stiff and sore, and, supporting himself by the nearest tree,
moved a few steps from the dead ashes of the camp-fire. The movement
frightened the lizard, who abandoned the paper and fled. With a
satirical recollection of Brace and his "ridiculous" discovery through
the medium of this animal, he stooped and picked up the paper. "Like as
not," he said to himself, with grim irony, "these yer lizards are in the
discovery business. P'r'aps this may lead to another mystery," and he
began to unfold the paper with a smile. But the smile ceased as his eye
suddenly caught his own name.

A dozen lines were written in pencil on what seemed to be a blank leaf
originally torn from some book. He trembled so that he was obliged to
sit down to read these words:--


"When you get this keep away from the woods. Dunn and another man are
in deadly pursuit of you and your companion. I overheard their plan to
surprise you in our cabin. DON'T GO THERE, and I will delay them and put
them off the scent. Don't mind me. God bless you, and if you never see
me again think sometimes of

"TERESA."


His trembling ceased; he did not start, but rose in an abstracted way,
and made a few deliberate steps in the direction Teresa had gone. Even
then he was so confused that he was obliged to refer to the paper again,
but with so little effect that he could only repeat the last words,
"think sometimes of Teresa." He was conscious that this was not all; he
had a full conviction of being deceived, and knew that he held the
proof in his hand, but he could not formulate it beyond that sentence.
"Teresa"--yes, he would think of her. She would explain it. And here she
was returning.

In that brief interval her face and manner had again changed. Her face
was pale and quite breathless. She cast a swift glance at Dunn and the
paper he mechanically held out, walked up to him, and tore it from his
hand.

"Well," she said hoarsely, "what are you going to do about it?"

He attempted to speak, but his voice failed him. Even then he was
conscious that if he had spoken he would have only repeated, "think
sometimes of Teresa." He looked longingly but helplessly at the spot
where she had thrown the paper, as if it had contained his unuttered
words.

"Yes," she went on to herself, as if he was a mute, indifferent
spectator--"yes, they're gone. That ends it all. The game's played out.
Well!" suddenly turning upon him, "now you know it all. Your Nellie WAS
here with him, and is with him now. Do you hear? Make the most of it;
you've lost them--but here I am."

"Yes," he said eagerly--"yes, Teresa."

She stopped, stared at him; then taking him by the hand led him like a
child back to his couch. "Well," she said, in half-savage explanation,
"I told you the truth when I said the girl wasn't at the cabin last
night, and that I didn't know her. What are you glowerin' at? No! I
haven't lied to you, I swear to God, except in one thing. Did you know
what that was? To save him I took upon me a shame I don't deserve. I let
you think I was his mistress. You think so now, don't you? Well, before
God to-day--and He may take me when He likes--I'm no more to him than a
sister! I reckon your Nellie can't say as much."

She turned away, and with the quick, impatient stride of some caged
animal made the narrow circuit of the opening, stopping a moment
mechanically before the sick man, and again, without looking at him,
continuing her monotonous round. The heat had become excessive, but
she held her shawl with both hands drawn tightly over her shoulders.
Suddenly a wood-duck darted out of the covert blindly into the opening,
struck against the blasted trunk, fell half stunned near her feet, and
then, recovering, fluttered away. She had scarcely completed another
circuit before the irruption was followed by a whirring bevy of quail, a
flight of jays, and a sudden tumult of wings swept through the wood like
a tornado. She turned inquiringly to Dunn, who had risen to his feet,
but the next moment she caught convulsively at his wrist; a wolf had
just dashed through the underbrush not a dozen yards away, and on either
side of them they could hear the scamper and rustle of hurrying feet
like the outburst of a summer shower. A cold wind arose from the
opposite direction, as if to contest this wild exodus, but it was
followed by a blast of sickening heat. Teresa sank at Dunn's feet in an
agony of terror.

"Don't let them touch me!" she gasped; "keep them off! Tell me, for
God's sake, what has happened!"

He laid his hand firmly on her arm, and lifted her in his turn to
her feet like a child. In that supreme moment of physical danger, his
strength, reason, and manhood returned in their plenitude of power. He
pointed coolly to the trail she had quitted, and said,

"The Carquinez Woods are on fire!"




CHAPTER X


The nest of the tuneful Burnhams, although in the suburbs of Indian
Spring, was not in ordinary weather and seasons hidden from the longing
eyes of the youth of that settlement. That night, however, it was veiled
in the smoke that encompassed the great highway leading to Excelsior.
It is presumed that the Burnham brood had long since folded their
wings, for there was no sign of life nor movement in the house as a
rapidly-driven horse and buggy pulled up before it. Fortunately, the
paternal Burnham was an early bird, in the habit of picking up the first
stirring mining worm, and a resounding knock brought him half dressed
to the street door. He was startled at seeing Father Wynn before him, a
trifle flushed and abstracted.

"Ah ha! up betimes, I see, and ready. No sluggards here--ha, ha!" he
said heartily, slamming the door behind him, and by a series of pokes in
the ribs genially backing his host into his own sitting-room. "I'm up,
too, and am here to see Nellie. She's here, eh--of course?" he added,
darting a quick look at Burnham.

But Mr. Burnham was one of those large, liberal Western husbands who
classified his household under the general title of "woman folk," for
the integers of which he was not responsible. He hesitated, and then
propounded over the balusters to the upper story the direct query--

"You don't happen to have Nellie Wynn up there, do ye?"

There was an interval of inquiry proceeding from half a dozen reluctant
throats, more or less cottony and muffled, in those various degrees
of grievance and mental distress which indicate too early roused
young womanhood. The eventual reply seemed to be affirmative, albeit
accompanied with a suppressed giggle, as if the young lady had just been
discovered as an answer to an amusing conundrum.

"All right," said Wynn, with an apparent accession of boisterous
geniality. "Tell her I must see her, and I've only got a few minutes to
spare. Tell her to slip on anything and come down; there's no one here
but myself, and I've shut the front door on Brother Burnham. Ha, ha!"
and suiting the action to the word, he actually bundled the admiring
Brother Burnham out on his own doorstep. There was a light pattering on
the staircase, and Nellie Wynn, pink with sleep, very tall, very slim,
hastily draped in a white counterpane with a blue border and a general
classic suggestion, slipped into the parlor. At the same moment her
father shut the door behind her, placed one hand on the knob, and with
the other seized her wrist.

"Where were you yesterday?" he asked.

Nellie looked at him, shrugged her shoulders, and said, "Here."

"You were in the Carquinez Woods with Low Dorman; you went there in
disguise; you've met him there before. He is your clandestine lover; you
have taken pledges of affection from him; you have--"

"Stop!" she said.

He stopped.

"Did he tell you this?" she asked, with an expression of disdain.

"No; I overheard it. Dunn and Brace were at the house waiting for you.
When the coach did not bring you, I went to the office to inquire. As I
left our door I thought I saw somebody listening at the parlor windows.
It was only a drunken Mexican muleteer leaning against the house; but
if HE heard nothing, I did. Nellie, I heard Brace tell Dunn that he had
tracked you in your disguise to the woods--do you hear? that when you
pretended to be here with the girls you were with Low--alone; that you
wear a ring that Low got of a trader here; that there was a cabin in the
woods--"

"Stop!" she repeated.

Wynn again paused.

"And what did YOU do?" she asked.

"I heard they were starting down there to surprise you and him together,
and I harnessed up and got ahead of them in my buggy."

"And found me here," she said, looking full into his eyes.

He understood her and returned the look. He recognized the full
importance of the culminating fact conveyed in her words, and was
obliged to content himself with its logical and worldly significance. It
was too late now to take her to task for mere filial disobedience; they
must become allies.

"Yes," he said hurriedly; "but if you value your reputation, if you wish
to silence both these men, answer me fully."

"Go on," she said.

"Did you go to the cabin in the woods yesterday?"

"No."

"Did you ever go there with Low?"

"No; I do not know even where it is."

Wynn felt that she was telling the truth. Nellie knew it; but as she
would have been equally satisfied with an equally efficacious falsehood,
her face remained unchanged.

"And when did he leave you?"

"At nine o'clock, here. He went to the hotel."

"He saved his life, then, for Dunn is on his way to the woods to kill
him."

The jeopardy of her lover did not seem to affect the young girl with
alarm, although her eyes betrayed some interest.

"Then Dunn has gone to the woods?" she said thoughtfully.

"He has," replied Wynn.

"Is that all?" she asked.

"I want to know what you are going to do?"

"I WAS going back to bed."

"This is no time for trifling, girl."

"I should think not," she said, with a yawn; "it's too early, or too
late."

Wynn grasped her wrist more tightly. "Hear me! Put whatever face you
like on this affair, you are compromised--and compromised with a man you
can't marry."

"I don't know that I ever wanted to marry Low, if you mean him," she
said quietly.

"And Dunn wouldn't marry you now."

"I'm not so sure of that, either."

"Nellie," said Wynn excitedly, "do you want to drive me mad? Have you
nothing to say--nothing to suggest?"

"Oh, you want me to help you, do you! Why didn't you say that first?
Well, go and bring Dunn here."

"Are you mad? The man has gone already in pursuit of your lover,
believing you with him."

"Then he will the more readily come and talk with me without him. Will
you take the invitation--yes or no?"

"Yes, but--"

"Enough. On your way there you will stop at the hotel and give Low a
letter from me."

"Nellie!"

"You shall read it, of course," she said scornfully, "for it will be
your text for the conversation you will have with him. Will you please
take your hand from the lock and open the door?"

Wynn mechanically opened the door. The young girl flew up-stairs. In a
very few moments she returned with two notes: one contained a few lines
of formal invitation to Dunn; the other read as follows:


"DEAR MR. DORMAN,--My father will tell you how deeply I regret that our
recent botanical excursions in the Carquinez Woods have been a source of
serious misapprehensions to those who had a claim to my consideration,
and that I shall be obliged to discontinue them for the future. At
the same time he wishes me to express my gratitude for your valuable
instruction and assistance in that pleasing study, even though
approaching events may compel me to relinquish it for other duties.
May I beg you to accept the inclosed ring as a slight recognition of my
obligations to you?

"Your grateful pupil,

"NELLIE WYNN."


When he had finished reading the letter, she handed him a ring, which
he took mechanically. He raised his eyes to hers with perfectly genuine
admiration. "You're a good girl, Nellie," he said, and, in a moment
of parental forgetfulness, unconsciously advanced his lips towards her
cheek. But she drew back in time to recall him to a sense of that human
weakness.

"I suppose I'll have time for a nap yet," she said, as a gentle hint to
her embarrassed parent. He nodded and turned towards the door.

"If I were you," she continued, repressing a yawn, "I'd manage to be
seen on good terms with Low at the hotel; so perhaps you need not give
the letter to him until the last thing. Good-by."

The sitting-room door opened and closed behind her as she slipped
up-stairs, and her father, without the formality of leave-taking,
quietly let himself out by the front door.

When he drove into the high road again, however, an overlooked
possibility threatened for a moment to indefinitely postpone his amiable
intentions regarding Low. The hotel was at the further end of the
settlement towards the Carquinez Woods, and as Wynn had nearly reached
it he was recalled to himself by the sounds of hoofs and wheels rapidly
approaching from the direction of the Excelsior turnpike. Wynn made no
doubt it was the sheriff and Brace. To avoid recognition at that moment,
he whipped up his horse, intending to keep the lead until he could turn
into the first cross-road. But the coming travelers had the fleetest
horse, and finding it impossible to distance them he drove close to the
ditch, pulling up suddenly as the strange vehicle was abreast of him,
and forcing them to pass him at full speed, with the result already
chronicled. When they had vanished in the darkness, Mr. Wynn, with a
heart overflowing with Christian thankfulness and universal benevolence,
wheeled round, and drove back to the hotel he had already passed. To
pull up at the veranda with a stentorian shout, to thump loudly at the
deserted bar, to hilariously beat the panels of the landlord's door,
and commit a jocose assault and battery upon that half-dresssed and
half-awakened man, was eminently characteristic of Wynn, and part of his
amiable plans that morning.

"Something to wash this wood smoke from my throat, Brother Carter, and
about as much again to prop open your eyes," he said, dragging Carter
before the bar, "and glasses round for as many of the boys as are up
and stirring after a hard-working Christian's rest. How goes the honest
publican's trade, and who have we here?"

"Thar's Judge Robinson and two lawyers from Sacramento, Dick Curson over
from Yolo," said Carter, "and that ar young Injin yarb doctor from the
Carquinez Woods. I reckon he's jist up--I noticed a light under his door
as I passed."

"He's my man for a friendly chat before breakfast," said Wynn. "You
needn't come up. I'll find the way. I don't want a light; I reckon my
eyes ain't as bright nor as young as his, but they'll see almost as far
in the dark--he! he!" And, nodding to Brother Carter, he strode
along the passage, and with no other introduction than a playful and
preliminary "Boo!" burst into one of the rooms. Low, who by the light
of a single candle was bending over the plates of a large quarto, merely
raised his eyes and looked at the intruder. The young man's natural
imperturbability, always exasperating to Wynn, seemed accented that
morning by contrast with his own over-acted animation.

"Ah ha!--wasting the midnight oil instead of imbibing the morning dews,"
said Father Wynn archly, illustrating his metaphor with a movement of
his hand to his lips. "What have we here?"

"An anonymous gift," replied Low simply, recognizing the father of
Nellie by rising from his chair. "It's a volume I've longed to possess,
but never could afford to buy. I cannot imagine who sent it to me."

Wynn was for a moment startled by the thought that this recipient of
valuable gifts might have influential friends. But a glance at the bare
room, which looked like a camp, and the strange, unconventional garb of
its occupant, restored his former convictions. There might be a promise
of intelligence, but scarcely of prosperity, in the figure before him.

"Ah! We must not forget that we are watched over in the night season,"
he said, laying his hand on Low's shoulder, with an illustration of
celestial guardianship that would have been impious but for its palpable
grotesqueness. "No, sir, we know not what a day may bring forth."

Unfortunately, Low's practical mind did not go beyond a mere human
interpretation. It was enough, however, to put a new light in his eye
and a faint color in his cheek.

"Could it have been Miss Nellie?" he asked, with half-boyish hesitation.

Mr. Wynn was too much of a Christian not to bow before what appeared to
him the purely providential interposition of this suggestion. Seizing
it and Low at the same moment, he playfully forced him down again in his
chair.

"Ah, you rascal!" he said, with infinite archness; "that's your game,
is it? You want to trap poor Father Wynn. You want to make him say 'No.'
You want to tempt him to commit himself. No, sir!--never, sir!--no, no!"

Firmly convinced that the present was Nellie's, and that her father only
good-humoredly guessed it, the young man's simple, truthful nature was
embarrassed. He longed to express his gratitude, but feared to betray
the young girl's trust. The Reverend Mr. Wynn speedily relieved his
mind.

"No," he continued, bestriding a chair, and familiarly confronting Low
over its back. "No, sir--no! And you want me to say 'No,' don't you,
regarding the little walks of Nellie and a certain young man in the
Carquinez Woods?--ha, ha! You'd like me to say that I knew nothing
of the botanizings, and the herb collectings, and the picknickings
there--he, he!--you sly dog! Perhaps you'd like to tempt Father Wynn
further, and make him swear he knows nothing of his daughter disguising
herself in a duster and meeting another young man--isn't it another
young man?--all alone, eh? Perhaps you want poor old Father Wynn to say
No. No, sir, nothing of the kind ever occurred. Ah, you young rascal!"

Slightly troubled, in spite of Wynn's hearty manner, Low, with his usual
directness, however, said, "I do not want anyone to deny that I have
seen Miss Nellie."

"Certainly, certainly," said Wynn, abandoning his method, considerably
disconcerted by Low's simplicity, and a certain natural reserve that
shook off his familiarity. "Certainly it's a noble thing to be able to
put your hand on your heart and say to the world, 'Come on, all of you!
Observe me; I have nothing to conceal. I walk with Miss Wynn in the
woods as her instructor--her teacher, in fact. We cull a flower here and
there; we pluck an herb fresh from the hands of the Creator. We look, so
to speak, from Nature to Nature's God.' Yes, my young friend, we should
be the first to repel the foul calumny that could misinterpret our most
innocent actions."

"Calumny?" repeated Low, starting to his feet. "What calumny?"

"My friend, my noble young friend, I recognize your indignation. I know
your worth. When I said to Nellie, my only child, my perhaps too simple
offspring--a mere wildflower like yourself--when I said to her, 'Go,
my child, walk in the woods with this young man, hand in hand. Let him
instruct you from the humblest roots, for he has trodden in the ways of
the Almighty. Gather wisdom from his lips, and knowledge from his simple
woodman's craft. Make, in fact, a collection not only of herbs, but of
moral axioms and experience'--I knew I could trust you, and, trusting
you, my young friend, I felt I could trust the world. Perhaps I was
weak, foolish. But I thought only of her welfare. I even recall how that
to preserve the purity of her garments, I bade her don a simple duster;
that, to secure her from the trifling companionship of others, I
bade her keep her own counsel, and seek you at seasons known but to
yourselves."

"But . . . did Nellie . . . understand you?" interrupted Low hastily.

"I see you read her simple nature. Understand me? No, not at first!
Her maidenly instinct--perhaps her duty to another--took the alarm. I
remember her words. 'But what will Dunn say?' she asked. 'Will he not be
jealous?'"

"Dunn! jealous! I don't understand," said Low, fixing his eyes on Wynn.

"That's just what I said to Nellie. 'Jealous!' I said. 'What, Dunn,
your affianced husband, jealous of a mere friend--a teacher, a guide, a
philosopher. It is impossible.' Well, sir, she was right. He is jealous.
And, more than that, he has imparted his jealousy to others! In other
words, he has made a scandal!"

Low's eyes flashed. "Where is your daughter now?" he said sternly.

"At present in bed, suffering from a nervous attack brought on by these
unjust suspicions. She appreciates your anxiety, and, knowing that you
could not see her, told me to give you this." He handed Low the ring and
the letter.

The climax had been forced, and, it must be confessed, was by no means
the one Mr. Wynn had fully arranged in his own inner consciousness.
He had intended to take an ostentatious leave of Low in the bar-room,
deliver the letter with archness, and escape before a possible
explosion. He consequently backed towards the door for an emergency.
But he was again at fault. That unaffected stoical fortitude in acute
suffering, which was the one remaining pride and glory of Low's race,
was yet to be revealed to Wynn's civilized eyes.

The young man took the letter, and read it without changing a muscle,
folded the ring in it, and dropped it into his haversack. Then he picked
up his blanket, threw it over his shoulder, took his trusty rifle in his
hand, and turned towards Wynn as if coldly surprised that he was still
standing there.

"Are you--are you--going?" stammered Wynn.

"Are you NOT?" replied Low dryly, leaning on his rifle for a moment as
if waiting for Wynn to precede him. The preacher looked at him a moment,
mumbled something, and then shambled feebly and ineffectively down the
staircase before Low, with a painful suggestion to the ordinary observer
of being occasionally urged thereto by the moccasin of the young man
behind him.

On reaching the lower hall, however, he endeavored to create a diversion
in his favor by dashing into the bar-room and clapping the occupants on
the back with indiscriminate playfulness. But here again he seemed to be
disappointed. To his great discomfiture, a large man not only returned
his salutation with powerful levity, but with equal playfulness seized
him in his arms, and after an ingenious simulation of depositing him
in the horse-trough set him down in affected amazement. "Bleth't if
I didn't think from the weight of your hand it wath my old friend,
Thacramento Bill," said Curson apologetically, with a wink at the
bystanders. "That'th the way Bill alwayth uthed to tackle hith friendth,
till he wath one day bounthed by a prithe-fighter in Frithco, whom he
had mithtaken for a mithionary." As Mr. Curson's reputation was of a
quality that made any form of apology from him instantly acceptable,
the amused spectators made way for him as, recognizing Low, who was just
leaving the hotel, he turned coolly from them and walked towards him.

"Halloo!" he said, extending his hand. "You're the man I'm waiting for.
Did you get a book from the exthpreth offithe latht night?"

"I did. Why?"

"It'th all right. Ath I'm rethponthible for it, I only wanted to know."

"Did YOU send it?" asked Low, quickly fixing his eyes on his face.

"Well, not exactly ME. But it'th not worth making a mythtery of it.
Teretha gave me a commithion to buy it and thend it to you anonymouthly.
That'th a woman'th nonthenth, for how could thee get a retheipt for it?"

"Then it was HER present," said Low gloomily.

"Of courthe. It wathn't mine, my boy. I'd have thent you a Tharp'th
rifle in plathe of that muthle loader you carry, or thomething
thenthible. But, I thay! what'th up? You look ath if you had been
running all night."

Low grasped his hand. "Thank you," he said hurriedly; "but it's nothing.
Only I must be back to the woods early. Good-by."

But Curson retained Low's hand in his own powerful grip.

"I'll go with you a bit further," he said. "In fact, I've got thomething
to thay to you; only don't be in thuch a hurry; the woodth can wait till
you get there." Quietly compelling Low to alter his own characteristic
Indian stride to keep pace with his, he went on: "I don't mind thaying
I rather cottoned to you from the time you acted like a white man--no
offenthe--to Teretha. She thayth you were left when a child lying
round, jutht ath promithcuouthly ath she wath; and if I can do anything
towardth putting you on the trail of your people, I'll do it. I know
thome of the voyageurth who traded with the Cherokeeth, and your
father wath one-wathn't he?" He glanced at Low's utterly abstracted and
immobile face. "I thay, you don't theem to take a hand in thith game,
pardner. What'th the row? Ith anything wrong over there?" and he pointed
to the Carquinez Woods, which were just looming out of the morning
horizon in the distance.

Low stopped. The last words of his companion seemed to recall him to
himself. He raised his eyes automatically to the woods and started.

"There IS something wrong over there," he said breathlessly. "Look!"

"I thee nothing," said Curson, beginning to doubt Low's sanity; "nothing
more than I thaw an hour ago."

"Look again. Don't you see that smoke rising straight up? It isn't blown
over there from the Divide; it's new smoke! The fire is in the woods!"

"I reckon that'th so," muttered Curson, shading his eyes with his hand.
"But, hullo! wait a minute! We'll get hortheth. I say!" he shouted,
forgetting his lisp in his excitement--"stop!" But Low had already
lowered his head and darted forward like an arrow.

In a few moments he had left not only his companion but the last
straggling houses of the outskirts far behind him, and had struck out in
a long, swinging trot for the disused "cut-off." Already he fancied he
heard the note of clamor in Indian Spring, and thought he distinguished
the sound of hurrying hoofs on the great highway. But the sunken trail
hid it from his view. From the column of smoke now plainly visible
in the growing morning light he tried to locate the scene of the
conflagration. It was evidently not a fire advancing regularly from the
outer skirt of the wood, communicated to it from the Divide; it was a
local outburst near its centre. It was not in the direction of his cabin
in the tree. There was no immediate danger to Teresa, unless fear drove
her beyond the confines of the wood into the hands of those who might
recognize her. The screaming of jays and ravens above his head quickened
his speed, as it heralded the rapid advance of the flames; and the
unexpected apparition of a bounding body, flattened and flying over
the yellow plain, told him that even the secure retreat of the
mountain wild-cat had been invaded. A sudden recollection of Teresa's
uncontrollable terror that first night smote him with remorse and
redoubled his efforts. Alone in the track of these frantic and
bewildered beasts, to what madness might she not be driven!

The sharp crack of a rifle from the high road turned his course
momentarily in that direction. The smoke was curling lazily over the
heads of the party of men in the road, while the huge hulk of a grizzly
was disappearing in the distance. A battue of the escaping animals had
commenced! In the bitterness of his heart he caught at the horrible
suggestion, and resolved to save her from them or die with her there.

How fast he ran, or the time it took him to reach the woods, has never
been known. Their outlines were already hidden when he entered them.
To a sense less keen, a courage less desperate, and a purpose less
unaltered than Low's, the wood would have been impenetrable. The central
fire was still confined to the lofty tree tops, but the downward rush of
wind from time to time drove the smoke into the aisles in blinding and
suffocating volumes. To simulate the creeping animals, and fall to the
ground on hands and knees, feel his way through the underbrush when
the smoke was densest, or take advantage of its momentary lifting, and
without uncertainty, mistake, or hesitation glide from tree to tree in
one undeviating course, was possible only to an experienced woodsman. To
keep his reason and insight so clear as to be able in the midst of this
bewildering confusion to shape that course so as to intersect the wild
and unknown tract of an inexperienced, frightened wanderer belonged to
Low, and Low alone. He was making his way against the wind towards
the fire. He had reasoned that she was either in comparative safety to
windward of it, or he should meet her being driven towards him by it,
or find her succumbed and fainting at its feet. To do this he must
penetrate the burning belt, and then pass under the blazing dome. He
was already upon it; he could see the falling fire dropping like rain or
blown like gorgeous blossoms of the conflagration across his path. The
space was lit up brilliantly. The vast shafts of dull copper cast no
shadow below, but there was no sign nor token of any human being. For a
moment the young man was at fault. It was true this hidden heart of the
forest bore no undergrowth; the cool matted carpet of the aisles seemed
to quench the glowing fragments as they fell. Escape might be difficult,
but not impossible, yet every moment was precious. He leaned against a
tree, and sent his voice like a clarion before him: "Teresa!" There was
no reply. He called again. A faint cry at his back from the trail he had
just traversed made him turn. Only a few paces behind him, blinded and
staggering, but following like a beaten and wounded animal, Teresa,
halted, knelt, clasped her hands, and dumbly held them out before her.
"Teresa!" he cried again, and sprang to her side.

She caught him by the knees, and lifted her face imploringly to his.

"Say that again!" she cried, passionately. "Tell me it was Teresa you
called, and no other! You have come back for me! You would not let me
die here alone!"

He lifted her tenderly in his arms, and cast a rapid glance around
him. It might have been his fancy, but there seemed a dull glow in the
direction he had come.

"You do not speak!" she said. "Tell me! You did not come here to seek
her?"

"Whom?" he said quickly.

"Nellie!"

With a sharp cry he let her slip to the ground. All the pent-up
agony, rage, and mortification of the last hour broke from him in that
inarticulate outburst. Then, catching her hands again, he dragged her to
his level.

"Hear me!" he cried, disregarding the whirling smoke and the fiery
baptism that sprinkled them--"hear me! If you value your life, if you
value your soul, and if you do not want me to cast you to the beasts
like Jezebel of old, never--never take that accursed name again upon
your lips. Seek her--HER? Yes! Seek her to tie her like a witch's
daughter of hell to that blazing tree!" He stopped. "Forgive me," he
said in a changed voice. "I'm mad, and forgetting myself and you. Come."

Without noticing the expression of half-savage delight that had passed
across her face, he lifted her in his arms.

"Which way are you going?" she asked, passing her hands vaguely across
his breast, as if to reassure herself of his identity.

"To our camp by the scarred tree," he replied.

"Not there, not there," she said, hurriedly. "I was driven from there
just now. I thought the fire began there until I came here."

Then it was as he feared. Obeying the same mysterious law that had
launched this fatal fire like a thunderbolt from the burning mountain
crest five miles away into the heart of the Carquinez Woods, it had
again leaped a mile beyond, and was hemming them between two narrowing
lines of fire. But Low was not daunted. Retracing his steps through
the blinding smoke, he strode off at right angles to the trail near the
point where he had entered the wood. It was the spot where he had first
lifted Nellie in his arms to carry her to the hidden spring. If any
recollection of it crossed his mind at that moment, it was only shown in
his redoubled energy. He did not glide through the thick underbrush, as
on that day, but seemed to take a savage pleasure in breaking through it
with sheer brute force. Once Teresa insisted upon relieving him of
the burden of her weight, but after a few steps she staggered blindly
against him, and would fain have recourse once more to his strong arms.
And so, alternately staggering, bending, crouching, or bounding and
crashing on, but always in one direction, they burst through the jealous
rampart, and came upon the sylvan haunt of the hidden spring. The
great angle of the half-fallen tree acted as a harrier to the wind and
drifting smoke, and the cool spring sparkled and bubbled in the almost
translucent air. He laid her down beside the water, and bathed her
face and hands. As he did so his quick eye caught sight of a woman's
handkerchief lying at the foot of the disrupted root. Dropping Teresa's
hand, he walked towards it, and with the toe of his moccasin gave it one
vigorous kick into the ooze at the overflow of the spring. He turned to
Teresa, but she evidently had not noticed the act.

"Where are you?" she asked, with a smile.

Something in her movement struck him! He came towards her, and bending
down looked into her face. "Teresa! Good God!--look at me! What has
happened?"

She raised her eyes to his. There was a slight film across them; the
lids were blackened; the beautiful lashes gone forever!

"I see you a little now, I think," she said, with a smile, passing her
hands vaguely over his face. "It must have happened when he fainted, and
I had to drag him through the blazing brush; both my hands were full,
and I could not cover my eyes."

"Drag whom?" said Low, quickly.

"Why, Dunn."

"Dunn! He here?" said Low, hoarsely.

"Yes; didn't you read the note I left on the herbarium? Didn't you come
to the camp-fire?" she asked hurriedly, clasping his hands. "Tell me
quickly!"

"No!"

"Then you were not there--then you didn't leave me to die?"

"No! I swear it, Teresa!" the stoicism that had upheld his own agony
breaking down before her strong emotion.

"Thank God!" She threw her arms around him, and hid her aching eyes in
his troubled breast.

"Tell me all, Teresa," he whispered in her listening ear. "Don't move;
stay there, and tell me all."

With her face buried in his bosom, as if speaking to his heart alone,
she told him part, but not all. With her eyes filled with tears, but a
smile on her lips, radiant with new-found happiness, she told him how
she had overheard the plans of Dunn and Brace, how she had stolen their
conveyance to warn him in time. But here she stopped, dreading to say
a word that would shatter the hope she was building upon his sudden
revulsion of feeling for Nellie. She could not bring herself to repeat
their interview--that would come later, when they were safe and out of
danger; now not even the secret of his birth must come between them with
its distraction, to mar their perfect communion. She faltered that Dunn
had fainted from weakness, and that she had dragged him out of danger.
"He will never interfere with us--I mean," she said softly, "with ME
again. I can promise you that as well as if he had sworn it."

"Let him pass, now," said Low; "that will come later on," he added,
unconsciously repeating her thought in a tone that made her heart sick.
"But tell me, Teresa, why did you go to Excelsior?"

She buried her head still deeper, as if to hide it. He felt her broken
heart beat against his own; he was conscious of a depth of feeling her
rival had never awakened in him. The possibility of Teresa loving him
had never occurred to his simple nature. He bent his head and kissed
her. She was frightened, and unloosed her clinging arms; but he retained
her hand, and said, "We will leave this accursed place, and you shall
go with me as you said you would; nor need you ever leave me, unless you
wish it."

She could hear the beating of her own heart through his words; she
longed to look at the eyes and lips that told her this, and read the
meaning his voice alone could not entirely convey. For the first time
she felt the loss of her sight. She did not know that it was, in this
moment of happiness, the last blessing vouchsafed to her miserable life.

A few moments of silence followed, broken only by the distant rumor of
the conflagration and the crash of falling boughs.

"It may be an hour yet," he whispered, "before the fire has swept a path
for us to the road below. We are safe here, unless some sudden current
should draw the fire down upon us. You are not frightened?" She pressed
his hand; she was thinking of the pale face of Dunn, lying in the
secure retreat she had purchased for him at such a sacrifice. Yet
the possibility of danger to him now for a moment marred her present
happiness and security. "You think the fire will not go north of where
you found me?" she asked softly.

"I think not," he said, "but I will reconnoitre. Stay where you are."

They pressed hands, and parted. He leaped upon the slanting trunk and
ascended it rapidly. She waited in mute expectation.

There was a sudden movement of the root on which she sat, a deafening
crash, and she was thrown forward on her face.

The vast bulk of the leaning tree, dislodged from its aerial support by
the gradual sapping of the spring at its roots, or by the crumbling
of the bark from the heat, had slipped, made a half revolution, and,
falling, overbore the lesser trees in its path, and tore, in its
resistless momentum, a broad opening to the underbrush.

With a cry to Low, Teresa staggered to her feet. There was an interval
of hideous silence, but no reply. She called again. There was a sudden
deepening roar, the blast of a fiery furnace swept through the opening,
a thousand luminous points around her burst into fire, and in an instant
she was lost in a whirlwind of smoke and flame! From the onset of its
fury to its culmination twenty minutes did not elapse; but in that
interval a radius of two hundred yards around the hidden spring was
swept of life and light and motion.

For the rest of that day and part of the night a pall of smoke hung
above the scene of desolation. It lifted only towards the morning, when
the moon, rising high, picked out in black and silver the shrunken and
silent columns of those roofless vaults, shorn of base and capital. It
flickered on the still, overflowing pool of the hidden spring, and
shone upon the white face of Low, who, with a rootlet of the fallen tree
holding him down like an arm across his breast, seemed to be sleeping
peacefully in the sleeping water.

* * * * *

Contemporaneous history touched him as briefly, but not as gently. "It
is now definitely ascertained," said "The Slumgullion Mirror," "that
Sheriff Dunn met his fate in the Carquinez Woods in the performance
of his duty; that fearless man having received information of
the concealment of a band of horse thieves in their recesses. The
desperadoes are presumed to have escaped, as the only remains found are
those of two wretched tramps, one of whom is said to have been a digger,
who supported himself upon roots and herbs, and the other a degraded
half-white woman. It is not unreasonable to suppose that the fire
originated through their carelessness, although Father Wynn of the First
Baptist Church, in his powerful discourse of last Sunday, pointed at the
warning and lesson of such catastrophes. It may not be out of place
here to say that the rumors regarding an engagement between the pastor's
accomplished daughter and the late lamented sheriff are utterly without
foundation, as it has been an on dit for some time in all well-informed
circles that the indefatigable Mr. Brace, of Wells, Fargo and Co.'s
Express, will shortly lead the lady to the hymeneal altar."

========================================
========================================

SNOW-BOUND AT EAGLE'S

by Bret Harte




SNOW-BOUND AT EAGLE'S




CHAPTER I


For some moments profound silence and darkness had accompanied a Sierran
stage-coach towards the summit. The huge, dim bulk of the vehicle,
swaying noiselessly on its straps, glided onward and upward as if
obeying some mysterious impulse from behind, so faint and indefinite
appeared its relation to the viewless and silent horses ahead. The
shadowy trunks of tall trees that seemed to approach the coach windows,
look in, and then move hurriedly away, were the only distinguishable
objects. Yet even these were so vague and unreal that they might have
been the mere phantoms of some dream of the half-sleeping passengers;
for the thickly-strewn needles of the pine, that choked the way and
deadened all sound, yielded under the silently-crushing wheels a faint
soporific odor that seemed to benumb their senses, already slipping back
into unconsciousness during the long ascent. Suddenly the stage stopped.

Three of the four passengers inside struggled at once into upright
wakefulness. The fourth passenger, John Hale, had not been sleeping, and
turned impatiently towards the window. It seemed to him that two of the
moving trees had suddenly become motionless outside. One of them moved
again, and the door opened quickly but quietly, as of itself.

"Git down," said a voice in the darkness.

All the passengers except Hale started. The man next to him moved his
right hand suddenly behind him, but as quickly stopped. One of the
motionless trees had apparently closed upon the vehicle, and what had
seemed to be a bough projecting from it at right angles changed slowly
into the faintly shining double-barrels of a gun at the window.

"Drop that!" said the voice.

The man who had moved uttered a short laugh, and returned his hand empty
to his knees. The two others perceptibly shrugged their shoulders as
over a game that was lost. The remaining passenger, John Hale, fearless
by nature, inexperienced by habit, awaking suddenly to the truth,
conceived desperate resistance. But without his making a gesture this
was instinctively felt by the others; the muzzle of the gun turned
spontaneously on him, and he was vaguely conscious of a certain contempt
and impatience of him in his companions.

"Git down," repeated the voice imperatively.

The three passengers descended. Hale, furious, alert, but helpless of
any opportunity, followed. He was surprised to find the stage-driver and
express messenger standing beside him; he had not heard them dismount.
He instinctively looked towards the horses. He could see nothing.

"Hold up your hands!"

One of the passengers had already lifted his, in a weary, perfunctory
way. The others did the same reluctantly and awkwardly, but apparently
more from the consciousness of the ludicrousness of their attitude
than from any sense of danger. The rays of a bull's-eye lantern, deftly
managed by invisible hands, while it left the intruders in shadow,
completely illuminated the faces and figures of the passengers. In spite
of the majestic obscurity and silence of surrounding nature, the group
of humanity thus illuminated was more farcical than dramatic. A scrap of
newspaper, part of a sandwich, and an orange peel that had fallen from
the floor of the coach, brought into equal prominence by the searching
light, completed the absurdity.

"There's a man here with a package of greenbacks," said the voice, with
an official coolness that lent a certain suggestion of Custom House
inspection to the transaction; "who is it?" The passengers looked at
each other, and their glance finally settled on Hale.

"It's not HIM," continued the voice, with a slight tinge of contempt on
the emphasis. "You'll save time and searching, gentlemen, if you'll tote
it out. If we've got to go through every one of you we'll try to make it
pay."

The significant threat was not unheeded. The passenger who had first
moved when the stage stopped put his hand to his breast.

"T'other pocket first, if you please," said the voice.

The man laughed, drew a pistol from his hip pocket, and, under the
strong light of the lantern, laid it on a spot in the road indicated
by the voice. A thick envelope, taken from his breast pocket, was laid
beside it. "I told the d--d fools that gave it to me, instead of sending
it by express, it would be at their own risk," he said apologetically.

"As it's going with the express now it's all the same," said the
inevitable humorist of the occasion, pointing to the despoiled express
treasure-box already in the road.

The intention and deliberation of the outrage was plain enough to Hale's
inexperience now. Yet he could not understand the cool acquiescence of
his fellow-passengers, and was furious. His reflections were interrupted
by a voice which seemed to come from a greater distance. He fancied it
was even softer in tone, as if a certain austerity was relaxed.

"Step in as quick as you like, gentlemen. You've five minutes to wait,
Bill."

The passengers reentered the coach; the driver and express messenger
hurriedly climbed to their places. Hale would have spoken, but an
impatient gesture from his companions stopped him. They were evidently
listening for something; he listened too.

Yet the silence remained unbroken. It seemed incredible that there
should be no indication near or far of that forceful presence which a
moment ago had been so dominant. No rustle in the wayside "brush," nor
echo from the rocky canyon below, betrayed a sound of their flight. A
faint breeze stirred the tall tips of the pines, a cone dropped on the
stage roof, one of the invisible horses that seemed to be listening too
moved slightly in his harness. But this only appeared to accentuate
the profound stillness. The moments were growing interminable, when the
voice, so near as to startle Hale, broke once more from the surrounding
obscurity.

"Good-night!"

It was the signal that they were free. The driver's whip cracked like
a pistol shot, the horses sprang furiously forward, the huge vehicle
lurched ahead, and then bounded violently after them. When Hale could
make his voice heard in the confusion--a confusion which seemed greater
from the colorless intensity of their last few moments' experience--he
said hurriedly, "Then that fellow was there all the time?"

"I reckon," returned his companion, "he stopped five minutes to cover
the driver with his double-barrel, until the two other men got off with
the treasure."

"The TWO others!" gasped Hale. "Then there were only THREE men, and we
SIX."

The man shrugged his shoulders. The passenger who had given up the
greenbacks drawled, with a slow, irritating tolerance, "I reckon you're
a stranger here?"

"I am--to this sort of thing, certainly, though I live a dozen miles
from here, at Eagle's Court," returned Hale scornfully.

"Then you're the chap that's doin' that fancy ranchin' over at Eagle's,"
continued the man lazily.

"Whatever I'm doing at Eagle's Court, I'm not ashamed of it," said Hale
tartly; "and that's more than I can say of what I've done--or HAVEN'T
done--to-night. I've been one of six men over-awed and robbed by THREE."

"As to the over-awin', ez you call it--mebbee you know more about
it than us. As to the robbin'--ez far as I kin remember, YOU haven't
onloaded much. Ef you're talkin' about what OUGHTER have been done,
I'll tell you what COULD have happened. P'r'aps ye noticed that when he
pulled up I made a kind of grab for my wepping behind me?"

"I did; and you wern't quick enough," said Hale shortly.

"I wasn't quick enough, and that saved YOU. For ef I got that pistol out
and in sight o' that man that held the gun--"

"Well," said Hale impatiently, "he'd have hesitated."

"He'd hev blown YOU with both barrels outer the window, and that before
I'd got a half-cock on my revolver."

"But that would have been only one man gone, and there would have been
five of you left," said Hale haughtily.

"That might have been, ef you'd contracted to take the hull charge of
two handfuls of buck-shot and slugs; but ez one eighth o' that amount
would have done your business, and yet left enough to have gone round,
promiskiss, and satisfied the other passengers, it wouldn't do to
kalkilate upon."

"But the express messenger and the driver were armed," continued Hale.

"They were armed, but not FIXED; that makes all the difference."

"I don't understand."

"I reckon you know what a duel is?"

"Yes."

"Well, the chances agin US was about the same as you'd have ef you was
put up agin another chap who was allowed to draw a bead on you, and the
signal to fire was YOUR DRAWIN' YOUR WEAPON. You may be a stranger to
this sort o' thing, and p'r'aps you never fought a duel, but even then
you wouldn't go foolin' your life away on any such chances."

Something in the man's manner, as in a certain sly amusement the other
passengers appeared to extract from the conversation, impressed Hale,
already beginning to be conscious of the ludicrous insufficiency of his
own grievance beside that of his interlocutor.

"Then you mean to say this thing is inevitable," said he bitterly, but
less aggressively.

"Ez long ez they hunt YOU; when you hunt THEM you've got the advantage,
allus provided you know how to get at them ez well as they know how to
get at you. This yer coach is bound to go regular, and on certain
days. THEY ain't. By the time the sheriff gets out his posse they've
skedaddled, and the leader, like as not, is takin' his quiet cocktail at
the Bank Exchange, or mebbe losin' his earnings to the sheriff over draw
poker, in Sacramento. You see you can't prove anything agin them unless
you take them 'on the fly.' It may be a part of Joaquim Murietta's band,
though I wouldn't swear to it."

"The leader might have been Gentleman George, from up-country,"
interposed a passenger. "He seemed to throw in a few fancy touches,
particlerly in that 'Good night.' Sorter chucked a little sentiment in
it. Didn't seem to be the same thing ez, 'Git, yer d--d suckers,' on the
other line."

"Whoever he was, he knew the road and the men who travelled on it. Like
ez not, he went over the line beside the driver on the box on the down
trip, and took stock of everything. He even knew I had those greenbacks;
though they were handed to me in the bank at Sacramento. He must have
been hanging 'round there."

For some moments Hale remained silent. He was a civic-bred man, with an
intense love of law and order; the kind of man who is the first to take
that law and order into his own hands when he does not find it existing
to please him. He had a Bostonian's respect for respectability,
tradition, and propriety, but was willing to face irregularity and
impropriety to create order elsewhere. He was fond of Nature with these
limitations, never quite trusting her unguided instincts, and finding
her as an instructress greatly inferior to Harvard University, though
possibly not to Cornell. With dauntless enterprise and energy he had
built and stocked a charming cottage farm in a nook in the Sierras,
whence he opposed, like the lesser Englishman that he was, his own
tastes to those of the alien West. In the present instance he felt it
incumbent upon him not only to assert his principles, but to act
upon them with his usual energy. How far he was impelled by the
half-contemptuous passiveness of his companions it would be difficult to
say.

"What is to prevent the pursuit of them at once?" he asked suddenly. "We
are a few miles from the station, where horses can be procured."

"Who's to do it?" replied the other lazily. "The stage company will
lodge the complaint with the authorities, but it will take two days to
get the county officers out, and it's nobody else's funeral."

"I will go for one," said Hale quietly. "I have a horse waiting for me
at the station, and can start at once."

There was an instant of silence. The stage-coach had left the obscurity
of the forest, and by the stronger light Hale could perceive that his
companion was examining him with two colorless, lazy eyes. Presently
he said, meeting Hale's clear glance, but rather as if yielding to a
careless reflection,--

"It MIGHT be done with four men. We oughter raise one man at the
station." He paused. "I don't know ez I'd mind taking a hand myself," he
added, stretching out his legs with a slight yawn.

"Ye can count ME in, if you're goin', Kernel. I reckon I'm talkin' to
Kernel Clinch," said the passenger beside Hale with sudden alacrity.
"I'm Rawlins, of Frisco. Heerd of ye afore, Kernel, and kinder spotted
you jist now from your talk."

To Hale's surprise the two men, after awkwardly and perfunctorily
grasping each other's hand, entered at once into a languid conversation
on the recent election at Fresno, without the slightest further
reference to the pursuit of the robbers. It was not until the remaining
and undenominated passenger turned to Hale, and, regretting that he had
immediate business at the Summit, offered to accompany the party if they
would wait a couple of hours, that Colonel Clinch briefly returned to
the subject.

"FOUR men will do, and ez we'll hev to take horses from the station
we'll hev to take the fourth man from there."

With these words he resumed his uninteresting conversation with the
equally uninterested Rawlins, and the undenominated passenger subsided
into an admiring and dreamy contemplation of them both. With all his
principle and really high-minded purpose, Hale could not help feeling
constrained and annoyed at the sudden subordinate and auxiliary position
to which he, the projector of the enterprise, had been reduced. It was
true that he had never offered himself as their leader; it was true that
the principle he wished to uphold and the effect he sought to obtain
would be equally demonstrated under another; it was true that the
execution of his own conception gravitated by some occult impulse to
the man who had not sought it, and whom he had always regarded as an
incapable. But all this was so unlike precedent or tradition that, after
the fashion of conservative men, he was suspicious of it, and only that
his honor was now involved he would have withdrawn from the enterprise.
There was still a chance of reasserting himself at the station, where he
was known, and where some authority might be deputed to him.

But even this prospect failed. The station, half hotel and half stable,
contained only the landlord, who was also express agent, and the new
volunteer who Clinch had suggested would be found among the stable-men.
The nearest justice of the peace was ten miles away, and Hale had to
abandon even his hope of being sworn in as a deputy constable. This
introduction of a common and illiterate ostler into the party on equal
terms with himself did not add to his satisfaction, and a remark from
Rawlins seemed to complete his embarrassment.

"Ye had a mighty narrer escape down there just now," said that gentleman
confidentially, as Hale buckled his saddle girths.

"I thought, as we were not supposed to defend ourselves, there was no
danger," said Hale scornfully.

"Oh, I don't mean them road agents. But HIM."

"Who?"

"Kernel Clinch. You jist ez good as allowed he hadn't any grit."

"Whatever I said, I suppose I am responsible for it," answered Hale
haughtily.

"That's what gits me," was the imperturbable reply. "He's the best shot
in Southern California, and hez let daylight through a dozen chaps afore
now for half what you said."

"Indeed!"

"Howsummever," continued Rawlins philosophically, "ez he's concluded to
go WITH ye instead of FOR ye, you're likely to hev your ideas on this
matter carried out up to the handle. He'll make short work of it, you
bet. Ef, ez I suspect, the leader is an airy young feller from Frisco,
who hez took to the road lately, Clinch hez got a personal grudge agin
him from a quarrel over draw poker."

This was the last blow to Hale's ideal crusade. Here he was--an honest,
respectable citizen--engaged as simple accessory to a lawless vendetta
originating at a gambling table! When the first shock was over that
grim philosophy which is the reaction of all imaginative and sensitive
natures came to his aid. He felt better; oddly enough he began to be
conscious that he was thinking and acting like his companions. With this
feeling a vague sympathy, before absent, faintly showed itself in their
actions. The Sharpe's rifle put into his hands by the stable-man was
accompanied by a familiar word of suggestion as to an equal, which
he was ashamed to find flattered him. He was able to continue the
conversation with Rawlins more coolly.

"Then you suspect who is the leader?"

"Only on giniral principles. There was a finer touch, so to speak, in
this yer robbery that wasn't in the old-fashioned style. Down in my
country they hed crude ideas about them things--used to strip the
passengers of everything, includin' their clothes. They say that at the
station hotels, when the coach came in, the folks used to stand round
with blankets to wrap up the passengers so ez not to skeer the wimen.
Thar's a story that the driver and express manager drove up one day with
only a copy of the Alty Californy wrapped around 'em; but thin," added
Rawlins grimly, "there WAS folks ez said the hull story was only an
advertisement got up for the Alty."

"Time's up."

"Are you ready, gentlemen?" said Colonel Clinch.

Hale started. He had forgotten his wife and family at Eagle's Court,
ten miles away. They would be alarmed at his absence, would perhaps hear
some exaggerated version of the stage coach robbery, and fear the worst.

"Is there any way I could send a line to Eagle's Court before daybreak?"
he asked eagerly.

The station was already drained of its spare men and horses. The
undenominated passenger stepped forward and offered to take it himself
when his business, which he would despatch as quickly as possible, was
concluded.

"That ain't a bad idea," said Clinch reflectively, "for ef yer hurry
you'll head 'em off in case they scent us, and try to double back on the
North Ridge. They'll fight shy of the trail if they see anybody on it,
and one man's as good as a dozen."

Hale could not help thinking that he might have been that one man, and
had his opportunity for independent action but for his rash proposal,
but it was too late to withdraw now. He hastily scribbled a few lines to
his wife on a sheet of the station paper, handed it to the man, and took
his place in the little cavalcade as it filed silently down the road.

They had ridden in silence for nearly an hour, and had passed the scene
of the robbery by a higher track. Morning had long ago advanced its
colors on the cold white peaks to their right, and was taking possession
of the spur where they rode.

"It looks like snow," said Rawlins quietly.

Hale turned towards him in astonishment. Nothing on earth or sky looked
less likely. It had been cold, but that might have been only a current
from the frozen peaks beyond, reaching the lower valley. The ridge
on which they had halted was still thick with yellowish-green summer
foliage, mingled with the darker evergreen of pine and fir. Oven-like
canyons in the long flanks of the mountain seemed still to glow with the
heat of yesterday's noon; the breathless air yet trembled and quivered
over stifling gorges and passes in the granite rocks, while far at their
feet sixty miles of perpetual summer stretched away over the winding
American River, now and then lost in a gossamer haze. It was scarcely
ripe October where they stood; they could see the plenitude of August
still lingering in the valleys.

"I've seen Thomson's Pass choked up with fifteen feet o' snow earlier
than this," said Rawlins, answering Hale's gaze; "and last September the
passengers sledded over the road we came last night, and all the time
Thomson, a mile lower down over the ridge in the hollow, smoking his
pipes under roses in his piazzy! Mountains is mighty uncertain; they
make their own weather ez they want it. I reckon you ain't wintered here
yet."

Hale was obliged to admit that he had only taken Eagle's Court in the
early spring.

"Oh, you're all right at Eagle's--when you're there! But it's like
Thomson's--it's the gettin' there that--Hallo! What's that?"

A shot, distant but distinct, had rung through the keen air. It was
followed by another so alike as to seem an echo.

"That's over yon, on the North Ridge," said the ostler, "about two miles
as the crow flies and five by the trail. Somebody's shootin' b'ar."

"Not with a shot gun," said Clinch, quickly wheeling his horse with a
gesture that electrified them. "It's THEM, and the've doubled on us! To
the North Ridge, gentlemen, and ride all you know!"

It needed no second challenge to completely transform that quiet
cavalcade. The wild man-hunting instinct, inseparable to most
humanity, rose at their leader's look and word. With an incoherent and
unintelligible cry, giving voice to the chase like the commonest hound
of their fields, the order-loving Hale and the philosophical Rawlins
wheeled with the others, and in another instant the little band swept
out of sight in the forest.

An immense and immeasurable quiet succeeded. The sunlight glistened
silently on cliff and scar, the vast distance below seemed to stretch
out and broaden into repose. It might have been fancy, but over the
sharp line of the North Ridge a light smoke lifted as of an escaping
soul.




CHAPTER II


Eagle's Court, one of the highest canyons of the Sierras, was in reality
a plateau of table-land, embayed like a green lake in a semi-circular
sweep of granite, that, lifting itself three thousand feet higher,
became a foundation for the eternal snows. The mountain genii of space
and atmosphere jealously guarded its seclusion and surrounded it with
illusions; it never looked to be exactly what it was: the traveller who
saw it from the North Ridge apparently at his feet in descending found
himself separated from it by a mile-long abyss and a rushing river;
those who sought it by a seeming direct trail at the end of an hour lost
sight of it completely, or, abandoning the quest and retracing their
steps, suddenly came upon the gap through which it was entered. That
which from the Ridge appeared to be a copse of bushes beside the tiny
dwelling were trees three hundred feet high; the cultivated lawn before
it, which might have been covered by the traveller's handkerchief, was a
field of a thousand acres.

The house itself was a long, low, irregular structure, chiefly of roof
and veranda, picturesquely upheld by rustic pillars of pine, with the
bark still adhering, and covered with vines and trailing roses. Yet it
was evident that the coolness produced by this vast extent of cover was
more than the architect, who had planned it under the influence of a
staring and bewildering sky, had trustfully conceived, for it had to be
mitigated by blazing fires in open hearths when the thermometer marked
a hundred degrees in the field beyond. The dry, restless wind that
continually rocked the tall masts of the pines with a sound like the
distant sea, while it stimulated out-door physical exertion and defied
fatigue, left the sedentary dwellers in these altitudes chilled in the
shade they courted, or scorched them with heat when they ventured to
bask supinely in the sun. White muslin curtains at the French windows,
and rugs, skins, and heavy furs dispersed in the interior, with
certain other charming but incongruous details of furniture, marked the
inconsistencies of the climate.

There was a coquettish indication of this in the costume of Miss
Kate Scott as she stepped out on the veranda that morning. A man's
broad-brimmed Panama hat, partly unsexed by a twisted gayly-colored
scarf, but retaining enough character to give piquancy to the pretty
curves of the face beneath, protected her from the sun; a red flannel
shirt--another spoil from the enemy--and a thick jacket shielded her
from the austerities of the morning breeze. But the next inconsistency
was peculiarly her own. Miss Kate always wore the freshest and lightest
of white cambric skirts, without the least reference to the temperature.
To the practical sanatory remonstrances of her brother-in-law, and to
the conventional criticism of her sister, she opposed the same defence:
"How else is one to tell when it is summer in this ridiculous climate?
And then, woollen is stuffy, color draws the sun, and one at least
knows when one is clean or dirty." Artistically the result was far from
unsatisfactory. It was a pretty figure under the sombre pines, against
the gray granite and the steely sky, and seemed to lend the yellowing
fields from which the flowers had already fled a floral relief of color.
I do not think the few masculine wayfarers of that locality objected
to it; indeed, some had betrayed an indiscreet admiration, and had
curiously followed the invitation of Miss Kate's warmly-colored figure
until they had encountered the invincible indifference of Miss Kate's
cold gray eyes. With these manifestations her brother-in-law did
not concern himself; he had perfect confidence in her unqualified
disinterest in the neighboring humanity, and permitted her to wander in
her solitary picturesqueness, or accompanied her when she rode in her
dark green habit, with equal freedom from anxiety.

For Miss Scott, although only twenty, had already subjected most of
her maidenly illusions to mature critical analyses. She had voluntarily
accompanied her sister and mother to California, in the earnest
hope that nature contained something worth saying to her, and was
disappointed to find she had already discounted its value in the pages
of books. She hoped to find a vague freedom in this unconventional
life thus opened to her, or rather to show others that she knew how
intelligently to appreciate it, but as yet she was only able to express
it in the one detail of dress already alluded to. Some of the men, and
nearly all the women, she had met thus far, she was amazed to find,
valued the conventionalities she believed she despised, and were
voluntarily assuming the chains she thought she had thrown off. Instead
of learning anything from them, these children of nature had bored her
with eager questionings regarding the civilization she had abandoned, or
irritated her with crude imitations of it for her benefit. "Fancy,"
she had written to a friend in Boston, "my calling on Sue Murphy, who
remembered the Donner tragedy, and who once shot a grizzly that was
prowling round her cabin, and think of her begging me to lend her my
sack for a pattern, and wanting to know if 'polonays' were still worn."
She remembered more bitterly the romance that had tickled her earlier
fancy, told of two college friends of her brother-in-law's who were
living the "perfect life" in the mines, laboring in the ditches with
a copy of Homer in their pockets, and writing letters of the purest
philosophy under the free air of the pines. How, coming unexpectedly on
them in their Arcadia, the party found them unpresentable through dirt,
and thenceforth unknowable through domestic complications that had
filled their Arcadian cabin with half-breed children.

Much of this disillusion she had kept within her own heart, from a
feeling of pride, or only lightly touched upon it in her relations with
her mother and sister. For Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Scott had no idols to
shatter, no enthusiasm to subdue. Firmly and unalterably conscious
of their own superiority to the life they led and the community that
surrounded them, they accepted their duties cheerfully, and performed
them conscientiously. Those duties were loyalty to Hale's interests and
a vague missionary work among the neighbors, which, like most missionary
work, consisted rather in making their own ideas understood than in
understanding the ideas of their audience. Old Mrs. Scott's zeal was
partly religious, an inheritance from her Puritan ancestry; Mrs. Hale's
was the affability of a gentlewoman and the obligation of her position.
To this was added the slight languor of the cultivated American wife,
whose health has been affected by the birth of her first child, and
whose views of marriage and maternity were slightly tinged with gentle
scepticism. She was sincerely attached to her husband, "who dominated
the household" like the rest of his "women folk," with the faint
consciousness of that division of service which renders the position
of the sultan of a seraglio at once so prominent and so precarious. The
attitude of John Hale in his family circle was dominant because it had
never been subjected to criticism or comparison; and perilous for the
same reason.

Mrs. Hale presently joined her sister in the veranda, and, shading her
eyes with a narrow white hand, glanced on the prospect with a polite
interest and ladylike urbanity. The searching sun, which, as Miss Kate
once intimated, was "vulgarity itself," stared at her in return, but
could not call a blush to her somewhat sallow cheek. Neither could it
detract, however, from the delicate prettiness of her refined face with
its soft gray shadows, or the dark gentle eyes, whose blue-veined lids
were just then wrinkled into coquettishly mischievous lines by the
strong light. She was taller and thinner than Kate, and had at times a
certain shy, coy sinuosity of movement which gave her a more virginal
suggestion than her unmarried sister. For Miss Kate, from her earliest
youth, had been distinguished by that matronly sedateness of voice and
step, and completeness of figure, which indicates some members of the
gallinaceous tribe from their callow infancy.

"I suppose John must have stopped at the Summit on some business," said
Mrs. Hale, "or he would have been here already. It's scarcely worth
while waiting for him, unless you choose to ride over and meet him. You
might change your dress," she continued, looking doubtfully at Kate's
costume. "Put on your riding-habit, and take Manuel with you."

"And take the only man we have, and leave you alone?" returned Kate
slowly. "No!"

"There are the Chinese field hands," said Mrs. Hale; "you must correct
your ideas, and really allow them some humanity, Kate. John says they
have a very good compulsory school system in their own country, and can
read and write."

"That would be of little use to you here alone if--if--" Kate hesitated.

"If what?" said Mrs. Hale smiling. "Are you thinking of Manuel's
dreadful story of the grizzly tracks across the fields this morning? I
promise you that neither I, nor mother, nor Minnie shall stir out of the
house until you return, if you wish it."

"I wasn't thinking of that," said Kate; "though I don't believe the
beating of a gong and the using of strong language is the best way to
frighten a grizzly from the house. Besides, the Chinese are going
down the river to-day to a funeral, or a wedding, or a feast of stolen
chickens--they're all the same--and won't be here."

"Then take Manuel," repeated Mrs. Hale. "We have the Chinese servants
and Indian Molly in the house to protect us from Heaven knows what! I
have the greatest confidence in Chy-Lee as a warrior, and in Chinese
warfare generally. One has only to hear him pipe in time of peace to
imagine what a terror he might become in war time. Indeed, anything more
deadly and soul-harrowing than that love song he sang for us last night
I cannot conceive. But really, Kate, I am not afraid to stay alone. You
know what John says: we ought to be always prepared for anything that
might happen.

"My dear Josie," returned Kate, putting her arm around her sister's
waist, "I am perfectly convinced that if three-fingered Jack,
or two-toed Bill, or even Joaquim Murietta himself, should step,
red-handed, on that veranda, you would gently invite him to take a cup
of tea, inquire about the state of the road, and refrain delicately
from any allusions to the sheriff. But I shan't take Manuel from you.
I really cannot undertake to look after his morals at the station, and
keep him from drinking aguardiente with suspicious characters at the
bar. It is true he 'kisses my hand' in his speech, even when it is
thickest, and offers his back to me for a horse-block, but I think
I prefer the sober and honest familiarity of even that Pike County
landlord who is satisfied to say, 'Jump, girl, and I'll ketch ye!'"

"I hope you didn't change your manner to either of them for that," said
Mrs. Hale with a faint sigh. "John wants to be good friends with them,
and they are behaving quite decently lately, considering that they can't
speak a grammatical sentence nor know the use of a fork."

"And now the man puts on gloves and a tall hat to come here on Sundays,
and the woman won't call until you've called first," retorted Kate;
"perhaps you call that improvement. The fact is, Josephine," continued
the young girl, folding her arms demurely, "we might as well admit it at
once--these people don't like us."

"That's impossible!" said Mrs. Hale, with sublime simplicity. "You don't
like them, you mean."

"I like them better than you do, Josie, and that's the reason why I feel
it and YOU don't." She checked herself, and after a pause resumed in a
lighter tone: "No; I sha'n't go to the station; I'll commune with nature
to-day, and won't 'take any humanity in mine, thank you,' as Bill the
driver says. Adios."

"I wish Kate would not use that dreadful slang, even in jest," said
Mrs. Scott, in her rocking-chair at the French window, when Josephine
reentered the parlor as her sister walked briskly away. "I am afraid
she is being infected by the people at the station. She ought to have a
change."

"I was just thinking," said Josephine, looking abstractedly at her
mother, "that I would try to get John to take her to San Francisco this
winter. The Careys are expected, you know; she might visit them."

"I'm afraid, if she stays here much longer, she won't care to see them
at all. She seems to care for nothing now that she ever liked before,"
returned the old lady ominously.

Meantime the subject of these criticisms was carrying away her own
reflections tightly buttoned up in her short jacket. She had driven back
her dog Spot--another one of her disillusions, who, giving way to
his lower nature, had once killed a sheep--as she did not wish her
Jacques-like contemplation of any wounded deer to be inconsistently
interrupted by a fresh outrage from her companion. The air was really
very chilly, and for the first time in her mountain experience the
direct rays of the sun seemed to be shorn of their power. This compelled
her to walk more briskly than she was conscious of, for in less than an
hour she came suddenly and breathlessly upon the mouth of the canyon, or
natural gateway to Eagle's Court.

To her always a profound spectacle of mountain magnificence, it seemed
to-day almost terrible in its cold, strong grandeur. The narrowing pass
was choked for a moment between two gigantic buttresses of granite,
approaching each other so closely at their towering summits that trees
growing in opposite clefts of the rock intermingled their branches and
pointed the soaring Gothic arch of a stupendous gateway. She raised her
eyes with a quickly beating heart. She knew that the interlacing trees
above her were as large as those she had just quitted; she knew also
that the point where they met was only half-way up the cliff, for she
had once gazed down upon them, dwindled to shrubs from the airy summit;
she knew that their shaken cones fell a thousand feet perpendicularly,
or bounded like shot from the scarred walls they bombarded. She
remembered that one of these pines, dislodged from its high foundations,
had once dropped like a portcullis in the archway, blocking the pass,
and was only carried afterwards by assault of steel and fire. Bending
her head mechanically, she ran swiftly through the shadowy passage, and
halted only at the beginning of the ascent on the other side.

It was here that the actual position of the plateau, so indefinite
of approach, began to be realized. It now appeared an independent
elevation, surrounded on three sides by gorges and watercourses, so
narrow as to be overlooked from the principal mountain range, with which
it was connected by a long canyon that led to the ridge. At the outlet
of this canyon--in bygone ages a mighty river--it had the appearance of
having been slowly raised by the diluvium of that river, and the debris
washed down from above--a suggestion repeated in miniature by the
artificial plateaus of excavated soil raised before the mouths of mining
tunnels in the lower flanks of the mountain. It was the realization of a
fact--often forgotten by the dwellers in Eagle's Court--that the valley
below them, which was their connecting link with the surrounding world,
was only reached by ascending the mountain, and the nearest road was
over the higher mountain ridge. Never before had this impressed itself
so strongly upon the young girl as when she turned that morning to look
upon the plateau below her. It seemed to illustrate the conviction
that had been slowly shaping itself out of her reflections on the
conversation of that morning. It was possible that the perfect
understanding of a higher life was only reached from a height still
greater, and that to those half-way up the mountain the summit was never
as truthfully revealed as to the humbler dwellers in the valley.

I do not know that these profound truths prevented her from gathering
some quaint ferns and berries, or from keeping her calm gray eyes open
to certain practical changes that were taking place around her. She had
noticed a singular thickening in the atmosphere that seemed to prevent
the passage of the sun's rays, yet without diminishing the transparent
quality of the air. The distant snow-peaks were as plainly seen, though
they appeared as if in moonlight. This seemed due to no cloud or mist,
but rather to a fading of the sun itself. The occasional flurry of wings
overhead, the whirring of larger birds in the cover, and a frequent
rustling in the undergrowth, as of the passage of some stealthy animal,
began equally to attract her attention. It was so different from the
habitual silence of these sedate solitudes. Kate had no vague fear of
wild beasts; she had been long enough a mountaineer to understand the
general immunity enjoyed by the unmolesting wayfarer, and kept her way
undismayed. She was descending an abrupt trail when she was stopped by a
sudden crash in the bushes. It seemed to come from the opposite incline,
directly in a line with her, and apparently on the very trail that she
was pursuing. The crash was then repeated again and again lower down, as
of a descending body. Expecting the apparition of some fallen tree, or
detached boulder bursting through the thicket, in its way to the bottom
of the gulch, she waited. The foliage was suddenly brushed aside, and
a large grizzly bear half rolled, half waddled, into the trail on the
opposite side of the hill. A few moments more would have brought them
face to face at the foot of the gulch; when she stopped there were not
fifty yards between them.

She did not scream; she did not faint; she was not even frightened.
There did not seem to be anything terrifying in this huge, stupid beast,
who, arrested by the rustle of a stone displaced by her descending feet,
rose slowly on his haunches and gazed at her with small, wondering eyes.
Nor did it seem strange to her, seeing that he was in her way, to pick
up a stone, throw it in his direction, and say simply, "Sho! get away!"
as she would have done to an intruding cow. Nor did it seem odd that
he should actually "go away" as he did, scrambling back into the bushes
again, and disappearing like some grotesque figure in a transformation
scene. It was not until after he had gone that she was taken with
a slight nervousness and giddiness, and retraced her steps somewhat
hurriedly, shying a little at every rustle in the thicket. By the time
she had reached the great gateway she was doubtful whether to be pleased
or frightened at the incident, but she concluded to keep it to herself.

It was still intensely cold. The light of the midday sun had decreased
still more, and on reaching the plateau again she saw that a dark cloud,
not unlike the precursor of a thunder-storm, was brooding over the snowy
peaks beyond. In spite of the cold this singular suggestion of summer
phenomena was still borne out by the distant smiling valley, and even
in the soft grasses at her feet. It seemed to her the crowning
inconsistency of the climate, and with a half-serious, half-playful
protest on her lips she hurried forward to seek the shelter of the
house.




CHAPTER III


To Kate's surprise, the lower part of the house was deserted, but there
was an unusual activity on the floor above, and the sound of heavy
steps. There were alien marks of dusty feet on the scrupulously clean
passage, and on the first step of the stairs a spot of blood. With a
sudden genuine alarm that drove her previous adventure from her mind,
she impatiently called her sister's name. There was a hasty yet subdued
rustle of skirts on the staircase, and Mrs. Hale, with her finger on her
lip, swept Kate unceremoniously into the sitting-room, closed the door,
and leaned back against it, with a faint smile. She had a crumpled paper
in her hand.

"Don't be alarmed, but read that first," she said, handing her sister
the paper. "It was brought just now."

Kate instantly recognized her brother's distinct hand. She read
hurriedly, "The coach was robbed last night; nobody hurt. I've lost
nothing but a day's time, as this business will keep me here until
to-morrow, when Manuel can join me with a fresh horse. No cause for
alarm. As the bearer goes out of his way to bring you this, see that he
wants for nothing."

"Well," said Kate expectantly.

"Well, the 'bearer' was fired upon by the robbers, who were lurking on
the Ridge. He was wounded in the leg. Luckily he was picked up by his
friend, who was coming to meet him, and brought here as the nearest
place. He's up-stairs in the spare bed in the spare room, with his
friend, who won't leave his side. He won't even have mother in the room.
They've stopped the bleeding with John's ambulance things, and now,
Kate, here's a chance for you to show the value of your education in
the ambulance class. The ball has got to be extracted. Here's your
opportunity."

Kate looked at her sister curiously. There was a faint pink flush on her
pale cheeks, and her eyes were gently sparkling. She had never seen her
look so pretty before.

"Why not have sent Manuel for a doctor at once?" asked Kate.

"The nearest doctor is fifteen miles away, and Manuel is nowhere to be
found. Perhaps he's gone to look after the stock. There's some talk of
snow; imagine the absurdity of it!"

"But who are they?"

"They speak of themselves as 'friends,' as if it were a profession. The
wounded one was a passenger, I suppose."

"But what are they like?" continued Kate. "I suppose they're like them
all."

Mrs. Hale shrugged her shoulders.

"The wounded one, when he's not fainting away, is laughing. The other is
a creature with a moustache, and gloomy beyond expression."

"What are you going to do with them?" said Kate.

"What should I do? Even without John's letter I could not refuse the
shelter of my house to a wounded and helpless man. I shall keep him,
of course, until John comes. Why, Kate, I really believe you are so
prejudiced against these people you'd like to turn them out. But I
forget! It's because you LIKE them so well. Well, you need not fear to
expose yourself to the fascinations of the wounded Christy Minstrel--I'm
sure he's that--or to the unspeakable one, who is shyness itself, and
would not dare to raise his eyes to you."

There was a timid, hesitating step in the passage. It paused before the
door, moved away, returned, and finally asserted its intentions in the
gentlest of taps.

"It's him; I'm sure of it," said Mrs. Hale, with a suppressed smile.

Kate threw open the door smartly, to the extreme discomfiture of a tall,
dark figure that already had slunk away from it. For all that, he was
a good-looking enough fellow, with a moustache as long and almost as
flexible as a ringlet. Kate could not help noticing also that his hand,
which was nervously pulling the moustache, was white and thin.

"Excuse me," he stammered, without raising his eyes, "I was looking
for--for--the old lady. I--I beg your pardon. I didn't know that
you--the young ladies--company--were here. I intended--I only wanted to
say that my friend--" He stopped at the slight smile that passed quickly
over Mrs. Hale's mouth, and his pale face reddened with an angry flush.

"I hope he is not worse," said Mrs. Hale, with more than her usual
languid gentleness. "My mother is not here at present. Can I--can
WE--this is my sister--do as well?"

Without looking up he made a constrained recognition of Kate's presence,
that embarrassed and curt as it was, had none of the awkwardness of
rusticity.

"Thank you; you're very kind. But my friend is a little stronger, and
if you can lend me an extra horse I'll try to get him on the Summit
to-night."

"But you surely will not take him away from us so soon?" said Mrs. Hale,
with a languid look of alarm, in which Kate, however, detected a certain
real feeling. "Wait at least until my husband returns to-morrow."

"He won't be here to-morrow," said the stranger hastily. He stopped,
and as quickly corrected himself. "That is, his business is so very
uncertain, my friend says."

Only Kate noticed the slip; but she noticed also that her sister was
apparently unconscious of it. "You think," she said, "that Mr. Hale may
be delayed?"

He turned upon her almost brusquely. "I mean that it is already snowing
up there;" he pointed through the window to the cloud Kate had noticed;
"if it comes down lower in the pass the roads will be blocked up. That
is why it would be better for us to try and get on at once."

"But if Mr. Hale is likely to be stopped by snow, so are you," said
Mrs. Hale playfully; "and you had better let us try to make your friend
comfortable here rather than expose him to that uncertainty in his
weak condition. We will do our best for him. My sister is dying for
an opportunity to show her skill in surgery," she continued, with
an unexpected mischievousness that only added to Kate's surprised
embarrassment. "Aren't you, Kate?"

Equivocal as the young girl knew her silence appeared, she was unable to
utter the simplest polite evasion. Some unaccountable impulse kept her
constrained and speechless. The stranger did not, however, wait for her
reply, but, casting a swift, hurried glance around the room, said, "It's
impossible; we must go. In fact, I've already taken the liberty to order
the horses round. They are at the door now. You may be certain," he
added, with quick earnestness, suddenly lifting his dark eyes to Mrs.
Hale, and as rapidly withdrawing them, "that your horse will be returned
at once, and--and--we won't forget your kindness." He stopped and turned
towards the hall. "I--I have brought my friend down-stairs. He wants to
thank you before he goes."

As he remained standing in the hall the two women stepped to the door.
To their surprise, half reclining on a cane sofa was the wounded man,
and what could be seen of his slight figure was wrapped in a dark
serape. His beardless face gave him a quaint boyishness quite
inconsistent with the mature lines of his temples and forehead. Pale,
and in pain, as he evidently was, his blue eyes twinkled with intense
amusement. Not only did his manner offer a marked contrast to the sombre
uneasiness of his companion, but he seemed to be the only one perfectly
at his ease in the group around him.

"It's rather rough making you come out here to see me off," he said,
with a not unmusical laugh that was very infectious, "but Ned there,
who carried me downstairs, wanted to tote me round the house in his arms
like a baby to say ta-ta to you all. Excuse my not rising, but I feel as
uncertain below as a mermaid, and as out of my element," he added, with
a mischievous glance at his friend. "Ned concluded I must go on. But I
must say good-by to the old lady first. Ah! here she is."

To Kate's complete bewilderment, not only did the utter familiarity of
this speech, pass unnoticed and unrebuked by her sister, but actually
her own mother advanced quickly with every expression of lively
sympathy, and with the authority of her years and an almost maternal
anxiety endeavored to dissuade the invalid from going. "This is not my
house," she said, looking at her daughter, "but if it were I should
not hear of your leaving, not only to-night, but until you were out of
danger. Josephine! Kate! What are you thinking of to permit it? Well,
then I forbid it--there!"

Had they become suddenly insane, or were they bewitched by this morose
intruder and his insufferably familiar confidant? The man was wounded,
it was true; they might have to put him up in common humanity; but here
was her austere mother, who wouldn't come in the room when Whisky Dick
called on business, actually pressing both of the invalid's hands,
while her sister, who never extended a finger to the ordinary visiting
humanity of the neighborhood, looked on with evident complacency.

The wounded man suddenly raised Mrs. Scott's hand to his lips, kissed
it gently, and, with his smile quite vanished, endeavored to rise to his
feet. "It's of no use--we must go. Give me your arm, Ned. Quick! Are the
horses there?"

"Dear me," said Mrs. Scott quickly. "I forgot to say the horse cannot be
found anywhere. Manuel must have taken him this morning to look up the
stock. But he will be back to-night certainly, and if to-morrow--"

The wounded man sank back to a sitting position. "Is Manuel your man?"
he asked grimly.

"Yes."

The two men exchanged glances.

"Marked on his left cheek and drinks a good deal?"

"Yes," said Kate, finding her voice. "Why?"

The amused look came back to the man's eyes. "That kind of man isn't
safe to wait for. We must take our own horse, Ned. Are you ready?"

"Yes."

The wounded man again attempted to rise. He fell back, but this time
quite heavily. He had fainted.

Involuntarily and simultaneously the three women rushed to his side. "He
cannot go," said Kate suddenly.

"He will be better in a moment."

"But only for a moment. Will nothing induce you to change your mind?"

As if in reply a sudden gust of wind brought a volley of rain against
the window.

"THAT will," said the stranger bitterly.

"The rain?"

"A mile from here it is SNOW; and before we could reach the Summit with
these horses the road would be impassable."

He made a slight gesture to himself, as if accepting an inevitable
defeat, and turned to his companion, who was slowly reviving under the
active ministration of the two women. The wounded man looked around with
a weak smile. "This is one way of going off," he said faintly, "but I
could do this sort of thing as well on the road."

"You can do nothing now," said his friend, decidedly. "Before we get to
the Gate the road will be impassable for our horses."

"For ANY horses?" asked Kate.

"For any horses. For any man or beast I might say. Where we cannot get
out, no one can get in," he added, as if answering her thoughts. "I
am afraid that you won't see your brother to-morrow morning. But I'll
reconnoitre as soon as I can do so without torturing HIM," he said,
looking anxiously at the helpless man; "he's got about his share of
pain, I reckon, and the first thing is to get him easier." It was the
longest speech he had made to her; it was the first time he had fairly
looked her in the face. His shy restlessness had suddenly given way to
dogged resignation, less abstracted, but scarcely more flattering to
his entertainers. Lifting his companion gently in his arms, as if he
had been a child, he reascended the staircase, Mrs. Scott and the
hastily-summoned Molly following with overflowing solicitude. As soon as
they were alone in the parlor Mrs. Hale turned to her sister: "Only that
our guests seemed to be as anxious to go just now as you were to pack
them off, I should have been shocked at your inhospitality. What has
come over you, Kate? These are the very people you have reproached me so
often with not being civil enough to."

"But WHO are they?"

"How do I know? There is YOUR BROTHER'S letter."

She usually spoke of her husband as "John." This slight shifting of
relationship and responsibility to the feminine mind was significant.
Kate was a little frightened and remorseful.

"I only meant you don't even know their names."

"That wasn't necessary for giving them a bed and bandages. Do you
suppose the good Samaritan ever asked the wounded Jew's name, and that
the Levite did not excuse himself because the thieves had taken the
poor man's card-case? Do the directions, 'In case of accident,' in your
ambulance rules, read, 'First lay the sufferer on his back and inquire
his name and family connections'? Besides, you can call one 'Ned' and
the other 'George,' if you like."

"Oh, you know what I mean," said Kate, irrelevantly. "Which is George?"

"George is the wounded man," said Mrs. Hale; "NOT the one who talked
to you more than he did to any one else. I suppose the poor man was
frightened and read dismissal in your eyes."

"I wish John were here."

"I don't think we have anything to fear in his absence from men whose
only wish is to get away from us. If it is a question of propriety,
my dear Kate, surely there is the presence of mother to prevent any
scandal--although really her own conduct with the wounded one is not
above suspicion," she added, with that novel mischievousness that seemed
a return of her lost girlhood. "We must try to do the best we can with
them and for them," she said decidedly, "and meantime I'll see if I
can't arrange John's room for them."

"John's room?"

"Oh, mother is perfectly satisfied; indeed, suggested it. It's larger
and will hold two beds, for 'Ned,' the friend, must attend to him at
night. And, Kate, don't you think, if you're not going out again, you
might change your costume? It does very well while we are alone--"

"Well," said Kate indignantly, "as I am not going into his room--"

"I'm not so sure about that, if we can't get a regular doctor. But he
is very restless, and wanders all over the house like a timid and
apologetic spaniel."

"Who?"

"Why 'Ned.' But I must go and look after the patient. I suppose they've
got him safe in his bed again," and with a nod to her sister she tripped
up-stairs.

Uncomfortable and embarrassed, she knew not why, Kate sought her mother.
But that good lady was already in attendance on the patient, and
Kate hurried past that baleful centre of attraction with a feeling of
loneliness and strangeness she had never experienced before. Entering
her own room she went to the window--that first and last refuge of the
troubled mind--and gazed out. Turning her eyes in the direction of her
morning's walk, she started back with a sense of being dazzled. She
rubbed first her eyes and then the rain-dimmed pane. It was no illusion!
The whole landscape, so familiar to her, was one vast field of dead,
colorless white! Trees, rocks, even distance itself, had vanished in
those few hours. An even shadowless, motionless white sea filled the
horizon. On either side a vast wall of snow seemed to shut out the
world like a shroud. Only the green plateau before her, with its sloping
meadows and fringe of pines and cottonwood, lay alone like a summer
island in this frozen sea.

A sudden desire to view this phenomenon more closely, and to learn for
herself the limits of this new tethered life, completely possessed
her, and, accustomed to act upon her independent impulses, she seized a
hooded waterproof cloak, and slipped out of the house unperceived. The
rain was falling steadily along the descending trail where she walked,
but beyond, scarcely a mile across the chasm, the wintry distance began
to confuse her brain with the inextricable swarming of snow. Hurrying
down with feverish excitement, she at last came in sight of the arching
granite portals of their domain. But her first glance through the
gateway showed it closed as if with a white portcullis. Kate remembered
that the trail began to ascend beyond the arch, and knew that what she
saw was only the mountain side she had partly climbed this morning. But
the snow had already crept down its flank, and the exit by trail was
practically closed. Breathlessly making her way back to the highest part
of the plateau--the cliff behind the house that here descended abruptly
to the rain-dimmed valley--she gazed at the dizzy depths in vain for
some undiscovered or forgotten trail along its face. But a single glance
convinced her of its inaccessibility. The gateway was indeed their only
outlet to the plain below. She looked back at the falling snow beyond
until she fancied she could see in the crossing and recrossing lines
the moving meshes of a fateful web woven around them by viewless but
inexorable fingers.

Half frightened, she was turning away, when she perceived, a few paces
distant, the figure of the stranger, "Ned," also apparently absorbed
in the gloomy prospect. He was wrapped in the clinging folds of a black
serape braided with silver; the broad flap of a slouch hat beaten back
by the wind exposed the dark, glistening curls on his white forehead. He
was certainly very handsome and picturesque, and that apparently without
effort or consciousness. Neither was there anything in his costume or
appearance inconsistent with his surroundings, or, even with what Kate
could judge were his habits or position. Nevertheless, she instantly
decided that he was TOO handsome and too picturesque, without suspecting
that her ideas of the limits of masculine beauty were merely personal
experience.

As he turned away from the cliff they were brought face to face. "It
doesn't look very encouraging over there," he said quietly, as if the
inevitableness of the situation had relieved him of his previous shyness
and effort; "it's even worse than I expected. The snow must have begun
there last night, and it looks as if it meant to stay." He stopped for a
moment, and then, lifting his eyes to her, said:--

"I suppose you know what this means?"

"I don't understand you."

"I thought not. Well! it means that you are absolutely cut off here from
any communication or intercourse with any one outside of that canyon.
By this time the snow is five feet deep over the only trail by which one
can pass in and out of that gateway. I am not alarming you, I hope, for
there is no real physical danger; a place like this ought to be
well garrisoned, and certainly is self-supporting so far as the mere
necessities and even comforts are concerned. You have wood, water,
cattle, and game at your command, but for two weeks at least you are
completely isolated."

"For two weeks," said Kate, growing pale--"and my brother!"

"He knows all by this time, and is probably as assured as I am of the
safety of his family."

"For two weeks," continued Kate; "impossible! You don't know my brother!
He will find some way to get to us."

"I hope so," returned the stranger gravely, "for what is possible for
him is possible for us."

"Then you are anxious to get away," Kate could not help saying.

"Very."

The reply was not discourteous in manner, but was so far from gallant
that Kate felt a new and inconsistent resentment. Before she could say
anything he added, "And I hope you will remember, whatever may happen,
that I did my best to avoid staying here longer than was necessary to
keep my friend from bleeding to death in the road."

"Certainly," said Kate; then added awkwardly, "I hope he'll be better
soon." She was silent, and then, quickening her pace, said hurriedly, "I
must tell my sister this dreadful news."

"I think she is prepared for it. If there is anything I can do to help
you I hope you will let me know. Perhaps I may be of some service. I
shall begin by exploring the trails to-morrow, for the best service we
can do you possibly is to take ourselves off; but I can carry a gun, and
the woods are full of game driven down from the mountains. Let me show
you something you may not have noticed." He stopped, and pointed to a
small knoll of sheltered shrubbery and granite on the opposite mountain,
which still remained black against the surrounding snow. It seemed to be
thickly covered with moving objects. "They are wild animals driven out
of the snow," said the stranger. "That larger one is a grizzly; there is
a panther, wolves, wild cats, a fox, and some mountain goats."

"An ill-assorted party," said the young girl.

"Ill luck makes them companions. They are too frightened to hurt one
another now."

"But they will eat each other later on," said Kate, stealing a glance at
her companion.

He lifted his long lashes and met her eyes. "Not on a haven of refuge."




CHAPTER IV


Kate found her sister, as the stranger had intimated, fully prepared. A
hasty inventory of provisions and means of subsistence showed that they
had ample resources for a much longer isolation.

"They tell me it is by no means an uncommon case, Kate; somebody over at
somebody's place was snowed in for four weeks, and now it appears that
even the Summit House is not always accessible. John ought to have known
it when he bought the place; in fact, I was ashamed to admit that he did
not. But that is like John to prefer his own theories to the experience
of others. However, I don't suppose we should even notice the privation
except for the mails. It will be a lesson to John, though. As Mr. Lee
says, he is on the outside, and can probably go wherever he likes from
the Summit except to come here."

"Mr. Lee?" echoed Kate.

"Yes, the wounded one; and the other's name is Falkner. I asked them in
order that you might be properly introduced. There were very respectable
Falkners in Charlestown, you remember; I thought you might warm to
the name, and perhaps trace the connection, now that you are such good
friends. It's providential they are here, as we haven't got a horse or
a man in the place since Manuel disappeared, though Mr. Falkner says
he can't be far away, or they would have met him on the trail if he had
gone towards the Summit."

"Did they say anything more of Manuel?"

"Nothing; though I am inclined to agree with you that he isn't
trustworthy. But that again is the result of John's idea of employing
native skill at the expense of retaining native habits."

The evening closed early, and with no diminution in the falling rain and
rising wind. Falkner kept his word, and unostentatiously performed the
out-door work in the barn and stables, assisted by the only Chinese
servant remaining, and under the advice and supervision of Kate.
Although he seemed to understand horses, she was surprised to find that
he betrayed a civic ignorance of the ordinary details of the farm and
rustic household. It was quite impossible that she should retain her
distrustful attitude, or he his reserve in their enforced companionship.
They talked freely of subjects suggested by the situation, Falkner
exhibiting a general knowledge and intuition of things without parade or
dogmatism. Doubtful of all versatility as Kate was, she could not help
admitting to herself that his truths were none the less true for their
quantity or that he got at them without ostentatious processes. His talk
certainly was more picturesque than her brother's, and less subduing to
her faculties. John had always crushed her.

When they returned to the house he did not linger in the parlor or
sitting-room, but at once rejoined his friend. When dinner was ready in
the dining-room, a little more deliberately arranged and ornamented than
usual, the two women were somewhat surprised to receive an excuse from
Falkner, begging them to allow him for the present to take his meals
with the patient, and thus save the necessity of another attendant.

"It is all shyness, Kate," said Mrs. Hale, confidently, "and must not be
permitted for a moment."

"I'm sure I should be quite willing to stay with the poor boy myself,"
said Mrs. Scott, simply, "and take Mr. Falkner's place while he dines."

"You are too willing, mother," said Mrs. Hale, pertly, "and your 'poor
boy,' as you call him, will never see thirty-five again."

"He will never see any other birthday!" retorted her mother, "unless you
keep him more quiet. He only talks when you're in the room."

"He wants some relief to his friend's long face and moustachios that
make him look prematurely in mourning," said Mrs. Hale, with a slight
increase of animation. "I don't propose to leave them too much together.
After dinner we'll adjourn to their room and lighten it up a little.
You must come, Kate, to look at the patient, and counteract the baleful
effects of my frivolity."

Mrs. Hale's instincts were truer than her mother's experience; not only
that the wounded man's eyes became brighter under the provocation of her
presence, but it was evident that his naturally exuberant spirits were
a part of his vital strength, and were absolutely essential to his quick
recovery. Encouraged by Falkner's grave and practical assistance, which
she could not ignore, Kate ventured to make an examination of Lee's
wound. Even to her unpractised eye it was less serious than at first
appeared. The great loss of blood had been due to the laceration of
certain small vessels below the knee, but neither artery nor bone was
injured. A recurrence of the haemorrhage or fever was the only thing to
be feared, and these could be averted by bandaging, repose, and simple
nursing.

The unfailing good humor of the patient under this manipulation, the
quaint originality of his speech, the freedom of his fancy, which was,
however, always controlled by a certain instinctive tact, began to
affect Kate nearly as it had the others. She found herself laughing over
the work she had undertaken in a pure sense of duty; she joined in the
hilarity produced by Lee's affected terror of her surgical mania, and
offered to undo the bandages in search of the thimble he declared she
had left in the wound with a view to further experiments.

"You ought to broaden your practice," he suggested. "A good deal might
be made out of Ned and a piece of soap left carelessly on the first step
of the staircase, while mountains of surgical opportunities lie in
a humble orange peel judiciously exposed. Only I warn you that you
wouldn't find him as docile as I am. Decoyed into a snow-drift and
frozen, you might get some valuable experiences in resuscitation by
thawing him."

"I fancied you had done that already, Kate," whispered Mrs. Hale.

"Freezing is the new suggestion for painless surgery," said Lee, coming
to Kate's relief with ready tact, "only the knowledge should be
more generally spread. There was a man up at Strawberry fell under a
sledge-load of wood in the snow. Stunned by the shock, he was slowly
freezing to death, when, with a tremendous effort, he succeeded in
freeing himself all but his right leg, pinned down by a small log. His
axe happened to have fallen within reach, and a few blows on the log
freed him."

"And saved the poor fellow's life," said Mrs. Scott, who was listening
with sympathizing intensity.

"At the expense of his LEFT LEG, which he had unknowingly cut off under
the pleasing supposition that it was a log," returned Lee demurely.

Nevertheless, in a few moments he managed to divert the slightly shocked
susceptibilities of the old lady with some raillery of himself, and did
not again interrupt the even good-humored communion of the party. The
rain beating against the windows and the fire sparkling on the hearth
seemed to lend a charm to their peculiar isolation, and it was not until
Mrs. Scott rose with a warning that they were trespassing upon the rest
of their patient that they discovered that the evening had slipped by
unnoticed. When the door at last closed on the bright, sympathetic
eyes of the two young women and the motherly benediction of the elder,
Falkner walked to the window, and remained silent, looking into the
darkness. Suddenly he turned bitterly to his companion.

"This is just h-ll, George."

George Lee, with a smile on his boyish face, lazily moved his head.

"I don't know! If it wasn't for the old woman, who is the one solid
chunk of absolute goodness here, expecting nothing, wanting nothing,
it would be good fun enough! These two women, cooped up in this house,
wanted excitement. They've got it! That man Hale wanted to show off by
going for us; he's had his chance, and will have it again before I've
done with him. That d--d fool of a messenger wanted to go out of his way
to exchange shots with me; I reckon he's the most satisfied of the lot!
I don't know why YOU should growl. You did your level best to get away
from here, and the result is, that little Puritan is ready to worship
you."

"Yes--but this playing it on them--George--this--"

"Who's playing it? Not you; I see you've given away our names already."

"I couldn't lie, and they know nothing by that."

"Do you think they would be happier by knowing it? Do you think that
soft little creature would be as happy as she was to-night if she knew
that her husband had been indirectly the means of laying me by the heels
here? Where is the swindle? This hole in my leg? If you had been five
minutes under that girl's d--d sympathetic fingers you'd have thought it
was genuine. Is it in our trying to get away? Do you call that ten-feet
drift in the pass a swindle? Is it in the chance of Hale getting back
while we're here? That's real enough, isn't it? I say, Ned, did you ever
give your unfettered intellect to the contemplation of THAT?"

Falkner did not reply. There was an interval of silence, but he could
see from the movement of George's shoulders that he was shaking with
suppressed laughter.

"Fancy Mrs. Hale archly introducing her husband! My offering him a
chair, but being all the time obliged to cover him with a derringer
under the bedclothes. Your rushing in from your peaceful pastoral
pursuits in the barn, with a pitchfork in one hand and the girl in the
other, and dear old mammy sympathizing all round and trying to make
everything comfortable."

"I should not be alive to see it, George," said Falkner gloomily.

"You'd manage to pitchfork me and those two women on Hale's horse and
ride away; that's what you'd do, or I don't know you! Look here, Ned,"
he added more seriously, "the only swindling was our bringing that note
here. That was YOUR idea. You thought it would remove suspicion, and as
you believed I was bleeding to death you played that game for all it was
worth to save me. You might have done what I asked you to do--propped
me up in the bushes, and got away yourself. I was good for a couple of
shots yet, and after that--what mattered? That night, the next day, the
next time I take the road, or a year hence? It will come when it will
come, all the same!"

He did not speak bitterly, nor relax his smile. Falkner, without
speaking, slid his hand along the coverlet. Lee grasped it, and their
hands remained clasped together for a few minutes in silence.

"How is this to end? We cannot go on here in this way," said Falkner
suddenly.

"If we cannot get away it must go on. Look here, Ned. I don't reckon
to take anything out of this house that I didn't bring in it, or isn't
freely offered to me; yet I don't otherwise, you understand, intend
making myself out a d--d bit better than I am. That's the only excuse I
have for not making myself out JUST WHAT I am. I don't know the fellow
who's obliged to tell every one the last company he was in, or the last
thing he did! Do you suppose even these pretty little women tell US
their whole story? Do you fancy that this St. John in the wilderness is
canonized in his family? Perhaps, when I take the liberty to intrude in
his affairs, as he has in mine, he'd see he isn't. I don't blame you for
being sensitive, Ned. It's natural. When a man lives outside the revised
statutes of his own State he is apt to be awfully fine on points of
etiquette in his own household. As for me, I find it rather comfortable
here. The beds of other people's making strike me as being more
satisfactory than my own. Good-night."

In a few moments he was sleeping the peaceful sleep of that youth which
seemed to be his own dominant quality. Falkner stood for a little space
and watched him, following the boyish lines of his cheek on the pillow,
from the shadow of the light brown lashes under his closed lids to the
lifting of his short upper lip over his white teeth, with his regular
respiration. Only a sharp accenting of the line of nostril and jaw and a
faint depression of the temple betrayed his already tried manhood.

The house had long sunk to repose when Falkner returned to the window,
and remained looking out upon the storm. Suddenly he extinguished the
light, and passing quickly to the bed laid his hand upon the sleeper.
Lee opened his eyes instantly.

"Are you awake?"

"Perfectly."

"Somebody is trying to get into the house!"

"Not HIM, eh?" said Lee gayly.

"No; two men. Mexicans, I think. One looks like Manuel."

"Ah," said Lee, drawing himself up to a sitting posture.

"Well?"

"Don't you see? He believes the women are alone."

"The dog--d--d hound!"

"Speak respectfully of one of my people, if you please, and hand me my
derringer. Light the candle again, and open the door. Let them get in
quietly. They'll come here first. It's HIS room, you understand, and if
there's any money it's here. Anyway, they must pass here to get to the
women's rooms. Leave Manuel to me, and you take care of the other."

"I see."

"Manuel knows the house, and will come first. When he's fairly in the
room shut the door and go for the other. But no noise. This is just one
of the SW-EETEST things out--if it's done properly."

"But YOU, George?"

"If I couldn't manage that fellow without turning down the bedclothes
I'd kick myself. Hush. Steady now."

He lay down and shut his eyes as if in natural repose. Only his right
hand, carelessly placed under his pillow, closed on the handle of his
pistol. Falkner quietly slipped into the passage. The light of the
candle faintly illuminated the floor and opposite wall, but left it on
either side in pitchy obscurity.

For some moments the silence was broken only by the sound of the rain
without. The recumbent figure in bed seemed to have actually succumbed
to sleep. The multitudinous small noises of a house in repose might have
been misinterpreted by ears less keen than the sleeper's; but when
the apparent creaking of a far-off shutter was followed by the sliding
apparition of a dark head of tangled hair at the door, Lee had not been
deceived, and was as prepared as if he had seen it. Another step, and
the figure entered the room. The door closed instantly behind it. The
sound of a heavy body struggling against the partition outside followed,
and then suddenly ceased.

The intruder turned, and violently grasped the handle of the door, but
recoiled at a quiet voice from the bed.

"Drop that, and come here."

He started back with an exclamation. The sleeper's eyes were wide open;
the sleeper's extended arm and pistol covered him.

"Silence! or I'll let that candle shine through you!"

"Yes, captain!" growled the astounded and frightened half-breed. "I
didn't know you were here."

Lee raised himself, and grasped the long whip in his left hand and
whirled it round his head.

"WILL YOU dry up?"

The man sank back against the wall in silent terror.

"Open that door now--softly."

Manuel obeyed with trembling fingers.

"Ned" said Lee in a low voice, "bring him in here--quick."

There was a slight rustle, and Falkner appeared, backing in another
gasping figure, whose eyes were starting under the strong grasp of the
captor at his throat.

"Silence," said Lee, "all of you."

There was a breathless pause. The sound of a door hesitatingly opened
in the passage broke the stillness, followed by the gentle voice of Mrs.
Scott.

"Is anything the matter?"

Lee made a slight gesture of warning to Falkner, of menace to the
others. "Everything's the matter," he called out cheerily. "Ned's
managed to half pull down the house trying to get at something from my
saddle-bags."

"I hope he has not hurt himself," broke in another voice mischievously.

"Answer, you clumsy villain," whispered Lee, with twinkling eyes.

"I'm all right, thank you," responded Falkner, with unaffected
awkwardness.

There was a slight murmuring of voices, and then the door was heard to
close. Lee turned to Falkner.

"Disarm that hound and turn him loose outside, and make no noise. And
you, Manuel! tell him what his and your chances are if he shows his
black face here again."

Manuel cast a single, terrified, supplicating glance, more suggestive
than words, at his confederate, as Falkner shoved him before him from
the room. The next moment they were silently descending the stairs.

"May I go too, captain?" entreated Manuel. "I swear to God--"

"Shut the door!" The man obeyed.

"Now, then," said Lee, with a broad, gratified smile, laying down his
whip and pistol within reach, and comfortably settling the pillows
behind his back, "we'll have a quiet confab. A sort of old-fashioned
talk, eh? You're not looking well, Manuel. You're drinking too much
again. It spoils your complexion."

"Let me go, captain," pleaded the man, emboldened by the good-humored
voice, but not near enough to notice a peculiar light in the speaker's
eye.

"You've only just come, Manuel; and at considerable trouble, too. Well,
what have you got to say? What's all this about? What are you doing
here?"

The captured man shuffled his feet nervously, and only uttered an uneasy
laugh of coarse discomfiture.

"I see. You're bashful. Well, I'll help you along. Come! You knew that
Hale was away and these women were here without a man to help them. You
thought you'd find some money here, and have your own way generally,
eh?"

The tone of Lee's voice inspired him to confidence; unfortunately, it
inspired him with familiarity also.

"I reckoned I had the right to a little fun on my own account, cap.
I reckoned ez one gentleman in the profession wouldn't interfere with
another gentleman's little game," he continued coarsely.

"Stand up."

"Wot for?"

"Up, I say!"

Manuel stood up and glanced at him.

"Utter a cry that might frighten these women, and by the living God
they'll rush in here only to find you lying dead on the floor of the
house you'd have polluted."

He grasped the whip and laid the lash of it heavily twice over the
ruffian's shoulders. Writhing in suppressed agony, the man fell
imploringly on his knees.

"Now, listen!" said Lee, softly twirling the whip in the air. "I want to
refresh your memory. Did you ever learn, when you were with me--before
I was obliged to kick you out of gentlemen's company--to break into a
private house? Answer!"

"No," stammered the wretch.

"Did you ever learn to rob a woman, a child, or any but a man, and that
face to face?"

"No," repeated Manuel.

"Did you ever learn from me to lay a finger upon a woman, old or young,
in anger or kindness?"

"No."

"Then, my poor Manuel, it's as I feared; civilization has ruined you.
Farming and a simple, bucolic life have perverted your morals. So you
were running off with the stock and that mustang, when you got stuck in
the snow; and the luminous idea of this little game struck you? Eh? That
was another mistake, Manuel; I never allowed you to think when you were
with me."

"No, captain."

"Who's your friend?"

"A d--d cowardly nigger from the Summit."

"I agree with you for once; but he hasn't had a very brilliant example.
Where's he gone now?"

"To h-ll, for all I care!"

"Then I want you to go with him. Listen. If there's a way out of the
place, you know it or can find it. I give you two days to do it--you and
he. At the end of that time the order will be to shoot you on sight. Now
take off your boots."

The man's dark face visibly whitened, his teeth chattered in
superstitious terror.

"I'm not going to shoot you now," said Lee, smiling, "so you will have a
chance to die with your boots on,* if you are superstitious. I only want
you to exchange them for that pair of Hale's in the corner. The fact
is I have taken a fancy to yours. That fashion of wearing the stockings
outside strikes me as one of the neatest things out."

     * "To die with one's boots on."  A synonym for death by
     violence, popular among Southwestern desperadoes, and the
     subject of superstitious dread.

Manuel suddenly drew off his boots with their muffled covering, and put
on the ones designated.

"Now open the door."

He did so. Falkner was already waiting at the threshold, "Turn Manuel
loose with the other, Ned, but disarm him first. They might quarrel. The
habit of carrying arms, Manuel," added Lee, as Falkner took a pistol and
bowie-knife from the half-breed, "is of itself provocative of violence,
and inconsistent with a bucolic and pastoral life."

When Falkner returned he said hurriedly to his companion, "Do you think
it wise, George, to let those hell-hounds loose? Good God! I could
scarcely let my grip of his throat go, when I thought of what they were
hunting."

"My dear Ned," said Lee, luxuriously ensconcing himself under the
bedclothes again with a slight shiver of delicious warmth, "I must warn
you against allowing the natural pride of a higher walk to prejudice you
against the general level of our profession. Indeed, I was quite struck
with the justice of Manuel's protest that I was interfering with certain
rude processes of his own towards results aimed at by others."

"George!" interrupted Falkner, almost savagely.

"Well. I admit it's getting rather late in the evening for pure
philosophical inquiry, and you are tired. Practically, then, it WAS wise
to let them get away before they discovered two things. One, our exact
relations here with these women; and the other, HOW MANY of us were
here. At present they think we are three or four in possession and with
the consent of the women."

"The dogs!"

"They are paying us the highest compliment they can conceive of by
supposing us cleverer scoundrels than themselves. You are very unjust,
Ned."

"If they escape and tell their story?"

"We shall have the rare pleasure of knowing we are better than people
believe us. And now put those boots away somewhere where we can produce
them if necessary, as evidence of Manuel's evening call. At present
we'll keep the thing quiet, and in the early morning you can find out
where they got in and remove any traces they have left. It is no use to
frighten the women. There's no fear of their returning."

"And if they get away?"

"We can follow in their tracks."

"If Manuel gives the alarm?"

"With his burglarious boots left behind in the house? Not much!
Good-night, Ned. Go to bed."

With these words Lee turned on his side and quietly resumed his
interrupted slumber. Falkner did not, however, follow this sensible
advice. When he was satisfied that his friend was sleeping he opened the
door softly and looked out. He did not appear to be listening, for
his eyes were fixed upon a small pencil of light that stole across the
passage from the foot of Kate's door. He watched it until it suddenly
disappeared, when, leaving the door partly open, he threw himself on
his couch without removing his clothes. The slight movement awakened
the sleeper, who was beginning to feel the accession of fever. He moved
restlessly.

"George," said Falkner, softly.

"Yes."

"Where was it we passed that old Mission Church on the road one dark
night, and saw the light burning before the figure of the Virgin through
the window?"

There was a moment of crushing silence. "Does that mean you're wanting
to light the candle again?"

"No."

"Then don't lie there inventing sacrilegious conundrums, but go to
sleep."

Nevertheless, in the morning his fever was slightly worse. Mrs. Hale,
offering her condolence, said, "I know that you have not been resting
well, for even after your friend met with that mishap in the hall, I
heard your voices, and Kate says your door was open all night. You have
a little fever too, Mr. Falkner."

George looked curiously at Falkner's pale face--it was burning.




CHAPTER V


The speed and fury with which Clinch's cavalcade swept on in the
direction of the mysterious shot left Hale no chance for reflection. He
was conscious of shouting incoherently with the others, of urging his
horse irresistibly forward, of momentarily expecting to meet or overtake
something, but without any further thought. The figures of Clinch and
Rawlins immediately before him shut out the prospect of the narrowing
trail. Once only, taking advantage of a sudden halt that threw them
confusedly together, he managed to ask a question.

"Lost their track--found it again!" shouted the ostler, as Clinch, with
a cry like the baying of a hound, again darted forward. Their horses
were panting and trembling under them, the ascent seemed to be growing
steeper, a singular darkness, which even the density of the wood did not
sufficiently account for, surrounded them, but still their leader
madly urged them on. To Hale's returning senses they did not seem in a
condition to engage a single resolute man, who might have ambushed in
the woods or beaten them in detail in the narrow gorge, but in another
instant the reason of their furious haste was manifest. Spurring his
horse ahead, Clinch dashed out into the open with a cheering shout--a
shout that as quickly changed to a yell of imprecation. They were on
the Ridge in a blinding snow-storm! The road had already vanished under
their feet, and with it the fresh trail they had so closely followed!
They stood helplessly on the shore of a trackless white sea, blank and
spotless of any trace or sign of the fugitives.

"'Pears to me, boys," said the ostler, suddenly ranging before them,
"ef you're not kalkilatin' on gittin' another party to dig ye out, ye'd
better be huntin' fodder and cover instead of road agents. 'Skuse me,
gentlemen, but I'm responsible for the hosses, and this ain't no time
for circus-ridin'. We're a matter o' six miles from the station in a bee
line."

"Back to the trail, then," said Clinch, wheeling his horse towards the
road they had just quitted.

"'Skuse me, Kernel," said the ostler, laying his hand on Clinch's rein,
"but that way only brings us back the road we kem--the stage road--three
miles further from home. That three miles is on the divide, and by the
time we get there it will be snowed up worse nor this. The shortest cut
is along the Ridge. If we hump ourselves we ken cross the divide afore
the road is blocked. And that, 'skuse me, gentlemen, is MY road."

There was no time for discussion. The road was already palpably
thickening under their feet. Hale's arm was stiffened to his side by
a wet, clinging snow-wreath. The figures of the others were almost
obliterated and shapeless. It was not snowing--it was snowballing! The
huge flakes, shaken like enormous feathers out of a vast blue-black
cloud, commingled and fell in sprays and patches. All idea of their
former pursuit was forgotten; the blind rage and enthusiasm that had
possessed them was gone. They dashed after their new leader with only an
instinct for shelter and succor.

They had not ridden long when fortunately, as it seemed to Hale, the
character of the storm changed. The snow no longer fell in such large
flakes, nor as heavily. A bitter wind succeeded; the soft snow began
to stiffen and crackle under the horses' hoofs; they were no longer
weighted and encumbered by the drifts upon their bodies; the smaller
flakes now rustled and rasped against them like sand, or bounded from
them like hail. They seemed to be moving more easily and rapidly, their
spirits were rising with the stimulus of cold and motion, when suddenly
their leader halted.

"It's no use, boys. It can't be done! This is no blizzard, but a regular
two days' snifter! It's no longer meltin', but packin' and driftin'
now. Even if we get over the divide, we're sure to be blocked up in the
pass."

It was true! To their bitter disappointment they could now see that
the snow had not really diminished in quantity, but that the now
finely-powdered particles were rapidly filling all inequalities of
the surface, packing closely against projections, and swirling in
long furrows across the levels. They looked with anxiety at their
self-constituted leader.

"We must make a break to get down in the woods again before it's too
late," he said briefly.

But they had already drifted away from the fringe of larches and dwarf
pines that marked the sides of the Ridge, and lower down merged into
the dense forest that clothed the flank of the mountain they had lately
climbed, and it was with the greatest difficulty that they again reached
it, only to find that at that point it was too precipitous for the
descent of their horses. Benumbed and speechless, they continued to toil
on, opposed to the full fury of the stinging snow, and at times obliged
to turn their horses to the blast to keep from being blown over the
Ridge. At the end of half an hour the ostler dismounted, and, beckoning
to the others, took his horse by the bridle, and began the descent. When
it came to Hale's turn to dismount he could not help at first recoiling
from the prospect before him. The trail--if it could be so called--was
merely the track or furrow of some fallen tree dragged, by accident
or design, diagonally across the sides of the mountain. At times it
appeared scarcely a foot in width; at other times a mere crumbling
gully, or a narrow shelf made by the projections of dead boughs and
collected debris. It seemed perilous for a foot passenger, it appeared
impossible for a horse. Nevertheless, he had taken a step forward when
Clinch laid his hand on his arm.

"You'll bring up the rear," he said not unkindly, "ez you're a stranger
here. Wait until we sing out to you."

"But if I prefer to take the same risks as you all?" said Hale stiffly.

"You kin," said Clinch grimly. "But I reckoned, as you wern't familiar
with this sort o' thing, you wouldn't keer, by any foolishness o' yours,
to stampede the rocks ahead of us, and break down the trail, or send
down an avalanche on top of us. But just ez you like."

"I will wait, then," said Hale hastily.

The rebuke, however, did him good service. It preoccupied his mind,
so that it remained unaffected by the dizzy depths, and enabled him
to abandon himself mechanically to the sagacity of his horse, who was
contented simply to follow the hoofprints of the preceding animal, and
in a few moments they reached the broader trail without a mishap. A
discussion regarding their future movements was already taking place.
The impossibility of regaining the station at the Summit was admitted;
the way down the mountain to the next settlement was still left to them,
or the adjacent woods, if they wished for an encampment. The ostler once
more assumed authority.

"'Skuse me, gentlemen, but them horses don't take no pasear down the
mountain to-night. The stage-road ain't a mile off, and I kalkilate to
wait here till the up stage comes. She's bound to stop on account of the
snow; and I've done my dooty when I hand the horses over to the driver."

"But if she hears of the block up yer, and waits at the lower station?"
said Rawlins.

"Then I've done my dooty all the same. 'Skuse me, gentlemen, but them ez
hez their own horses kin do ez they like."

As this clearly pointed to Hale, he briefly assured his companions that
he had no intention of deserting them. "If I cannot reach Eagle's Court,
I shall at least keep as near it as possible. I suppose any messenger
from my house to the Summit will learn where I am and why I am delayed?"

"Messenger from your house!" gasped Rawlins. "Are you crazy, stranger?
Only a bird would get outer Eagle's now; and it would hev to be an eagle
at that! Between your house and the Summit the snow must be ten feet by
this time, to say nothing of the drift in the pass."

Hale felt it was the truth. At any other time he would have worried over
this unexpected situation, and utter violation of all his traditions.
He was past that now, and even felt a certain relief. He knew his
family were safe; it was enough. That they were locked up securely,
and incapable of interfering with HIM, seemed to enhance his new,
half-conscious, half-shy enjoyment of an adventurous existence.

The ostler, who had been apparently lost in contemplation of the steep
trail he had just descended, suddenly clapped his hand to his leg with
an ejaculation of gratified astonishment.

"Waal, darn my skin ef that ain't Hennicker's 'slide' all the time! I
heard it was somewhat about here."

Rawlins briefly explained to Hale that a slide was a rude incline for
the transit of heavy goods that could not be carried down a trail.

"And Hennicker's," continued the man, "ain't more nor a mile away. Ye
might try Hennicker's at a push, eh?"

By a common instinct the whole party looked dubiously at Hale. "Who's
Hennicker?" he felt compelled to ask.

The ostler hesitated, and glanced at the others to reply. "There ARE
folks," he said lazily, at last, "ez beleeves that Hennicker ain't much
better nor the crowd we're hunting; but they don't say it TO Hennicker.
We needn't let on what we're after."

"I for one," said Hale stoutly, "decidedly object to any concealment of
our purpose."

"It don't follow," said Rawlins carelessly, "that Hennicker even knows
of this yer robbery. It's his gineral gait we refer to. Ef yer think it
more polite, and it makes it more sociable to discuss this matter afore
him, I'm agreed."

"Hale means," said Clinch, "that it wouldn't be on the square to take
and make use of any points we might pick up there agin the road agents."

"Certainly," said Hale. It was not at all what he had meant, but he felt
singularly relieved at the compromise.

"And ez I reckon Hennicker ain't such a fool ez not to know who we are
and what we're out for," continued Clinch, "I reckon there ain't any
concealment."

"Then it's Hennicker's?" said the ostler, with swift deduction.

"Hennicker's it is! Lead on."

The ostler remounted his horse, and the others followed. The trail
presently turned into a broader track, that bore some signs of
approaching habitations, and at the end of five minutes they came upon
a clearing. It was part of one of the fragmentary mountain terraces, and
formed by itself a vast niche, or bracketed shelf, in the hollow flank
of the mountain that, to Hale's first glance, bore a rude resemblance
to Eagle's Court. But there was neither meadow nor open field; the few
acres of ground had been wrested from the forest by axe and fire, and
unsightly stumps everywhere marked the rude and difficult attempts at
cultivation. Two or three rough buildings of unplaned and unpainted
boards, connected by rambling sheds, stood in the centre of the
amphitheatre. Far from being protected by the encircling rampart, it
seemed to be the selected arena for the combating elements. A whirlwind
from the outer abyss continually filled this cave of AEolus with driving
snow, which, however, melted as it fell, or was quickly whirled away
again.

A few dogs barked and ran out to meet the cavalcade, but there was no
other sign of any life disturbed or concerned at their approach.

"I reckon Hennicker ain't home, or he'd hev been on the lookout afore
this," said the ostler, dismounting and rapping on the door.

After a silence, a female voice, unintelligibly to the others,
apparently had some colloquy with the ostler, who returned to the party.

"Must go in through the kitchin--can't open the door for the wind."

Leaving their horses in the shed, they entered the kitchen, which
communicated, and presently came upon a square room filled with smoke
from a fire of green pine logs. The doors and windows were tightly
fastened; the only air came in through the large-throated chimney in
voluminous gusts, which seemed to make the hollow shell of the apartment
swell and expand to the point of bursting. Despite the stinging of the
resinous smoke, the temperature was grateful to the benumbed travellers.
Several cushionless arm-chairs, such as were used in bar-rooms, two
tables, a sideboard, half bar and half cupboard, and a rocking-chair
comprised the furniture, and a few bear and buffalo skins covered
the floor. Hale sank into one of the arm-chairs, and, with a lazy
satisfaction, partly born of his fatigue and partly from some
newly-discovered appreciative faculty, gazed around the room, and then
at the mistress of the house, with whom the others were talking.

She was tall, gaunt, and withered; in spite of her evident years, her
twisted hair was still dark and full, and her eyes bright and piercing;
her complexion and teeth had long since succumbed to the vitiating
effects of frontier cookery, and her lips were stained with the yellow
juice of a brier-wood pipe she held in her mouth. The ostler had
explained their intrusion, and veiled their character under the vague
epithet of a "hunting party," and was now evidently describing them
personally. In his new-found philosophy the fact that the interest of
his hostess seemed to be excited only by the names of his companions,
that he himself was carelessly, and even deprecatingly, alluded to as
the "stranger from Eagle's" by the ostler, and completely overlooked by
the old woman, gave him no concern.

"You'll have to talk to Zenobia yourself. Dod rot ef I'm gine to
interfere. She knows Hennicker's ways, and if she chooses to take in
transients it ain't no funeral o' mine. Zeenie! You, Zeenie! Look yer!"

A tall, lazy-looking, handsome girl appeared on the threshold of the
next room, and with a hand on each door-post slowly swung herself
backwards and forwards, without entering. "Well, Maw?"

The old woman briefly and unalluringly pictured the condition of the
travellers.

"Paw ain't here," began the girl doubtfully, "and--How dy, Dick! is that
you?" The interruption was caused by her recognition of the ostler, and
she lounged into the room. In spite of a skimp, slatternly gown, whose
straight skirt clung to her lower limbs, there was a quaint, nymph-like
contour to her figure. Whether from languor, ill-health, or more
probably from a morbid consciousness of her own height, she moved with
a slightly affected stoop that had become a habit. It did not seem
ungraceful to Hale, already attracted by her delicate profile, her
large dark eyes, and a certain weird resemblance she had to some
half-domesticated dryad.

"That'll do, Maw," she said, dismissing her parent with a nod. "I'll
talk to Dick."

As the door closed on the old woman, Zenobia leaned her hands on
the back of a chair, and confronted the admiring eyes of Dick with a
goddess-like indifference.

"Now wot's the use of your playin' this yer game on me, Dick? Wot's the
good of your ladlin' out that hogwash about huntin'? HUNTIN'! I'll tell
yer the huntin' you-uns hev been at! You've been huntin' George Lee
and his boys since an hour before sun up. You've been followin' a blind
trail up to the Ridge, until the snow got up and hunted YOU right here!
You've been whoopin' and yellin' and circus-ridin' on the roads like
ez yer wos Comanches, and frightening all the women folk within
miles--that's your huntin'! You've been climbin' down Paw's old slide
at last, and makin' tracks for here to save the skins of them condemned
government horses of the Kempany! And THAT'S your huntin'!"

To Hale's surprise, a burst of laughter from the party followed this
speech. He tried to join in, but this ridiculous summary of the result
of his enthusiastic sense of duty left him--the only earnest believer
mortified and embarrassed. Nor was he the less concerned as he found the
girl's dark eyes had rested once or twice upon him curiously. Zenobia
laughed too, and, lazily turning the chair around, dropped into it. "And
by this time George Lee's loungin' back in his chyar and smokin' his
cigyar somewhar in Sacramento," she added, stretching her feet out to
the fire, and suiting the action to the word with an imaginary cigar
between the long fingers of a thin and not over-clean hand.

"We cave, Zeenie!" said Rawlins, when their hilarity had subsided to a
more subdued and scarcely less flattering admiration of the unconcerned
goddess before them. "That's about the size of it. You kin rake down the
pile. I forgot you're an old friend of George's."

"He's a white man!" said the girl decidedly.

"Ye used to know him?" continued Rawlins.

"Once. Paw ain't in that line now," she said simply.

There was such a sublime unconsciousness of any moral degradation
involved in this allusion that even Hale accepted it without a shock.
She rose presently, and, going to the little sideboard, brought out
a number of glasses; these she handed to each of the party, and then,
producing a demijohn of whiskey, slung it dexterously and gracefully
over her arm, so that it rested on her elbow like a cradle, and, going
to each one in succession, filled their glasses. It obliged each one to
rise to accept the libation, and as Hale did so in his turn he met the
dark eyes of the girl full on his own. There was a pleased curiosity in
her glance that made this married man of thirty-five color as awkwardly
as a boy.

The tender of refreshment being understood as a tacit recognition of
their claims to a larger hospitality, all further restraint was removed.
Zenobia resumed her seat, and placing her elbow on the arm of her chair,
and her small round chin in her hand, looked thoughtfully in the fire.
"When I say George Lee's a white man, it ain't because I know him.
It's his general gait. Wot's he ever done that's underhanded or mean?
Nothin'! You kant show the poor man he's ever took a picayune from. When
he's helped himself to a pile it's been outer them banks or them express
companies, that think it mighty fine to bust up themselves, and swindle
the poor folks o' their last cent, and nobody talks o' huntin' THEM!
And does he keep their money? No; he passes it round among the boys that
help him, and they put it in circulation. HE don't keep it for himself;
he ain't got fine houses in Frisco; he don't keep fast horses for show.
Like ez not the critter he did that job with--ef it was him--none of
you boys would have rid! And he takes all the risks himself; you ken bet
your life that every man with him was safe and away afore he turned his
back on you-uns."

"He certainly drops a little of his money at draw poker, Zeenie," said
Clinch, laughing. "He lost five thousand dollars to Sheriff Kelly last
week."

"Well, I don't hear of the sheriff huntin' him to give it back, nor do
I reckon Kelly handed it over to the Express it was taken from. I heard
YOU won suthin' from him a spell ago. I reckon you've been huntin' him
to find out whar you should return it." The laugh was clearly against
Clinch. He was about to make some rallying rejoinder when the young girl
suddenly interrupted him. "Ef you're wantin' to hunt somebody, why don't
you take higher game? Thar's that Jim Harkins: go for him, and I'll join
you."

"Harkins!" exclaimed Clinch and Hale simultaneously.

"Yes, Jim Harkins; do you know him?" she said, glancing from one to the
other.

"One of my friends do," said Clinch laughing; "but don't let that stop
you."

"And YOU--over there," continued Zenobia, bending her head and eyes
towards Hale.

"The fact is--I believe he was my banker," said Hale, with a smile. "I
don't know him personally."

"Then you'd better hunt him before he does you."

"What's HE done, Zeenie?" asked Rawlins, keenly enjoying the
discomfiture of the others.

"What?" She stopped, threw her long black braids over her shoulder,
clasped her knee with her hands, and rocking backwards and forwards,
sublimely unconscious of the apparition of a slim ankle and
half-dropped-off slipper from under her shortened gown, continued, "It
mightn't please HIM," she said slyly, nodding towards Hale.

"Pray don't mind me," said Hale, with unnecessary eagerness.

"Well," said Zenobia, "I reckon you all know Ned Falkner and the
Excelsior Ditch?"

"Yes, Falkner's the superintendent of it," said Rawlins. "And a square
man too. Thar ain't anything mean about him."

"Shake," said Zenobia, extending her hand. Rawlins shook the proffered
hand with eager spontaneousness, and the girl resumed: "He's about
ez good ez they make 'em--you bet. Well, you know Ned has put all his
money, and all his strength, and all his sabe, and--"

"His good looks," added Clinch mischievously.

"Into that Ditch," continued Zenobia, ignoring the interruption. "It's
his mother, it's his sweetheart, it's his everything! When other chaps
of his age was cavortin' round Frisco, and havin' high jinks, Ned was in
his Ditch. 'Wait till the Ditch is done,' he used to say. 'Wait till she
begins to boom, and then you just stand round.' Mor'n that, he got all
the boys to put in their last cent--for they loved Ned, and love him
now, like ez ef he wos a woman."

"That's so," said Clinch and Rawlins simultaneously, "and he's worth
it."

"Well," continued Zenobia, "the Ditch didn't boom ez soon ez they
kalkilated. And then the boys kept gettin' poorer and poorer, and Ned
he kept gettin' poorer and poorer in everything but his hopefulness and
grit. Then he looks around for more capital. And about this time, that
coyote Harkins smelt suthin' nice up there, and he gits Ned to give him
control of it, and he'll lend him his name and fix up a company. Soon ez
he gets control, the first thing he does is to say that it wants half a
million o' money to make it pay, and levies an assessment of two hundred
dollars a share. That's nothin' for them rich fellows to pay, or pretend
to pay, but for boys on grub wages it meant only ruin. They couldn't
pay, and had to forfeit their shares for next to nothing. And Ned made
one more desperate attempt to save them and himself by borrowing money
on his shares; when that hound Harkins got wind of it, and let it be
buzzed around that the Ditch is a failure, and that he was goin' out
of it; that brought the shares down to nothing. As Ned couldn't raise
a dollar, the new company swooped down on his shares for the debts THEY
had put up, and left him and the boys to help themselves. Ned couldn't
bear to face the boys that he'd helped to ruin, and put out, and ain't
been heard from since. After Harkins had got rid of Ned and the boys
he manages to pay off that wonderful debt, and sells out for a hundred
thousand dollars. That money--Ned's money--he sends to Sacramento, for
he don't dare to travel with it himself, and is kalkilatin' to leave the
kentry, for some of the boys allow to kill him on sight. So ef you're
wantin' to hunt suthin', thar's yer chance, and you needn't go inter the
snow to do it."

"But surely the law can recover this money?" said Hale indignantly. "It
is as infamous a robbery as--" He stopped as he caught Zenobia's eye.

"Ez last night's, you were goin' to say. I'll call it MORE. Them road
agents don't pretend to be your friend--but take yer money and run their
risks. For ez to the law--that can't help yer."

"It's a skin game, and you might ez well expect to recover a gambling
debt from a short-card sharp," explained Clinch; "Falkner oughter shot
him on sight."

"Or the boys lynched him," suggested Rawlins.

"I think," said Hale, more reflectively, "that in the absence of legal
remedy a man of that kind should have been forced under strong physical
menace to give up his ill-gotten gains. The money was the primary
object, and if that could be got without bloodshed--which seems to me a
useless crime--it would be quite as effective. Of course, if there was
resistance or retaliation, it might be necessary to kill him."

He had unconsciously fallen into his old didactic and dogmatic habit of
speech, and perhaps, under the spur of Zenobia's eyes, he had given
it some natural emphasis. A dead silence followed, in which the others
regarded him with amused and gratified surprise, and it was broken only
by Zenobia rising and holding out her hand. "Shake!"

Hale raised it gallantly, and pressed his lips on the one spotless
finger.

"That's gospel truth. And you ain't the first white man to say it."

"Indeed," laughed Hale. "Who was the other?"

"George Lee!"




CHAPTER VI


The laughter that followed was interrupted by a sudden barking of
the dogs in the outer clearing. Zenobia rose lazily and strode to the
window. It relieved Hale of certain embarrassing reflections suggested
by her comment.

"Ef it ain't that God-forsaken fool Dick bringing up passengers from
the snow-bound up stage in the road! I reckon I'VE got suthin' to say
to that!" But the later appearance of the apologetic Dick, with the
assurance that the party carried a permission from her father, granted
at the lower station in view of such an emergency, checked her active
opposition. "That's like Paw," she soliloquized aggrievedly; "shuttin'
us up and settin' dogs on everybody for a week, and then lettin' the
whole stage service pass through one door and out at another. Well, it's
HIS house and HIS whiskey, and they kin take it, but they don't get me
to help 'em."

They certainly were not a prepossessing or good-natured acquisition to
the party. Apart from the natural antagonism which, on such occasions,
those in possession always feel towards the new-comer, they were
strongly inclined to resist the dissatisfied querulousness and
aggressive attitude of these fresh applicants for hospitality. The most
offensive one was a person who appeared to exercise some authority over
the others. He was loud, assuming, and dressed with vulgar pretension.
He quickly disposed himself in the chair vacated by Zenobia, and called
for some liquor.

"I reckon you'll hev to help yourself," said Rawlins dryly, as the
summons met with no response. "There are only two women in the house,
and I reckon their hands are full already."

"I call it d--d uncivil treatment," said the man, raising his voice;
"and Hennicker had better sing smaller if he don't want his old den
pulled down some day. He ain't any better than men that hev been picked
up afore now."

"You oughter told him that, and mebbe he'd hev come over with yer,"
returned Rawlins. "He's a mild, soft, easy-going man, is Hennicker!
Ain't he, Colonel Clinch?"

The casual mention of Clinch's name produced the effect which the
speaker probably intended. The stranger stared at Clinch, who,
apparently oblivious of the conversation, was blinking his cold gray
eyes at the fire. Dropping his aggressive tone to mere querulousness,
the man sought the whiskey demijohn, and helped himself and his
companions. Fortified by liquor he returned to the fire.

"I reckon you've heard about this yer robbery, Colonel," he said,
addressing Clinch, with an attempt at easy familiarity.

Without raising his eyes from the fire, Clinch briefly assented, "I
reckon."

"I'm up yer, examining into it, for the Express."

"Lost much?" asked Rawlins.

"Not so much ez they might hev. That fool Harkins had a hundred thousand
dollars in greenbacks sealed up like an ordinary package of a thousand
dollars, and gave it to a friend, Bill Guthrie, in the bank to pick out
some unlikely chap among the passengers to take charge of it to Reno. He
wouldn't trust the Express. Ha! ha!"

The dead, oppressive silence that followed his empty laughter made it
seem almost artificial. Rawlins held his breath and looked at Clinch.
Hale, with the instincts of a refined, sensitive man, turned hot with
the embarrassment Clinch should have shown. For that gentleman, without
lifting his eyes from the fire, and with no apparent change in his
demeanor, lazily asked--

"Ye didn't ketch the name o' that passenger?"

"Naturally, no! For when Guthrie heard what was said agin him he
wouldn't give his name until he heard from him."

"And WHAT was said agin him?" asked Clinch musingly.

"What would be said agin a man that give up that sum o' money, like a
chaw of tobacco, for the asking? Why, there were but three men, as far
ez we kin hear, that did the job. And there were four passengers inside,
armed, and the driver and express messenger on the box. Six were robbed
by THREE!--they were a sweet-scented lot! Reckon they must hev felt
mighty small, for I hear they got up and skedaddled from the station
under the pretext of lookin' for the robbers." He laughed again, and the
laugh was noisily repeated by his five companions at the other end of
the room.

Hale, who had forgotten that the stranger was only echoing a part of
his own criticism of eight hours before, was on the point of rising with
burning cheeks and angry indignation, when the lazily uplifted eye of
Clinch caught his, and absolutely held him down with its paralyzing and
deadly significance. Murder itself seemed to look from those cruelly
quiet and remorseless gray pupils. For a moment he forgot his own rage
in this glimpse of Clinch's implacable resentment; for a moment he
felt a thrill of pity for the wretch who had provoked it. He remained
motionless and fascinated in his chair as the lazy lids closed like a
sheath over Clinch's eyes again. Rawlins, who had probably received the
same glance of warning, remained equally still.

"They haven't heard the last of it yet, you bet," continued the
infatuated stranger. "I've got a little statement here for the
newspaper," he added, drawing some papers from his pocket; "suthin' I
just run off in the coach as I came along. I reckon it'll show things up
in a new light. It's time there should be some change. All the cussin'
that's been usually done hez been by the passengers agin the express and
stage companies. I propose that the Company should do a little cussin'
themselves. See? P'r'aps you don't mind my readin' it to ye? It's just
spicy enough to suit them newspaper chaps."

"Go on," said Colonel Clinch quietly.

The man cleared his throat, with the preliminary pose of authorship, and
his five friends, to whom the composition was evidently not unfamiliar,
assumed anticipatory smiles.

"I call it 'Prize Pusillanimous Passengers.' Sort of runs easy off the
tongue, you know.

"'It now appears that the success of the late stagecoach robbery near
the Summit was largely due to the pusillanimity--not to use a more
serious word'"--He stopped, and looked explanatorily towards Clinch:
"Ye'll see in a minit what I'm gettin' at by that pusillanimity of the
passengers themselves. 'It now transpires that there were only three
robbers who attacked the coach, and that although passengers, driver,
and express messenger were fully armed, and were double the number of
their assailants, not a shot was fired. We mean no reflections upon
the well-known courage of Yuba Bill, nor the experience and coolness of
Bracy Tibbetts, the courteous express messenger, both of whom have
since confessed to have been more than astonished at the Christian and
lamb-like submission of the insiders. Amusing stories of some laughable
yet sickening incidents of the occasion--such as grown men kneeling in
the road, and offering to strip themselves completely, if their lives
were only spared; of one of the passengers hiding under the seat, and
only being dislodged by pulling his coat-tails; of incredible sums
promised, and even offers of menial service, for the preservation of
their wretched carcases--are received with the greatest gusto; but we
are in possession of facts which may lead to more serious accusations.
Although one of the passengers is said to have lost a large sum of
money intrusted to him, while attempting with barefaced effrontery to
establish a rival "carrying" business in one of the Express Company's
own coaches--'I call that a good point." He interrupted himself to allow
the unrestrained applause of his own party. "Don't you?"

"It's just h-ll," said Clinch musingly.

"'Yet the affair," resumed the stranger from his manuscript, "'is locked
up in great and suspicious mystery. The presence of Jackson N. Stanner,
Esq.' (that's me), 'special detective agent to the Company, and his
staff in town, is a guaranty that the mystery will be thoroughly
probed.' Hed to put that in to please the Company," he again
deprecatingly explained. "'We are indebted to this gentleman for the
facts.'"

"The pint you want to make in that article," said Clinch, rising, but
still directing his face and his conversation to the fire, "ez far ez I
ken see ez that no three men kin back down six unless they be cowards,
or are willing to be backed down."

"That's the point what I start from," rejoined Stanner, "and work up. I
leave it to you ef it ain't so."

"I can't say ez I agree with you," said the Colonel dryly. He turned,
and still without lifting his eyes walked towards the door of the room
which Zenobia had entered. The key was on the inside, but Clinch gently
opened the door, removed the key, and closing the door again locked
it from his side. Hale and Rawlins felt their hearts beat quickly; the
others followed Clinch's slow movements and downcast mien with amused
curiosity. After locking the other outlet from the room, and putting the
keys in his pocket, Clinch returned to the fire. For the first time he
lifted his eyes; the man nearest him shrank back in terror.

"I am the man," he said slowly, taking deliberate breath between his
sentences, "who gave up those greenbacks to the robbers. I am one of the
three passengers you have lampooned in that paper, and these gentlemen
beside me are the other two." He stopped and looked around him. "You
don't believe that three men can back down six! Well, I'll show you how
it can be done. More than that, I'll show you how ONE man can do it;
for, by the living G-d, if you don't hand over that paper I'll kill you
where you sit! I'll give you until I count ten; if one of you moves he
and you are dead men--but YOU first!"

Before he had finished speaking Hale and Rawlins had both risen, as if
in concert, with their weapons drawn. Hale could not tell how or why
he had done so, but he was equally conscious, without knowing why, of
fixing his eye on one of the other party, and that he should, in the
event of an affray, try to kill him. He did not attempt to reason;
he only knew that he should do his best to kill that man and perhaps
others.

"One," said Clinch, lifting his derringer, "two--three--"

"Look here, Colonel--I swear I didn't know it was you. Come--d--m it!
I say--see here," stammered Stanner, with white cheeks, not daring to
glance for aid to his stupefied party.

"Four--five--six--"

"Wait! Here!" He produced the paper and threw it on the floor.

"Pick it up and hand it to me. Seven--eight--"

Stanner hastily scrambled to his feet, picked up the paper, and handed
it to the Colonel. "I was only joking, Colonel," he said, with a forced
laugh.

"I'm glad to hear it. But as this joke is in black and white, you
wouldn't mind saying so in the same fashion. Take that pen and ink
and write as I dictate. 'I certify that I am satisfied that the above
statement is a base calumny against the characters of Ringwood Clinch,
Robert Rawlins, and John Hale, passengers, and that I do hereby
apologize to the same.' Sign it. That'll do. Now let the rest of your
party sign as witnesses."

They complied without hesitation; some, seizing the opportunity of
treating the affair as a joke, suggested a drink.

"Excuse me," said Clinch quietly, "but ez this house ain't big enough
for me and that man, and ez I've got business at Wild Cat Station with
this paper, I think I'll go without drinkin'." He took the keys from his
pocket, unlocked the doors, and taking up his overcoat and rifle turned
as if to go.

Rawlins rose to follow him; Hale alone hesitated. The rapid occurrences
of the last half hour gave him no time for reflection. But he was by
no means satisfied of the legality of the last act he had aided and
abetted, although he admitted its rude justice, and felt he would have
done so again. A fear of this, and an instinct that he might be led into
further complications if he continued to identify himself with Clinch
and Rawlins; the fact that they had professedly abandoned their quest,
and that it was really supplanted by the presence of an authorized
party whom they had already come in conflict with--all this urged him to
remain behind. On the other hand, the apparent desertion of his comrades
at the last moment was opposed both to his sense of honor and the liking
he had taken to them. But he reflected that he had already shown his
active partisanship, that he could be of little service to them at Wild
Cat Station, and would be only increasing the distance from his home;
and above all, an impatient longing for independent action finally
decided him. "I think I'll stay here," he said to Clinch, "unless you
want me."

Clinch cast a swift and meaning glance at the enemy, but looked
approval. "Keep your eyes skinned, and you're good for a dozen of 'em,"
he said sotto voce, and then turned to Stanner. "I'm going to take this
paper to Wild Cat. If you want to communicate with me hereafter you know
where I am to be found, unless"--he smiled grimly--"you'd like to see me
outside for a few minutes before I go?"

"It is a matter that concerns the Stage Company, not me," said Stanner,
with an attempt to appear at his ease.

Hale accompanied Clinch and Rawlins through the kitchen to the stables.
The ostler, Dick, had already returned to the rescue of the snow-bound
coach.

"I shouldn't like to leave many men alone with that crowd," said Clinch,
pressing Hale's hand; "and I wouldn't have allowed your staying behind
ef I didn't know I could bet my pile on you. Your offerin' to stay just
puts a clean finish on it. Look yer, Hale, I didn't cotton much to you
at first; but ef you ever want a friend, call on Ringwood Clinch."

"The same here, old man," said Rawlins, extending his hand as he
appeared from a hurried conference with the old woman at the woodshed,
"and trust to Zeenie to give you a hint ef there's anythin' underhanded
goin' on. So long."

Half inclined to resent this implied suggestion of protection, yet half
pleased at the idea of a confidence with the handsome girl he had seen,
Hale returned to the room. A whispered discussion among the party ceased
on his entering, and an awkward silence followed, which Hale did not
attempt to break as he quietly took his seat again by the fire. He
was presently confronted by Stanner, who with an affectation of easy
familiarity crossed over to the hearth.

"The old Kernel's d--d peppery and high toned when he's got a little
more than his reg'lar three fingers o' corn juice, eh?"

"I must beg you to understand distinctly, Mr. Stanner," said Hale, with
a return of his habitual precision of statement, "that I regard any
slighting allusion to the gentleman who has just left not only as in
exceedingly bad taste coming from YOU, but very offensive to myself. If
you mean to imply that he was under the influence of liquor, it is
my duty to undeceive you; he was so perfectly in possession of his
faculties as to express not only his own but MY opinion of your conduct.
You must also admit that he was discriminating enough to show his
objection to your company by leaving it. I regret that circumstances do
not make it convenient for me to exercise that privilege; but if I am
obliged to put up with your presence in this room, I strongly insist
that it is not made unendurable with the addition of your conversation."

The effect of this deliberate and passionless declaration was more
discomposing to the party than Clinch's fury. Utterly unaccustomed to
the ideas and language suddenly confronting them, they were unable to
determine whether it was the real expression of the speaker, or whether
it was a vague badinage or affectation to which any reply would involve
them in ridicule. In a country terrorized by practical joking, they did
not doubt but that this was a new form of hoaxing calculated to provoke
some response that would constitute them as victims. The immediate
effect upon them was that complete silence in regard to himself that
Hale desired. They drew together again and conversed in whispers, while
Hale, with his eyes fixed on the fire, gave himself up to somewhat late
and useless reflection.

He could scarcely realize his position. For however he might look at it,
within a space of twelve hours he had not only changed some of his most
cherished opinions, but he had acted in accordance with that change in
a way that made it seem almost impossible for him ever to recant. In the
interests of law and order he had engaged in an unlawful and disorderly
pursuit of criminals, and had actually come in conflict not with the
criminals, but with the only party apparently authorized to pursue them.
More than that, he was finding himself committed to a certain sympathy
with the criminals. Twenty-four hours ago, if anyone had told him that
he would have condoned an illegal act for its abstract justice, or
assisted to commit an illegal act for the same purpose, he would have
felt himself insulted. That he knew he would not now feel it as an
insult perplexed him still more. In these circumstances the fact that he
was separated from his family, and as it were from all his past life and
traditions, by a chance accident, did not disturb him greatly; indeed,
he was for the first time a little doubtful of their probable criticism
on his inconsistency, and was by no means in a hurry to subject himself
to it.

Lifting his eyes, he was suddenly aware that the door leading to the
kitchen was slowly opening. He had thought he heard it creak once or
twice during his deliberate reply to Stanner. It was evidently moving
now so as to attract his attention, without disturbing the others. It
presently opened sufficiently wide to show the face of Zeenie, who, with
a gesture of caution towards his companions, beckoned him to join her.
He rose carelessly as if going out, and, putting on his hat, entered
the kitchen as the retreating figure of the young girl glided lightly
towards the stables. She ascended a few open steps as if to a hay-loft,
but stopped before a low door. Pushing it open, she preceded him into
a small room, apparently under the roof, which scarcely allowed her to
stand upright. By the light of a stable lantern hanging from a beam he
saw that, though poorly furnished, it bore some evidence of feminine
taste and habitation. Motioning to the only chair, she seated herself on
the edge of the bed, with her hands clasping her knees in her familiar
attitude. Her face bore traces of recent agitation, and her eyes were
shining with tears. By the closer light of the lantern he was surprised
to find it was from laughter.

"I reckoned you'd be right lonely down there with that Stanner crowd,
particklerly after that little speech o' your'n, so I sez to Maw I'd get
you up yer for a spell. Maw and I heerd you exhort 'em! Maw allowed you
woz talkin' a furrin' tongue all along, but I--sakes alive!--I hed to
hump myself to keep from bustin' into a yell when yer jist drawed them
Webster-unabridged sentences on 'em." She stopped and rocked backwards
and forwards with a laugh that, subdued by the proximity of the roof and
the fear of being overheard, was by no means unmusical. "I'll tell ye
whot got me, though! That part commencing, 'Suckamstances over which
I've no controul.'"

"Oh, come! I didn't say that," interrupted Hale, laughing.

"'Don't make it convenient for me to exercise the privilege of kickin'
yer out to that extent,'" she continued; "'but if I cannot dispense with
your room, the least I can say is that it's a d--d sight better than
your company--'or suthin' like that! And then the way you minded your
stops, and let your voice rise and fall just ez easy ez if you wos a
First Reader in large type. Why, the Kernel wasn't nowhere. HIS cussin'
didn't come within a mile o' yourn. That Stanner jist turned yaller."

"I'm afraid you are laughing at me," said Hale, not knowing whether to
be pleased or vexed at the girl's amusement.

"I reckon I'm the only one that dare do it, then," said the girl simply.
"The Kernel sez the way you turned round after he'd done his cussin',
and said yer believed you'd stay and take the responsibility of the
whole thing--and did, in that kam, soft, did-anybody-speak-to-me
style--was the neatest thing he'd seen yet. No! Maw says I ain't much on
manners, but I know a man when I see him."

For an instant Hale gave himself up to the delicious flattery of
unexpected, unintended, and apparently uninterested compliment. Becoming
at last a little embarrassed under the frank curiosity of the girl's
dark eyes, he changed the subject.

"Do you always come up here through the stables?" he asked, glancing
round the room, which was evidently her own.

"I reckon," she answered half abstractedly. "There's a ladder down thar
to Maw's room"--pointing to a trapdoor beside the broad chimney that
served as a wall--"but it's handier the other way, and nearer the bosses
if you want to get away quick."

This palpable suggestion--borne out by what he remembered of the other
domestic details--that the house had been planned with reference to
sudden foray or escape reawakened his former uneasy reflections. Zeenie,
who had been watching his face, added, "It's no slouch, when b'ar or
painters hang round nights and stampede the stock, to be able to swing
yourself on to a boss whenever you hear a row going on outside."

"Do you mean that YOU--"

"Paw USED, and I do NOW, sense I've come into the room." She pointed
to a nondescript garment, half cloak, half habit, hanging on the wall.
"I've been outer bed and on Pitchpine's back as far ez the trail five
minutes arter I heard the first bellow."

Hale regarded her with undisguised astonishment. There was nothing at
all Amazonian or horsey in her manners, nor was there even the
robust physical contour that might have been developed through such
experiences. On the contrary, she seemed to be lazily effeminate in body
and mind. Heedless of his critical survey of her, she beckoned him to
draw his chair nearer, and, looking into his eyes, said--

"Whatever possessed YOU to take to huntin' men?"

Hale was staggered by the question, but nevertheless endeavored to
explain. But he was surprised to find that his explanation appeared
stilted even to himself, and, he could not doubt, was utterly
incomprehensible to the girl. She nodded her head, however, and
continued--

"Then you haven't anythin' agin' George?"

"I don't know George," said Hale, smiling. "My proceeding was against
the highwayman."

"Well, HE was the highwayman."

"I mean, it was the principle I objected to--a principle that I consider
highly dangerous."

"Well HE is the principal, for the others only HELPED, I reckon," said
Zeenie with a sigh, "and I reckon he IS dangerous."

Hale saw it was useless to explain. The girl continued--

"What made you stay here instead of going on with the Kernel? There was
suthin' else besides your wanting to make that Stanner take water. What
is it?"

A light sense of the propinquity of beauty, of her confidence, of their
isolation, of the eloquence of her dark eyes, at first tempted Hale to
a reply of simple gallantry; a graver consideration of the same
circumstances froze it upon his lips.

"I don't know," he returned awkwardly.

"Well, I'll tell you," she said. "You didn't cotton to the Kernel and
Rawlins much more than you did to Stanner. They ain't your kind."

In his embarrassment Hale blundered upon the thought he had honorably
avoided.

"Suppose," he said, with a constrained laugh, "I had stayed to see you."

"I reckon I ain't your kind, neither," she replied promptly. There was
a momentary pause when she rose and walked to the chimney. "It's
very quiet down there," she said, stooping and listening over the
roughly-boarded floor that formed the ceiling of the room below. "I
wonder what's going on."

In the belief that this was a delicate hint for his return to the party
he had left, Hale rose, but the girl passed him hurriedly, and, opening
the door, cast a quick glance into the stable beyond.

"Just as I reckoned--the horses are gone too. They've skedaddled," she
said blankly.

Hale did not reply. In his embarrassment a moment ago the idea of taking
an equally sudden departure had flashed upon him. Should he take this as
a justification of that impulse, or how? He stood irresolutely gazing
at the girl, who turned and began to descend the stairs silently. He
followed. When they reached the lower room they found it as they had
expected--deserted.

"I hope I didn't drive them away," said Hale, with an uneasy look at the
troubled face of the girl. "For I really had an idea of going myself a
moment ago."

She remained silent, gazing out of the window. Then, turning with a
slight shrug of her shoulders, said half defiantly: "What's the use now?
Oh, Maw! the Stanner crowd has vamosed the ranch, and this yer stranger
kalkilates to stay!"




CHAPTER VII


A week had passed at Eagle's Court--a week of mingled clouds and
sunshine by day, of rain over the green plateau and snow on the
mountain by night. Each morning had brought its fresh greenness to the
winter-girt domain, and a fresh coat of dazzling white to the barrier
that separated its dwellers from the world beyond. There was little
change in the encompassing wall of their prison; if anything, the snowy
circle round them seemed to have drawn its lines nearer day by day. The
immediate result of this restricted limit had been to confine the range
of cattle to the meadows nearer the house, and at a safe distance from
the fringe of wilderness now invaded by the prowling tread of predatory
animals.

Nevertheless, the two figures lounging on the slope at sunset gave very
little indication of any serious quality in the situation. Indeed,
so far as appearances were concerned, Kate, who was returning from an
afternoon stroll with Falkner, exhibited, with feminine inconsistency,
a decided return to the world of fashion and conventionality apparently
just as she was effectually excluded from it. She had not only discarded
her white dress as a concession to the practical evidence of the
surrounding winter, but she had also brought out a feather hat and sable
muff which had once graced a fashionable suburb of Boston. Even Falkner
had exchanged his slouch hat and picturesque serape for a beaver
overcoat and fur cap of Hale's which had been pressed upon him by Kate,
under the excuse of the exigencies of the season. Within a stone's throw
of the thicket, turbulent with the savage forces of nature, they walked
with the abstraction of people hearing only their own voices; in the
face of the solemn peaks clothed with white austerity they talked
gravely of dress.

"I don't mean to say," said Kate demurely, "that you're to give up the
serape entirely; you can wear it on rainy nights and when you ride over
here from your friend's house to spend the evening--for the sake of old
times," she added, with an unconscious air of referring to an already
antiquated friendship; "but you must admit it's a little too gorgeous
and theatrical for the sunlight of day and the public highway."

"But why should that make it wrong, if the experience of a people has
shown it to be a garment best fitted for their wants and requirements?"
said Falkner argumentatively.

"But you are not one of those people," said Kate, "and that makes all
the difference. You look differently and act differently, so that there
is something irreconcilable between your clothes and you that makes you
look odd."

"And to look odd, according to your civilized prejudices, is to be
wrong," said Falkner bitterly.

"It is to seem different from what one really is--which IS wrong. Now,
you are a mining superintendent, you tell me. Then you don't want to
look like a Spanish brigand, as you do in that serape. I am sure if you
had ridden up to a stage-coach while I was in it, I'd have handed you my
watch and purse without a word. There! you are not offended?" she added,
with a laugh, which did not, however, conceal a certain earnestness.
"I suppose I ought to have said I would have given it gladly to such
a romantic figure, and perhaps have got out and danced a saraband or
bolero with you--if that is the thing to do nowadays. Well!" she said,
after a dangerous pause, "consider that I've said it."

He had been walking a little before her, with his face turned towards
the distant mountain. Suddenly he stopped and faced her. "You would have
given enough of your time to the highwayman, Miss Scott, as would have
enabled you to identify him for the police--and no more. Like your
brother, you would have been willing to sacrifice yourself for the
benefit of the laws of civilization and good order."

If a denial to this assertion could have been expressed without the
use of speech, it was certainly transparent in the face and eyes of the
young girl at that moment. If Falkner had been less self-conscious he
would have seen it plainly. But Kate only buried her face in her lifted
muff, slightly raised her pretty shoulders, and, dropping her tremulous
eyelids, walked on. "It seems a pity," she said, after a pause, "that
we cannot preserve our own miserable existence without taking something
from others--sometimes even a life!" He started. "And it's horrid to
have to remind you that you have yet to kill something for the invalid's
supper," she continued. "I saw a hare in the field yonder."

"You mean that jackass rabbit?" he said, abstractedly.

"What you please. It's a pity you didn't take your gun instead of your
rifle."

"I brought the rifle for protection."

"And a shot gun is only aggressive, I suppose?"

Falkner looked at her for a moment, and then, as the hare suddenly
started across the open a hundred yards away, brought the rifle to his
shoulder. A long interval--as it seemed to Kate--elapsed; the animal
appeared to be already safely out of range, when the rifle suddenly
cracked; the hare bounded in the air like a ball, and dropped
motionless. The girl looked at the marksman in undisguised admiration.
"Is it quite dead?" she said timidly.

"It never knew what struck it."

"It certainly looks less brutal than shooting it with a shot gun, as
John does, and then not killing it outright," said Kate. "I hate what is
called sport and sportsmen, but a rifle seems--"

"What?" said Falkner.

"More--gentlemanly."

She had raised her pretty head in the air, and, with her hand shading
her eyes, was looking around the clear ether, and said meditatively, "I
wonder--no matter."

"What is it?"

"Oh, nothing."

"It is something," said Falkner, with an amused smile, reloading his
rifle.

"Well, you once promised me an eagle's feather for my hat. Isn't that
thing an eagle?"

"I am afraid it's only a hawk."

"Well, that will do. Shoot that!"

Her eyes were sparkling. Falkner withdrew his own with a slight smile,
and raised his rifle with provoking deliberation.

"Are you quite sure it's what you want?" he asked demurely.

"Yes--quick!"

Nevertheless, it was some minutes before the rifle cracked again. The
wheeling bird suddenly struck the wind with its wings aslant, and then
fell like a plummet at a distance which showed the difficulty of the
feat. Falkner started from her side before the bird reached the ground.
He returned to her after a lapse of a few moments, bearing a trailing
wing in his hand. "You shall make your choice," he said gayly.

"Are you sure it was killed outright?"

"Head shot off," said Falkner briefly.

"And besides, the fall would have killed it," said Kate conclusively.
"It's lovely. I suppose they call you a very good shot?"

"They--who?"

"Oh! the people you know--your friends, and their sisters."

"George shoots better than I do, and has had more experience. I've seen
him do that with a pistol. Of course not such a long shot, but a more
difficult one."

Kate did not reply, but her face showed a conviction that as an artistic
and gentlemanly performance it was probably inferior to the one she
had witnessed. Falkner, who had picked up the hare also, again took his
place by her side, as they turned towards the house.

"Do you remember the day you came, when we were walking here, you
pointed out that rock on the mountain where the poor animals had taken
refuge from the snow?" said Kate suddenly.

"Yes," answered Falkner; "they seem to have diminished. I am afraid you
were right; they have either eaten each other or escaped. Let us hope
the latter."

"I looked at them with a glass every day," said Kate, "and they've got
down to only four. There's a bear and that shabby, over-grown cat you
call a California lion, and a wolf, and a creature like a fox or a
squirrel."

"It's a pity they're not all of a kind," said Falkner.

"Why?"

"There'd be nothing to keep them from being comfortable together."

"On the contrary, I should think it would be simply awful to be shut up
entirely with one's own kind."

"Then you believe it is possible for them, with their different
natures and habits, to be happy together?" said Falkner, with sudden
earnestness.

"I believe," said Kate hurriedly, "that the bear and the lion find the
fox and the wolf very amusing, and that the fox and the wolf--"

"Well?" said Falkner, stopping short.

"Well, the fox and the wolf will carry away a much better opinion of the
lion and bear than they had before."

They had reached the house by this time, and for some occult reason Kate
did not immediately enter the parlor, where she had left her sister and
the invalid, who had already been promoted to a sofa and a cushion by
the window, but proceeded directly to her own room. As a manoeuvre to
avoid meeting Mrs. Hale, it was scarcely necessary, for that lady was
already in advance of her on the staircase, as if she had left the
parlor for a moment before they entered the house. Falkner, too, would
have preferred the company of his own thoughts, but Lee, apparently
the only unpreoccupied, all-pervading, and boyishly alert spirit in the
party, hailed him from within, and obliged him to present himself on
the threshold of the parlor with the hare and hawk's wing he was still
carrying. Eying the latter with affected concern, Lee said gravely:
"Of course, I CAN eat it, Ned, and I dare say it's the best part of the
fowl, and the hare isn't more than enough for the women, but I had no
idea we were so reduced. Three hours and a half gunning, and only one
hare and a hawk's wing. It's terrible."

Perceiving that his friend was alone, Falkner dropped his burden in the
hall and strode rapidly to his side. "Look here, George, we must, I must
leave this place at once. It's no use talking; I can stand this sort of
thing no longer."

"Nor can I, with the door open. Shut it, and say what you want quick,
before Mrs. Hale comes back. Have you found a trail?"

"No, no; that's not what I mean."

"Well, it strikes me it ought to be, if you expect to get away. Have
you proposed to Beacon Street, and she thinks it rather premature on a
week's acquaintance?"

"No; but--"

"But you WILL, you mean? DON'T, just yet."

"But I cannot live this perpetual lie."

"That depends. I don't know HOW you're lying when I'm not with you. If
you're walking round with that girl, singing hymns and talking of
your class in Sunday-school, or if you're insinuating that you're a
millionaire, and think of buying the place for a summer hotel, I should
say you'd better quit that kind of lying. But, on the other hand, I
don't see the necessity of your dancing round here with a shot gun, and
yelling for Harkins's blood, or counting that package of greenbacks in
the lap of Miss Scott, to be truthful. It seems to me there ought to be
something between the two."

"But, George, don't you think--you are on such good terms with Mrs. Hale
and her mother--that you might tell them the whole story? That is, tell
it in your own way; they will hear anything from you, and believe it."

"Thank you; but suppose I don't believe in lying, either?"

"You know what I mean! You have a way, d--n it, of making everything
seem like a matter of course, and the most natural thing going."

"Well, suppose I did. Are you prepared for the worst?"

Falkner was silent for a moment, and then replied, "Yes, anything would
be better than this suspense."

"I don't agree with you. Then you would be willing to have them forgive
us?"

"I don't understand you."

"I mean that their forgiveness would be the worst thing that could
happen. Look here, Ned. Stop a moment; listen at that door. Mrs. Hale
has the tread of an angel, with the pervading capacity of a cat. Now
listen! I don't pretend to be in love with anybody here, but if I were I
should hardly take advantage of a woman's helplessness and solitude with
a sensational story about myself. It's not giving her a fair show. You
know she won't turn you out of the house."

"No," said Falkner, reddening; "but I should expect to go at once, and
that would be my only excuse for telling her."

"Go! where? In your preoccupation with that girl you haven't even found
the trail by which Manuel escaped. Do you intend to camp outside the
house, and make eyes at her when she comes to the window?"

"Because you think nothing of flirting with Mrs. Hale," said Falkner
bitterly, "you care little--"

"My dear Ned," said Lee, "the fact that Mrs. Hale has a husband, and
knows that she can't marry me, puts us on equal terms. Nothing that she
could learn about me hereafter would make a flirtation with me any less
wrong than it would be now, or make her seem more a victim. Can you say
the same of yourself and that Puritan girl?"

"But you did not advise me to keep aloof from her; on the contrary,
you--"

"I thought you might make the best of the situation, and pay her some
attention, BECAUSE you could not go any further."

"You thought I was utterly heartless and selfish, like--"

"Ned!"

Falkner walked rapidly to the fireplace, and returned.

"Forgive me, George--I'm a fool--and an ungrateful one."

Lee did not reply at once, although he took and retained the hand
Falkner had impulsively extended. "Promise me," he said slowly, after a
pause, "that you will say nothing yet to either of these women. I ask it
for your own sake, and this girl's, not for mine. If, on the contrary,
you are tempted to do so from any Quixotic idea of honor, remember that
you will only precipitate something that will oblige you, from that same
sense of honor, to separate from the girl forever."

"I don't understand."

"Enough!" said he, with a quick return of his old reckless gayety.
"Shoot-Off-His-Mouth--the Beardless Boy Chief of the Sierras--has
spoken! Let the Pale Face with the black moustache ponder and beware how
he talks hereafter to the Rippling Cochituate Water! Go!"

Nevertheless, as soon as the door had closed upon Falkner, Lee's smile
vanished. With his colorless face turned to the fading light at the
window, the hollows in his temples and the lines in the corners of his
eyes seemed to have grown more profound. He remained motionless and
absorbed in thought so deep that the light rustle of a skirt, that would
at other times have thrilled his sensitive ear, passed unheeded. At
last, throwing off his reverie with the full and unrestrained sigh of
a man who believes himself alone, he was startled by the soft laugh of
Mrs. Hale, who had entered the room unperceived.

"Dear me! How portentous! Really, I almost feel as if I were
interrupting a tete-a-tete between yourself and some old flame. I
haven't heard anything so old-fashioned and conservative as that sigh
since I have been in California. I thought you never had any Past out
here?"

Fortunately his face was between her and the light, and the unmistakable
expression of annoyance and impatience which was passed over it was
spared her. There was, however, still enough dissonance in his manner to
affect her quick feminine sense, and when she drew nearer to him it was
with a certain maiden-like timidity.

"You are not worse, Mr. Lee, I hope? You have not over-exerted
yourself?"

"There's little chance of that with one leg--if not in the grave at
least mummified with bandages," he replied, with a bitterness new to
him.

"Shall I loosen them? Perhaps they are too tight. There is nothing so
irritating to one as the sensation of being tightly bound."

The light touch of her hand upon the rug that covered his knees,
the thoughtful tenderness of the blue-veined lids, and the delicate
atmosphere that seemed to surround her like a perfume cleared his face
of its shadow and brought back the reckless fire into his blue eyes.

"I suppose I'm intolerant of all bonds," he said, looking at her
intently, "in others as well as myself!"

Whether or not she detected any double meaning in his words, she was
obliged to accept the challenge of his direct gaze, and, raising her
eyes to his, drew back a little from him with a slight increase of
color. "I was afraid you had heard bad news just now."

"What would you call bad news?" asked Lee, clasping his hands behind
his head, and leaning back on the sofa, but without withdrawing his eyes
from her face.

"Oh, any news that would interrupt your convalescence, or break up our
little family party," said Mrs. Hale. "You have been getting on so well
that really it would seem cruel to have anything interfere with our life
of forgetting and being forgotten. But," she added with apprehensive
quickness, "has anything happened? Is there really any news from--from,
the trails? Yesterday Mr. Falkner said the snow had recommenced in the
pass. Has he seen anything, noticed anything different?"

She looked so very pretty, with the rare, genuine, and youthful
excitement that transfigured her wearied and wearying regularity of
feature, that Lee contented himself with drinking in her prettiness as
he would have inhaled the perfume of some flower.

"Why do you look at me so, Mr. Lee?" she asked, with a slight smile.
"I believe something HAS happened. Mr. Falkner HAS brought you some
intelligence."

"He has certainly found out something I did not foresee."

"And that troubles you?"

"It does."

"Is it a secret?"

"No."

"Then I suppose you will tell it to me at dinner," she said, with a
little tone of relief.

"I am afraid, if I tell it at all, I must tell it now," he said,
glancing at the door.

"You must do as you think best," she said coldly, "as it seems to be a
secret, after all." She hesitated. "Kate is dressing, and will not be
down for some time."

"So much the better. For I'm afraid that Ned has made a poor return to
your hospitality by falling in love with her."

"Impossible! He has known her for scarcely a week."

"I am afraid we won't agree as to the length of time necessary to
appreciate and love a woman. I think it can be done in seven days and
four hours, the exact time we have been here."

"Yes; but as Kate was not in when you arrived, and did not come until
later, you must take off at least one hour," said Mrs. Hale gayly.

"Ned can. I shall not abate a second."

"But are you not mistaken in his feelings?" she continued hurriedly. "He
certainly has not said anything to her."

"That is his last hold on honor and reason. And to preserve that little
intact he wants to run away at once."

"But that would be very silly."

"Do you think so?" he said, looking at her fixedly.

"Why not?" she asked in her turn, but rather faintly.

"I'll tell you why," he said, lowering his voice with a certain
intensity of passion unlike his usual boyish lightheartedness. "Think of
a man whose life has been one of alternate hardness and aggression, of
savage disappointment and equally savage successes, who has known no
other relaxation than dissipation and extravagance; a man to whom
the idea of the domestic hearth and family ties only meant weakness,
effeminacy, or--worse; who had looked for loyalty and devotion only in
the man who battled for him at his right hand in danger, or shared his
privations and sufferings. Think of such a man, and imagine that an
accident has suddenly placed him in an atmosphere of purity, gentleness,
and peace, surrounded him by the refinements of a higher life than he
had ever known, and that he found himself as in a dream, on terms of
equality with a pure woman who had never known any other life, and yet
would understand and pity his. Imagine his loving her! Imagine that the
first effect of that love was to show him his own inferiority and the
immeasurable gulf that lay between his life and hers! Would he not fly
rather than brave the disgrace of her awakening to the truth? Would
he not fly rather than accept even the pity that might tempt her to a
sacrifice?"

"But--is Mr. Falkner all that?"

"Nothing of the kind, I assure you!" said he demurely. "But that's the
way a man in love feels."

"Really! Mr. Falkner should get you to plead his cause with Kate," said
Mrs. Hale with a faint laugh.

"I need all my persuasive powers in that way for myself," said Lee
boldly.

Mrs. Hale rose. "I think I hear Kate coming," she said. Nevertheless,
she did not move away. "It IS Kate coming," she added hurriedly,
stooping to pick up her work-basket, which had slipped with Lee's hand
from her own.

It was Kate, who at once flew to her sister's assistance, Lee deploring
from the sofa his own utter inability to aid her. "It's all my fault,
too," he said to Kate, but looking at Mrs. Hale. "It seems I have
a faculty of upsetting existing arrangements without the power of
improving them, or even putting them back in their places. What shall I
do? I am willing to hold any number of skeins or rewind any quantity of
spools. I am even willing to forgive Ned for spending the whole day with
you, and only bringing me the wing of a hawk for supper."

"That was all my folly, Mr. Lee," said Kate, with swift mendacity; "he
was all the time looking after something for you, when I begged him to
shoot a bird to get a feather for my hat. And that wing is SO pretty."

"It is a pity that mere beauty is not edible," said Lee, gravely, "and
that if the worst comes to the worst here you would probably prefer me
to Ned and his moustachios, merely because I've been tied by the leg to
this sofa and slowly fattened like a Strasbourg goose."

Nevertheless, his badinage failed somehow to amuse Kate, and she
presently excused herself to rejoin her sister, who had already slipped
from the room. For the first time during their enforced seclusion a
sense of restraint and uneasiness affected Mrs. Hale, her sister, and
Falkner at dinner. The latter addressed himself to Mrs. Scott, almost
entirely. Mrs. Hale was fain to bestow an exceptional and marked
tenderness on her little daughter Minnie, who, however, by some
occult childish instinct, insisted upon sharing it with Lee--her great
friend--to Mrs. Hale's uneasy consciousness. Nor was Lee slow to profit
by the child's suggestion, but responded with certain vicarious caresses
that increased the mother's embarrassment. That evening they retired
early, but in the intervals of a restless night Kate was aware, from
the sound of voices in the opposite room, that the friends were equally
wakeful.

A morning of bright sunshine and soft warm air did not, however, bring
any change to their new and constrained relations. It only seemed to
offer a reason for Falkner to leave the house very early for his
daily rounds, and gave Lee that occasion for unaided exercise with an
extempore crutch on the veranda which allowed Mrs. Hale to pursue her
manifold duties without the necessity of keeping him company. Kate also,
as if to avoid an accidental meeting with Falkner, had remained at home
with her sister. With one exception, they did not make their guests the
subject of their usual playful comments, nor, after the fashion of their
sex, quote their ideas and opinions. That exception was made by Mrs.
Hale.

"You have had no difference with Mr. Falkner?" she said carelessly.

"No," said Kate quickly. "Why?"

"I only thought he seemed rather put out at dinner last night, and you
didn't propose to go and meet him to-day."

"He must be bored with my company at times, I dare say," said Kate, with
an indifference quite inconsistent with her rising color. "I shouldn't
wonder if he was a little vexed with Mr. Lee's chaffing him about his
sport yesterday, and probably intends to go further to-day, and bring
home larger game. I think Mr. Lee very amusing always, but I sometimes
fancy he lacks feeling."

"Feeling! You don't know him, Kate," said Mrs. Hale quickly. She stopped
herself, but with a half-smiling recollection in her dropped eyelids.

"Well, he doesn't look very amiable now, stamping up and down the
veranda. Perhaps you'd better go and soothe him."

"I'm really SO busy just now," said Mrs. Hale, with sudden and
inconsequent energy; "things have got dreadfully behind in the last
week. You had better go, Kate, and make him sit down, or he'll be
overdoing it. These men never know any medium--in anything."

Contrary to Kate's expectation, Falkner returned earlier than usual,
and, taking the invalid's arm, supported him in a more ambitious walk
along the terrace before the house. They were apparently absorbed in
conversation, but the two women who observed them from the window could
not help noticing the almost feminine tenderness of Falkner's manner
towards his wounded friend, and the thoughtful tenderness of his
ministering care.

"I wonder," said Mrs. Hale, following them with softly appreciative
eyes, "if women are capable of as disinterested friendship as men? I
never saw anything like the devotion of these two creatures. Look! if
Mr. Falkner hasn't got his arm round Mr. Lee's waist, and Lee, with his
own arm over Falkner's neck, is looking up in his eyes. I declare, Kate,
it almost seems an indiscretion to look at them."

Kate, however, to Mrs. Hale's indignation, threw her pretty head back
and sniffed the air contemptuously. "I really don't see anything but
some absurd sentimentalism of their own, or some mannish wickedness
they're concocting by themselves. I am by no means certain, Josephine,
that Lee's influence over that young man is the best thing for him."

"On the contrary! Lee's influence seems the only thing that checks
his waywardness," said Mrs. Hale quickly. "I'm sure, if anyone makes
sacrifices, it is Lee; I shouldn't wonder that even now he is making
some concession to Falkner, and all those caressing ways of your friend
are for a purpose. They're not much different from us, dear."

"Well, I wouldn't stand there and let them see me looking at them as if
I couldn't bear them out of my sight for a moment," said Kate, whisking
herself out of the room. "They're conceited enough, Heaven knows,
already."

That evening, at dinner, however, the two men exhibited no trace of the
restraint or uneasiness of the previous day. If they were less impulsive
and exuberant, they were still frank and interested, and if the term
could be used in connection with men apparently trained to neither
self-control nor repose, there was a certain gentle dignity in their
manner which for the time had the effect of lifting them a little
above the social level of their entertainers. For even with all their
predisposition to the strangers, Kate and Mrs. Hale had always retained
a conscious attitude of gentle condescension and superiority towards
them--an attitude not inconsistent with a stronger feeling, nor
altogether unprovocative of it; yet this evening they found themselves
impressed with something more than an equality in the men who had amused
and interested them, and they were perhaps a little more critical
and doubtful of their own power. Mrs. Hale's little girl, who had
appreciated only the seriousness of the situation, had made her own
application of it. "Are you dow'in' away from aunt Kate and mamma?" she
asked, in an interval of silence.

"How else can I get you the red snow we saw at sunset, the other day, on
the peak yonder?" said Lee gayly. "I'll have to get up some morning very
early, and catch it when it comes at sunrise."

"What is this wonderful snow, Minnie, that you are tormenting Mr. Lee
for?" asked Mrs. Hale.

"Oh! it's a fairy snow that he told me all about; it only comes when
the sun comes up and goes down, and if you catch ever so little of it
in your hand it makes all you fink you want come true! Wouldn't that be
nice?" But to the child's astonishment her little circle of auditors,
even while assenting, sighed.

The red snow was there plain enough the next morning before the valley
was warm with light, and while Minnie, her mother, and aunt Kate were
still peacefully sleeping. And Mr. Lee had kept his word, and was
evidently seeking it, for he and Falkner were already urging their
horses through the pass, with their faces towards and lit up by its
glow.




CHAPTER VIII


Kate was stirring early, but not as early as her sister, who met her
on the threshold of her room. Her face was quite pale, and she held a
letter in her hand. "What does this mean, Kate?"

"What is the matter?" asked Kate, her own color fading from her cheek.

"They are gone--with their horses. Left before day, and left this."

She handed Kate an open letter. The girl took it hurriedly, and read--

"When you get this we shall be no more; perhaps not even as much. Ned
found the trail yesterday, and we are taking the first advantage of it
before day. We dared not trust ourselves to say 'Good-by!' last evening;
we were too cowardly to face you this morning; we must go as we came,
without warning, but not without regret. We leave a package and a letter
for your husband. It is not only our poor return for your gentleness and
hospitality, but, since it was accidentally the means of giving us the
pleasure of your society, we beg you to keep it in safety until his
return. We kiss your mother's hands. Ned wants to say something more,
but time presses, and I only allow him to send his love to Minnie, and
to tell her that he is trying to find the red snow.

"GEORGE LEE."


"But he is not fit to travel," said Mrs. Hale. "And the trail--it may
not be passable."

"It was passable the day before yesterday," said Kate drearily, "for I
discovered it, and went as far as the buck-eyes."

"Then it was you who told them about it," said Mrs. Hale reproachfully.

"No," said Kate indignantly. "Of course I didn't." She stopped, and,
reading the significance of her speech in the glistening eyes of her
sister, she blushed. Josephine kissed her, and said--

"It WAS treating us like children, Kate, but we must make them pay for
it hereafter. For that package and letter to John means something, and
we shall probably see them before long. I wonder what the letter is
about, and what is in the package?"

"Probably one of Mr. Lee's jokes. He is quite capable of turning the
whole thing into ridicule. I dare say he considers his visit here a
prolonged jest."

"With his poor leg, Kate? You are as unfair to him as you were to
Falkner when they first came."

Kate, however, kept her dark eyebrows knitted in a piquant frown.

"To think of his intimating WHAT he would allow Falkner to say! And yet
you believe he has no evil influence over the young man."

Mrs. Hale laughed. "Where are you going so fast, Kate?" she called
mischievously, as the young lady flounced out of the room.

"Where? Why, to tidy John's room. He may be coming at any moment now. Or
do you want to do it yourself?"

"No, no," returned Mrs. Hale hurriedly; "you do it. I'll look in a
little later on."

She turned away with a sigh. The sun was shining brilliantly outside.
Through the half-open blinds its long shafts seemed to be searching the
house for the lost guests, and making the hollow shell appear doubly
empty. What a contrast to the dear dark days of mysterious seclusion
and delicious security, lit by Lee's laughter and the sparkling hearth,
which had passed so quickly! The forgotten outer world seemed to have
returned to the house through those open windows and awakened its
dwellers from a dream.

The morning seemed interminable, and it was past noon, while they
were deep in a sympathetic conference with Mrs. Scott, who had drawn a
pathetic word-picture of the two friends perishing in the snow-drift,
without flannels, brandy, smelling-salts, or jelly, which they had
forgotten, when they were startled by the loud barking of "Spot" on the
lawn before the house. The women looked hurriedly at each other.

"They have returned," said Mrs. Hale.

Kate ran to the window. A horseman was approaching the house. A single
glance showed her that it was neither Falkner, Lee, nor Hale, but a
stranger.

"Perhaps he brings some news of them," said Mrs. Scott quickly. So
complete had been their preoccupation with the loss of their guests that
they could not yet conceive of anything that did not pertain to it.

The stranger, who was at once ushered into the parlor, was evidently
disconcerted by the presence of the three women.

"I reckoned to see John Hale yer," he began, awkwardly.

A slight look of disappointment passed over their faces. "He has not yet
returned," said Mrs. Hale briefly.

"Sho! I wanter know. He's hed time to do it, I reckon," said the
stranger.

"I suppose he hasn't been able to get over from the Summit," returned
Mrs. Hale. "The trail is closed."

"It ain't now, for I kem over it this mornin' myself."

"You didn't--meet--anyone?" asked Mrs. Hale timidly, with a glance at
the others.

"No."

A long silence ensued. The unfortunate visitor plainly perceived
an evident abatement of interest in himself, yet he still struggled
politely to say something. "Then I reckon you know what kept Hale away?"
he said dubiously.

"Oh, certainly--the stage robbery."

"I wish I'd known that," said the stranger reflectively, "for I ez good
ez rode over jist to tell it to ye. Ye see John Hale, he sent a note to
ye 'splainin' matters by a gentleman; but the road agents tackled that
man, and left him for dead in the road."

"Yes," said Mrs. Hale impatiently.

"Luckily he didn't die, but kem to, and managed to crawl inter the
brush, whar I found him when I was lookin' for stock, and brought him to
my house--"

"YOU found him? YOUR house?" interrupted Mrs. Hale.

"Inter MY house," continued the man doggedly. "I'm Thompson of
Thompson's Pass over yon; mebbe it ain't much of a house; but I brought
him thar. Well, ez he couldn't find the note that Hale had guv him, and
like ez not the road agents had gone through him and got it, ez soon ez
the weather let up I made a break over yer to tell ye."

"You say Mr. Lee came to your house," repeated Mrs. Hale, "and is there
now?"

"Not much," said the man grimly; "and I never said LEE was thar. I mean
that Bilson waz shot by Lee and kem--"

"Certainly, Josephine!" said Kate, suddenly stepping between her sister
and Thompson, and turning upon her a white face and eyes of silencing
significance; "certainly--don't you remember?--that's the story we got
from the Chinaman, you know, only muddled. Go on sir," she continued,
turning to Thompson calmly; "you say that the man who brought the note
from my brother was shot by Lee?"

"And another fellow they call Falkner. Yes, that's about the size of
it."

"Thank you; it's nearly the same story that we heard. But you have had
a long ride, Mr. Thompson; let me offer you a glass of whiskey in the
dining-room. This way, please."

The door closed upon them none too soon. For Mrs. Hale already felt the
room whirling around her, and sank back into her chair with a hysterical
laugh. Old Mrs. Scott did not move from her seat, but, with her eyes
fixed on the door, impatiently waited Kate's return. Neither spoke, but
each felt that the young, untried girl was equal to the emergency, and
would get at the truth.

The sound of Thompson's feet in the hall and the closing of the front
door was followed by Kate's reappearance. Her face was still pale, but
calm.

"Well?" said the two women in a breath.

"Well," returned Kate slowly; "Mr. Lee and Mr. Falkner were undoubtedly
the two men who took the paper from John's messenger and brought it
here."

"You are sure?" said Mrs. Scott.

"There can be no mistake, mother."

"THEN," said Mrs. Scott, with triumphant feminine logic, "I don't want
anything more to satisfy me that they are PERFECTLY INNOCENT!"

More convincing than the most perfect masculine deduction, this
single expression of their common nature sent a thrill of sympathy and
understanding through each. They cried for a few moments on each other's
shoulders. "To think," said Mrs. Scott, "what that poor boy must have
suffered to have been obliged to do--that to--to--Bilson--isn't that the
creature's name? I suppose we ought to send over there and inquire after
him, with some chicken and jelly, Kate. It's only common humanity, and
we must be just, my dear; for even if he shot Mr. Lee and provoked the
poor boy to shoot him, he may have thought it his duty. And then, it
will avert suspicions."

"To think," murmured Mrs. Hale, "what they must have gone through while
they were here--momentarily expecting John to come, and yet keeping up
such a light heart."

"I believe, if they had stayed any longer, they would have told us
everything," said Mrs. Scott.

Both the younger women were silent. Kate was thinking of Falkner's
significant speech as they neared the house on their last walk;
Josephine was recalling the remorseful picture drawn by Lee, which she
knew was his own portrait. Suddenly she started.

"But John will be here soon; what are we to tell him? And then that
package and that letter."

"Don't be in a hurry to tell him anything at present, my child," said
Mrs. Scott gently. "It is unfortunate this Mr. Thompson called here, but
we are not obliged to understand what he says now about John's message,
or to connect our visitors with his story. I'm sure, Kate, I should have
treated them exactly as we did if they had come without any message from
John; so I do not know why we should lay any stress on that, or even
speak of it. The simple fact is that we have opened our house to
two strangers in distress. Your husband," continued Mr. Hale's
mother-in-law, "does not require to know more. As to the letter and
package, we will keep that for further consideration. It cannot be of
much importance, or they would have spoken of it before; it is probably
some trifling present as a return for your hospitality. I should use no
INDECOROUS haste in having it opened."

The two women kissed Mrs. Scott with a feeling of relief, and fell
back into the monotony of their household duties. It is to be feared,
however, that the absence of their outlawed guests was nearly as
dangerous as their presence in the opportunity it afforded for
uninterrupted and imaginative reflection. Both Kate and Josephine were
at first shocked and wounded by the discovery of the real character of
the two men with whom they had associated so familiarly, but it was no
disparagement to their sense of propriety to say that the shock did not
last long, and was accompanied with the fascination of danger. This was
succeeded by a consciousness of the delicate flattery implied in their
indirect influence over the men who had undoubtedly risked their lives
for the sake of remaining with them. The best woman is not above being
touched by the effect of her power over the worst man, and Kate at first
allowed herself to think of Falkner in that light. But if in her later
reflections he suffered as a heroic experience to be forgotten, he
gained something as an actual man to be remembered. Now that the
proposed rides from "his friend's house" were a part of the illusion,
would he ever dare to visit them again? Would she dare to see him? She
held her breath with a sudden pain of parting that was new to her; she
tried to think of something else, to pick up the scattered threads of
her life before that eventful day. But in vain; that one week had filled
the place with implacable memories, or more terrible, as it seemed to
her and her sister, they had both lost their feeble, alien hold
upon Eagle's Court in the sudden presence of the real genii of these
solitudes, and henceforth they alone would be the strangers there.
They scarcely dared to confess it to each other, but this return to the
dazzling sunlight and cloudless skies of the past appeared to them to be
the one unreal experience; they had never known the true wild flavor
of their home, except in that week of delicious isolation. Without
breathing it aloud, they longed for some vague denoument to this
experience that should take them from Eagle's Court forever.

It was noon the next day when the little household beheld the last shred
of their illusion vanish like the melting snow in the strong sunlight
of John Hale's return. He was accompanied by Colonel Clinch and Rawlins,
two strangers to the women. Was it fancy, or the avenging spirit of
their absent companions? but HE too looked a stranger, and as the little
cavalcade wound its way up the slope he appeared to sit his horse and
wear his hat with a certain slouch and absence of his usual restraint
that strangely shocked them. Even the old half-condescending,
half-punctilious gallantry of his greeting of his wife and family was
changed, as he introduced his companions with a mingling of familiarity
and shyness that was new to him. Did Mrs. Hale regret it, or feel a
sense of relief in the absence of his usual seignorial formality? She
only knew that she was grateful for the presence of the strangers, which
for the moment postponed a matrimonial confidence from which she shrank.

"Proud to know you," said Colonel Clinch, with a sudden outbreak of the
antique gallantry of some remote Huguenot ancestor. "My friend, Judge
Hale, must be a regular Roman citizen to leave such a family and such a
house at the call of public duty. Eh, Rawlins?"

"You bet," said Rawlins, looking from Kate to her sister in undisguised
admiration.

"And I suppose the duty could not have been a very pleasant one," said
Mrs. Hale, timidly, without looking at her husband.

"Gad, madam, that's just it," said the gallant Colonel, seating himself
with a comfortable air, and an easy, though by no means disrespectful,
familiarity. "We went into this fight a little more than a week ago. The
only scrimmage we've had has been with the detectives that were on the
robbers' track. Ha! ha! The best people we've met have been the friends
of the men we were huntin', and we've generally come to the conclusion
to vote the other ticket! Ez Judge Hale and me agreed ez we came along,
the two men ez we'd most like to see just now and shake hands with are
George Lee and Ned Falkner."

"The two leaders of the party who robbed the coach," explained Mr. Hale,
with a slight return of his usual precision of statement.

The three women looked at each other with a blaze of thanksgiving in
their grateful eyes. Without comprehending all that Colonel Clinch had
said, they understood enough to know that their late guests were safe
from the pursuit of that party, and that their own conduct was spared
criticism. I hardly dare write it, but they instantly assumed the
appearance of aggrieved martyrs, and felt as if they were!

"Yes, ladies!" continued the Colonel, inspired by the bright eyes fixed
upon him. "We haven't taken the road ourselves yet, but--pohn honor--we
wouldn't mind doing it in a case like this." Then with the fluent, but
somewhat exaggerated, phraseology of a man trained to "stump" speaking,
he gave an account of the robbery and his own connection with it. He
spoke of the swindling and treachery which had undoubtedly provoked
Falkner to obtain restitution of his property by an overt act of
violence under the leadership of Lee. He added that he had learned since
at Wild Cat Station that Harkins had fled the country, that a suit had
been commenced by the Excelsior Ditch Company, and that all available
property of Harkins had been seized by the sheriff.

"Of course it can't be proved yet, but there's no doubt in my mind that
Lee, who is an old friend of Ned Falkner's, got up that job to help him,
and that Ned's off with the money by this time--and I'm right glad of
it. I can't say ez we've done much towards it, except to keep tumbling
in the way of that detective party of Stanner's, and so throw them off
the trail--ha, ha! The Judge here, I reckon, has had his share of
fun, for while he was at Hennicker's trying to get some facts from
Hennicker's pretty daughter, Stanner tried to get up some sort of
vigilance committee of the stage passengers to burn down Hennicker's
ranch out of spite, but the Judge here stepped in and stopped that."

"It was really a high-handed proceeding, Josephine, but I managed to
check it," said Hale, meeting somewhat consciously the first direct
look his wife had cast upon him, and falling back for support on his old
manner. "In its way, I think it was worse than the robbery by Lee and
Falkner, for it was done in the name of law and order; while, as far
as I can judge from the facts, the affair that we were following up
was simply a rude and irregular restitution of property that had been
morally stolen."

"I have no doubt you did quite right, though I don't understand it,"
said Mrs. Hale languidly; "but I trust these gentlemen will stay to
luncheon, and in the meantime excuse us for running away, as we are
short of servants, and Manuel seems to have followed the example of the
head of the house and left us, in pursuit of somebody or something."

When the three women had gained the vantage-ground of the drawing-room,
Kate said, earnestly, "As it's all right, hadn't we better tell him
now?"

"Decidedly not, child," said Mrs. Scott, imperatively. "Do you suppose
they are in a hurry to tell us THEIR whole story? Who are those
Hennicker people? and they were there a week ago!"

"And did you notice John's hat when he came in, and the vulgar
familiarity of calling him 'Judge'?" said Mrs. Hale.

"Well, certainly anything like the familiarity of this man Clinch I
never saw," said Kate. "Contrast his manner with Mr. Falkner's."

At luncheon the three suffering martyrs finally succeeded in reducing
Hale and his two friends to an attitude of vague apology. But their
triumph was short-lived. At the end of the meal they were startled by
the trampling of hoofs without, followed by loud knocking. In another
moment the door was opened, and Mr. Stanner strode into the room. Hale
rose with a look of indignation.

"I thought, as Mr. Stanner understood that I had no desire for his
company elsewhere, he would hardly venture to intrude upon me in my
house, and certainly not after--"

"Ef you're alluding to the Vigilantes shakin' you and Zeenie up at
Hennicker's, you can't make ME responsible for that. I'm here now on
business--you understand--reg'lar business. Ef you want to see the
papers yer ken. I suppose you know what a warrant is?"

"I know what YOU are," said Hale hotly; "and if you don't leave my
house--"

"Steady, boys," interrupted Stanner, as his five henchmen filed into the
hall. "There's no backin' down here, Colonel Clinch, unless you and Hale
kalkilate to back down the State of Californy! The matter stands like
this. There's a half-breed Mexican, called Manuel, arrested over at the
Summit, who swears he saw George Lee and Edward Falkner in this house
the night after the robbery. He says that they were makin' themselves
at home here, as if they were among friends, and considerin' the kind of
help we've had from Mr. John Hale, it looks ez if it might be true."

"It's an infamous lie!" said Hale.

"It may be true, John," said Mrs. Scott, suddenly stepping in front of
her pale-cheeked daughters. "A wounded man was brought here out of
the storm by his friend, who claimed the shelter of your roof. As your
mother I should have been unworthy to stay beneath it and have denied
that shelter or withheld it until I knew his name and what he was. He
stayed here until he could be removed. He left a letter for you. It will
probably tell you if he was the man this person is seeking."

"Thank you, mother," said Hale, lifting her hand to his lips quietly;
"and perhaps you will kindly tell these gentlemen that, as your son does
not care to know who or what the stranger was, there is no necessity for
opening the letter, or keeping Mr. Stanner a moment longer."

"But you will oblige ME, John, by opening it before these gentlemen,"
said Mrs. Hale recovering her voice and color. "Please to follow me,"
she said preceding them to the staircase.

They entered Mr. Hale's room, now restored to its original condition. On
the table lay a letter and a small package. The eyes of Mr. Stanner, a
little abashed by the attitude of the two women, fastened upon it and
glistened.

Josephine handed her husband the letter. He opened it in breathless
silence and read--

"JOHN HALE,

"We owe you no return for voluntarily making yourself a champion of
justice and pursuing us, except it was to offer you a fair field and no
favor. We didn't get that much from you, but accident brought us into
your house and into your family, where we DID get it, and were fairly
vanquished. To the victors belong the spoils. We leave the package of
greenbacks which we took from Colonel Clinch in the Sierra coach, but
which was first stolen by Harkins from forty-four shareholders of the
Excelsior Ditch. We have no right to say what YOU should do with it, but
if you aren't tired of following the same line of justice that induced
you to run after US, you will try to restore it to its rightful owners.

"We leave you another trifle as an evidence that our intrusion into your
affairs was not without some service to you, even if the service was as
accidental as the intrusion. You will find a pair of boots in the corner
of your closet. They were taken from the burglarious feet of Manuel,
your peon, who, believing the three ladies were alone and at his mercy,
entered your house with an accomplice at two o'clock on the morning of
the 21st, and was kicked out by

"Your obedient servants,

"GEORGE LEE & EDWARD FALKNER"


Hale's voice and color changed on reading this last paragraph. He turned
quickly towards his wife; Kate flew to the closet, where the muffled
boots of Manuel confronted them. "We never knew it. I always suspected
something that night," said Mrs. Hale and Mrs. Scott in the same breath.

"That's all very well, and like George Lee's high falutin'," said
Stanner, approaching the table, "but as long ez the greenbacks are here
he can make what capital he likes outer Manuel. I'll trouble you to pass
over that package."

"Excuse me," said Hale, "but I believe this is the package taken from
Colonel Clinch. Is it not?" he added, appealing to the Colonel.

"It is," said Clinch.

"Then take it," said Hale, handing him the package. "The first
restitution is to you, but I believe you will fulfil Lee's instructions
as well as myself."

"But," said Stanner, furiously interposing, "I've a warrant to seize
that wherever found, and I dare you to disobey the law."

"Mr. Stanner," said Clinch, slowly, "there are ladies present. If you
insist upon having that package I must ask them to withdraw, and I'm
afraid you'll find me better prepared to resist a SECOND robbery than I
was the first. Your warrant, which was taken out by the Express Company,
is supplanted by civil proceedings taken the day before yesterday
against the property of the fugitive swindler Harkins! You should have
consulted the sheriff before you came here."

Stanner saw his mistake. But in the faces of his grinning followers he
was obliged to keep up his bluster. "You shall hear from me again, sir,"
he said, turning on his heel.

"I beg your pardon," said Clinch grimly, "but do I understand that at
last I am to have the honor--"

"You shall hear from the Company's lawyers, sir," said Stanner turning
red, and noisily leaving the room.

"And so, my dear ladies," said Colonel Clinch, "you have spent a week
with a highwayman. I say A highwayman, for it would be hard to call my
young friend Falkner by that name for his first offence, committed under
great provocation, and undoubtedly instigated by Lee, who was an old
friend of his, and to whom he came, no doubt, in desperation."

Kate stole a triumphant glance at her sister, who dropped her lids over
her glistening eyes. "And this Mr. Lee," she continued more gently, "is
he really a highwayman?"

"George Lee," said Clinch, settling himself back oratorically in his
chair, "my dear young lady, IS a highwayman, but not of the common sort.
He is a gentleman born, madam, comes from one of the oldest families of
the Eastern Shore of Maryland. He never mixes himself up with anything
but some of the biggest strikes, and he's an educated man. He is very
popular with ladies and children; he was never known to do or say
anything that could bring a blush to the cheek of beauty or a tear to
the eye of innocence. I think I may say I'm sure you found him so."

"I shall never believe him anything but a gentleman," said Mrs. Scott,
firmly.

"If he has a defect, it is perhaps a too reckless indulgence in draw
poker," said the Colonel, musingly; "not unbecoming a gentleman,
understand me, Mrs. Scott, but perhaps too reckless for his own good.
George played a grand game, a glittering game, but pardon me if I say an
UNCERTAIN game. I've told him so; it's the only point on which we ever
differed."

"Then you know him?" said Mrs. Hale, lifting her soft eyes to the
Colonel.

"I have that honor."

"Did his appearance, Josephine," broke in Hale, somewhat ostentatiously,
"appear to--er--er--correspond with these qualities? You know what I
mean."

"He certainly seemed very simple and natural," said Mrs. Hale, slightly
drawing her pretty lips together. "He did not wear his trousers rolled
up over his boots in the company of ladies, as you're doing now, nor did
he make his first appearance in this house with such a hat as you wore
this morning, or I should not have admitted him."

There were a few moments of embarrassing silence.

"Do you intend to give that package to Mr. Falkner yourself, Colonel?"
asked Mrs. Scott.

"I shall hand it over to the Excelsior Company," said the Colonel, "but
I shall inform Ned of what I have done."

"Then," said Mrs. Scott, "will you kindly take a message from us to
him?"

"If you wish it."

"You will be doing ME a great favor, Colonel," said Hale, politely.


Whatever the message was, six months later it brought Edward Falkner,
the reestablished superintendent of the Excelsior Ditch, to Eagle's
Court. As he and Kate stood again on the plateau, looking towards the
distant slopes once more green with verdure, Falkner said--

"Everything here looks as it did the first day I saw it, except your
sister."

"The place does not agree with her," said Kate hurriedly. "That is why
my brother thinks of leaving it before the winter sets in."

"It seems so sad," said Falkner, "for the last words poor George said to
me, as he left to join his cousin's corps at Richmond, were: 'If I'm
not killed, Ned, I hope some day to stand again beside Mrs. Hale, at the
window in Eagle's Court, and watch you and Kate coming home!'"

========================================
========================================

DEVIL'S FORD

by Bret Harte




DEVIL'S FORD




CHAPTER I


It was a season of unequalled prosperity in Devil's Ford. The half a
dozen cabins scattered along the banks of the North Fork, as if by some
overflow of that capricious river, had become augmented during a week of
fierce excitement by twenty or thirty others, that were huddled together
on the narrow gorge of Devil's Spur, or cast up on its steep sides. So
sudden and violent had been the change of fortune, that the dwellers
in the older cabins had not had time to change with it, but still kept
their old habits, customs, and even their old clothes. The flour pan in
which their daily bread was mixed stood on the rude table side by side
with the "prospecting pans," half full of gold washed up from their
morning's work; the front windows of the newer tenements looked upon
the one single thoroughfare, but the back door opened upon the uncleared
wilderness, still haunted by the misshapen bulk of bear or the nightly
gliding of catamount.

Neither had success as yet affected their boyish simplicity and the
frankness of old frontier habits; they played with their new-found
riches with the naive delight of children, and rehearsed their glowing
future with the importance and triviality of school-boys.

"I've bin kalklatin'," said Dick Mattingly, leaning on his long-handled
shovel with lazy gravity, "that when I go to Rome this winter, I'll get
one o' them marble sharps to chisel me a statoo o' some kind to set up
on the spot where we made our big strike. Suthin' to remember it by, you
know."

"What kind o' statoo--Washington or Webster?" asked one of the Kearney
brothers, without looking up from his work.

"No--I reckon one o' them fancy groups--one o' them Latin goddesses that
Fairfax is always gassin' about, sorter leadin', directin' and bossin'
us where to dig."

"You'd make a healthy-lookin' figger in a group," responded Kearney,
critically regarding an enormous patch in Mattingly's trousers. "Why
don't you have a fountain instead?"

"Where'll you get the water?" demanded the first speaker, in return.
"You know there ain't enough in the North Fork to do a week's washing
for the camp--to say nothin' of its color."

"Leave that to me," said Kearney, with self-possession. "When I've built
that there reservoir on Devil's Spur, and bring the water over the ridge
from Union Ditch, there'll be enough to spare for that."

"Better mix it up, I reckon--have suthin' half statoo, half fountain,"
interposed the elder Mattingly, better known as "Maryland Joe," "and set
it up afore the Town Hall and Free Library I'm kalklatin' to give. Do
THAT, and you can count on me."

After some further discussion, it was gravely settled that Kearney
should furnish water brought from the Union Ditch, twenty miles away,
at a cost of two hundred thousand dollars, to feed a memorial fountain
erected by Mattingly, worth a hundred thousand dollars, as a crowning
finish to public buildings contributed by Maryland Joe, to the extent
of half a million more. The disposition of these vast sums by gentlemen
wearing patched breeches awakened no sense of the ludicrous, nor did any
doubt, reservation, or contingency enter into the plans of the charming
enthusiasts themselves. The foundation of their airy castles lay already
before them in the strip of rich alluvium on the river bank, where the
North Fork, sharply curving round the base of Devil's Spur, had for
centuries swept the detritus of gulch and canyon. They had barely
crossed the threshold of this treasure-house, to find themselves rich
men; what possibilities of affluence might be theirs when they had fully
exploited their possessions? So confident were they of that ultimate
prospect, that the wealth already thus obtained was religiously expended
in engines and machinery for the boring of wells and the conveyance of
that precious water which the exhausted river had long since ceased to
yield. It seemed as if the gold they had taken out was by some ironical
compensation gradually making its way back to the soil again through
ditch and flume and reservoir.

Such was the position of affairs at Devil's Ford on the 13th of August,
1860. It was noon of a hot day. Whatever movement there was in the
stifling air was seen rather than felt in a tremulous, quivering,
upward-moving dust along the flank of the mountain, through which the
spires of the pines were faintly visible. There was no water in the
bared and burning bars of the river to reflect the vertical sun, but
under its direct rays one or two tinned roofs and corrugated zinc cabins
struck fire, a few canvas tents became dazzling to the eye, and the
white wooded corral of the stage office and hotel insupportable. For
two hours no one ventured in the glare of the open, or even to cross the
narrow, unshadowed street, whose dull red dust seemed to glow between
the lines of straggling houses. The heated shells of these green
unseasoned tenements gave out a pungent odor of scorching wood and
resin. The usual hurried, feverish toil in the claim was suspended;
the pick and shovel were left sticking in the richest "pay gravel;"
the toiling millionaires themselves, ragged, dirty, and perspiring, lay
panting under the nearest shade, where the pipes went out listlessly,
and conversation sank to monosyllables.

"There's Fairfax," said Dick Mattingly, at last, with a lazy effort. His
face was turned to the hillside, where a man had just emerged from
the woods, and was halting irresolutely before the glaring expanse of
upheaved gravel and glistening boulders that stretched between him and
the shaded group. "He's going to make a break for it," he added, as the
stranger, throwing his linen coat over his head, suddenly started into
an Indian trot through the pelting sunbeams toward them. This strange
act was perfectly understood by the group, who knew that in that
intensely dry heat the danger of exposure was lessened by active
exercise and the profuse perspiration that followed it. In another
moment the stranger had reached their side, dripping as if rained upon,
mopping his damp curls and handsome bearded face with his linen coat, as
he threw himself pantingly on the ground.

"I struck out over here first, boys, to give you a little warning," he
said, as soon as he had gained breath. "That engineer will be down here
to take charge as soon as the six o'clock stage comes in. He's an oldish
chap, has got a family of two daughters, and--I--am--d----d if he is not
bringing them down here with him."

"Oh, go long!" exclaimed the five men in one voice, raising themselves
on their hands and elbows, and glaring at the speaker.

"Fact, boys! Soon as I found it out I just waltzed into that Jew shop at
the Crossing and bought up all the clothes that would be likely to suit
you fellows, before anybody else got a show. I reckon I cleared out the
shop. The duds are a little mixed in style, but I reckon they're clean
and whole, and a man might face a lady in 'em. I left them round at the
old Buckeye Spring, where they're handy without attracting attention.
You boys can go there for a general wash-up, rig yourselves up without
saying anything, and then meander back careless and easy in your store
clothes, just as the stage is coming in, sabe?"

"Why didn't you let us know earlier?" asked Mattingly aggrievedly;
"you've been back here at least an hour."

"I've been getting some place ready for THEM," returned the new-comer.
"We might have managed to put the man somewhere, if he'd been alone, but
these women want family accommodation. There was nothing left for me to
do but to buy up Thompson's saloon."

"No?" interrupted his audience, half in incredulity, half in
protestation.

"Fact! You boys will have to take your drinks under canvas again, I
reckon! But I made Thompson let those gold-framed mirrors that used to
stand behind the bar go into the bargain, and they sort of furnish the
room. You know the saloon is one of them patent houses you can take to
pieces, and I've been reckoning you boys will have to pitch in and help
me to take the whole shanty over to the laurel bushes, and put it up
agin Kearney's cabin."

"What's all that?" said the younger Kearney, with an odd mingling of
astonishment and bashful gratification.

"Yes, I reckon yours is the cleanest house, because it's the newest, so
you'll just step out and let us knock in one o' the gables, and clap it
on to the saloon, and make ONE house of it, don't you see? There'll be
two rooms, one for the girls and the other for the old man."

The astonishment and bewilderment of the party had gradually given way
to a boyish and impatient interest.

"Hadn't we better do the job at once?" suggested Dick Mattingly.

"Or throw ourselves into those new clothes, so as to be ready," added
the younger Kearney, looking down at his ragged trousers. "I say,
Fairfax, what are the girls like, eh?"

All the others had been dying to ask the question, yet one and all
laughed at the conscious manner and blushing cheek of the questioner.

"You'll find out quick enough," returned Fairfax, whose curt
carelessness did not, however, prevent a slight increase of color on his
own cheek. "We'd better get that job off our hands before doing anything
else. So, if you're ready, boys, we'll just waltz down to Thompson's and
pack up the shanty. He's out of it by this time, I reckon. You might
as well be perspiring to some purpose over there as gaspin' under this
tree. We won't go back to work this afternoon, but knock off now, and
call it half a day. Come! Hump yourselves, gentlemen. Are you ready?
One, two, three, and away!"

In another instant the tree was deserted; the figures of the five
millionaires of Devil's Ford, crossing the fierce glare of the open
space, with boyish alacrity, glistened in the sunlight, and then
disappeared in the nearest fringe of thickets.




CHAPTER II


Six hours later, when the shadow of Devil's Spur had crossed the river,
and spread a slight coolness over the flat beyond, the Pioneer coach,
leaving the summit, began also to bathe its heated bulk in the long
shadows of the descent. Conspicuous among the dusty passengers, the
two pretty and youthful faces of the daughters of Philip Carr, mining
superintendent and engineer, looked from the windows with no little
anxiety towards their future home in the straggling settlement below,
that occasionally came in view at the turns of the long zigzagging road.
A slight look of comical disappointment passed between them as they
gazed upon the sterile flat, dotted with unsightly excrescences that
stood equally for cabins or mounds of stone and gravel. It was so feeble
and inconsistent a culmination to the beautiful scenery they had passed
through, so hopeless and imbecile a conclusion to the preparation of
that long picturesque journey, with its glimpses of sylvan and pastoral
glades and canyons, that, as the coach swept down the last incline,
and the remorseless monotony of the dead level spread out before them,
furrowed by ditches and indented by pits, under cover of shielding their
cheeks from the impalpable dust that rose beneath the plunging
wheels, they buried their faces in their handkerchiefs, to hide a few
half-hysterical tears. Happily, their father, completely absorbed in a
practical, scientific, and approving contemplation of the topography
and material resources of the scene of his future labors, had no time
to notice their defection. It was not until the stage drew up before
a rambling tenement bearing the inscription, "Hotel and Stage Office,"
that he became fully aware of it.

"We can't stop HERE, papa," said Christie Carr decidedly, with a shake
of her pretty head. "You can't expect that."

Mr. Carr looked up at the building; it was half grocery, half saloon.
Whatever other accommodations it contained must have been hidden in the
rear, as the flat roof above was almost level with the raftered ceiling
of the shop.

"Certainly," he replied hurriedly; "we'll see to that in a moment. I
dare say it's all right. I told Fairfax we were coming. Somebody ought
to be here."

"But they're not," said Jessie Carr indignantly; "and the few that were
here scampered off like rabbits to their burrows as soon as they saw us
get down."

It was true. The little group of loungers before the building had
suddenly disappeared. There was the flash of a red shirt vanishing in an
adjacent doorway; the fading apparition of a pair of high boots and blue
overalls in another; the abrupt withdrawal of a curly blond head from a
sashless window over the way. Even the saloon was deserted, although
a back door in the dim recess seemed to creak mysteriously. The
stage-coach, with the other passengers, had already rattled away.

"I certainly think Fairfax understood that I--" began Mr. Carr.

He was interrupted by the pressure of Christie's fingers on his arm and
a subdued exclamation from Jessie, who was staring down the street.

"What are they?" she whispered in her sister's ear. "Nigger minstrels, a
circus, or what?"

The five millionaires of Devil's Ford had just turned the corner of the
straggling street, and were approaching in single file. One glance was
sufficient to show that they had already availed themselves of the new
clothing bought by Fairfax, had washed, and one or two had shaved. But
the result was startling.

Through some fortunate coincidence in size, Dick Mattingly was the only
one who had achieved an entire new suit. But it was of funereal black
cloth, and although relieved at one extremity by a pair of high riding
boots, in which his too short trousers were tucked, and at the other
by a tall white hat, and cravat of aggressive yellow, the effect was
depressing. In agreeable contrast, his brother, Maryland Joe, was
attired in a thin fawn-colored summer overcoat, lightly worn open, so as
to show the unstarched bosom of a white embroidered shirt, and a pair of
nankeen trousers and pumps.

The Kearney brothers had divided a suit between them, the elder wearing
a tightly-fitting, single-breasted blue frock-coat and a pair of pink
striped cotton trousers, while the younger candidly displayed the
trousers of his brother's suit, as a harmonious change to a shining
black alpaca coat and crimson neckerchief. Fairfax, who brought up the
rear, had, with characteristic unselfishness, contented himself with a
French workman's blue blouse and a pair of white duck trousers. Had they
shown the least consciousness of their finery, or of its absurdity, they
would have seemed despicable. But only one expression beamed on the five
sunburnt and shining faces--a look of unaffected boyish gratification
and unrestricted welcome.

They halted before Mr. Carr and his daughters, simultaneously removed
their various and remarkable head coverings, and waited until Fairfax
advanced and severally presented them. Jessie Carr's half-frightened
smile took refuge in the trembling shadows of her dark lashes; Christie
Carr stiffened slightly, and looked straight before her.

"We reckoned--that is--we intended to meet you and the young ladies at
the grade," said Fairfax, reddening a little as he endeavored to
conceal his too ready slang, "and save you from trapesing--from dragging
yourselves up grade again to your house."

"Then there IS a house?" said Jessie, with an alarming frank laugh
of relief, that was, however, as frankly reflected in the boyishly
appreciative eyes of the young men.

"Such as it is," responded Fairfax, with a shade of anxiety, as he
glanced at the fresh and pretty costumes of the young women, and
dubiously regarded the two Saratoga trunks resting hopelessly on the
veranda. "I'm afraid it isn't much, for what you're accustomed to. But,"
he added more cheerfully, "it will do for a day or two, and perhaps
you'll give us the pleasure of showing you the way there now."

The procession was quickly formed. Mr. Carr, alive only to the actual
business that had brought him there, at once took possession of
Fairfax, and began to disclose his plans for the working of the mine,
occasionally halting to look at the work already done in the ditches,
and to examine the field of his future operations. Fairfax, not
displeased at being thus relieved of a lighter attendance on Mr.
Carr's daughters, nevertheless from time to time cast a paternal glance
backwards upon their escorts, who had each seized a handle of the two
trunks, and were carrying them in couples at the young ladies' side. The
occupation did not offer much freedom for easy gallantry, but no sign
of discomfiture or uneasiness was visible in the grateful faces of the
young men. The necessity of changing hands at times with their burdens
brought a corresponding change of cavalier at the lady's side, although
it was observed that the younger Kearney, for the sake of continuing a
conversation with Miss Jessie, kept his grasp of the handle nearest the
young lady until his hand was nearly cut through, and his arm worn out
by exhaustion.

"The only thing on wheels in the camp is a mule wagon, and the mules are
packin' gravel from the river this afternoon," explained Dick Mattingly
apologetically to Christie, "or we'd have toted--I mean carried--you and
your baggage up to the shant--the--your house. Give us two weeks more,
Miss Carr--only two weeks to wash up our work and realize--and we'll
give you a pair of 2.40 steppers and a skeleton buggy to meet you at the
top of the hill and drive you over to the cabin. Perhaps you'd prefer
a regular carriage; some ladies do. And a nigger driver. But what's the
use of planning anything? Afore that time comes we'll have run you up
a house on the hill, and you shall pick out the spot. It wouldn't take
long--unless you preferred brick. I suppose we could get brick over from
La Grange, if you cared for it, but it would take longer. If you
could put up for a time with something of stained glass and a mahogany
veranda--"

In spite of her cold indignation, and the fact that she could understand
only a part of Mattingly's speech, Christie comprehended enough to make
her lift her clear eyes to the speaker, as she replied freezingly that
she feared she would not trouble them long with her company.

"Oh, you'll get over that," responded Mattingly, with an exasperating
confidence that drove her nearly frantic, from the manifest kindliness
of intent that made it impossible for her to resent it. "I felt that way
myself at first. Things will look strange and unsociable for a while,
until you get the hang of them. You'll naturally stamp round and cuss a
little--" He stopped in conscious consternation.

With ready tact, and before Christie could reply, Maryland Joe had put
down the trunk and changed hands with his brother.

"You mustn't mind Dick, or he'll go off and kill himself with shame," he
whispered laughingly in her ear. "He means all right, but he's picked
up so much slang here that he's about forgotten how to talk English, and
it's nigh on to four years since he's met a young lady."

Christie did not reply. Yet the laughter of her sister in advance with
the Kearney brothers seemed to make the reserve with which she tried to
crush further familiarity only ridiculous.

"Do you know many operas, Miss Carr?"

She looked at the boyish, interested, sunburnt face so near to her
own, and hesitated. After all, why should she add to her other real
disappointments by taking this absurd creature seriously?

"In what way?" she returned, with a half smile.

"To play. On the piano, of course. There isn't one nearer here than
Sacramento; but I reckon we could get a small one by Thursday. You
couldn't do anything on a banjo?" he added doubtfully; "Kearney's got
one."

"I imagine it would be very difficult to carry a piano over those
mountains," said Christie laughingly, to avoid the collateral of the
banjo.

"We got a billiard-table over from Stockton," half bashfully interrupted
Dick Mattingly, struggling from his end of the trunk to recover his
composure, "and it had to be brought over in sections on the back of a
mule, so I don't see why--" He stopped short again in confusion, at a
sign from his brother, and then added, "I mean, of course, that a piano
is a heap more delicate, and valuable, and all that sort of thing, but
it's worth trying for."

"Fairfax was always saying he'd get one for himself, so I reckon it's
possible," said Joe.

"Does he play?" asked Christie.

"You bet," said Joe, quite forgetting himself in his enthusiasm. "He can
snatch Mozart and Beethoven bald-headed."

In the embarrassing silence that followed this speech the fringe of pine
wood nearest the flat was reached. Here there was a rude "clearing," and
beneath an enormous pine stood the two recently joined tenements. There
was no attempt to conceal the point of junction between Kearney's
cabin and the newly-transported saloon from the flat--no architectural
illusion of the palpable collusion of the two buildings, which seemed
to be telescoped into each other. The front room or living room occupied
the whole of Kearney's cabin. It contained, in addition to the necessary
articles for housekeeping, a "bunk" or berth for Mr. Carr, so as to
leave the second building entirely to the occupation of his daughters as
bedroom and boudoir.

There was a half-humorous, half-apologetic exhibition of the rude
utensils of the living room, and then the young men turned away as the
two girls entered the open door of the second room. Neither Christie nor
Jessie could for a moment understand the delicacy which kept these young
men from accompanying them into the room they had but a few moments
before decorated and arranged with their own hands, and it was not until
they turned to thank their strange entertainers that they found that
they were gone.

The arrangement of the second room was rude and bizarre, but not without
a singular originality and even tastefulness of conception. What had
been the counter or "bar" of the saloon, gorgeous in white and gold,
now sawn in two and divided, was set up on opposite sides of the room as
separate dressing-tables, decorated with huge bunches of azaleas, that
hid the rough earthenware bowls, and gave each table the appearance of a
vestal altar.

The huge gilt plate-glass mirror which had hung behind the bar still
occupied one side of the room, but its length was artfully divided by
an enormous rosette of red, white, and blue muslin--one of the surviving
Fourth of July decorations of Thompson's saloon. On either side of the
door two pathetic-looking, convent-like cots, covered with spotless
sheeting, and heaped up in the middle, like a snow-covered grave, had
attracted their attention. They were still staring at them when Mr. Carr
anticipated their curiosity.

"I ought to tell you that the young men confided to me the fact that
there was neither bed nor mattress to be had on the Ford. They have
filled some flour sacks with clean dry moss from the woods, and put half
a dozen blankets on the top, and they hope you can get along until
the messenger who starts to-night for La Grange can bring some bedding
over."

Jessie flew with mischievous delight to satisfy herself of the truth
of this marvel. "It's so, Christie," she said laughingly--"three
flour-sacks apiece; but I'm jealous: yours are all marked 'superfine,'
and mine 'middlings.'"

Mr. Carr had remained uneasily watching Christie's shadowed face.

"What matters?" she said drily. "The accommodation is all in keeping."

"It will be better in a day or two," he continued, casting a longing
look towards the door--the first refuge of masculine weakness in an
impending domestic emergency. "I'll go and see what can be done," he
said feebly, with a sidelong impulse towards the opening and freedom.
"I've got to see Fairfax again to-night any way."

"One moment, father," said Christie, wearily. "Did you know anything of
this place and these--these people--before you came?"

"Certainly--of course I did," he returned, with the sudden testiness of
disturbed abstraction. "What are you thinking of? I knew the geological
strata and the--the report of Fairfax and his partners before I
consented to take charge of the works. And I can tell you that there is
a fortune here. I intend to make my own terms, and share in it."

"And not take a salary or some sum of money down?" said Christie, slowly
removing her bonnet in the same resigned way.

"I am not a hired man, or a workman, Christie," said her father sharply.
"You ought not to oblige me to remind you of that."

"But the hired men--the superintendent and his workmen--were the only
ones who ever got anything out of your last experience with Colonel
Waters at La Grange, and--and we at least lived among civilized people
there."

"These young men are not common people, Christie; even if they have
forgotten the restraints of speech and manners, they're gentlemen."

"Who are willing to live like--like negroes."

"You can make them what you please."

Christie raised her eyes. There was a certain cynical ring in her
father's voice that was unlike his usual hesitating abstraction. It both
puzzled and pained her.

"I mean," he said hastily, "that you have the same opportunity to direct
the lives of these young men into more regular, disciplined channels
that I have to regulate and correct their foolish waste of industry and
material here. It would at least beguile the time for you."

Fortunately for Mr. Carr's escape and Christie's uneasiness, Jessie, who
had been examining the details of the living-room, broke in upon this
conversation.

"I'm sure it will be as good as a perpetual picnic. George Kearney says
we can have a cooking-stove under the tree outside at the back, and as
there will be no rain for three months we can do the cooking there,
and that will give us more room for--for the piano when it comes;
and there's an old squaw to do the cleaning and washing-up any
day--and--and--it will be real fun."

She stopped breathlessly, with glowing cheeks and sparkling eyes--a
charming picture of youth and trustfulness. Mr. Carr had seized the
opportunity to escape.

"Really, now, Christie," said Jessie confidentially, when they were
alone, and Christie had begun to unpack her trunk, and to mechanically
put her things away, "they're not so bad."

"Who?" asked Christie.

"Why, the Kearneys, and Mattinglys, and Fairfax, and the lot, provided
you don't look at their clothes. And think of it! they told me--for they
tell one EVERYTHING in the most alarming way--that those clothes were
bought to please US. A scramble of things bought at La Grange, without
reference to size or style. And to hear these creatures talk, why, you'd
think they were Astors or Rothschilds. Think of that little one with
the curls--I don't believe he is over seventeen, for all his baby
moustache--says he's going to build an assembly hall for us to give
a dance in next month; and apologizes the next breath to tell us that
there isn't any milk to be had nearer than La Grange, and we must do
without it, and use syrup in our tea to-morrow."

"And where is all this wealth?" said Christie, forcing herself to smile
at her sister's animation.

"Under our very feet, my child, and all along the river. Why, what
we thought was pure and simple mud is what they call 'gold-bearing
cement.'"

"I suppose that is why they don't brush their boots and trousers, it's
so precious," returned Christie drily. "And have they ever translated
this precious dirt into actual coin?"

"Bless you, yes. Why, that dirty little gutter, you know, that ran along
the side of the road and followed us down the hill all the way here,
that cost them--let me see--yes, nearly sixty thousand dollars. And
fancy! papa's just condemned it--says it won't do; and they've got to
build another."

An impatient sigh from Christie drew Jessie's attention to her troubled
eyebrows.

"Don't worry about our disappointment, dear. It isn't so very great. I
dare say we'll be able to get along here in some way, until papa is rich
again. You know they intend to make him share with them."

"It strikes me that he is sharing with them already," said Christie,
glancing bitterly round the cabin; "sharing everything--ourselves, our
lives, our tastes."

"Ye-e-s!" said Jessie, with vaguely hesitating assent. "Yes, even
these:" she showed two dice in the palm of her little hand. "I found 'em
in the drawer of our dressing-table."

"Throw them away," said Christie impatiently.

But Jessie's small fingers closed over the dice. "I'll give them to the
little Kearney. I dare say they were the poor boy's playthings."

The appearance of these relics of wild dissipation, however, had lifted
Christie out of her sublime resignation. "For Heaven's sake, Jessie,"
she said, "look around and see if there is anything more!"

To make sure, they each began to scrimmage; the broken-spirited Christie
exhibiting both alacrity and penetration in searching obscure corners.
In the dining-room, behind the dresser, three or four books were
discovered: an odd volume of Thackeray, another of Dickens, a
memorandum-book or diary. "This seems to be Latin," said Jessie, fishing
out a smaller book. "I can't read it."

"It's just as well you shouldn't," said Christie shortly, whose ideas
of a general classical impropriety had been gathered from pages of
Lempriere's dictionary. "Put it back directly."

Jessie returned certain odes of one Horatius Flaccus to the corner, and
uttered an exclamation. "Oh, Christie! here are some letters tied up
with a ribbon."

They were two or three prettily written letters, exhaling a faint odor
of refinement and of the pressed flowers that peeped from between the
loose leaves. "I see, 'My darling Fairfax.' It's from some woman."

"I don't think much of her, whosoever she is," said Christie, tossing
the intact packet back into the corner.

"Nor I," echoed Jessie.

Nevertheless, by some feminine inconsistency, evidently the circumstance
did make them think more of HIM, for a minute later, when they had
reentered their own room, Christie remarked, "The idea of petting a
man by his family name! Think of mamma ever having called papa 'darling
Carr'!"

"Oh, but his family name isn't Fairfax," said Jessie hastily; "that's
his FIRST name, his Christian name. I forget what's his other name, but
nobody ever calls him by it."

"Do you mean," said Christie, with glistening eyes and awful
deliberation--"do you mean to say that we're expected to fall in with
this insufferable familiarity? I suppose they'll be calling US by our
Christian names next."

"Oh, but they do!" said Jessie, mischievously.

"What!"

"They call me Miss Jessie; and Kearney, the little one, asked me if
Christie played."

"And what did you say?"

"I said that you did," answered Jessie, with an affectation of cherubic
simplicity. "You do, dear; don't you? . . . There, don't get angry,
darling; I couldn't flare up all of a sudden in the face of that poor
little creature; he looked so absurd--and so--so honest."

Christie turned away, relapsing into her old resigned manner, and
assuming her household duties in a quiet, temporizing way that was,
however, without hope or expectation.

Mr. Carr, who had dined with his friends under the excuse of not adding
to the awkwardness of the first day's housekeeping returned late at
night with a mass of papers and drawings, into which he afterwards
withdrew, but not until he had delivered himself of a mysterious package
entrusted to him by the young men for his daughters. It contained a
contribution to their board in the shape of a silver spoon and battered
silver mug, which Jessie chose to facetiously consider as an affecting
reminiscence of the youthful Kearney's christening days--which it
probably was.

The young girls retired early to their white snow-drifts: Jessie not
without some hilarious struggles with hers, in which she was, however,
quickly surprised by the deep and refreshing sleep of youth; Christie to
lie awake and listen to the night wind, that had changed from the first
cool whispers of sunset to the sturdy breath of the mountain. At times
the frail house shook and trembled. Wandering gusts laden with the
deep resinous odors of the wood found their way through the imperfect
jointure of the two cabins, swept her cheek and even stirred her long,
wide-open lashes. A broken spray of pine needles rustled along the roof,
or a pine cone dropped with a quick reverberating tap-tap that for an
instant startled her. Lying thus, wide awake, she fell into a dreamy
reminiscence of the past, hearing snatches of old melody in the moving
pines, fragments of sentences, old words, and familiar epithets in the
murmuring wind at her ear, and even the faint breath of long-forgotten
kisses on her cheek. She remembered her mother--a pallid creature, who
had slowly faded out of one of her father's vague speculations in a
vaguer speculation of her own, beyond his ken--whose place she had
promised to take at her father's side. The words, "Watch over him,
Christie; he needs a woman's care," again echoed in her ears, as if
borne on the night wind from the lonely grave in the lonelier cemetery
by the distant sea. She had devoted herself to him with some little
sacrifices of self, only remembered now for their uselessness in
saving her father the disappointment that sprang from his sanguine and
one-idea'd temperament. She thought of him lying asleep in the other
room, ready on the morrow to devote those fateful qualities to the new
enterprise that with equally fateful disposition she believed would end
in failure. It did not occur to her that the doubts of her own practical
nature were almost as dangerous and illogical as his enthusiasm, and
that for that reason she was fast losing what little influence she
possessed over him. With the example of her mother's weakness before her
eyes, she had become an unsparing and distrustful critic, with the sole
effect of awakening his distrust and withdrawing his confidence from
her.

He was beginning to deceive her as he had never deceived her mother.
Even Jessie knew more of this last enterprise than she did herself.

All that did not tend to decrease her utter restlessness. It was already
past midnight when she noticed that the wind had again abated. The
mountain breeze had by this time possessed the stifling valleys and
heated bars of the river in its strong, cold embraces; the equilibrium
of Nature was restored, and a shadowy mist rose from the hollow. A
stillness, more oppressive and intolerable than the previous commotion,
began to pervade the house and the surrounding woods. She could hear the
regular breathing of the sleepers; she even fancied she could detect the
faint impulses of the more distant life in the settlement. The far-off
barking of a dog, a lost shout, the indistinct murmur of some nearer
watercourse--mere phantoms of sound--made the silence more irritating.
With a sudden resolution she arose, dressed herself quietly and
completely, threw a heavy cloak over her head and shoulders, and opened
the door between the living-room and her own. Her father was sleeping
soundly in his bunk in the corner. She passed noiselessly through the
room, opened the lightly fastened door, and stepped out into the night.

In the irritation and disgust of her walk hither, she had never noticed
the situation of the cabin, as it nestled on the slope at the fringe of
the woods; in the preoccupation of her disappointment and the mechanical
putting away of her things, she had never looked once from the window of
her room, or glanced backward out of the door that she had entered. The
view before her was a revelation--a reproach, a surprise that took away
her breath. Over her shoulders the newly risen moon poured a flood of
silvery light, stretching from her feet across the shining bars of the
river to the opposite bank, and on up to the very crest of the
Devil's Spur--no longer a huge bulk of crushing shadow, but the steady
exaltation of plateau, spur, and terrace clothed with replete and
unutterable beauty. In this magical light that beauty seemed to be
sustained and carried along by the river winding at its base, lifted
again to the broad shoulder of the mountain, and lost only in the
distant vista of death-like, overcrowning snow. Behind and above where
she stood the towering woods seemed to be waiting with opened ranks
to absorb her with the little cabin she had quitted, dwarfed into
insignificance in the vast prospect; but nowhere was there another sign
or indication of human life and habitation. She looked in vain for
the settlement, for the rugged ditches, the scattered cabins, and the
unsightly heaps of gravel. In the glamour of the moonlight they had
vanished; a veil of silver-gray vapor touched here and there with ebony
shadows masked its site. A black strip beyond was the river bank. All
else was changed. With a sudden sense of awe and loneliness she turned
to the cabin and its sleeping inmates--all that seemed left to her in
the vast and stupendous domination of rock and wood and sky.

But in another moment the loneliness passed. A new and delicious sense
of an infinite hospitality and friendliness in their silent presence
began to possess her. This same slighted, forgotten, uncomprehended,
but still foolish and forgiving Nature seemed to be bending over her
frightened and listening ear with vague but thrilling murmurings of
freedom and independence. She felt her heart expand with its wholesome
breath, her soul fill with its sustaining truth.

She felt--

What was that?

An unmistakable outburst of a drunken song at the foot of the slope:--

     "Oh, my name it is Johnny from Pike,
     I'm h-ll on a spree or a strike." . . .

She stopped as crimson with shame and indignation as if the viewless
singer had risen before her.

     "I knew when to bet, and get up and get--"

"Hush! D--n it all. Don't you hear?"

There was the sound of hurried whispers, a "No" and "Yes," and then a
dead silence.

Christie crept nearer to the edge of the slope in the shadow of a
buckeye. In the clearer view she could distinguish a staggering
figure in the trail below who had evidently been stopped by two other
expostulating shadows that were approaching from the shelter of a tree.

"Sho!--didn't know!"

The staggering figure endeavored to straighten itself, and then slouched
away in the direction of the settlement. The two mysterious shadows
retreated again to the tree, and were lost in its deeper shadow.
Christie darted back to the cabin, and softly reentered her room.

"I thought I heard a noise that woke me, and I missed you," said Jessie,
rubbing her eyes. "Did you see anything?"

"No," said Christie, beginning to undress.

"You weren't frightened, dear?"

"Not in the least," said Christie, with a strange little laugh. "Go to
sleep."




CHAPTER III


The five impulsive millionaires of Devil's Ford fulfilled not a few of
their most extravagant promises. In less than six weeks Mr. Carr and
his daughters were installed in a new house, built near the site of the
double cabin, which was again transferred to the settlement, in order
to give greater seclusion to the fair guests. It was a long, roomy,
one-storied villa, with a not unpicturesque combination of deep veranda
and trellis work, which relieved the flat monotony of the interior and
the barrenness of the freshly-cleared ground. An upright piano, brought
from Sacramento, occupied the corner of the parlor. A suite of gorgeous
furniture, whose pronounced and extravagant glories the young girls
instinctively hid under home-made linen covers, had also been spoils
from afar. Elsewhere the house was filled with ornaments and decorations
that in their incongruity forcibly recalled the gilded plate-glass
mirrors of the bedroom in the old cabin. In the hasty furnishing of
this Aladdin's palace, the slaves of the ring had evidently seized
upon anything that would add to its glory, without reference always to
fitness.

"I wish it didn't look so cussedly like a robber's cave," said George
Kearney, when they were taking a quiet preliminary survey of the
unclassified treasures, before the Carrs took possession.

"Or a gambling hell," said his brother reflectively.

"It's about the same thing, I reckon," said Dick Mattingly, who was
supposed, in his fiery youth, to have encountered the similarity.

Nevertheless, the two girls managed to bestow the heterogeneous
collection with tasteful adaptation to their needs. A crystal
chandelier, which had once lent a fascinating illusion to the game of
Monte, hung unlighted in the broad hall, where a few other bizarre and
public articles were relegated. A long red sofa or bench, which had done
duty beside a billiard-table found a place here also. Indeed, it is to
be feared that some of the more rustic and bashful youths of Devil's
Ford, who had felt it incumbent upon them to pay their respects to
the new-comers, were more at ease in this vestibule than in the arcana
beyond, whose glories they could see through the open door. To others,
it represented a recognized state of probation before their re-entree
into civilization again. "I reckon, if you don't mind, miss," said the
spokesman of one party, "ez this is our first call, we'll sorter hang
out in the hall yer, until you'r used to us." On another occasion, one
Whiskey Dick, impelled by a sense of duty, paid a visit to the new house
and its fair occupants, in a fashion frankly recounted by him afterwards
at the bar of the Tecumseh Saloon.

"You see, boys, I dropped in there the other night, when some of you
fellers was doin' the high-toned 'thankee, marm' business in the parlor.
I just came to anchor in the corner of the sofy in the hall, without
lettin' on to say that I was there, and took up a Webster's dictionary
that was on the table and laid it open--keerless like, on my knees, ez
if I was sorter consultin' it--and kinder dozed off there, listenin' to
you fellows gassin' with the young ladies, and that yer Miss Christie
just snakin' music outer that pianner, and I reckon I fell asleep.
Anyhow, I was there nigh on to two hours. It's mighty soothin', them
fashionable calls; sorter knocks the old camp dust outer a fellow, and
sets him up again."

It would have been well if the new life of the Devil's Ford had shown
no other irregularity than the harmless eccentricities of its original
locaters. But the news of its sudden fortune, magnified by report, began
presently to flood the settlement with another class of adventurers.
A tide of waifs, strays, and malcontents of old camps along the river
began to set towards Devil's Ford, in very much the same fashion as the
debris, drift, and alluvium had been carried down in bygone days and
cast upon its banks. A few immigrant wagons, diverted from the highways
of travel by the fame of the new diggings, halted upon the slopes of
Devil's Spur and on the arid flats of the Ford, and disgorged their
sallow freight of alkali-poisoned, prematurely-aged women and children
and maimed and fever-stricken men. Against this rude form of domesticity
were opposed the chromo-tinted dresses and extravagant complexions of
a few single unattended women--happily seen more often at night behind
gilded bars than in the garish light of day--and an equal number of
pale-faced, dark-moustached, well-dressed, and suspiciously idle men.
A dozen rivals of Thompson's Saloon had sprung up along the narrow
main street. There were two new hotels--one a "Temperance House," whose
ascetic quality was confined only to the abnegation of whiskey--a rival
stage office, and a small one-storied building, from which the "Sierran
Banner" fluttered weekly, for "ten dollars a year, in advance."
Insufferable in the glare of a Sabbath sun, bleak, windy, and flaring in
the gloom of a Sabbath night, and hopelessly depressing on all days of
the week, the First Presbyterian Church lifted its blunt steeple from
the barrenest area of the flats, and was hideous! The civic improvements
so enthusiastically contemplated by the five millionaires in the earlier
pages of this veracious chronicle--the fountain, reservoir, town-hall,
and free library--had not yet been erected. Their sites had been
anticipated by more urgent buildings and mining works, unfortunately
not considered in the sanguine dreams of the enthusiasts, and, more
significant still, their cost and expense had been also anticipated by
the enormous outlay of their earnings in the work upon Devil's Ditch.

Nevertheless, the liberal fulfilment of their promise in the new house
in the suburbs blinded the young girls' eyes to their shortcomings in
the town. Their own remoteness and elevation above its feverish life
kept them from the knowledge of much that was strange, and perhaps
disturbing to their equanimity. As they did not mix with the immigrant
women--Miss Jessie's good-natured intrusion into one of their
half-nomadic camps one day having been met with rudeness and
suspicion--they gradually fell into the way of trusting the
responsibility of new acquaintances to the hands of their original
hosts, and of consulting them in the matter of local recreation. It thus
occurred that one day the two girls, on their way to the main street for
an hour's shopping at the Villa de Paris and Variety Store, were stopped
by Dick Mattingly a few yards from their house, with the remark that, as
the county election was then in progress, it would be advisable for
them to defer their intention for a few hours. As he did not deem it
necessary to add that two citizens, in the exercise of a freeman's
franchise, had been supplementing their ballots with bullets, in front
of an admiring crowd, they knew nothing of that accident that removed
from Devil's Ford an entertaining stranger, who had only the night
before partaken of their hospitality.

A week or two later, returning one morning from a stroll in the forest,
Christie and Jessie were waylaid by George Kearney and Fairfax, and,
under pretext of being shown a new and romantic trail, were diverted
from the regular path. This enabled Mattingly and Maryland Joe to cut
down the body of a man hanged by the Vigilance Committee a few hours
before on the regular trail, and to remonstrate with the committee
on the incompatibility of such exhibitions with a maidenly worship of
nature.

"With the whole county to hang a man in," expostulated Joe, "you might
keep clear of Carr's woods."

It is needless to add that the young girls never knew of this act of
violence, or the delicacy that kept them in ignorance of it. Mr. Carr
was too absorbed in business to give heed to what he looked upon as
a convulsion of society as natural as a geological upheaval, and too
prudent to provoke the criticism of his daughters by comment in their
presence.

An equally unexpected confidence, however, took its place. Mr. Carr
having finished his coffee one morning, lingered a moment over his
perfunctory paternal embraces, with the awkwardness of a preoccupied
man endeavoring by the assumption of a lighter interest to veil another
abstraction.

"And what are we doing to-day, Christie?" he asked, as Jessie left the
dining-room.

"Oh, pretty much the usual thing--nothing in particular. If George
Kearney gets the horses from the summit, we're going to ride over to
Indian Spring to picnic. Fairfax--Mr. Munroe--I always forget that man's
real name in this dreadfully familiar country--well, he's coming to
escort us, and take me, I suppose--that is, if Kearney takes Jessie."

"A very nice arrangement," returned her father, with a slight nervous
contraction of the corners of his mouth and eyelids to indicate
mischievousness. "I've no doubt they'll both be here. You know they
usually are--ha! ha! And what about the two Mattinglys and Philip
Kearney, eh?" he continued; "won't they be jealous?"

"It isn't their turn," said Christie carelessly; "besides, they'll
probably be there."

"And I suppose they're beginning to be resigned," said Carr, smiling.

"What on earth are you talking of, father?"

She turned her clear brown eyes upon him, and was regarding him with
such manifest unconsciousness of the drift of his speech, and, withal,
a little vague impatience of his archness, that Mr. Carr was feebly
alarmed. It had the effect of banishing his assumed playfulness, which
made his serious explanation the more irritating.

"Well, I rather thought that--that young Kearney was paying considerable
attention to--to--to Jessie," replied her father, with hesitating
gravity.

"What! that boy?"

"Young Kearney is one of the original locators, and an equal partner in
the mine. A very enterprising young fellow. In fact, much more advanced
and bolder in his conceptions than the others. I find no difficulty with
him."

At another time Christie would have questioned the convincing quality
of this proof, but she was too much shocked at her father's first
suggestion, to think of anything else.

"You don't mean to say, father, that you are talking seriously of these
men--your friends--whom we see every day--and our only company?"

"No, no!" said Mr. Carr hastily; "you misunderstand. I don't suppose
that Jessie or you--"

"Or ME! Am I included?"

"You don't let me speak, Christie. I mean, I am not talking seriously,"
continued Mr. Carr, with his most serious aspect, "of you and Jessie
in this matter; but it may be a serious thing to these young men to be
thrown continually in the company of two attractive girls."

"I understand--you mean that we should not see so much of them," said
Christie, with a frank expression of relief so genuine as to utterly
discompose her father. "Perhaps you are right, though I fail to
discover anything serious in the attentions of young Kearney to
Jessie--or--whoever it may be--to me. But it will be very easy to
remedy it, and see less of them. Indeed, we might begin to-day with some
excuse."

"Yes--certainly. Of course!" said Mr. Carr, fully convinced of his
utter failure, but, like most weak creatures, consoling himself with the
reflection that he had not shown his hand or committed himself. "Yes;
but it would perhaps be just as well for the present to let things go on
as they were. We'll talk of it again--I'm in a hurry now," and, edging
himself through the door, he slipped away.

"What do you think is father's last idea?" said Christie, with, I fear,
a slight lack of reverence in her tone, as her sister reentered the
room. "He thinks George Kearney is paying you too much attention."

"No!" said Jessie, replying to her sister's half-interrogative,
half-amused glance with a frank, unconscious smile.

"Yes, and he says that Fairfax--I think it's Fairfax--is equally
fascinated with ME."

Jessie's brow slightly contracted as she looked curiously at her sister.

"Of all things," she said, "I wonder if any one has put that idea into
his dear old head. He couldn't have thought it himself."

"I don't know," said Christie musingly; "but perhaps it's just as well
if we kept a little more to ourselves for a while."

"Did father say so?" said Jessie quickly.

"No, but that is evidently what he meant."

"Ye-es," said Jessie slowly, "unless--"

"Unless what?" said Christie sharply. "Jessie, you don't for a moment
mean to say that you could possibly conceive of anything else?"

"I mean to say," said Jessie, stealing her arm around her sister's waist
demurely, "that you are perfectly right. We'll keep away from these
fascinating Devil's Forders, and particularly the youngest Kearney.
I believe there has been some ill-natured gossip. I remember that the
other day, when we passed the shanty of that Pike County family on
the slope, there were three women at the door, and one of them said
something that made poor little Kearney turn white and pink alternately,
and dance with suppressed rage. I suppose the old lady--M'Corkle, that's
her name--would like to have a share of our cavaliers for her Euphemy
and Mamie. I dare say it's only right; I would lend them the cherub
occasionally, and you might let them have Mr. Munroe twice a week."

She laughed, but her eyes sought her sister's with a certain
watchfulness of expression.

Christie shrugged her shoulders, with a suggestion of disgust.

"Don't joke. We ought to have thought of all this before."

"But when we first knew them, in the dear old cabin, there wasn't any
other woman and nobody to gossip, and that's what made it so nice. I
don't think so very much of civilization, do you?" said the young lady
pertly.

Christie did not reply. Perhaps she was thinking the same thing. It
certainly had been very pleasant to enjoy the spontaneous and chivalrous
homage of these men, with no further suggestion of recompense or
responsibility than the permission to be worshipped; but beyond that she
racked her brain in vain to recall any look or act that proclaimed the
lover. These men, whom she had found so relapsed into barbarism that
they had forgotten the most ordinary forms of civilization; these
men, even in whose extravagant admiration there was a certain loss of
self-respect, that as a woman she would never forgive; these men, who
seemed to belong to another race--impossible! Yet it was so.

"What construction must they have put upon her father's acceptance of
their presents--of their company--of her freedom in their presence? No!
they must have understood from the beginning that she and her sister
had never looked upon them except as transient hosts and chance
acquaintances. Any other idea was preposterous. And yet--"

It was the recurrence of this "yet" that alarmed her. For she remembered
now that but for their slavish devotion they might claim to be her
equal. According to her father's account, they had come from homes as
good as their own; they were certainly more than her equal in fortune;
and her father had come to them as an employee, until they had taken him
into partnership. If there had only been sentiment of any kind
connected with any of them! But they were all alike, brave, unselfish,
humorous--and often ridiculous. If anything, Dick Mattingly was funniest
by nature, and made her laugh more. Maryland Joe, his brother, told
better stories (sometimes of Dick), though not so good a mimic as the
other Kearney, who had a fairly sympathetic voice in singing. They were
all good-looking enough; perhaps they set store on that--men are so
vain.

And as for her own rejected suitor, Fairfax Munroe, except for a kind of
grave and proper motherliness about his protecting manner, he absolutely
was the most indistinctive of them all. He had once brought her some
rare tea from the Chinese camp, and had taught her how to make it; he
had cautioned her against sitting under the trees at nightfall; he had
once taken off his coat to wrap around her. Really, if this were the
only evidence of devotion that could be shown, she was safe!

"Well," said Jessie, "it amuses you, I see."

Christie checked the smile that had been dimpling the cheek nearest
Jessie, and turned upon her the face of an elder sister.

"Tell me, have YOU noticed this extraordinary attention of Mr. Munroe to
me?"

"Candidly?" asked Jessie, seating herself comfortably on the table
sideways, and endeavoring, to pull her skirt over her little feet.
"Honest Injun?"

"Don't be idiotic, and, above all, don't be slangy! Of course,
candidly."

"Well, no. I can't say that I have."

"Then," said Christie, "why in the name of all that's preposterous, do
they persist in pairing me off with the least interesting man of the
lot?"

Jessie leaped from the table.

"Come now," she said, with a little nervous laugh, "he's not so bad as
all that. You don't know him. But what does it matter now, as long as
we're not going to see them any more?"

"They're coming here for the ride to-day," said Christie resignedly.
"Father thought it better not to break it off at once."

"Father thought so!" echoed Jessie, stopping with her hand on the door.

"Yes; why do you ask?"

But Jessie had already left the room, and was singing in the hall.


CHAPTER IV


The afternoon did not, however, bring their expected visitors. It
brought, instead, a brief note by the hands of Whiskey Dick from
Fairfax, apologizing for some business that kept him and George Kearney
from accompanying the ladies. It added that the horses were at the
disposal of themselves and any escort they might select, if they would
kindly give the message to Whiskey Dick.

The two girls looked at each other awkwardly; Jessie did not attempt to
conceal a slight pout.

"It looks as if they were anticipating us," she said, with a half-forced
smile. "I wonder, now, if there really has been any gossip? But no! They
wouldn't have stopped for that, unless--" She looked curiously at her
sister.

"Unless what?" repeated Christie; "you are horribly mysterious this
morning."

"Am I? It's nothing. But they're wanting an answer. Of course you'll
decline."

"And intimate we only care for their company! No! We'll say we're sorry
they can't come, and--accept their horses. We can do without an escort,
we two."

"Capital!" said Jessie, clapping her hands. "We'll show them--"

"We'll show them nothing," interrupted Christie decidedly. "In our place
there's only the one thing to do. Where is this--Whiskey Dick?"

"In the parlor."

"The parlor!" echoed Christie. "Whiskey Dick? What--is he--"

"Yes; he's all right," said Jessie confidently. "He's been here before,
but he stayed in the hall; he was so shy. I don't think you saw him."

"I should think not--Whiskey Dick!"

"Oh, you can call him Mr. Hall, if you like," said Jessie, laughing.
"His real name is Dick Hall. If you want to be funny, you can say Alky
Hall, as the others do."

Christie's only reply to this levity was a look of superior resignation
as she crossed the hall and entered the parlor.

Then ensued one of those surprising, mystifying, and utterly
inexplicable changes that leave the masculine being so helpless in the
hands of his feminine master. Before Christie opened the door her face
underwent a rapid transformation: the gentle glow of a refined woman's
welcome suddenly beamed in her interested eyes; the impulsive courtesy
of an expectant hostess eagerly seizing a long-looked-for opportunity
broke in a smile upon her lips as she swept across the room, and stopped
with her two white outstretched hands before Whiskey Dick.

It needed only the extravagant contrast presented by that gentleman to
complete the tableau. Attired in a suit of shining black alpaca, the
visitor had evidently prepared himself with some care for a possible
interview. He was seated by the French window opening upon the veranda,
as if to secure a retreat in case of an emergency. Scrupulously washed
and shaven, some of the soap appeared to have lingered in his eyes and
inflamed the lids, even while it lent a sleek and shining lustre, not
unlike his coat, to his smooth black hair. Nevertheless, leaning back
in his chair, he had allowed a large white handkerchief to depend
gracefully from his fingers--a pose at once suggesting easy and elegant
langour.

"How kind of you to give me an opportunity to make up for my misfortune
when you last called! I was so sorry to have missed you. But it was
entirely my fault! You were hurried, I think--you conversed with others
in the hall--you--"

She stopped to assist him to pick up the handkerchief that had fallen,
and the Panama hat that had rolled from his lap towards the window
when he had started suddenly to his feet at the apparition of grace and
beauty. As he still nervously retained the two hands he had grasped,
this would have been a difficult feat, even had he not endeavored at the
same moment, by a backward furtive kick, to propel the hat out of the
window, at which she laughingly broke from his grasp and flew to the
rescue.

"Don't mind it, miss," he said hurriedly. "It is not worth your
demeaning yourself to touch it. Leave it outside thar, miss. I wouldn't
have toted it in, anyhow, if some of those high-falutin' fellows hadn't
allowed, the other night, ez it were the reg'lar thing to do; as if,
miss, any gentleman kalkilated to ever put on his hat in the house afore
a lady!"

But Christie had already possessed herself of the unlucky object, and
had placed it upon the table. This compelled Whiskey Dick to rise again,
and as an act of careless good breeding to drop his handkerchief in it.
He then leaned one elbow upon the piano, and, crossing one foot over the
other, remained standing in an attitude he remembered to have seen
in the pages of an illustrated paper as portraying the hero in some
drawing-room scene. It was easy and effective, but seemed to be more
favorable to revery than conversation. Indeed, he remembered that he had
forgotten to consult the letterpress as to which it represented.

"I see you agree with me, that politeness is quite a matter of
intention," said Christie, "and not of mere fashion and rules. Now, for
instance," she continued, with a dazzling smile, "I suppose, according
to the rules, I ought to give you a note to Mr. Munroe, accepting his
offer. That is all that is required; but it seems so much nicer, don't
you think, to tell it to YOU for HIM, and have the pleasure of your
company and a little chat at the same time."

"That's it, that's just it, Miss Carr; you've hit it in the centre this
time," said Whiskey Dick, now quite convinced that his attitude was not
intended for eloquence, and shifting back to his own seat, hat and all;
"that's tantamount to what I said to the boys just now. 'You want an
excuse,' sez I, 'for not goin' out with the young ladies. So, accorden'
to rules, you writes a letter allowin' buzziness and that sorter thing
detains you. But wot's the facts? You're a gentleman, and as gentlemen
you and George comes to the opinion that you're rather playin' it for
all it's worth in this yer house, you know--comin' here night and day,
off and on, reg'lar sociable and fam'ly like, and makin' people talk
about things they ain't any call to talk about, and, what's a darned
sight more, YOU FELLOWS ain't got any right YET to allow 'em to talk
about, d'ye see?" he paused, out of breath.

It was Miss Christie's turn to move about. In changing her seat to the
piano-stool, so as to be nearer her visitor, she brushed down some loose
music, which Whiskey Dick hastened to pick up.

"Pray don't mind it," she said, "pray don't, really--let it be--"
But Whiskey Dick, feeling himself on safe ground in this attention,
persisted to the bitter end of a disintegrated and well-worn
"Travatore." "So that is what Mr. Munroe said," she remarked quietly.

"Not just then, in course, but it's what's bin on his mind and in his
talk for days off and on," returned Dick, with a knowing smile and a nod
of mysterious confidence. "Bless your soul, Miss Carr, folks like you
and me don't need to have them things explained. That's what I said to
him, sez I. 'Don't send no note, but just go up there and hev it out
fair and square, and say what you do mean.' But they would hev the note,
and I kalkilated to bring it. But when I set my eyes on you, and heard
you express yourself as you did just now, I sez to myself, sez I, 'Dick,
yer's a young lady, and a fash'nable lady at that, ez don't go foolin'
round on rules and etiketts'--excuse my freedom, Miss Carr--'and you and
her, sez I, 'kin just discuss this yer matter in a sociable, off-hand,
fash'nable way.' They're a good lot o' boys, Miss Carr, a square
lot--white men all of 'em; but they're a little soft and green, may be,
from livin' in these yer pine woods along o' the other sap. They just
worship the ground you and your sister tread on--certain! of course!
of course!" he added hurriedly, recognizing Christie's half-conscious,
deprecating gesture with more exaggerated deprecation. "I understand.
But what I wanter say is that they'd be willin' to be that ground,
and lie down and let you walk over them--so to speak, Miss Carr, so to
speak--if it would keep the hem of your gown from gettin' soiled in the
mud o' the camp. But it wouldn't do for them to make a reg'lar curderoy
road o' themselves for the houl camp to trapse over, on the mere chance
of your some time passin' that way, would it now?"

"Won't you let me offer you some refreshment, Mr. Hall?" said Christie,
rising, with a slight color. "I'm really ashamed of my forgetfulness
again, but I'm afraid it's partly YOUR fault for entertaining me to the
exclusion of yourself. No, thank you, let me fetch it for you."

She turned to a handsome sideboard near the door, and presently faced
him again with a decanter of whiskey and a glass in her hand, and a
return of the bewitching smile she had worn on entering.

"But perhaps you don't take whiskey?" suggested the arch deceiver, with
a sudden affected but pretty perplexity of eye, brow, and lips.

For the first time in his life Whiskey Dick hesitated between two forms
of intoxication. But he was still nervous and uneasy; habit triumphed,
and he took the whiskey. He, however, wiped his lips with a slight wave
of his handkerchief, to support a certain easy elegance which he firmly
believed relieved the act of any vulgar quality.

"Yes, ma'am," he continued, after an exhilarated pause. "Ez I said
afore, this yer's a matter you and me can discuss after the fashion o'
society. My idea is that these yer boys should kinder let up on you and
Miss Jessie for a while, and do a little more permiskus attention round
the Ford. There's one or two families yer with grown-up gals ez oughter
be squared; that is--the boys mighter put in a few fancy touches among
them--kinder take 'em buggy riding--or to church--once in a while--just
to take the pizen outer their tongues, and make a kind o' bluff to the
parents, d'ye see? That would sorter divert their own minds; and even if
it didn't, it would kinder get 'em accustomed agin to the old style and
their own kind. I want to warn ye agin an idea that might occur to you
in a giniral way. I don't say you hev the idea, but it's kind o' nat'ral
you might be thinkin' of it some time, and I thought I'd warn you agin
it."

"I think we understand each other too well to differ much, Mr. Hall,"
said Christie, still smiling; "but what is the idea?"

The delicate compliment to their confidential relations and the slight
stimulus of liquor had tremulously exalted Whiskey Dick. Affecting to
look cautiously out of the window and around the room, he ventured
to draw nearer the young woman with a half-paternal, half-timid
familiarity.

"It might have occurred to you," he said, laying his handkerchief as if
to veil mere vulgar contact, on Christie's shoulder, "that it would be a
good thing on YOUR side to invite down some of your high-toned gentlemen
friends from 'Frisco to visit you and escort you round. It seems quite
nat'ral like, and I don't say it ain't, but--the boys wouldn't stand for
it."

In spite of her self-possession, Christie's eyes suddenly darkened,
and she involuntarily drew herself up. But Whiskey Dick, guiltily
attributing the movement to his own indiscreet gesture, said, "Excuse
me, miss," recovered himself by lightly dusting her shoulder with his
handkerchief, as if to remove the impression, and her smile returned.

"They wouldn't stand for it," said Dick, "and there'd be some shooting!
Not afore you, miss--not afore you, in course! But they'd adjourn to the
woods some morning with them city folks, and hev it out with rifles at
a hundred yards. Or, seein' ez they're city folks, the boys would do the
square thing with pistols at twelve paces. They're good boys, as I
said afore; but they're quick and tetchy--George, being the youngest,
nat'rally is the tetchiest. You know how it is, Miss Carr; his pretty,
gal-like face and little moustaches haz cost him half a dozen scrimmages
already. He'z had a fight for every hair that's growed in his moustache
since he kem here."

"Say no more, Mr. Hall!" said Christie, rising and pressing her hands
lightly on Dick's tremulous fingers. "If I ever had any such idea, I
should abandon it now; you are quite right in this as in your other
opinions. I shall never cease to be thankful to Mr. Munroe and Mr.
Kearney that they intrusted this delicate matter to your hands."

"Well," said the gratified and reddening visitor, "it ain't perhaps
the square thing to them or myself to say that they reckoned to have me
discuss their delicate affairs for them, but--"

"I understand," interrupted Christie. "They simply gave you the letter
as a friend. It was my good fortune to find you a sympathizing and
liberal man of the world." The delighted Dick, with conscious vanity
beaming from every feature of his shining face, lightly waved the
compliment aside with his handkerchief, as she continued, "But I am
forgetting the message. We accept the horses. Of course we COULD do
without an escort; but forgive my speaking so frankly, are YOU engaged
this afternoon?"

"Excuse me, miss, I don't take--" stammered Dick, scarcely believing his
ears.

"Could you give us your company as an escort?" repeated Christie with a
smile.

Was he awake or dreaming, or was this some trick of liquor in his
often distorted fancy? He, Whiskey Dick! the butt of his friends, the
chartered oracle of the barrooms, even in whose wretched vanity there
was always the haunting suspicion that he was despised and scorned; he,
who had dared so much in speech, and achieved so little in fact! he,
whose habitual weakness had even led him into the wildest indiscretion
here; he--now offered a reward for that indiscretion! He, Whiskey Dick,
the solicited escort of these two beautiful and peerless girls! What
would they say at the Ford? What would his friends think? It would be
all over the Ford the next day. His past would be vindicated, his future
secured. He grew erect at the thought. It was almost in other voice,
and with no trace of his previous exaggeration, that he said, "With
pleasure."

"Then, if you will bring the horses at once, we shall be ready when you
return."

In another instant he had vanished, as if afraid to trust the reality of
his good fortune to the dangers of delay. At the end of half an hour
he reappeared, leading the two horses, himself mounted on a half-broken
mustang. A pair of large, jingling silver spurs and a stiff sombrero,
borrowed with the mustang from some mysterious source, were donned to do
honor to the occasion.

The young girls were not yet ready, but he was shown by the Chinese
servant into the parlor to wait for them. The decanter of whiskey and
glasses were still invitingly there. He was hot, trembling, and flushed
with triumph. He walked to the table and laid his hand on the decanter,
when an odd thought flashed upon him. He would not drink this time.
No, it should not be said that he, the selected escort of the elite of
Devil's Ford, had to fill himself up with whiskey before they started.
The boys might turn to each other in their astonishment, as he proudly
passed with his fair companions, and say, "It's Whiskey Dick," but he'd
be d----d if they should add, "and full as ever." No, sir! Nor when
he was riding beside these real ladies, and leaning over them at some
confidential moment, should they even know it from his breath! No. . . .
Yet a thimbleful, taken straight, only a thimbleful, wouldn't be much,
and might help to pull him together. He again reached his trembling
hand for the decanter, hesitated, and then, turning his back upon it,
resolutely walked to the open window. Almost at the same instant he
found himself face to face with Christie on the veranda.

She looked into his bloodshot eyes, and cast a swift glance at the
decanter.

"Won't you take something before you go?" she said sweetly.

"I--reckon--not, jest now," stammered Whiskey Dick, with a heroic
effort.

"You're right," said Christie. "I see you are like me. It's too hot for
anything fiery. Come with me."

She led him into the dining-room, and pouring out a glass of iced
tea handed it to him. Poor Dick was not prepared for this terrible
culmination. Whiskey Dick and iced tea! But under pretence of seeing if
it was properly flavored, Christie raised it to her own lips.

"Try it, to please me."

He drained the goblet.

"Now, then," said Christie gayly, "let's find Jessie, and be off!"




CHAPTER V


Whatever might have been his other deficiencies as an escort, Whiskey
Dick was a good horseman, and, in spite of his fractious brute,
exhibited such skill and confidence as to at once satisfy the young
girls of his value to them in the management of their own horses,
to whom side-saddles were still an alarming novelty. Jessie, who
had probably already learned from her sister the purport of Dick's
confidences, had received him with equal cordiality and perhaps a more
unqualified amusement; and now, when fairly lifted into the saddle by
his tremulous but respectful hands, made a very charming picture of
youthful and rosy satisfaction. And when Christie, more fascinating than
ever in her riding-habit, took her place on the other side of Dick, as
they sallied from the gate, that gentleman felt his cup of happiness
complete. His triumphal entree into the world of civilization and
fashion was secure. He did not regret the untasted liquor; here was
an experience in after years to lean his back against comfortably in
bar-rooms, to entrance or defy mankind. He had even got so far as
to formulate in fancy the sentence: "I remember, gentlemen, that one
afternoon, being on a pasear with two fash'nable young ladies," etc.,
etc.

At present, however, he was obliged to confine himself to the functions
of an elegant guide and cicerone--when not engaged in "having it out"
with his horse. Their way lay along the slope, crossing the high-road at
right angles, to reach the deeper woods beyond. Dick would have lingered
on the highway--ostensibly to point out to his companions the new flume
that had taken the place of the condemned ditch, but really in the hope
of exposing himself in his glory to the curious eyes of the wayfaring
world.

Unhappily the road was deserted in the still powerful sunlight, and he
was obliged to seek the cover of the woods, with a passing compliment to
the parent of his charges. Waving his hands towards the flume, he
said, "Look at that work of your father's; there ain't no other man in
Californy but Philip Carr ez would hev the grit to hold up such a bluff
agin natur and agin luck ez that yer flume stands for. I don't say it
'cause you're his daughters, ladies! That ain't the style, ez YOU know,
in sassiety, Miss Carr," he added, turning to Christie as the more
socially experienced. "No! but there ain't another man to be found
ez could do it. It cost already two hundred thousand; it'll cost five
hundred thousand afore it's done; and every cent of it is got out of the
yearth beneath it, or HEZ got to be out of it. 'Tain't ev'ry man, Miss
Carr, ez hev got the pluck to pledge not only what he's got, but what he
reckons to git."

"But suppose he don't get it?" said Christie, slightly contracting her
brows.

"Then there's the flume to show for it," said Dick.

"But of what use is the flume, if there isn't any more gold?" continued
Christie, almost angrily.

"That's good from YOU, miss," said Dick, giving way to a fit of
hilarity. "That's good for a fash'nable young lady--own daughter of
Philip Carr. She sez, says she," continued Dick, appealing to the sedate
pines for appreciation of Christie's rare humor, "'Wot's the use of a
flume, when gold ain't there?' I must tell that to the boys."

"And what's the use of the gold in the ground when the flume isn't there
to work it out?" said Jessie to her sister, with a cautioning glance
towards Dick.

But Dick did not notice the look that passed between the sisters. The
richer humor of Jessie's retort had thrown him into convulsions of
laughter.

"And now SHE says, wot's the use o' the gold without the flume? 'Xcuse
me, ladies, but that's just puttin' the hull question that's agitatin'
this yer camp inter two speeches as clear as crystal. There's the
hull crowd outside--and some on 'em inside, like Fairfax, hez their
doubts--ez says with Miss Christie; and there's all of us inside, ez
holds Miss Jessie's views."

"I never heard Mr. Munroe say that the flume was wrong," said Jessie
quickly.

"Not to you, nat'rally," said Dick, with a confidential look at
Christie; "but I reckon he'd like some of the money it cost laid out for
suthin' else. But what's the odds? The gold is there, and WE'RE bound to
get it."

Dick was the foreman of a gang of paid workmen, who had replaced the
millionaires in mere manual labor, and the WE was a polite figure of
speech.

The conversation seemed to have taken an unfortunate turn, and both the
girls experienced a feeling of relief when they entered the long gulch
or defile that led to Indian Spring. The track now becoming narrow, they
were obliged to pass in single file along the precipitous hillside,
led by this escort. This effectually precluded any further speech,
and Christie at once surrendered herself to the calm, obliterating
influences of the forest. The settlement and its gossip were far behind
and forgotten. In the absorption of nature, her companions passed out of
her mind, even as they sometimes passed out of her sight in the windings
of the shadowy trail. As she rode alone, the fronds of breast-high
ferns seemed to caress her with outstretched and gently-detaining hands;
strange wildflowers sprang up through the parting underbrush; even the
granite rocks that at times pressed closely upon the trail appeared as
if cushioned to her contact with star-rayed mosses, or lightly flung
after her long lassoes of delicate vines. She recalled the absolute
freedom of their al-fresco life in the old double cabin, when she
spent the greater part of her waking hours under the mute trees in
the encompassing solitude, and, half regretting the more civilized
restraints of this newer and more ambitious abode, forgot that she had
ever rebelled against it. The social complication that threatened her
now seemed to her rather the outcome of her half-civilized parlor than
of the sylvan glade. How easy it would have been to have kept the cabin,
and then to have gone away entirely, than for her father to have allowed
them to be compromised with the growing fortunes of the settlement!
The suspicions and distrust that she had always felt of their fortunes
seemed to grow with the involuntary admission of Whiskey Dick that
they were shared by others who were practical men. She was fain to have
recourse to the prospect again to banish these thoughts, and this opened
her eyes to the fact that her companions had been missing from the trail
ahead of her for some time. She quickened her pace slightly to reach
a projecting point of rock that gave her a more extended prospect. But
they had evidently disappeared.

She was neither alarmed nor annoyed. She could easily overtake them
soon, for they would miss her, and return or wait for her at the spring.
At the worst she would have no difficulty in retracing her steps home.
In her present mood, she could readily spare their company; indeed she
was not sorry that no other being should interrupt that sympathy with
the free woods which was beginning to possess her.

She was destined, however, to be disappointed. She had not proceeded a
hundred yards before she noticed the moving figure of a man beyond her
in the hillside chaparral above the trail. He seemed to be going in the
same direction as herself, and, as she fancied, endeavoring to avoid
her. This excited her curiosity to the point of urging her horse forward
until the trail broadened into the level forest again, which she now
remembered was a part of the environs of Indian Spring. The stranger
hesitated, pausing once or twice with his back towards her, as if
engaged in carefully examining the dwarf willows to select a switch.
Christie slightly checked her speed as she drew nearer; when, as if
obedient to a sudden resolution, he turned and advanced towards her. She
was relieved and yet surprised to recognize the boyish face and figure
of George Kearney. He was quite pale and agitated, although attempting,
by a jaunty swinging of the switch he had just cut, to assume the
appearance of ease and confidence.

Here was an opportunity. Christie resolved to profit by it. She did not
doubt that the young fellow had already passed her sister on the trail,
but, from bashfulness, had not dared to approach her. By inviting his
confidence, she would doubtless draw something from him that would deny
or corroborate her father's opinion of his sentiments. If he was really
in love with Jessie, she would learn what reasons he had for expecting
a serious culmination of his suit, and perhaps she might be able
delicately to open his eyes to the truth. If, as she believed, it was
only a boyish fancy, she would laugh him out of it with that camaraderie
which had always existed between them. A half motherly sympathy, albeit
born quite as much from a contemplation of his beautiful yearning eyes
as from his interesting position, lightened the smile with which she
greeted him.

"So you contrived to throw over your stupid business and join us,
after all," she said; "or was it that you changed your mind at the
last moment?" she added mischievously. "I thought only we women were
permitted that!" Indeed, she could not help noticing that there was
really a strong feminine suggestion in the shifting color and slightly
conscious eyelids of the young fellow.

"Do young girls always change their minds?" asked George, with an
embarrassed smile.

"Not, always; but sometimes they don't know their own mind--particularly
if they are very young; and when they do at last, you clever creatures
of men, who have interpreted their ignorance to please yourselves, abuse
them for being fickle." She stopped to observe the effect of what she
believed a rather clear and significant exposition of Jessie's and
George's possible situation. But she was not prepared for the look
of blank resignation that seemed to drive the color from his face and
moisten the fire of his dark eyes.

"I reckon you're right," he said, looking down.

"Oh! we're not accusing you of fickleness," said Christie gayly;
"although you didn't come, and we were obliged to ask Mr. Hall to join
us. I suppose you found him and Jessie just now?"

But George made no reply. The color was slowly coming back to his face,
which, as she glanced covertly at him, seemed to have grown so much
older that his returning blood might have brought two or three years
with it.

"Really, Mr. Kearney," she said dryly, "one would think that some silly,
conceited girl"--she was quite earnest in her epithets, for a sudden,
angry conviction of some coquetry and disingenuousness in Jessie had
come to her in contemplating its effects upon the young fellow at her
side--"some country jilt, had been trying her rustic hand upon you."

"She is not silly, conceited, nor countrified," said George, slowly
raising his beautiful eyes to the young girl half reproachfully. "It is
I who am all that. No, she is right, and you know it."

Much as Christie admired and valued her sister's charms, she thought
this was really going too far. What had Jessie ever done--what was
Jessie--to provoke and remain insensible to such a blind devotion as
this? And really, looking at him now, he was not so VERY YOUNG for
Jessie; whether his unfortunate passion had brought out all his latent
manliness, or whether he had hitherto kept his serious nature in the
background, certainly he was not a boy. And certainly his was not a
passion that he could be laughed out of. It was getting very tiresome.
She wished she had not met him--at least until she had had some clearer
understanding with her sister. He was still walking beside her, with his
hand on her bridle rein, partly to lead her horse over some boulders in
the trail, and partly to conceal his first embarrassment. When they had
fairly reached the woods, he stopped.

"I am going to say good-by, Miss Carr."

"Are you not coming further? We must be near Indian Spring, now; Mr.
Hall and--and Jessie--cannot be far away. You will keep me company until
we meet them?"

"No," he replied quietly. "I only stopped you to say good-by. I am going
away."

"Not from Devil's Ford?" she asked, in half-incredulous astonishment.
"At least, not for long?"

"I am not coming back," he replied.

"But this is very abrupt," she said hurriedly, feeling that in some
ridiculous way she had precipitated an equally ridiculous catastrophe.
"Surely you are not going away in this fashion, without saying good-by
to Jessie and--and father?"

"I shall see your father, of course--and you will give my regards to
Miss Jessie."

He evidently was in earnest. Was there ever anything so perfectly
preposterous? She became indignant.

"Of course," she said coldly, "I won't detain you; your business must
be urgent, and I forgot--at least I had forgotten until to-day--that
you have other duties more important than that of squire of dames. I am
afraid this forgetfulness made me think you would not part from us in
quite such a business fashion. I presume, if you had not met me just
now, we should none of us have seen you again?"

He did not reply.

"Will you say good-by, Miss Carr?"

He held out his hand.

"One moment, Mr. Kearney. If I have said anything which you think
justifies this very abrupt leave-taking, I beg you will forgive and
forget it--or, at least, let it have no more weight with you than the
idle words of any woman. I only spoke generally. You know--I--I might be
mistaken."

His eyes, which had dilated when she began to speak, darkened; his
color, which had quickly come, as quickly sank when she had ended.

"Don't say that, Miss Carr. It is not like you, and--it is useless. You
know what I meant a moment ago. I read it in your reply. You meant that
I, like others, had deceived myself. Did you not?"

She could not meet those honest eyes with less than equal honesty.
She knew that Jessie did not love him--would not marry him--whatever
coquetry she might have shown.

"I did not mean to offend you," she said hesitatingly; "I only half
suspected it when I spoke."

"And you wish to spare me the avowal?" he said bitterly.

"To me, perhaps, yes, by anticipating it. I could not tell what ideas
you might have gathered from some indiscreet frankness of Jessie--or my
father," she added, with almost equal bitterness.

"I have never spoken to either," he replied quickly. He stopped, and
added, after a moment's mortifying reflection, "I've been brought up in
the woods, Miss Carr, and I suppose I have followed my feelings, instead
of the etiquette of society."

Christie was too relieved at the rehabilitation of Jessie's truthfulness
to notice the full significance of his speech.

"Good-by," he said again, holding out his hand.

"Good-by!"

She extended her own, ungloved, with a frank smile. He held it for a
moment, with his eyes fixed upon hers. Then suddenly, as if obeying
an uncontrollable impulse, he crushed it like a flower again and again
against his burning lips, and darted away.

Christie sank back in her saddle with a little cry, half of pain and
half of frightened surprise. Had the poor boy suddenly gone mad, or was
this vicarious farewell a part of the courtship of Devil's Ford? She
looked at her little hand, which had reddened under the pressure, and
suddenly felt the flush extending to her cheeks and the roots of her
hair. This was intolerable.

"Christie!"

It was her sister emerging from the wood to seek her. In another moment
she was at her side.

"We thought you were following," said Jessie. "Good heavens! how you
look! What has happened?"

"Nothing. I met Mr. Kearney a moment ago on the trail. He is going away,
and--and--" She stopped, furious and flushing.

"And," said Jessie, with a burst of merriment, "he told you at last he
loved you. Oh, Christie!"




CHAPTER VI


The abrupt departure of George Kearney from Devil's Ford excited
but little interest in the community, and was soon forgotten. It was
generally attributed to differences between himself and his partners
on the question of further outlay of their earnings on mining
improvements--he and Philip Carr alone representing a sanguine minority
whose faith in the future of the mine accepted any risks. It was alleged
by some that he had sold out to his brother; it was believed by others
that he had simply gone to Sacramento to borrow money on his share,
in order to continue the improvements on his own responsibility. The
partners themselves were uncommunicative; even Whiskey Dick, who since
his remarkable social elevation had become less oracular, much to his
own astonishment, contributed nothing to the gossip except a suggestion
that as the fiery temper of George Kearney brooked no opposition,
even from his brother, it was better they should separate before the
estrangement became serious.

Mr. Carr did not disguise his annoyance at the loss of his young
disciple and firm ally. But an unlucky allusion to his previous remarks
on Kearney's attentions to Jessie, and a querulous regret that he had
permitted a disruption of their social intimacy, brought such an ominous
and frigid opposition, not only from Christie, but even the frivolous
Jessie herself, that Carr sank back in a crushed and terrified silence.
"I only meant to say," he stammered after a pause, in which he, however,
resumed his aggrieved manner, "that FAIRFAX seems to come here still,
and HE is not such a particular friend of mine."

"But she is--and has your interest entirely at heart," said Jessie,
stoutly, "and he only comes here to tell us how things are going on at
the works."

"And criticise your father, I suppose," said Mr. Carr, with an
attempt at jocularity that did not, however, disguise an irritated
suspiciousness. "He really seems to have supplanted ME as he has poor
Kearney in your estimation."

"Now, father," said Jessie, suddenly seizing him by the shoulders in
affected indignation, but really to conceal a certain embarrassment
that sprang quite as much from her sister's quietly observant eye as her
father's speech, "you promised to let this ridiculous discussion drop.
You will make me and Christie so nervous that we will not dare to
open the door to a visitor, until he declares his innocence of any
matrimonial intentions. You don't want to give color to the gossip that
agreement with your views about the improvements is necessary to getting
on with us."

"Who dares talk such rubbish?" said Carr, reddening; "is that the kind
of gossip that Fairfax brings here?"

"Hardly, when it's known that he don't quite agree with you, and DOES
come here. That's the best denial of the gossip."

Christie, who had of late loftily ignored these discussions, waited
until her father had taken his departure.

"Then that is the reason why you still see Mr. Munroe, after what you
said," she remarked quietly to Jessie.

Jessie, who would have liked to escape with her father, was obliged to
pause on the threshold of the door, with a pretty assumption of blank
forgetfulness in her blue eyes and lifted eyebrows.

"Said what? when?" she asked vacantly.

"When--when Mr. Kearney that day--in the woods--went away," said
Christie, faintly coloring.

"Oh! THAT day," said Jessie briskly; "the day he just gloved your
hand with kisses, and then fled wildly into the forest to conceal his
emotion."

"The day he behaved very foolishly," said Christie, with reproachful
calmness, that did not, however, prevent a suspicion of indignant
moisture in her eyes--"when you explained"--

"That it wasn't meant for ME," interrupted Jessie.

"That it was to you that MR. MUNROE'S attentions were directed. And then
we agreed that it was better to prevent any further advances of this
kind by avoiding any familiar relations with either of them."

"Yes," said Jessie, "I remember; but you're not confounding my seeing
Fairfax occasionally now with that sort of thing. HE doesn't kiss my
hand like anything," she added, as if in abstract reflection.

"Nor run away, either," suggested the trodden worm, turning.

There was an ominous silence.

"Do you know we are nearly out of coffee?" said Jessie choking, but
moving towards the door with Spartan-like calmness.

"Yes. And something must be done this very day about the washing," said
Christie, with suppressed emotion, going towards the opposite entrance.

Tears stood in each other's eyes with this terrible exchange of domestic
confidences. Nevertheless, after a moment's pause, they deliberately
turned again, and, facing each other with frightful calmness, left
the room by purposeless and deliberate exits other than those they
had contemplated--a crushing abnegation of self, that, to some extent,
relieved their surcharged feelings.

Meantime the material prosperity of Devil's Ford increased, if a
prosperity based upon no visible foundation but the confidences and
hopes of its inhabitants could be called material. Few, if any, stopped
to consider that the improvements, buildings, and business were simply
the outlay of capital brought from elsewhere, and as yet the settlement
or town, as it was now called, had neither produced nor exported capital
of itself equal to half the amount expended. It was true that some
land was cultivated on the further slope, some mills erected and lumber
furnished from the inexhaustible forest; but the consumers were the
inhabitants themselves, who paid for their produce in borrowed capital
or unlimited credit. It was never discovered that while all roads led to
Devil's Ford, Devil's Ford led to nowhere. The difficulties overcome
in getting things into the settlement were never surmounted for getting
things out of it. The lumber was practically valueless for export to
other settlements across the mountain roads, which were equally rich in
timber. The theory so enthusiastically held by the original locators,
that Devil's Ford was a vast sink that had, through ages, exhausted and
absorbed the trickling wealth of the adjacent hills and valleys, was
suffering an ironical corroboration.

One morning it was known that work was stopped at the Devil's Ford
Ditch--temporarily only, it was alleged, and many of the old workmen
simply had their labor for the present transferred to excavating the
river banks, and the collection of vast heaps of "pay gravel." Specimens
from these mounds, taken from different localities, and at different
levels, were sent to San Francisco for more rigid assay and analysis.
It was believed that this would establish the fact of the permanent
richness of the drifts, and not only justify past expenditure, but a
renewed outlay of credit and capital. The suspension of engineering work
gave Mr. Carr an opportunity to visit San Francisco on general business
of the mine, which could not, however, prevent him from arranging
further combinations with capital. His two daughters accompanied him. It
offered an admirable opportunity for a shopping expedition, a change of
scene, and a peaceful solution of their perplexing and anomalous social
relations with Devil's Ford. In the first flush of gratitude to their
father for this opportune holiday, something of harmony had been
restored to the family circle that had of late been shaken by discord.

But their sanguine hopes of enjoyment were not entirely fulfilled. Both
Jessie and Christie were obliged to confess to a certain disappointment
in the aspect of the civilization they were now reentering. They at
first attributed it to the change in their own habits during the last
three months, and their having become barbarous and countrified in
their seclusion. Certainly in the matter of dress they were behind the
fashions as revealed in Montgomery Street. But when the brief solace
afforded them by the modiste and dressmaker was past, there seemed
little else to be gained. They missed at first, I fear, the chivalrous
and loyal devotion that had only amused them at Devil's Ford, and were
the more inclined, I think, to distrust the conscious and more civilized
gallantry of the better dressed and more carefully presented men they
met. For it must be admitted that, for obvious reasons, their criticisms
were at first confined to the sex they had been most in contact with.
They could not help noticing that the men were more eager, annoyingly
feverish, and self-asserting in their superior elegance and external
show than their old associates were in their frank, unrestrained habits.
It seemed to them that the five millionaires of Devil's Ford, in their
radical simplicity and thoroughness, were perhaps nearer the type of
true gentlemanhood than these citizens who imitated a civilization they
were unable yet to reach.

The women simply frightened them, as being, even more than the men,
demonstrative and excessive in their fine looks, their fine dresses,
their extravagant demand for excitement. In less than a week they found
themselves regretting--not the new villa on the slope of Devil's Ford,
which even in its own bizarre fashion was exceeded by the barbarous
ostentation of the villas and private houses around them--but the double
cabin under the trees, which now seemed to them almost aristocratic in
its grave simplicity and abstention. In the mysterious forests of masts
that thronged the city's quays they recalled the straight shafts of the
pines on Devil's slopes, only to miss the sedate repose and infinite
calm that used to environ them. In the feverish, pulsating life of the
young metropolis they often stopped oppressed, giddy, and choking; the
roar of the streets and thoroughfares was meaningless to them, except to
revive strange memories of the deep, unvarying monotone of the evening
wind over their humbler roof on the Sierran hillside. Civic bred and
nurtured as they were, the recurrence of these sensations perplexed and
alarmed them.

"It seems so perfectly ridiculous," said Jessie, "for us to feel as out
of place here as that Pike County servant girl in Sacramento who had
never seen a steamboat before; do you know, I quite had a turn the other
day at seeing a man on the Stockton wharf in a red shirt, with a rifle
on his shoulder."

"And you wanted to go and speak to him?" said Christie, with a sad
smile.

"No, that's just it; I felt awfully hurt and injured that he did not
come up and speak to ME! I wonder if we got any fever or that sort of
thing up there; it makes one quite superstitious."

Christie did not reply; more than once before she had felt that
inexplicable misgiving. It had sometimes seemed to her that she had
never been quite herself since that memorable night when she had
slipped out of their sleeping-cabin, and stood alone in the gracious and
commanding presence of the woods and hills. In the solitude of night,
with the hum of the great city rising below her--at times even in
theatres or crowded assemblies of men and women--she forgot herself,
and again stood in the weird brilliancy of that moonlight night in
mute worship at the foot of that slowly-rising mystic altar of piled
terraces, hanging forests, and lifted plateaus that climbed forever to
the lonely skies. Again she felt before her the expanding and opening
arms of the protecting woods. Had they really closed upon her in some
pantheistic embrace that made her a part of them? Had she been baptized
in that moonlight as a child of the great forest? It was easy to believe
in the myths of the poets of an idyllic life under those trees, where,
free from conventional restrictions, one loved and was loved. If she,
with her own worldly experience, could think of this now, why might
not George Kearney have thought? . . . She stopped, and found herself
blushing even in the darkness. As the thought and blush were the usual
sequel of her reflections, it is to be feared that they may have been at
times the impelling cause.

Mr. Carr, however, made up for his daughters' want of sympathy with
metropolitan life. To their astonishment, he not only plunged into the
fashionable gayeties and amusements of the town, but in dress and manner
assumed the role of a leader of society. The invariable answer to their
half-humorous comment was the necessities of the mine, and the policy
of frequenting the company of capitalists, to enlist their support and
confidence. There was something in this so unlike their father, that
what at any other time they would have hailed as a relief to
his habitual abstraction now half alarmed them. Yet he was not
dissipated--he did not drink nor gamble. There certainly did not seem
any harm in his frequenting the society of ladies, with a gallantry that
appeared to be forced and a pleasure that to their critical eyes was
certainly apocryphal. He did not drag his daughters into the mixed
society of that period; he did not press upon them the company of those
he most frequented, and whose accepted position in that little world of
fashion was considered equal to their own. When Jessie strongly objected
to the pronounced manners of a certain widow, whose actual present
wealth and pecuniary influence condoned for a more uncertain prehistoric
past, Mr. Carr did not urge a further acquaintance. "As long as you're
not thinking of marrying again, papa," Jessie had said finally, "I don't
see the necessity of our knowing her." "But suppose I were," had replied
Mr. Carr with affected humor. "Then you certainly wouldn't care for any
one like her," his daughter had responded triumphantly. Mr. Carr smiled,
and dropped the subject, but it is probable that his daughters' want of
sympathy with his acquaintances did not in the least interfere with
his social prestige. A gentleman in all his relations and under all
circumstances, even his cold scientific abstraction was provocative;
rich men envied his lofty ignorance of the smaller details of
money-making, even while they mistrusted his judgment. A man still well
preserved, and free from weakening vices, he was a dangerous rival to
younger and faster San Francisco, in the eyes of the sex, who knew how
to value a repose they did not themselves possess.

Suddenly Mr. Carr announced his intention of proceeding to Sacramento,
on further business of the mine, leaving his two daughters in the family
of a wealthy friend until he should return for them. He opposed their
ready suggestion to return to Devil's Ford with a new and unnecessary
inflexibility: he even met their compromise to accompany him to
Sacramento with equal decision.

"You will be only in my way," he said curtly. "Enjoy yourselves here
while you can."

Thus left to themselves, they tried to accept his advice. Possibly some
slight reaction to their previous disappointment may have already set
in; perhaps they felt any distraction to be a relief to their anxiety
about their father. They went out more; they frequented concerts and
parties; they accepted, with their host and his family, an invitation to
one of those opulent and barbaric entertainments with which a noted San
Francisco millionaire distracted his rare moments of reflection in his
gorgeous palace on the hills. Here they could at least be once more in
the country they loved, albeit of a milder and less heroic type, and a
little degraded by the overlapping tinsel and scattered spangles of the
palace.

It was a three days' fete; the style and choice of amusements left to
the guests, and an equal and active participation by no means necessary
or indispensable. Consequently, when Christie and Jessie Carr proposed
a ride through the adjacent canyon on the second morning, they had no
difficulty in finding horses in the well-furnished stables of their
opulent entertainers, nor cavaliers among the other guests, who were
too happy to find favor in the eyes of the two pretty girls who were
supposed to be abnormally fastidious and refined. Christie's escort
was a good-natured young banker, shrewd enough to avoid demonstrative
attentions, and lucky enough to interest her during the ride with his
clear and half-humorous reflections on some of the business speculations
of the day. If his ideas were occasionally too clever, and not always
consistent with a high sense of honor, she was none the less interested
to know the ethics of that world of speculation into which her father
had plunged, and the more convinced, with mingled sense of pride and
anxiety, that his still dominant gentlemanhood would prevent his coping
with it on equal terms. Nor could she help contrasting the conversation
of the sharp-witted man at her side with what she still remembered of
the vague, touching, boyish enthusiasm of the millionaires of Devil's
Ford. Had her escort guessed the result of this contrast, he would
hardly have been as gratified as he was with the grave attention of her
beautiful eyes.

The fascination of a gracious day and the leafy solitude of the canyon
led them to prolong their ride beyond the proposed limit, and it became
necessary towards sunset for them to seek some shorter cut home.

"There's a vaquero in yonder field," said Christie's escort, who was
riding with her a little in advance of the others, "and those fellows
know every trail that a horse can follow. I'll ride on, intercept him,
and try my Spanish on him. If I miss him, as he's galloping on, you
might try your hand on him yourself. He'll understand your eyes, Miss
Carr, in any language."

As he dashed away, to cover his first audacity of compliment, Christie
lifted the eyes thus apostrophized to the opposite field. The vaquero,
who was chasing some cattle, was evidently too preoccupied to heed the
shouts of her companion, and wheeling round suddenly to intercept one
of the deviating fugitives, permitted Christie's escort to dash past him
before that gentleman could rein in his excited steed. This brought the
vaquero directly in her path. Perceiving her, he threw his horse back on
its haunches, to prevent a collision. Christie rode up to him, suddenly
uttered a cry, and halted. For before her, sunburnt in cheek and throat,
darker in the free growth of moustache and curling hair, clad in the
coarse, picturesque finery of his class, undisguised only in his boyish
beauty, sat George Kearney.

The blood, that had forsaken her astonished face, rushed as quickly
back. His eyes, which had suddenly sparkled with an electrical glow,
sank before hers. His hand dropped, and his cheek flushed with a dark
embarrassment.

"You here, Mr. Kearney? How strange!--but how glad I am to meet you
again!"

She tried to smile; her voice trembled, and her little hand shook as she
extended it to him.

He raised his dark eyes quickly, and impulsively urged his horse to her
side. But, as if suddenly awakening to the reality of the situation,
he glanced at her hurriedly, down at his barbaric finery, and threw a
searching look towards her escort.

In an instant Christie saw the infelicity of her position, and its
dangers. The words of Whiskey Dick, "He wouldn't stand that," flashed
across her mind. There was no time to lose. The banker had already
gained control over his horse, and was approaching them, all unconscious
of the fixed stare with which George was regarding him. Christie hastily
seized the hand which he had allowed to fall at his side, and said
quickly:--

"Will you ride with me a little way, Mr. Kearney?"

He turned the same searching look upon her. She met it clearly and
steadily; he even thought reproachfully.

"Do!" she said hurriedly. "I ask it as a favor. I want to speak to you.
Jessie and I are here alone. Father is away. YOU are one of our oldest
friends."

He hesitated. She turned to the astonished young banker, who rode up.

"I have just met an old friend. Will you please ride back as quickly as
you can, and tell Jessie that Mr. Kearney is here, and ask her to join
us?"

She watched her dazed escort, still speechless from the spectacle of the
fastidious Miss Carr tete-a-tete with a common Mexican vaquero, gallop
off in the direction of the canyon, and then turned to George.

"Now take me home, the shortest way, as quick as you can."

"Home?" echoed George.

"I mean to Mr. Prince's house. Quick! before they can come up to us."

He mechanically put spurs to his horse; she followed. They presently
struck into a trail that soon diverged again into a disused logging
track through the woods.

"This is the short cut to Prince's, by two miles," he said, as they
entered the woods.

As they were still galloping, without exchanging a word, Christie began
to slacken her speed; George did the same. They were safe from intrusion
at the present, even if the others had found the short cut. Christie,
bold and self-reliant a moment ago, suddenly found herself growing weak
and embarrassed. What had she done?

She checked her horse suddenly.

"Perhaps we had better wait for them," she said timidly.

George had not raised his eyes to hers.

"You said you wanted to hurry home," he replied gently, passing his hand
along his mustang's velvety neck, "and--and you had something to say to
me."

"Certainly," she answered, with a faint laugh. "I'm so astonished at
meeting you here. I'm quite bewildered. You are living here; you have
forsaken us to buy a ranche?" she continued, looking at him attentively.

His brow colored slightly.

"No, I'm living here, but I have bought no ranche. I'm only a hired man
on somebody else's ranche, to look after the cattle."

He saw her beautiful eyes fill with astonishment and--something else.
His brow cleared; he went on, with his old boyish laugh:

"No, Miss Carr. The fact is, I'm dead broke. I've lost everything since
I saw you last. But as I know how to ride, and I'm not afraid of work, I
manage to keep along."

"You have lost money in--in the mines?" said Christie suddenly.

"No"--he replied quickly, evading her eyes. "My brother has my interest,
you know. I've been foolish on my own account solely. You know I'm
rather inclined to that sort of thing. But as long as my folly don't
affect others, I can stand it."

"But it may affect others--and THEY may not think of it as folly--" She
stopped short, confused by his brightening color and eyes. "I mean--Oh,
Mr. Kearney, I want you to be frank with me. I know nothing of business,
but I know there has been trouble about the mine at Devil's Ford. Tell
me honestly, has my father anything to do with it? If I thought that
through any imprudence of his, you had suffered--if I believed that
you could trace any misfortune of yours to him--to US--I should never
forgive myself"--she stopped and flashed a single look at him--"I should
never forgive YOU for abandoning us."

The look of pain which had at first shown itself in his face, which
never concealed anything, passed, and a quick smile followed her
feminine anticlimax.

"Miss Carr," he said, with boyish eagerness, "if any man suggested to me
that your father wasn't the brightest and best of his kind--too wise and
clever for the fools about him to understand--I'd--I'd shoot him."

Confused by his ready and gracious disclaimer of what she had NOT
intended to say, there was nothing left for her but to rush upon
what she really intended to say, with what she felt was shameful
precipitation.

"One word more, Mr. Kearney," she began, looking down, but feeling the
color come to her face as she spoke. "When you spoke to me the day you
left, you must have thought me hard and cruel. When I tell you that I
thought you were alluding to Jessie and some feeling you had for her--"

"For Jessie!" echoed George.

"You will understand that--that--"

"That what?" said George, drawing nearer to her.

"That I was only speaking as she might have spoken had you talked to her
of me," added Christie hurriedly, slightly backing her horse away from
him.

But this was not so easy, as George was the better rider, and by an
imperceptible movement of his wrist and foot had glued his horse to her
side. "He will go now," she had thought, but he didn't.

"We must ride on," she suggested faintly.

"No," he said with a sudden dropping of his boyish manner and a slight
lifting of his head. "We must ride together no further, Miss Carr. I
must go back to the work I am hired to do, and you must go on with
your party, whom I hear coming. But when we part here you must bid me
good-by--not as Jessie's sister--but as Christie--the one--the only
woman that I love, or that I ever have loved."

He held out his hand. With the recollection of their previous parting,
she tremblingly advanced her own. He took it, but did not raise it to
his lips. And it was she who found herself half confusedly retaining his
hand in hers, until she dropped it with a blush.

"Then is this the reason you give for deserting us as you have deserted
Devil's Ford?" she said coldly.

He lifted his eyes to her with a strange smile, and said, "Yes," wheeled
his horse, and disappeared in the forest.

He had left her thus abruptly once before, kissed, blushing, and
indignant. He was leaving her now, unkissed, but white and indignant.
Yet she was so self-possessed when the party joined her, that the
singular rencontre and her explanation of the stranger's sudden
departure excited no further comment. Only Jessie managed to whisper in
her ear,--

"I hope you are satisfied now that it wasn't me he meant?"

"Not at all," said Christie coldly.




CHAPTER VII


A few days after the girls had returned to San Francisco, they received
a letter from their father. His business, he wrote, would detain him in
Sacramento some days longer. There was no reason why they should return
to Devil's Ford in the heat of the summer; their host had written to
beg him to allow them a more extended visit, and, if they were enjoying
themselves, he thought it would be well not to disoblige an old friend.
He had heard they had a pleasant visit to Mr. Prince's place, and that a
certain young banker had been very attentive to Christie.

"Do you know what all this means, dear?" asked Jessie, who had been
watching her sister with an unusually grave face.

Christie whose thoughts had wandered from the letter, replied
carelessly,--

"I suppose it means that we are to wait here until father sends for us."

"It means a good deal more. It means that papa has had another reverse;
it means that the assay has turned out badly for the mine--that the
further they go from the flat the worse it gets--that all the gold they
will probably ever see at Devil's Ford is what they have already found
or will find on the flat; it means that all Devil's Ford is only a
'pocket,' and not a 'lead.'" She stopped, with unexpected tears in her
eyes.

"Who told you this?" asked Christie breathlessly.

"Fairfax--Mr. Munroe," stammered her sister, "writes to me as if we
already knew it--tells me not to be alarmed, that it isn't so bad--and
all that."

"How long has this happened, Jessie?" said Christie, taking her hand,
with a white but calm face.

"Nearly ever since we've been here, I suppose. It must be so, for he
says poor papa is still hopeful of doing something yet."

"And Mr. Munroe writes to you?" said Christie abstractedly.

"Of course," said Jessie quickly. "He feels interested in--us."

"Nobody tells ME anything," said Christie.

"Didn't--"

"No," said Christie bitterly.

"What on earth DID you talk about? But people don't confide in you
because they're afraid of you. You're so--"

"So what?"

"So gently patronizing, and so 'I-don't-suppose-you-can-help-it,
poor-thing,' in your general style," said Jessie, kissing her. "There!
I only wish I was like you. What do you say if we write to father that
we'll go back to Devil's Ford? Mr. Munroe thinks we will be of service
there just now. If the men are dissatisfied, and think we're spending
money--"

"I'm afraid Mr. Munroe is hardly a disinterested adviser. At least, I
don't think it would look quite decent for you to fly back without your
father, at his suggestion," said Christie coldly. "He is not the only
partner. We are spending no money. Besides, we have engaged to go to Mr.
Prince's again next week."

"As you like, dear," said Jessie, turning away to hide a faint smile.

Nevertheless, when they returned from their visit to Mr. Prince's, and
one or two uneventful rides, Christie looked grave. It was only a few
days later that Jessie burst upon her one morning.

"You were saying that nobody ever tells you anything. Well, here's your
chance. Whiskey Dick is below."

"Whiskey Dick?" repeated Christie. "What does he want?"

"YOU, love. Who else? You know he always scorns me as not being
high-toned and elegant enough for his social confidences. He asked for
you only."

With an uneasy sense of some impending revelation, Christie descended to
the drawing-room. As she opened the door, a strong flavor of that toilet
soap and eau de Cologne with which Whiskey Dick was in the habit of
gracefully effacing the traces of dissipation made known his presence.
In spite of a new suit of clothes, whose pristine folds refused to
adapt themselves entirely to the contour of his figure, he was somewhat
subdued by the unexpected elegance of the drawing-room of Christie's
host. But a glance at Christie's sad but gracious face quickly reassured
him. Taking from his hat a three-cornered parcel, he unfolded a
handsome saffrona rose, which he gravely presented to her. Having
thus reestablished his position, he sank elegantly into a tete-a-tete
ottoman. Finding the position inconvenient to face Christie, who had
seated herself on a chair, he transferred himself to the other side of
the ottoman, and addressed her over its back as from a pulpit.

"Is this really a fortunate accident, Mr. Hall, or did you try to find
us?" said Christie pleasantly.

"Partly promiskuss, and partly coincident, Miss Christie, one up and
t'other down," said Dick lightly. "Work being slack at present at
Devil's Ford, I reck'ned I'd take a pasear down to 'Frisco, and dip into
the vortex o' fash'nable society and out again." He lightly waved a
new handkerchief to illustrate his swallow-like intrusion. "This yer
minglin' with the bo-tong is apt to be wearisome, ez you and me knows,
unless combined with experience and judgment. So when them boys up
there allows that there's a little too much fash'nable society and San
Francisco capital and high-falutin' about the future goin' on fer square
surface mining, I sez, 'Look yere, gentlemen,' sez I, 'you don't see the
pint. The pint is to get the pop'lar eye fixed, so to speak, on Devil's
Ford. When a fash'nable star rises above the 'Frisco horizon--like Miss
Carr--and, so to speak, dazzles the gineral eye, people want to know
who she is. And when people say that's the accomplished daughter o' the
accomplished superintendent of the Devil's Ford claim--otherwise known
as the Star-eyed Goddess o' Devil's Ford--every eye is fixed on the
mine, and Capital, so to speak, tumbles to her.' And when they sez that
the old man--excuse my freedom, but that's the way the boys talk of your
father, meaning no harm--the old man, instead o' trying to corral rich
widders--grass or otherwise--to spend their money on the big works for
the gold that ain't there yet--should stay in Devil's Ford and put all
his sabe and genius into grindin' out the little gold that is there, I
sez to them that it ain't your father's style. 'His style,' sez I, 'ez
to go in and build them works.' When they're done he turns round to
Capital, and sez he--'Look yer,' sez he, 'thar's all the works you
want, first quality--cost a million; thar's all the water you want,
onlimited--cost another million; thar's all the pay gravel you want
in and outer the ground--call it two millions more. Now my time's too
vally'ble; my professhun's too high-toned to WORK mines. I MAKE 'em.
Hand me over a check for ten millions and call it square, and work it
for yourself.' So Capital hands over the money and waltzes down to run
the mine, and you original locators walks round with yer hands in yer
pockets a-top of your six million profit, and you let's Capital take the
work and the responsibility."

Preposterous as this seemed from the lips of Whiskey Dick, Christie
had a haunting suspicion that it was not greatly unlike the theories
expounded by the clever young banker who had been her escort. She did
not interrupt his flow of reminiscent criticism; when he paused for
breath, she said, quietly:

"I met Mr. George Kearney the other day in the country."

Whiskey Dick stopped awkwardly, glanced hurriedly at Christie, and
coughed behind his handkerchief.

"Mr. Kearney--eh--er--certengly--yes--er--met him, you say. Was
he--er--er--well?"

"In health, yes; but otherwise he has lost everything," said Christie,
fixing her eyes on the embarrassed Dick.

"Yes--er--in course--in course--" continued Dick, nervously glancing
round the apartment as if endeavoring to find an opening to some less
abrupt statement of the fact.

"And actually reduced to take some menial employment," added Christie,
still regarding Dick with her clear glance.

"That's it--that's just it," said Dick, beaming as he suddenly found his
delicate and confidential opportunity. "That's it, Miss Christie; that's
just what I was sayin' to the boys. 'Ez it the square thing,' sez I,
'jest because George hez happened to hypothecate every dollar he has,
or expects to hev, to put into them works, only to please Mr. Carr, and
just because he don't want to distress that intelligent gentleman by
letting him see he's dead broke--for him to go and demean himself and
Devil's Ford by rushing away and hiring out as a Mexican vaquero
on Mexican wages? Look,' sez I, 'at the disgrace he brings upon a
high-toned, fash'nable girl, at whose side he's walked and danced, and
passed rings, and sentiments, and bokays in the changes o' the cotillion
and the mizzourka. And wot,' sez I, 'if some day, prancing along in a
fash'nable cavalcade, she all of a suddents comes across him drivin' a
Mexican steer?' That's what I said to the boys. And so you met him, Miss
Christie, as usual," continued Dick, endeavoring under the appearance
of a large social experience to conceal an eager anxiety to know the
details--"so you met him; and, in course, you didn't let on yer knew
him, so to speak, nat'rally, or p'raps you kinder like asked him to fix
your saddle-girth, and give him a five-dollar piece--eh?"

Christie, who had risen and gone to the window, suddenly turned a very
pale face and shining eyes on Dick.

"Mr. Hall," she said, with a faint attempt at a smile, "we are old
friends, and I feel I can ask you a favor. You once before acted as our
escort--it was for a short but a happy time--will you accept a larger
trust? My father is busy in Sacramento for the mine: will you, without
saying anything to anybody, take Jessie and me back at once to Devil's
Ford?"

"Will I? Miss Christie," said Dick, choking between an intense
gratification and a desire to keep back its vulgar exhibition, "I shall
be proud!"

"When I say keep it a secret"--she hesitated--"I don't mean that I
object to your letting Mr. Kearney, if you happen to know where he is,
understand that we are going back to Devil's Ford."

"Cert'nly--nat'rally," said Dick, waving his hand gracefully;
"sorter drop him a line, saying that bizness of a social and delicate
nature--being the escort of Miss Christie and Jessie Carr to Devil's
Ford--prevents my having the pleasure of calling."

"That will do very well, Mr. Hall," said Christie, faintly smiling
through her moist eyelashes. "Then will you go at once and secure
tickets for to-night's boat, and bring them here? Jessie and I will
arrange everything else."

"Cert'nly," said Dick impulsively, and preparing to take a graceful
leave.

"We'll be impatient until you return with the tickets," said Christie
graciously.

Dick shook hands gravely, got as far as the door, and paused.

"You think it better to take the tickets now?" he said dubiously.

"By all means," said Christie impetuously. "I've set my heart on going
to-night--and unless you secure berths early--"

"In course--in course," interrupted Dick nervously. "But--"

"But what?" said Christie impatiently.

Dick hesitated, shut the door carefully, and, looking round the
room, lightly shook out his handkerchief, apparently flicked away an
embarrassing suggestion, and said, with a little laugh:

"It's ridiklous, perfectly ridiklous, Miss Christie; but not bein' in
the habit of carryin' ready money, and havin' omitted to cash a draft on
Wells, Fargo & Co.--"

"Of course," said Christie rapidly. "How forgetful I am! Pray forgive
me, Mr. Hall. I didn't think. I'll run up and get it from our host; he
will be glad to be our banker."

"One moment, Miss Christie," said Dick lightly, as his thumb and finger
relaxed in his waistcoat pocket over the only piece of money in the
world that had remained to him after his extravagant purchase of
Christie's saffrona rose, "one moment: in this yer monetary transaction,
if you like, you are at liberty to use MY name."




CHAPTER VIII


As Christie and Jessie Carr looked from the windows of the coach, whose
dust-clogged wheels were slowly dragging them, as if reluctant, nearer
the last stage of their journey to Devil's Ford, they were conscious
of a change in the landscape, which they could not entirely charge upon
their changed feelings. The few bared open spaces on the upland, the
long stretch of rocky ridge near the summit, so vivid and so velvety
during their first journey, were now burnt and yellow; even the brief
openings in the forest were seared as if by a hot iron in the scorching
rays of a half year's sun. The pastoral slopes of the valley below were
cloaked in lustre-leather: the rare watercourses along the road had
faded from the waiting eye and ear; it seemed as if the long and dry
summer had even invaded the close-set ranks of pines, and had blown a
simoom breath through the densest woods, leaving its charred red ashes
on every leaf and spray along the tunnelled shade. As they leaned out
of the window and inhaled the half-dead spices of the evergreens, they
seemed to have entered the atmosphere of some exhausted passion--of some
fierce excitement that was even now slowly burning itself out.

It was a relief at last to see the straggling houses of Devil's Ford far
below come once more into view, as they rounded the shoulder of Devil's
Spur and began the long descent. But as they entered the town a change
more ominous and startling than the desiccation of the landscape
forced itself upon them. The town was still there, but where were
the inhabitants? Four months ago they had left the straggling street
thronged with busy citizens--groups at every corner, and a chaos
of merchandise and traders in the open plaza or square beside the
Presbyterian church. Now all was changed. Only a few wayfarers lifted
their heads lazily as the coach rattled by, crossing the deserted square
littered with empty boxes, and gliding past empty cabins or vacant shop
windows, from which not only familiar faces, but even the window sashes
themselves, were gone. The great unfinished serpent-like flume, crossing
the river on gigantic trestles, had advanced as far as the town,
stooping over it like some enormous reptile that had sucked its life
blood and was gorged with its prey.

Whiskey Dick, who had left the stage on the summit to avail himself of
a shorter foot trail to the house, that would give him half an hour's
grace to make preparations, met them at the stage office with a buggy.
A glance at the young girls, perhaps, convinced him that the graces of
elegant worldly conversation were out of place with the revelation he
read on their faces. Perhaps, he, too, was a trifle indisposed. The
short journey to the house was made in profound silence.

The villa had been repainted and decorated, and it looked fresher, and
even, to their preoccupied minds, appeared more attractive than ever.
Thoughtful hands had taken care of the vines and rose-bushes on the
trellises; water--that precious element in Devil's Ford--had not been
spared in keeping green through the long drought the plants which the
girls had so tenderly nurtured. It was the one oasis in which the summer
still lingered; and yet a singular sense of loss came over the girls as
they once more crossed its threshold. It seemed no longer their own.

"Ef I was you, Miss Christie, I'd keep close to the house for a day or
two, until--until--things is settled," said Dick; "there's a heap o'
tramps and sich cattle trapsin' round. P'raps you wouldn't feel so
lonesome if you was nearer town--for instance, 'bout wher' you useter
live."

"In the dear old cabin," said Christie quickly; "I remember it; I wish
we were there now."

"Do you really? Do you?" said Whiskey Dick, with suddenly twinkling
eyes. "That's like you to say it. That's what I allus said," continued
Dick, addressing space generally; "if there's any one ez knows how
to come square down to the bottom rock without flinchin', it's your
high-toned, fash'nable gals. But I must meander back to town, and let
the boys know you're in possession, safe and sound. It's right mean that
Fairfax and Mattingly had to go down to Lagrange on some low business
yesterday, but they'll be back to-morrow. So long."

Left alone, the girls began to realize their strange position. They had
conceived no settled plan. The night they left San Francisco they had
written an earnest letter to their father, telling him that on learning
the truth about the reverses of Devil's Ford, they thought it their duty
to return and share them with others, without obliging him to prefer the
request, and with as little worry to him as possible. He would find them
ready to share his trials, and in what must be the scene of their work
hereafter.

"It will bring father back," said Christie; "he won't leave us here
alone; and then together we must come to some understanding with
him--with THEM--for somehow I feel as if this house belonged to us no
longer."

Her surmise was not far wrong. When Mr. Carr arrived hurriedly from
Sacramento the next evening, he found the house deserted. His daughters
were gone; there were indications that they had arrived, and, for some
reason, suddenly departed. The vague fear that had haunted his guilty
soul after receiving their letter, and during his breathless journey,
now seemed to be realized. He was turning from the empty house, whose
reproachful solitude frightened him, when he was confronted on the
threshold by the figure of Fairfax Munroe.

"I came to the stage office to meet you," he said; "you must have left
the stage at the summit."

"I did," said Carr angrily. "I was anxious to meet my daughters quickly,
to know the reason of their foolish alarm, and to know also who had been
frightening them. Where are they?"

"They are safe in the old cabin beyond, that has been put up ready to
receive them again," said Fairfax quietly.

"But what is the meaning of this? Why are they not here?" demanded Carr,
hiding his agitation in a burst of querulous rage.

"Do YOU ask, Mr. Carr?" said Fairfax sadly. "Did you expect them to
remain here until the sheriff took possession? No one knows better than
yourself that the money advanced you on the deeds of this homestead has
never been repaid."

Carr staggered, but recovered himself with feeble violence.

"Since you know so much of my affairs, how do you know that this claim
will ever be pressed for payment? How do you know it is not the advance
of a--a--friend?"

"Because I have seen the woman who advanced it," said Fairfax
hopelessly. "She was here to look at the property before your daughters
came."

"Well?" said Carr nervously.

"Well! You force me to tell you something I should like to forget. You
force me to anticipate a disclosure I expected to make to you only when
I came to ask permission to woo your daughter Jessie; and when I tell
you what it is, you will understand that I have no right to criticise
your conduct. I am only explaining my own."

"Go on," said Carr impatiently.

"When I first came to this country, there was a woman I loved
passionately. She treated me as women of her kind only treat men like
me; she ruined me, and left me. That was four years ago. I love your
daughter, Mr. Carr, but she has never heard it from my lips. I would not
woo her until I had told you all. I have tried to do it ere this, and
failed. Perhaps I should not now, but--"

"But what?" said Carr furiously; "speak out!"

"But this. Look!" said Fairfax, producing from his pocket the packet of
letters Jessie had found; "perhaps you know the handwriting?"

"What do you mean?" gasped Carr.

"That woman--my mistress--is the woman who advanced you money, and who
claims this house."


The interview, and whatever came of it, remained a secret with the two
men. When Mr. Carr accepted the hospitality of the old cabin again, it
was understood that he had sacrificed the new house and its furniture
to some of the more pressing debts of the mine, and the act went far to
restore his waning popularity. But a more genuine feeling of relief was
experienced by Devil's Ford when it was rumored that Fairfax Munroe had
asked for the hand of Jessie Carr, and that some promise contingent upon
the equitable adjustment of the affairs of the mine had been given
by Mr. Carr. To the superstitious mind of Devil's Ford and its few
remaining locators, this new partnership seemed to promise that unity
of interest and stability of fortune that Devil's Ford had lacked. But
nothing could be done until the rainy season had fairly set in; until
the long-looked-for element that was to magically separate the gold from
the dross in those dull mounds of dust and gravel had come of its own
free will, and in its own appointed channels, independent of the feeble
auxiliaries that had hopelessly riven the rocks on the hillside, or hung
incomplete and unfinished in lofty scaffoldings above the settlement.

The rainy season came early. At first in gathered mists on the higher
peaks that were lifted in the morning sun only to show a fresher field
of dazzling white below; in white clouds that at first seemed to be mere
drifts blown across from those fresh snowfields, and obscuring the
clear blue above; in far-off murmurs in the hollow hills and gulches;
in nearer tinkling melody and baby prattling in the leaves. It came
with bright flashes of sunlight by day, with deep, monotonous shadow at
night; with the onset of heavy winds, the roar of turbulent woods,
the tumultuous tossing of leafy arms, and with what seemed the silent
dissolution of the whole landscape in days of steady and uninterrupted
downfall. It came extravagantly, for every canyon had grown into a
torrent, every gulch a waterspout, every watercourse a river, and all
pouring into the North Fork, that, rushing past the settlement, seemed
to threaten it with lifted crest and flying mane. It came dangerously,
for one night the river, leaping the feeble barrier of Devil's Ford,
swept away houses and banks, scattered with unconscious irony the
laboriously collected heaps of gravel left for hydraulic machinery, and
spread out a vast and silent lake across the submerged flat.

In the hurry and confusion of that night the girls had thrown open their
cabin to the escaping miners, who hurried along the slope that was now
the bank of the river. Suddenly Christie felt her arm grasped, and she
was half-led, half-dragged, into the inner room. Her father stood before
her.

"Where is George Kearney?" he asked tremulously.

"George Kearney!" echoed Christie, for a moment believing the excitement
had turned her father's brain. "You know he is not here; he is in San
Francisco."

"He is here--I tell you," said Carr impatiently; "he has been here ever
since the high water, trying to save the flume and reservoir."

"George--here!" Christie could only gasp.

"Yes! He passed here a few moments ago, to see if you were all safe,
and he has gone on towards the flume. But what he is trying to do is
madness. If you see him, implore him to do no more. Let him abandon the
accursed flume to its fate. It has worked already too much woe upon us
all; why should it carry his brave and youthful soul down with it?"

The words were still ringing in her ears, when he suddenly passed away,
with the hurrying crowd. Scarcely knowing what she did, she ran out,
vaguely intent only on one thought, seeking only the one face, lately
so dear in recollection that she felt she would die if she never saw it
again. Perplexed by confused voices in the woods, she lost track of
the crowd, until the voices suddenly were raised in one loud outcry,
followed by the crashing of timber, the splashing of water, a silence,
and then a dull, continuous roar. She ran vaguely on in the direction of
the reservoir, with her father's injunction still in her mind, until a
terrible idea displaced it, and she turned at right angles suddenly, and
ran towards the slope leading down to the submerged flat. She had barely
left the shelter of the trees behind her before the roar of water
seemed to rise at her very feet. She stopped, dazed, bewildered, and
horror-stricken, on the edge of the slope. It was the slope no longer,
but the bank of the river itself!

Even in the gray light of early morning, and with inexperienced eyes,
she saw all too clearly now. The trestle-work had given way; the curving
mile of flume, fallen into the stream, and, crushed and dammed against
the opposite shore, had absolutely turned the whole river through the
half-finished ditch and partly excavated mine in its way, a few rods
further on to join the old familiar channel. The bank of the river was
changed; the flat had become an island, between which and the slope
where she stood the North Fork was rolling its resistless yellow
torrent. As she gazed spellbound, a portion of the slope beneath her
suddenly seemed to sink and crumble, and was swallowed up in the rushing
stream. She heard a cry of warning behind her, but, rooted to the spot
by a fearful fascination, she heeded it not.

Again there was a sudden disruption, and another part of the slope sank
to rise no more; but this time she felt herself seized by the waist and
dragged back. It was her father standing by her side.

He was flushed and excited, gazing at the water with a strange
exultation.

"Do you see it? Do you know what has happened?" he asked quickly.

"The flume has fallen and turned the river," said Christie hurriedly.
"But--have you seen him--is he safe?"

"He--who?" he answered vacantly.

"George Kearney!"

"He is safe," he said impatiently. "But, do you see, Christie? Do you
know what this means?"

He pointed with his tremulous hand to the stream before them.

"It means we are ruined," said Christie coldly.

"Nothing of the kind! It means that the river is doing the work of the
flume. It is sluicing off the gravel, deepening the ditch, and altering
the slope which was the old bend of the river. It will do in ten minutes
the work that would take us a year. If we can stop it in time, or
control it, we are safe; but if we can not, it will carry away the bed
and deposit with the rest, and we are ruined again."

With a gesture of impotent fury, he dashed away in the direction of an
equally excited crowd, that on a point of the slope nearer the island
were gesticulating and shouting to a second group of men, who on the
opposite shore were clambering on over the choked debris of the flume
that had dammed and diverted the current. It was evident that the same
idea had occurred to them, and they were risking their lives in the
attempt to set free the impediments. Shocked and indignant as Christie
had been at the degrading absorption of material interests at such
a moment, the element of danger lifted the labors of these men into
heroism, and she began to feel a strange exultation as she watched them.
Under the skilful blows of their axes, in a few moments the vast body
of drift began to disintegrate, and then to swing round and move towards
the old channel. A cheer went up, but as suddenly died away again. An
overlapping fringe of wreckage had caught on the point of the island and
arrested the whole mass.

The men, who had gained the shore with difficulty, looked back with a
cry of despair. But the next moment from among them leaped a figure,
alert, buoyant, invincible, and, axe in hand, once more essayed the
passage. Springing from timber to timber, he at last reached the point
of obstruction. A few strokes of the axe were sufficient to clear it;
but at the first stroke it was apparent that the striker was also losing
his hold upon the shore, and that he must inevitably be carried away
with the tossing debris. But this consideration did not seem to affect
him; the last blow was struck, and as the freed timbers rolled on,
over and over, he boldly plunged into the flood. Christie gave a little
cry--her heart had bounded with him; it seemed as if his plunge had
splashed the water in her eyes. He did not come to the surface until he
had passed the point below where her father stood, and then struggling
feebly, as if stunned or disabled by a blow. It seemed to her that he
was trying to approach the side of the river where she was. Would he do
it? Could she help him? She was alone; he was hidden from the view of
the men on the point, and no succor could come from them. There was a
fringe of alder nearly opposite their cabin that almost overhung the
stream. She ran to it, clutched it with a frantic hand, and, leaning
over the boiling water, uttered for the first time his name:

"George!"

As if called to the surface by the magic of her voice, he rose a few
yards from her in mid-current, and turned his fading eyes towards the
bank. In another moment he would have been swept beyond her reach, but
with a supreme effort he turned on one side; the current, striking him
sideways, threw him towards the bank, and she caught him by his sleeve.
For an instant it seemed as if she would be dragged down with him. For
one dangerous moment she did not care, and almost yielded to the spell;
but as the rush of water pressed him against the bank, she recovered
herself, and managed to lift him beyond its reach. And then she sat
down, half-fainting, with his white face and damp curls upon her breast.

"George, darling, speak to me! Only one word! Tell me, have I saved
you?"

His eyes opened. A faint twinkle of the old days came to them--a boyish
smile played upon his lips.

"For yourself--or Jessie?"

She looked around her with a little frightened air. They were alone.
There was but one way of sealing those mischievous lips, and she found
it!


"That's what I allus said, gentlemen," lazily remarked Whiskey Dick,
a few weeks later, leaning back against the bar, with his glass in
his hand. "'George,' sez I, 'it ain't what you SAY to a fash'nable,
high-toned young lady; it's what you DOES ez makes or breaks you.' And
that's what I sez gin'rally o' things in the Ford. It ain't what Carr
and you boys allows to do; it's the gin'ral average o' things ez IS done
that gives tone to the hull, and hez brought this yer new luck to you
all!"

========================================
========================================

THE HERITAGE OF DEDLOW MARSH and Other Tales


by

Bret Harte




CONTENTS.

  THE HERITAGE OF DEDLOW MARSH
  A KNIGHT-ERRANT OF THE FOOT-HILLS
  A SECRET OF TELEGRAPH HILL
  CAPTAIN JIM'S FRIEND



THE HERITAGE OF DEDLOW MARSH.

I.

The sun was going down on the Dedlow Marshes.  The tide was following
it fast as if to meet the reddening lines of sky and water in the west,
leaving the foreground to grow blacker and blacker every moment, and to
bring out in startling contrast the few half-filled and half-lit pools
left behind and forgotten.  The strong breath of the Pacific fanning
their surfaces at times kindled them into a dull glow like dying
embers.  A cloud of sand-pipers rose white from one of the nearer
lagoons, swept in a long eddying ring against the sunset, and became a
black and dropping rain to seaward.  The long sinuous line of channel,
fading with the light and ebbing with the tide, began to give off here
and there light puffs of gray-winged birds like sudden exhalations.
High in the darkening sky the long arrow-headed lines of geese and
'brant' pointed towards the upland.  As the light grew more uncertain
the air at times was filled with the rush of viewless and melancholy
wings, or became plaintive with far-off cries and lamentations.  As the
Marshes grew blacker the far-scattered tussocks and accretions on its
level surface began to loom in exaggerated outline, and two human
figures, suddenly emerging erect on the bank of the hidden channel,
assumed the proportion of giants.

When they had moored their unseen boat, they still appeared for some
moments to be moving vaguely and aimlessly round the spot where they
had disembarked.  But as the eye became familiar with the darkness it
was seen that they were really advancing inland, yet with a slowness of
progression and deviousness of course that appeared inexplicable to the
distant spectator.  Presently it was evident that this seemingly even,
vast, black expanse was traversed and intersected by inky creeks and
small channels, which made human progression difficult and dangerous.
As they appeared nearer and their figures took more natural
proportions, it could be seen that each carried a gun; that one was a
young girl, although dressed so like her companion in shaggy pea-jacket
and sou'wester as to be scarcely distinguished from him above the short
skirt that came halfway down her high india-rubber fishing-boots.  By
the time they had reached firmer ground, and turned to look back at the
sunset, it could be also seen that the likeness between their faces was
remarkable.  Both, had crisp, black, tightly curling hair; both had
dark eyes and heavy eyebrows; both had quick vivid complexions,
slightly heightened by the sea and wind.  But more striking than their
similarity of coloring was the likeness of expression and bearing.
Both wore the same air of picturesque energy; both bore themselves with
a like graceful effrontery and self-possession.

The young man continued his way.  The young girl lingered for a moment
looking seaward, with her small brown hand lifted to shade her eyes,--a
precaution which her heavy eyebrows and long lashes seemed to render
utterly gratuitous.

"Come along, Mag.  What are ye waitin' for?" said the young man
impatiently.

"Nothin'.  Lookin' at that boat from the Fort."  Her clear eyes were
watching a small skiff, invisible to less keen-sighted observers,
aground upon a flat near the mouth of the channel. "Them chaps will
have a high ole time gunnin' thar, stuck in the mud, and the tide goin'
out like sixty!"

"Never you mind the sodgers," returned her companion, aggressively,
"they kin take care o' their own precious skins, or Uncle Sam will do
it for 'em, I reckon.  Anyhow the people--that's you and me, Mag--is
expected to pay for their foolishness.  That's what they're sent yer
for.  Ye oughter to be satisfied with that," he added with deep sarcasm.

"I reckon they ain't expected to do much off o' dry land, and they
can't help bein' queer on the water," returned the young girl with a
reflecting sense of justice.

"Then they ain't no call to go gunnin', and wastin' Guv'nment powder on
ducks instead o' Injins."

"Thet's so," said the girl thoughtfully.  "Wonder ef Guv'nment pays for
them frocks the Kernel's girls went cavortin' round Logport in last
Sunday--they looked like a cirkis."

"Like ez not the old Kernel gets it outer contracts--one way or
another.  WE pay for it all the same," he added gloomily.

"Jest the same ez if they were MY clothes," said the girl, with a
quick, fiery, little laugh, "ain't it?  Wonder how they'd like my
sayin' that to 'em when they was prancin' round, eh, Jim?"

But her companion was evidently unprepared for this sweeping feminine
deduction, and stopped it with masculine promptitude.

"Look yer--instead o' botherin' your head about what the Fort girls
wear, you'd better trot along a little more lively.  It's late enough
now."

"But these darned boots hurt like pizen," said the girl, limping. "They
swallowed a lot o' water over the tops while I was wadin' down there,
and my feet go swashin' around like in a churn every step."

"Lean on me, baby," he returned, passing his arm around her waist, and
dropping her head smartly on his shoulder.  "Thar!"  The act was
brotherly and slightly contemptuous, but it was sufficient to at once
establish their kinship.

They continued on thus for some moments in silence, the girl, I fear,
after the fashion of her sex, taking the fullest advantage of this
slightly sentimental and caressing attitude.  They were moving now
along the edge of the Marsh, parallel with the line of rapidly fading
horizon, following some trail only known to their keen youthful eyes.
It was growing darker and darker.  The cries of the sea-birds had
ceased; even the call of a belated plover had died away inland; the
hush of death lay over the black funereal pall of marsh at their side.
The tide had run out with the day.  Even the sea-breeze had lulled in
this dead slack-water of all nature, as if waiting outside the bar with
the ocean, the stars, and the night.

Suddenly the girl stopped and halted her companion.  The faint far
sound of a bugle broke the silence, if the idea of interruption could
have been conveyed by the two or three exquisite vibrations that seemed
born of that silence itself, and to fade and die in it without break or
discord.  Yet it was only the 'retreat' call from the Fort two miles
distant and invisible.

The young girl's face had become irradiated, and her small mouth half
opened as she listened.  "Do you know, Jim," she said with a
confidential sigh, "I allus put words to that when I hear it--it's so
pow'ful pretty.  It allus goes to me like this: 'Goes the day, Far
away, With the light, And the night Comes along--Comes along--Comes
along--Like a-a so-o-ong.'"  She here lifted her voice, a sweet, fresh,
boyish contralto, in such an admirable imitation of the bugle that her
brother, after the fashion of more select auditors, was for a moment
quite convinced that the words meant something.  Nevertheless, as a
brother, it was his duty to crush this weakness.  "Yes; and it
says:'shut your head, Go to bed,'" he returned irascibly; "and YOU'D
better come along, if we're goin' to hev any supper.  There's Yeller
Bob hez got ahead of us over there with the game already."

The girl glanced towards a slouching burdened figure that now appeared
to be preceding them, straightened herself suddenly, and then looked
attentively towards the Marsh.

"Not the sodgers again?" said her brother impatiently.

"No," she said quickly; "but if that don't beat anythin'!  I'd hev
sworn, Jim, that Yeller Bob was somewhere behind us.  I saw him only
jest now when 'Taps' sounded, somewhere over thar."  She pointed with a
half-uneasy expression in quite another direction from that in which
the slouching Yellow Bob had just loomed.

"Tell ye what, Mag, makin' poetry outer bugle calls hez kinder muddled
ye.  THAT'S Yeller Bob ahead, and ye orter know Injins well enuff by
this time to remember that they allus crop up jest when ye don't expect
them.  And there's the bresh jest afore us.  Come!"

The 'bresh,' or low bushes, was really a line of stunted willows and
alders that seemed to have gradually sunk into the level of the plain,
but increased in size farther inland, until they grew to the height and
density of a wood.  Seen from the channel it had the appearance of a
green cape or promontory thrust upon the Marsh. Passing through its
tangled recesses, with the aid of some unerring instinct, the two
companions emerged upon another and much larger level that seemed as
illimitable as the bay.  The strong breath of the ocean lying just
beyond the bar and estuary they were now facing came to them salt and
humid as another tide.  The nearer expanse of open water reflected the
after-glow, and lightened the landscape.  And between the two wayfarers
and the horizon rose, bleak and startling, the strange outlines of
their home.

At first it seemed a ruined colonnade of many pillars, whose base and
pediment were buried in the earth, supporting a long parallelogram of
entablature and cornices.  But a second glance showed it to be a
one-storied building, upheld above the Marsh by numberless piles placed
at regular distances; some of them sunken or inclined from the
perpendicular, increasing the first illusion. Between these pillars,
which permitted a free circulation of air, and, at extraordinary tides,
even the waters of the bay itself, the level waste of marsh, the bay,
the surges of the bar, and finally the red horizon line, were
distinctly visible.  A railed gallery or platform, supported also on
piles, and reached by steps from the Marsh, ran around the building,
and gave access to the several rooms and offices.

But if the appearance of this lacustrine and amphibious dwelling was
striking, and not without a certain rude and massive grandeur, its
grounds and possessions, through which the brother and sister were
still picking their way, were even more grotesque and remarkable.  Over
a space of half a dozen acres the flotsam and jetsam of years of tidal
offerings were collected, and even guarded with a certain care.  The
blackened hulks of huge uprooted trees, scarcely distinguishable from
the fragments of genuine wrecks beside them, were securely fastened by
chains to stakes and piles driven in the marsh, while heaps of broken
and disjointed bamboo orange crates, held together by ropes of fibre,
glistened like ligamented bones heaped in the dead valley.  Masts,
spars, fragments of shell-encrusted boats, binnacles, round-houses and
galleys, and part of the after-deck of a coasting schooner, had ceased
their wanderings and found rest in this vast cemetery of the sea.  The
legend on a wheel-house, the lettering on a stern or bow, served for
mortuary inscription.  Wailed over by the trade winds, mourned by
lamenting sea-birds, once every year the tide visited its lost dead and
left them wet with its tears.

To such a spot and its surroundings the atmosphere of tradition and
mystery was not wanting.  Six years ago Boone Culpepper had built the
house, and brought to it his wife--variously believed to be a gypsy, a
Mexican, a bright mulatto, a Digger Indian, a South Sea princess from
Tahiti, somebody else's wife--but in reality a little Creole woman from
New Orleans, with whom he had contracted a marriage, with other
gambling debts, during a winter's vacation from his home in Virginia.
At the end of two years she had died, succumbing, as differently
stated, from perpetual wet feet, or the misanthropic idiosyncrasies of
her husband, and leaving behind her a girl of twelve and a boy of
sixteen to console him.  How futile was this bequest may be guessed
from a brief summary of Mr. Culpepper's peculiarities.  They were the
development of a singular form of aggrandizement and misanthropy.  On
his arrival at Logport he had bought a part of the apparently valueless
Dedlow Marsh from the Government at less than a dollar an acre,
continuing his singular investment year by year until he was the owner
of three leagues of amphibious domain.  It was then discovered that
this property carried with it the WATER FRONT of divers valuable and
convenient sites for manufactures and the commercial ports of a noble
bay, as well as the natural embarcaderos of some 'lumbering' inland
settlements.  Boone Culpepper would not sell.  Boone Culpepper would
not rent or lease.  Boone Culpepper held an invincible blockade of his
neighbors, and the progress and improvement he despised--granting only,
after a royal fashion, occasional license, revocable at pleasure, in
the shape of tolls, which amply supported him, with the game he shot in
his kingfisher's eyrie on the Marsh.  Even the Government that had made
him powerful was obliged to 'condemn' a part of his property at an
equitable price for the purposes of Fort Redwood, in which the adjacent
town of Logport shared.  And Boone Culpepper, unable to resist the act,
refused to receive the compensation or quit-claim the town.  In his
scant intercourse with his neighbors he always alluded to it as his
own, showed it to his children as part of their strange inheritance,
and exhibited the starry flag that floated from the Fort as a flaunting
insult to their youthful eyes. Hated, feared, and superstitiously
shunned by some, regarded as a madman by others, familiarly known as
'The Kingfisher of Dedlow,' Boone Culpepper was one day found floating
dead in his skiff, with a charge of shot through his head and
shoulders.  The shot-gun lying at his feet at the bottom of the boat
indicated the 'accident' as recorded in the verdict of the coroner's
jury--but not by the people.  A thousand rumors of murder or suicide
prevailed, but always with the universal rider, 'Served him right.' So
invincible was this feeling that but few attended his last rites, which
took place at high water.  The delay of the officiating clergyman lost
the tide; the homely catafalque--his own boat--was left aground on the
Marsh, and deserted by all mourners except the two children.  Whatever
he had instilled into them by precept and example, whatever took place
that night in their lonely watch by his bier on the black marshes, it
was certain that those who confidently looked for any change in the
administration of the Dedlow Marsh were cruelly mistaken.  The old
Kingfisher was dead, but he had left in the nest two young birds, more
beautiful and graceful, it was true, yet as fierce and tenacious of
beak and talon.


II.

Arriving at the house, the young people ascended the outer flight of
wooden steps, which bore an odd likeness to the companion-way of a
vessel, and the gallery, or 'deck,' as it was called--where a number of
nets, floats, and buoys thrown over the railing completed the nautical
resemblance.  This part of the building was evidently devoted to
kitchen, dining-room, and domestic offices; the principal room in the
centre serving as hall or living-room, and communicating on the other
side with two sleeping apartments.  It was of considerable size, with
heavy lateral beams across the ceiling--built, like the rest of the
house, with a certain maritime strength--and looked not unlike a saloon
cabin.  An enormous open Franklin stove between the windows, as large
as a chimney, blazing with drift-wood, gave light and heat to the
apartment, and brought into flickering relief the boarded walls hung
with the spoils of sea and shore, and glittering with gun-barrels.
Fowling-pieces of all sizes, from the long ducking-gun mounted on a
swivel for boat use to the light single-barrel or carbine, stood in
racks against the walls; game-bags, revolvers in their holsters,
hunting and fishing knives in their sheaths, depended from hooks above
them. In one corner stood a harpoon; in another, two or three Indian
spears for salmon.  The carpetless floor and rude chairs and settles
were covered with otter, mink, beaver, and a quantity of valuable
seal-skins, with a few larger pelts of the bear and elk. The only
attempt at decoration was the displayed wings and breasts of the wood
and harlequin duck, the muir, the cormorant, the gull, the gannet, and
the femininely delicate half-mourning of petrel and plover, nailed
against the wall.  The influence of the sea was dominant above all, and
asserted its saline odors even through the spice of the curling
drift-wood smoke that half veiled the ceiling.

A berry-eyed old Indian woman with the complexion of dried salmon; her
daughter, also with berry eyes, and with a face that seemed wholly made
of a moist laugh; 'Yellow Bob,' a Digger 'buck,' so called from the
prevailing ochre markings of his cheek, and 'Washooh,' an ex-chief; a
nondescript in a blanket, looking like a cheap and dirty doll whose
fibrous hair was badly nailed on his carved wooden head, composed the
Culpepper household.  While the two former were preparing supper in the
adjacent dining-room, Yellow Bob, relieved of his burden of game,
appeared on the gallery and beckoned mysteriously to his master through
the window.  James Culpepper went out, returned quickly, and after a
minute's hesitation and an uneasy glance towards his sister, who had
meantime pushed back her sou'wester from her forehead, and without
taking off her jacket had dropped into a chair before the fire with her
back towards him, took his gun noiselessly from the rack, and saying
carelessly that he would be back in a moment, disappeared.

Left to herself, Maggie coolly pulled off her long boots and stockings,
and comfortably opposed to the fire two very pretty feet and ankles,
whose delicate purity was slightly blue-bleached by confinement in the
tepid sea-water.  The contrast of their waxen whiteness with her blue
woolen skirt, and with even the skin of her sunburnt hands and wrists,
apparently amused her, and she sat for some moments with her elbows on
her knees, her skirts slightly raised, contemplating them, and curling
her toes with evident satisfaction.  The firelight playing upon the
rich coloring of her face, the fringe of jet-black curls that almost
met the thick sweep of eyebrows, and left her only a white strip of
forehead, her short upper lip and small chin, rounded but resolute,
completed a piquant and striking figure.  The rich brown shadows on the
smoke-stained walls and ceiling, the occasional starting into relief of
the scutcheons of brilliant plumage, and the momentary glitter of the
steel barrels, made a quaint background to this charming picture.
Sitting there, and following some lingering memory of her tramp on the
Marsh, she hummed to herself a few notes of the bugle call that had
impressed her--at first softly, and finally with the full pitch of her
voice.

Suddenly she stopped.

There was a faint and unmistakable rapping on the floor beneath her.
It was distinct, but cautiously given, as if intended to be audible to
her alone.  For a moment she stood upright, her feet still bare and
glistening, on the otter skin that served as a rug. There were two
doors to the room, one from which her brother had disappeared, which
led to the steps, the other giving on the back gallery, looking inland.
With a quick instinct she caught up her gun and ran to that one, but
not before a rapid scramble near the railing was followed by a cautious
opening of the door.  She was just in time to shut it on the extended
arm and light blue sleeve of an army overcoat that protruded through
the opening, and for a moment threw her whole weight against it.

"A dhrop of whiskey, Miss, for the love of God."

She retained her hold, cocked her weapon, and stepped back a pace from
the door.  The blue sleeve was followed by the rest of the overcoat,
and a blue cap with the infantry blazoning, and the letter H on its
peak.  They were for the moment more distinguishable than the man
beneath them--grimed and blackened with the slime of the Marsh.  But
what could be seen of his mud-stained face was more grotesque than
terrifying.  A combination of weakness and audacity, insinuation and
timidity struggled through the dirt for expression.  His small blue
eyes were not ill-natured, and even the intruding arm trembled more
from exhaustion than passion.

"On'y a dhrop, Miss," he repeated piteously, "and av ye pleeze, quick!
afore I'm stharved with the cold entoirely."

She looked at him intently--without lowering her gun.

"Who are you?"

"Thin, it's the truth I'll tell ye, Miss--whisth then!" he said in a
half-whisper; "I'm a desarter!"

"Then it was YOU that was doggin' us on the Marsh?"

"It was the sarjint I was lavin', Miss."

She looked at him hesitatingly.

"Stay outside there; if you move a step into the room, I'll blow you
out of it."

He stepped back on the gallery.  She closed the door, bolted it, and
still holding the gun, opened a cupboard, poured out a glass of
whiskey, and returning to the door, opened it and handed him the liquor.

She watched him drain it eagerly, saw the fiery stimulant put life into
his shivering frame, trembling hands, and kindle his dull
eye--and--quietly raised her gun again.

"Ah, put it down, Miss, put it down!  Fwhot's the use?  Sure the
bullets yee carry in them oiyes of yours is more deadly!  It's out here
oi'll sthand, glory be to God, all night, without movin' a fut till the
sarjint comes to take me, av ye won't levil them oiyes at me like that.
Ah, whirra! look at that now! but it's a gooddess she is--the livin'
Jaynus of warr, standin' there like a statoo, wid her alybaster fut put
forward."

In her pride and conscious superiority, any suggestion of shame at thus
appearing before a common man and a mendicant was as impossible to her
nature as it would have been to a queen or the goddess of his simile.
His presence and his compliment alike passed her calm modesty
unchallenged.  The wretched scamp recognized the fact and felt its
power, and it was with a superstitious reverence asserting itself
through his native extravagance that he raised his grimy hand to his
cap in military salute and became respectfully rigid.

"Then the sodgers were huntin' YOU?" she said thoughtfully, lowering
her weapon.

"Thrue for you, Miss--they worr, and it's meself that was lyin' flat in
the ditch wid me faytures makin' an illigant cast in the mud--more
betoken, as ye see even now--and the sarjint and his daytail thrampin'
round me.  It was thin that the mortial cold sthruck thro' me mouth,
and made me wake for the whiskey that would resthore me."

"What did you desert fer?"

"Ah, list to that now!  Fwhat did I desart fer?  Shure ev there was the
ghost of an inemy round, it's meself that would be in the front now!
But it was the letthers from me ould mother, Miss, that is sthruck wid
a mortial illness--long life to her!--in County Clare, and me sisthers
in Ninth Avenue in New York, fornint the daypo, that is brekken their
harruts over me listin' in the Fourth Infanthry to do duty in a haythen
wilderness.  Av it was the cavalry--and it's me own father that was in
the Innishkillen Dthragoons, Miss--oi wouldn't moind.  Wid a horse
betune me legs, it's on parade oi'd be now, Miss, and not wandhering
over the bare flure of the Marsh, stharved wid the cold, the thirst,
and hunger, wid the mud and the moire thick on me; facin' an illigant
young leddy as is the ekal ov a Fayld Marshal's darter--not to sphake
ov Kernal Preston's--ez couldn't hold a candle to her."

Brought up on the Spanish frontier, Maggie Culpepper was one of the few
American girls who was not familiar with the Irish race.  The rare
smile that momentarily lit up her petulant mouth seemed to justify the
intruder's praise.  But it passed quickly, and she returned dryly:

"That means you want more drink, suthin' to eat, and clothes. Suppose
my brother comes back and ketches you here?"

"Shure, Miss, he's just now hunten me, along wid his two haythen
Diggers, beyond the laygoon there.  It worr the yellar one that
sphotted me lyin' there in the ditch; it worr only your own oiyes,
Miss--more power to their beauty for that!--that saw me folly him
unbeknownst here; and that desaved them, ye see!"

The young girl remained for an instant silent and thoughtful.

"We're no friends of the Fort," she said finally, "but I don't reckon
for that reason my brother will cotton to YOU.  Stay out thar where ye
are, till I come to ye.  If you hear me singin' again, you'll know he's
come back, and ye'd better scoot with what you've already got, and be
thankful."

She shut the door again and locked it, went into the dining-room,
returned with some provisions wrapped in paper, took a common wicker
flask from the wall, passed into her brother's bedroom, and came out
with a flannel shirt, overalls, and a coarse Indian blanket, and,
reopening the door, placed them before the astonished and delighted
vagabond.  His eye glistened; he began, "Glory be to God," but for once
his habitual extravagance failed him.  Nature triumphed with a more
eloquent silence over his well-worn art.  He hurriedly wiped his
begrimed face and eyes with the shirt she had given him, and catching
the sleeve of her rough pea-jacket in his dirty hand, raised it to his
lips.

"Go!" she said imperiously.  "Get away while you can."

"Av it vas me last words--it's speechless oi am," he stammered, and
disappeared over the railing.

She remained for a moment holding the door half open, and gazing into
the darkness that seemed to flow in like a tide.  Then she shut it, and
going into her bedroom resumed her interrupted toilette.  When she
emerged again she was smartly stockinged and slippered, and even the
blue serge skirt was exchanged for a bright print, with a white fichu
tied around her throat.  An attempt to subdue her rebellious curls had
resulted in the construction from their ruins of a low Norman arch
across her forehead with pillared abutments of ringlets.  When her
brother returned a few moments later she did not look up, but remained,
perhaps a little ostentatiously, bending over the fire.

"Bob allowed that the Fort boat was huntin' MEN--deserters, I reckon,"
said Jim aggrievedly.  "Wanted me to believe that he SAW one on the
Marsh hidin'.  On'y an Injin lie, I reckon, to git a little extra
fire-water, for toting me out to the bresh on a fool's errand."

"Oh, THAT'S where you went!" said Maggie, addressing the fire. "Since
when hev you tuk partnership with the Guv'nment and Kernel Preston to
hunt up and take keer of their property?"

"Well, I ain't goin' to hev such wreckage as they pick up and enlist
set adrift on our marshes, Mag," said Jim decidedly.

"What would you hev done had you ketched him?" said Maggie, looking
suddenly into her brother's face.

"Given him a dose of snipe-shot that he'd remember, and be thankful it
wasn't slugs," said Jim promptly.  Observing a deeper seriousness in
her attitude, he added, "Why, if it was in war-time he'd get a BALL
from them sodgers on sight."

"Yes; but YOU ain't got no call to interfere," said Maggie.

"Ain't I?  Why, he's no better than an outlaw.  I ain't sure that he
hasn't been stealin' or killin' somebody over theer."

"Not that man!" said Maggie impulsively.

"Not what man?" said her brother, facing her quickly.

"Why," returned Maggie, repairing her indiscretion with feminine
dexterity, "not ANY man who might have knocked you and me over on the
marshes in the dusk, and grabbed our guns."

"Wish he'd hev tried it," said the brother, with a superior smile, but
a quickly rising color.  "Where d'ye suppose I'D hev been all the
while?"

Maggie saw her mistake, and for the first time in her life resolved to
keep a secret from her brother--overnight.  "Supper's gettin' cold,"
she said, rising.

They went into the dining-room--an apartment as plainly furnished as
the one they had quitted, but in its shelves, cupboards, and closely
fitting boarding bearing out the general nautical suggestion of the
house--and seated themselves before a small table on which their frugal
meal was spread.  In this tete-a-tete position Jim suddenly laid down
his knife and fork and stared at his sister.

"Hello!"

"What's the matter?" said Maggie, starting slightly.  "How you do skeer
one."

"Who's been prinkin', eh?"

"My ha'r was in kinks all along o' that hat," said Maggie, with a
return of higher color, "and I had to straighten it.  It's a boy's hat,
not a girl's."

"But that necktie and that gown--and all those frills and tuckers?"
continued Jim generalizing, with a rapid twirling of his fingers over
her.  "Are you expectin' Judge Martin, or the Expressman this evening?"

Judge Martin was the lawyer of Logport, who had proven her father's
will, and had since raved about his single interview with the
Kingfisher's beautiful daughter; the Expressman was a young fellow who
was popularly supposed to have left his heart while delivering another
valuable package on Maggie in person, and had "never been the same man
since."  It was a well-worn fraternal pleasantry that had done duty
many a winter's evening, as a happy combination of moral admonition and
cheerfulness.  Maggie usually paid it the tribute of a quick little
laugh and a sisterly pinch, but that evening those marks of approbation
were withheld.

"Jim dear," said she, when their Spartan repast was concluded and they
were reestablished before the living-room fire.  "What was it the
Redwood Mill Kempany offered you for that piece near Dead Man's Slough?"

Jim took his pipe from his lips long enough to say, "Ten thousand
dollars," and put it back again.

"And what do ye kalkilate all our property, letting alone this yer
house, and the driftwood front, is worth all together?"

"Includin' wot the Gov'nment owes us?--for that's all ours, ye know?"
said Jim quickly.

"No--leavin' that out--jest for greens, you know," suggested Maggie.

"Well nigh onter a hundred and seventy-five thousand dollars, I reckon,
by and large."

"That's a heap o' money, Jim!  I reckon old Kernel Preston wouldn't
raise that in a hundred years," continued Maggie, warming her knees by
the fire.

"In five million years," said Jim, promptly sweeping away further
discussion.  After a pause he added, "You and me, Mag, kin see
anybody's pile, and go 'em fifty thousand better."

There were a few moments of complete silence, in which Maggie smoothed
her knees, and Jim's pipe, which seemed to have become gorged and
apoplectic with its owner's wealth, snored unctuously.

"Jim dear, what if--it's on'y an idea of mine, you know--what if you
sold that piece to the Redwood Mill, and we jest tuk that money
and--and--and jest lifted the ha'r offer them folks at Logport? Jest
astonished 'em!  Jest tuk the best rooms in that new hotel, got a hoss
and buggy, dressed ourselves, you and me, fit to kill, and made them
Fort people take a back seat in the Lord's Tabernacle, oncet for all.
You see what I mean, Jim," she said hastily, as her brother seemed to
be succumbing, like his pipe, in apoplectic astonishment, "jest on'y to
SHOW 'em what we COULD do if we keerd.  Lord! when we done it and spent
the money we'd jest snap our fingers and skip back yer ez nat'ral ez
life!  Ye don't think, Jim," she said, suddenly turning half fiercely
upon him, "that I'd allow to LIVE among 'em--to stay a menet after
that!"

Jim laid down his pipe and gazed at his sister with stony deliberation.
"And--what--do--you--kalkilate--to make by all that?" he said with
scornful distinctness.

"Why, jest to show 'em we HAVE got money, and could buy 'em all up if
we wanted to," returned Maggie, sticking boldly to her guns, albeit
with a vague conviction that her fire was weakened through elevation,
and somewhat alarmed at the deliberation of the enemy.

"And you mean to say they don't know it now," he continued with slow
derision.

"No," said Maggie.  "Why, theer's that new school-marm over at Logport,
you know, Jim, the one that wanted to take your picter in your boat for
a young smuggler or fancy pirate or Eyetalian fisherman, and allowed
that you'r handsomed some, and offered to pay you for sittin'--do you
reckon SHE'D believe you owned the land her schoolhouse was built on.
No!  Lots of 'em don't.  Lots of 'em thinks we're poor and low
down--and them ez doesn't, thinks"--

"What?" asked her brother sharply.

"That we're MEAN."

The quick color came to Jim's cheek.  "So," he said, facing her
quickly, "for the sake of a lot of riff-raff and scum that's drifted
here around us--jest for the sake of cuttin' a swell before
them--you'll go out among the hounds ez allowed your mother was a
Spanish nigger or a kanaka, ez called your father a pirate and
landgrabber, ez much as allowed he was shot by some one or killed
himself a purpose, ez said you was a heathen and a looney because you
didn't go to school or church along with their trash, ez kept away from
Maw's sickness ez if it was smallpox, and Dad's fun'ral ez if he was a
hoss-thief, and left you and me to watch his coffin on the marshes all
night till the tide kem back.  And now you--YOU that jined hands with
me that night over our father lyin' there cold and despised--ez if he
was a dead dog thrown up by the tide--and swore that ez long ez that
tide ebbed and flowed it couldn't bring you to them, or them to you
agin!  You now want--what?  What? Why, to go and cast your lot among
'em, and live among 'em, and join in their God-forsaken holler
foolishness, and--and--and"--

"Stop!  It's a lie!  I DIDN'T say that.  Don't you dare to say it!"
said the girl, springing to her feet, and facing her brother in turn,
with flashing eyes.

For a moment the two stared at each other--it might have been as in a
mirror, so perfectly were their passions reflected in each line, shade,
and color of the other's face.  It was as if they had each confronted
their own passionate and willful souls, and were frightened.  It had
often occurred before, always with the same invariable ending.  The
young man's eyes lowered first; the girl's filled with tears.

"Well, ef ye didn't mean that, what did ye mean?" said Jim, sinking,
with sullen apology, back into his chair.

"I--only--meant it--for--for--revenge!" sobbed Maggie.

"Oh!" said Jim, as if allowing his higher nature to be touched by this
noble instinct.  "But I didn't jest see where the revenge kem in."

"No?  But, never mind now, Jim," said Maggie, ostentatiously ignoring,
after the fashion of her sex, the trouble she had provoked; "but to
think--that--that--you thought"--(sobbing).

"But I didn't, Mag"--(caressingly).

With this very vague and impotent conclusion, Maggie permitted herself
to be drawn beside her brother, and for a few moments they plumed each
other's ruffled feathers, and smoothed each other's lifted crests, like
two beautiful young specimens of that halcyon genus to which they were
popularly supposed to belong.  At the end of half an hour Jim rose,
and, yawning slightly, said in a perfunctory way:

"Where's the book?"

The book in question was the Bible.  It had been the self-imposed
custom of these two young people to read aloud a chapter every night as
their one vague formula of literary and religious discipline.  When it
was produced, Maggie, presuming on his affectionate and penitential
condition, suggested that to-night he should pick out "suthin'
interestin'."  But this unorthodox frivolity was sternly put aside by
Jim--albeit, by way of compromise, he agreed to "chance it," i. e.,
open its pages at random.

He did so.  Generally he allowed himself a moment's judicious pause for
a certain chaste preliminary inspection necessary before reading aloud
to a girl.  To-night he omitted that modest precaution, and in a
pleasant voice, which in reading was singularly free from colloquial
infelicities of pronunciation, began at once:

"'Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the Lord, to
the help of the Lord against the mighty.'"

"Oh, you looked first," said Maggie.

"I didn't now--honest Injin!  I just opened."

"Go on," said Maggie, eagerly shoving him and interposing her neck over
his shoulder.

And Jim continued Deborah's wonderful song of Jael and Sisera to the
bitter end of its strong monosyllabic climax.

"There," he said, closing the volume, "that's what I call revenge.
That's the real Scripture thing--no fancy frills theer."

"Yes; but, Jim dear, don't you see that she treated him first--sorter
got round him with free milk and butter, and reg'larly blandished him,"
argued Maggie earnestly.

But Jim declined to accept this feminine suggestion, or to pursue the
subject further, and after a fraternal embrace they separated for the
night.  Jim lingered long enough to look after the fastening of the
door and windows, and Maggie remained for some moments at her casement,
looking across the gallery to the Marsh beyond.

The moon had risen, the tide was half up.  Whatever sign or trace of
alien footprint or occupation had been there was already smoothly
obliterated; even the configuration of the land had changed.  A black
cape had disappeared, a level line of shore had been eaten into by
teeth of glistening silver.  The whole dark surface of the Marsh was
beginning to be streaked with shining veins as if a new life was
coursing through it.  Part of the open bay before the Fort, encroaching
upon the shore, seemed in the moonlight to be reaching a white and
outstretched arm towards the nest of the Kingfisher.


III.

The reveille at Fort Redwood had been supplemented full five minutes by
the voice of Lieutenant George Calvert's servant, before that young
officer struggled from his bed.  His head was splitting, his tongue and
lips were dry and feverish, his bloodshot eyes were shrinking from the
insufferable light of the day, his mind a confused medley of the past
night and the present morning, of cards and wild revelry, and the
vision of a reproachfully trim orderly standing at his door with
reports and orders which he now held composedly in his hand.  For
Lieutenant Calvert had been enjoying a symposium variously known as
"Stag Feed" and "A Wild Stormy Night" with several of his brother
officers, and a sickening conviction that it was not the first or the
last time he had indulged in these festivities.  At that moment he
loathed himself, and then after the usual derelict fashion cursed the
fate that had sent him, after graduating, to a frontier garrison--the
dull monotony of whose duties made the Border horse-play of dissipation
a relief.  Already he had reached the miserable point of envying the
veteran capacities of his superiors and equals.  "If I could drink like
Kirby or Crowninshield, or if there was any other cursed thing a man
could do in this hole," he had wretchedly repeated to himself, after
each misspent occasion, and yet already he was looking forward to them
as part of a 'sub's' duty and worthy his emulation. Already the dream
of social recreation fostered by West Point had been rudely dispelled.
Beyond the garrison circle of Colonel Preston's family and two
officers' wives, there was no society. The vague distrust and civil
jealousy with which some frontier communities regard the Federal power,
heightened in this instance by the uncompromising attitude the
Government had taken towards the settlers' severe Indian policy, had
kept the people of Logport aloof from the Fort.  The regimental band
might pipe to them on Saturdays, but they would not dance.

Howbeit, Lieutenant Calvert dressed himself with uncertain hands but
mechanical regularity and neatness, and, under the automatic training
of discipline and duty, managed to button his tunic tightly over his
feelings, to pull himself together with his sword-belt, compressing a
still cadet-like waist, and to present that indescribable combination
of precision and jauntiness which his brother officers too often
allowed to lapse into frontier carelessness.  His closely clipped light
hair, yet dripping from a plunge in the cold water, had been brushed
and parted with military exactitude, and when surmounted by his cap,
with the peak in an artful suggestion of extra smartness tipped forward
over his eyes, only his pale face--a shade lighter than his little
blonde moustache--showed his last night's excesses.  He was
mechanically reaching for his sword and staring confusedly at the
papers on his table when his servant interrupted:

"Major Bromley arranged that Lieutenant Kirby takes your sash this
morning, as you're not well, sir; and you're to report for special to
the colonel," he added, pointing discreetly to the envelope.

Touched by this consideration of his superior, Major Bromley, who had
been one of the veterans of last night's engagement, Calvert mastered
the contents of the envelope without the customary anathema of
specials, said, "Thank you, Parks," and passed out on the veranda.

The glare of the quiet sunlit quadrangle, clean as a well-swept floor,
the whitewashed walls and galleries of the barrack buildings beyond,
the white and green palisade of officers' cottages on either side, and
the glitter of a sentry's bayonet, were for a moment intolerable to
him.  Yet, by a kind of subtle irony, never before had the genius and
spirit of the vocation he had chosen seemed to be as incarnate as in
the scene before him.  Seclusion, self-restraint, cleanliness,
regularity, sobriety, the atmosphere of a wholesome life, the austere
reserve of a monastery without its mysterious or pensive meditation,
were all there.  To escape which, he had of his own free will
successively accepted a fool's distraction, the inevitable result of
which was, the viewing of them the next morning with tremulous nerves
and aching eyeballs.

An hour later, Lieutenant George Calvert had received his final
instructions from Colonel Preston to take charge of a small detachment
to recover and bring back certain deserters, but notably one, Dennis
M'Caffrey of Company H, charged additionally with mutinous solicitation
and example.  As Calvert stood before his superior, that distinguished
officer, whose oratorical powers had been considerably stimulated
through a long course of "returning thanks for the Army," slightly
expanded his chest and said paternally:

"I am aware, Mr. Calvert, that duties of this kind are somewhat
distasteful to young officers, and are apt to be considered in the
light of police detail; but I must remind you that no one part of a
soldier's duty can be held more important or honorable than another,
and that the fulfilment of any one, however trifling, must, with honor
to himself and security to his comrades, receive his fullest devotion.
A sergeant and a file of men might perform your duty, but I require, in
addition, the discretion, courtesy, and consideration of a gentleman
who will command an equal respect from those with whom his duty brings
him in contact.  The unhappy prejudices which the settlers show to the
military authority here render this, as you are aware, a difficult
service, but I believe that you will, without forgetting the respect
due to yourself and the Government you represent, avoid arousing these
prejudices by any harshness, or inviting any conflict with the civil
authority. The limits of their authority you will find in your written
instructions; but you might gain their confidence, and impress them,
Mr. Calvert, with the idea of your being their AUXILIARY in the
interests of justice--you understand.  Even if you are unsuccessful in
bringing back the men, you will do your best to ascertain if their
escape has been due to the sympathy of the settlers, or even with their
preliminary connivance.  They may not be aware that inciting enlisted
men to desert is a criminal offence; you will use your own discretion
in informing them of the fact or not, as occasion may serve you.  I
have only to add, that while you are on the waters of this bay and the
land covered by its tides, you have no opposition of authority, and are
responsible to no one but your military superiors.  Good-bye, Mr.
Calvert.  Let me hear a good account of you."

Considerably moved by Colonel Preston's manner, which was as paternal
and real as his rhetoric was somewhat perfunctory, Calvert half forgot
his woes as he stepped from the commandant's piazza. But he had to face
a group of his brother officers, who were awaiting him.

"Good-bye, Calvert," said Major Bromley; "a day or two out on grass
won't hurt you--and a change from commissary whiskey will put you all
right.  By the way, if you hear of any better stuff at Westport than
they're giving us here, sample it and let us know.  Take care of
yourself.  Give your men a chance to talk to you now and then, and you
may get something from them, especially Donovan.  Keep your eye on
Ramon.  You can trust your sergeant straight along."

"Good-bye, George," said Kirby.  "I suppose the old man told you that,
although no part of a soldier's duty was better than another, your
service was a very delicate one, just fitted for you, eh?  He always
does when he's cut out some hellish scrub-work for a chap. And told
you, too, that as long as you didn't go ashore, and kept to a
dispatch-boat, or an eight-oared gig, where you couldn't deploy your
men, or dress a line, you'd be invincible."

"He did say something like that," smiled Calvert, with an uneasy
recollection, however, that it was THE part of his superior's speech
that particularly impressed him.

"Of course," said Kirby gravely, "THAT, as an infantry officer, is
clearly your duty."

"And don't forget, George," said Rollins still more gravely, "that,
whatever may befall you, you belong to a section of that numerically
small but powerfully diversified organization--the American Army.
Remember that in the hour of peril you can address your men in any
language, and be perfectly understood.  And remember that when you
proudly stand before them, the eyes not only of your own country, but
of nearly all the others, are upon you! Good-bye, Georgey.  I heard the
major hint something about whiskey. They say that old pirate,
Kingfisher Culpepper, had a stock of the real thing from Robertson
County laid in his shebang on the Marsh just before he died.  Pity we
aren't on terms with them, for the cubs cannot drink it, and might be
induced to sell.  Shouldn't wonder, by the way, if your friend
M'Caffrey was hanging round somewhere there; he always had a keen
scent.  You might confiscate it as an "incitement to desertion," you
know.  The girl's pretty, and ought to be growing up now."

But haply at this point the sergeant stopped further raillery by
reporting the detachment ready; and drawing his sword, Calvert, with a
confused head, a remorseful heart, but an unfaltering step, marched off
his men on his delicate mission.

It was four o'clock when he entered Jonesville.  Following a
matter-of-fact idea of his own, he had brought his men the greater
distance by a circuitous route through the woods, thus avoiding the
ostentatious exposure of his party on the open bay in a well-manned
boat to an extended view from the three leagues of shore and marsh
opposite.  Crossing the stream, which here separated him from the
Dedlow Marsh by the common ferry, he had thus been enabled to halt
unperceived below the settlement and occupy the two roads by which the
fugitives could escape inland.  He had deemed it not impossible that,
after the previous visit of the sergeant, the deserters hidden in the
vicinity might return to Jonesville in the belief that the visit would
not be repeated so soon.  Leaving a part of his small force to patrol
the road and another to deploy over the upland meadows, he entered the
village.  By the exercise of some boyish diplomacy and a certain
prepossessing grace, which he knew when and how to employ, he became
satisfied that the objects of his quest were not THERE--however, their
whereabouts might have been known to the people.  Dividing his party
again, he concluded to take a corporal and a few men and explore the
lower marshes himself.

The preoccupation of duty, exercise, and perhaps, above all, the keen
stimulus of the iodine-laden salt air seemed to clear his mind and
invigorate his body.  He had never been in the Marsh before, and
enjoyed its novelty with the zest of youth.  It was the hour when the
tide of its feathered life was at its flood.  Clouds of duck and teal
passing from the fresh water of the river to the salt pools of the
marshes perpetually swept his path with flying shadows; at times it
seemed as if even the uncertain ground around him itself arose and sped
away on dusky wings.  The vicinity of hidden pools and sloughs was
betrayed by startled splashings; a few paces from their marching feet
arose the sunlit pinions of a swan. The air was filled with
multitudinous small cries and pipings.  In this vocal confusion it was
some minutes before he recognized the voice of one of his out-flankers
calling to the other.

An important discovery had been made.  In a long tongue of bushes that
ran down to the Marsh they had found a mud-stained uniform, complete
even to the cap, bearing the initial of the deserter's company.

"Is there any hut or cabin hereabouts, Schmidt?" asked Calvert.

"Dot vos schoost it, Lefdennun," replied his corporal.  "Dot vos de
shanty from der Kingvisher--old Gulbebber.  I pet a dollar, py
shimminy, dot der men haf der gekommt."

He pointed through the brake to a long, low building that now raised
itself, white in the sunlight, above the many blackened piles.  Calvert
saw in a single reconnoitring glance that it had but one approach--the
flight of steps from the Marsh.  Instructing his men to fall in on the
outer edge of the brake and await his orders, he quickly made his way
across the space and ascended the steps.  Passing along the gallery he
knocked at the front door. There was no response.  He repeated his
knock.  Then the window beside it opened suddenly, and he was
confronted with the double-muzzle of a long ducking-gun.  Glancing
instinctively along the barrels, he saw at their other extremity the
bright eyes, brilliant color, and small set mouth of a remarkably
handsome girl.  It was the fact, and to the credit of his training,
that he paid more attention to the eyes than to the challenge of the
shining tubes before him.

"Jest stop where you are--will you!" said the girl determinedly.

Calvert's face betrayed not the slightest terror or surprise. Immovable
as on parade, he carried his white gloved hand to his cap, and said
gently, "With pleasure."

"Oh yes," said the girl quickly; "but if you move a step I'll jest blow
you and your gloves offer that railin' inter the Marsh."

"I trust not," returned Calvert, smiling.

"And why?"

"Because it would deprive me of the pleasure of a few moments'
conversation with you--and I've only one pair of gloves with me."

He was still watching her beautiful eyes--respectfully, admiringly, and
strategically.  For he was quite convinced that if he DID move she
would certainly discharge one or both barrels at him.

"Where's the rest of you?" she continued sharply.

"About three hundred yards away, in the covert, not near enough to
trouble you."

"Will they come here?"

"I trust not."

"You trust not?" she repeated scornfully.  "Why?

"Because they would be disobeying orders."

She lowered her gun slightly, but kept her black brows levelled at him.
"I reckon I'm a match for YOU," she said, with a slightly contemptuous
glance at his slight figure, and opened the door.  For a moment they
stood looking at each other.  He saw, besides the handsome face and
eyes that had charmed him, a tall slim figure, made broader across the
shoulders by an open pea-jacket that showed a man's red flannel shirt
belted at the waist over a blue skirt, with the collar knotted by a
sailor's black handkerchief, and turned back over a pretty though
sunburnt throat.  She saw a rather undersized young fellow in a jaunty
undress uniform, scant of gold braid, and bearing only the single gold
shoulder-bars of his rank, but scrupulously neat and well fitting.
Light-colored hair cropped close, the smallest of light moustaches,
clear and penetrating blue eyes, and a few freckles completed a picture
that did not prepossess her.  She was therefore the more inclined to
resent the perfect ease and self-possession with which the stranger
carried off these manifest defects before her.

She laid aside the gun, put her hands deep in the pockets of her
pea-jacket, and, slightly squaring her shoulders, said curtly, "What do
you want?"

"A very little information, which I trust it will not trouble you to
give me.  My men have just discovered the uniform belonging to a
deserter from the Fort lying in the bushes yonder.  Can you give me the
slightest idea how it came there?"

"What right have you trapseing over our property?" she said, turning
upon him sharply, with a slight paling of color.

"None whatever."

"Then what did you come for?"

"To ask that permission, in case you would give me no information."

"Why don't you ask my brother, and not a woman?  Were you afraid?"

"He could hardly have done me the honor of placing me in more peril
than you have," returned Calvert, smiling.  "Then I have the pleasure
of addressing Miss Culpepper?"

"I'm Jim Culpepper's sister."

"And, I believe, equally able to give or refuse the permission I ask."

"And what if I refuse?"

"Then I have only to ask pardon for having troubled you, go back, and
return here with the tide.  You don't resist THAT with a shotgun, do
you?" he asked pleasantly.

Maggie Culpepper was already familiar with the accepted theory of the
supreme jurisdiction of the Federal Sea.  She half turned her back upon
him, partly to show her contempt, but partly to evade the domination of
his clear, good-humored, and self-sustained little eyes.

"I don't know anythin' about your deserters, nor what rags o' theirs
happen to be floated up here," she said, angrily, "and don't care to.
You kin do what you like."

"Then I'm afraid I should remain here a little longer, Miss Culpepper;
but my duty"--

"Your wot?" she interrupted, disdainfully.

"I suppose I AM talking shop," he said smilingly.  "Then my business"--

"Your business--pickin' up half-starved runaways!"

"And, I trust, sometimes a kind friend," he suggested, with a grave bow.

"You TRUST?  Look yer, young man," she said, with her quick, fierce,
little laugh, "I reckon you TRUST a heap too much!"  She would like to
have added, "with your freckled face, red hair, and little eyes"--but
this would have obliged her to face them again, which she did not care
to do.

Calvert stepped back, lifted his hand to his cap, still pleasantly, and
then walked gravely along the gallery, down the steps, and towards the
cover.  From her window, unseen, she followed his neat little figure
moving undeviatingly on, without looking to the left or right, and
still less towards the house he had just quitted. Then she saw the
sunlight flash on cross-belt plates and steel barrels, and a light blue
line issued from out the dark green bushes, round the point, and
disappeared.  And then it suddenly occurred to her what she had been
doing!  This, then, was her first step towards that fancy she had so
lately conceived, quarrelled over with her brother, and lay awake last
night to place anew, in spite of all opposition!  This was her
brilliant idea of dazzling and subduing Logport and the Fort!  Had she
grown silly, or what had happened?  Could she have dreamed of the
coming of this whipper-snapper, with his insufferable airs, after that
beggarly deserter?  I am afraid that for a few moments the miserable
fugitive had as small a place in Maggie's sympathy as the redoubtable
whipper-snapper himself.  And now the cherished dream of triumph and
conquest was over!  What a "looney" she had been! Instead of inviting
him in, and outdoing him in "company manners," and "fooling" him about
the deserter, and then blazing upon him afterwards at Logport in the
glory of her first spent wealth and finery, she had driven him away!

And now "he'll go and tell--tell the Fort girls of his hairbreadth
escape from the claws of the Kingfisher's daughter!"

The thought brought a few bitter tears to her eyes, but she wiped them
away.  The thought brought also the terrible conviction that Jim was
right, that there could be nothing but open antagonism between them and
the traducers of their parents, as she herself had instinctively shown!
But she presently wiped that conviction away also, as she had her tears.

Half an hour later she was attracted by the appearance from the windows
of certain straggling blue spots on the upland that seemed moving
diagonally towards the Marsh.  She did not know that it was Calvert's
second "detail" joining him, but believed for a moment that he had not
yet departed, and was strangely relieved.  Still later the frequent
disturbed cries of coot, heron, and marsh-hen, recognizing the presence
of unusual invaders of their solitude, distracted her yet more, and
forced her at last with increasing color and an uneasy sense of shyness
to steal out to the gallery for a swift furtive survey of the Marsh.
But an utterly unexpected sight met her eyes, and kept her motionless.

The birds were rising everywhere and drifting away with querulous
perturbation before a small but augmented blue detachment that was
moving with monotonous regularity towards the point of bushes where she
had seen the young officer previously disappear.  In their midst,
between two soldiers with fixed bayonets, marched the man whom even at
that distance she instantly recognized as the deserter of the preceding
night, in the very clothes she had given him.  To complete her
consternation, a little to the right marched the young officer also,
but accompanied by, and apparently on the most amicable terms with,
Jim--her own brother!

To forget all else and dart down the steps, flying towards the point of
bushes, scarcely knowing why or what she was doing, was to Maggie the
impulse and work of a moment.  When she had reached it the party were
not twenty paces away.  But here a shyness and hesitation again seized
her, and she shrank back in the bushes with an instinctive cry to her
brother inarticulate upon her lips.  They came nearer, they were
opposite to her; her brother Jim keeping step with the invader, and
even conversing with him with an animation she had seldom seen upon his
face--they passed!  She had been unnoticed except by one.  The roving
eye of the deserter had detected her handsome face among the leaves,
slightly turned towards it, and poured out his whole soul in a single
swift wink of eloquent but indescribable confidence.

When they had quite gone, she crept back to the house, a little
reassured, but still tremulous.  When her brother returned at
nightfall, he found her brooding over the fire, in the same attitude as
on the previous night.

"I reckon ye might hev seen me go by with the sodgers," he said,
seating himself beside her, a little awkwardly, and with an unusual
assumption of carelessness.

Maggie, without looking up, was languidly surprised.  He had been with
the soldiers--and where?

"About two hours ago I met this yer Leftenant Calvert," he went on with
increasing awkwardness, "and--oh, I say, Mag--he said he saw you, and
hoped he hadn't troubled ye, and--and--ye saw him, didn't ye?"

Maggie, with all the red of the fire concentrated in her cheek as she
gazed at the flame, believed carelessly "that she had seen a shrimp in
uniform asking questions."

"Oh, he ain't a bit stuck up," said Jim quickly, "that's what I like
about him.  He's ez nat'ral ez you be, and tuck my arm, walkin' around,
careless-like, laffen at what he was doin', ez ef it was a game, and he
wasn't sole commander of forty men.  He's only a year or two older than
me--and--and"--he stopped and looked uneasily at Maggie.

"So ye've bin craw-fishin' agin?" said Maggie, in her deepest and most
scornful contralto.

"Who's craw-fishin'?" he retorted, angrily.

"What's this backen out o' what you said yesterday?  What's all this
trucklin' to the Fort now?"

"What?  Well now, look yer," said Jim, rising suddenly, with
reproachful indignation, "darned if I don't jest tell ye everythin'. I
promised HIM I wouldn't.  He allowed it would frighten ye."

"FRIGHTEN ME!" repeated Maggie contemptuously, nevertheless with her
cheek paling again.  "Frighten me--with what?"

"Well, since yer so cantankerous, look yer.  We've been robbed!"

"Robbed?" echoed Maggie, facing him.

"Yes, robbed by that same deserter.  Robbed of a suit of my clothes,
and my whiskey-flask, and the darned skunk had 'em on. And if it hadn't
bin for that Leftenant Calvert, and my givin' him permission to hunt
him over the Marsh, we wouldn't have caught him."

"Robbed?" repeated Maggie again, vaguely.

"Yes, robbed!  Last night, afore we came home.  He must hev got in yer
while we was comin' from the boat."

"Did, did that Leftenant say so?" stammered Maggie.

"Say it, of course he did! and so do I," continued Jim, impatiently.
"Why, there were my very clothes on his back, and he daren't deny it.
And if you'd hearkened to me jest now, instead of flyin' off in
tantrums, you'd see that THAT'S jest how we got him, and how me and the
Leftenant joined hands in it.  I didn't give him permission to hunt
deserters, but THIEVES.  I didn't help him to ketch the man that
deserted from HIM, but the skunk that took MY clothes.  For when the
Leftenant found the man's old uniform in the bush, he nat'rally
kalkilated he must hev got some other duds near by in some underhand
way.  Don't you see? eh?  Why, look, Mag. Darned if you ain't skeered
after all!  Who'd hev thought it? There now--sit down, dear.  Why,
you're white ez a gull."

He had his arm round her as she sank back in the chair again with a
forced smile.

"There now," he said with fraternal superiority, "don't mind it, Mag,
any more.  Why, it's all over now.  You bet he won't trouble us agin,
for the Leftenant sez that now he's found out to be a thief, they'll
jest turn him over to the police, and he's sure o' getten six months'
state prison fer stealin' and burglarin' in our house.  But"--he
stopped suddenly and looked at his sister's contracted face; "look yer,
Mag, you're sick, that's what's the matter.  Take suthin'"--

"I'm better now," she said with an effort; "it's only a kind o' blind
chill I must hev got on the Marsh last night.  What's that?"

She had risen, and grasping her brother's arm tightly had turned
quickly to the window.  The casement had suddenly rattled.

"It's only the wind gettin' up.  It looked like a sou'wester when I
came in.  Lot o' scud flyin'.  But YOU take some quinine, Mag. Don't
YOU go now and get down sick like Maw."

Perhaps it was this well-meant but infelicitous reference that brought
a moisture to her dark eyes, and caused her lips to momentarily quiver.
But it gave way to a quick determined setting of her whole face as she
turned it once more to the fire, and said, slowly:

"I reckon I'll sleep it off, if I go to bed now.  What time does the
tide fall."

"About three, unless this yer wind piles it up on the Marsh afore then.
Why?"

"I was only wonderin' if the boat wus safe," said Maggie, rising.

"You'd better hoist yourself outside some quinine, instead o' talken
about those things," said Jim, who preferred to discharge his fraternal
responsibility by active medication.  "You aren't fit to read tonight."

"Good night, Jim," she said suddenly, stopping before him.

"Good night, Mag."  He kissed her with protecting and amiable
toleration, generously referring her hot hands and feverish lips to
that vague mystery of feminine complaint which man admits without
indorsing.

They separated.  Jim, under the stimulus of the late supposed robbery,
ostentatiously fastening the doors and windows with assuring comments,
calculated to inspire confidence in his sister's startled heart.  Then
he went to bed.  He lay awake long enough to be pleasantly conscious
that the wind had increased to a gale, and to be lulled again to sleep
by the cosy security of the heavily timbered and tightly sealed
dwelling that seemed to ride the storm like the ship it resembled.  The
gale swept through the piles beneath him and along the gallery as
through bared spars and over wave-washed decks.  The whole structure,
attacked above, below, and on all sides by the fury of the wind, seemed
at times to be lifted in the air.  Once or twice the creaking timbers
simulated the sound of opening doors and passing footsteps, and again
dilated as if the gale had forced a passage through.  But Jim slept on
peacefully, and was at last only aroused by the brilliant sunshine
staring through his window from the clear wind-swept blue arch beyond.

Dressing himself lazily, he passed into the sitting-room and proceeded
to knock at his sister's door, as was his custom; he was amazed to find
it open and the room empty.  Entering hurriedly, he saw that her bed
was undisturbed, as if it had not been occupied, and was the more
bewildered to see a note ostentatiously pinned upon the pillow,
addressed in pencil, in a large school-hand, "To Jim."

Opening it impatiently, he was startled to read as follows:--


"Don't be angry, Jim dear--but it was all my fault--and I didn't tell
you.  I knew all about the deserter, and I gave him the clothes and
things that they say he stole.  It was while you was out that night,
and he came and begged of me, and was mournful and hidjus to behold.  I
thought I was helping him, and getting our revenge on the Fort, all at
the same time.  Don't be mad, Jim dear, and do not be frighted fer me.
I'm going over thar to make it all right--to free HIM of stealing--to
have YOU left out of it all--and take it all on myself.  Don't you be a
bit feared for me.  I ain't skeert of the wind or of going.  I'll close
reef everything, clear the creek, stretch across to Injen Island, hugg
the Point, and bear up fer Logport.  Dear Jim--don't get mad--but I
couldn't bear this fooling of you nor HIM--and that man being took for
stealing any longer!--Your loving sister,

MAGGIE."


With a confused mingling of shame, anger, and sudden fear he ran out on
the gallery.  The tide was well up, half the Marsh had already
vanished, and the little creek where he had moored his skiff was now an
empty shining river.  The water was everywhere--fringing the tussocks
of salt grass with concentric curves of spume and drift, or
tumultuously tossing its white-capped waves over the spreading expanse
of the lower bay.  The low thunder of breakers in the farther estuary
broke monotonously on the ear.  But his eye was fascinated by a dull
shifting streak on the horizon, that, even as he gazed, shuddered,
whitened along its whole line, and then grew ghastly gray again.  It
was the ocean bar.


IV.

"Well, I must say," said Cicely Preston, emphasizing the usual feminine
imperative for perfectly gratuitous statement, as she pushed back her
chair from the commandant's breakfast table, "I MUST really say that I
don't see anything particularly heroic in doing something wrong, lying
about it just to get other folks into trouble, and then rushing off to
do penance in a high wind and an open boat.  But she's pretty, and
wears a man's shirt and coat, and of course THAT settles anything.  But
why earrings and wet white stockings and slippers?  And why that Gothic
arch of front and a boy's hat?  That's what I simply ask;" and the
youngest daughter of Colonel Preston rose from the table, shook out the
skirt of her pretty morning dress, and, placing her little thumbs in
the belt of her smart waist, paused witheringly for a reply.

"You are most unfair, my child," returned Colonel Preston gravely. "Her
giving food and clothes to a deserter may have been only an ordinary
instinct of humanity towards a fellow-creature who appeared to be
suffering, to say nothing of M'Caffrey's plausible tongue.  But her
periling her life to save him from an unjust accusation, and her desire
to shield her brother's pride from ridicule, is altogether praiseworthy
and extraordinary.  And the moral influence of her kindness was strong
enough to make that scamp refuse to tell the plain truth that might
implicate her in an indiscretion, though it saved him from state
prison."

"He knew you wouldn't believe him if he had said the clothes were given
to him," retorted Miss Cicely, "so I don't see where the moral
influence comes in.  As to her periling her life, those Marsh people
are amphibious anyway, or would be in those clothes.  And as to her
motive, why, papa, I heard you say in this very room, and afterwards to
Mr. Calvert, when you gave him instructions, that you believed those
Culpeppers were capable of enticing away deserters; and you forget the
fuss you had with her savage brother's lawyer about that water front,
and how you said it was such people who kept up the irritation between
the Civil and Federal power."

The colonel coughed hurriedly.  It is the fate of all great organizers,
military as well as civil, to occasionally suffer defeat in the family
circle.

"The more reason," he said, soothingly, "why we should correct harsh
judgments that spring from mere rumors.  You should give yourself at
least the chance of overcoming your prejudices, my child.  Remember,
too, that she is now the guest of the Fort."

"And she chooses to stay with Mrs. Bromley!  I'm sure it's quite enough
for you and mamma to do duty--and Emily, who wants to know why Mr.
Calvert raves so about her--without MY going over there to stare."

Colonel Preston shook his head reproachfully, but eventually retired,
leaving the field to the enemy.  The enemy, a little pink in the
cheeks, slightly tossed the delicate rings of its blonde crest, settled
its skirts again at the piano, but after turning over the leaves of its
music book, rose, and walked pettishly to the window.

But here a spectacle presented itself that for a moment dismissed all
other thoughts from the girl's rebellious mind.

Not a dozen yards away, on the wind-swept parade, a handsome young
fellow, apparently halted by the sentry, had impetuously turned upon
him in an attitude of indignant and haughty surprise.  To the quick
fancy of the girl it seemed as if some disguised rustic god had been
startled by the challenge of a mortal.  Under an oilskin hat, like the
petasus of Hermes, pushed back from his white forehead, crisp black
curls were knotted around a head whose beardless face was perfect as a
cameo cutting.  In the close-fitting blue woolen jersey under his open
jacket the clear outlines and youthful grace of his upper figure were
revealed as clearly as in a statue.  Long fishing-boots reaching to his
thighs scarcely concealed the symmetry of his lower limbs.  Cricket and
lawn-tennis, knickerbockers and flannels had not at that period
familiarized the female eye to unfettered masculine outline, and Cicely
Preston, accustomed to the artificial smartness and regularity of
uniform, was perhaps the more impressed by the stranger's lawless grace.

The sentry had repeated his challenge; an angry flush was deepening on
the intruder's cheek.  At this critical moment Cicely threw open the
French windows and stepped upon the veranda.

The sentry saluted the familiar little figure of his colonel's daughter
with an explanatory glance at the stranger.  The young fellow looked
up--and the god became human.

"I'm looking for my sister," he said, half awkwardly, half defiantly;
"she's here, somewhere."

"Yes--and perfectly safe, Mr. Culpepper, I think," said the
arch-hypocrite with dazzling sweetness; "and we're all so delighted.
And so brave and plucky and skillful in her to come all that way--and
for such a purpose."

"Then--you know--all about it"--stammered Jim, more relieved than he
had imagined--"and that I"--

"That you were quite ignorant of your sister helping the deserter. Oh
yes, of course," said Cicely, with bewildering promptitude. "You see,
Mr. Culpepper, we girls are SO foolish.  I dare say I should have done
the same thing in her place, only I should never have had the courage
to do what she did afterwards.  You really must forgive her.  But won't
you come in--DO."  She stepped back, holding the window open with the
half-coaxing air of a spoiled child.  "This way is quickest.  DO come."
As he still hesitated, glancing from her to the house, she added, with
a demure little laugh, "Oh, I forget--this is Colonel Preston's
quarters, and I'm his daughter."

And this dainty little fairy, so natural in manner, so tasteful in
attire, was one of the artificial over-dressed creatures that his
sister had inveighed against so bitterly!  Was Maggie really to be
trusted?  This new revelation coming so soon after the episode of the
deserter staggered him.  Nevertheless he hesitated, looking up with a
certain boyish timidity into Cicely's dangerous eyes.

"Is--is--my sister there?"

"I'm expecting her with my mother every moment," responded this
youthful but ingenious diplomatist sweetly; "she might be here now;
but," she added with a sudden heart-broken flash of sympathy, "I know
HOW anxious you both must be.  I'LL take you to her now.  Only one
moment, please."  The opportunity of leading this handsome savage as it
were in chains across the parade, before everybody, her father, her
mother, her sister, and HIS--was not to be lost. She darted into the
house, and reappeared with the daintiest imaginable straw hat on the
side of her head, and demurely took her place at his side.  "It's only
over there, at Major Bromley's," she said, pointing to one of the
vine-clad cottage quarters; "but you are a stranger here, you know, and
might get lost."

Alas! he was already that.  For keeping step with those fairy-like
slippers, brushing awkwardly against that fresh and pretty skirt, and
feeling the caress of the soft folds; looking down upon the brim of
that beribboned little hat, and more often meeting the upturned blue
eyes beneath it, Jim was suddenly struck with a terrible conviction of
his own contrasting coarseness and deficiencies.  How hideous those
oiled canvas fishing-trousers and pilot jacket looked beside this
perfectly fitted and delicately gowned girl!  He loathed his collar,
his jersey, his turned-back sou'wester, even his height, which seemed
to hulk beside her--everything, in short, that the girl had recently
admired.  By the time that they had reached Major Bromley's door he had
so far succumbed to the fair enchantress and realized her ambition of a
triumphant procession, that when she ushered him into the presence of
half a dozen ladies and gentlemen he scarcely recognized his sister as
the centre of attraction, or knew that Miss Cicely's effusive greeting
of Maggie was her first one.  "I knew he was dying to see you after all
you had BOTH passed through, and I brought him straight here," said the
diminutive Machiavelli, meeting the astonished gaze of her father and
the curious eyes of her sister with perfect calmness, while Maggie,
full of gratitude and admiration of her handsome brother, forgot his
momentary obliviousness, and returned her greeting warmly.
Nevertheless, there was a slight movement of reserve among the
gentlemen at the unlooked-for irruption of this sunburnt Adonis, until
Calvert, disengaging himself from Maggie's side, came forward with his
usual frank imperturbability and quiet tact, and claimed Jim as his
friend and honored guest.

It then came out with that unostentatious simplicity which
characterized the brother and sister, and was their secure claim to
perfect equality with their entertainers, that Jim, on discovering his
sister's absence, and fearing that she might be carried by the current
towards the bar, had actually SWUM THE ESTUARY to Indian Island, and in
an ordinary Indian canoe had braved the same tempestuous passage she
had taken a few hours before.  Cicely, listening to this recital with
rapt attention, nevertheless managed to convey the impression of having
fully expected it from the first.  "Of course he'd have come here; if
she'd only waited," she said, sotto voce, to her sister Emily.

"He's certainly the handsomer of the two," responded that young lady.

"Of course," returned Cicely, with a superior air, "don't you see she
COPIES him."

Not that this private criticism prevented either from vying with the
younger officers in their attentions to Maggie, with perhaps the
addition of an open eulogy of her handsome brother, more or less
invidious in comparison to the officers.  "I suppose it's an active
out-of-door life gives him that perfect grace and freedom," said Emily,
with a slight sneer at the smartly belted Calvert. "Yes; and he don't
drink or keep late hours," responded Cicely significantly.  "His sister
says they always retire before ten o'clock, and that although his
father left him some valuable whiskey he seldom takes a drop of it."
"Therein," gravely concluded Captain Kirby, "lies OUR salvation.  If,
after such a confession, Calvert doesn't make the most of his
acquaintance with young Culpepper to remove that whiskey from his path
and bring it here, he's not the man I take him for."

Indeed, for the moment it seemed as if he was not.  During the next
three or four days, in which Colonel Preston had insisted upon
detaining his guests, Calvert touched no liquor, evaded the evening
poker parties at quarters, and even prevailed upon some of his brother
officers to give them up for the more general entertainment of the
ladies.  Colonel Preston was politician enough to avail himself of the
popularity of Maggie's adventure to invite some of the Logport people
to assist him in honoring their neighbor.  Not only was the old feud
between the Fort and the people thus bridged over, but there was no
doubt that the discipline of the Fort had been strengthened by Maggie's
extravagant reputation as a mediator among the disaffected rank and
file.  Whatever characteristic license the grateful Dennis
M'Caffrey--let off with a nominal punishment--may have taken in his
praise of the "Quane of the Marshes," it is certain that the men
worshiped her, and that the band pathetically begged permission to
serenade her the last night of her stay.

At the end of that time, with a dozen invitations, a dozen
appointments, a dozen vows of eternal friendship, much hand-shaking,
and accompanied by a number of the officers to their boat, Maggie and
Jim departed.  They talked but little on their way home; by some tacit
understanding they did not discuss those projects, only recalling
certain scenes and incidents of their visit.  By the time they had
reached the little creek the silence and nervous apathy which usually
follow excitement in the young seemed to have fallen upon them.  It was
not until after their quiet frugal supper that, seated beside the fire,
Jim looked up somewhat self-consciously in his sister's grave and
thoughtful face.

"Say, Mag, what was that idea o' yours about selling some land, and
taking a house at Logport?"

Maggie looked up, and said passively, "Oh, THAT idea?"

"Yes."

"Why?"

"Well," said Jim somewhat awkwardly, "it COULD be done, you know. I'm
willin'."

As she did not immediately reply, he continued uneasily, "Miss Preston
says we kin get a nice little house that is near the Fort, until we
want to build."

"Oh, then you HAVE talked about it?"

"Yes--that is--why, what are ye thinkin' of, Mag?  Wasn't it YOUR idea
all along?" he said, suddenly facing her with querulous embarrassment.
They had been sitting in their usual evening attitudes of Assyrian
frieze profile, with even more than the usual Assyrian frieze
similarity of feature.

"Yes; but, Jim dear, do you think it the best thing for--for us to do?"
said Maggie, with half-frightened gravity.

At this sudden and startling exhibition of female inconsistency and
inconsequence, Jim was for a moment speechless.  Then he recovered
himself, volubly, aggrievedly, and on his legs.  What DID she mean? Was
he to give up understanding girls--or was it their sole vocation in
life to impede masculine processes and shipwreck masculine conclusions?
Here, after all she said the other night, after they had nearly
"quo'lled" over her "set idees," after she'd "gone over all that
foolishness about Jael and Sisera--and there wasn't any use for
it--after she'd let him run on to them officers all he was goin' to
do--nay, after SHE herself, for he had heard her, had talked to Calvert
about it, she wanted to know NOW if it was best."  He looked at the
floor and the ceiling, as if expecting the tongued and grooved planks
to cry out at this crowning enormity.

The cause of it had resumed her sad gaze at the fire.  Presently,
without turning her head, she reached up her long, graceful arm, and
clasping her brother's neck, brought his face down in profile with her
own, cheek against cheek, until they looked like the double outlines of
a medallion.  Then she said--to the fire:

"Jim, do you think she's pretty?"

"Who?" said Jim, albeit his color had already answered the question.

"You know WHO.  Do you like her?"

Jim here vaguely murmured to the fire that he thought her "kinder
nice," and that she dressed mighty purty.  "Ye know, Mag," he said with
patronizing effusion, "you oughter get some gownds like hers."

"That wouldn't make me like her," said Maggie gravely.

"I don't know about that," said Jim politely, but with an appalling
hopelessness of tone.  After a pause he added slyly, "'Pears to me
SOMEBODY ELSE thought somebody else mighty purty--eh?"

To his discomfiture she did not solicit further information.  After a
pause he continued, still more archly:

"Do you like HIM, Mag?"

"I think he's a perfect gentleman," she said calmly.

He turned his eyes quickly from the glowing fire to her face.  The
cheek that had been resting against his own was as cool as the night
wind that came through the open door, and the whole face was as fixed
and tranquil as the upper stars.


V.

For a year the tide had ebbed and flowed on the Dedlow Marsh unheeded
before the sealed and sightless windows of the "Kingfisher's Nest."
Since the young birds had flown to Logport, even the Indian caretakers
had abandoned the piled dwelling for their old nomadic haunts in the
"bresh."  The high spring tide had again made its annual visit to the
little cemetery of drift-wood, and, as if recognizing another wreck in
the deserted home, had hung a few memorial offerings on the blackened
piles, softly laid a garland of grayish drift before it, and then
sobbed itself out in the salt grass.

From time to time the faint echoes of the Culpeppers' life at Logport
reached the upland, and the few neighbors who had only known them by
hearsay shook their heads over the extravagance they as yet only knew
by report.  But it was in the dead ebb of the tide and the waning
daylight that the feathered tenants of the Marsh seemed to voice dismal
prophecies of the ruin of their old master and mistress, and to give
themselves up to gloomiest lamentation and querulous foreboding.
Whether the traditional "bird of the air" had entrusted his secret to a
few ornithological friends, or whether from a natural disposition to
take gloomy views of life, it was certain that at this hour the vocal
expression of the Marsh was hopeless and despairing.  It was then that
a dejected plover, addressing a mocking crew of sandpipers on a
floating log, seemed to bewail the fortune that was being swallowed up
by the riotous living and gambling debts of Jim.  It was then that the
querulous crane rose, and testily protested against the selling of his
favorite haunt in the sandy peninsula, which only six months of Jim's
excesses had made imperative.  It was then that a mournful curlew, who,
with the preface that he had always been really expecting it,
reiterated the story that Jim had been seen more than once staggering
home with nervous hands and sodden features from a debauch with the
younger officers; it was the same desponding fowl who knew that
Maggie's eyes had more than once filled with tears at Jim's failings,
and had already grown more hollow with many watchings.  It was a flock
of wrangling teal that screamingly discussed the small scandals,
jealous heart-burnings, and curious backbitings that had attended
Maggie's advent into society.  It was the high-flying brent who,
knowing how the sensitive girl, made keenly conscious at every turn of
her defective training and ingenuous ignorance, had often watched their
evening flight with longing gaze, now "honked" dismally at the
recollection.  It was at this hour and season that the usual vague
lamentings of Dedlow Marsh seemed to find at last a preordained
expression.  And it was at such a time, when light and water were both
fading, and the blackness of the Marsh was once more reasserting
itself, that a small boat was creeping along one of the tortuous
inlets, at times half hiding behind the bank like a wounded bird.  As
it slowly penetrated inland it seemed to be impelled by its solitary
occupant in a hesitating uncertain way, as if to escape observation
rather than as if directed to any positive bourn.  Stopping beside a
bank of reeds at last, the figure rose stoopingly, and drew a gun from
between its feet and the bottom of the boat.  As the light fell upon
its face, it could be seen that it was James Culpepper!  James
Culpepper! hardly recognizable in the swollen features, bloodshot eyes,
and tremulous hands of that ruined figure!  James Culpepper, only
retaining a single trace of his former self in his look of set and
passionate purpose!  And that purpose was to kill himself--to be found
dead, as his father had been before him--in an open boat, adrift upon
the Marsh!

It was not the outcome of a sudden fancy.  The idea had first come to
him in a taunting allusion from the drunken lips of one of his ruder
companions, for which he had stricken the offender to the earth.  It
had since haunted his waking hours of remorse and hopeless fatuity; it
had seemed to be the one relief and atonement he could make his devoted
sister; and, more fatuous than all, it seemed to the miserable boy the
one revenge he would take upon the faithless coquette, who for a year
had played with his simplicity, and had helped to drive him to the
distraction of cards and drink. Only that morning Colonel Preston had
forbidden him the house; and now it seemed to him the end had come.  He
raised his distorted face above the reedy bank for a last tremulous and
half-frightened glance at the landscape he was leaving forever.  A
glint in the western sky lit up the front of his deserted dwelling in
the distance, abreast of which the windings of the inlet had
unwittingly led him.  As he looked he started, and involuntarily
dropped into a crouching attitude.  For, to his superstitious terror,
the sealed windows of his old home were open, the bright panes were
glittering with the fading light, and on the outer gallery the familiar
figure of his sister stood, as of old, awaiting his return!  Was he
really going mad, or had this last vision of his former youth been
purposely vouchsafed him?

But, even as he gazed, the appearance of another figure in the
landscape beyond the house proved the reality of his vision, and as
suddenly distracted him from all else.  For it was the apparition of a
man on horseback approaching the house from the upland; and even at
that distance he recognized its well-known outlines.  It was Calvert!
Calvert the traitor!  Calvert, the man whom he had long suspected as
being the secret lover and destined husband of Cicely Preston!
Calvert, who had deceived him with his calm equanimity and his affected
preference for Maggie, to conceal his deliberate understanding with
Cicely.  What was he doing here?  Was he a double traitor, and now
trying to deceive HER--as he had him? And Maggie here!  This sudden
return--this preconcerted meeting. It was infamy!

For a moment he remained stupefied, and then, with a mechanical
instinct, plunged his head and face in the lazy-flowing water, and then
once again rose cool and collected.  The half-mad distraction of his
previous resolve had given way to another, more deliberate, but not
less desperate determination.  He knew now WHY he came there--WHY he
had brought his gun--why his boat had stopped when it did!

Lying flat in the bottom, he tore away fragments of the crumbling bank
to fill his frail craft, until he had sunk it to the gunwale, and below
the low level of the Marsh.  Then, using his hands as noiseless
paddles, he propelled this rude imitation of a floating log slowly past
the line of vision, until the tongue of bushes had hidden him from
view.  With a rapid glance at the darkening flat, he then seized his
gun, and springing to the spongy bank, half crouching half crawling
through reeds and tussocks, he made his way to the brush.  A foot and
eye less experienced would have plunged its owner helpless in the black
quagmire.  At one edge of the thicket he heard hoofs trampling the
dried twigs.  Calvert's horse was already there, tied to a skirting
alder.

He ran to the house, but, instead of attracting attention by ascending
the creaking steps, made his way to the piles below the rear gallery
and climbed to it noiselessly.  It was the spot where the deserter had
ascended a year ago, and, like him, he could see and hear all that
passed distinctly.  Calvert stood near the open door as if departing.
Maggie stood between him and the window, her face in shadow, her hands
clasped tightly behind her.  A profound sadness, partly of the dying
day and waning light, and partly of some vague expiration of their own
sorrow, seemed to encompass them.  Without knowing why, a strange
trembling took the place of James Culpepper's fierce determination, and
a film of moisture stole across his staring eyes.

"When I tell you that I believe all this will pass, and that you will
still win your brother back to you," said Calvert's sad but clear
voice, "I will tell you why--although, perhaps, it is only a part of
that confidence you command me to withhold.  When I first saw you, I
myself had fallen into like dissolute habits; less excusable than he,
for I had some experience of the world and its follies.  When I met
YOU, and fell under the influence of your pure, simple, and healthy
life; when I saw that isolation, monotony, misunderstanding, even the
sense of superiority to one's surroundings could be lived down and
triumphed over, without vulgar distractions or pitiful ambitions; when
I learned to love you--hear me out, Miss Culpepper, I beg you--you
saved ME--I, who was nothing to you, even as I honestly believe you
will still save your brother, whom you love."

"How do you know I didn't RUIN him?" she said, turning upon him
bitterly.  "How do you know that it wasn't to get rid of OUR monotony,
OUR solitude that I drove him to this vulgar distraction, this
pitiful--yes, you were right--pitiful ambition?"

"Because it isn't your real nature," he said quietly.

"My real nature," she repeated with a half savage vehemence that seemed
to be goaded from her by his very gentleness, "my real nature!  What
did HE--what do YOU know of it?--My real nature!--I'll tell you what it
was," she went on passionately.  "It was to be revenged on you all for
your cruelty, your heartlessness, your wickedness to me and mine in the
past.  It was to pay you off for your slanders of my dead father--for
the selfishness that left me and Jim alone with his dead body on the
Marsh.  That was what sent me to Logport--to get even with you--to--to
fool and flaunt you! There, you have it now!  And now that God has
punished me for it by crushing my brother--you--you expect me to let
you crush ME too."

"But," he said eagerly, advancing toward her, "you are wronging me--you
are wronging yourself, cruelly."

"Stop," she said, stepping back, with her hands still locked behind
her.  "Stay where you are.  There!  That's enough!"  She drew herself
up and let her hands fall at her side.  "Now, let us speak of Jim," she
said coldly.

Without seeming to hear her, he regarded her for the first time with
hopeless sadness.

"Why did you let my brother believe you were his rival with Cicely
Preston?" she asked impatiently.

"Because I could not undeceive him without telling him I hopelessly
loved his sister.  You are proud, Miss Culpepper," he said, with the
first tinge of bitterness in his even voice.  "Can you not understand
that others may be proud too?"

"No," she said bluntly; "it is not pride but weakness.  You could have
told him what you knew to be true: that there could be nothing in
common between her folk and such savages as we; that there was a gulf
as wide as that Marsh and as black between our natures, our training
and theirs, and even if they came to us across it, now and then, to
suit their pleasure, light and easy as that tide--it was still there to
some day ground and swamp them!  And if he doubted it, you had only to
tell him your own story.  You had only to tell him what you have just
told me--that you yourself, an officer and a gentleman, thought you
loved me, a vulgar, uneducated, savage girl, and that I, kinder to you
than you to me or him, made you take it back across that tide, because
I couldn't let you link your life with me, and drag you in the mire."

"You need not have said that, Miss Culpepper," returned Calvert with
the same gentle smile, "to prove that I am your inferior in all but one
thing."

"And that?" she said quickly.

"Is my love."

His gentle face was as set now as her own as he moved back slowly
towards the door.  There he paused.

"You tell me to speak of Jim, and Jim only.  Then hear me.  I believe
that Miss Preston cares for him as far as lies in her young and giddy
nature.  I could not, therefore, have crushed HIS hope without
deceiving him, for there are as cruel deceits prompted by what we call
reason as by our love.  If you think that a knowledge of this plain
truth would help to save him, I beg you to be kinder to him than you
have been to me,--or even, let me dare to hope, to YOURSELF."

He slowly crossed the threshold, still holding his cap lightly in his
hand.

"When I tell you that I am going away to-morrow on a leave of absence,
and that in all probability we may not meet again, you will not
misunderstand why I add my prayer to the message your friends in
Logport charged me with.  They beg that you will give up your idea of
returning here, and come back to them.  Believe me, you have made
yourself loved and respected there, in spite--I beg pardon--perhaps I
should say BECAUSE of your pride.  Good-night and good-bye."

For a single instant she turned her set face to the window with a
sudden convulsive movement, as if she would have called him back, but
at the same moment the opposite door creaked and her brother slipped
into the room.  Whether a quick memory of the deserter's entrance at
that door a year ago had crossed her mind, whether there was some
strange suggestion in his mud-stained garments and weak deprecating
smile, or whether it was the outcome of some desperate struggle within
her, there was that in her face that changed his smile into a
frightened cry for pardon, as he ran and fell on his knees at her feet.
But even as he did so her stern look vanished, and with her arm around
him she bent over him and mingled her tears with his.

"I heard it all, Mag dearest!  All!  Forgive me!  I have been
crazy!--wild!--I will reform!--I will be better!  I will never disgrace
you again, Mag!  Never, never!  I swear it!"

She reached down and kissed him.  After a pause, a weak boyish smile
struggled into his face.

"You heard what he said of HER, Mag.  Do you think it might be true?"

She lifted the damp curls from his forehead with a sad half-maternal
smile, but did not reply.

"And Mag, dear, don't you think YOU were a little--just a little--hard
on HIM?  No!  Don't look at me that way, for God's sake! There, I
didn't mean anything.  Of course you knew best.  There, Maggie dear,
look up.  Hark there!  Listen, Mag, do!"

They lifted their eyes to the dim distance seen through the open door.
Borne on the fading light, and seeming to fall and die with it over
marsh and river, came the last notes of the bugle from the Fort.

"There!  Don't you remember what you used to say, Mag?"

The look that had frightened him had quite left her face now.

"Yes," she smiled, laying her cold cheek beside his softly.  "Oh yes!
It was something that came and went, 'Like a song'--'Like a song.'"




A KNIGHT-ERRANT OF THE FOOTHILLS.

I.

As Father Felipe slowly toiled up the dusty road towards the Rancho of
the Blessed Innocents, he more than once stopped under the shadow of a
sycamore to rest his somewhat lazy mule and to compose his own
perplexed thoughts by a few snatches from his breviary. For the good
padre had some reason to be troubled.  The invasion of Gentile
Americans that followed the gold discovery of three years before had
not confined itself to the plains of the Sacramento, but stragglers had
already found their way to the Santa Cruz Valley, and the seclusion of
even the mission itself was threatened.  It was true that they had not
brought their heathen engines to disembowel the earth in search of
gold, but it was rumored that they had already speculated upon the
agricultural productiveness of the land, and had espied "the fatness
thereof."  As he reached the higher plateau he could see the afternoon
sea-fog--presently to obliterate the fair prospect--already pulling
through the gaps in the Coast Range, and on a nearer slope--no less
ominously--the smoke of a recent but more permanently destructive
Yankee saw-mill was slowly drifting towards the valley.

"Get up, beast!" said the father, digging his heels into the
comfortable flanks of his mule with some human impatience, "or art
THOU, too, a lazy renegade?  Thinkest thou, besotted one, that the
heretic will spare thee more work than the Holy Church."

The mule, thus apostrophized in ear and flesh, shook its head
obstinately as if the question was by no means clear to its mind, but
nevertheless started into a little trot, which presently brought it to
the low adobe wall of the courtyard of "The Innocents," and entered the
gate.  A few lounging peons in the shadow of an archway took off their
broad-brimmed hats and made way for the padre, and a half dozen equally
listless vaqueros helped him to alight.  Accustomed as he was to the
indolence and superfluity of his host's retainers, to-day it
nevertheless seemed to strike some note of irritation in his breast.

A stout, middle-aged woman of ungirt waist and beshawled head and
shoulders appeared at the gateway as if awaiting him.  After a formal
salutation she drew him aside into an inner passage.

"He is away again, your Reverence," she said.

"Ah--always the same?"

"Yes, your Reverence--and this time to 'a meeting' of the heretics at
their pueblo, at Jonesville--where they will ask him of his land for a
road."

"At a MEETING?" echoed the priest uneasily.

"Ah yes! a meeting--where Tiburcio says they shout and spit on the
ground, your Reverence, and only one has a chair and him they call a
'chairman' because of it, and yet he sits not but shouts and spits even
as the others and keeps up a tapping with a hammer like a very pico.
And there it is they are ever 'resolving' that which is not, and
consider it even as done."

"Then he is still the same," said the priest gloomily, as the woman
paused for breath.

"Only more so, your Reverence, for he reads nought but the newspaper of
the Americanos that is brought in the ship, the 'New York 'errald'--and
recites to himself the orations of their legislators.  Ah! it was an
evil day when the shipwrecked American sailor taught him his uncouth
tongue, which, as your Reverence knows, is only fit for beasts and
heathen incantation."

"Pray Heaven THAT were all he learned of him," said the priest hastily,
"for I have great fear that this sailor was little better than an
atheist and an emissary from Satan.  But where are these newspapers and
the fantasies of publicita that fill his mind?  I would see them, my
daughter."

"You shall, your Reverence, and more too," she replied eagerly, leading
the way along the passage to a grated door which opened upon a small
cell-like apartment, whose scant light and less air came through the
deeply embayed windows in the outer wall.  "Here is his estudio."

In spite of this open invitation, the padre entered with that air of
furtive and minute inspection common to his order.  His glance fell
upon a rude surveyor's plan of the adjacent embryo town of Jonesville
hanging on the wall, which he contemplated with a cold disfavor that
even included the highly colored vignette of the projected Jonesville
Hotel in the left-hand corner.  He then passed to a supervisor's notice
hanging near it, which he examined with a suspicion heightened by that
uneasiness common to mere worldly humanity when opposed to an unknown
and unfamiliar language.  But an exclamation broke from his lips when
he confronted an election placard immediately below it.  It was printed
in Spanish and English, and Father Felipe had no difficulty in reading
the announcement that "Don Jose Sepulvida would preside at a meeting of
the Board of Education in Jonesville as one of the trustees."

"This is madness," said the padre.

Observing that Dona Maria was at the moment preoccupied in examining
the pictorial pages of an illustrated American weekly which had
hitherto escaped his eyes, he took it gently from her hand.

"Pardon, your Reverence," she said with slightly acidulous deprecation,
"but thanks to the Blessed Virgin and your Reverence's teaching, the
text is but gibberish to me and I did but glance at the pictures."

"Much evil may come in with the eye," said the priest sententiously,
"as I will presently show thee.  We have here," he continued, pointing
to an illustration of certain college athletic sports, "a number of
youthful cavaliers posturing and capering in a partly nude condition
before a number of shameless women, who emulate the saturnalia of
heathen Rome by waving their handkerchiefs.  We have here a companion
picture," he said, indicating an illustration of gymnastic exercises by
the students of a female academy at "Commencement," "in which, as thou
seest, even the aged of both sexes unblushingly assist as spectators
with every expression of immodest satisfaction."

"Have they no bull-fights or other seemly recreation that they must
indulge in such wantonness?" asked Dona Maria indignantly, gazing,
however, somewhat curiously at the baleful representations.

"Of all that, my daughter, has their pampered civilization long since
wearied," returned the good padre, "for see, this is what they consider
a moral and even a religious ceremony."  He turned to an illustration
of a woman's rights convention; "observe with what rapt attention the
audience of that heathen temple watch the inspired ravings of that
elderly priestess on the dais.  It is even this kind of sacrilegious
performance that I am told thy nephew Don Jose expounds and defends."

"May the blessed saints preserve us; where will it lead to?" murmured
the horrified Dona Maria.

"I will show thee," said Father Felipe, briskly turning the pages with
the same lofty ignoring of the text until he came to a representation
of a labor procession.  "There is one of their periodic revolutions
unhappily not unknown even in Mexico.  Thou perceivest those complacent
artisans marching with implements of their craft, accompanied by the
military, in the presence of their own stricken masters.  Here we see
only another instance of the instability of all communities that are
not founded on the principles of the Holy Church."

"And what is to be done with my nephew?"

The good father's brow darkened with the gloomy religious zeal of two
centuries ago.  "We must have a council of the family, the alcalde, and
the archbishop, at ONCE," he said ominously.  To the mere heretical
observer the conclusion might have seemed lame and impotent, but it was
as near the Holy inquisition as the year of grace 1852 could offer.

A few days after this colloquy the unsuspecting subject of it, Don Jose
Sepulvida, was sitting alone in the same apartment.  The fading glow of
the western sky, through the deep embrasured windows, lit up his rapt
and meditative face.  He was a young man of apparently twenty-five,
with a colorless satin complexion, dark eyes alternating between
melancholy and restless energy, a narrow high forehead, long straight
hair, and a lightly penciled moustache.  He was said to resemble the
well-known portrait of the Marquis of Monterey in the mission church, a
face that was alleged to leave a deep and lasting impression upon the
observers.  It was undoubtedly owing to this quality during a brief
visit of the famous viceroy to a remote and married ancestress of Don
Jose at Leon that the singular resemblance may be attributed.

A heavy and hesitating step along the passage stopped before the
grating.  Looking up, Don Jose beheld to his astonishment the slightly
inflamed face of Roberto, a vagabond American whom he had lately taken
into his employment.

Roberto, a polite translation of "Bob the Bucker," cleaned out at a
monte-bank in Santa Cruz, penniless and profligate, had sold his
mustang to Don Jose and recklessly thrown himself in with the bargain.
Touched by the rascal's extravagance, the quality of the mare, and
observing that Bob's habits had not yet affected his seat in the
saddle, but rather lent a demoniac vigor to his chase of wild cattle,
Don Jose had retained rider and horse in his service as vaquero.

Bucking Bob, observing that his employer was alone, coolly opened the
door without ceremony, shut it softly behind him, and then closed the
wooden shutter of the grating.  Don Jose surveyed him with mild
surprise and dignified composure.  The man appeared perfectly
sober,--it was a peculiarity of his dissipated habits that, when not
actually raving with drink, he was singularly shrewd and practical.

"Look yer, Don Kosay," he began in a brusque but guarded voice, "you
and me is pards.  When ye picked me and the mare up and set us on our
legs again in this yer ranch, I allowed I'd tie to ye whenever you was
in trouble--and wanted me.  And I reckon that's what's the matter now.
For from what I see and hear on every side, although you're the boss of
this consarn, you're surrounded by a gang of spies and traitors.  Your
comings and goings, your ins and outs, is dogged and followed and blown
upon.  The folks you trust is playing it on ye.  It ain't for me to say
why or wherefore--what's their rights and what's yourn--but I've come
to tell ye that if you don't get up and get outer this ranch them d--d
priests and your own flesh and blood--your aunts and your uncles and
your cousins, will have you chucked outer your property, and run into a
lunatic asylum."

"Me--Don Jose Sepulvida--a lunatico!  You are yourself crazy of drink,
friend Roberto."

"Yes," said Roberto grimly, "but that kind ain't ILLEGAL, while your
makin' ducks and drakes of your property and going into 'Merikin ideas
and 'Merikin speculations they reckon is.  And speakin' on the square,
it ain't NAT'RAL."

Don Jose sprang to his feet and began to pace up and down his cell-like
study.  "Ah, I remember now," he muttered, "I begin to comprehend:
Father Felipe's homilies and discourses!  My aunt's too affectionate
care!  My cousin's discreet consideration!  The prompt attention of my
servants!  I see it all!  And you," he said, suddenly facing Roberto,
"why come you to tell me this?"

"Well, boss," said the American dryly, "I reckoned to stand by you."

"Ah," said Don Jose, visibly affected.  "Good Roberto, come hither,
child, you may kiss my hand."

"If! it's all the same to you, Don Kosay,--THAT kin slide."

"Ah, if--yes," said Don Jose, meditatively putting his hand to his
forehead, "miserable that I am!--I remembered not you were Americano.
Pardon, my friend--embrace me--Conpanero y Amigo."

With characteristic gravity he reclined for a moment upon Robert's
astonished breast.  Then recovering himself with equal gravity he
paused, lifted his hand with gentle warning, marched to a recess in the
corner, unhooked a rapier hanging from the wall, and turned to his
companion.

"We will defend ourselves, friend Roberto.  It is the sword of the
Comandante--my ancestor.  The blade is of Toledo."

"An ordinary six-shooter of Colt's would lay over that," said Roberto
grimly--"but that ain't your game just now, Don Kosay.  You must get up
and get, and at once.  You must vamose the ranch afore they lay hold of
you and have you up before the alcalde.  Once away from here, they
daren't follow you where there's 'Merikin law, and when you kin fight
'em in the square."

"Good," said Don Jose with melancholy preciseness.  "You are wise,
friend Roberto.  We may fight them later, as you say--on the square, or
in the open Plaza.  And you, camarado, YOU shall go with me--you and
your mare."

Sincere as the American had been in his offer of service, he was
somewhat staggered at this imperative command.  But only for a moment.
"Well," he said lazily, "I don't care if I do."

"But," said Don Jose with increased gravity, "you SHALL care, friend
Roberto.  We shall make an alliance, an union.  It is true, my brother,
you drink of whiskey, and at such times are even as a madman.  It has
been recounted to me that it was necessary to your existence that you
are a lunatic three days of the week.  Who knows?  I myself, though I
drink not of aguardiente, am accused of fantasies for all time.
Necessary it becomes therefore that we should go TOGETHER.  My
fantasies and speculations cannot injure you, my brother; your whiskey
shall not empoison me.  We shall go together in the great world of your
American ideas of which I am much inflamed.  We shall together breathe
as one the spirit of Progress and Liberty.  We shall be even as
neophytes making of ourselves Apostles of Truth.  I absolve and
renounce myself henceforth of my family.  I shall take to myself the
sister and the brother, the aunt and the uncle, as we proceed.  I
devote myself to humanity alone.  I devote YOU, my friend, and the
mare--though happily she has not a Christian soul--to this glorious
mission."

The few level last rays of light lit up a faint enthusiasm in the face
of Don Jose, but without altering his imperturbable gravity. The
vaquero eyed him curiously and half doubtfully.

"We will go to-morrow," resumed Don Jose with solemn decision, "for it
is Wednesday.  It was a Sunday that thou didst ride the mare up the
steps of the Fonda and demanded that thy liquor should be served to
thee in a pail.  I remember it, for the landlord of the Fonda claimed
twenty pesos for damage and the kissing of his wife. Therefore, by
computation, good Roberto, thou shouldst be sober until Friday, and we
shall have two clear days to fly before thy madness again seizes thee."

"They kin say what they like, Don Kosay, but YOUR head is level,"
returned the unabashed American, grasping Don Jose's hand.  "All right,
then.  Hasta manana, as your folks say."

"Hasta manana," repeated Don Jose gravely.

At daybreak next morning, while slumber still weighted the lazy eyelids
of "the Blessed Innocents," Don Jose Sepulvida and his trusty squire
Roberto, otherwise known as "Bucking Bob," rode forth unnoticed from
the corral.


II.

Three days had passed.  At the close of the third, Don Jose was seated
in a cosy private apartment of the San Mateo Hotel, where they had
halted for an arranged interview with his lawyer before reaching San
Francisco.  From his window he could see the surrounding park-like
avenues of oaks and the level white high road, now and then clouded
with the dust of passing teams.  But his eyes were persistently fixed
upon a small copy of the American Constitution before him.  Suddenly
there was a quick rap on his door, and before he could reply to it a
man brusquely entered.

Don Jose raised his head slowly, and recognized the landlord.  But the
intruder, apparently awed by the gentle, grave, and studious figure
before him, fell back for an instant in an attitude of surly apology.

"Enter freely, my good Jenkinson," said Don Jose, with a quiet courtesy
that had all the effect of irony.  "The apartment, such as it is, is at
your disposition.  It is even yours, as is the house."

"Well, I'm darned if I know as it is," said the landlord, recovering
himself roughly, "and that's jest what's the matter. Yer's that man of
yours smashing things right and left in the bar-room and chuckin' my
waiters through the window."

"Softly, softly, good Jenkinson," said Don Jose, putting a mark in the
pages of the volume before him.  "It is necessary first that I should
correct your speech.  He is not my 'MAN,' which I comprehend to mean a
slave, a hireling, a thing obnoxious to the great American nation which
I admire and to which HE belongs.  Therefore, good Jenkinson, say
'friend,' 'companion,' 'guide,' philosopher,' if you will.  As to the
rest, it is of no doubt as you relate.  I myself have heard the
breakings of glass and small dishes as I sit here; three times I have
seen your waiters projected into the road with much violence and
confusion.  To myself I have then said, even as I say to you, good
Jenkinson, 'Patience, patience, the end is not far.'  In four hours,"
continued Don Jose, holding up four fingers, "he shall make a finish.
Until then, not."

"Well, I'm d--d," ejaculated Jenkinson, gasping for breath in his
indignation.

"Nay, excellent Jenkinson, not dam-ned but of a possibility dam-AGED.
That I shall repay when he have make a finish."

"But, darn it all," broke in the landlord angrily.

"Ah," said Don Jose gravely, "you would be paid before!  Good; for how
much shall you value ALL you have in your bar?"

Don Jose's imperturbability evidently shook the landlord's faith in the
soundness of his own position.  He looked at his guest critically and
audaciously.

"It cost me two hundred dollars to fit it up," he said curtly.

Don Jose rose, and, taking a buckskin purse from his saddle-bag,
counted out four slugs[1] and handed them to the stupefied Jenkinson.
The next moment, however, his host recovered himself, and casting the
slugs back on the little table, brought his fist down with an emphasis
that made them dance.

"But, look yer--suppose I want this thing stopped--you hear
me--STOPPED--now."

"That would be interfering with the liberty of the subject, my good
Jenkinson--which God forbid!" said Don Jose calmly.  "Moreover, it is
the custom of the Americanos--a habit of my friend Roberto--a necessity
of his existence--and so recognized of his friends. Patience and
courage, Senor Jenkinson.  Stay--ah, I comprehend! you have--of a
possibility--a wife?"

"No, I'm a widower," said Jenkinson sharply.

"Then I congratulate you.  My friend Roberto would have kissed her. It
is also of his habit.  Truly you have escaped much.  I embrace you,
Jenkinson."

He threw his arms gravely around Jenkinson, in whose astounded face at
last an expression of dry humor faintly dawned.  After a moment's
survey of Don Jose's impenetrable gravity, he coolly gathered up the
gold coins, and saying that he would assess the damages and return the
difference, he left the room as abruptly as he had entered it.

But Don Jose was not destined to remain long in peaceful study of the
American Constitution.  He had barely taken up the book again and
renewed his serious contemplation of its excellences when there was
another knock at his door.  This time, in obedience to his invitation
to enter, the new visitor approached with more deliberation and a
certain formality.

He was a young man of apparently the same age as Don Jose, handsomely
dressed, and of a quiet self-possession and gravity almost equal to his
host's.

"I believe I am addressing Don Jose Sepulvida," he said with a familiar
yet courteous inclination of his handsome head.  Don Jose, who had
risen in marked contrast to his reception of his former guest,
answered,--

"You are truly making to him a great honor."

"Well, you're going it blind as far as I'M concerned certainly," said
the young man, with a slight smile, "for you don't know ME."

"Pardon, my friend," said Don Jose gently, "in this book, this great
Testament of your glorious nation, I have read that you are all equal,
one not above, one not below the other.  I salute in you the Nation!
It is enough!"

"Thank you," returned the stranger, with a face that, saving the
faintest twinkle in the corner of his dark eyes, was as immovable as
his host's, "but for the purposes of my business I had better say I am
Jack Hamlin, a gambler, and am just now dealing faro in the Florida
saloon round the corner."

He paused carelessly, as if to allow Don Jose the protest he did not
make, and then continued,--

"The matter is this.  One of your vaqueros, who is, however, an
American, was round there an hour ago bucking against faro, and put up
and LOST, not only the mare he was riding, but a horse which I have
just learned is yours.  Now we reckon, over there, that we can make
enough money playing a square game, without being obliged to take
property from a howling drunkard, to say nothing of it not belonging to
him, and I've come here, Don Jose, to say that if you'll send over and
bring away your man and your horse, you can have 'em both."

"If I have comprehended, honest Hamlin," said Don Jose slowly, "this
Roberto, who was my vaquero and is my brother, has approached this faro
game by himself unsolicited?"

"He certainly didn't seem shy of it," said Mr. Hamlin with equal
gravity.  "To the best of my knowledge he looked as if he'd been there
before."

"And if he had won, excellent Hamlin, you would have given him the
equal of his mare and horse?"

"A hundred dollars for each, yes, certainly."

"Then I see not why I should send for the property which is truly no
longer mine, nor for my brother who will amuse himself after the
fashion of his country in the company of so honorable a caballero as
yourself?  Stay! oh imbecile that I am.  I have not remembered. You
would possibly say that he has no longer of horses!  Play him; play
him, admirable yet prudent Hamlin.  I have two thousand horses!  Of a
surety he cannot exhaust them in four hours. Therefore play him, trust
to me for recompensa, and have no fear."

A quick flush covered the stranger's cheek, and his eyebrows
momentarily contracted.  He walked carelessly to the window, however,
glanced out, and then turned to Don Jose.

"May I ask, then," he said with almost sepulchral gravity, "is anybody
taking care of you?"

"Truly," returned Don Jose cautiously, "there is my brother and friend
Roberto."

"Ah! Roberto, certainly," said Mr. Hamlin profoundly.

"Why do you ask, considerate friend?"

"Oh! I only thought, with your kind of opinions, you must often feel
lonely in California.  Good-bye."  He shook Don Jose's hand heartily,
took up his hat, inclined his head with graceful seriousness, and
passed out of the room.  In the hall he met the landlord.

"Well," said Jenkinson, with a smile half anxious, half insinuating,
"you saw him?  What do you think of him?"

Mr. Hamlin paused and regarded Jenkinson with a calmly contemplative
air, as if he were trying to remember first who he was, and secondly
why he should speak to him at all.  "Think of whom?" he repeated
carelessly.

"Why him--you know--Don Jose."

"I did not see anything the matter with him," returned Hamlin with
frigid simplicity.

"What? nothing queer?"

"Well, no--except that he's a guest in YOUR house," said Hamlin with
great cheerfulness.  "But then, as you keep a hotel, you can't help
occasionally admitting a--gentleman."

Mr. Jenkinson smiled the uneasy smile of a man who knew that his
interlocutor's playfulness occasionally extended to the use of a
derringer, in which he was singularly prompt and proficient, and Mr.
Hamlin, equally conscious of that knowledge on the part of his
companion, descended the staircase composedly.

But the day had darkened gradually into night, and Don Jose was at last
compelled to put aside his volume.  The sound of a large bell rung
violently along the hall and passages admonished him that the American
dinner was ready, and although the viands and the mode of cooking were
not entirely to his fancy, he had, in his grave enthusiasm for the
national habits, attended the table d'hote regularly with Roberto.  On
reaching the lower hall he was informed that his henchman had early
succumbed to the potency of his libations, and had already been carried
by two men to bed. Receiving this information with his usual stoical
composure, he entered the dining-room, but was surprised to find that a
separate table had been prepared for him by the landlord, and that a
rude attempt had been made to serve him with his own native dishes.

"Senores y Senoritas," said Don Jose, turning from it and with grave
politeness addressing the assembled company, "if I seem to-day to
partake alone and in a reserved fashion of certain viands that have
been prepared for me, it is truly from no lack of courtesy to your
distinguished company, but rather, I protest, to avoid the appearance
of greater discourtesy to our excellent Jenkinson, who has taken some
pains and trouble to comport his establishment to what he conceives to
be my desires.  Wherefore, my friends, in God's name fall to, the same
as if I were not present, and grace be with you."

A few stared at the tall, gentle, melancholy figure with some
astonishment; a few whispered to their neighbors; but when, at the
conclusion of his repast, Don Jose arose and again saluted the company,
one or two stood up and smilingly returned the courtesy, and Polly
Jenkinson, the landlord's youngest daughter, to the great delight of
her companions, blew him a kiss.

After visiting the vaquero in his room, and with his own hand applying
some native ointment to the various contusions and scratches which
recorded the late engagements of the unconscious Roberto, Don Jose
placed a gold coin in the hands of the Irish chamber-maid, and bidding
her look after the sleeper, he threw his serape over his shoulders and
passed into the road.  The loungers on the veranda gazed at him
curiously, yet half acknowledged his usual serious salutation, and made
way for him with a certain respect.  Avoiding the few narrow streets of
the little town, he pursued his way meditatively along the highroad,
returning to the hotel after an hour's ramble, as the evening
stage-coach had deposited its passengers and departed.

"There's a lady waiting to see you upstairs," said the landlord with a
peculiar smile.  "She rather allowed it wasn't the proper thing to see
you alone, or she wasn't quite ekal to it, I reckon, for she got my
Polly to stand by her."

"Your Polly, good Jenkinson?" said Don Jose interrogatively.

"My darter, Don Jose."

"Ah, truly!  I am twice blessed," said Don Jose, gravely ascending the
staircase.

On entering the room he perceived a tall, large-featured woman with an
extraordinary quantity of blond hair parted on one side of her broad
forehead, sitting upon the sofa.  Beside her sat Polly Jenkinson, her
fresh, honest, and rather pretty face beaming with delighted
expectation and mischief.  Don Jose saluted them with a formal
courtesy, which, however, had no trace of the fact that he really did
not remember anything of them.

"I called," said the large-featured woman with a voice equally
pronounced, "in reference to a request from you, which, though perhaps
unconventional in the extreme, I have been able to meet by the
intervention of this young lady's company.  My name on this card may
not be familiar to you--but I am 'Dorothy Dewdrop.'"

A slight movement of abstraction and surprise passed over Don Jose's
face, but as quickly vanished as he advanced towards her and gracefully
raised the tips of her fingers to his lips.  "Have I then, at last, the
privilege of beholding that most distressed and deeply injured of
women!  Or is it but a dream!"

It certainly was not, as far as concerned the substantial person of the
woman before him, who, however, seemed somewhat uneasy under his words
as well as the demure scrutiny of Miss Jenkinson.  "I thought you might
have forgotten," she said with slight acerbity, "that you desired an
interview with the authoress of"--

"Pardon," interrupted Don Jose, standing before her in an attitude of
the deepest sympathizing dejection, "I had not forgotten.  It is now
three weeks since I have read in the journal 'Golden Gate' the eloquent
and touching poem of your sufferings, and your aspirations, and your
miscomprehensions by those you love.  I remember as yesterday that you
have said, that cruel fate have linked you to a soulless
state--that--but I speak not well your own beautiful language--you are
in tears at evenfall 'because that you are not understood of others,
and that your soul recoiled from iron bonds, until, as in a dream, you
sought succor and release in some true Knight of equal plight.'"

"I am told," said the large-featured woman with some satisfaction,
"that the poem to which you allude has been generally admired."

"Admired!  Senora," said Don Jose, with still darker sympathy, "it is
not the word; it is FELT.  I have felt it.  When I read those words of
distress, I am touched of compassion!  I have said, This woman, so
disconsolate, so oppressed, must be relieved, protected! I have wrote
to you, at the 'Golden Gate,' to see me here."

"And I have come, as you perceive," said the poetess, rising with a
slight smile of constraint; "and emboldened by your appreciation, I
have brought a few trifles thrown off"--

"Pardon, unhappy Senora," interrupted Don Jose, lifting his hand
deprecatingly without relaxing his melancholy precision, "but to a
cavalier further evidence is not required--and I have not yet make
finish.  I have not content myself to WRITE to you.  I have sent my
trusty friend Roberto to inquire at the 'Golden Gate' of your
condition.  I have found there, most unhappy and persecuted
friend--that with truly angelic forbearance you have not told ALL--that
you are MARRIED, and that of a necessity it is your husband that is
cold and soulless and unsympathizing--and all that you describe."

"Sir!" said the poetess, rising in angry consternation.

"I have written to him," continued Don Jose, with unheeding gravity;
"have appealed to him as a friend, I have conjured him as a caballero,
I have threatened him even as a champion of the Right, I have said to
him, in effect--that this must not be as it is.  I have informed him
that I have made an appointment with you even at this house, and I
challenged him to meet you here--in this room--even at this instant,
and, with God's help, we should make good our charges against him.  It
is yet early; I have allowed time for the lateness of the stage and the
fact that he will come by another conveyance.  Therefore, O Dona
Dewdrop, tremble not like thy namesake as it were on the leaf of
apprehension and expectancy.  I, Don Jose, am here to protect thee.  I
will take these charges"--gently withdrawing the manuscripts from her
astonished grasp--"though even, as I related to thee before, I want
them not, yet we will together confront him with them and make them
good against him."

"Are you mad?" demanded the lady in almost stentorious accents, "or is
this an unmanly hoax?"  Suddenly she stopped in undeniable
consternation.  "Good heavens," she muttered, "if Abner should believe
this.  He is SUCH a fool!  He has lately been queer and jealous.  Oh
dear!" she said, turning to Polly Jenkinson with the first indication
of feminine weakness, "Is he telling the truth? is he crazy? what shall
I do?"

Polly Jenkinson, who had witnessed the interview with the intensest
enjoyment, now rose equal to the occasion.

"You have made a mistake," she said, uplifting her demure blue eyes to
Don Jose's dark and melancholy gaze.  "This lady is a POETESS! The
sufferings she depicts, the sorrows she feels, are in the IMAGINATION,
in her fancy only."

"Ah!" said Don Jose gloomily; "then it is all false."

"No," said Polly quickly, "only they are not her OWN, you know. They
are somebody elses.  She only describes them for another, don't you
see?"

"And who, then, is this unhappy one?" asked the Don quickly.

"Well--a--friend," stammered Polly, hesitatingly.

"A friend!" repeated Don Jose.  "Ah, I see, of possibility a dear one,
even," he continued, gazing with tender melancholy into the untroubled
cerulean depths of Polly's eyes, "even, but no, child, it could not be!
THOU art too young."

"Ah," said Polly, with an extraordinary gulp and a fierce nudge of the
poetess, "but it WAS me."

"You, Senorita," repeated Don Jose, falling back in an attitude of
mingled admiration and pity.  "You, the child of Jenkinson!"

"Yes, yes," joined in the poetess hurriedly; "but that isn't going to
stop the consequences of your wretched blunder.  My husband will be
furious, and will be here at any moment.  Good gracious! what is that?"

The violent slamming of a distant door at that instant, the sounds of
quick scuffling on the staircase, and the uplifting of an irate voice
had reached her ears and thrown her back in the arms of Polly
Jenkinson.  Even the young girl herself turned an anxious gaze towards
the door.  Don Jose alone was unmoved.

"Possess yourselves in peace, Senoritas," he said calmly.  "We have
here only the characteristic convalescence of my friend and brother,
the excellent Roberto.  He will ever recover himself from drink with
violence, even as he precipitates himself into it with fury.  He has
been prematurely awakened.  I will discover the cause."

With an elaborate bow to the frightened women, he left the room.
Scarcely had the door closed when the poetess turned quickly to Polly.
"The man's a stark staring lunatic, but, thank Heaven, Abner will see
it at once.  And now let's get away while we can. To think," she said,
snatching up her scattered manuscripts, "that THAT was all the beast
wanted."

"I'm sure he's very gentle and kind," said Polly, recovering her
dimples with a demure pout; "but stop, he's coming back."

It was indeed Don Jose re-entering the room with the composure of a
relieved and self-satisfied mind.  "It is even as I said, Senora," he
began, taking the poetess's hand,--"and MORE.  You are SAVED!"

As the women only stared at each other, he gravely folded his arms and
continued: "I will explain.  For the instant I have not remember that,
in imitation of your own delicacy, I have given to your husband in my
letter, not the name of myself, but, as a mere Don Fulano, the name of
my brother Roberto--'Bucking Bob.'  Your husband have this moment
arrive!  Penetrating the bedroom of the excellent Roberto, he has
indiscreetly seize him in his bed, without explanation, without
introduction, without fear!  The excellent Roberto, ever ready for such
distractions, have respond! In a word, to use the language of the good
Jenkinson--our host, our father--who was present, he have 'wiped the
floor with your husband,' and have even carried him down the staircase
to the street.  Believe me, he will not return.  You are free!"

"Fool!  Idiot!  Crazy beast!" said the poetess, dashing past him and
out of the door.  "You shall pay for this!"

Don Jose did not change his imperturbable and melancholy calm. "And
now, little one," he said, dropping on one knee before the
half-frightened Polly, "child of Jenkinson, now that thy perhaps too
excitable sponsor has, in a poet's caprice, abandoned thee for some
newer fantasy, confide in me thy distress, to me, thy Knight, and tell
the story of thy sorrows."

"But," said Polly, rising to her feet and struggling between a laugh
and a cry.  "I haven't any sorrows.  Oh dear! don't you see, it's only
her FANCY to make me seem so.  There's nothing the matter with me."

"Nothing the matter," repeated Don Jose slowly.  "You have no distress?
You want no succor, no relief, no protector?  This, then, is but
another delusion!" he said, rising sadly.

"Yes, no--that is--oh, my gracious goodness!" said Polly, hopelessly
divided between a sense of the ridiculous and some strange attraction
in the dark, gentle eyes that were fixed upon her half reproachfully.
"You don't understand."

Don Jose replied only with a melancholy smile, and then going to the
door, opened it with a bowed head and respectful courtesy.  At the act,
Polly plucked up courage again, and with it a slight dash of her old
audacity.

"I'm sure I'm very sorry that I ain't got any love sorrows," she said
demurely.  "And I suppose it's very dreadful in me not to have been
raving and broken-hearted over somebody or other as that woman has
said.  Only," she waited till she had gained the secure vantage of the
threshold, "I never knew a gentleman to OBJECT to it before!"

With this Parthian arrow from her blue eyes she slipped into the
passage and vanished through the door of the opposite parlor.  For an
instant Don Jose remained motionless and reflecting.  Then, recovering
himself with grave precision, he deliberately picked up his narrow
black gloves from the table, drew them on, took his hat in his hand,
and solemnly striding across the passage, entered the door that had
just closed behind her.


[1] Hexagonal gold pieces valued at $50 each, issued by a private firm
as coin in the early days.


III.

It must not be supposed that in the meantime the flight of Don Jose and
his follower was unattended by any commotion at the rancho of the
Blessed Innocents.  At the end of three hours' deliberation, in which
the retainers were severally examined, the corral searched, and the
well in the courtyard sounded, scouts were dispatched in different
directions, who returned with the surprising information that the
fugitives were not in the vicinity.  A trustworthy messenger was sent
to Monterey for "custom-house paper," on which to draw up a formal
declaration of the affair.  The archbishop was summoned from San Luis,
and Don Victor and Don Vincente Sepulvida, with the Donas Carmen and
Inez Alvarado, and a former alcalde, gathered at a family council the
next day.  In this serious conclave the good Father Felipe once more
expounded the alienated condition and the dangerous reading of the
absent man.  In the midst of which the ordinary post brought a letter
from Don Jose, calmly inviting the family to dine with him and Roberto
at San Mateo on the following Wednesday.  The document was passed
gravely from hand to hand.  Was it a fresh evidence of mental
aberration--an audacity of frenzy--or a trick of the vaquero?  The
archbishop and alcalde shook their heads--it was without doubt a
lawless, even a sacrilegious and blasphemous fete.  But a certain
curiosity of the ladies and of Father Felipe carried the day.  Without
formally accepting the invitation it was decided that the family should
examine the afflicted man, with a view of taking active measures
hereafter.  On the day appointed, the traveling carriage of the
Sepulvidas, an equipage coeval with the beginning of the century, drawn
by two white mules gaudily caparisoned, halted before the hotel at San
Mateo and disgorged Father Felipe, the Donas Carmen and Inez Alvarado
and Maria Sepulvida, while Don Victor and Don Vincente Sepulvida, their
attendant cavaliers on fiery mustangs, like outriders, drew rein at the
same time.  A slight thrill of excitement, as of the advent of a
possible circus, had preceded them through the little town; a faint
blending of cigarette smoke and garlic announced their presence on the
veranda.

Ushered into the parlor of the hotel, apparently set apart for their
reception, they were embarrassed at not finding their host present.
But they were still more disconcerted when a tall full-bearded
stranger, with a shrewd amused-looking face, rose from a chair by the
window, and stepping forward, saluted them in fluent Spanish with a
slight American accent.

"I have to ask you, gentlemen and ladies," he began, with a certain
insinuating ease and frankness that alternately aroused and lulled
their suspicions, "to pardon the absence of our friend Don Jose
Sepulvida at this preliminary greeting.  For to be perfectly frank with
you, although the ultimate aim and object of our gathering is a social
one, you are doubtless aware that certain infelicities and
misunderstandings--common to most families--have occurred, and a free,
dispassionate, unprejudiced discussion and disposal of them at the
beginning will only tend to augment the goodwill of our gathering."

"The Senor without doubt is"--suggested the padre, with a polite
interrogative pause.

"Pardon me!  I forgot to introduce myself.  Colonel Parker--entirely at
your service and that of these charming ladies."

The ladies referred to allowed their eyes to rest with evident
prepossession on the insinuating stranger.  "Ah, a soldier," said Don
Vincente.

"Formerly," said the American lightly; "at present a lawyer, the
counsel of Don Jose."

A sudden rigor of suspicion stiffened the company; the ladies withdrew
their eyes; the priest and the Sepulvidas exchanged glances.

"Come," said Colonel Parker, with apparent unconsciousness of the
effect of his disclosure, "let us begin frankly.  You have, I believe,
some anxiety in regard to the mental condition of Don Jose."

"We believe him to be mad," said Padre Felipe promptly, "irresponsible,
possessed!"

"That is your opinion; good," said the lawyer quietly.

"And ours too," clamored the party, "without doubt."

"Good," returned the lawyer with perfect cheerfulness.  "As his
relations, you have no doubt had superior opportunities for observing
his condition.  I understand also that you may think it necessary to
have him legally declared non compos, a proceeding which, you are
aware, might result in the incarceration of our distinguished friend in
a mad-house."

"Pardon, Senor," interrupted Dona Maria proudly, "you do not comprehend
the family.  When a Sepulvida is visited of God we do not ask the
Government to confine him like a criminal.  We protect him in his own
house from the consequences of his frenzy."

"From the machinations of the worldly and heretical," broke in the
priest, "and from the waste and dispersion of inherited possessions."

"Very true," continued Colonel Parker, with unalterable good-humor;
"but I was only about to say that there might be conflicting evidence
of his condition.  For instance, our friend has been here three days.
In that time he has had three interviews with three individuals under
singular circumstances."  Colonel Parker then briefly recounted the
episodes of the landlord, the gambler, Miss Jenkinson and the poetess,
as they had been related to him.  "Yet," he continued, "all but one of
these individuals are willing to swear that they not only believe Don
Jose perfectly sane, but endowed with a singularly sound judgment.  In
fact, the testimony of Mr. Hamlin and Miss Jenkinson is remarkably
clear on that subject."

The company exchanged a supercilious smile.  "Do you not see, O Senor
Advocate," said Don Vincente compassionately, "that this is but a
conspiracy to avail themselves of our relative's weakness. Of a
necessity they find him sane who benefits them."

"I have thought of that, and am glad to hear you say so," returned the
lawyer still more cheerfully, "for your prompt opinion emboldens me to
be at once perfectly frank with you.  Briefly then, Don Jose has
summoned me here to make a final disposition of his property.  In the
carrying out of certain theories of his, which it is not my province to
question, he has resolved upon comparative poverty for himself as best
fitted for his purpose, and to employ his wealth solely for others.  In
fact, of all his vast possessions he retains for himself only an income
sufficient for the bare necessaries of life."

"And you have done this?" they asked in one voice.

"Not yet," said the lawyer.

"Blessed San Antonio, we have come in time!" ejaculated Dona Carmen.
"Another day and it would have been too late; it was an inspiration of
the Blessed Innocents themselves," said Dona Maria, crossing herself.
"Can you longer doubt that this is the wildest madness?" said Father
Felipe with flashing eyes.

"Yet," returned the lawyer, caressing his heavy beard with a meditative
smile, "the ingenious fellow actually instanced the vows of YOUR OWN
ORDER, reverend sir, as an example in support of his theory.  But to be
brief.  Conceiving, then, that his holding of property was a mere
accident of heritage, not admitted by him, unworthy his acceptance, and
a relic of superstitious ignorance"--

"This is the very sacrilege of Satanic prepossession," broke in the
priest indignantly.

"He therefore," continued the lawyer composedly, "makes over and
reverts the whole of his possessions, with the exceptions I have
stated, to his family and the Church."

A breathless and stupefying silence fell upon the company.  In the dead
hush the sound of Polly Jenkinson's piano, played in a distant room,
could be distinctly heard.  With their vacant eyes staring at him the
speaker continued:

"That deed of gift I have drawn up as he dictated it.  I don't mind
saying that in the opinion of some he might be declared non compos upon
the evidence of that alone.  I need not say how relieved I am to find
that your opinion coincides with my own."

"But," gasped Father Felipe hurriedly, with a quick glance at the
others, "it does not follow that it will be necessary to resort to
these legal measures.  Care, counsel, persuasion--"

"The general ministering of kinship--nursing, a woman's care--the
instincts of affection," piped Dona Maria in breathless eagerness.

"Any light social distraction--a harmless flirtation--a possible
attachment," suggested Dona Carmen shyly.

"Change of scene--active exercise--experiences--even as those you have
related," broke in Don Vincente.

"I for one have ever been opposed to LEGAL measures," said Don Victor.
"A mere consultation of friends--in fact, a fete like this is
sufficient."

"Good friends," said Father Felipe, who had by this time recovered
himself, taking out his snuff-box portentously, "it would seem truly,
from the document which this discreet caballero has spoken of, that the
errors of our dear Don Jose are rather of method than intent, and that
while we may freely accept the one"--

"Pardon," interrupted Colonel Parker with bland persistence, "but I
must point out to you that what we call in law 'a consideration' is
necessary to the legality of a conveyance, even though that
consideration be frivolous and calculated to impair the validity of the
document."

"Truly," returned the good padre insinuatingly; "but if a discreet
advocate were to suggest the substitution of some more pious and
reasonable consideration"--

"But that would be making it a perfectly sane and gratuitous document,
not only glaringly inconsistent with your charges, my good friends,
with Don Jose's attitude towards you and his flight from home, but open
to the gravest suspicion in law.  In fact, its apparent propriety in
the face of these facts would imply improper influence."

The countenances of the company fell.  The lawyer's face, however,
became still more good-humored and sympathizing.  "The case is simply
this.  If in the opinion of judge and jury Don Jose is declared insane,
the document is worthless except as a proof of that fact or a possible
indication of the undue influence of his relations, which might compel
the court to select his guardians and trustees elsewhere than among
them."

"Friend Abogado," said Father Felipe with extraordinary deliberation,
"the document thou hast just described so eloquently convinces me
beyond all doubt that Don Jose is not only perfectly sane but endowed
with a singular discretion.  I consider it as a delicate and
high-spirited intimation to us, his friends and kinsmen, of his
unalterable and logically just devotion to his family and religion,
whatever may seem to be his poetical and imaginative manner of
declaring it.  I think there is not one here," continued the padre,
looking around him impressively, "who is not entirely satisfied of Don
Jose's reason and competency to arrange his own affairs."

"Entirely," "truly," "perfectly," eagerly responded the others with
affecting spontaneity.

"Nay, more.  To prevent any misconception, we shall deem it our duty to
take every opportunity of making our belief publicly known," added
Father Felipe.

The padre and Colonel Parker gazed long and gravely into each other's
eyes.  It may have been an innocent touch of the sunlight through the
window, but a faint gleam seemed to steal into the pupil of the affable
lawyer at the same moment that, probably from the like cause, there was
a slight nervous contraction of the left eyelid of the pious father.
But it passed, and the next instant the door opened to admit Don Jose
Sepulvida.

He was at once seized and effusively embraced by the entire company
with every protest of affection and respect.  Not only Mr. Hamlin and
Mr. Jenkinson, who accompanied him as invited guests, but Roberto, in a
new suit of clothes and guiltless of stain or trace of dissipation,
shared in the pronounced friendliness of the kinsmen.  Padre Felipe
took snuff, Colonel Parker blew his nose gently.

Nor were they less demonstrative of their new convictions later at the
banquet.  Don Jose, with Jenkinson and the padre on his right and left,
preserved his gentle and half-melancholy dignity in the midst of the
noisy fraternization.  Even Padre Felipe, in a brief speech or
exhortation proposing the health of their host, lent himself in his own
tongue to this polite congeniality.  "We have had also, my friends and
brothers," he said in peroration, "a pleasing example of the compliment
of imitation shown by our beloved Don Jose.  No one who has known him
during his friendly sojourn in this community but will be struck with
the conviction that he has acquired that most marvelous faculty of your
great American nation, the exhibition of humor and of the practical
joke."

Every eye was turned upon the imperturbable face of Don Jose as he
slowly rose to reply.  "In bidding you to this fete, my friends and
kinsmen," he began calmly, "it was with the intention of formally
embracing the habits, customs, and spirit of American institutions by
certain methods of renunciation of the past, as became a caballero of
honor and resolution.  Those methods may possibly be known to some of
you."  He paused for a moment as if to allow the members of his family
to look unconscious.  "Since then, in the wisdom of God, it has
occurred to me that my purpose may be as honorably effected by a
discreet blending of the past and the present--in a word, by the
judicious combination of the interests of my native people and the
American nation.  In consideration of that purpose, friends and
kinsmen, I ask you to join me in drinking the good health of my host
Senor Jenkinson, my future father-in-law, from whom I have to-day had
the honor to demand the hand of the peerless Polly, his daughter, as
the future mistress of the Rancho of the Blessed Innocents."


The marriage took place shortly after.  Nor was the free will and
independence of Don Jose Sepulvida in the least opposed by his
relations.  Whether they felt they had already committed themselves, or
had hopes in the future, did not transpire.  Enough that the escapade
of a week was tacitly forgotten.  The only allusion ever made to the
bridegroom's peculiarities was drawn from the demure lips of the bride
herself on her installation at the "Blessed Innocents."

"And what, little one, didst thou find in me to admire?" Don Jose had
asked tenderly.

"Oh, you seemed to be so much like that dear old Don Quixote, you
know," she answered demurely.

"Don Quixote," repeated Don Jose with gentle gravity.  "But, my child,
that was only a mere fiction--a romance, of one Cervantes. Believe me,
of a truth there never was any such person!"




A SECRET OF TELEGRAPH HILL

I.

As Mr. Herbert Bly glanced for the first time at the house which was to
be his future abode in San Francisco, he was somewhat startled.  In
that early period of feverish civic improvement the street before it
had been repeatedly graded and lowered until the dwelling--originally a
pioneer suburban villa perched upon a slope of Telegraph Hill--now
stood sixty feet above the sidewalk, superposed like some Swiss chalet
on successive galleries built in the sand-hill, and connected by a
half-dozen distinct zigzag flights of wooden staircase.  Stimulated,
however, by the thought that the view from the top would be a fine one,
and that existence there would have all the quaint originality of
Robinson Crusoe's tree-dwelling, Mr. Bly began cheerfully to mount the
steps.  It should be premised that, although a recently appointed clerk
in a large banking house, Mr. Bly was somewhat youthful and
imaginative, and regarded the ascent as part of that "Excelsior"
climbing pointed out by a great poet as a praiseworthy function of
ambitious youth.

Reaching at last the level of the veranda, he turned to the view. The
distant wooded shore of Contra Costa, the tossing white-caps and
dancing sails of the bay between, and the foreground at his feet of
wharves and piers, with their reed-like jungles of masts and cordage,
made up a bright, if somewhat material, picture.  To his right rose the
crest of the hill, historic and memorable as the site of the old
semaphoric telegraph, the tossing of whose gaunt arms formerly thrilled
the citizens with tidings from the sea. Turning to the house, he
recognized the prevailing style of light cottage architecture, although
incongruously confined to narrow building plots and the civic
regularity of a precise street frontage.  Thus a dozen other villas,
formerly scattered over the slope, had been laboriously displaced and
moved to the rigorous parade line drawn by the street surveyor, no
matter how irregular and independent their design and structure.
Happily, the few scrub-oaks and low bushes which formed the scant
vegetation of this vast sand dune offered no obstacle and suggested no
incongruity. Beside the house before which Mr. Bly now stood, a
prolific Madeira vine, quickened by the six months' sunshine, had alone
survived the displacement of its foundations, and in its untrimmed
luxuriance half hid the upper veranda from his view.

Still glowing with his exertion, the young man rang the bell and was
admitted into a fair-sized drawing-room, whose tasteful and
well-arranged furniture at once prepossessed him.  An open piano, a
sheet of music carelessly left on the stool, a novel lying face
downwards on the table beside a skein of silk, and the distant rustle
of a vanished skirt through an inner door, gave a suggestion of refined
domesticity to the room that touched the fancy of the homeless and
nomadic Bly.  He was still enjoying, in half embarrassment, that vague
and indescribable atmosphere of a refined woman's habitual presence,
when the door opened and the mistress of the house formally presented
herself.

She was a faded but still handsome woman.  Yet she wore that peculiar
long, limp, formless house-shawl which in certain phases of Anglo-Saxon
spinster and widowhood assumes the functions of the recluse's veil and
announces the renunciation of worldly vanities and a resigned
indifference to external feminine contour.  The most audacious
masculine arm would shrink from clasping that shapeless void in which
the flatness of asceticism or the heavings of passion might alike lie
buried.  She had also in some mysterious way imported into the fresh
and pleasant room a certain bombaziny shadow of the past, and a
suggestion of that appalling reminiscence known as "better days."
Though why it should be always represented by ashen memories, or why
better days in the past should be supposed to fix their fitting symbol
in depression in the present, Mr. Bly was too young and too preoccupied
at the moment to determine.  He only knew that he was a little
frightened of her, and fixed his gaze with a hopeless fascination on a
letter which she somewhat portentously carried under the shawl, and
which seemed already to have yellowed in its arctic shade.

"Mr. Carstone has written to me that you would call," said Mrs. Brooks
with languid formality.  "Mr. Carstone was a valued friend of my late
husband, and I suppose has told you the circumstances--the only
circumstances--which admit of my entertaining his proposition of taking
anybody, even temporarily, under my roof. The absence of my dear son
for six months at Portland, Oregon, enables me to place his room at the
disposal of Mr. Carstone's young protege, who, Mr. Carstone tells me,
and I have every reason to believe, is, if perhaps not so seriously
inclined nor yet a church communicant, still of a character and
reputation not unworthy to follow my dear Tappington in our little
family circle as he has at his desk in the bank."

The sensitive Bly, struggling painfully out of an abstraction as to how
he was ever to offer the weekly rent of his lodgings to such a remote
and respectable person, and also somewhat embarrassed at being appealed
to in the third person, here started and bowed.

"The name of Bly is not unfamiliar to me," continued Mrs. Brooks,
pointing to a chair and sinking resignedly into another, where her
baleful shawl at once assumed the appearance of a dust-cover; "some of
my dearest friends were intimate with the Blys of Philadelphia. They
were a branch of the Maryland Blys of the eastern shore, of whom my
Uncle James married.  Perhaps you are distantly related?"

Mrs. Brooks was perfectly aware that her visitor was of unknown Western
origin, and a poor but clever protege of the rich banker; but she was
one of a certain class of American women who, in the midst of a fierce
democracy, are more or less cat-like conservators of family pride and
lineage, and more or less felinely inconsistent and treacherous to
republican principles.  Bly, who had just settled in his mind to send
her the rent anonymously--as a weekly valentine--recovered himself and
his spirits in his usual boyish fashion.

"I am afraid, Mrs. Brooks," he said gayly, "I cannot lay claim to any
distinguished relationship, even to that 'Nelly Bly' who, you remember,
'winked her eye when she went to sleep.'"  He stopped in consternation.
The terrible conviction flashed upon him that this quotation from a
popular negro-minstrel song could not possibly be remembered by a lady
as refined as his hostess, or even known to her superior son.  The
conviction was intensified by Mrs. Brooks rising with a smileless face,
slightly shedding the possible vulgarity with a shake of her shawl, and
remarking that she would show him her son's room, led the way upstairs
to the apartment recently vacated by the perfect Tappington.

Preceded by the same distant flutter of unseen skirts in the passage
which he had first noticed on entering the drawing-room, and which
evidently did not proceed from his companion, whose self-composed
cerements would have repressed any such indecorous agitation, Mr. Bly
stepped timidly into the room.  It was a very pretty apartment,
suggesting the same touches of tasteful refinement in its furniture and
appointments, and withal so feminine in its neatness and regularity,
that, conscious of his frontier habits and experience, he felt at once
repulsively incongruous.  "I cannot expect, Mr. Bly," said Mrs. Brooks
resignedly, "that you can share my son's extreme sensitiveness to
disorder and irregularity; but I must beg you to avoid as much as
possible disturbing the arrangement of the book-shelves, which, you
observe, comprise his books of serious reference, the Biblical
commentaries, and the sermons which were his habitual study.  I must
beg you to exercise the same care in reference to the valuable
offerings from his Sabbath-school scholars which are upon the mantel.
The embroidered book-marker, the gift of the young ladies of his
Bible-class in Dr. Stout's church, is also, you perceive, kept for
ornament and affectionate remembrance.  The harmonium--even if you are
not yourself given to sacred song--I trust you will not find in your
way, nor object to my daughter continuing her practice during your
daily absence.  Thank you.  The door you are looking at leads by a
flight of steps to the side street."

"A very convenient arrangement," said Bly hopefully, who saw a chance
for an occasional unostentatious escape from a too protracted
contemplation of Tappington's perfections.  "I mean," he added
hurriedly, "to avoid disturbing you at night."

"I believe my son had neither the necessity nor desire to use it for
that purpose," returned Mrs. Brooks severely; "although he found it
sometimes a convenient short cut to church on Sabbath when he was late."

Bly, who in his boyish sensitiveness to external impressions had by
this time concluded that a life divided between the past perfections of
Tappington and the present renunciations of Mrs. Brooks would be
intolerable, and was again abstractedly inventing some delicate excuse
for withdrawing without committing himself further, was here suddenly
attracted by a repetition of the rustling of the unseen skirt.  This
time it was nearer, and this time it seemed to strike even Mrs.
Brooks's remote preoccupation. "My daughter, who is deeply devoted to
her brother," she said, slightly raising her voice, "will take upon
herself the care of looking after Tappington's precious mementoes, and
spare you the trouble.  Cherry, dear! this way.  This is the young
gentleman spoken of by Mr. Carstone, your papa's friend.  My daughter
Cherubina, Mr. Bly."

The fair owner of the rustling skirt, which turned out to be a pretty
French print, had appeared at the doorway.  She was a tall, slim
blonde, with a shy, startled manner, as of a penitent nun who was
suffering for some conventual transgression--a resemblance that was
heightened by her short-cut hair, that might have been cropped as if
for punishment.  A certain likeness to her mother suggested that she
was qualifying for that saint's ascetic shawl--subject, however, to
rebellious intervals, indicated in the occasional sidelong fires of her
gray eyes.  Yet the vague impression that she knew more of the world
than her mother, and that she did not look at all as if her name was
Cherubina, struck Bly in the same momentary glance.

"Mr. Bly is naturally pleased with what he has seen of our dear
Tappington's appointments; and as I gather from Mr. Carstone's letter
that he is anxious to enter at once and make the most of the dear boy's
absence, you will see, my dear Cherry, that Ellen has everything ready
for him?"

Before the unfortunate Bly could explain or protest, the young girl
lifted her gray eyes to his.  Whether she had perceived and understood
his perplexity he could not tell; but the swift shy glance was at once
appealing, assuring, and intelligent.  She was certainly unlike her
mother and brother.  Acting with his usual impulsiveness, he forgot his
previous resolution, and before he left had engaged to begin his
occupation of the room on the following day.

The next afternoon found him installed.  Yet, after he had unpacked his
modest possessions and put them away, after he had placed his few books
on the shelves, where they looked glaringly trivial and frivolous
beside the late tenant's severe studies; after he had set out his
scanty treasures in the way of photographs and some curious mementoes
of his wandering life, and then quickly put them back again with a
sudden angry pride at exposing them to the unsympathetic incongruity of
the other ornaments, he, nevertheless, felt ill at ease.  He glanced in
vain around the pretty room.  It was not the delicately flowered
wall-paper; it was not the white and blue muslin window-curtains
gracefully tied up with blue and white ribbons; it was not the spotless
bed, with its blue and white festooned mosquito-net and flounced
valances, and its medallion portrait of an unknown bishop at the back;
it was not the few tastefully framed engravings of certain cardinal
virtues, "The Rock of Ages," and "The Guardian Angel"; it was not the
casts in relief of "Night" and "Morning"; it was certainly not the cosy
dimity-covered arm-chairs and sofa, nor yet the clean-swept polished
grate with its cheerful fire sparkling against the chill afternoon
sea-fogs without; neither was it the mere feminine suggestion, for that
touched a sympathetic chord in his impulsive nature; nor the religious
and ascetic influence, for he had occupied a monastic cell in a school
of the padres at an old mission, and slept profoundly;--it was none of
those, and yet a part of all.  Most habitations retain a cast or shell
of their previous tenant that, fitting tightly or loosely, is still
able to adjust itself to the newcomer; in most occupied apartments
there is still a shadowy suggestion of the owner's individuality; there
was nothing here that fitted Bly--nor was there either, strange to say,
any evidence of the past proprietor in this inhospitality of sensation.
It did not strike him at the time that it was this very LACK of
individuality which made it weird and unreal, that it was strange only
because it was ARTIFICIAL, and that a REAL Tappington had never
inhabited it.

He walked to the window--that never-failing resource of the unquiet
mind--and looked out.  He was a little surprised to find, that, owing
to the grading of the house, the scrub-oaks and bushes of the hill were
nearly on the level of his window, as also was the adjoining side
street on which his second door actually gave. Opening this, the sudden
invasion of the sea-fog and the figure of a pedestrian casually passing
along the disused and abandoned pavement not a dozen feet from where he
had been comfortably seated, presented such a striking contrast to the
studious quiet and cosiness of his secluded apartment that he hurriedly
closed the door again with a sense of indiscreet exposure.  Returning
to the window, he glanced to the left, and found that he was overlooked
by the side veranda of another villa in the rear, evidently on its way
to take position on the line of the street.  Although in actual and
deliberate transit on rollers across the backyard and still occulting a
part of the view, it remained, after the reckless fashion of the
period, inhabited.  Certainly, with a door fronting a thoroughfare, and
a neighbor gradually approaching him, he would not feel lonely or lack
excitement.

He drew his arm-chair to the fire and tried to realize the
all-pervading yet evasive Tappington.  There was no portrait of him in
the house, and although Mrs. Brooks had said that he "favored" his
sister, Bly had, without knowing why, instinctively resented it. He had
even timidly asked his employer, and had received the vague reply that
he was "good-looking enough," and the practical but discomposing
retort, "What do you want to know for?"  As he really did not know why,
the inquiry had dropped.  He stared at the monumental crystal ink-stand
half full of ink, yet spotless and free from stains, that stood on the
table, and tried to picture Tappington daintily dipping into it to
thank the fair donors--"daughters of Rebecca."  Who were they? and what
sort of man would they naturally feel grateful to?

What was that?

He turned to the window, which had just resounded to a slight tap or
blow, as if something soft had struck it.  With an instinctive
suspicion of the propinquity of the adjoining street he rose, but a
single glance from the window satisfied him that no missile would have
reached it from thence.  He scanned the low bushes on the level before
him; certainly no one could be hiding there.  He lifted his eyes toward
the house on the left; the curtains of the nearest window appeared to
be drawn suddenly at the same moment. Could it have come from there?
Looking down upon the window-ledge, there lay the mysterious missile--a
little misshapen ball.  He opened the window and took it up.  It was a
small handkerchief tied into a soft knot, and dampened with water to
give it the necessary weight as a projectile.

Was it apparently the trick of a mischievous child? or--

But here a faint knock on the door leading into the hall checked his
inquiry.  He opened it sharply in his excitement, and was embarrassed
to find the daughter of his hostess standing there, shy, startled, and
evidently equally embarrassed by his abrupt response.

"Mother only wanted me to ask you if Ellen had put everything to
rights," she said, making a step backwards.

"Oh, thank you.  Perfectly," said Herbert with effusion.  "Nothing
could be better done.  In fact"--

"You're quite sure she hasn't forgotten anything? or that there isn't
anything you would like changed?" she continued, with her eyes leveled
on the floor.

"Nothing, I assure you," he said, looking at her downcast lashes. As
she still remained motionless, he continued cheerfully, "Would
you--would you--care to look round and see?"

"No; I thank you."

There was an awkward pause.  He still continued to hold the door open.
Suddenly she moved forward with a school-girl stride, entered the room,
and going to the harmonium, sat down upon the music-stool beside it,
slightly bending forward, with one long, slim, white hand on top of the
other, resting over her crossed knees.

Herbert was a little puzzled.  It was the awkward and brusque act of a
very young person, and yet nothing now could be more gentle and
self-composed than her figure and attitude.

"Yes," he continued, smilingly; "I am only afraid that I may not be
able to live quite up to the neatness and regularity of the example I
find here everywhere.  You know I am dreadfully careless and not at all
orderly.  I shudder to think what may happen; but you and your mother,
Miss Brooks, I trust, will make up your minds to overlook and forgive a
good deal.  I shall do my best to be worthy of Mr. Tap--of my
predecessor--but even then I am afraid you'll find me a great bother."

She raised her shy eyelids.  The faintest ghost of a long-buried dimple
came into her pale cheek as she said softly, to his utter consternation:

"Rats!"

Had she uttered an oath he could not have been more startled than he
was by this choice gem of Western saloon-slang from the pure lips of
this Evangeline-like figure before him.  He sat gazing at her with a
wild hysteric desire to laugh.  She lifted her eyes again, swept him
with a slightly terrified glance, and said:

"Tap says you all say that when any one makes-believe politeness to
you."

"Oh, your BROTHER says that, does he?" said Herbert, laughing.

"Yes, and sometimes 'Old rats.'  But," she continued hurriedly, "HE
doesn't say it; he says YOU all do.  My brother is very particular, and
very good.  Doctor Stout loves him.  He is thought very much of in all
Christian circles.  That book-mark was given to him by one of his
classes."

Every trace of her dimples had vanished.  She looked so sweetly grave,
and withal so maidenly, sitting there slightly smoothing the lengths of
her pink fingers, that Herbert was somewhat embarrassed.

"But I assure you, Miss Brooks, I was not making-believe.  I am really
very careless, and everything is so proper--I mean so neat and
pretty--here, that I"--he stopped, and, observing the same backward
wandering of her eye as of a filly about to shy, quickly changed the
subject.  "You have, or are about to have, neighbors?" he said,
glancing towards the windows as he recalled the incident of a moment
before.

"Yes; and they're not at all nice people.  They are from Pike County,
and very queer.  They came across the plains in '50.  They say
'Stranger'; the men are vulgar, and the girls very forward. Tap forbids
my ever going to the window and looking at them. They're quite what you
would call 'off color.'"

Herbert, who did not dare to say that he never would have dreamed of
using such an expression in any young girl's presence, was plunged in
silent consternation.

"Then your brother doesn't approve of them?" he said, at last,
awkwardly.

"Oh, not at all.  He even talked of having ground-glass put in all
these windows, only it would make the light bad."

Herbert felt very embarrassed.  If the mysterious missile came from
these objectionable young persons, it was evidently because they
thought they had detected a more accessible and sympathizing individual
in the stranger who now occupied the room.  He concluded he had better
not say anything about it.

Miss Brooks's golden eyelashes were bent towards the floor.  "Do you
play sacred music, Mr. Bly?" she said, without raising them.

"I am afraid not."

"Perhaps you know only negro-minstrel songs?"

"I am afraid--yes."

"I know one."  The dimples faintly came back again.  "It's called 'The
Ham-fat Man.'  Some day when mother isn't in I'll play it for you."

Then the dimples fled again, and she immediately looked so distressed
that Herbert came to her assistance.

"I suppose your brother taught you that too?"

"Oh dear, no!" she returned, with her frightened glance; "I only heard
him say some people preferred that kind of thing to sacred music, and
one day I saw a copy of it in a music-store window in Clay Street, and
bought it.  Oh no! Tappington didn't teach it to me."

In the pleasant discovery that she was at times independent of her
brother's perfections, Herbert smiled, and sympathetically drew a step
nearer to her.  She rose at once, somewhat primly holding back the
sides of her skirt, school-girl fashion, with thumb and finger, and her
eyes cast down.

"Good afternoon, Mr. Bly."

"Must you go?  Good afternoon."

She walked directly to the open door, looking very tall and stately as
she did so, but without turning towards him.  When she reached it she
lifted her eyes; there was the slightest suggestion of a return of her
dimples in the relaxation of her grave little mouth. Then she said,
"good-bye, Mr. Bly," and departed.

The skirt of her dress rustled for an instant in the passage. Herbert
looked after her.  "I wonder if she skipped then--she looks like a girl
that might skip at such a time," he said to himself. "How very odd she
is--and how simple!  But I must pull her up in that slang when I know
her better.  Fancy her brother telling her THAT!  What a pair they must
be!"  Nevertheless, when he turned back into the room again he forbore
going to the window to indulge further curiosity in regard to his
wicked neighbors.  A certain new feeling of respect to his late
companion--and possibly to himself--held him in check.  Much as he
resented Tappington's perfections, he resented quite as warmly the
presumption that he was not quite as perfect, which was implied in that
mysterious overture.  He glanced at the stool on which she had been
sitting with a half-brotherly smile, and put it reverently on one side
with a very vivid recollection of her shy maidenly figure.  In some
mysterious way too the room seemed to have lost its formal strangeness;
perhaps it was the touch of individuality--HERS--that had been wanting?
He began thoughtfully to dress himself for his regular dinner at the
Poodle Dog Restaurant, and when he left the room he turned back to look
once more at the stool where she had sat.  Even on his way to that fast
and famous cafe of the period he felt, for the first time in his
thoughtless but lonely life, the gentle security of the home he had
left behind him.


II.

It was three or four days before he became firmly adjusted to his new
quarters.  During this time he had met Cherry casually on the
staircase, in going or coming, and received her shy greetings; but she
had not repeated her visit, nor again alluded to it.  He had spent part
of a formal evening in the parlor in company with a calling deacon,
who, unappalled by the Indian shawl for which the widow had exchanged
her household cerements on such occasions, appeared to Herbert to have
remote matrimonial designs, as far at least as a sympathetic
deprecation of the vanities of the present, an echoing of her sighs
like a modest encore, a preternatural gentility of manner, a vague
allusion to the necessity of bearing "one another's burdens," and an
everlasting promise in store, would seem to imply.  To Herbert's vivid
imagination, a discussion on the doctrinal points of last Sabbath's
sermon was fraught with delicate suggestion and an acceptance by the
widow of an appointment to attend the Wednesday evening "Lectures" had
all the shy reluctant yielding of a granted rendezvous.  Oddly enough,
the more formal attitude seemed to be reserved for the young people,
who, in the suggestive atmosphere of this spiritual flirtation, alone
appeared to preserve the proprieties and, to some extent, decorously
chaperon their elders.  Herbert gravely turned the leaves of Cherry's
music while she played and sang one or two discreet but depressing
songs expressive of her unalterable but proper devotion to her mother's
clock, her father's arm-chair, and her aunt's Bible; and Herbert joined
somewhat boyishly in the soul-subduing refrain.  Only once he ventured
to suggest in a whisper that he would like to add HER music-stool to
the adorable inventory; but he was met by such a disturbed and
terrified look that he desisted. "Another night of this wild and
reckless dissipation will finish me," he said lugubriously to himself
when he reached the solitude of his room.  "I wonder how many times a
week I'd have to help the girl play the spiritual gooseberry downstairs
before we could have any fun ourselves?"

Here the sound of distant laughter, interspersed with vivacious
feminine shrieks, came through the open window.  He glanced between the
curtains.  His neighbor's house was brilliantly lit, and the shadows of
a few romping figures were chasing each other across the muslin shades
of the windows.  The objectionable young women were evidently enjoying
themselves.  In some conditions of the mind there is a certain
exasperation in the spectacle of unmeaning enjoyment, and he shut the
window sharply.  At the same moment some one knocked at his door.

It was Miss Brooks, who had just come upstairs.

"Will you please let me have my music-stool?"

He stared at her a moment in surprise, then recovering himself, said,
"Yes, certainly," and brought the stool.  For an instant he was tempted
to ask why she wanted it, but his pride forbade him.

"Thank you.  Good-night."

"Good-night!"

"I hope it wasn't in your way?"

"Not at all."

"Good-night!"

"Good-night."

She vanished.  Herbert was perplexed.  Between young ladies whose naive
exuberance impelled them to throw handkerchiefs at his window and young
ladies whose equally naive modesty demanded the withdrawal from his
bedroom of a chair on which they had once sat, his lot seemed to have
fallen in a troubled locality.  Yet a day or two later he heard Cherry
practising on the harmonium as he was ascending the stairs on his
return from business; she had departed before he entered the room, but
had left the music-stool behind her.  It was not again removed.

One Sunday, the second or third of his tenancy, when Cherry and her
mother were at church, and he had finished some work that he had
brought from the bank, his former restlessness and sense of strangeness
returned.  The regular afternoon fog had thickened early, and, driving
him back from a cheerless, chilly ramble on the hill, had left him
still more depressed and solitary.  In sheer desperation he moved some
of the furniture, and changed the disposition of several smaller
ornaments.  Growing bolder, he even attacked the sacred shelf devoted
to Tappington's serious literature and moral studies.  At first glance
the book of sermons looked suspiciously fresh and new for a volume of
habitual reference, but its leaves were carefully cut, and contained
one or two book-marks.  It was only another evidence of that perfect
youth's care and neatness.  As he was replacing it he noticed a small
object folded in white paper at the back of the shelf.  To put the book
back into its former position it was necessary to take this out.  He
did so, but its contents slid from his fingers and the paper to the
floor.  To his utter consternation, looking down he saw a pack of
playing-cards strewn at his feet!

He hurriedly picked them up.  They were worn and slippery from use, and
exhaled a faint odor of tobacco.  Had they been left there by some
temporary visitor unknown to Tappington and his family, or had they
been hastily hidden by a servant?  Yet they were of a make and texture
superior to those that a servant would possess; looking at them
carefully, he recognized them to be of a quality used by the
better-class gamblers.  Restoring them carefully to their former
position, he was tempted to take out the other volumes, and was
rewarded with the further discovery of a small box of ivory counters,
known as "poker-chips."  It was really very extraordinary!  It was
quite the cache of some habitual gambler. Herbert smiled grimly at the
irreverent incongruity of the hiding-place selected by its unknown and
mysterious owner, and amused himself by fancying the horror of his
sainted predecessor had he made the discovery.  He determined to
replace them, and to put some mark upon the volumes before them in
order to detect any future disturbance of them in his absence.

Ought he not to take Miss Brooks in his confidence?  Or should he say
nothing about it at present, and trust to chance to discover the
sacrilegious hider?  Could it possibly be Cherry herself, guilty of the
same innocent curiosity that had impelled her to buy the "Ham-fat Man"?
Preposterous!  Besides, the cards had been used, and she could not play
poker alone!

He watched the rolling fog extinguish the line of Russian Hill, the
last bit of far perspective from his window.  He glanced at his
neighbor's veranda, already dripping with moisture; the windows were
blank; he remembered to have heard the girls giggling in passing down
the side street on their way to church, and had noticed from behind his
own curtains that one was rather pretty. This led him to think of
Cherry again, and to recall the quaint yet melancholy grace of her
figure as she sat on the stool opposite. Why had she withdrawn it so
abruptly; did she consider his jesting allusion to it indecorous and
presuming?  Had he really meant it seriously; and was he beginning to
think too much about her?  Would she ever come again?  How nice it
would be if she returned from church alone early, and they could have a
comfortable chat together here!  Would she sing the "Ham-fat Man" for
him?  Would the dimples come back if she did?  Should he ever know more
of this quaint repressed side of her nature?  After all, what a dear,
graceful, tantalizing, lovable creature she was!  Ought he not at all
hazards try to know her better?  Might it not be here that he would
find a perfect realization of his boyish dreams, and in HER all
that--what nonsense he was thinking!

Suddenly Herbert was startled by the sound of a light but hurried foot
upon the wooden outer step of his second door, and the quick but
ineffective turning of the door-handle.  He started to his feet, his
mind still filled with a vision of Cherry.  Then he as suddenly
remembered that he had locked the door on going out, putting the key in
his overcoat pocket.  He had returned by the front door, and his
overcoat was now hanging in the lower hall.

The door again rattled impetuously.  Then it was supplemented by a
female voice in a hurried whisper: "Open quick, can't you? do hurry!"

He was confounded.  The voice was authoritative, not unmusical; but it
was NOT Cherry's.  Nevertheless he called out quickly, "One moment,
please, and I'll get the key!" dashed downstairs and up again,
breathlessly unlocked the door and threw it open.

Nobody was there!

He ran out into the street.  On one side it terminated abruptly on the
cliff on which his dwelling was perched; on the other, it descended
more gradually into the next thoroughfare; but up and down the street,
on either hand, no one was to be seen.  A slightly superstitious
feeling for an instant crept over him.  Then he reflected that the
mysterious visitor could in the interval of his getting the key have
easily slipped down the steps of the cliff or entered the shrubbery of
one of the adjacent houses.  But why had she not waited?  And what did
she want?  As he reentered his door he mechanically raised his eyes to
the windows of his neighbor's. This time he certainly was not mistaken.
The two amused, mischievous faces that suddenly disappeared behind the
curtain as he looked up showed that the incident had not been
unwitnessed. Yet it was impossible that it could have been either of
THEM. Their house was only accessible by a long detour.  It might have
been the trick of a confederate; but the tone of half familiarity and
half entreaty in the unseen visitor's voice dispelled the idea of any
collusion.  He entered the room and closed the door angrily. A grim
smile stole over his face as he glanced around at the dainty saint-like
appointments of the absent Tappington, and thought what that
irreproachable young man would have said to the indecorous intrusion,
even though it had been a mistake.  Would those shameless Pike County
girls have dared to laugh at HIM?

But he was again puzzled to know why he himself should have been
selected for this singular experience.  Why was HE considered fair game
for these girls?  And, for the matter of that, now that he reflected
upon it, why had even this gentle, refined, and melancholy Cherry
thought it necessary to talk slang to HIM on their first acquaintance,
and offer to sing him the "Ham-fat Man"? It was true he had been a
little gay, but never dissipated.  Of course he was not a saint, like
Tappington--oh, THAT was it!  He believed he understood it now.  He was
suffering from that extravagant conception of what worldliness consists
of, so common to very good people with no knowledge of the world.
Compared to Tappington he was in their eyes, of course, a rake and a
roue.  The explanation pleased him.  He would not keep it to himself.
He would gain Cherry's confidence and enlist her sympathies.  Her
gentle nature would revolt at this injustice to their lonely lodger.
She would see that there were degrees of goodness besides her
brother's.  She would perhaps sit on that stool again and NOT sing the
"Ham-fat Man."

A day or two afterwards the opportunity seemed offered to him.  As he
was coming home and ascending the long hilly street, his eye was taken
by a tall graceful figure just preceding him.  It was she. He had never
before seen her in the street, and was now struck with her ladylike
bearing and the grave superiority of her perfectly simple attire.  In a
thoroughfare haunted by handsome women and striking toilettes, the
refined grace of her mourning costume, and a certain stateliness that
gave her the look of a young widow, was a contrast that evidently
attracted others than himself.  It was with an odd mingling of pride
and jealousy that he watched the admiring yet respectful glances of the
passers-by, some of whom turned to look again, and one or two to
retrace their steps and follow her at a decorous distance.  This caused
him to quicken his own pace, with a new anxiety and a remorseful sense
of wasted opportunity.  What a booby he had been, not to have made more
of his contiguity to this charming girl--to have been frightened at the
naive decorum of her maidenly instincts!  He reached her side, and
raised his hat with a trepidation at her new-found graces--with a
boldness that was defiant of her other admirers.  She blushed slightly.

"I thought you'd overtake me before," she said naively.  "I saw YOU
ever so long ago."

He stammered, with an equal simplicity, that he had not dared to.

She looked a little frightened again, and then said hurriedly: "I only
thought that I would meet you on Montgomery Street, and we would walk
home together.  I don't like to go out alone, and mother cannot always
go with me.  Tappington never cared to take me out--I don't know why.
I think he didn't like the people staring and stop ping us.  But they
stare more--don't you think?--when one is alone. So I thought if you
were coming straight home we might come together--unless you have
something else to do?"

Herbert impulsively reiterated his joy at meeting her, and averred that
no other engagement, either of business or pleasure, could or would
stand in his way.  Looking up, however, it was with some consternation
that he saw they were already within a block of the house.

"Suppose we take a turn around the hill and come back by the old street
down the steps?" he suggested earnestly.

The next moment he regretted it.  The frightened look returned to her
eyes; her face became melancholy and formal again.

"No!" she said quickly.  "That would be taking a walk with you like
these young girls and their young men on Saturdays.  That's what Ellen
does with the butcher's boy on Sundays.  Tappington often used to meet
them.  Doing the 'Come, Philanders,' as he says you call it."

It struck Herbert that the didactic Tappington's method of inculcating
a horror of slang in his sister's breast was open to some objection;
but they were already on the steps of their house, and he was too much
mortified at the reception of his last unhappy suggestion to make the
confidential disclosure he had intended, even if there had still been
time.

"There's mother waiting for me," she said, after an awkward pause,
pointing to the figure of Mrs. Brooks dimly outlined on the veranda.
"I suppose she was beginning to be worried about my being out alone.
She'll be so glad I met you."  It didn't appear to Herbert, however,
that Mrs. Brooks exhibited any extravagant joy over the occurrence, and
she almost instantly retired with her daughter into the sitting-room,
linking her arm in Cherry's, and, as it were, empanoplying her with her
own invulnerable shawl. Herbert went to his room more dissatisfied with
himself than ever.

Two or three days elapsed without his seeing Cherry; even the
well-known rustle of her skirt in the passage was missing.  On the
third evening he resolved to bear the formal terrors of the
drawing-room again, and stumbled upon a decorous party consisting of
Mrs. Brooks, the deacon, and the pastor's wife--but not Cherry.  It
struck him on entering that the momentary awkwardness of the company
and the formal beginning of a new topic indicated that HE had been the
subject of their previous conversation.  In this idea he continued,
through that vague spirit of opposition which attacks impulsive people
in such circumstances, to generally disagree with them on all subjects,
and to exaggerate what he chose to believe they thought objectionable
in him.  He did not remain long; but learned in that brief interval
that Cherry had gone to visit a friend in Contra Costa, and would be
absent a fortnight; and he was conscious that the information was
conveyed to him with a peculiar significance.

The result of which was only to intensify his interest in the absent
Cherry, and for a week to plunge him in a sea of conflicting doubts and
resolutions.  At one time he thought seriously of demanding an
explanation from Mrs. Brooks, and of confiding to her--as he had
intended to do to Cherry--his fears that his character had been
misinterpreted, and his reasons for believing so.  But here he was met
by the difficulty of formulating what he wished to have explained, and
some doubts as to whether his confidences were prudent.  At another
time he contemplated a serious imitation of Tappington's perfections, a
renunciation of the world, and an entire change in his habits.  He
would go regularly to church--HER church, and take up Tappington's
desolate Bible-class.  But here the torturing doubt arose whether a
young lady who betrayed a certain secular curiosity, and who had
evidently depended upon her brother for a knowledge of the world, would
entirely like it.  At times he thought of giving up the room and
abandoning for ever this doubly dangerous proximity; but here again he
was deterred by the difficulty of giving a satisfactory reason to his
employer, who had procured it as a favor.  His passion--for such he
began to fear it to be--led him once to the extravagance of asking a
day's holiday from the bank, which he vaguely spent in the streets of
Oakland in the hope of accidentally meeting the exiled Cherry.


III.

The fortnight slowly passed.  She returned, but he did not see her. She
was always out or engaged in her room with some female friend when
Herbert was at home.  This was singular, as she had never appeared to
him as a young girl who was fond of visiting or had ever affected
female friendships.  In fact, there was little doubt now that,
wittingly or unwittingly, she was avoiding him.

He was moodily sitting by the fire one evening, having returned early
from dinner.  In reply to his habitual but affectedly careless inquiry,
Ellen had told him that Mrs. Brooks was confined to her room by a
slight headache, and that Miss Brooks was out.  He was trying to read,
and listening to the wind that occasionally rattled the casement and
caused the solitary gas-lamp that was visible in the side street to
flicker and leap wildly.  Suddenly he heard the same footfall upon his
outer step and a light tap at the door.  Determined this time to solve
the mystery, he sprang to his feet and ran to the door; but to his
anger and astonishment it was locked and the key was gone.  Yet he was
positive that HE had not taken it out.

The tap was timidly repeated.  In desperation he called out, "Please
don't go away yet.  The key is gone; but I'll find it in a moment."
Nevertheless he was at his wits' end.

There was a hesitating pause and then the sound of a key cautiously
thrust into the lock.  It turned; the door opened, and a tall figure,
whose face and form were completely hidden in a veil and long gray
shawl, quickly glided into the room and closed the door behind it.
Then it suddenly raised its arms, the shawl was parted, the veil fell
aside, and Cherry stood before him!

Her face was quite pale.  Her eyes, usually downcast, frightened, or
coldly clear, were bright and beautiful with excitement.  The dimples
were faintly there, although the smile was sad and half hysterical.
She remained standing, erect and tall, her arms dropped at her side,
holding the veil and shawl that still depended from her shoulders.

"So--I've caught you!" she said, with a strange little laugh.  "Oh yes.
'Please don't go away yet.  I'll get the key in a moment,'" she
continued, mimicking his recent utterance.

He could only stammer, "Miss Brooks--then it was YOU?"

"Yes; and you thought it was SHE, didn't you?  Well, and you're caught!
I didn't believe it; I wouldn't believe it when they said it.  I
determined to find it out myself.  And I have; and it's true."

Unable to determine whether she was serious or jesting, and conscious
only of his delight at seeing her again, he advanced impulsively.  But
her expression instantly changed: she became at once stiff and
school-girlishly formal, and stepped back towards the door.

"Don't come near me, or I'll go," she said quickly, with her hand upon
the lock.

"But not before you tell me what you mean," he said half laughingly
half earnestly.  "Who is SHE? and what wouldn't you have believed? For
upon my honor, Miss Brooks, I don't know what you are talking about."

His evident frankness and truthful manner appeared to puzzle her. "You
mean to say you were expecting no one?" she said sharply.

"I assure you I was not."

"And--and no woman was ever here--at that door?"

He hesitated.  "Not to-night--not for a long time; not since you
returned from Oakland."

"Then there WAS one?"

"I believe so."

"You BELIEVE--you don't KNOW?"

"I believed it was a woman from her voice; for the door was locked, and
the key was downstairs.  When I fetched it and opened the door, she--or
whoever it was--was gone."

"And that's why you said so imploringly, just now, 'Please don't go
away yet'?  You see I've caught you.  Ah! I don't wonder you blush!"

If he had, his cheeks had caught fire from her brilliant eyes and the
extravagantly affected sternness--as of a school-girl monitor--in her
animated face.  Certainly he had never seen such a transformation.

"Yes; but, you see, I wanted to know who the intruder was," he said,
smiling at his own embarrassment.

"You did--well, perhaps THAT will tell you?  It was found under your
door before I went away."  She suddenly produced from her pocket a
folded paper and handed it to him.  It was a misspelt scrawl, and ran
as follows:--

"Why are you so cruel?  Why do you keep me dansing on the stepps before
them gurls at the windows?  Was it that stuckup Saint, Miss Brooks,
that you were afraid of, my deer?  Oh, you faithless trater!  Wait till
I ketch you!  I'll tear your eyes out and hern!"

It did not require great penetration for Herbert to be instantly
convinced that the writer of this vulgar epistle and the owner of the
unknown voice were two very different individuals.  The note was
evidently a trick.  A suspicion of its perpetrators flashed upon him.

"Whoever the woman was, it was not she who wrote the note," he said
positively.  "Somebody must have seen her at the door.  I remember now
that those girls--your neighbors--were watching me from their window
when I came out.  Depend upon it, that letter comes from them."

Cherry's eyes opened widely with a sudden childlike perception, and
then shyly dropped.  "Yes," she said slowly; "they DID watch you. They
know it, for it was they who made it the talk of the neighborhood, and
that's how it came to mother's ears."  She stopped, and, with a
frightened look, stepped back towards the door again.

"Then THAT was why your mother"--

"Oh yes," interrupted Cherry quickly.  "That was why I went over to
Oakland, and why mother forbade my walking with you again, and why she
had a talk with friends about your conduct, and why she came near
telling Mr. Carstone all about it until I stopped her."  She checked
herself--he could hardly believe his eyes--the pale, nun-like girl was
absolutely blushing.

"I thank you, Miss Brooks," he said gravely, "for your thoughtfulness,
although I hope I could have still proven my innocence to Mr. Carstone,
even if some unknown woman tried my door by mistake, and was seen doing
it.  But I am pained to think that YOU could have believed me capable
of so wanton and absurd an impropriety--and such a gross disrespect to
your mother's house."

"But," said Cherry with childlike naivete, "you know YOU don't think
anything of such things, and that's what I told mother."

"You told your mother THAT?"

"Oh yes--I told her Tappington says it's quite common with young men.
Please don't laugh--for it's very dreadful.  Tappington didn't laugh
when he told it to me as a warning.  He was shocked."

"But, my dear Miss Brooks"--

"There--now you're angry--and that's as bad.  Are you sure you didn't
know that woman?"

"Positive!"

"Yet you seemed very anxious just now that she should wait till you
opened the door."

"That was perfectly natural."

"I don't think it was natural at all."

"But--according to Tappington"--

"Because my brother is very good you need not make fun of him."

"I assure you I have no such intention.  But what more can I say? I
give you my word that I don't know who that unlucky woman was. No doubt
she may have been some nearsighted neighbor who had mistaken the house,
and I dare say was as thoroughly astonished at my voice as I was at
hers.  Can I say more?  Is it necessary for me to swear that since I
have been here no woman has ever entered that door--but"--

"But who?"

"Yourself."

"I know what you mean," she said hurriedly, with her old frightened
look, gliding to the outer door.  "It's shameful what I've done. But I
only did it because--because I had faith in you, and didn't believe
what they said was true."  She had already turned the lock. There were
tears in her pretty eyes.

"Stop," said Herbert gently.  He walked slowly towards her, and within
reach of her frightened figure stopped with the timid respect of a
mature and genuine passion.  "You must not be seen going out of that
door," he said gravely.  "You must let me go first, and, when I am
gone, lock the door again and go through the hall to your own room.  No
one must know that I was in the house when you came in at that door.
Good-night."

Without offering his hand he lifted his eyes to her face.  The dimples
were all there--and something else.  He bowed and passed out.

Ten minutes later he ostentatiously returned to the house by the front
door, and proceeded up the stairs to his own room.  As he cast a glance
around he saw that the music-stool had been moved before the fire,
evidently with the view of attracting his attention.  Lying upon it,
carefully folded, was the veil that she had worn.  There could be no
doubt that it was left there purposely.  With a smile at this strange
girl's last characteristic act of timid but compromising recklessness,
after all his precautions, he raised it tenderly to his lips, and then
hastened to hide it from the reach of vulgar eyes.  But had Cherry
known that its temporary resting-place that night was under his pillow
she might have doubted his superior caution.

When he returned from the bank the next afternoon, Cherry rapped
ostentatiously at his door.  "Mother wishes me to ask you," she began
with a certain prim formality, which nevertheless did not preclude
dimples, "if you would give us the pleasure of your company at our
Church Festival to-night?  There will be a concert and a collation.
You could accompany us there if you cared.  Our friends and
Tappington's would be so glad to see you, and Dr. Stout would be
delighted to make your acquaintance."

"Certainly!" said Herbert, delighted and yet astounded.  "Then," he
added in a lower voice, "your mother no longer believes me so
dreadfully culpable?"

"Oh no," said Cherry in a hurried whisper, glancing up and down the
passage; "I've been talking to her about it, and she is satisfied that
it is all a jealous trick and slander of these neighbors. Why, I told
her that they had even said that I was that mysterious woman; that I
came that way to you because she had forbidden my seeing you openly."

"What!  You dared say that?"

"Yes don't you see?  Suppose they said they HAD seen me coming in last
night--THAT answers it," she said triumphantly.

"Oh, it does?" he said vacantly.

"Perfectly.  So you see she's convinced that she ought to put you on
the same footing as Tappington, before everybody; and then there won't
be any trouble.  You'll come, won't you?  It won't be so VERY good.
And then, I've told mother that as there have been so many
street-fights, and so much talk about the Vigilance Committee lately, I
ought to have somebody for an escort when I am coming home.  And if
you're known, you see, as one of US, there'll be no harm in your
meeting me."

"Thank you," he said, extending his hand gratefully.

Her fingers rested a moment in his.  "Where did you put it?" she said
demurely.

"It?  Oh! IT'S all safe," he said quickly, but somewhat vaguely.

"But I don't call the upper drawer of your bureau safe," she returned
poutingly, "where EVERYBODY can go.  So you'll find it NOW inside the
harmonium, on the keyboard."

"Oh, thank you."

"It's quite natural to have left it there ACCIDENTALLY--isn't it?" she
said imploringly, assisted by all her dimples.  Alas! she had forgotten
that he was still holding her hand.  Consequently, she had not time to
snatch it away and vanish, with a stifled little cry, before it had
been pressed two or three times to his lips.  A little ashamed of his
own boldness, Herbert remained for a few moments in the doorway
listening, and looking uneasily down the dark passage.  Presently a
slight sound came over the fanlight of Cherry's room.  Could he believe
his ears?  The saint-like Cherry--no doubt tutored, for example's sake,
by the perfect Tappington--was softly whistling.

In this simple fashion the first pages of this little idyl were quietly
turned.  The book might have been closed or laid aside even then.  But
it so chanced that Cherry was an unconscious prophet; and presently it
actually became a prudential necessity for her to have a masculine
escort when she walked out.  For a growing state of lawlessness and
crime culminated one day the deep tocsin of the Vigilance Committee,
and at its stroke fifty thousand peaceful men, reverting to the first
principles of social safety, sprang to arms, assembled at their
quarters, or patrolled the streets.  In another hour the city of San
Francisco was in the hands of a mob--the most peaceful, orderly, well
organized, and temperate the world had ever known, and yet in
conception as lawless, autocratic, and imperious as the conditions it
opposed.


IV.

Herbert, enrolled in the same section with his employer and one or two
fellow-clerks, had participated in the meetings of the committee with
the light-heartedness and irresponsibility of youth, regretting only
the loss of his usual walk with Cherry and the hours that kept him from
her house.  He was returning from a protracted meeting one night, when
the number of arrests and searching for proscribed and suspected
characters had been so large as to induce fears of organized resistance
and rescue, and on reaching the foot of the hill found it already so
late, that to avoid disturbing the family he resolved to enter his room
directly by the door in the side street.  On inserting his key in the
lock it met with some resisting obstacle, which, however, yielded and
apparently dropped on the mat inside.  Opening the door and stepping
into the perfectly dark apartment, he trod upon this object, which
proved to be another key.  The family must have procured it for their
convenience during his absence, and after locking the door had
carelessly left it in the lock.  It was lucky that it had yielded so
readily.

The fire had gone out.  He closed the door and lit the gas, and after
taking off his overcoat moved to the door leading into the passage to
listen if anybody was still stirring.  To his utter astonishment he
found it locked.  What was more remarkable--the key was also INSIDE!
An inexplicable feeling took possession of him. He glanced suddenly
around the room, and then his eye fell upon the bed.  Lying there,
stretched at full length, was the recumbent figure of a man.

He was apparently in the profound sleep of utter exhaustion.  The
attitude of his limbs and the order of his dress--of which only his
collar and cravat had been loosened--showed that sleep must have
overtaken him almost instantly.  In fact, the bed was scarcely
disturbed beyond the actual impress of his figure.  He seemed to be a
handsome, matured man of about forty; his dark straight hair was a
little thinned over the temples, although his long heavy moustache was
still youthful and virgin.  His clothes, which were elegantly cut and
of finer material than that in ordinary use, the delicacy and neatness
of his linen, the whiteness of his hands, and, more particularly, a
certain dissipated pallor of complexion and lines of recklessness on
the brow and cheek, indicated to Herbert that the man before him was
one of that desperate and suspected class--some of whose proscribed
members he had been hunting--the professional gambler!

Possibly the magnetism of Herbert's intent and astonished gaze affected
him.  He moved slightly, half opened his eyes, said "Halloo, Tap,"
rubbed them again, wholly opened them, fixed them with a lazy stare on
Herbert, and said:

"Now, who the devil are you?"

"I think I have the right to ask that question, considering that this
is my room," said Herbert sharply.

"YOUR room?"

"Yes!"

The stranger half raised himself on his elbow, glanced round the room,
settled himself slowly back on the pillows, with his hands clasped
lightly behind his head, dropped his eyelids, smiled, and said:

"Rats!"

"What?" demanded Herbert, with a resentful sense of sacrilege to
Cherry's virgin slang.

"Well, old rats then!  D'ye think I don't know this shebang?  Look
here, Johnny, what are you putting on all this side for, eh? What's
your little game?  Where's Tappington?"

"If you mean Mr. Brooks, the son of this house, who formerly lived in
this room," replied Herbert, with a formal precision intended to show a
doubt of the stranger's knowledge of Tappington, "you ought to know
that he has left town."

"Left town!" echoed the stranger, raising himself again.  "Oh, I see!
getting rather too warm for him here?  Humph! I ought to have thought
of that.  Well, you know, he DID take mighty big risks, anyway!"  He
was silent a moment, with his brows knit and a rather dangerous
expression in his handsome face.  "So some d--d hound gave him
away--eh?"

"I hadn't the pleasure of knowing Mr. Brooks except by reputation, as
the respected son of the lady upon whose house you have just intruded,"
said Herbert frigidly, yet with a creeping consciousness of some
unpleasant revelation.

The stranger stared at him for a moment, again looked carefully round
the room, and then suddenly dropped his head back on the pillow, and
with his white hands over his eyes and mouth tried to restrain a spasm
of silent laughter.  After an effort he succeeded, wiped his moist
eyes, and sat up.

"So you didn't know Tappington, eh?" he said, lazily buttoning his
collar.

"No."

"No more do I."

He retied his cravat, yawned, rose, shook himself perfectly neat again,
and going to Herbert's dressing-table quietly took up a brush and began
to lightly brush himself, occasionally turning to the window to glance
out.  Presently he turned to Herbert and said:

"Well, Johnny, what's your name?"

"I am Herbert Bly, of Carstone's Bank."

"So, and a member of this same Vigilance Committee, I reckon," he
continued.

"Yes."

"Well, Mr. Bly, I owe you an apology for coming here, and some thanks
for the only sleep I've had in forty-eight hours.  I struck this old
shebang at about ten o'clock, and it's now two, so I reckon I've put in
about four hours' square sleep.  Now, look here."  He beckoned Herbert
towards the window.  "Do you see those three men standing under that
gaslight?  Well, they're part of a gang of Vigilantes who've hunted me
to the hill, and are waiting to see me come out of the bushes, where
they reckon I'm hiding.  Go to them and say that I'm here!  Tell them
you've got Gentleman George--George Dornton, the man they've been
hunting for a week--in this room.  I promise you I won't stir, nor kick
up a row, when they've come.  Do it, and Carstone, if he's a square
man, will raise your salary for it, and promote you."  He yawned
slightly, and then slowly looking around him, drew the easy-chair
towards him and dropped comfortably in it, gazing at the astounded and
motionless Herbert with a lazy smile.

"You're wondering what my little game is, Johnny, ain't you?  Well,
I'll tell you.  What with being hunted from pillar to post, putting my
old pards to no end of trouble, and then slipping up on it whenever I
think I've got a sure thing like this,"--he cast an almost affectionate
glance at the bed,--"I've come to the conclusion that it's played out,
and I might as well hand in my checks.  It's only a question of my
being RUN OUT of 'Frisco, or hiding until I can SLIP OUT myself; and
I've reckoned I might as well give them the trouble and expense of
transportation.  And if I can put a good thing in your way in doing
it--why, it will sort of make things square with you for the fuss I've
given you."

Even in the stupefaction and helplessness of knowing that the man
before him was the notorious duellist and gambler George Dornton, one
of the first marked for deportation by the Vigilance Committee, Herbert
recognized all he had heard of his invincible coolness, courage, and
almost philosophic fatalism.  For an instant his youthful imagination
checked even his indignation.  When he recovered himself, he said, with
rising color and boyish vehemence:

"Whoever YOU may be, I am neither a police officer nor a spy.  You have
no right to insult me by supposing that I would profit by the mistake
that made you my guest, or that I would refuse you the sanctuary of the
roof that covers your insult as well as your blunder."

The stranger gazed at him with an amused expression, and then rose and
stretched out his hand.

"Shake, Mr. Bly!  You're the only man that ever kicked George Dornton
when he deserved it.  Good-night!"  He took his hat and walked to the
door.

"Stop!" said Herbert impulsively; "the night is already far gone; go
back and finish your sleep."

"You mean it?"

"I do."

The stranger turned, walked back to the bed, unfastening his coat and
collar as he did so, and laid himself down in the attitude of a moment
before.

"I will call you in the morning," continued Herbert.  "By that
time,"--he hesitated,--"by that time your pursuers may have given up
their search.  One word more.  You will be frank with me?"

"Go on."

"Tappington and you are--friends?"

"Well--yes."

"His mother and sister know nothing of this?"

"I reckon he didn't boast of it.  I didn't.  Is that all?" sleepily.

"Yes."

"Don't YOU worry about HIM.  Good-night."

"Good-night."

But even at that moment George Dornton had dropped off in a quiet,
peaceful sleep.

Bly turned down the light, and, drawing his easy-chair to the window,
dropped into it in bewildering reflection.  This then was the
secret--unknown to mother and daughter--unsuspected by all! This was
the double life of Tappington, half revealed in his flirtation with the
neighbors, in the hidden cards behind the books, in the mysterious
visitor--still unaccounted for--and now wholly exploded by this
sleeping confederate, for whom, somehow, Herbert felt the greatest
sympathy!  What was to be done?  What should he say to Cherry--to her
mother--to Mr. Carstone?  Yet he had felt he had done right.  From time
to time he turned to the motionless recumbent shadow on the bed and
listened to its slow and peaceful respiration.  Apart from that
undefinable attraction which all original natures have for each other,
the thrice-blessed mystery of protection of the helpless, for the first
time in his life, seemed to dawn upon him through that night.

Nevertheless, the actual dawn came slowly.  Twice he nodded and awoke
quickly with a start.  The third time it was day.  The street-lamps
were extinguished, and with them the moving, restless watchers seemed
also to have vanished.  Suddenly a formal deliberate rapping at the
door leading to the hall startled him to his feet.

It must be Ellen.  So much the better; he could quickly get rid of her.
He glanced at the bed; Dornton slept on undisturbed.  He unlocked the
door cautiously, and instinctively fell back before the erect, shawled,
and decorous figure of Mrs. Brooks.  But an utterly new resolution and
excitement had supplanted the habitual resignation of her handsome
features, and given them an angry sparkle of expression.

Recollecting himself, he instantly stepped forward into the passage,
drawing to the door behind him, as she, with equal celerity, opposed it
with her hand.

"Mr. Bly," she said deliberately, "Ellen has just told me that your
voice has been heard in conversation with some one in this room late
last night.  Up to this moment I have foolishly allowed my daughter to
persuade me that certain infamous scandals regarding your conduct here
were false.  I must ask you as a gentleman to let me pass now and
satisfy myself."

"But, my dear madam, one moment.  Let me first explain--I
beg"--stammered Herbert with a half-hysterical laugh.  "I assure you a
gentleman friend"--

But she had pushed him aside and entered precipitately.  With a quick
feminine glance round the room she turned to the bed, and then halted
in overwhelming confusion.

"It's a friend," said Herbert in a hasty whisper.  "A friend of mine
who returned with me late, and whom, on account of the disturbed state
of the streets, I induced to stay here all night. He was so tired that
I have not had the heart to disturb him yet."

"Oh, pray don't!--I beg"--said Mrs. Brooks with a certain youthful
vivacity, but still gazing at the stranger's handsome features as she
slowly retreated.  "Not for worlds!"

Herbert was relieved; she was actually blushing.

"You see, it was quite unpremeditated, I assure you.  We came in
together," whispered Herbert, leading her to the door, "and I"--

"Don't believe a word of it, madam," said a lazy voice from the bed, as
the stranger leisurely raised himself upright, putting the last
finishing touch to his cravat as he shook himself neat again. "I'm an
utter stranger to him, and he knows it.  He found me here, biding from
the Vigilantes, who were chasing me on the hill.  I got in at that
door, which happened to be unlocked.  He let me stay because he was a
gentleman--and--I wasn't.  I beg your pardon, madam, for having
interrupted him before you; but it was a little rough to have him lie
on MY account when he wasn't the kind of man to lie on his OWN.  You'll
forgive him--won't you, please?--and, as I'm taking myself off now,
perhaps you'll overlook MY intrusion too."

It was impossible to convey the lazy frankness of this speech, the
charming smile with which it was accompanied, or the easy yet
deferential manner with which, taking up his hat, he bowed to Mrs.
Brooks as he advanced toward the door.

"But," said Mrs. Brooks, hurriedly glancing from Herbert to the
stranger, "it must be the Vigilantes who are now hanging about the
street.  Ellen saw them from her window, and thought they were YOUR
friends, Mr. Bly.  This gentleman--your friend"--she had become a
little confused in her novel excitement--"really ought not to go out
now.  It would be madness."

"If you wouldn't mind his remaining a little longer, it certainly would
be safer," said Herbert, with wondering gratitude.

"I certainly shouldn't consent to his leaving my house now," said Mrs.
Brooks with dignity; "and if you wouldn't mind calling Cherry here, Mr.
Bly--she's in the dining-room--and then showing yourself for a moment
in the street and finding out what they wanted, it would be the best
thing to do."

Herbert flew downstairs; in a few hurried words he gave the same
explanation to the astounded Cherry that he had given to her mother,
with the mischievous addition that Mrs. Brooks's unjust suspicions had
precipitated her into becoming an amicable accomplice, and then ran out
into the street.  Here he ascertained from one of the Vigilantes, whom
he knew, that they were really seeking Dornton; but that, concluding
that the fugitive had already escaped to the wharves, they expected to
withdraw their surveillance at noon.  Somewhat relieved, he hastened
back, to find the stranger calmly seated on the sofa in the parlor with
the same air of frank indifference, lazily relating the incidents of
his flight to the two women, who were listening with every expression
of sympathy and interest.  "Poor fellow!" said Cherry, taking the
astonished Bly aside into the hall, "I don't believe he's half as bad
as THEY said he is--or as even HE makes himself out to be.  But DID you
notice mother?"

Herbert, a little dazed, and, it must be confessed, a trifle uneasy at
this ready acceptance of the stranger, abstractedly said he had not.

"Why, it's the most ridiculous thing.  She's actually going round
WITHOUT HER SHAWL, and doesn't seem to know it."


V.

When Herbert finally reached the bank that morning he was still in a
state of doubt and perplexity.  He had parted with his grateful
visitor, whose safety in a few hours seemed assured, but without the
least further revelation or actual allusion to anything antecedent to
his selecting Tappington's room as refuge.  More than that, Herbert was
convinced from his manner that he had no intention of making a
confidant of Mrs. Brooks, and this convinced him that Dornton's
previous relations with Tappington were not only utterly inconsistent
with that young man's decorous reputation, but were unsuspected by the
family.  The stranger's familiar knowledge of the room, his mysterious
allusions to the "risks" Tappington had taken, and his sudden silence
on the discovery of Bly's ignorance of the whole affair all pointed to
some secret that, innocent or not, was more or less perilous, not only
to the son but to the mother and sister.  Of the latter's ignorance he
had no doubt--but had he any right to enlighten them?  Admitting that
Tappington had deceived them with the others, would they thank him for
opening their eyes to it?  If they had already a suspicion, would they
care to know that it was shared by him?  Halting between his frankness
and his delicacy, the final thought that in his budding relations with
the daughter it might seem a cruel bid for her confidence, or a revenge
for their distrust of him, inclined him to silence.  But an unforeseen
occurrence took the matter from his hands.  At noon he was told that
Mr. Carstone wished to see him in his private room!

Satisfied that his complicity with Dornton's escape was discovered, the
unfortunate Herbert presented himself, pale but self-possessed, before
his employer.  That brief man of business bade him be seated, and
standing himself before the fireplace, looked down curiously, but not
unkindly, upon his employee.

"Mr. Bly, the bank does not usually interfere with the private affairs
of its employees, but for certain reasons which I prefer to explain to
you later, I must ask you to give me a straightforward answer to one or
two questions.  I may say that they have nothing to do with your
relations to the bank, which are to us perfectly satisfactory."

More than ever convinced that Mr. Carstone was about to speak of his
visitor, Herbert signified his willingness to reply.

"You have been seen a great deal with Miss Brooks lately--on the street
and elsewhere--acting as her escort, and evidently on terms of
intimacy.  To do you both justice, neither of you seemed to have made
it a secret or avoided observation; but I must ask you directly if it
is with her mother's permission?"

Considerably relieved, but wondering what was coming, Herbert answered,
with boyish frankness, that it was.

"Are you--engaged to the young lady?"

"No, sir."

"Are you--well, Mr. Bly--briefly, are you what is called 'in love' with
her?" asked the banker, with a certain brusque hurrying over of a
sentiment evidently incompatible with their present business
surroundings.

Herbert blushed.  It was the first time he had heard the question
voiced, even by himself.

"I am," he said resolutely.

"And you wish to marry her?"

"If I dared ask her to accept a young man with no position as yet,"
stammered Herbert.

"People don't usually consider a young man in Carstone's Bank of no
position," said the banker dryly; "and I wish for your sake THAT were
the only impediment.  For I am compelled to reveal to you a secret."
He paused, and folding his arms, looked fixedly down upon his clerk.
"Mr. Bly, Tappington Brooks, the brother of your sweetheart, was a
defaulter and embezzler from this bank!"

Herbert sat dumfounded and motionless.

"Understand two things," continued Mr. Carstone quickly.  "First, that
no purer or better women exist than Miss Brooks and her mother.
Secondly, that they know nothing of this, and that only myself and one
other man are in possession of the secret."

He slightly changed his position, and went on more deliberately. "Six
weeks ago Tappington sat in that chair where you are sitting now, a
convicted hypocrite and thief.  Luckily for him, although his guilt was
plain, and the whole secret of his double life revealed to me, a sum of
money advanced in pity by one of his gambling confederates had made his
accounts good and saved him from suspicion in the eyes of his
fellow-clerks and my partners.  At first he tried to fight me on that
point; then he blustered and said his mother could have refunded the
money; and asked me what was a paltry five thousand dollars!  I told
him, Mr. Bly, that it might be five years of his youth in state prison;
that it might be five years of sorrow and shame for his mother and
sister; that it might be an everlasting stain on the name of his dead
father--my friend.  He talked of killing himself: I told him he was a
cowardly fool.  He asked me to give him up to the authorities: I told
him I intended to take the law in my own hands and give him another
chance; and then he broke down.  I transferred him that very day,
without giving him time to communicate with anybody, to our branch
office at Portland, with a letter explaining his position to our agent,
and the injunction that for six months he should be under strict
surveillance.  I myself undertook to explain his sudden departure to
Mrs. Brooks, and obliged him to write to her from time to time."  He
paused, and then continued: "So far I believe my plan has been
successful: the secret has been kept; he has broken with the evil
associates that ruined him here--to the best of my knowledge he has had
no communication with them since; even a certain woman here who shared
his vicious hidden life has abandoned him."

"Are you sure?" asked Herbert involuntarily, as he recalled his
mysterious visitor.

"I believe the Vigilance Committee has considered it a public duty to
deport her and her confederates beyond the State," returned Carstone
dryly.

Another idea flashed upon Herbert.  "And the gambler who advanced the
money to save Tappington?" he said breathlessly.

"Wasn't such a hound as the rest of his kind, if report says true,"
answered Carstone.  "He was well known here as George
Dornton--Gentleman George--a man capable of better things.  But he was
before your time, Mr. Bly--YOU don't know him."

Herbert didn't deem it a felicitous moment to correct his employer, and
Mr. Carstone continued: "I have now told you what I thought it was my
duty to tell you.  I must leave YOU to judge how far it affects your
relations with Miss Brooks."

Herbert did not hesitate.  "I should be very sorry, sir, to seem to
undervalue your consideration or disregard your warning; but I am
afraid that even if you had been less merciful to Tappington, and he
were now a convicted felon, I should change neither my feelings nor my
intentions to his sister."

"And you would still marry her?" said Carstone sternly; "YOU, an
employee of the bank, would set the example of allying yourself with
one who had robbed it?"

"I--am afraid I would, sir," said Herbert slowly.

"Even if it were a question of your remaining here?" said Carstone
grimly.

Poor Herbert already saw himself dismissed and again taking up his
weary quest for employment; but, nevertheless, he answered stoutly:

"Yes, sir."

"And nothing will prevent you marrying Miss Brooks?"

"Nothing--save my inability to support her."

"Then," said Mr. Carstone, with a peculiar light in his eyes, "it only
remains for the bank to mark its opinion of your conduct by INCREASING
YOUR SALARY TO ENABLE YOU TO DO SO!  Shake hands, Mr. Bly," he said,
laughing.  "I think you'll do to tie to--and I believe the young lady
will be of the same opinion.  But not a word to either her or her
mother in regard to what you have heard.  And now I may tell you
something more.  I am not without hope of Tappington's future,
nor--d--n it!--without some excuse for his fault, sir.  He was
artificially brought up.  When my old friend died, Mrs. Brooks, still a
handsome woman, like all her sex wouldn't rest until she had another
devotion, and wrapped herself and her children up in the Church.
Theology may be all right for grown people, but it's apt to make
children artificial; and Tappington was pious before he was fairly
good.  He drew on a religious credit before he had a moral capital
behind it.  He was brought up with no knowledge of the world, and when
he went into it--it captured him.  I don't say there are not saints
born into the world occasionally; but for every one you'll find a lot
of promiscuous human nature.  My old friend Josh Brooks had a heap of
it, and it wouldn't be strange if some was left in his children, and
burst through their straight-lacing in a queer way.  That's all!
Good-morning, Mr. Bly.  Forget what I've told you for six months, and
then I shouldn't wonder if Tappington was on hand to give his sister
away."

       .       .       .       .       .       .       .

Mr. Carstone's prophecy was but half realized.  At the end of six
months Herbert Bly's discretion and devotion were duly rewarded by
Cherry's hand.  But Tappington did NOT give her away.  That saintly
prodigal passed his period of probation with exemplary rectitude, but,
either from a dread of old temptation, or some unexplained reason, he
preferred to remain in Portland, and his fastidious nest on Telegraph
Hill knew him no more.  The key of the little door on the side street
passed, naturally, into the keeping of Mrs. Bly.

Whether the secret of Tappington's double life was ever revealed to the
two women is not known to the chronicler.  Mrs. Bly is reported to have
said that the climate of Oregon was more suited to her brother's
delicate constitution than the damp fogs of San Francisco, and that his
tastes were always opposed to the mere frivolity of metropolitan
society.  The only possible reason for supposing that the mother may
have become cognizant of her son's youthful errors was in the
occasional visits to the house of the handsome George Dornton, who, in
the social revolution that followed the brief reign of the Vigilance
Committee, characteristically returned as a dashing stockbroker, and
the fact that Mrs. Brooks seemed to have discarded her ascetic shawl
forever.  But as all this was contemporaneous with the absurd rumor,
that owing to the loneliness induced by the marriage of her daughter
she contemplated a similar change in her own condition, it is deemed
unworthy the serious consideration of this veracious chronicle.




CAPTAIN JIM'S FRIEND.

I.

Hardly one of us, I think, really believed in the auriferous
probabilities of Eureka Gulch.  Following a little stream, we had one
day drifted into it, very much as we imagined the river gold might have
done in remoter ages, with the difference that WE remained there, while
the river gold to all appearances had not. At first it was tacitly
agreed to ignore this fact, and we made the most of the charming
locality, with its rare watercourse that lost itself in tangled depths
of manzanita and alder, its laurel-choked pass, its flower-strewn
hillside, and its summit crested with rocking pines.

"You see," said the optimistic Rowley, "water's the main thing after
all.  If we happen to strike river gold, thar's the stream for washing
it; if we happen to drop into quartz--and that thar rock looks mighty
likely--thar ain't a more natural-born site for a mill than that right
bank, with water enough to run fifty stamps.  That hillside is an
original dump for your tailings, and a ready found inclined road for
your trucks, fresh from the hands of Providence; and that road we're
kalkilatin' to build to the turnpike will run just easy along that
ridge."

Later, when we were forced to accept the fact that finding gold was
really the primary object of a gold-mining company, we still remained
there, excusing our youthful laziness and incertitude by brilliant and
effective sarcasms upon the unremunerative attractions of the gulch.
Nevertheless, when Captain Jim, returning one day from the nearest
settlement and post-office, twenty miles away, burst upon us with
"Well, the hull thing'll be settled now, boys; Lacy Bassett is coming
down yer to look round," we felt considerably relieved.

And yet, perhaps, we had as little reason for it as we had for
remaining there.  There was no warrant for any belief in the special
divining power of the unknown Lacy Bassett, except Captain Jim's
extravagant faith in his general superiority, and even that had always
been a source of amused skepticism to the camp.  We were already
impatiently familiar with the opinions of this unseen oracle; he was
always impending in Captain Jim's speech as a fragrant memory or an
unquestioned authority.  When Captain Jim began, "Ez Lacy was one day
tellin' me," or, "Ez Lacy Bassett allows," or more formally, when
strangers were present, "Ez a partickler friend o' mine, Lacy
Bassett--maybe ez you know him--sez," the youthful and lighter members
of the Eureka Mining Company glanced at each other in furtive
enjoyment.  Nevertheless no one looked more eagerly forward to the
arrival of this apocryphal sage than these indolent skeptics.  It was
at least an excitement; they were equally ready to accept his
condemnation of the locality or his justification of their original
selection.

He came.  He was received by the Eureka Mining Company lying on their
backs on the grassy site of the prospective quartz mill, not far from
the equally hypothetical "slide" to the gulch.  He came by the future
stage road--at present a thickset jungle of scrub-oaks and ferns.  He
was accompanied by Captain Jim, who had gone to meet him on the trail,
and for a few moments all critical inspection of himself was withheld
by the extraordinary effect he seemed to have upon the faculties of his
introducer.

Anything like the absolute prepossession of Captain Jim by this
stranger we had never imagined.  He approached us running a little
ahead of his guest, and now and then returning assuringly to his side
with the expression of a devoted Newfoundland dog, which in fluffiness
he generally resembled.  And now, even after the introduction was over,
when he made a point of standing aside in an affectation of
carelessness, with his hands in his pockets, the simulation was so
apparent, and his consciousness and absorption in his friend so
obvious, that it was a relief to us to recall him into the conversation.

As to our own first impressions of the stranger, they were probably
correct.  We all disliked him; we thought him conceited,
self-opinionated, selfish, and untrustworthy.  But later, reflecting
that this was possibly the result of Captain Jim's over-praise, and
finding none of these qualities as yet offensively opposed to our own
selfishness and conceit, we were induced, like many others, to forget
our first impressions.  We could easily correct him if he attempted to
impose upon US, as he evidently had upon Captain Jim. Believing, after
the fashion of most humanity, that there was something about US
particularly awe-inspiring and edifying to vice or weakness of any
kind, we good-humoredly yielded to the cheap fascination of this showy,
self-saturated, over-dressed, and underbred stranger.  Even the epithet
of "blower" as applied to him by Rowley had its mitigations; in that
Trajan community a bully was not necessarily a coward, nor florid
demonstration always a weakness.

His condemnation of the gulch was sweeping, original, and striking. He
laughed to scorn our half-hearted theory of a gold deposit in the bed
and bars of our favorite stream.  We were not to look for auriferous
alluvium in the bed of any present existing stream, but in the "cement"
or dried-up bed of the original prehistoric rivers that formerly ran
parallel with the present bed, and which--he demonstrated with the stem
of Pickney's pipe in the red dust--could be found by sinking shafts at
right angles with the stream.  The theory was to us, at that time,
novel and attractive.  It was true that the scientific explanation,
although full and gratuitous, sounded vague and incoherent.  It was
true that the geological terms were not always correct, and their
pronunciation defective, but we accepted such extraordinary discoveries
as "ignus fatuus rock," "splendiferous drift," "mica twist" (recalling
a popular species of tobacco), "iron pirates," and "discomposed quartz"
as part of what he not inaptly called a "tautological formation," and
were happy.  Nor was our contentment marred by the fact that the
well-known scientific authority with whom the stranger had been
intimate,--to the point of "sleeping together" during a survey,--and
whom he described as a bent old man with spectacles, must have aged
considerably since one of our party saw him three years before as a
keen young fellow of twenty-five.  Inaccuracies like those were only
the carelessness of genius.  "That's my opinion, gentlemen," he
concluded, negligently rising, and with pointed preoccupation whipping
the dust of Eureka Gulch from his clothes with his handkerchief, "but
of course it ain't nothin' to me."

Captain Jim, who had followed every word with deep and trustful
absorption, here repeated, "It ain't nothing to him, boys," with a
confidential implication of the gratuitous blessing we had received,
and then added, with loyal encouragement to him, "It ain't nothing to
you, Lacy, in course," and laid his hand on his shoulder with infinite
tenderness.

We, however, endeavored to make it something to Mr. Lacy Bassett. He
was spontaneously offered a share in the company and a part of Captain
Jim's tent.  He accepted both after a few deprecating and muttered
asides to Captain Jim, which the latter afterwards explained to us was
the giving up of several other important enterprises for our sake.
When he finally strolled away with Rowley to look over the gulch,
Captain Jim reluctantly tore himself away from him only for the
pleasure of reiterating his praise to us as if in strictest confidence
and as an entirely novel proceeding.

"You see, boys, I didn't like to say it afore HIM, we bein' old
friends; but, between us, that young feller ez worth thousands to the
camp.  Mebbee," he continued with grave naivete, "I ain't said much
about him afore, mebbee, bein' old friends and accustomed to him--you
know how it is, boys,--I haven't appreciated him as much ez I ought,
and ez you do.  In fact, I don't ezakly remember how I kem to ask him
down yer.  It came to me suddent, one day only a week ago Friday night,
thar under that buckeye; I was thinkin' o' one of his sayins, and sez
I--thar's Lacy, if he was here he'd set the hull thing right.  It was
the ghost of a chance my findin' him free, but I did.  And there HE is,
and yer WE are settled!  Ye noticed how he just knocked the bottom
outer our plans to work.  Ye noticed that quick sort o' sneerin' smile
o' his, didn't ye--that's Lacy!  I've seen him knock over a heap o'
things without sayin' anythin'--with jist that smile."

It occurred to us that we might have some difficulty in utilizing this
smile in our present affairs, and that we should have probably
preferred something more assuring, but Captain Jim's faith was
contagious.

"What is he, anyway?" asked Joe Walker lazily.

"Eh!" echoed Captain Jim in astonishment.  "What is Lacy Bassett?"

"Yes, what is he?" repeated Walker.

"Wot IS--he?"

"Yes."

"I've knowed him now goin' as four year," said Captain Jim with slow
reflective contentment.  "Let's see.  It was in the fall o' '54 I first
met him, and he's allus been the same ez you see him now."

"But what is his business or profession?  What does he do?"

Captain Jim looked reproachfully at his questioner.

"Do?" he repeated, turning to the rest of us as if disdaining a direct
reply.  "Do?--why, wot he's doin' now.  He's allus the same, allus Lacy
Bassett."

Howbeit, we went to work the next day under the superintendence of the
stranger with youthful and enthusiastic energy, and began the sinking
of a shaft at once.  To do Captain Jim's friend justice, for the first
few weeks he did not shirk a fair share of the actual labor, replacing
his objectionable and unsuitable finery with a suit of serviceable
working clothes got together by general contribution of the camp, and
assuring us of a fact we afterwards had cause to remember, that "he
brought nothing but himself into Eureka Gulch."  It may be added that
he certainly had not brought money there, as Captain Jim advanced the
small amounts necessary for his purchases in the distant settlement,
and for the still smaller sums he lost at cards, which he played with
characteristic self-sufficiency.

Meantime the work in the shaft progressed slowly but regularly. Even
when the novelty had worn off and the excitement of anticipation grew
fainter, I am afraid that we clung to this new form of occupation as an
apology for remaining there; for the fascinations of our vagabond and
unconventional life were more potent than we dreamed of.  We were
slowly fettered by our very freedom; there was a strange spell in this
very boundlessness of our license that kept us from even the desire of
change; in the wild and lawless arms of nature herself we found an
embrace as clinging, as hopeless and restraining, as the civilization
from which we had fled.  We were quite content after a few hours' work
in the shaft to lie on our backs on the hillside staring at the
unwinking sky, or to wander with a gun through the virgin forest in
search of game scarcely less vagabond than ourselves.  We indulged in
the most extravagant and dreamy speculations of the fortune we should
eventually discover in the shaft, and believed that we were practical.
We broke our "saleratus bread" with appetites unimpaired by
restlessness or anxiety; we went to sleep under the grave and sedate
stars with a serene consciousness of having fairly earned our rest; we
awoke the next morning with unabated trustfulness, and a sweet
obliviousness of even the hypothetical fortunes we had perhaps won or
lost at cards overnight.  We paid no heed to the fact that our little
capital was slowly sinking with the shaft, and that the rainy
season--wherein not only "no man could work," but even such play as
ours was impossible--was momentarily impending.

In the midst of this, one day Lacy Bassett suddenly emerged from the
shaft before his "shift" of labor was over with every sign of disgust
and rage in his face and inarticulate with apparent passion.  In vain
we gathered round him in concern; in vain Captain Jim regarded him with
almost feminine sympathy, as he flung away his pick and dashed his hat
to the ground.

"What's up, Lacy, old pard?  What's gone o' you?" said Captain Jim
tenderly.

"Look!" gasped Lacy at last, when every eye was on him, holding up a
small fragment of rock before us and the next moment grinding it under
his heel in rage.  "Look!  To think that I've been fooled agin by this
blanked fossiliferous trap--blank it!  To think that after me and
Professor Parker was once caught jist in this way up on the Stanislaus
at the bottom of a hundred-foot shaft by this rotten trap--that yer I
am--bluffed agin!"

There was a dead silence; we looked at each other blankly.

"But, Bassett," said Walker, picking up a part of the fragment, "we've
been finding this kind of stuff for the last two weeks."

"But how?" returned Lacy, turning upon him almost fiercely.  "Did ye
find it superposed on quartz, or did you find it NOT superposed on
quartz?  Did you find it in volcanic drift, or did ye find it in old
red-sandstone or coarse illuvion?  Tell me that, and then ye kin talk.
But this yer blank fossiliferous trap, instead o' being superposed on
top, is superposed on the bottom.  And that means"--

"What?" we all asked eagerly.

"Why--blank it all--that this yer convulsion of nature, this
prehistoric volcanic earthquake, instead of acting laterally and
chuckin' the stream to one side, has been revolutionary and turned the
old river-bed bottom-side up, and yer d--d cement hez got half the
globe atop of it!  Ye might strike it from China, but nowhere else."

We continued to look at one another, the older members with darkening
faces, the younger with a strong inclination to laugh. Captain Jim, who
had been concerned only in his friend's emotion, and who was hanging
with undisguised satisfaction on these final convincing proofs of his
superior geological knowledge, murmured approvingly and confidingly,
"He's right, boys!  Thar ain't another man livin' ez could give you the
law and gospil like that!  Ye can tie to what he says.  That's Lacy all
over."

Two weeks passed.  We had gathered, damp and disconsolate, in the only
available shelter of the camp.  For the long summer had ended
unexpectedly to us; we had one day found ourselves caught like the
improvident insect of the child's fable with gauzy and unseasonable
wings wet and bedraggled in the first rains, homeless and hopeless. The
scientific Lacy, who lately spent most of his time as a bar-room oracle
in the settlement, was away, and from our dripping canvas we could see
Captain Jim returning from a visit to him, slowly plodding along the
trail towards us.

"It's no use, boys," said Rowley, summarizing the result of our
conference, "we must speak out to him, and if nobody else cares to do
it I will.  I don't know why we should be more mealy-mouthed than they
are at the settlement.  They don't hesitate to call Bassett a
dead-beat, whatever Captain Jim says to the contrary."

The unfortunate Captain Jim had halted irresolutely before the gloomy
faces in the shelter.  Whether he felt instinctively some forewarning
of what was coming I cannot say.  There was a certain dog-like
consciousness in his eye and a half-backward glance over his shoulder
as if he were not quite certain that Lacy was not following.  The rain
had somewhat subdued his characteristic fluffiness, and he cowered with
a kind of sleek storm-beaten despondency over the smoking fire of green
wood before our tent.

Nevertheless, Rowley opened upon him with a directness and decision
that astonished us.  He pointed out briefly that Lacy Bassett had been
known to us only through Captain Jim's introduction.  That he had been
originally invited there on Captain Jim's own account, and that his
later connection with the company had been wholly the result of Captain
Jim's statements.  That, far from being any aid or assistance to them,
Bassett had beguiled them by apocryphal knowledge and sham scientific
theories into an expensive and gigantic piece of folly.  That, in
addition to this, they had just discovered that he had also been using
the credit of the company for his own individual expenses at the
settlement while they were working on his d--d fool shaft--all of which
had brought them to the verge of bankruptcy.  That, as a result, they
were forced now to demand his resignation--not only on their general
account, but for Captain Jim's sake--believing firmly, as they did,
that he had been as grossly deceived in his friendship for Lacy Bassett
as THEY were in their business relations with him.

Instead of being mollified by this, Captain Jim, to our greater
astonishment, suddenly turned upon the speaker, bristling with his old
canine suggestion.

"There!  I said so!  Go on!  I'd have sworn to it afore you opened your
lips.  I knowed it the day you sneaked around and wanted to know wot
his business was!  I said to myself, Cap, look out for that sneakin'
hound Rowley, he's no friend o' Lacy's.  And the day Lacy so far
demeaned himself as to give ye that splendid explanation o' things, I
watched ye; ye didn't think it, but I watched ye.  Ye can't fool me!  I
saw ye lookin' at Walker there, and I said to myself, Wot's the use,
Lacy, wot's the use o' your slingin' them words to such as THEM?  Wot
do THEY know?  It's just their pure jealousy and ignorance.  Ef you'd
come down yer, and lazed around with us and fallen into our common
ways, you'd ha' been ez good a man ez the next.  But no, it ain't your
style, Lacy, you're accustomed to high-toned men like Professor Parker,
and you can't help showing it.  No wonder you took to avoidin' us; no
wonder I've had to foller you over the Burnt Wood Crossin' time and
again, to get to see ye.  I see it all now: ye can't stand the kempany
I brought ye to!  Ye had to wipe the slum gullion of Eureka Gulch off
your hands, Lacy"--  He stopped, gasped for breath, and then lifted his
voice more savagely, "And now, what's this?  Wot's this hogwash? this
yer lyin' slander about his gettin' things on the kempany's credit?
Eh, speak up, some of ye!"

We were so utterly shocked and stupefied at the degradation of this
sudden and unexpected outburst from a man usually so honorable, gentle,
self-sacrificing, and forgiving, that we forgot the cause of it and
could only stare at each other.  What was this cheap stranger, with his
shallow swindling tricks, to the ignoble change he had worked upon the
man before us.  Rowley and Walker, both fearless fighters and quick to
resent an insult, only averted their saddened faces and turned aside
without a word.

"Ye dussen't say it!  Well, hark to me then," he continued with white
and feverish lips.  "I put him up to helpin' himself.  I told him to
use the kempany's name for credit.  Ye kin put that down to ME.  And
when ye talk of HIS resigning, I want ye to understand that I resign
outer this rotten kempany and TAKE HIM WITH ME!  Ef all the gold yer
lookin' for was piled up in that shaft from its bottom in hell to its
top in the gulch, it ain't enough to keep me here away from him!  Ye
kin take all my share--all MY rights yer above ground and below it--all
I carry,"--he threw his buckskin purse and revolver on the
ground,--"and pay yourselves what you reckon you've lost through HIM.
But you and me is quits from to-day."

He strode away before a restraining voice or hand could reach him. His
dripping figure seemed to melt into the rain beneath the thickening
shadows of the pines, and the next moment he was gone. From that day
forward Eureka Gulch knew him no more.  And the camp itself somehow
melted away during the rainy season, even as he had done.


II.

Three years had passed.  The pioneer stage-coach was sweeping down the
long descent to the pastoral valley of Gilead, and I was looking
towards the village with some pardonable interest and anxiety.  For I
carried in my pocket my letters of promotion from the box seat of the
coach--where I had performed the functions of treasure messenger for
the Excelsior Express Company--to the resident agency of that company
in the bucolic hamlet before me. The few dusty right-angled streets,
with their rigid and staringly new shops and dwellings, the stern
formality of one or two obelisk-like meeting-house spires, the
illimitable outlying plains of wheat and wild oats beyond, with their
monotony scarcely broken by skeleton stockades, corrals, and
barrack-looking farm buildings, were all certainly unlike the unkempt
freedom of the mountain fastnesses in which I had lately lived and
moved.  Yuba Bill, the driver, whose usual expression of humorous
discontent deepened into scorn as he gathered up his reins as if to
charge the village and recklessly sweep it from his path, indicated a
huge, rambling, obtrusively glazed, and capital-lettered building with
a contemptuous flick of his whip as we passed.  "Ef you're kalkilatin'
we'll get our partin' drink there you're mistaken. That's wot they call
a TEMPERANCE HOUSE--wot means a place where the licker ye get underhand
is only a trifle worse than the hash ye get above-board.  I suppose
it's part o' one o' the mysteries o' Providence that wharever you find
a dusty hole like this--that's naturally THIRSTY--ye run agin a
'temperance' house.  But never YOU mind!  I shouldn't wonder if thar
was a demijohn o' whiskey in the closet of your back office, kept thar
by the feller you're relievin'--who was a white man and knew the ropes."

A few minutes later, when my brief installation was over, we DID find
the demijohn in the place indicated.  As Yuba Bill wiped his mouth with
the back of his heavy buckskin glove, he turned to me not unkindly.  "I
don't like to set ye agin Gile-ad, which is a scrip-too-rural place,
and a God-fearin' place, and a nice dry place, and a place ez I've
heard tell whar they grow beans and pertatoes and garden sass; but
afore three weeks is over, old pard, you'll be howlin' to get back on
that box seat with me, whar you uster sit, and be ready to take your
chances agin, like a little man, to get drilled through with buckshot
from road agents.  You hear me!  I'll give you three weeks, sonny, just
three weeks, to get your butes full o' hayseed and straws in yer har;
and I'll find ye wadin' the North Fork at high water to get out o'
this."  He shook my hand with grim tenderness, removing his glove--a
rare favor--to give me the pressure of his large, soft, protecting
palm, and strode away.  The next moment he was shaking the white dust
of Gilead from his scornful chariot-wheels.

In the hope of familiarizing myself with the local interests of the
community, I took up a copy of the "Gilead Guardian" which lay on my
desk, forgetting for the moment the usual custom of the country press
to displace local news for long editorials on foreign subjects and
national politics.  I found, to my disappointment, that the "Guardian"
exhibited more than the usual dearth of domestic intelligence, although
it was singularly oracular on "The State of Europe," and "Jeffersonian
Democracy."  A certain cheap assurance, a copy-book dogmatism, a
colloquial familiarity, even in the impersonal plural, and a series of
inaccuracies and blunders here and there, struck some old chord in my
memory.  I was mutely wondering where and when I had become personally
familiar with rhetoric like that, when the door of the office opened
and a man entered.  I was surprised to recognize Captain Jim.

I had not seen him since he had indignantly left us, three years
before, in Eureka Gulch.  The circumstances of his defection were
certainly not conducive to any voluntary renewal of friendship on
either side; and although, even as a former member of the Eureka Mining
Company, I was not conscious of retaining any sense of injury, yet the
whole occurrence flashed back upon me with awkward distinctness.  To my
relief, however, he greeted me with his old cordiality; to my amusement
he added to it a suggestion of the large forgiveness of conscious
rectitude and amiable toleration.  I thought, however, I detected, as
he glanced at the paper which was still in my hand and then back again
at my face, the same uneasy canine resemblance I remembered of old.  He
had changed but little in appearance; perhaps he was a trifle stouter,
more mature, and slower in his movements.  If I may return to my canine
illustration, his grayer, dustier, and more wiry ensemble gave me the
impression that certain pastoral and agricultural conditions had varied
his type, and he looked more like a shepherd's dog in whose brown eyes
there was an abiding consciousness of the care of straying sheep, and
possibly of one black one in particular.

He had, he told me, abandoned mining and taken up farming on a rather
large scale.  He had prospered.  He had other interests at stake, "A
flour-mill with some improvements--and--and"--here his eyes wandered to
the "Guardian" again, and he asked me somewhat abruptly what I thought
of the paper.  Something impelled me to restrain my previous fuller
criticism, and I contented myself by saying briefly that I thought it
rather ambitious for the locality. "That's the word," he said with a
look of gratified relief, "'ambitious'--you've just hit it.  And what's
the matter with thet? Ye kan't expect a high-toned man to write down to
the level of every karpin' hound, ken ye now?  That's what he says to
me"--  He stopped half confused, and then added abruptly: "That's one
o' my investments."

"Why, Captain Jim, I never suspected that you"--

"Oh, I don't WRITE it," he interrupted hastily.  "I only furnish the
money and the advertising, and run it gin'rally, you know; and I'm
responsible for it.  And I select the eddyter--and"--he continued, with
a return of the same uneasy wistful look--"thar's suthin' in thet, you
know, eh?"

I was beginning to be perplexed.  The memory evoked by the style of the
editorial writing and the presence of Captain Jim was assuming a
suspicious relationship to each other.  "And who's your editor?" I
asked.

"Oh, he's--he's--er--Lacy Bassett," he replied, blinking his eyes with
a hopeless assumption of carelessness.  "Let's see!  Oh yes! You knowed
Lacy down there at Eureka.  I disremembered it till now. Yes, sir!" he
repeated suddenly and almost rudely, as if to preclude any adverse
criticism, "he's the eddyter!"

To my surprise he was quite white and tremulous with nervousness. I was
very sorry for him, and as I really cared very little for the
half-forgotten escapade of his friend except so far as it seemed to
render HIM sensitive, I shook his hand again heartily and began to talk
of our old life in the gulch--avoiding as far as possible any allusion
to Lacy Bassett.  His face brightened; his old simple cordiality and
trustfulness returned, but unfortunately with it his old disposition to
refer to Bassett.  "Yes, they waz high old times, and ez I waz sayin'
to Lacy on'y yesterday, there is a kind o' freedom 'bout that sort o'
life that runs civilization and noospapers mighty hard, however
high-toned they is.  Not but what Lacy ain't right," he added quickly,
"when he sez that the opposition the 'Guardian' gets here comes from
ignorant low-down fellers ez wos brought up in played-out camps, and
can't tell a gentleman and a scholar and a scientific man when they
sees him. No!  So I sez to Lacy, 'Never you mind, it's high time they
did, and they've got to do it and to swaller the "Guardian," if I sink
double the money I've already put into the paper.'"

I was not long in discovering from other sources that the "Guardian"
was not popular with the more intelligent readers of Gilead, and that
Captain Jim's extravagant estimate of his friend was by no means
indorsed by the community.  But criticism took a humorous turn even in
that practical settlement, and it appeared that Lacy Bassett's vanity,
assumption, and ignorance were an unfailing and weekly joy to the
critical, in spite of the vague distrust they induced in the more
homely-witted, and the dull acquiescence of that minority who accepted
the paper for its respectable exterior and advertisements.  I was
somewhat grieved, however, to find that Captain Jim shared equally with
his friend in this general verdict of incompetency, and that some of
the most outrageous blunders were put down to HIM.  But I was not
prepared to believe that Lacy had directly or by innuendo helped the
public to this opinion.

Whether through accident or design on his part, Lacy Bassett did not
personally obtrude himself upon my remembrance until a month later.
One dazzling afternoon, when the dust and heat had driven the pride of
Gilead's manhood into the surreptitious shadows of the temperance
hotel's back room, and had even cleared the express office of its
loungers, and left me alone with darkened windows in the private
office, the outer door opened and Captain Jim's friend entered as part
of that garish glitter I had shut out.  To do the scamp strict justice,
however, he was somewhat subdued in his dress and manner, and, possibly
through some gentle chastening of epigram and revolver since I had seen
him last, was less aggressive and exaggerated.  I had the impression,
from certain odors wafted through the apartment and a peculiar physical
exaltation that was inconsistent with his evident moral hesitancy, that
he had prepared himself for the interview by a previous visit to the
hidden fountains of the temperance hotel.

"We don't seem to have run agin each other since you've been here," he
said with an assurance that was nevertheless a trifle forced "but I
reckon we're both busy men, and there's a heap too much loafing goin'
on in Gilead.  Captain Jim told me he met you the day you arrived; said
you just cottoned to the 'Guardian' at once and thought it a deal too
good for Gilead; eh?  Oh, well, jest ez likely he DIDN'T say it--it was
only his gassin'.  He's a queer man--is Captain Jim."

I replied somewhat sharply that I considered him a very honest man, a
very simple man, and a very loyal man.

"That's all very well," said Bassett, twirling his cane with a
patronizing smile, "but, as his friend, don't you find him considerable
of a darned fool?"

I could not help retorting that I thought HE had found that hardly an
objection.

"YOU think so," he said querulously, apparently ignoring everything but
the practical fact,--"and maybe others do; but that's where you're
mistaken.  It don't pay.  It may pay HIM to be runnin' me as his
particular friend, to be quotin' me here and there, to be gettin'
credit of knowin' me and my friends and ownin' me--by Gosh! but I don't
see where the benefit to ME comes in.  Eh?  Take your own case down
there at Eureka Gulch; didn't he send for me just to show me up to you
fellers?  Did I want to have anything to do with the Eureka Company?
Didn't he set me up to give my opinion about that shaft just to show
off what I knew about science and all that? And what did he get me to
join the company for?  Was it for you? No!  Was it for me?  No!  It was
just to keep me there for HIMSELF, and kinder pit me agin you fellers
and crow over you!  Now that ain't my style!  It may be HIS--it may be
honest and simple and loyal, as you say, and it may be all right for
him to get me to run up accounts at the settlement and then throw off
on me--but it ain't my style.  I suppose he let on that I did that.
No?  He didn't?  Well then, why did he want to run me off with him, and
out the whole concern in an underhand way and make me leave with nary a
character behind me, eh?  Now, I never said anything about this
before--did I?  It ain't like me.  I wouldn't have said anything about
it now, only you talked about MY being benefited by his darned
foolishness.  Much I've made outer HIM."

Despicable, false, and disloyal as this was, perhaps it was the
crowning meanness of such confidences that his very weakness seemed
only a reflection of Captain Jim's own, and appeared in some strange
way to degrade his friend as much as himself.  The simplicity of his
vanity and selfishness was only equalled by the simplicity of Captain
Jim's admiration of it.  It was a part of my youthful inexperience of
humanity that I was not above the common fallacy of believing that a
man is "known by the company he keeps," and that he is in a manner
responsible for its weakness; it was a part of that humanity that I
felt no surprise in being more amused than shocked by this revelation.
It seemed a good joke on Captain Jim!

"Of course YOU kin laugh at his darned foolishness; but, by Gosh, it
ain't a laughing matter to me!"

"But surely he's given you a good position on the 'Guardian,'" I urged.
"That was disinterested, certainly."

"Was it?  I call that the cheekiest thing yet.  When he found he
couldn't make enough of me in private life, he totes me out in public
as HIS editor--the man who runs HIS paper!  And has his name in print
as the proprietor, the only chance he'd ever get of being before the
public.  And don't know the whole town is laughing at him!"

"That may be because they think HE writes some of the articles," I
suggested.

Again the insinuation glanced harmlessly from his vanity.  "That
couldn't be, because I do all the work, and it ain't his style," he
said with naive discontent.  "And it's always the highest style, done
to please him, though between you and me it's sorter castin' pearls
before swine--this 'Frisco editing--and the public would be just as
satisfied with anything I could rattle off that was peart and
sassy,--something spicy or personal.  I'm willing to climb down and do
it, for there's nothin' stuck-up about me, you know; but that darned
fool Captain Jim has got the big head about the style of the paper, and
darned if I don't think he's afraid if there's a lettin' down, people
may think it's him!  Ez if!  Why, you know as well as me that there's a
sort of snap I could give these things that would show it was me and no
slouch did them, in a minute."

I had my doubts about the elegance or playfulness of Mr. Bassett's
trifling, but from some paragraphs that appeared in the next issue of
the "Guardian" I judged that he had won over Captain Jim--if indeed
that gentleman's alleged objections were not entirely the outcome of
Bassett's fancy.  The social paragraphs themselves were clumsy and
vulgar.  A dull-witted account of a select party at Parson Baxter's,
with a point-blank compliment to Polly Baxter his daughter, might have
made her pretty cheek burn but for her evident prepossession for the
meretricious scamp, its writer.  But even this horse-play seemed more
natural than the utterly artificial editorials with their pinchbeck
glitter and cheap erudition; and thus far it appeared harmless.

I grieve to say that these appearances were deceptive.  One afternoon,
as I was returning from a business visit to the outskirts of the
village, I was amazed on reentering the main street to find a crowd
collected around the "Guardian" office, gazing at the broken glass of
its windows and a quantity of type scattered on the ground.  But my
attention was at that moment more urgently attracted by a similar group
around my own office, who, however, seemed more cautious, and were
holding timorously aloof from the entrance.  As I ran rapidly towards
them, a few called out, "Look out--he's in there!" while others made
way to let me pass.  With the impression of fire or robbery in my mind,
I entered precipitately, only to find Yuba Bill calmly leaning back in
an arm-chair with his feet on the back of another, a glass of whiskey
from my demijohn in one hand and a huge cigar in his mouth.  Across his
lap lay a stumpy shotgun which I at once recognized as "the Left
Bower," whose usual place was at his feet on the box during his
journeys.  He looked cool and collected, although there were one or two
splashes of printer's ink on his shirt and trousers, and from the
appearance of my lavatory and towel he had evidently been removing
similar stains from his hands.  Putting his gun aside and grasping my
hand warmly without rising, he began with even more than his usual lazy
imperturbability:

"Well, how's Gilead lookin' to-day?"

It struck me as looking rather disturbed, but, as I was still too
bewildered to reply, he continued lazily:

"Ez you didn't hunt me up, I allowed you might hev got kinder petrified
and dried up down yer, and I reckoned to run down and rattle round a
bit and make things lively for ye.  I've jist cleared out a newspaper
office over thar.  They call it the 'Guardi-an,' though it didn't seem
to offer much pertection to them fellers ez was in it.  In fact, it
wasn't ez much a fight ez it orter hev been.  It was rather monotonous
for me."

"But what's the row, Bill?  What has happened?" I asked excitedly.

"Nothin' to speak of, I tell ye," replied Yuba Bill reflectively. "I
jest meandered into that shop over there, and I sez, 'I want ter see
the man ez runs this yer mill o' literatoor an' progress.' Thar waz two
infants sittin' on high chairs havin' some innocent little game o'
pickin' pieces o' lead outer pill-boxes like, and as soon ez they seed
me one of 'em crawled under his desk and the other scooted outer the
back door.  Bimeby the door opens again, and a fluffy coyote-lookin'
feller comes in and allows that HE is responsible for that yer paper.
When I saw the kind of animal he was, and that he hadn't any weppings,
I jist laid the Left Bower down on the floor.  Then I sez, 'You allowed
in your paper that I oughter hev a little sevility knocked inter me,
and I'm here to hev it done.  You ken begin it now.'  With that I
reached for him, and we waltzed oncet or twicet around the room, and
then I put him up on the mantelpiece and on them desks and little
boxes, and took him down again, and kinder wiped the floor with him
gin'rally, until the first thing I knowed he was outside the winder on
the sidewalk. On'y blamed if I didn't forget to open the winder.  Ef it
hadn't been for that, it would hev been all quiet and peaceful-like,
and nobody hev knowed it.  But the sash being in the way, it sorter
created a disturbance and unpleasantness OUTSIDE."

"But what was it all about?" I repeated.  "What had he done to you?"

"Ye'll find it in that paper," he said, indicating a copy of the
"Guardian" that lay on my table with a lazy nod of his head. "P'r'aps
you don't read it?  No more do I.  But Joe Bilson sez to me yesterday:
'Bill,' sez he, 'they're goin' for ye in the "Guardian."'  'Wot's
that?' sez I.  'Hark to this,' sez he, and reads out that bit that
you'll find there."

I had opened the paper, and he pointed to a paragraph.  "There it is.
Pooty, ain't it?"  I read with amazement as follows:--


"If the Pioneer Stage Company want to keep up with the times, and not
degenerate into the old style 'one hoss' road-wagon business, they'd
better make some reform on the line.  They might begin by shipping off
some of the old-time whiskey-guzzling drivers who are too high and
mighty to do anything but handle the ribbons, and are above speaking to
a passenger unless he's a favorite or one of their set.  Over-praise
for an occasional scrimmage with road agents, and flattery from Eastern
greenhorns, have given them the big head.  If the fool-killer were let
loose on the line with a big club, and knocked a little civility into
their heads, it wouldn't be a bad thing, and would be a particular
relief to the passengers for Gilead who have to take the stage from
Simpson's Bar."


"That's my stage," said Yuba Bill quietly, when I had ended; "and
that's ME."

"But it's impossible," I said eagerly.  "That insult was never written
by Captain Jim."

"Captain Jim," repeated Yuba Bill reflectively.  "Captain Jim,--yes,
that was the name o' the man I was playin' with.  Shortish hairy
feller, suthin' between a big coyote and the old-style hair-trunk.
Fought pretty well for a hay-footed man from Gil-e-ad."

"But you've whipped the wrong man, Bill," I said.  "Think again! Have
you had any quarrel lately?--run against any newspaper man?" The
recollection had flashed upon me that Lacy Bassett had lately returned
from a visit to Stockton.

Yuba Bill regarded his boots on the other arm-chair for a few moments
in profound meditation.  "There was a sort o' gaudy insect," he began
presently, "suthin' halfway betwixt a boss-fly and a devil's
darnin'-needle, ez crawled up onter the box seat with me last week, and
buzzed!  Now I think on it, he talked high-faluten' o' the inflooence
of the press and sech.  I may hev said 'shoo' to him when he was
hummin' the loudest.  I mout hev flicked him off oncet or twicet with
my whip.  It must be him.  Gosh!" he said suddenly, rising and lifting
his heavy hand to his forehead, "now I think agin he was the feller ez
crawled under the desk when the fight was goin' on, and stayed there.
Yes, sir, that was HIM. His face looked sorter familiar, but I didn't
know him moultin' with his feathers off."  He turned upon me with the
first expression of trouble and anxiety I had ever seen him wear.
"Yes, sir, that's him.  And I've kem--me, Yuba Bill!--kem MYSELF, a
matter of twenty miles, totin' a GUN--a gun, by Gosh!--to fight
that--that--that potatar-bug!"  He walked to the window, turned, walked
back again, finished his whiskey with a single gulp, and laid his hand
almost despondingly on my shoulder.  "Look ye, old--old fell, you and
me's ole friends.  Don't give me away.  Don't let on a word o' this to
any one!  Say I kem down yer howlin' drunk on a gen'ral tear!  Say I
mistook that newspaper office for a cigar-shop, and--got licked by the
boss!  Say anythin' you like, 'cept that I took a gun down yer to chase
a fly that had settled onter me.  Keep the Left Bower in yer back
office till I send for it.  Ef you've got a back door somewhere handy
where I can slip outer this without bein' seen I'd be thankful."

As this desponding suggestion appeared to me as the wisest thing for
him to do in the then threatening state of affairs outside,--which, had
he suspected it, he would have stayed to face,--I quickly opened a door
into a courtyard that communicated through an alley with a side street.
Here we shook hands and parted; his last dejected ejaculation being,
"That potatobug!"  Later I ascertained that Captain Jim had retired to
his ranch some four miles distant. He was not seriously hurt, but
looked, to use the words of my informant, "ez ef he'd been hugged by a
playful b'ar."  As the "Guardian" made its appearance the next week
without the slightest allusion to the fracas, I did not deem it
necessary to divulge the real facts.  When I called to inquire about
Captain Jim's condition, he himself, however, volunteered an
explanation.

"I don't mind tellin' you, ez an old friend o' mine and Lacy's, that
the secret of that there attack on me and the 'Guardian' was
perlitikal.  Yes, sir!  There was a powerful orginization in the
interest o' Halkins for assemblyman ez didn't like our high-toned
editorials on caucus corruption, and hired a bully to kem down here and
suppress us.  Why, this yer Lacy spotted the idea to oncet; yer know
how keen be is."

"Was Lacy present?" I asked as carelessly as I could.

Captain Jim glanced his eyes over his shoulder quite in his old furtive
canine fashion, and then blinked them at me rapidly.  "He war!  And if
it warn't for HIS pluck and HIS science and HIS strength, I don't know
whar I'D hev been now!  Howsomever, it's all right.  I've had a fair
offer to sell the 'Guardian' over at Simpson's Bar, and it's time I
quit throwin' away the work of a man like Lacy Bassett upon it.  And
between you and me, I've got an idea and suthin' better to put his
talens into."


III.

It was not long before it became evident that the "talens" of Mr. Lacy
Bassett, as indicated by Captain Jim, were to grasp at a seat in the
state legislature.  An editorial in the "Simpson's Bar Clarion" boldly
advocated his pretensions.  At first it was believed that the article
emanated from the gifted pen of Lacy himself, but the style was so
unmistakably that of Colonel Starbottle, an eminent political
"war-horse" of the district, that a graver truth was at once suggested,
namely, that the "Guardian" had simply been transferred to Simpson's
Bar, and merged into the "Clarion" solely on this condition.  At least
it was recognized that it was the hand of Captain Jim which guided the
editorial fingers of the colonel, and Captain Jim's money that
distended the pockets of that gallant political leader.

Howbeit Lacy Bassett was never elected; in fact he was only for one
brief moment a candidate.  It was related that upon his first ascending
the platform at Simpson's Bar a voice in the audience said lazily,
"Come down!"  That voice was Yuba Bill's.  A slight confusion ensued,
in which Yuba Bill whispered a few words in the colonel's ear.  After a
moment's hesitation the "war-horse" came forward, and in his loftiest
manner regretted that the candidate had withdrawn.  The next issue of
the "Clarion" proclaimed with no uncertain sound that a base conspiracy
gotten up by the former proprietor of the "Guardian" to undermine the
prestige of the Great Express Company had been ruthlessly exposed, and
the candidate on learning it HIMSELF for the first time, withdrew his
name from the canvass, as became a high-toned gentleman.  Public
opinion, ignoring Lacy Bassett completely, unhesitatingly denounced
Captain Jim.

During this period I had paid but little heed to Lacy Bassett's social
movements, or the successes which would naturally attend such a
character with the susceptible sex.  I had heard that he was engaged to
Polly Baxter, but that they had quarrelled in consequence of his
flirtations with others, especially a Mrs. Sweeny, a profusely
ornamented but reputationless widow.  Captain Jim had often alluded
with a certain respectful pride and delicacy to Polly's ardent
appreciation of his friend, and had more than half hinted with the same
reverential mystery to their matrimonial union later, and his intention
of "doing the square thing" for the young couple.  But it was presently
noticed that these allusions became less frequent during Lacy's amorous
aberrations, and an occasional depression and unusual reticence marked
Captain Jim's manner when the subject was discussed in his presence.
He seemed to endeavor to make up for his friend's defection by a kind
of personal homage to Polly, and not unfrequently accompanied her to
church or to singing-class.  I have a vivid recollection of meeting him
one afternoon crossing the fields with her, and looking into her face
with that same wistful, absorbed, and uneasy canine expression that I
had hitherto supposed he had reserved for Lacy alone.  I do not know
whether Polly was averse to the speechless devotion of these yearning
brown eyes; her manner was animated and the pretty cheek that was
nearest me mantled as I passed; but I was struck for the first time
with the idea that Captain Jim loved her! I was surprised to have that
fancy corroborated in the remark of another wayfarer whom I met, to the
effect, "That now that Bassett was out o' the running it looked ez if
Captain Jim was makin' up for time!"  Was it possible that Captain Jim
had always loved her? I did not at first know whether to be pained or
pleased for his sake.  But I concluded that whether the unworthy
Bassett had at last found a RIVAL in Captain Jim or in the girl
herself, it was a displacement that was for Captain Jim's welfare.  But
as I was about leaving Gilead for a month's transfer to the San
Francisco office, I had no opportunity to learn more from the
confidences of Captain Jim.

I was ascending the principal staircase of my San Francisco hotel one
rainy afternoon, when I was pointedly recalled to Gilead by the passing
glitter of Mrs. Sweeny's jewelry and the sudden vanishing behind her of
a gentleman who seemed to be accompanying her.  A few moments after I
had entered my room I heard a tap at my door, and opened it upon Lacy
Bassett.  I thought he looked a little confused and agitated.
Nevertheless, with an assumption of cordiality and ease he said, "It
appears we're neighbors.  That's my room next to yours."  He pointed to
the next room, which I then remembered was a sitting-room en suite with
my own, and communicating with it by a second door, which was always
locked.  It had not been occupied since my tenancy.  As I suppose my
face did not show any extravagant delight at the news of his
contiguity, he added, hastily, "There's a transom over the door, and I
thought I'd tell you you kin hear everything from the one room to the
other."

I thanked him, and told him dryly that, as I had no secrets to divulge
and none that I cared to hear, it made no difference to me. As this
seemed to increase his confusion and he still hesitated before the
door, I asked him if Captain Jim was with him.

"No," he said quickly.  "I haven't seen him for a month, and don't want
to.  Look here, I want to talk to you a bit about him."  He walked into
the room, and closed the door behind him.  "I want to tell you that me
and Captain Jim is played!  All this runnin' o' me and interferin' with
me is played!  I'm tired of it.  You kin tell him so from me."

"Then you have quarrelled?"

"Yes.  As much as any man can quarrel with a darned fool who can't take
a hint."

"One moment.  Have you quarrelled about Polly Baxter?"

"Yes," he answered querulously.  "Of course I have.  What does he mean
by interfering?

"Now listen to me, Mr. Bassett," I interrupted.  "I have no desire to
concern myself in your association with Captain Jim, but since you
persist in dragging me into it, you must allow me to speak plainly.
From all that I can ascertain you have no serious intentions of
marrying Polly Baxter.  You have come here from Gilead to follow Mrs.
Sweeny, whom I saw you with a moment ago. Now, why do you not frankly
give up Miss Baxter to Captain Jim, who will make her a good husband,
and go your own way with Mrs. Sweeny? If you really wish to break off
your connection with Captain Jim, that's the only way to do it."

His face, which had exhibited the weakest and most pitiable
consciousness at the mention of Mrs. Sweeny, changed to an expression
of absolute stupefaction as I concluded.

"Wot stuff are you tryin' to fool me with?" he said at last roughly.

"I mean," I replied sharply, "that this double game of yours is
disgraceful.  Your association with Mrs. Sweeny demands the withdrawal
of any claim you have upon Miss Baxter at once.  If you have no respect
for Captain Jim's friendship, you must at least show common decency to
her."

He burst into a half-relieved, half-hysteric laugh.  "Are you crazy?"
gasped he.  "Why, Captain Jim's just huntin' ME down to make ME marry
Polly.  That's just what the row's about.  That's just what he's
interferin' for--just to carry out his darned fool ideas o' gettin' a
wife for me; just his vanity to say HE'S made the match.  It's ME that
he wants to marry to that Baxter girl--not himself.  He's too cursed
selfish for that."

I suppose I was not different from ordinary humanity, for in my
unexpected discomfiture I despised Captain Jim quite as much as I did
the man before me.  Reiterating my remark that I had no desire to mix
myself further in their quarrels, I got rid of him with as little
ceremony as possible.  But a few minutes later, when the farcical side
of the situation struck me, my irritation was somewhat mollified,
without however increasing my respect for either of the actors.  The
whole affair had assumed a triviality that was simply amusing, nothing
more, and I even looked forward to a meeting with Captain Jim and HIS
exposition of the matter--which I knew would follow--with pleasurable
anticipation.  But I was mistaken.

One afternoon, when I was watching the slanting volleys of rain driven
by a strong southwester against the windows of the hotel reading-room,
I was struck by the erratic movements of a dripping figure outside that
seemed to be hesitating over the entrance to the hotel.  At times
furtively penetrating the porch as far as the vestibule, and again
shyly recoiling from it, its manner was so strongly suggestive of some
timid animal that I found myself suddenly reminded of Captain Jim and
the memorable evening of his exodus from Eureka Gulch.  As the figure
chanced to glance up to the window where I stood I saw to my
astonishment that it WAS Captain Jim himself, but so changed and
haggard that I scarcely knew him.  I instantly ran out into the hall
and vestibule, but when I reached the porch he had disappeared.  Either
he had seen me and wished to avoid me, or he had encountered the object
of his quest, which I at once concluded must be Lacy Bassett.  I was so
much impressed and worried by his appearance and manner, that, in this
belief, I overcame my aversion to meeting Bassett, and even sought him
through the public rooms and lobbies in the hope of finding Captain Jim
with him.  But in vain; possibly he had succeeded in escaping his
relentless friend.

As the wind and rain increased at nightfall and grew into a tempestuous
night, with deserted streets and swollen waterways, I did not go out
again, but retired early, inexplicably haunted by the changed and
brooding face of Captain Jim.  Even in my dreams he pursued me in his
favorite likeness of a wistful, anxious, and uneasy hound, who, on my
turning to caress him familiarly, snapped at me viciously, and appeared
to have suddenly developed a snarling rabid fury.  I seemed to be
awakened at last by the sound of his voice.  For an instant I believed
the delusion a part of my dream. But I was mistaken; I was lying broad
awake, and the voice clearly had come from the next room, and was
distinctly audible over the transom.

"I've had enough of it," he said, "and I'm givin' ye now--this
night--yer last chance.  Quit this hotel and that woman, and go back to
Gilead and marry Polly.  Don't do it and I'll kill ye, ez sure ez you
sit there gapin' in that chair.  If I can't get ye to fight me like a
man,--and I'll spit in yer face or put some insult onto you afore that
woman, afore everybody, ez would make a bigger skunk nor you
turn,--I'll hunt ye down and kill ye in your tracks."

There was a querulous murmur of interruption in Lacy's voice, but
whether of defiance or appeal I could not distinguish.  Captain Jim's
voice again rose, dogged and distinct.

"Ef YOU kill me it's all the same, and I don't say that I won't thank
ye.  This yer world is too crowded for yer and me, Lacy Bassett.  I've
believed in ye, trusted in ye, lied for ye, and fought for ye.  From
the time I took ye up--a feller-passenger to 'Fresco--believin' there
wor the makin's of a man in ye, to now, you fooled me,--fooled me afore
the Eureka boys; fooled me afore Gilead; fooled me afore HER; fooled me
afore God!  It's got to end here.  Ye've got to take the curse of that
foolishness off o' me! You've got to do one single thing that's like
the man I took ye for, or you've got to die.  Times waz when I'd have
wished it for your account--that's gone, Lacy Bassett!  You've got to
do it for ME.  You've got to do it so I don't see 'd--d fool' writ in
the eyes of every man ez looks at me."

He had apparently risen and walked towards the door.  His voice sounded
from another part of the room.

"I'll give ye till to-morrow mornin' to do suthin' to lift this curse
off o' me.  Ef you refoose, then, by the living God, I'll slap yer face
in the dinin'-room, or in the office afore them all! You hear me!"

There was a pause, and then a quick sharp explosion that seemed to fill
and expand both rooms until the windows were almost lifted from their
casements, a hysterical inarticulate cry from Lacy, the violent opening
of a door, hurried voices, and the tramping of many feet in the
passage.  I sprang out of bed, partly dressed myself, and ran into the
hall.  But by that time I found a crowd of guests and servants around
the next door, some grasping Bassett, who was white and trembling, and
others kneeling by Captain Jim, who was half lying in the doorway
against the wall.

"He heard it all," Bassett gasped hysterically, pointing to me. "HE
knows that this man wanted to kill me."

Before I could reply, Captain Jim partly raised himself with a
convulsive effort.  Wiping away the blood that, oozing from his lips,
already showed the desperate character of his internal wound, he said
in a husky and hurried voice: "It's all right, boys!  It's my fault.
It was ME who done it.  I went for him in a mean underhanded way jest
now, when he hadn't a weppin nor any show to defend himself.  We
gripped.  He got a holt o' my derringer--you see that's MY pistol
there, I swear it--and turned it agin me in self-defense, and sarved me
right.  I swear to God, gentlemen, it's so!"  Catching sight of my
face, he looked at me, I fancied half imploringly and half
triumphantly, and added, "I might hev knowed it!  I allers allowed Lacy
Bassett was game!--game, gentlemen--and he was.  If it's my last word,
I say it--he was game!"

And with this devoted falsehood upon his lips and something of the old
canine instinct in his failing heart, as his head sank back he seemed
to turn it towards Bassett, as if to stretch himself out at his feet.
Then the light failed from his yearning upward glance, and the curse of
foolishness was lifted from him forever.

So conclusive were the facts, that the coroner's jury did not deem it
necessary to detain Mr. Bassett for a single moment after the inquest.
But he returned to Gilead, married Polly Baxter, and probably on the
strength of having "killed his man," was unopposed on the platform next
year, and triumphantly elected to the legislature!

========================================
========================================

A MILLIONAIRE OF ROUGH-AND-READY


by

BRET HARTE


JTABLE 4 7 1

PROLOGUE

There was no mistake this time: he had struck gold at last!

It had lain there before him a moment ago--a misshapen piece of
brown-stained quartz, interspersed with dull yellow metal; yielding
enough to have allowed the points of his pick to penetrate its
honeycombed recesses, yet heavy enough to drop from the point of his
pick as he endeavored to lift it from the red earth.

He was seeing all this plainly, although he found himself, he knew not
why, at some distance from the scene of his discovery, his heart
foolishly beating, his breath impotently hurried.  Yet he was walking
slowly and vaguely; conscious of stopping and staring at the landscape,
which no longer looked familiar to him.  He was hoping for some
instinct or force of habit to recall him to himself; yet when he saw a
neighbor at work in an adjacent claim, he hesitated, and then turned
his back upon him.  Yet only a moment before he had thought of running
to him, saying, "By Jingo!  I've struck it," or "D--n it, old man, I've
got it"; but that moment had passed, and now it seemed to him that he
could scarce raise his voice, or, if he did, the ejaculation would
appear forced and artificial.  Neither could he go over to him coolly
and tell his good fortune; and, partly from this strange shyness, and
partly with a hope that another survey of the treasure might restore
him to natural expression, he walked back to his tunnel.

Yes; it was there!  No mere "pocket" or "deposit," but a part of the
actual vein he had been so long seeking.  It was there, sure enough,
lying beside the pick and the debris of the "face" of the vein that he
had exposed sufficiently, after the first shock of discovery, to assure
himself of the fact and the permanence of his fortune.  It was there,
and with it the refutation of his enemies' sneers, the corroboration of
his friends' belief, the practical demonstration of his own theories,
the reward of his patient labors.  It was there, sure enough.  But,
somehow, he not only failed to recall the first joy of discovery, but
was conscious of a vague sense of responsibility and unrest.  It was,
no doubt, an enormous fortune to a man in his circumstances: perhaps it
meant a couple of hundred thousand dollars, or more, judging from the
value of the old Martin lead, which was not as rich as this, but it
required to be worked constantly and judiciously.  It was with a
decided sense of uneasiness that he again sought the open sunlight of
the hillside.  His neighbor was still visible on the adjacent claim;
but he had apparently stopped working, and was contemplatively smoking
a pipe under a large pine-tree.  For an instant he envied him his
apparent contentment.  He had a sudden fierce and inexplicable desire
to go over to him and exasperate his easy poverty by a revelation of
his own new-found treasure.  But even that sensation quickly passed,
and left him staring blankly at the landscape again.

As soon as he had made his discovery known, and settled its value, he
would send for his wife and her children in the States.  He would build
a fine house on the opposite hillside, if she would consent to it,
unless she preferred, for the children's sake, to live in San
Francisco.  A sense of a loss of independence--of a change of
circumstances that left him no longer his own master--began to perplex
him, in the midst of his brightest projects. Certain other relations
with other members of his family, which had lapsed by absence and his
insignificance, must now be taken up anew.  He must do something for
his sister Jane, for his brother William, for his wife's poor
connections.  It would be unfair to him to say that he contemplated
those things with any other instinct than that of generosity; yet he
was conscious of being already perplexed and puzzled.

Meantime, however, the neighbor had apparently finished his pipe, and,
knocking the ashes out of it, rose suddenly, and ended any further
uncertainty of their meeting by walking over directly towards him.  The
treasure-finder advanced a few steps on his side, and then stopped
irresolutely.

"Hollo, Slinn!" said the neighbor, confidently.

"Hollo, Masters," responded Slinn, faintly.  From the sound of the two
voices a stranger might have mistaken their relative condition. "What
in thunder are you mooning about for?  What's up?"  Then, catching
sight of Slinn's pale and anxious face, he added abruptly, "Are you
sick?"

Slinn was on the point of telling him his good fortune, but stopped.
The unlucky question confirmed his consciousness of his physical and
mental disturbance, and he dreaded the ready ridicule of his companion.
He would tell him later; Masters need not know WHEN he had made the
strike.  Besides, in his present vagueness, he shrank from the brusque,
practical questioning that would be sure to follow the revelation to a
man of Masters' temperament.

"I'm a little giddy here," he answered, putting his hand to his head,
"and I thought I'd knock off until I was better."

Masters examined him with two very critical gray eyes.  "Tell ye what,
old man!--if you don't quit this dog-goned foolin' of yours in that
God-forsaken tunnel you'll get loony!  Times you get so tangled up in
follerin' that blind lead o' yours you ain't sensible!"

Here was the opportunity to tell him all, and vindicate the justice of
his theories!  But he shrank from it again; and now, adding to the
confusion, was a singular sense of dread at the mental labor of
explanation.  He only smiled painfully, and began to move away. "Look
you!" said Masters, peremptorily, "ye want about three fingers of
straight whiskey to set you right, and you've got to take it with me.
D--n it, man, it may be the last drink we take together!  Don't look so
skeered!  I mean--I made up my mind about ten minutes ago to cut the
whole d--d thing, and light out for fresh diggings.  I'm sick of
getting only grub wages out o' this bill.  So that's what I mean by
saying it's the last drink you and me'll take together.  You know my
ways: sayin' and doin' with me's the same thing."

It was true.  Slinn had often envied Masters' promptness of decision
and resolution.  But he only looked at the grim face of his
interlocutor with a feeble sense of relief.  He was GOING.  And he,
Slinn, would not have to explain anything!

He murmured something about having to go over to the settlement on
business.  He dreaded lest Masters should insist upon going into the
tunnel.

"I suppose you want to mail that letter," said Masters, drily. "The
mail don't go till to-morrow, so you've got time to finish it, and put
it in an envelope."

Following the direction of Masters' eyes, Slinn looked down and saw, to
his utter surprise, that he was holding an unfinished pencilled note in
his hand.  How it came there, when he had written it, he could not
tell; he dimly remembered that one of his first impulses was to write
to his wife, but that he had already done so he had forgotten.  He
hastily concealed the note in his breast-pocket, with a vacant smile.
Masters eyed him half contemptuously, half compassionately.

"Don't forget yourself and drop it in some hollow tree for a
letter-box," he said.  "Well--so long!--since you won't drink. Take
care of yourself," and, turning on his heel, Masters walked away.

Slinn watched him as he crossed over to his abandoned claim, saw him
gather his few mining utensils, strap his blanket over his back, lift
his hat on his long-handled shovel as a token of farewell, and then
stride light-heartedly over the ridge.

He was alone now with his secret and his treasure.  The only man in the
world who knew of the exact position of his tunnel had gone away
forever.  It was not likely that this chance companion of a few weeks
would ever remember him or the locality again; he would now leave his
treasure alone--for even a day perhaps--until he had thought out some
plan and sought out some friend in whom to confide.  His secluded life,
the singular habits of concentration which had at last proved so
successful had, at the same time, left him few acquaintances and no
associates.  And in all his well-laid plans and patiently-digested
theories for finding the treasure, the means and methods of working it
and disposing of it had never entered.

And now, at the hour when he most needed his faculties, what was the
meaning of this strange benumbing of them!

Patience!  He only wanted a little rest--a little time to recover
himself.  There was a large boulder under a tree in the highway of the
settlement--a sheltered spot where he had often waited for the coming
of the stage-coach.  He would go there, and when he was sufficiently
rested and composed he would go on.

Nevertheless, on his way he diverged and turned into the woods, for no
other apparent purpose than to find a hollow tree.  "A hollow tree."
Yes! that was what Masters had said; he remembered it distinctly; and
something was to be done there, but what it was, or why it should be
done, he could not tell.  However, it was done, and very luckily, for
his limbs could scarcely support him further, and reaching that boulder
he dropped upon it like another stone.

And now, strange to say, the uneasiness and perplexity which had
possessed him ever since he had stood before his revealed wealth
dropped from him like a burden laid upon the wayside.  A measureless
peace stole over him, in which visions of his new-found fortune, no
longer a trouble and perplexity, but crowned with happiness and
blessing to all around him, assumed proportions far beyond his own
weak, selfish plans.  In its even-handed benefaction, his wife and
children, his friends and relations, even his late poor companion of
the hillside, met and moved harmoniously together; in its far-reaching
consequences there was only the influence of good.  It was not strange
that this poor finite mind should never have conceived the meaning of
the wealth extended to him; or that conceiving it he should faint and
falter under the revelation.  Enough that for a few minutes he must
have tasted a joy of perfect anticipation that years of actual
possession might never bring.

The sun seemed to go down in a rosy dream of his own happiness, as he
still sat there.  Later, the shadows of the trees thickened and
surrounded him, and still later fell the calm of a quiet evening sky
with far-spaced passionless stars, that seemed as little troubled by
what they looked upon as he was by the stealthy creeping life in the
grasses and underbrush at his feet.  The dull patter of soft little
feet in the soft dust of the road, the gentle gleam of moist and
wondering little eyes on the branches and in the mossy edges of the
boulder, did not disturb him.  He sat patiently through it all, as if
he had not yet made up his mind.

But when the stage came with the flashing sun the next morning, and the
irresistible clamor of life and action, the driver suddenly laid his
four spirited horses on their haunches before the quiet spot.  The
express messenger clambered down from the box, and approached what
seemed to be a heap of cast-off clothes upon the boulder.

"He don't seem to be drunk," he said, in reply to a querulous
interrogation from the passengers.  "I can't make him out.  His eyes
are open, but he cannot speak or move.  Take a look at him, Doc."

A rough unprofessional-looking man here descended from the inside of
the coach, and, carelessly thrusting aside the other curious
passengers, suddenly leant over the heap of clothes in a professional
attitude.

"He is dead," said one of the passengers.

The rough man let the passive head sink softly down again.  "No such
luck for him," he said curtly, but not unkindly.  "It's a stroke of
paralysis--and about as big as they make 'em.  It's a toss-up if he
ever speaks or moves again as long as he lives."



CHAPTER I

When Alvin Mulrady announced his intention of growing potatoes and
garden "truck" on the green slopes of Los Gatos, the mining community
of that region, and the adjacent hamlet of "Rough-and-Ready," regarded
it with the contemptuous indifference usually shown by those
adventurers towards all bucolic pursuits.  There was certainly no
active objection to the occupation of two hillsides, which gave so
little promise to the prospector for gold that it was currently
reported that a single prospector, called "Slinn," had once gone mad or
imbecile through repeated failures.  The only opposition came,
incongruously enough, from the original pastoral owner of the soil, one
Don Ramon Alvarado, whose claim for seven leagues of hill and valley,
including the now prosperous towns of Rough-and-Ready and Red Dog, was
met with simple derision from the squatters and miners.  "Looks ez ef
we woz goin' to travel three thousand miles to open up his d--d old
wilderness, and then pay for the increased valoo we give it--don't it?
Oh, yes, certainly!" was their ironical commentary.  Mulrady might have
been pardoned for adopting this popular opinion; but by an equally
incongruous sentiment, peculiar, however, to the man, he called upon
Don Ramon, and actually offered to purchase the land, or "go shares"
with him in the agricultural profits.  It was alleged that the Don was
so struck with this concession that he not only granted the land, but
struck up a quaint reserved friendship for the simple-minded
agriculturist and his family.  It is scarcely necessary to add that
this intimacy was viewed by the miners with the contempt that it
deserved.  They would have been more contemptuous, however, had they
known the opinion that Don Ramon entertained of their particular
vocation, and which he early confided to Mulrady.

"They are savages who expect to reap where they have not sown; to take
out of the earth without returning anything to it but their precious
carcasses; heathens, who worship the mere stones they dig up."  "And
was there no Spaniard who ever dug gold?" asked Mulrady, simply.  "Ah,
there are Spaniards and Moors," responded Don Ramon, sententiously.
"Gold has been dug, and by caballeros; but no good ever came of it.
There were Alvarados in Sonora, look you, who had mines of SILVER, and
worked them with peons and mules, and lost their money--a gold mine to
work a silver one--like gentlemen!  But this grubbing in the dirt with
one's fingers, that a little gold may stick to them, is not for
caballeros.  And then, one says nothing of the curse."

"The curse!" echoed Mary Mulrady, with youthful feminine superstition.
"What is that?"

"You knew not, friend Mulrady, that when these lands were given to my
ancestors by Charles V., the Bishop of Monterey laid a curse upon any
who should desecrate them.  Good!  Let us see!  Of the three Americanos
who founded yonder town, one was shot, another died of a
fever--poisoned, you understand, by the soil--and the last got himself
crazy of aguardiente.  Even the scientifico,[1] who came here years ago
and spied into the trees and the herbs: he was afterwards punished for
his profanation, and died of an accident in other lands.  But," added
Don Ramon, with grave courtesy, "this touches not yourself.  Through
me, YOU are of the soil."

Indeed, it would seem as if a secure if not a rapid prosperity was the
result of Don Ramon's manorial patronage.  The potato patch and market
garden flourished exceedingly; the rich soil responded with magnificent
vagaries of growth; the even sunshine set the seasons at defiance with
extraordinary and premature crops.  The salt pork and biscuit consuming
settlers did not allow their contempt of Mulrady's occupation to
prevent their profiting by this opportunity for changing their diet.
The gold they had taken from the soil presently began to flow into his
pockets in exchange for his more modest treasures.  The little cabin,
which barely sheltered his family--a wife, son, and daughter--was
enlarged, extended, and refitted, but in turn abandoned for a more
pretentious house on the opposite hill.  A whitewashed fence replaced
the rudely-split rails, which had kept out the wilderness.  By degrees,
the first evidences of cultivation--the gashes of red soil, the piles
of brush and undergrowth, the bared boulders, and heaps of
stone--melted away, and were lost under a carpet of lighter green,
which made an oasis in the tawny desert of wild oats on the hillside.
Water was the only free boon denied this Garden of Eden; what was
necessary for irrigation had to be brought from a mining ditch at great
expense, and was of insufficient quantity.  In this emergency Mulrady
thought of sinking an artesian well on the sunny slope beside his
house; not, however, without serious consultation and much objection
from his Spanish patron.  With great austerity Don Ramon pointed out
that this trifling with the entrails of the earth was not only an
indignity to Nature almost equal to shaft-sinking and tunneling, but
was a disturbance of vested interests.  "I and my fathers, San Diego
rest them!" said Don Ramon, crossing himself, "were content with wells
and cisterns, filled by Heaven at its appointed seasons; the cattle,
dumb brutes though they were, knew where to find water when they wanted
it.  But thou sayest truly," he added, with a sigh, "that was before
streams and rain were choked with hellish engines, and poisoned with
their spume.  Go on, friend Mulrady, dig and bore if thou wilt, but in
a seemly fashion, and not with impious earthquakes of devilish
gunpowder."

With this concession Alvin Mulrady began to sink his first artesian
shaft.  Being debarred the auxiliaries of steam and gunpowder, the work
went on slowly.  The market garden did not suffer meantime, as Mulrady
had employed two Chinamen to take charge of the ruder tillage, while he
superintended the engineering work of the well. This trifling incident
marked an epoch in the social condition of the family.  Mrs. Mulrady at
once assumed a conscious importance among her neighbors.  She spoke of
her husband's "men"; she alluded to the well as "the works"; she
checked the easy frontier familiarity of her customers with pretty Mary
Mulrady, her seventeen-year-old daughter.  Simple Alvin Mulrady looked
with astonishment at this sudden development of the germ planted in all
feminine nature to expand in the slightest sunshine of prosperity.
"Look yer, Malviny; ain't ye rather puttin' on airs with the boys that
want to be civil to Mamie?  Like as not one of 'em may be makin' up to
her already."  "You don't mean to say, Alvin Mulrady," responded Mrs.
Mulrady, with sudden severity, "that you ever thought of givin' your
daughter to a common miner, or that I'm goin' to allow her to marry out
of our own set?"  "Our own set!" echoed Mulrady feebly, blinking at her
in astonishment, and then glancing hurriedly across at his
freckle-faced son and the two Chinamen at work in the cabbages.  "Oh,
you know what I mean," said Mrs. Mulrady sharply; "the set that we move
in.  The Alvarados and their friends!  Doesn't the old Don come here
every day, and ain't his son the right age for Mamie?  And ain't they
the real first families here--all the same as if they were noblemen?
No, leave Mamie to me, and keep to your shaft; there never was a man
yet had the least sabe about these things, or knew what was due to his
family."  Like most of his larger minded, but feebler equipped sex,
Mulrady was too glad to accept the truth of the latter proposition,
which left the meannesses of life to feminine manipulation, and went
off to his shaft on the hillside.  But during that afternoon he was
perplexed and troubled.  He was too loyal a husband not to be pleased
with this proof of an unexpected and superior foresight in his wife,
although he was, like all husbands, a little startled by it.  He tried
to dismiss it from his mind.  But looking down from the hillside upon
his little venture, where gradual increase and prosperity had not been
beyond his faculties to control and understand, he found himself
haunted by the more ambitious projects of his helpmate.  From his own
knowledge of men, he doubted if Don Ramon, any more than himself, had
ever thought of the possibility of a matrimonial connection between the
families.  He doubted if he would consent to it.  And unfortunately it
was this very doubt that, touching his own pride as a self-made man,
made him first seriously consider his wife's proposition.  He was as
good as Don Ramon, any day!  With this subtle feminine poison instilled
in his veins, carried completely away by the logic of his wife's
illogical premises, he almost hated his old benefactor.  He looked down
upon the little Garden of Eden, where his Eve had just tempted him with
the fatal fruit, and felt a curious consciousness that he was losing
its simple and innocent enjoyment forever.

Happily, about this time Don Ramon died.  It is not probable that he
ever knew the amiable intentions of Mrs. Mulrady in regard to his son,
who now succeeded to the paternal estate, sadly partitioned by
relatives and lawsuits.  The feminine Mulradys attended the funeral, in
expensive mourning from Sacramento; even the gentle Alvin was forced
into ready-made broadcloth, which accented his good-natured but
unmistakably common presence.  Mrs. Mulrady spoke openly of her "loss";
declared that the old families were dying out; and impressed the wives
of a few new arrivals at Red Dog with the belief that her own family
was contemporary with the Alvarados, and that her husband's health was
far from perfect. She extended a motherly sympathy to the orphaned Don
Caesar. Reserved, like his father, in natural disposition, he was still
more gravely ceremonious from his loss; and, perhaps from the shyness
of an evident partiality for Mamie Mulrady, he rarely availed himself
of her mother's sympathizing hospitality.  But he carried out the
intentions of his father by consenting to sell to Mulrady, for a small
sum, the property he had leased.  The idea of purchasing had originated
with Mrs. Mulrady.

"It'll be all in the family," had observed that astute lady, "and it's
better for the looks of the things that we shouldn't he his tenants."

It was only a few weeks later that she was startled by hearing her
husband's voice calling her from the hillside as he rapidly approached
the house.  Mamie was in her room putting on a new pink cotton gown, in
honor of an expected visit from young Don Caesar, and Mrs. Mulrady was
tidying the house in view of the same event. Something in the tone of
her good man's voice, and the unusual circumstance of his return to the
house before work was done, caused her, however, to drop her dusting
cloth, and run to the kitchen door to meet him.  She saw him running
through the rows of cabbages, his face shining with perspiration and
excitement, a light in his eyes which she had not seen for years.  She
recalled, without sentiment, that he looked like that when she had
called him--a poor farm hand of her father's--out of the brush heap at
the back of their former home, in Illinois, to learn the consent of her
parents.  The recollection was the more embarrassing as he threw his
arms around her, and pressed a resounding kiss upon her sallow cheek.

"Sakes alive!  Mulrady!" she said, exorcising the ghost of a blush that
had also been recalled from the past with her housewife's apron, "what
are you doin', and company expected every minit?"

"Malviny, I've struck it; and struck it rich!"

She disengaged herself from his arms, without excitement, and looked at
him with bright but shrewdly observant eyes.

"I've struck it in the well--the regular vein that the boys have been
looking fer.  There's a fortin' fer you and Mamie: thousands and tens
of thousands!"

"Wait a minit."

She left him quickly, and went to the foot of the stairs.  He could
hear her wonderingly and distinctly.  "Ye can take off that new frock,
Mamie," she called out.

There was a sound of undisguised expostulation from Mamie.

"I'm speaking," said Mrs. Mulrady, emphatically.

The murmuring ceased.  Mrs. Mulrady returned to her husband.  The
interruption seemed to have taken off the keen edge of his enjoyment.
He at once abdicated his momentary elevation as a discoverer, and
waited for her to speak.

"Ye haven't told any one yet?" she asked.

"No.  I was alone, down in the shaft.  Ye see, Malviny, I wasn't
expectin' of anything."  He began, with an attempt at fresh enjoyment,
"I was just clearin' out, and hadn't reckoned on anythin'."

"You see, I was right when I advised you taking the land," she said,
without heeding him.

Mulrady's face fell.  "I hope Don Caesar won't think"--he began,
hesitatingly.  "I reckon, perhaps, I oughter make some sorter
compensation--you know."

"Stuff!" said Mrs. Mulrady, decidedly.  "Don't be a fool.  Any gold
discovery, anyhow, would have been yours--that's the law.  And you
bought the land without any restrictions.  Besides, you never had any
idea of this!"--she stopped, and looked him suddenly in the face--"had
you?"

Mulrady opened his honest, pale-gray eyes widely.

"Why, Malviny!  You know I hadn't.  I could swear!"

"Don't swear, and don't let on to anybody but what you DID know it was
there.  Now, Alvin Mulrady, listen to me."  Her voice here took the
strident form of action.  "Knock off work at the shaft, and send your
man away at once.  Put on your things, catch the next stage to
Sacramento at four o'clock, and take Mamie with you."

"Mamie!" echoed Mulrady, feebly.

"You want to see Lawyer Cole and my brother Jim at once," she went on,
without heeding him, "and Mamie wants a change and some proper.
clothes.  Leave the rest to me and Abner.  I'll break it to Mamie, and
get her ready."

Mulrady passed his hands through his tangled hair, wet with
perspiration.  He was proud of his wife's energy and action; he did not
dream of opposing her, but somehow he was disappointed.  The charming
glamour and joy of his discovery had vanished before he could fairly
dazzle her with it; or, rather, she was not dazzled with it at all.  It
had become like business, and the expression "breaking it" to Mamie
jarred upon him.  He would have preferred to tell her himself; to watch
the color come into her delicate oval face, to have seen her soft eyes
light with an innocent joy he had not seen in his wife's; and he felt a
sinking conviction that his wife was the last one to awaken it.

"You ain't got any time to lose," she said, impatiently, as he
hesitated.

Perhaps it was her impatience that struck harshly upon him; perhaps, if
she had not accepted her good fortune so confidently, he would not have
spoken what was in his mind at the time; but he said gravely, "Wait a
minit, Malviny; I've suthin' to tell you 'bout this find of mine that's
sing'lar."

"Go on," she said, quickly.

"Lyin' among the rotten quartz of the vein was a pick," he said,
constrainedly; "and the face of the vein sorter looked ez if it had
been worked at.  Follering the line outside to the base of the hill
there was signs of there having been an old tunnel; but it had fallen
in, and was blocked up."

"Well?" said Mrs. Mulrady, contemptuously.

"Well," returned her husband, somewhat disconnectedly, "it kinder
looked as if some feller might have discovered it before."

"And went away, and left it for others!  That's likely--ain't it?"
interrupted his wife, with ill-disguised intolerance.  "Everybody knows
the hill wasn't worth that for prospectin'; and it was abandoned when
we came here.  It's your property and you've paid for it.  Are you
goin' to wait to advertise for the owner, Alvin Mulrady, or are you
going to Sacramento at four o'clock to-day?"

Mulrady started.  He had never seriously believed in the possibility of
a previous discovery; but his conscientious nature had prompted him to
give it a fair consideration.  She was probably right.  What he might
have thought had she treated it with equal conscientiousness he did not
consider.  "All right," he said simply.  "I reckon we'll go at once."

"And when you talk to Lawyer Cole and Jim, keep that silly stuff about
the pick to yourself.  There's no use of putting queer ideas into other
people's heads because you happen to have 'em yourself."

When the hurried arrangements were at last completed, and Mr. Mulrady
and Mamie, accompanied by a taciturn and discreet Chinaman, carrying
their scant luggage, were on their way to the high road to meet the up
stage, the father gazed somewhat anxiously and wistfully into his
daughter's face.  He had looked forward to those few moments to enjoy
the freshness and naivete of Mamie's youthful delight and enthusiasm as
a relief to his wife's practical, far-sighted realism.  There was a
pretty pink suffusion in her delicate cheek, the breathless happiness
of a child in her half-opened little mouth, and a beautiful absorption
in her large gray eyes that augured well for him.

"Well, Mamie, how do we like bein' an heiress?  How do we like layin'
over all the gals between this and 'Frisco?"

"Eh?"

She had not heard him.  The tender beautiful eyes were engaged in an
anticipatory examination of the remembered shelves in the "Fancy
Emporium" at Sacramento; in reading the admiration of the clerks; in
glancing down a little criticisingly at the broad cowhide brogues that
strode at her side; in looking up the road for the stage-coach; in
regarding the fit of her new gloves--everywhere but in the loving eyes
of the man beside her.

He, however, repeated the question, touched with her charming
preoccupation, and passing his arm around her little waist.

"I like it well enough, pa, you know!" she said, slightly disengaging
his arm, but adding a perfunctory little squeeze to his elbow to soften
the separation.  "I always had an idea SOMETHING would happen.  I
suppose I'm looking like a fright," she added; "but ma made me hurry to
get away before Don Caesar came."

"And you didn't want to go without seeing him?" he added, archly.

"I didn't want him to see me in this frock," said Mamie, simply. "I
reckon that's why ma made me change," she added, with a slight laugh.

"Well I reckon you're allus good enough for him in any dress," said
Mulrady, watching her attentively; "and more than a match for him NOW,"
he added, triumphantly.

"I don't know about that," said Mamie.  "He's been rich all the time,
and his father and grandfather before him; while we've been poor and
his tenants."

His face changed; the look of bewilderment, with which he had followed
her words, gave way to one of pain, and then of anger. "Did he get off
such stuff as that?" he asked, quickly.

"No.  I'd like to catch him at it," responded Mamie, promptly. "There's
better nor him to be had for the asking now."

They had walked on a few moments in aggrieved silence, and the Chinaman
might have imagined some misfortune had just befallen them.  But
Mamie's teeth shone again between her parted lips.  "La, pa! it ain't
that!  He cares everything for me, and I do for him; and if ma hadn't
got new ideas--"  She stopped suddenly.

"What new ideas?" queried her father, anxiously.

"Oh, nothing!  I wish, pa, you'd put on your other boots! Everybody can
see these are made for the farrows.  And you ain't a market gardener
any more."

"What am I, then?" asked Mulrady, with a half-pleased, half-uneasy
laugh.

"You're a capitalist, I say; but ma says a landed proprietor."
Nevertheless, the landed proprietor, when he reached the boulder on the
Red Dog highway, sat down in somewhat moody contemplation, with his
head bowed over the broad cowhide brogues, that seemed to have already
gathered enough of the soil to indicate his right to that title.
Mamie, who had recovered her spirits, but had not lost her
preoccupation, wandered off by herself in the meadow, or ascended the
hillside, as her occasional impatience at the delay of the coach, or
the following of some ambitious fancy, alternately prompted her.  She
was so far away at one time that the stage-coach, which finally drew up
before Mulrady, was obliged to wait for her.

When she was deposited safely inside, and Mulrady had climbed to the
box beside the driver, the latter remarked, curtly,--

"Ye gave me a right smart skeer, a minit ago, stranger."

"Ez how?"

"Well, about three years ago, I was comin' down this yer grade, at just
this time, and sittin' right on that stone, in just your attitude, was
a man about your build and years.  I pulled up to let him in, when,
darn my skin! if he ever moved, but sorter looked at me without
speakin'.  I called to him, and he never answered, 'cept with that
idiotic stare.  I then let him have my opinion of him, in mighty strong
English, and drove off, leavin' him there.  The next morning, when I
came by on the up-trip, darn my skin! if he wasn't thar, but lyin' all
of a heap on the boulder.  Jim drops down and picks him up.  Doctor
Duchesne, ez was along, allowst it was a played-out prospector, with a
big case of paralysis, and we expressed him through to the County
Hospital, like so much dead freight.  I've allus been kinder
superstitious about passin' that rock, and when I saw you jist now,
sittin' thar, dazed like, with your head down like the other chap, it
rather threw me off my centre."

In the inexplicable and half-superstitious uneasiness that this
coincidence awakened in Mulrady's unimaginative mind, he was almost on
the point of disclosing his good fortune to the driver, in order to
prove how preposterous was the parallel, but checked himself in time.

"Did you find out who he was?" broke in a rash passenger.  "Did you
ever get over it?" added another unfortunate.

With a pause of insulting scorn at the interruption, the driver
resumed, pointedly, to Mulrady: "The pint of the whole thing was my
cussin' a helpless man, ez could neither cuss back nor shoot; and then
afterwards takin' you for his ghost layin' for me to get even."  He
paused again, and then added, carelessly, "They say he never kem to
enuff to let on who he was or whar he kem from; and he was eventooally
taken to a 'Sylum for Doddering Idjits and Gin'ral and Permiskus
Imbeciles at Sacramento.  I've heerd it's considered a first-class
institooshun, not only for them ez is paralyzed and can't talk, as for
them ez is the reverse and is too chipper. Now," he added, languidly
turning for the first time to his miserable questioners, "how did YOU
find it?"


[1] Don Ramon probably alluded to the eminent naturalist Douglas, who
visited California before the gold excitement, and died of an accident
in the Sandwich Islands.



CHAPTER II

When the news of the discovery of gold in Mulrady shaft was finally
made public, it created an excitement hitherto unknown in the history
of the country.  Half of Red Dog and all Rough-and-Ready were emptied
upon the yellow hills surrounding Mulrady's, until their circling camp
fires looked like a besieging army that had invested his peaceful
pastoral home, preparatory to carrying it by assault.  Unfortunately
for them, they found the various points of vantage already garrisoned
with notices of "preemption" for mining purposes in the name of the
various members of the Alvarado family. This stroke of business was due
to Mrs. Mulrady, as a means of mollifying the conscientious scruples of
her husband and of placating the Alvarados, in view of some remote
contingency.  It is but fair to say that this degradation of his
father's Castilian principles was opposed by Don Caesar.  "You needn't
work them yourself, but sell out to them that will; it's the only way
to keep the prospectors from taking it without paying for it at all,"
argued Mrs. Mulrady.  Don Caesar finally assented; perhaps less to the
business arguments of Mulrady's wife than to the simple suggestion of
Mamie's mother.  Enough that he realized a sum in money for a few acres
that exceeded the last ten years' income of Don Ramon's seven leagues.

Equally unprecedented and extravagant was the realization of the
discovery in Mulrady's shaft.  It was alleged that a company, hastily
formed in Sacramento, paid him a million of dollars down, leaving him
still a controlling two-thirds interest in the mine. With an obstinacy,
however, that amounted almost to a moral conviction, he refused to
include the house and potato-patch in the property.  When the company
had yielded the point, he declined, with equal tenacity, to part with
it to outside speculators on even the most extravagant offers.  In vain
Mrs. Mulrady protested; in vain she pointed out to him that the
retention of the evidence of his former humble occupation was a green
blot upon their social escutcheon.

"If you will keep the land, build on it, and root up the garden." But
Mulrady was adamant.

"It's the only thing I ever made myself, and got out of the soil with
my own hands; it's the beginning of my fortune, and it may be the end
of it.  Mebbee I'll be glad enough to have it to come back to some day,
and be thankful for the square meal I can dig out of it."

By repeated pressure, however, Mulrady yielded the compromise that a
portion of it should be made into a vineyard and flower-garden, and by
a suitable coloring of ornament and luxury obliterate its vulgar part.
Less successful, however, was that energetic woman in another effort to
mitigate the austerities of their earlier state. It occurred to her to
utilize the softer accents of Don Caesar in the pronunciation of their
family name, and privately had "Mulrade" take the place of Mulrady on
her visiting card.  "It might be Spanish," she argued with her husband.
"Lawyer Cole says most American names are corrupted, and how do you
know that yours ain't?"  Mulrady, who would not swear that his
ancestors came from Ireland to the Carolinas in '98, was helpless to
refute the assertion.  But the terrible Nemesis of an un-Spanish,
American provincial speech avenged the orthographical outrage at once.
When Mrs. Mulrady began to be addressed orally, as well as by letter,
as "Mrs. Mulraid," and when simple amatory effusions to her daughter
rhymed with "lovely maid," she promptly refused the original vowel. But
she fondly clung to the Spanish courtesy which transformed her
husband's baptismal name, and usually spoke of him--in his absence--as
"Don Alvino."  But in the presence of his short, square figure, his
orange tawny hair, his twinkling gray eyes, and retrousse nose, even
that dominant woman withheld his title.  It was currently reported at
Red Dog that a distinguished foreigner had one day approached Mulrady
with the formula, "I believe I have the honor of addressing Don Alvino
Mulrady?"  "You kin bet your boots, stranger, that's me," had returned
that simple hidalgo.

Although Mrs. Mulrady would have preferred that Mamie should remain at
Sacramento until she could join her, preparatory to a trip to "the
States" and Europe, she yielded to her daughter's desire to astonish
Rough-and-Ready, before she left, with her new wardrobe, and unfold in
the parent nest the delicate and painted wings with which she was to
fly from them forever.  "I don't want them to remember me afterwards in
those spotted prints, ma, and like as not say I never had a decent
frock until I went away."  There was something so like the daughter of
her mother in this delicate foresight that the touched and gratified
parent kissed her, and assented.  The result was gratifying beyond her
expectation.  In that few weeks' sojourn at Sacramento, the young girl
seemed to have adapted and assimilated herself to the latest modes of
fashion with even more than the usual American girl's pliancy and
taste. Equal to all emergencies of style and material, she seemed to
supply, from some hitherto unknown quality she possessed, the grace and
manner peculiar to each.  Untrammeled by tradition, education, or
precedent, she had the Western girl's confidence in all things being
possible, which made them so often probable.  Mr. Mulrady looked at his
daughter with mingled sentiments of pride and awe. Was it possible that
this delicate creature, so superior to him that he seemed like a
degenerate scion of her remoter race, was his own flesh and blood?  Was
she the daughter of her mother, who even in her remembered youth was
never equipped like this?  If the thought brought no pleasure to his
simple, loving nature, it at least spared him the pain of what might
have seemed ingratitude in one more akin to himself.  "The fact is, we
ain't quite up to her style," was his explanation and apology.  A vague
belief that in another and a better world than this he might
approximate and understand this perfection somewhat soothed and
sustained him.

It was quite consistent, therefore, that the embroidered cambric dress
which Mamie Mulrady wore one summer afternoon on the hillside at Los
Gatos, while to the critical feminine eye at once artistic and
expensive, should not seem incongruous to her surroundings or to
herself in the eyes of a general audience.  It certainly did not seem
so to one pair of frank, humorous ones that glanced at her from time to
time, as their owner, a young fellow of five-and-twenty, walked at her
side.  He was the new editor of the "Rough-and-Ready Record," and,
having been her fellow-passenger from Sacramento, had already once or
twice availed himself of her father's invitation to call upon them.
Mrs. Mulrady had not discouraged this mild flirtation.  Whether she
wished to disconcert Don Caesar for some occult purpose, or whether,
like the rest of her sex, she had an overweening confidence in the
unheroic, unseductive, and purely platonic character of masculine
humor, did not appear.

"When I say I'm sorry you are going to leave us, Miss Mulrady," said
the young fellow, lightly, "you will comprehend my unselfishness, since
I frankly admit your departure would be a positive relief to me as an
editor and a man.  The pressure in the Poet's Corner of the 'Record'
since it was mistakingly discovered that a person of your name might be
induced to seek the 'glade' and 'shade' without being 'afraid,'
'dismayed,' or 'betrayed,' has been something enormous, and,
unfortunately, I am debarred from rejecting anything, on the just
ground that I am myself an interested admirer."

"It's dreadful to be placarded around the country by one's own full
name, isn't it?" said Mamie, without, however, expressing much horror
in her face.

"They think it much more respectful than to call you 'Mamie,'" he
responded, lightly; "and many of your admirers are middle-aged men,
with a mediaeval style of compliment.  I've discovered that amatory
versifying wasn't entirely a youthful passion.  Colonel Cash is about
as fatal with a couplet as with a double-barreled gun, and scatters as
terribly.  Judge Butts and Dr. Wilson have both discerned the
resemblance of your gifts to those of Venus, and their own to Apollo.
But don't undervalue those tributes, Miss Mulrady," he added, more
seriously.  "You'll have thousands of admirers where you are going; but
you'll be willing to admit in the end, I think, that none were more
honest and respectful than your subjects at Rough-and-Ready and Red
Dog."  He stopped, and added in a graver tone, "Does Don Caesar write
poetry?"

"He has something better to do," said the young lady, pertly.

"I can easily imagine that," he returned, mischievously; "it must be a
pallid substitute for other opportunities."

"What did you come here for?" she asked, suddenly.

"To see you."

"Nonsense!  You know what I mean.  Why did you ever leave Sacramento to
come here?  I should think it would suit you so much better than this
place."

"I suppose I was fired by your father's example, and wished to find a
gold mine."

"Men like you never do," she said, simply.

"Is that a compliment, Miss Mulrady?"

"I don't know.  But I think that you think that it is."

He gave her the pleased look of one who had unexpectedly found a
sympathetic intelligence.  "Do I?  This is interesting.  Let's sit
down."  In their desultory rambling they had reached, quite
unconsciously, the large boulder at the roadside.  Mamie hesitated a
moment, looked up and down the road, and then, with an already opulent
indifference to the damaging of her spotless skirt, sat herself upon
it, with her furled parasol held by her two little hands thrown over
her half-drawn-up knee.  The young editor, half sitting, half leaning,
against the stone, began to draw figures in the sand with his cane.

"On the contrary, Miss Mulrady, I hope to make some money here. You are
leaving Rough-and-Ready because you are rich.  We are coming to it
because we are poor."

"We?" echoed Mamie, lazily, looking up the road.

"Yes.  My father and two sisters."

"I am sorry.  I might have known them if I hadn't been going away." At
the same moment, it flashed across her mind that, if they were like the
man before her, they might prove disagreeably independent and critical.
"Is your father in business?" she asked.

He shook his head.  After a pause, he said, punctuating his sentences
with the point of his stick in the soft dust, "He is paralyzed, and out
of his mind, Miss Mulrady.  I came to California to seek him, as all
news of him ceased three years since; and I found him only two weeks
ago, alone, friendless--an unrecognized pauper in the county hospital."

"Two weeks ago?  That was when I went to Sacramento."

"Very probably."

"It must have been very shocking to you?"

"It was."

"I should think you'd feel real bad?"

"I do, at times."  He smiled, and laid his stick on the stone. "You now
see, Miss Mulrady, how necessary to me is this good fortune that you
don't think me worthy of.  Meantime I must try to make a home for them
at Rough-and-Ready."

Miss Mulrady put down her knee and her parasol.  "We mustn't stay here
much longer, you know."

"Why?"

"Why, the stage-coach comes by at about this time."

"And you think the passengers will observe us sitting here?"

"Of course they will."

"Miss Mulrady, I implore you to stay."

He was leaning over her with such apparent earnestness of voice and
gesture that the color came into her cheek.  For a moment she scarcely
dared to lift her conscious eyes to his.  When she did so, she suddenly
glanced her own aside with a flash of anger.  He was laughing.

"If you have any pity for me, do not leave me now," he repeated. "Stay
a moment longer, and my fortune is made.  The passengers will report us
all over Red Dog as engaged.  I shall be supposed to be in your
father's secrets, and shall be sought after as a director of all the
new companies.  The 'Record' will double its circulation; poetry will
drop out of its columns, advertising rush to fill its place, and I
shall receive five dollars a week more salary, if not seven and a half.
Never mind the consequences to yourself at such a moment.  I assure you
there will be none.  You can deny it the next day--I will deny it--nay,
more, the 'Record' itself will deny it in an extra edition of one
thousand copies, at ten cents each.  Linger a moment longer, Miss
Mulrady.  Fly, oh fly not yet.  They're coming--hark! oh!  By Jove,
it's only Don Caesar!"

It was, indeed, only the young scion of the house of Alvarado,
blue-eyed, sallow-skinned, and high-shouldered, coming towards them on
a fiery, half-broken mustang, whose very spontaneous lawlessness seemed
to accentuate and bring out the grave and decorous ease of his rider.
Even in his burlesque preoccupation the editor of the "Record" did not
withhold his admiration of this perfect horsemanship.  Mamie, who, in
her wounded amour propre, would like to have made much of it to annoy
her companion, was thus estopped any ostentatious compliment.

Don Caesar lifted his hat with sweet seriousness to the lady, with
grave courtesy to the gentleman.  While the lower half of this Centaur
was apparently quivering with fury, and stamping the ground in his
evident desire to charge upon the pair, the upper half, with natural
dignity, looked from the one to the other, as if to leave the privilege
of an explanation with them.  But Mamie was too wise, and her companion
too indifferent, to offer one.  A slight shade passed over Don Caesar's
face.  To complicate the situation at that moment, the expected
stagecoach came rattling by.  With quick feminine intuition, Mamie
caught in the faces of the driver and the expressman, and reflected in
the mischievous eyes of her companion, a peculiar interpretation of
their meeting, that was not removed by the whispered assurance of the
editor that the passengers were anxiously looking back "to see the
shooting."

The young Spaniard, equally oblivious of humor or curiosity, remained
impassive.

"You know Mr. Slinn, of the 'Record," said Mamie, "don't you?"

Don Caesar had never before met the Senor Esslinn.  He was under the
impression that it was a Senor Robinson that was of the "Record."

"Oh, HE was shot," said Slinn.  "I'm taking his place."

"Bueno!  To be shot too?  I trust not."

Slinn looked quickly and sharply into Don Caesar's grave face.  He
seemed to be incapable of any double meaning.  However, as he had no
serious reason for awakening Don Caesar's jealousy, and very little
desire to become an embarrassing third in this conversation, and
possibly a burden to the young lady, he proceeded to take his leave of
her.  From a sudden feminine revulsion of sympathy, or from some
unintelligible instinct of diplomacy, Mamie said, as she extended her
hand, "I hope you'll find a home for your family near here.  Mamma
wants pa to let our old house.  Perhaps it might suit you, if not too
far from your work.  You might speak to ma about it."

"Thank you; I will," responded the young man, pressing her hand with
unaffected cordiality.

Don Caesar watched him until he had disappeared behind the wayside
buckeyes.

"He is a man of family--this one--your countryman?"

It seemed strange to her to have a mere acquaintance spoken of as "her
countryman"--not the first time nor the last time in her career.  As
there appeared no trace or sign of jealousy in her questioner's manner,
she answered briefly but vaguely:

"Yes; it's a shocking story.  His father disappeared some years ago,
and he has just found him--a helpless paralytic--in the Sacramento
Hospital.  He'll have to support him--and they're very poor."

"So, then, they are not independent of each other always--these fathers
and children of Americans!"

"No," said Mamie, shortly.  Without knowing why, she felt inclined to
resent Don Caesar's manner.  His serious gravity--gentle and high-bred
as it was, undoubtedly--was somewhat trying to her at times, and seemed
even more so after Slinn's irreverent humor.  She picked up her
parasol, a little impatiently, as if to go.

But Don Caesar had already dismounted, and tied his horse to a tree
with a strong lariat that hung at his saddle-bow.

"Let us walk through the woods towards your home.  I can return alone
for the horse when you shall dismiss me."

They turned in among the pines that, overcrowding the hollow, crept
partly up the side of the hill of Mulrady's shaft.  A disused trail,
almost hidden by the waxen-hued yerba buena, led from the highway, and
finally lost itself in the undergrowth.  It was a lovers' walk; they
were lovers, evidently, and yet the man was too self-poised in his
gravity, the young woman too conscious and critical, to suggest an
absorbing or oblivious passion.

"I should not have made myself so obtrusive to-day before your friend,"
said Don Caesar, with proud humility, "but I could not understand from
your mother whether you were alone or whether my company was desirable.
It is of this I have now to speak, Mamie. Lately your mother has seemed
strange to me; avoiding any reference to our affection; treating it
lightly, and even as to-day, I fancy, putting obstacles in the way of
our meeting alone.  She was disappointed at your return from Sacramento
where, I have been told, she intended you to remain until you left the
country; and since your return I have seen you but twice.  I may be
wrong. Perhaps I do not comprehend the American mother; I have--who
knows?--perhaps offended in some point of etiquette, omitted some
ceremony that was her due.  But when you told me, Mamie, that it was
not necessary to speak to HER first, that it was not the American
fashion--"

Mamie started, and blushed slightly.

"Yes," she said hurriedly, "certainly; but ma has been quite queer of
late, and she may think--you know--that since--since there has been so
much property to dispose of, she ought to have been consulted."

"Then let us consult her at once, dear child!  And as to the property,
in Heaven's name, let her dispose of it as she will. Saints forbid that
an Alvarado should ever interfere.  And what is it to us, my little
one?  Enough that Dona Mameta Alvarado will never have less state than
the richest bride that ever came to Los Gatos."

Mamie had not forgotten that, scarcely a month ago, even had she loved
the man before her no more than she did at present, she would still
have been thrilled with delight at these words!  Even now she was
moved--conscious as she had become that the "state" of a bride of the
Alvarados was not all she had imagined, and that the bare adobe court
of Los Gatos was open to the sky and the free criticism of Sacramento
capitalists!

"Yes, dear," she murmured with a half childlike pleasure, that lit up
her face and eyes so innocently that it stopped any minute
investigation into its origin and real meaning.  "Yes, dear; but we
need not have a fuss made about it at present, and perhaps put ma
against us.  She wouldn't hear of our marrying now; and she might
forbid our engagement."

"But you are going away."

"I should have to go to New York or Europe FIRST, you know," she
answered, naively, "even if it were all settled.  I should have to get
things!  One couldn't be decent here."

With the recollection of the pink cotton gown, in which she had first
pledged her troth to him, before his eyes, he said, "But you are
charming now.  You cannot be more so to me.  If I am satisfied, little
one, with you as you are, let us go together, and then you can get
dresses to please others."

She had not expected this importunity.  Really, if it came to this, she
might have engaged herself to some one like Slinn; he at least would
have understood her.  He was much cleverer, and certainly more of a man
of the world.  When Slinn had treated her like a child, it was with the
humorous tolerance of an admiring superior, and not the didactic
impulse of a guardian.  She did not say this, nor did her pretty eyes
indicate it, as in the instance of her brief anger with Slinn.  She
only said gently,--

"I should have thought you, of all men, would have been particular
about your wife doing the proper thing.  But never mind!  Don't let us
talk any more about it.  Perhaps as it seems such a great thing to you,
and so much trouble, there may be no necessity for it at all."

I do not think that the young lady deliberately planned this charmingly
illogical deduction from Don Caesar's speech, or that she calculated
its effect upon him; but it was part of her nature to say it, and
profit by it.  Under the unjust lash of it, his pride gave way.

"Ah, do you not see why I wish to go with you?" he said, with sudden
and unexpected passion.  "You are beautiful; you are good; it has
pleased Heaven to make you rich also; but you are a child in
experience, and know not your own heart.  With your beauty, your
goodness, and your wealth, you will attract all to you--as you do
here--because you cannot help it.  But you will be equally helpless,
little one, if THEY should attract YOU, and you had no tie to fall back
upon."

It was an unfortunate speech.  The words were Don Caesar's; but the
thought she had heard before from her mother, although the deduction
had been of a very different kind.  Mamie followed the speaker with
bright but visionary eyes.  There must be some truth in all this.  Her
mother had said it; Mr. Slinn had laughingly admitted it.  She HAD a
brilliant future before her!  Was she right in making it impossible by
a rash and foolish tie?  He himself had said she was inexperienced.
She knew it; and yet, what was he doing now but taking advantage of
that inexperience?  If he really loved her, he would be willing to
submit to the test.  She did not ask a similar one from him; and was
willing, if she came out of it free, to marry him just the same.  There
was something so noble in this thought that she felt for a moment
carried away by an impulse of compassionate unselfishness, and smiled
tenderly as she looked up in his face.

"Then you consent, Mamie?" he said, eagerly, passing his arm around her
waist.

"Not now, Caesar," she said, gently disengaging herself.  "I must think
it over; we are both too young to act upon it rashly; it would be
unfair to you, who are so quiet and have seen so few girls--I mean
Americans--to tie yourself to the first one you have known.  When I am
gone you will go more into the world.  There are Mr. Slinn's two
sisters coming here--I shouldn't wonder if they were far cleverer and
talked far better than I do--and think how I should feel if I knew that
only a wretched pledge to me kept you from loving them!"  She stopped,
and cast down her eyes.

It was her first attempt at coquetry, for, in her usual charming
selfishness, she was perfectly frank and open; and it might not have
been her last, but she had gone too far at first, and was not prepared
for a recoil of her own argument.

"If you admit that it is possible--that it is possible to you!" he
said, quickly.

She saw her mistake.  "We may not have many opportunities to meet
alone," she answered, quietly; "and I am sure we would be happier when
we meet not to accuse each other of impossibilities.  Let us rather see
how we can communicate together, if anything should prevent our
meeting.  Remember, it was only by chance that you were able to see me
now.  If ma has believed that she ought to have been consulted, our
meeting together in this secret way will only make matters worse.  She
is even now wondering where I am, and may be suspicious.  I must go
back at once.  At any moment some one may come here looking for me."

"But I have so much to say," he pleaded.  "Our time has been so short."

"You can write."

"But what will your mother think of that?" he said, in grave
astonishment.

She colored again as she returned, quickly, "Of course, you must not
write to the house.  You can leave a letter somewhere for me--say,
somewhere about here.  Stop!" she added, with a sudden girlish gayety,
"see, here's the very place.  Look there!"

She pointed to the decayed trunk of a blasted sycamore, a few feet from
the trail.  A cavity, breast high, half filled with skeleton leaves and
pine-nuts, showed that it had formerly been a squirrel's hoard, but for
some reason had been deserted.

"Look! it's a regular letter-box," she continued, gayly, rising on
tip-toe to peep into its recesses.  Don Caesar looked at her
admiringly; it seemed like a return to their first idyllic love-making
in the old days, when she used to steal out of the cabbage rows in her
brown linen apron and sun-bonnet to walk with him in the woods.  He
recalled the fact to her with the fatality of a lover already seeking
to restore in past recollections something that was wanting in the
present.  She received it with the impatience of youth, to whom the
present is all sufficient.

"I wonder how you could ever have cared for me in that holland apron,"
she said, looking down upon her new dress.

"Shall I tell you why?" he said, fondly, passing his arm around her
waist, and drawing her pretty head nearer his shoulder.

"No--not now!" she said, laughingly, but struggling to free herself.
"There's not time.  Write it, and put it in the box. There," she added,
hastily, "listen!--what's that?"

"It's only a squirrel," he whispered reassuringly in her ear.

"No; it's somebody coming!  I must go!  Please!  Caesar, dear! There,
then--"

She met his kiss half-way, released herself with a lithe movement of
her wrist and shoulder, and the next moment seemed to slip into the
woods, and was gone.

Don Caesar listened with a sigh as the last rustling ceased, cast a
look at the decayed tree as if to fix it in his memory, and then slowly
retraced his steps towards his tethered mustang.

He was right, however, in his surmise of the cause of that
interruption.  A pair of bright eyes had been watching them from the
bough of an adjacent tree.  It was a squirrel, who, having had serious
and prior intentions of making use of the cavity they had discovered,
had only withheld examination by an apparent courteous discretion
towards the intruding pair.  Now that they were gone he slipped down
the tree and ran towards the decayed stump.



CHAPTER III

Apparently dissatisfied with the result of an investigation, which
proved that the cavity was unfit as a treasure hoard for a discreet
squirrel, whatever its value as a receptacle for the love-tokens of
incautious humanity, the little animal at once set about to put things
in order.  He began by whisking out an immense quantity of dead leaves,
disturbed a family of tree-spiders, dissipated a drove of patient
aphides browsing in the bark, as well as their attendant dairymen, the
ants, and otherwise ruled it with the high hand of dispossession and a
contemptuous opinion of the previous incumbents.  It must not be
supposed, however, that his proceedings were altogether free from
contemporaneous criticism; a venerable crow sitting on a branch above
him displayed great interest in his occupation, and, hopping down a few
moments afterwards, disposed of some worm-eaten nuts, a few larvae, and
an insect or two, with languid dignity and without prejudice.  Certain
incumbrances, however, still resisted the squirrel's general eviction;
among them a folded square of paper with sharply defined edges, that
declined investigation, and, owing to a nauseous smell of tobacco,
escaped nibbling as it had apparently escaped insect ravages.  This,
owing to its sharp angles, which persisted in catching in the soft
decaying wood in his whirlwind of house-cleaning, he allowed to remain.
Having thus, in a general way, prepared for the coming winter, the
self-satisfied little rodent dismissed the subject from his active mind.

His rage and indignation a few days later may be readily conceived,
when he found, on returning to his new-made home, another square of
paper, folded like the first, but much fresher and whiter, lying within
the cavity, on top of some moss which had evidently been placed there
for the purpose.  This he felt was really more than he could bear, but
it was smaller, and with a few energetic kicks and whisks of his tail
he managed to finally dislodge it through the opening, where it fell
ignominiously to the earth.  The eager eyes of the ever-attendant crow,
however, instantly detected it; he flew to the ground, and, turning it
over, examined it gravely.  It was certainly not edible, but it was
exceedingly rare, and, as an old collector of curios, he felt he could
not pass it by.  He lifted it in his beak, and, with a desperate
struggle against the superincumbent weight, regained the branch with
his prize.  Here, by one of those delicious vagaries of animal nature,
he apparently at once discharged his mind of the whole affair, became
utterly oblivious of it, allowed it to drop without the least concern,
and eventually flew away with an abstracted air, as if he had been
another bird entirely.  The paper got into a manzanita bush, where it
remained suspended until the evening, when, being dislodged by a
passing wild-cat on its way to Mulrady's hen-roost, it gave that
delicately sensitive marauder such a turn that she fled into the
adjacent county.

But the troubles of the squirrel were not yet over.  On the following
day the young man who had accompanied the young woman returned to the
trunk, and the squirrel had barely time to make his escape before the
impatient visitor approached the opening of the cavity, peered into it,
and even passed his hand through its recesses.  The delight visible
upon his anxious and serious face at the disappearance of the letter,
and the apparent proof that it had been called for, showed him to have
been its original depositor, and probably awakened a remorseful
recollection in the dark bosom of the omnipresent crow, who uttered a
conscious-stricken croak from the bough above him.  But the young man
quickly disappeared again, and the squirrel was once more left in
undisputed possession.

A week passed.  A weary, anxious interval to Don Caesar, who had
neither seen nor heard from Mamie since their last meeting.  Too
conscious of his own self-respect to call at the house after the
equivocal conduct of Mrs. Mulrady, and too proud to haunt the lanes and
approaches in the hope of meeting her daughter, like an ordinary lover,
he hid his gloomy thoughts in the monastic shadows of the courtyard at
Los Gatos, or found relief in furious riding at night and early morning
on the highway.  Once or twice the up-stage had been overtaken and
passed by a rushing figure as shadowy as a phantom horseman, with only
the star-like point of a cigarette to indicate its humanity.  It was in
one of these fierce recreations that he was obliged to stop in early
morning at the blacksmith's shop at Rough-and-Ready, to have a loosened
horseshoe replaced, and while waiting picked up a newspaper.  Don
Caesar seldom read the papers, but noticing that this was the "Record,"
he glanced at its columns.  A familiar name suddenly flashed out of the
dark type like a spark from the anvil.  With a brain and heart that
seemed to be beating in unison with the blacksmith's sledge, he read as
follows:--

"Our distinguished fellow-townsman, Alvin Mulrady, Esq., left town day
before yesterday to attend an important meeting of directors of the Red
Dog Ditch Company, in San Francisco.  Society will regret to hear that
Mrs. Mulrady and her beautiful and accomplished daughter, who are
expecting to depart for Europe at the end of the month, anticipated the
event nearly a fortnight, by taking this opportunity of accompanying
Mr. Mulrady as far as San Francisco, on their way to the East.  Mrs.
and Miss Mulrady intend to visit London, Paris, and Berlin, and will be
absent three years.  It is possible that Mr. Mulrady may join them
later at one or other of those capitals.  Considerable disappointment
is felt that a more extended leave-taking was not possible, and that,
under the circumstances, no opportunity was offered for a 'send off'
suitable to the condition of the parties and the esteem in which they
are held in Rough-and-Ready."

The paper dropped from his hands.  Gone! and without a word!  No, that
was impossible!  There must be some mistake; she had written; the
letter had miscarried; she must have sent word to Los Gatos, and the
stupid messenger had blundered; she had probably appointed another
meeting, or expected him to follow to San Francisco.  "The day before
yesterday!"  It was the morning's paper--she had been gone scarcely two
days--it was not too late yet to receive a delayed message by post, by
some forgetful hand--by--ah--the tree!

Of course it was in the tree, and he had not been there for a week! Why
had he not thought of it before?  The fault was his, not hers. Perhaps
she had gone away, believing him faithless, or a country boor.

"In the name of the Devil, will you keep me here till eternity!"

The blacksmith stared at him.  Don Caesar suddenly remembered that he
was speaking, as he was thinking--in Spanish.

"Ten dollars, my friend, if you have done in five minutes!"

The man laughed.  "That's good enough American," he said, beginning to
quicken his efforts.  Don Caesar again took up the paper.  There was
another paragraph that recalled his last interview with Mamie:--

"Mr. Harry Slinn, Jr., the editor of this paper, has just moved into
the pioneer house formerly occupied by Alvin Mulrady, Esq., which has
already become historic in the annals of the county.  Mr. Slinn brings
with him his father--H. J. Slinn, Esq.,--and his two sisters.  Mr.
Slinn, Sen., who has been suffering for many years from complete
paralysis, we understand is slowly improving; and it is by the advice
of his physicians that he has chosen the invigorating air of the
foothills as a change to the debilitating heat of Sacramento."

The affair had been quickly settled, certainly, reflected Don Caesar,
with a slight chill of jealousy, as he thought of Mamie's interest in
the young editor.  But the next moment he dismissed it from his mind;
all except a dull consciousness that, if she really loved him--Don
Caesar--as he loved her, she could not have assisted in throwing into
his society the young sisters of the editor, who she expected might be
so attractive.

Within the five minutes the horse was ready, and Don Caesar in the
saddle again.  In less than half an hour he was at the wayside boulder.
Here he picketed his horse, and took the narrow foot-trail through the
hollow.  It did not take him long to reach their old trysting-place.
With a beating heart he approached the decaying trunk and looked into
the cavity.  There was no letter there!

A few blackened nuts and some of the dry moss he had put there were
lying on the ground at its roots.  He could not remember whether they
were there when he had last visited the spot.  He began to grope in the
cavity with both hands.  His fingers struck against the sharp angles of
a flat paper packet: a thrill of joy ran through them and stopped his
beating heart; he drew out the hidden object, and was chilled with
disappointment.

It was an ordinary-sized envelope of yellowish-brown paper, bearing,
besides the usual government stamp, the official legend of an express
company, and showing its age as much by this record of a now obsolete
carrying service as by the discoloration of time and atmosphere.  Its
weight, which was heavier than that of any ordinary letter of the same
size and thickness, was evidently due to some loose enclosures, that
slightly rustled and could be felt by the fingers, like minute pieces
of metal or grains of gravel. It was within Don Caesar's experience
that gold specimens were often sent in that manner.  It was in a state
of singular preservation, except the address, which, being written in
pencil, was scarcely discernible, and even when deciphered appeared to
be incoherent and unfinished.  The unknown correspondent had written
"dear Mary," and then "Mrs. Mary Slinn," with an unintelligible scrawl
following for the direction.  If Don Caesar's mind had not been lately
preoccupied with the name of the editor, he would hardly have guessed
the superscription.

In his cruel disappointment and fully aroused indignation, he at once
began to suspect a connection of circumstances which at any other
moment he would have thought purely accidental, or perhaps not have
considered at all.  The cavity in the tree had evidently been used as a
secret receptacle for letters before; did Mamie know it at the time,
and how did she know it?  The apparent age of the letter made it
preposterous to suppose that it pointed to any secret correspondence of
hers with young Mr. Slinn; and the address was not in her handwriting.
Was there any secret previous intimacy between the families?  There was
but one way in which he could connect this letter with Mamie's
faithlessness.  It was an infamous, a grotesquely horrible idea, a
thought which sprang as much from his inexperience of the world and his
habitual suspiciousness of all humor as anything else!  It was that the
letter was a brutal joke of Slinn's--a joke perhaps concocted by Mamie
and himself--a parting insult that should at the last moment proclaim
their treachery and his own credulity.  Doubtless it contained a
declaration of their shame, and the reason why she had fled from him
without a word of explanation.  And the enclosure, of course, was some
significant and degrading illustration.  Those Americans are full of
those low conceits; it was their national vulgarity.

He had the letter in his angry hand.  He could break it open if he
wished and satisfy himself; but it was not addressed to HIM, and the
instinct of honor, strong even in his rage, was the instinct of an
adversary as well.  No; Slinn should open the letter before him. Slinn
should explain everything, and answer for it.  If it was nothing--a
mere accident--it would lead to some general explanation, and perhaps
even news of Mamie.  But he would arraign Slinn, and at once.  He put
the letter in his pocket, quickly retraced his steps to his horse, and,
putting spurs to the animal, followed the high road to the gate of
Mulrady's pioneer cabin.

He remembered it well enough.  To a cultivated taste, it was superior
to the more pretentious "new house."  During the first year of
Mulrady's tenancy, the plain square log-cabin had received those
additions and attractions which only a tenant can conceive and actual
experience suggest; and in this way the hideous right angles were
broken with sheds, "lean-to" extensions, until a certain
picturesqueness was given to the irregularity of outline, and a
home-like security and companionship to the congregated buildings.  It
typified the former life of the great capitalist, as the tall new house
illustrated the loneliness and isolation that wealth had given him.
But the real points of vantage were the years of cultivation and
habitation that had warmed and enriched the soil, and evoked the
climbing vines and roses that already hid its unpainted boards, rounded
its hard outlines, and gave projection and shadow from the pitiless
glare of a summer's long sun, or broke the steady beating of the winter
rains.  It was true that pea and bean poles surrounded it on one side,
and the only access to the house was through the cabbage rows that once
were the pride and sustenance of the Mulradys.  It was this fact, more
than any other, that had impelled Mrs. Mulrady to abandon its site; she
did not like to read the history of their humble origin reflected in
the faces of their visitors as they entered.

Don Caesar tied his horse to the fence, and hurriedly approached the
house.  The door, however, hospitably opened when he was a few paces
from it, and when he reached the threshold he found himself
unexpectedly in the presence of two pretty girls.  They were evidently
Slinn's sisters, whom he had neither thought of nor included in the
meeting he had prepared.  In spite of his preoccupation, he felt
himself suddenly embarrassed, not only by the actual distinction of
their beauty, but by a kind of likeness that they seemed to bear to
Mamie.

"We saw you coming," said the elder, unaffectedly.  "You are Don Caesar
Alvarado.  My brother has spoken of you."

The words recalled Don Caesar to himself and a sense of courtesy. He
was not here to quarrel with these fair strangers at their first
meeting; he must seek Slinn elsewhere, and at another time.  The
frankness of his reception and the allusion to their brother made it
appear impossible that they should be either a party to his
disappointment, or even aware of it.  His excitement melted away before
a certain lazy ease, which the consciousness of their beauty seemed to
give them.  He was able to put a few courteous inquiries, and, thanks
to the paragraph in the "Record," to congratulate them upon their
father's improvement.

"Oh, pa is a great deal better in his health, and has picked up even in
the last few days, so that he is able to walk round with crutches,"
said the elder sister.  "The air here seems to invigorate him
wonderfully."

"And you know, Esther," said the younger, "I think he begins to take
more notice of things, especially when he is out-of-doors.  He looks
around on the scenery, and his eye brightens, as if he knew all about
it; and sometimes he knits his brows, and looks down so, as if he was
trying to remember."

"You know, I suppose," exclaimed Esther, "that since his seizure his
memory has been a blank--that is, three or four years of his life seem
to have been dropped out of his recollection."

"It might be a mercy sometimes, Senora," said Don Caesar, with a grave
sigh, as he looked at the delicate features before him, which recalled
the face of the absent Mamie.

"That's not very complimentary," said the younger girl, laughingly;
"for pa didn't recognize us, and only remembered us as little girls."

"Vashti!" interrupted Esther, rebukingly; then, turning to Don Caesar,
she added, "My sister, Vashti, means that father remembers more what
happened before he came to California, when we were quite young, than
he does of the interval that elapsed.  Dr. Duchesne says it's a
singular case.  He thinks that, with his present progress, he will
recover the perfect use of his limbs; though his memory may never come
back again."

"Unless--  You forget what the doctor told us this morning,"
interrupted Vashti again, briskly.

"I was going to say it," said Esther, a little curtly.  "UNLESS he has
another stroke.  Then he will either die or recover his mind entirely."

Don Caesar glanced at the bright faces, a trifle heightened in color by
their eager recital and the slight rivalry of narration, and looked
grave.  He was a little shocked at a certain lack of sympathy and
tenderness towards their unhappy parent.  They seemed to him not only
to have caught that dry, curious toleration of helplessness which
characterizes even relationship in its attendance upon chronic
suffering and weakness, but to have acquired an unconscious habit of
turning it to account.  In his present sensitive condition, he even
fancied that they flirted mildly over their parent's infirmity.

"My brother Harry has gone to Red Dog," continued Esther; "he'll be
right sorry to have missed you.  Mrs. Mulrady spoke to him about you;
you seem to have been great friends.  I s'pose you knew her daughter,
Mamie; I hear she is very pretty."

Although Don Caesar was now satisfied that the Slinns knew nothing of
Mamie's singular behavior to him, he felt embarrassed by this
conversation.  "Miss Mulrady is very pretty," he said, with grave
courtesy; "it is a custom of her race.  She left suddenly," he added
with affected calmness.

"I reckon she did calculate to stay here longer--so her mother said;
but the whole thing was settled a week ago.  I know my brother was
quite surprised to hear from Mr. Mulrady that if we were going to
decide about this house we must do it at once; he had an idea himself
about moving out of the big one into this when they left."

"Mamie Mulrady hadn't much to keep her here, considerin' the money and
the good looks she has, I reckon," said Vashti.  "She isn't the sort of
girl to throw herself away in the wilderness, when she can pick and
choose elsewhere.  I only wonder she ever come back from Sacramento.
They talk about papa Mulrady having BUSINESS at San Francisco, and THAT
hurrying them off!  Depend upon it, that 'business' was Mamie herself.
Her wish is gospel to them.  If she'd wanted to stay and have a
farewell party, old Mulrady's business would have been nowhere."

"Ain't you a little rough on Mamie," said Esther, who had been quietly
watching the young man's face with her large languid eyes, "considering
that we don't know her, and haven't even the right of friends to
criticise?"

"I don't call it rough," returned Vashti, frankly, "for I'd do the same
if I were in her shoes--and they're four-and-a-halves, for Harry told
me so.  Give me her money and her looks, and you wouldn't catch me
hanging round these diggings--goin' to choir meetings Saturdays, church
Sundays, and buggy-riding once a month--for society!  No--Mamie's head
was level--you bet!"

Don Caesar rose hurriedly.  They would present his compliments to their
father, and he would endeavor to find their brother at Red Dog.  He,
alas! had neither father, mother, nor sister, but if they would receive
his aunt, the Dona Inez Sepulvida, the next Sunday, when she came from
mass, she should be honored and he would be delighted.  It required all
his self-possession to deliver himself of this formal courtesy before
he could take his leave, and on the back of his mustang give way to the
rage, disgust and hatred of everything connected with Mamie that filled
his heart.  Conscious of his disturbance, but not entirely appreciating
their own share in it, the two girls somewhat wickedly prolonged the
interview by following him into the garden.

"Well, if you MUST leave now," said Esther, at last, languidly, "it
ain't much out of your way to go down through the garden and take a
look at pa as you go.  He's somewhere down there, near the woods, and
we don't like to leave him alone too long.  You might pass the time of
day with him; see if he's right side up.  Vashti and I have got a heap
of things to fix here yet; but if anything's wrong with him, you can
call us.  So-long."

Don Caesar was about to excuse himself hurriedly; but that sudden and
acute perception of all kindred sorrow which belongs to refined
suffering, checked his speech.  The loneliness of the helpless old man
in this atmosphere of active and youthful selfishness touched him.  He
bowed assent, and turned aside into one of the long perspectives of
bean-poles.  The girls watched him until out of sight.

"Well," said Vashti, "don't tell ME.  But if there wasn't something
between him and that Mamie Mulrady, I don't know a jilted man when I
see him."

"Well, you needn't have let him SEE that you knew it, so that any
civility of ours would look as if we were ready to take up with her
leavings," responded Esther, astutely, as the girls reentered the house.

Meantime, the unconscious object of their criticism walked sadly down
the old market-garden, whose rude outlines and homely details he once
clothed with the poetry of a sensitive man's first love. Well, it was a
common cabbage field and potato patch after all.  In his disgust he
felt conscious of even the loss of that sense of patronage and
superiority which had invested his affection for a girl of meaner
condition.  His self-respect was humiliated with his love.  The soil
and dirt of those wretched cabbages had clung to him, but not to her.
It was she who had gone higher; it was he who was left in the vulgar
ruins of his misplaced passion.

He reached the bottom of the garden without observing any sign of the
lonely invalid.  He looked up and down the cabbage rows, and through
the long perspective of pea-vines, without result.  There was a newer
trail leading from a gap in the pines to the wooded hollow, which
undoubtedly intersected the little path that he and Mamie had once
followed from the high road.  If the old man had taken this trail he
had possibly over-tasked his strength, and there was the more reason
why he should continue his search, and render any assistance if
required.  There was another idea that occurred to him, which
eventually decided him to go on.  It was that both these trails led to
the decayed sycamore stump, and that the older Slinn might have
something to do with the mysterious letter.  Quickening his steps
through the field, he entered the hollow, and reached the intersecting
trail as he expected.  To the right it lost itself in the dense woods
in the direction of the ominous stump; to the left it descended in
nearly a straight line to the highway, now plainly visible, as was
equally the boulder on which he had last discovered Mamie sitting with
young Slinn.  If he were not mistaken, there was a figure sitting there
now; it was surely a man.  And by that half-bowed, helpless attitude,
the object of his search!

It did not take him long to descend the track to the highway and
approach the stranger.  He was seated with his hands upon his knees,
gazing in a vague, absorbed fashion upon the hillside, now crowned with
the engine-house and chimney that marked the site of Mulrady's shaft.
He started slightly, and looked up, as Don Caesar paused before him.
The young man was surprised to see that the unfortunate man was not as
old as he had expected, and that his expression was one of quiet and
beatified contentment.

"Your daughters told me you were here," said Don Caesar, with gentle
respect.  "I am Caesar Alvarado, your not very far neighbor; very happy
to pay his respects to you as he has to them."

"My daughters?" said the old man, vaguely.  "Oh, yes! nice little
girls.  And my boy Harry.  Did you see Harry?  Fine little fellow,
Harry."

"I am glad to hear that you are better," said Don Caesar, hastily, "and
that the air of our country does you no harm.  God benefit you, senor,"
he added, with a profoundly reverential gesture, dropping unconsciously
into the religious habit of his youth.  "May he protect you, and bring
you back to health and happiness!"

"Happiness?" said Slinn, amazedly.  "I am happy--very happy!  I have
everything I want: good air, good food, good clothes, pretty little
children, kind friends--"  He smiled benignantly at Don Caesar.  "God
is very good to me!"

Indeed, he seemed very happy; and his face, albeit crowned with white
hair, unmarked by care and any disturbing impression, had so much of
satisfied youth in it that the grave features of his questioner made
him appear the elder.  Nevertheless, Don Caesar noticed that his eyes,
when withdrawn from him, sought the hillside with the same visionary
abstraction.

"It is a fine view, Senor Esslinn," said Don Caesar.

"It is a beautiful view, sir," said Slinn, turning his happy eyes upon
him for a moment, only to rest them again on the green slope opposite.

"Beyond that hill which you are looking at--not far, Senor Esslinn--I
live.  You shall come and see me there--you and your family."

"You--you--live there?" stammered the invalid, with a troubled
expression--the first and only change to the complete happiness that
had hitherto suffused his face.  "You--and your name is--is Ma--"

"Alvarado," said Don Caesar, gently.  "Caesar Alvarado."

"You said Masters," said the old man, with sudden querulousness.

"No, good friend.  I said Alvarado," returned Don Caesar, gravely.

"If you didn't say Masters, how could I say it?  I don't know any
Masters."

Don Caesar was silent.  In another moment the happy tranquillity
returned to Slinn's face; and Don Caesar continued:--

"It is not a long walk over the hill, though it is far by the road.
When you are better you shall try it.  Yonder little trail leads to the
top of the hill, and then--"

He stopped, for the invalid's face had again assumed its troubled
expression.  Partly to change his thoughts, and partly for some
inexplicable idea that had suddenly seized him, Don Caesar continued:--

"There is a strange old stump near the trail, and in it a hole.  In the
hole I found this letter."  He stopped again--this time in alarm.
Slinn had staggered to his feet with ashen and distorted features, and
was glancing at the letter which Don Caesar had drawn from his pocket.
The muscles of his throat swelled as if he was swallowing; his lips
moved, but no sound issued from them.  At last, with a convulsive
effort, he regained a disjointed speech, in a voice scarcely audible.

"My letter! my letter!  It's mine!  Give it me!  It's my fortune--all
mine!  In the tunnel--hill!  Masters stole it--stole my fortune!  Stole
it all!  See, see!"

He seized the letter from Don Caesar with trembling hands, and tore it
open forcibly: a few dull yellow grains fell from it heavily, like
shot, to the ground.

"See, it's true!  My letter!  My gold!  My strike!  My--my--my God!"

A tremor passed over his face.  The hand that held the letter suddenly
dropped sheer and heavy as the gold had fallen.  The whole side of his
face and body nearest Don Caesar seemed to drop and sink into itself as
suddenly.  At the same moment, and without a word, he slipped through
Don Caesar's outstretched hands to the ground.  Don Caesar bent quickly
over him, but no longer than to satisfy himself that he lived and
breathed, although helpless.  He then caught up the fallen letter, and,
glancing over it with flashing eyes, thrust it and the few specimens in
his pocket.  He then sprang to his feet, so transformed with energy and
intelligence that he seemed to have added the lost vitality of the man
before him to his own.  He glanced quickly up and down the highway.
Every moment to him was precious now; but he could not leave the
stricken man in the dust of the road; nor could he carry him to the
house; nor, having alarmed his daughters, could he abandon his
helplessness to their feeble arms.  He remembered that his horse was
still tied to the garden fence.  He would fetch it, and carry the
unfortunate man across the saddle to the gate.  He lifted him with
difficulty to the boulder, and ran rapidly up the road in the direction
of his tethered steed.  He had not proceeded far when he heard the
noise of wheels behind him.  It was the up stage coming furiously
along.  He would have called to the driver for assistance, but even
through that fast-sweeping cloud of dust and motion he could see that
the man was utterly oblivious of anything but the speed of his rushing
chariot, and had even risen in his box to lash the infuriated and
frightened animals forward.

An hour later, when the coach drew up at the Red Dog Hotel, the driver
descended from the box, white, but taciturn.  When he had swallowed a
glass of whiskey at a single gulp, he turned to the astonished express
agent, who had followed him in.

"One of two things, Jim, hez got to happen," he said, huskily. "Either
that there rock hez got to get off the road, or I have. I've seed HIM
on it agin!"



CHAPTER IV

No further particulars of the invalid's second attack were known than
those furnished by Don Caesar's brief statement, that he had found him
lying insensible on the boulder.  This seemed perfectly consistent with
the theory of Dr. Duchesne; and as the young Spaniard left Los Gatos
the next day, he escaped not only the active reporter of the "Record,"
but the perusal of a grateful paragraph in the next day's paper
recording his prompt kindness and courtesy.  Dr. Duchesne's prognosis,
however, seemed at fault; the elder Slinn did not succumb to this
second stroke, nor did he recover his reason.  He apparently only
relapsed into his former physical weakness, losing the little ground he
had gained during the last month, and exhibiting no change in his
mental condition, unless the fact that he remembered nothing of his
seizure and the presence of Don Caesar could be considered as
favorable.  Dr. Duchesne's gravity seemed to give that significance to
this symptom, and his cross-questioning of the patient was
characterized by more than his usual curtness.

"You are sure you don't remember walking in the garden before you were
ill?" he said.  "Come, think again.  You must remember that." The old
man's eyes wandered restlessly around the room, but he answered by a
negative shake of his head.  "And you don't remember sitting down on a
stone by the road?"

The old man kept his eyes resolutely fixed on the bedclothes before
him.  "No!" he said, with a certain sharp decision that was new to him.

The doctor's eye brightened.  "All right, old man; then don't."

On his way out he took the eldest Miss Slinn aside.  "He'll do," he
said, grimly: "he's beginning to lie."

"Why, he only said he didn't remember," responded Esther.

"That was because he didn't want to remember," said the doctor,
authoritatively.  "The brain is acting on some impression that is
either painful and unpleasant, or so vague that he can't formulate it;
he is conscious of it, and won't attempt it yet.  It's a heap better
than his old self-satisfied incoherency."

A few days later, when the fact of Slinn's identification with the
paralytic of three years ago by the stage-driver became generally
known, the doctor came in quite jubilant.

"It's all plain now," he said, decidedly.  "That second stroke was
caused by the nervous shock of his coming suddenly upon the very spot
where he had the first one.  It proved that his brain still retained
old impressions, but as this first act of his memory was a painful one,
the strain was too great.  It was mighty unlucky; but it was a good
sign."

"And you think, then--" hesitated Harry Slinn.

"I think," said Dr. Duchesne, "that this activity still exists, and the
proof of it, as I said before, is that he is trying now to forget it,
and avoid thinking of it.  You will find that he will fight shy of any
allusion to it, and will be cunning enough to dodge it every time."

He certainly did.  Whether the doctor's hypothesis was fairly based or
not, it was a fact that, when he was first taken out to drive with his
watchful physician, he apparently took no notice of the boulder--which
still remained on the roadside, thanks to the later practical
explanation of the stage-driver's vision--and curtly refused to talk
about it.  But, more significant to Duchesne, and perhaps more
perplexing, was a certain morose abstraction, which took the place of
his former vacuity of contentment, and an intolerance of his
attendants, which supplanted his old habitual trustfulness to their
care, that had been varied only by the occasional querulousness of an
invalid.  His daughters sometimes found him regarding them with an
attention little short of suspicion, and even his son detected a
half-suppressed aversion in his interviews with him.

Referring this among themselves to his unfortunate malady, his
children, perhaps, justified this estrangement by paying very little
attention to it.  They were more pleasantly occupied.  The two girls
succeeded to the position held by Mamie Mulrady in the society of the
neighborhood, and divided the attentions of Rough-and-Ready.  The young
editor of the "Record" had really achieved, through his supposed
intimacy with the Mulradys, the good fortune he had jestingly
prophesied.  The disappearance of Don Caesar was regarded as a virtual
abandonment of the field to his rival: and the general opinion was that
he was engaged to the millionaire's daughter on a certain probation of
work and influence in his prospective father-in-law's interests.  He
became successful in one or two speculations, the magic of the lucky
Mulrady's name befriending him.  In the superstition of the mining
community, much of this luck was due to his having secured the old
cabin.

"To think," remarked one of the augurs of Red Dog, French Pete, a
polyglot jester, "that while every fool went to taking up claims where
the gold had already been found no one thought of stepping into the old
man's old choux in the cabbage-garden!"  Any doubt, however, of the
alliance of the families was dissipated by the intimacy that sprang up
between the elder Slinn and the millionaire, after the latter's return
from San Francisco.

It began in a strange kind of pity for the physical weakness of the
man, which enlisted the sympathies of Mulrady, whose great strength had
never been deteriorated by the luxuries of wealth, and who was still
able to set his workmen an example of hard labor; it was sustained by a
singular and superstitious reverence for his mental condition, which,
to the paternal Mulrady, seemed to possess that spiritual quality with
which popular ignorance invests demented people.

"Then you mean to say that during these three years the vein o' your
mind, so to speak, was a lost lead, and sorter dropped out o' sight or
follerin'?" queried Mulrady, with infinite seriousness.

"Yes," returned Slinn, with less impatience than he usually showed to
questions.

"And durin' that time, when you was dried up and waitin' for rain, I
reckon you kinder had visions?"

A cloud passed over Slinn's face.

"Of course, of course!" said Mulrady, a little frightened at his
tenacity in questioning the oracle.  "Nat'rally, this was private, and
not to be talked about.  I meant, you had plenty of room for 'em
without crowdin'; you kin tell me some day when you're better, and kin
sorter select what's points and what ain't."

"Perhaps I may some day," said the invalid, gloomily, glancing in the
direction of his preoccupied daughters; "when we're alone."

When his physical strength had improved, and his left arm and side had
regained a feeble but slowly gathering vitality, Alvin Mulrady one day
surprised the family by bringing the convalescent a pile of letters and
accounts, and spreading them on a board before Slinn's invalid chair,
with the suggestion that he should look over, arrange, and docket them.
The idea seemed preposterous, until it was found that the old man was
actually able to perform this service, and exhibited a degree of
intellectual activity and capacity for this kind of work that was
unsuspected.  Dr. Duchesne was delighted, and divided with admiration
between his patient's progress and the millionaire's sagacity.  "And
there are envious people," said the enthusiastic doctor, "who believe
that a man like him, who could conceive of such a plan for occupying a
weak intellect without taxing its memory or judgment, is merely a lucky
fool!  Look here.  May be it didn't require much brains to stumble on a
gold mine, and it is a gift of Providence.  But, in my experience,
Providence don't go round buyin' up d--d fools, or investin' in dead
beats."

When Mr. Slinn, finally, with the aid of crutches, was able to hobble
every day to the imposing counting-house and the office of Mr. Mulrady,
which now occupied the lower part of the new house, and contained some
of its gorgeous furniture, he was installed at a rosewood desk behind
Mr. Mulrady's chair, as his confidential clerk and private secretary.
The astonishment of Red Dog and Rough-and-Ready at this singular
innovation knew no bounds; but the boldness and novelty of the idea
carried everything before it.  Judge Butts, the oracle of
Rough-and-Ready, delivered its decision: "He's got a man who's
physically incapable of running off with his money, and has no memory
to run off with his ideas.  How could he do better?" Even his own son,
Harry, coming upon his father thus installed, was for a moment struck
with a certain filial respect, and for a day or two patronized him.

In this capacity Slinn became the confidant not only of Mulrady's
business secrets, but of his domestic affairs.  He knew that young
Mulrady, from a freckle-faced slow country boy, had developed into a
freckle-faced fast city man, with coarse habits of drink and gambling.
It was through the old man's hands that extravagant bills and shameful
claims passed on their way to be cashed by Mulrady; it was he that at
last laid before the father one day his signature perfectly forged by
the son.

"Your eyes are not ez good ez mine, you know, Slinn," said Mulrady,
gravely.  "It's all right.  I sometimes make my Y's like that.  I'd
clean forgot to cash that check.  You must not think you've got the
monopoly of disremembering," he added, with a faint laugh.

Equally through Slinn's hands passed the record of the lavish
expenditure of Mrs. Mulrady and the fair Mamie, as well as the
chronicle of their movements and fashionable triumphs.  As Mulrady had
already noticed that Slinn had no confidence with his own family, he
did not try to withhold from them these domestic details, possibly as
an offset to the dreary catalogue of his son's misdeeds, but more often
in the hope of gaining from the taciturn old man some comment that
might satisfy his innocent vanity as father and husband, and perhaps
dissipate some doubts that were haunting him.

"Twelve hundred dollars looks to be a good figger for a dress, ain't
it?  But Malviny knows, I reckon, what ought to be worn at the
Tooilleries, and she don't want our Mamie to take a back seat before
them furrin' princesses and gran' dukes.  It's a slap-up affair, I
kalkilate.  Let's see.  I disremember whether it's an emperor or a king
that's rulin' over thar now.  It must be suthin' first class and A1,
for Malviny ain't the woman to throw away twelve hundred dollars on any
of them small-potato despots!  She says Mamie speaks French already
like them French Petes.  I don't quite make out what she means here.
She met Don Caesar in Paris, and she says, 'I think Mamie is nearly off
with Don Caesar, who has followed her here.  I don't care about her
dropping him TOO suddenly; the reason I'll tell you hereafter.  I think
the man might be a dangerous enemy.'  Now, what do you make of this?  I
allus thought Mamie rather cottoned to him, and it was the old woman
who fought shy, thinkin' Mamie would do better.  Now, I am agreeable
that my gal should marry any one she likes, whether it's a dook or a
poor man, as long as he's on the square.  I was ready to take Don
Caesar; but now things seem to have shifted round.  As to Don Caesar's
being a dangerous enemy if Mamie won't have him, that's a little too
high and mighty for me, and I wonder the old woman don't make him climb
down.  What do you think?"

"Who is Don Caesar?" asked Slinn.

"The man what picked you up that day.  I mean," continued Mulrady,
seeing the marks of evident ignorance on the old man's face,--"I mean a
sort of grave, genteel chap, suthin' between a parson and a
circus-rider.  You might have seen him round the house talkin' to your
gals."

But Slinn's entire forgetfulness of Don Caesar was evidently unfeigned.
Whatever sudden accession of memory he had at the time of his attack,
the incident that caused it had no part in his recollection.  With the
exception of these rare intervals of domestic confidences with his
crippled private secretary, Mulrady gave himself up to money-getting.
Without any especial faculty for it--an easy prey often to unscrupulous
financiers--his unfailing luck, however, carried him safely through,
until his very mistakes seemed to be simply insignificant means to a
large significant end and a part of his original plan.  He sank another
shaft, at a great expense, with a view to following the lead he had
formerly found, against the opinions of the best mining engineers, and
struck the artesian spring he did NOT find at that time, with a volume
of water that enabled him not only to work his own mine, but to furnish
supplies to his less fortunate neighbors at a vast profit. A league of
tangled forest and canyon behind Rough-and-Ready, for which he had paid
Don Ramon's heirs an extravagant price in the presumption that it was
auriferous, furnished the most accessible timber to build the town, at
prices which amply remunerated him. The practical schemes of
experienced men, the wildest visions of daring dreams delayed or
abortive for want of capital, eventually fell into his hands.  Men
sneered at his methods, but bought his shares.  Some who affected to
regard him simply as a man of money were content to get only his name
to any enterprise.  Courted by his superiors, quoted by his equals, and
admired by his inferiors, he bore his elevation equally without
ostentation or dignity. Bidden to banquets, and forced by his position
as director or president into the usual gastronomic feats of that
civilization and period, he partook of simple food, and continued his
old habit of taking a cup of coffee with milk and sugar at dinner.
Without professing temperance, he drank sparingly in a community where
alcoholic stimulation was a custom.  With neither refinement nor an
extended vocabulary, he was seldom profane, and never indelicate. With
nothing of the Puritan in his manner or conversation, he seemed to be
as strange to the vices of civilization as he was to its virtues.  That
such a man should offer little to and receive little from the
companionship of women of any kind was a foregone conclusion.  Without
the dignity of solitude, he was pathetically alone.

Meantime, the days passed; the first six months of his opulence were
drawing to a close, and in that interval he had more than doubled the
amount of his discovered fortune.  The rainy season set in early.
Although it dissipated the clouds of dust under which Nature and Art
seemed to be slowly disappearing, it brought little beauty to the
landscape at first, and only appeared to lay bare the crudenesses of
civilization.  The unpainted wooden buildings of Rough-and-Ready,
soaked and dripping with rain, took upon themselves a sleek and shining
ugliness, as of second-hand garments; the absence of cornices or
projections to break the monotony of the long straight lines of
downpour made the town appear as if it had been recently submerged,
every vestige of ornamentation swept away, and only the bare outlines
left.  Mud was everywhere; the outer soil seemed to have risen and
invaded the houses even to their most secret recesses, as if outraged
Nature was trying to revenge herself.  Mud was brought into the saloons
and barrooms and express offices, on boots, on clothes, on baggage, and
sometimes appeared mysteriously in splashes of red color on the walls,
without visible conveyance.  The dust of six months, closely packed in
cornice and carving, yielded under the steady rain a thin yellow paint,
that dropped on wayfarers or unexpectedly oozed out of ceilings and
walls on the wretched inhabitants within.  The outskirts of
Rough-and-Ready and the dried hills round Los Gatos did not appear to
fare much better; the new vegetation had not yet made much headway
against the dead grasses of the summer; the pines in the hollow wept
lugubriously into a small rivulet that had sprung suddenly into life
near the old trail; everywhere was the sound of dropping, splashing,
gurgling, or rushing waters.

More hideous than ever, the new Mulrady house lifted itself against the
leaden sky, and stared with all its large-framed, shutterless windows
blankly on the prospect, until they seemed to the wayfarer to become
mere mirrors set in the walls, reflecting only the watery landscape,
and unable to give the least indication of light or heat within.
Nevertheless, there was a fire in Mulrady's private office that
December afternoon, of a smoky, intermittent variety, that sufficed
more to record the defects of hasty architecture than to comfort the
millionaire and his private secretary, who had lingered after the early
withdrawal of the clerks.  For the next day was Christmas, and, out of
deference to the near approach of this festivity, a half-holiday had
been given to the employees. "They'll want, some of them, to spend
their money before to-morrow; and others would like to be able to rise
up comfortably drunk Christmas morning," the superintendent had
suggested.  Mr. Mulrady had just signed a number of checks indicating
his largess to those devoted adherents with the same unostentatious,
undemonstrative, matter-of-fact manner that distinguished his ordinary
business. The men had received it with something of the same manner.  A
half-humorous "Thank you, sir"--as if to show that, with their patron,
they tolerated this deference to a popular custom, but were a little
ashamed of giving way to it--expressed their gratitude and their
independence.

"I reckon that the old lady and Mamie are having a high old time in
some of them gilded pallises in St. Petersburg or Berlin about this
time.  Them diamonds that I ordered at Tiffany ought to have reached
'em about now, so that Mamie could cut a swell at Christmas with her
war-paint.  I suppose it's the style to give presents in furrin'
countries ez it is here, and I allowed to the old lady that whatever
she orders in that way she is to do in Californy style--no
dollar-jewelry and galvanized-watches business.  If she wants to make a
present to any of them nobles ez has been purlite to her, it's got to
be something that Rough-and-Ready ain't ashamed of.  I showed you that
pin Mamie bought me in Paris, didn't I?  It's just come for my
Christmas present.  No!  I reckon I put it in the safe, for them kind
o' things don't suit my style: but s'pose I orter sport it to-morrow.
It was mighty thoughtful in Mamie, and it must cost a lump; it's got no
slouch of a pearl in it.  I wonder what Mamie gave for it?"

"You can easily tell; the bill is here.  You paid it yesterday," said
Slinn.  There was no satire in the man's voice, nor was there the least
perception of irony in Mulrady's manner, as he returned quietly,--

"That's so; it was suthin' like a thousand francs; but French money,
when you pan it out as dollars and cents, don't make so much, after
all."  There was a few moments' silence, when he continued, in the same
tone of voice, "Talkin' o' them things, Slinn, I've got suthin' for
you."  He stopped suddenly.  Ever watchful of any undue excitement in
the invalid, he had noticed a slight flush of disturbance pass over his
face, and continued carelessly, "But we'll talk it over to-morrow; a
day or two don't make much difference to you and me in such things, you
know. P'raps I'll drop in and see you.  We'll be shut up here."

"Then you're going out somewhere?" asked Slinn, mechanically.

"No," said Mulrady, hesitatingly.  It had suddenly occurred to him that
he had nowhere to go if he wanted to, and he continued, half in
explanation, "I ain't reckoned much on Christmas, myself. Abner's at
the Springs; it wouldn't pay him to come here for a day--even if there
was anybody here he cared to see.  I reckon I'll hang round the shanty,
and look after things generally.  I haven't been over the house
upstairs to put things to rights since the folks left.  But YOU needn't
come here, you know."

He helped the old man to rise, assisted him in putting on his overcoat,
and than handed him the cane which had lately replaced his crutches.

"Good-by, old man!  You musn't trouble yourself to say 'Merry
Christmas' now, but wait until you see me again.  Take care of
yourself."

He slapped him lightly on the shoulder, and went back into his private
office.  He worked for some time at his desk, and then laid his pen
aside, put away his papers methodically, placing a large envelope on
his private secretary's vacant table.  He then opened the office door
and ascended the staircase.  He stopped on the first landing to listen
to the sound of rain on the glass skylight, that seemed to echo through
the empty hall like the gloomy roll of a drum.  It was evident that the
searching water had found out the secret sins of the house's
construction, for there were great fissures of discoloration in the
white and gold paper in the corners of the wall.  There was a strange
odor of the dank forest in the mirrored drawing-room, as if the rain
had brought out the sap again from the unseasoned timbers; the blue and
white satin furniture looked cold, and the marble mantels and centre
tables had taken upon themselves the clamminess of tombstones.  Mr.
Mulrady, who had always retained his old farmer-like habit of taking
off his coat with his hat on entering his own house, and appearing in
his shirt-sleeves, to indicate domestic ease and security, was obliged
to replace it, on account of the chill.  He had never felt at home in
this room.  Its strangeness had lately been heightened by Mrs.
Mulrady's purchase of a family portrait of some one she didn't know,
but who, she had alleged, resembled her "Uncle Bob," which hung on the
wall beside some paintings in massive frames.  Mr. Mulrady cast a
hurried glance at the portrait that, on the strength of a high
coat-collar and high top curl--both rolled with equal precision and
singular sameness of color--had always glared at Mulrady as if HE was
the intruder; and, passing through his wife's gorgeous bedroom, entered
the little dressing-room, where he still slept on the smallest of cots,
with hastily improvised surroundings, as if he was a bailiff in
"possession."  He didn't linger here long, but, taking a key from a
drawer, continued up the staircase, to the ominous funeral marches of
the beating rain on the skylight, and paused on the landing to glance
into his son's and daughter's bedrooms, duplicates of the bizarre
extravagance below.  If he were seeking some characteristic traces of
his absent family, they certainly were not here in the painted and
still damp blazoning of their later successes.  He ascended another
staircase, and, passing to the wing of the house, paused before a small
door, which was locked.  Already the ostentatious decorations of wall
and passages were left behind, and the plain lath-and-plaster partition
of the attic lay before him.  He unlocked the door, and threw it open.



CHAPTER V

The apartment he entered was really only a lumber-room or loft over the
wing of the house, which had been left bare and unfinished, and which
revealed in its meagre skeleton of beams and joints the hollow sham of
the whole structure.  But in more violent contrast to the fresher
glories of the other part of the house were its contents, which were
the heterogeneous collection of old furniture, old luggage, and
cast-off clothing, left over from the past life in the old cabin.  It
was a much plainer record of the simple beginnings of the family than
Mrs. Mulrady cared to have remain in evidence, and for that reason it
had been relegated to the hidden recesses of the new house, in the hope
that it might absorb or digest it.  There were old cribs, in which the
infant limbs of Mamie and Abner had been tucked up; old
looking-glasses, that had reflected their shining, soapy faces, and
Mamie's best chip Sunday hat; an old sewing-machine, that had been worn
out in active service; old patchwork quilts; an old accordion, to whose
long drawn inspirations Mamie had sung hymns; old pictures, books, and
old toys.  There were one or two old chromos, and, stuck in an old
frame, a colored print from the "Illustrated London News" of a
Christmas gathering in an old English country house.  He stopped and
picked up this print, which he had often seen before, gazing at it with
a new and singular interest.  He wondered if Mamie had seen anything of
this kind in England, and why couldn't he have had something like it
here, in their own fine house, with themselves and a few friends?  He
remembered a past Christmas, when he had bought Mamie that now headless
doll with the few coins that were left him after buying their frugal
Christmas dinner.  There was an old spotted hobby-horse that another
Christmas had brought to Abner--Abner, who would be driving a fast
trotter to-morrow at the Springs!  How everything had changed!  How
they all had got up in the world, and how far beyond this kind of
thing--and yet--yet it would have been rather comfortable to have all
been together again here.  Would THEY have been more comfortable?  No!
Yet then he might have had something to do, and been less lonely
to-morrow. What of that?  He HAD something to do: to look after this
immense fortune.  What more could a man want, or should he want?  It
was rather mean in him, able to give his wife and children everything
they wanted, to be wanting anything more.  He laid down the print
gently, after dusting its glass and frame with his silk handkerchief,
and slowly left the room.

The drum-beat of the rain followed him down the staircase, but he shut
it out with his other thoughts, when he again closed the door of his
office.  He set diligently to work by the declining winter light, until
he was interrupted by the entrance of his Chinese waiter to tell him
that supper--which was the meal that Mulrady religiously adhered to in
place of the late dinner of civilization--was ready in the dining-room.
Mulrady mechanically obeyed the summons; but on entering the room the
oasis of a few plates in a desert of white table-cloth which awaited
him made him hesitate. In its best aspect, the high dark Gothic
mahogany ecclesiastical sideboard and chairs of this room, which looked
like the appointments of a mortuary chapel, were not exhilarating; and
to-day, in the light of the rain-filmed windows and the feeble rays of
a lamp half-obscured by the dark shining walls, it was most depressing.

"You kin take up supper into my office," said Mulrady, with a sudden
inspiration.  "I'll eat it there."

He ate it there, with his usual healthy appetite, which did not require
even the stimulation of company.  He had just finished, when his Irish
cook--the one female servant of the house--came to ask permission to be
absent that evening and the next day.

"I suppose the likes of your honor won't be at home on the Christmas
Day?  And it's me cousins from the old counthry at Rough-and-Ready that
are invitin' me."

"Why don't you ask them over here?" said Mulrady, with another vague
inspiration.  "I'll stand treat."

"Lord preserve you for a jinerous gintleman!  But it's the likes of
them and myself that wouldn't be at home here on such a day."

There was so much truth in this that Mulrady checked a sigh as he gave
the required permission, without saying that he had intended to remain.
He could cook his own breakfast: he had done it before; and it would be
something to occupy him.  As to his dinner, perhaps he could go to the
hotel at Rough-and-Ready.  He worked on until the night had well
advanced.  Then, overcome with a certain restlessness that disturbed
him, he was forced to put his books and papers away.  It had begun to
blow in fitful gusts, and occasionally the rain was driven softly
across the panes like the passing of childish fingers.  This disturbed
him more than the monotony of silence, for he was not a nervous man.
He seldom read a book, and the county paper furnished him only the
financial and mercantile news which was part of his business.  He knew
he could not sleep if he went to bed.  At last he rose, opened the
window, and looked out from pure idleness of occupation.  A splash of
wheels in the distant muddy road and fragments of a drunken song showed
signs of an early wandering reveller.  There were no lights to be seen
at the closed works; a profound darkness encompassed the house, as if
the distant pines in the hollow had moved up and round it.  The silence
was broken now only by the occasional sighing of wind and rain.  It was
not an inviting night for a perfunctory walk; but an idea struck
him--he would call upon the Slinns, and anticipate his next day's
visit!  They would probably have company, and be glad to see him: he
could tell the girls of Mamie and her success.  That he had not thought
of this before was a proof of his usual self-contained isolation, that
he thought of it now was an equal proof that he was becoming at last
accessible to loneliness. He was angry with himself for what seemed to
him a selfish weakness.

He returned to his office, and, putting the envelope that had been
lying on Slinn's desk in his pocket, threw a serape over his shoulders,
and locked the front door of the house behind him.  It was well that
the way was a familiar one to him, and that his feet instinctively
found the trail, for the night was very dark.  At times he was warned
only by the gurgling of water of little rivulets that descended the
hill and crossed his path.  Without the slightest fear, and with
neither imagination nor sensitiveness, he recalled how, the winter
before, one of Don Caesar's vaqueros, crossing this hill at night, had
fallen down the chasm of a landslip caused by the rain, and was found
the next morning with his neck broken in the gully.  Don Caesar had to
take care of the man's family.  Suppose such an accident should happen
to him? Well, he had made his will.  His wife and children would be
provided for, and the work of the mine would go on all the same; he had
arranged for that.  Would anybody miss him?  Would his wife, or his
son, or his daughter?  No.  He felt such a sudden and overwhelming
conviction of the truth of this that he stopped as suddenly as if the
chasm had opened before him.  No!  It was the truth.  If he were to
disappear forever in the darkness of the Christmas night there was none
to feel his loss.  His wife would take care of Mamie; his son would
take care of himself, as he had before--relieved of even the scant
paternal authority he rebelled against.  A more imaginative man than
Mulrady would have combated or have followed out this idea, and then
dismissed it; to the millionaire's matter-of-fact mind it was a
deduction that, having once presented itself to his perception, was
already a recognized fact.  For the first time in his life he felt a
sudden instinct of something like aversion towards his family, a
feeling that even his son's dissipation and criminality had never
provoked.  He hurried on angrily through the darkness.

It was very strange; the old house should be almost before him now,
across the hollow, yet there were no indications of light!  It was not
until he actually reached the garden fence, and the black bulk of
shadow rose out against the sky, that he saw a faint ray of light from
one of the lean-to windows.  He went to the front door and knocked.
After waiting in vain for a reply, he knocked again. The second knock
proving equally futile, he tried the door; it was unlocked, and,
pushing it open, he walked in.  The narrow passage was quite dark, but
from his knowledge of the house he knew the "lean-to" was next to the
kitchen, and, passing through the dining-room into it, he opened the
door of the little room from which the light proceeded.  It came from a
single candle on a small table, and beside it, with his eyes moodily
fixed on the dying embers of the fire, sat old Slinn.  There was no
other light nor another human being in the whole house.

For the instant Mulrady, forgetting his own feelings in the mute
picture of the utter desolation of the helpless man, remained
speechless on the threshold.  Then, recalling himself, he stepped
forward and laid his hand gayly on the bowed shoulders.

"Rouse up out o' this, old man!  Come! this won't do.  Look!  I've run
over here in the rain, jist to have a sociable time with you all."

"I knew it," said the old man, without looking up; "I knew you'd come."

"You knew I'd come?" echoed Mulrady, with an uneasy return of the
strange feeling of awe with which he regarded Slinn's abstraction.

"Yes; you were alone--like myself--all alone!"

"Then, why in thunder didn't you open the door or sing out just now?"
he said, with an affected brusquerie to cover his uneasiness. "Where's
your daughters?"

"Gone to Rough-and-Ready to a party."

"And your son?"

"He never comes here when he can amuse himself elsewhere."

"Your children might have stayed home on Christmas Eve."

"So might yours."

He didn't say this impatiently, but with a certain abstracted
conviction far beyond any suggestion of its being a retort. Mulrady did
not appear to notice it.

"Well, I don't see why us old folks can't enjoy ourselves without
them," said Mulrady, with affected cheerfulness.  "Let's have a good
time, you and me.  Let's see--you haven't any one you can send to my
house, hev you?"

"They took the servant with them," said Slinn, briefly.  "There is no
one here."

"All right," said the millionaire, briskly.  "I'll go myself.  Do you
think you can manage to light up a little more, and build a fire in the
kitchen while I'm gone?  It used to be mighty comfortable in the old
times."

He helped the old man to rise from his chair, and seemed to have
infused into him some of his own energy.  He then added, "Now, don't
you get yourself down again into that chair until I come back," and
darted out into the night once more.

In a quarter of an hour he returned with a bag on his broad shoulders,
which one of his porters would have shrunk from lifting, and laid it
before the blazing hearth of the now lighted kitchen. "It's something
the old woman got for her party, that didn't come off," he said,
apologetically.  "I reckon we can pick out enough for a spread.  That
darned Chinaman wouldn't come with me," he added, with a laugh,
"because, he said, he'd knocked off work 'allee same, Mellican man!'
Look here, Slinn," he said, with a sudden decisiveness, "my pay-roll of
the men around here don't run short of a hundred and fifty dollars a
day, and yet I couldn't get a hand to help me bring this truck over for
my Christmas dinner."

"Of course," said Slinn, gloomily.

"Of course; so it oughter be," returned Mulrady, shortly.  "Why, it's
only their one day out of 364; and I can have 363 days off, as I am
their boss.  I don't mind a man's being independent," he continued,
taking off his coat and beginning to unpack his sack--a common "gunny
bag"--used for potatoes.  "We're independent ourselves, ain't we,
Slinn?"

His good spirits, which had been at first labored and affected, had
become natural.  Slinn, looking at his brightened eye and fresher
color, could not help thinking he was more like his own real self at
this moment than in his counting-house and offices--with all his
simplicity as a capitalist.  A less abstracted and more observant
critic than Slinn would have seen in this patient aptitude for real
work, and the recognition of the force of petty detail, the dominance
of the old market-gardener in his former humble, as well as his later
more ambitious, successes.

"Heaven keep us from being dependent upon our children!" said Slinn,
darkly.

"Let the young ones alone to-night; we can get along without them, as
they can without us," said Mulrady, with a slight twinge as he thought
of his reflections on the hillside.  "But look here, there's some
champagne and them sweet cordials that women like; there's jellies and
such like stuff, about as good as they make 'em, I reckon; and
preserves, and tongues, and spiced beef--take your pick!  Stop, let's
spread them out."  He dragged the table to the middle of the floor, and
piled the provisions upon it.  They certainly were not deficient in
quality or quantity.  "Now, Slinn, wade in."

"I don't feel hungry," said the invalid, who had lapsed again into a
chair before the fire.

"No more do I," said Mulrady; "but I reckon it's the right thing to do
about this time.  Some folks think they can't be happy without they're
getting outside o' suthin', and my directors down at 'Frisco can't do
any business without a dinner.  Take some champagne, to begin with."

He opened a bottle, and filled two tumblers.  "It's past twelve
o'clock, old man, so here's a merry Christmas to you, and both of us ez
is here.  And here's another to our families--ez isn't."

They both drank their wine stolidly.  The rain beat against the windows
sharply, but without the hollow echoes of the house on the hill.  "I
must write to the old woman and Mamie, and say that you and me had a
high old time on Christmas Eve."

"By ourselves," added the invalid.

Mr. Mulrady coughed.  "Nat'rally--by ourselves.  And her provisions,"
he added, with a laugh.  "We're really beholden to HER for 'em.  If she
hadn't thought of having them--"

"For somebody else, you wouldn't have had them--would you?" said Slinn,
slowly, gazing at the fire.

"No," said Mulrady, dubiously.  After a pause he began more
vivaciously, and as if to shake off some disagreeable thought that was
impressing him, "But I mustn't forget to give you YOUR Christmas, old
man, and I've got it right here with me."  He took the folded envelope
from his pocket, and, holding it in his hand with his elbow on the
table, continued, "I don't mind telling you what idea I had in giving
you what I'm goin' to give you now.  I've been thinking about it for a
day or two.  A man like you don't want money--you wouldn't spend it.  A
man like you don't want stocks or fancy investments, for you couldn't
look after them.  A man like you don't want diamonds and jewellery, nor
a gold-headed cane, when it's got to be used as a crutch.  No, sir.
What you want is suthin' that won't run away from you; that is always
there before you and won't wear out, and will last after you're gone.
That's land!  And if it wasn't that I have sworn never to sell or give
away this house and that garden, if it wasn't that I've held out agin
the old woman and Mamie on that point, you should have THIS house and
THAT garden.  But, mebbee, for the same reason that I've told you, I
want that land to keep for myself.  But I've selected four acres of the
hill this side of my shaft, and here's the deed of it.  As soon as
you're ready, I'll put you up a house as big as this--that shall be
yours, with the land, as long as you live, old man; and after that your
children's."

"No; not theirs!" broke in the old man, passionately.  "Never!"

Mulrady recoiled for an instant in alarm at the sudden and unexpected
vehemence of his manner, "Go slow, old man; go slow," he said,
soothingly.  "Of course, you'll do with your own as you like."  Then,
as if changing the subject, he went on cheerfully: "Perhaps you'll
wonder why I picked out that spot on the hillside. Well, first, because
I reserved it after my strike in case the lead should run that way, but
it didn't.  Next, because when you first came here you seemed to like
the prospect.  You used to sit there looking at it, as if it reminded
you of something.  You never said it did.  They say you was sitting on
that boulder there when you had that last attack, you know; but," he
added, gently, "you've forgotten all about it."

"I have forgotten nothing," said Slinn, rising, with a choking voice.
"I wish to God I had; I wish to God I could!"

He was on his feet now, supporting himself by the table.  The subtle
generous liquor he had drunk had evidently shaken his self-control, and
burst those voluntary bonds he had put upon himself for the last six
months; the insidious stimulant had also put a strange vigor into his
blood and nerves.  His face was flushed, but not distorted; his eyes
were brilliant, but not fixed; he looked as he might have looked to
Masters in his strength three years before on that very hillside.

"Listen to me, Alvin Mulrady," he said, leaning over him with burning
eyes.  "Listen, while I have brain to think and strength to utter, why
I have learnt to distrust, fear, and hate them!  You think you know my
story.  Well, hear the truth from ME to-night, Alvin Mulrady, and do
not wonder if I have cause."

He stopped, and, with pathetic inefficiency, passed the fingers and
inward-turned thumb of his paralyzed hand across his mouth, as if to
calm himself.  "Three years ago I was a miner, but not a miner like
you!  I had experience, I had scientific knowledge, I had a theory, and
the patience and energy to carry it out.  I selected a spot that had
all the indications, made a tunnel, and, without aid, counsel or
assistance of any kind, worked it for six months, without rest or
cessation, and with scarcely food enough to sustain my body.  Well, I
made a strike; not like you, Mulrady, not a blunder of good luck, a
fool's fortune--there, I don't blame you for it--but in perfect
demonstration of my theory, the reward of my labor.  It was no pocket,
but a vein, a lead, that I had regularly hunted down and found--a
fortune!

"I never knew how hard I had worked until that morning; I never knew
what privations I had undergone until that moment of my success, when I
found I could scarcely think or move!  I staggered out into the open
air.  The only human soul near me was a disappointed prospector, a man
named Masters, who had a tunnel not far away.  I managed to conceal
from him my good fortune and my feeble state, for I was suspicious of
him--of any one; and as he was going away that day I thought I could
keep my secret until he was gone.  I was dizzy and confused, but I
remember that I managed to write a letter to my wife, telling her of my
good fortune, and begging her to come to me; and I remember that I saw
Masters go.  I don't remember anything else.  They picked me up on the
road, near that boulder, as you know."

"I know," said Mulrady, with a swift recollection of the stage-driver's
account of his discovery.

"They say," continued Slinn, tremblingly, "that I never recovered my
senses or consciousness for nearly three years; they say I lost my
memory completely during my illness, and that by God's mercy, while I
lay in that hospital, I knew no more than a babe; they say, because I
could not speak or move, and only had my food as nature required it,
that I was an imbecile, and that I never really came to my senses until
after my son found me in the hospital.  They SAY that--but I tell you
to-night, Alvin Mulrady," he said, raising his voice to a hoarse
outcry, "I tell you that it is a lie!  I came to my senses a week after
I lay on that hospital cot; I kept my senses and memory ever after
during the three years that I was there, until Harry brought his cold,
hypocritical face to my bedside and recognized me.  Do you understand?
I, the possessor of millions, lay there a pauper.  Deserted by wife and
children--a spectacle for the curious, a sport for the doctors--AND I
KNEW IT!  I heard them speculate on the cause of my helplessness.  I
heard them talk of excesses and indulgences--I, that never knew wine or
woman!  I heard a preacher speak of the finger of God, and point to me.
May God curse him!"

"Go slow, old man; go slow," said Mulrady, gently.

"I heard them speak of me as a friendless man, an outcast, a
criminal--a being whom no one would claim.  They were right; no one
claimed me.  The friends of others visited them; relations came and
took away their kindred; a few lucky ones got well; a few, equally
lucky, died!  I alone lived on, uncared for, deserted.

"The first year," he went on more rapidly, "I prayed for their coming.
I looked for them every day.  I never lost hope.  I said to myself,
'She has not got my letter; but when the time passes she will be
alarmed by my silence, and then she will come or send some one to seek
me.'  A young student got interested in my case, and, by studying my
eyes, thought that I was not entirely imbecile and unconscious.  With
the aid of an alphabet, he got me to spell my name and town in
Illinois, and promised by signs to write to my family.  But in an evil
moment I told him of my cursed fortune, and in that moment I saw that
he thought me a fool and an idiot.  He went away, and I saw him no
more.  Yet I still hoped.  I dreamed of their joy at finding me, and
the reward that my wealth would give them.  Perhaps I was a little weak
still, perhaps a little flighty, too, at times; but I was quite happy
that year, even in my disappointment, for I had still hope!"

He paused, and again composed his face with his paralyzed hand; but his
manner had become less excited, and his voice was stronger.

"A change must have come over me the second year, for I only dreaded
their coming now and finding me so altered.  A horrible idea that they
might, like the student, believe me crazy if I spoke of my fortune made
me pray to God that they might not reach me until after I had regained
my health and strength--and found my fortune.  When the third year
found me still there--I no longer prayed for them--I cursed them!  I
swore to myself that they should never enjoy my wealth; but I wanted to
live, and let them know I had it.  I found myself getting stronger; but
as I had no money, no friends, and nowhere to go, I concealed my real
condition from the doctors, except to give them my name, and to try to
get some little work to do to enable me to leave the hospital and seek
my lost treasure.  One day I found out by accident that it had been
discovered!  You understand--my treasure!--that had cost me years of
labor and my reason; had left me a helpless, forgotten pauper. That
gold I had never enjoyed had been found and taken possession of by
another!"

He checked an exclamation from Mulrady with his hand.  "They say they
picked me up senseless from the floor, where I must have fallen when I
heard the news--I don't remember--I recall nothing until I was
confronted, nearly three weeks after, by my son, who had called at the
hospital, as a reporter for a paper, and had accidentally discovered me
through my name and appearance.  He thought me crazy, or a fool.  I
didn't undeceive him.  I did not tell him the story of the mine to
excite his doubts and derision, or, worse (if I could bring proof to
claim it), have it perhaps pass into his ungrateful hands.  No; I said
nothing.  I let him bring me here.  He could do no less, and common
decency obliged him to do that."

"And what proof could you show of your claim?" asked Mulrady, gravely.

"If I had that letter--if I could find Masters," began Slinn, vaguely.

"Have you any idea where the letter is, or what has become of Masters?"
continued Mulrady, with a matter-of-fact gravity, that seemed to
increase Slinn's vagueness and excite his irritability.

"I don't know--I sometimes think--"  He stopped, sat down again, and
passed his hands across his forehead.  "I have seen the letter
somewhere since.  Yes," he went on, with sudden vehemence, "I know it,
I have seen it!  I--"  His brows knitted, his features began to work
convulsively; he suddenly brought his paralyzed hand down, partly
opened, upon the table.  "I WILL remember where."

"Go slow, old man; go slow."

"You asked me once about my visions.  Well, that is one of them.  I
remember a man somewhere showing me that letter.  I have taken it from
his hands and opened it, and knew it was mine by the specimens of gold
that were in it.  But where--or when--or what became of it, I cannot
tell.  It will come to me--it MUST come to me soon."

He turned his eyes upon Mulrady, who was regarding him with an
expression of grave curiosity, and said bitterly, "You think me crazy.
I know it.  It needed only this."

"Where is this mine," asked Mulrady, without heeding him.

The old man's eyes swiftly sought the ground.

"It is a secret, then?"

"No."

"You have spoken of it to any one?"

"No."

"Not to the man who possesses it?"

"No."

"Why?"

"Because I wouldn't take it from him."

"Why wouldn't you?"

"Because that man is yourself!"

In the instant of complete silence that followed they could hear that
the monotonous patter of rain on the roof had ceased.

"Then all this was in MY shaft, and the vein I thought I struck there
was YOUR lead, found three years ago in YOUR tunnel.  Is that your
idea?"

"Yes."

"Then I don't sabe why you don't want to claim it."

"I have told you why I don't want it for my children.  I go further,
now, and I tell you, Alvin Mulrady, that I was willing that your
children should squander it, as they were doing.  It has only been a
curse to me; it could only be a curse to them; but I thought you were
happy in seeing it feed selfishness and vanity. You think me bitter and
hard.  Well, I should have left you in your fool's paradise, but that I
saw to-night, when you came here, that your eyes had been opened like
mine.  You, the possessor of my wealth, my treasure, could not buy your
children's loving care and company with your millions, any more than I
could keep mine in my poverty.  You were to-night lonely and forsaken,
as I was.  We were equal, for the first time in our lives.  If that
cursed gold had dropped down the shaft between us into the hell from
which it sprang, we might have clasped hands like brothers across the
chasm."

Mulrady, who in a friendly show of being at his ease had not yet
resumed his coat, rose in his shirt-sleeves, and, standing before the
hearth, straightened his square figure by drawing down his waistcoat on
each side with two powerful thumbs.  After a moment's contemplative
survey of the floor between him and the speaker, he raised his eyes to
Slinn.  They were small and colorless; the forehead above them was low,
and crowned with a shock of tawny reddish hair; even the rude strength
of his lower features was enfeebled by a long, straggling, goat-like
beard; but for the first time in his life the whole face was impressed
and transformed with a strong and simple dignity.

"Ez far ez I kin see, Slinn," he said, gravely, "the pint between you
and me ain't to be settled by our children, or wot we allow is doo and
right from them to us.  Afore we preach at them for playing in the
slumgullion, and gettin' themselves splashed, perhaps we mout ez well
remember that that thar slumgullion comes from our own sluice-boxes,
where we wash our gold.  So we'll just put THEM behind us, so," he
continued, with a backward sweep of his powerful hand towards the
chimney, "and goes on.  The next thing that crops up ahead of us is
your three years in the hospital, and wot you went through at that
time.  I ain't sayin' it wasn't rough on you, and that you didn't have
it about as big as it's made; but ez you'll allow that you'd hev had
that for three years, whether I'd found your mine or whether I hadn't,
I think we can put THAT behind us, too.  There's nothin' now left to
prospect but your story of your strike.  Well, take your own proofs.
Masters is not here; and if he was, accordin' to your own story, he
knows nothin' of your strike that day, and could only prove you were a
disappointed prospector in a tunnel; your letter--that the person you
wrote to never got--YOU can't produce; and if you did, would be only
your own story without proof!  There is not a business man ez would
look at your claim; there isn't a friend of yours that wouldn't believe
you were crazy, and dreamed it all; there isn't a rival of yours ez
wouldn't say ez you'd invented it.  Slinn, I'm a business man--I am
your friend--I am your rival--but I don't think you're lyin'--I don't
think you're crazy--and I'm not sure your claim ain't a good one!

"Ef you reckon from that that I'm goin' to hand you over the mine
to-morrow," he went on, after a pause, raising his hand with a
deprecating gesture, "you're mistaken.  For your own sake, and the sake
of my wife and children, you've got to prove it more clearly than you
hev; but I promise you that from this night forward I will spare
neither time nor money to help you to do it.  I have more than doubled
the amount that you would have had, had you taken the mine the day you
came from the hospital.  When you prove to me that your story is
true--and we will find some way to prove it, if it IS true--that amount
will be yours at once, without the need of a word from law or lawyers.
If you want my name to that in black and white, come to the office
to-morrow, and you shall have it."

"And you think I'll take it now?" said the old man passionately. "Do
you think that your charity will bring back my dead wife, the three
years of my lost life, the love and respect of my children? Or do you
think that your own wife and children, who deserted you in your wealth,
will come back to you in your poverty?  No!  Let the mine stay, with
its curse, where it is--I'll have none of it!"

"Go slow, old man; go slow," said Mulrady, quietly, putting on his
coat.  "You will take the mine if it is yours; if it isn't, I'll keep
it.  If it is yours, you will give your children a chance to sho what
they can do for you in your sudden prosperity, as I shall give mine a
chance to show how they can stand reverse and disappointment.  If my
head is level--and I reckon it is--they'll both pan out all right."

He turned and opened the door.  With a quick revulsion of feeling,
Slinn suddenly seized Mulrady's hand between both of his own, and
raised it to his lips.  Mulrady smiled, disengaged his hand gently, and
saying soothingly, "Go slow, old man; go slow," closed the door behind
him, and passed out into the clear Christmas dawn.

For the stars, with the exception of one that seemed to sparkle
brightly over the shaft of his former fortunes, were slowly paling. A
burden seemed to have fallen from his square shoulders as he stepped
out sturdily into the morning air.  He had already forgotten the lonely
man behind him, for he was thinking only of his wife and daughter.  And
at the same moment they were thinking of him; and in their elaborate
villa overlooking the blue Mediterranean at Cannes were discussing, in
the event of Mamie's marriage with Prince Rosso e Negro, the
possibility of Mr. Mulrady's paying two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars, the gambling debts of that unfortunate but deeply
conscientious nobleman.



CHAPTER VI

When Alvin Mulrady reentered his own house, he no longer noticed its
loneliness.  Whether the events of the last few hours had driven it
from his mind, or whether his late reflections had repeopled it with
his family under pleasanter auspices, it would be difficult to
determine.  Destitute as he was of imagination, and matter-of-fact in
his judgments, he realized his new situation as calmly as he would have
considered any business proposition.  While he was decided to act upon
his moral convictions purely, he was prepared to submit the facts of
Slinn's claim to the usual patient and laborious investigation of his
practical mind.  It was the least he could do to justify the ready and
almost superstitious assent he had given to Slinn's story.

When he had made a few memoranda at his desk by the growing light, he
again took the key of the attic, and ascended to the loft that held the
tangible memories of his past life.  If he was still under the
influence of his reflections, it was with very different sensations
that he now regarded them.  Was it possible that these ashes might be
warmed again, and these scattered embers rekindled? His practical sense
said No! whatever his wish might have been.  A sudden chill came over
him; he began to realize the terrible change that was probable, more by
the impossibility of his accepting the old order of things than by his
voluntarily abandoning the new. His wife and children would never
submit.  They would go away from this place, far away, where no
reminiscence of either former wealth or former poverty could obtrude
itself upon them.  Mamie--his Mamie--should never go back to the cabin,
since desecrated by Slinn's daughters, and take their places.  No!  Why
should she?--because of the half-sick, half-crazy dreams of an old
vindictive man?

He stopped suddenly.  In moodily turning over a heap of mining
clothing, blankets, and india-rubber boots, he had come upon an old
pickaxe--the one he had found in the shaft; the one he had carefully
preserved for a year, and then forgotten!  Why had he not remembered it
before?  He was frightened, not only at this sudden resurrection of the
proof he was seeking, but at his own fateful forgetfulness.  Why had he
never thought of this when Slinn was speaking?  A sense of shame, as if
he had voluntarily withheld it from the wronged man, swept over him.
He was turning away, when he was again startled.

This time it was by a voice from below--a voice calling him--Slinn's
voice.  How had the crippled man got here so soon, and what did he
want?  He hurriedly laid aside the pick, which, in his first impulse,
he had taken to the door of the loft with him, and descended the
stairs.  The old man was standing at the door of his office awaiting
him.

As Mulrady approached, he trembled violently, and clung to the doorpost
for support.

"I had to come over, Mulrady," he said, in a choked voice; "I could
stand it there no longer.  I've come to beg you to forget all that I
have said; to drive all thought of what passed between us last night
out of your head and mine forever!  I've come to ask you to swear with
me that neither of us will ever speak of this again forever.  It is not
worth the happiness I have had in your friendship for the last
half-year; it is not worth the agony I have suffered in its loss in the
last half-hour."

Mulrady grasped his outstretched hand.  "P'raps," he said, gravely,
"there mayn't be any use for another word, if you can answer one now.
Come with me.  No matter," he added, as Slinn moved with difficulty; "I
will help you."

He half supported, half lifted the paralyzed man up the three flights
of stairs, and opened the door of the loft.  The pick was leaning
against the wall, where he had left it.  "Look around, and see if you
recognize anything."

The old man's eyes fell upon the implement in a half-frightened way,
and then lifted themselves interrogatively to Mulrady's face.

"Do you know that pick?"

Slinn raised it in his trembling hands.  "I think I do; and yet--"

"Slinn! is it yours?"

"No," he said hurriedly.

"Then what makes you think you know it?"

"It has a short handle like one I've seen."

"And is isn't yours?"

"No.  The handle of mine was broken and spliced.  I was too poor to buy
a new one."

"Then you say that this pick which I found in my shaft is not yours?"

"Yes."

"Slinn!"

The old man passed his hand across his forehead, looked at Mulrady, and
dropped his eyes.  "It is not mine," he said simply.

"That will do," said Mulrady, gravely.

"And you will not speak of this again?" said the old man, timidly.

"I promise you--not until I have some more evidence."

He kept his word, but not before he had extorted from Slinn as full a
description of Masters as his imperfect memory and still more imperfect
knowledge of his former neighbor could furnish.  He placed this, with a
large sum of money and the promise of a still larger reward, in the
hands of a trustworthy agent.  When this was done he resumed his old
relations with Slinn, with the exception that the domestic letters of
Mrs. Mulrady and Mamie were no longer a subject of comment, and their
bills no longer passed through his private secretary's hands.

Three months passed; the rainy season had ceased, the hillsides around
Mulrady's shaft were bridal-like with flowers; indeed, there were
rumors of an approaching fashionable marriage in the air, and vague
hints in the "Record" that the presence of a distinguished capitalist
might soon be required abroad.  The face of that distinguished man did
not, however, reflect the gayety of nature nor the anticipation of
happiness; on the contrary, for the past few weeks, he had appeared
disturbed and anxious, and that rude tranquillity which had
characterized him was wanting.  People shook their heads; a few
suggested speculations; all agreed on extravagance.

One morning, after office hours, Slinn, who had been watching the
careworn face of his employer, suddenly rose and limped to his side.

"We promised each other," he said, in a voice trembling with emotion;
"never to allude to our talk of Christmas Eve again unless we had other
proofs of what I told you then.  We have none; I don't believe we'll
ever have any more.  I don't care if we ever do, and I break that
promise now because I cannot bear to see you unhappy and know that this
is the cause."

Mulrady made a motion of deprecation, but the old man continued--

"You are unhappy, Alvin Mulrady.  You are unhappy because you want to
give your daughter a dowry of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars,
and you will not use the fortune that you think may be mine."

"Who's been talking about a dowry?" asked Mulrady, with an angry flush.

"Don Caesar Alvarado told my daughter."

"Then that is why he has thrown off on me since he returned," said
Mulrady, with sudden small malevolence, "just that he might unload his
gossip because Mamie wouldn't have him.  The old woman was right in
warnin' me agin him."

The outburst was so unlike him, and so dwarfed his large though common
nature with its littleness, that it was easy to detect its feminine
origin, although it filled Slinn with vague alarm.

"Never mind him," said the old man, hastily; "what I wanted to say now
is that I abandon everything to you and yours.  There are no proofs;
there never will be any more than what we know, than what we have
tested and found wanting.  I swear to you that, except to show you that
I have not lied and am not crazy, I would destroy them on their way to
your hands.  Keep the money, and spend it as you will.  Make your
daughter happy, and, through her, yourself. You have made me happy
through your liberality; don't make me suffer through your privation."

"I tell you what, old man," said Mulrady, rising to his feet, with an
awkward mingling of frankness and shame in his manner and accent, "I
should like to pay that money for Mamie, and let her be a princess, if
it would make her happy.  I should like to shut the lantern jaws of
that Don Caesar, who'd be too glad if anything happened to break off
Mamie's match.  But I shouldn't touch that capital--unless you'd lend
it to me.  If you'll take a note from me, payable if the property ever
becomes yours, I'd thank you.  A mortgage on the old house and garden,
and the lands I bought of Don Caesar, outside the mine, will screen
you."

"If that pleases you," said the old man, with a smile, "have your way;
and if I tear up the note, it does not concern you."

It did please the distinguished capitalist of Rough-and-Ready; for the
next few days his face wore a brightened expression, and he seemed to
have recovered his old tranquillity.  There was, in fact, a slight
touch of consequence in his manner, the first ostentation he had ever
indulged in, when he was informed one morning at his private office
that Don Caesar Alvarado was in the counting-house, desiring a few
moments' conference.  "Tell him to come in," said Mulrady, shortly.
The door opened upon Don Caesar--erect, sallow, and grave.  Mulrady had
not seen him since his return from Europe, and even his inexperienced
eyes were struck with the undeniable ease and grace with which the
young Spanish-American had assimilated the style and fashion of an
older civilization.  It seemed rather as if he had returned to a
familiar condition than adopted a new one.

"Take a cheer," said Mulrady.

The young man looked at Slinn with quietly persistent significance.

"You can talk all the same," said Mulrady, accepting the significance.
"He's my private secretary."

"It seems that for that reason we might choose another moment for our
conversation," returned Don Caesar, haughtily.  "Do I understand you
cannot see me now?"

Mulrady hesitated, he had always revered and recognized a certain
social superiority in Don Ramon Alvarado; somehow his son--a young man
of half his age, and once a possible son-in-law--appeared to claim that
recognition also.  He rose, without a word, and preceded Don Caesar
up-stairs into the drawing-room.  The alien portrait on the wall seemed
to evidently take sides with Don Caesar, as against the common
intruder, Mulrady.

"I hoped the Senora Mulrady might have saved me this interview," said
the young man, stiffly; "or at least have given you some intimation of
the reason why I seek it.  As you just now proposed my talking to you
in the presence of the unfortunate Senor Esslinn himself, it appears
she has not."

"I don't know what you're driving at, or what Mrs. Mulrady's got to do
with Slinn or you," said Mulrady, in angry uneasiness.

"Do I understand," said Don Caesar, sternly, "that Senora Mulrady has
not told you that I entrusted to her an important letter, belonging to
Senor Esslinn, which I had the honor to discover in the wood six months
ago, and which she said she would refer to you?"

"Letter?" echoed Mulrady, slowly; "my wife had a letter of Slinn's?"

Don Caesar regarded the millionaire attentively.  "It is as I feared,"
he said, gravely.  "You do not know or you would not have remained
silent."  He then briefly recounted the story of his finding Slinn's
letter, his exhibition of it to the invalid, its disastrous effect upon
him, and his innocent discovery of the contents.  "I believed myself at
that time on the eve of being allied with your family, Senor Mulrady,"
he said, haughtily; "and when I found myself in the possession of a
secret which affected its integrity and good name, I did not choose to
leave it in the helpless hands of its imbecile owner, or his sillier
children, but proposed to trust it to the care of the Senora, that she
and you might deal with it as became your honor and mine.  I followed
her to Paris, and gave her the letter there.  She affected to laugh at
any pretension of the writer, or any claim he might have on your
bounty; but she kept the letter, and, I fear, destroyed it.  You will
understand, Senor Mulrady, that when I found that my attentions were no
longer agreeable to your daughter, I had no longer the right to speak
to you on the subject, nor could I, without misapprehension, force her
to return it.  I should have still kept the secret to myself, if I had
not since my return here made the nearer acquaintance of Senor
Esslinn's daughters.  I cannot present myself at his house, as a suitor
for the hand of the Senorita Vashti, until I have asked his absolution
for my complicity in the wrong that has been done to him.  I cannot, as
a caballero, do that without your permission.  It is for that purpose I
am here."

It needed only this last blow to complete the humiliation that whitened
Mulrady's face.  But his eye was none the less clear and his voice none
the less steady as he turned to Don Caesar.

"You know perfectly the contents of that letter?"

"I have kept a copy of it."

"Come with me."

He preceded his visitor down the staircase and back into his private
office.  Slinn looked up at his employer's face in unrestrained
anxiety.  Mulrady sat down at his desk, wrote a few hurried lines, and
rang a bell.  A manager appeared from the counting-room.

"Send that to the bank."

He wiped his pen as methodically as if he had not at that moment
countermanded the order to pay his daughter's dowry, and turned quietly
to Slinn.

"Don Caesar Alvarado has found the letter you wrote your wife on the
day you made your strike in the tunnel that is now my shaft. He gave
the letter to Mrs. Mulrady; but he has kept a copy."

Unheeding the frightened gesture of entreaty from Slinn, equally with
the unfeigned astonishment of Don Caesar, who was entirely unprepared
for this revelation of Mulrady's and Slinn's confidences, he continued,
"He has brought the copy with him.  I reckon it would be only square
for you to compare it with what you remember of the original."

In obedience to a gesture from Mulrady, Don Caesar mechanically took
from his pocket a folded paper, and handed it to the paralytic.  But
Slinn's trembling fingers could scarcely unfold the paper; and as his
eyes fell upon its contents, his convulsive lips could not articulate a
word.

"P'raps I'd better read it for you," said Mulrady, gently.  "You kin
follow me and stop me when I go wrong."

He took the paper, and, in dead silence, read as follows:--

"DEAR WIFE,--I've just struck gold in my tunnel, and you must get ready
to come here with the children, at once.  It was after six months' hard
work; and I'm so weak I . . .  It's a fortune for us all.  We should be
rich even if it were only a branch vein dipping west towards the next
tunnel, instead of dipping east, according to my theory--"

"Stop!" said Slinn, in a voice that shook the room.

Mulrady looked up.

"It's wrong, ain't it?" he asked, anxiously; "it should be EAST towards
the next tunnel."

"No!  IT'S RIGHT!  I am wrong!  We're all wrong!"

Slinn had risen to his feet, erect and inspired.  "Don't you see," he
almost screamed, with passionate vehemence, "it's MASTERS' ABANDONED
TUNNEL your shaft has struck?  Not mine!  It was Masters' pick you
found!  I know it now!"

"And your own tunnel?" said Mulrady, springing to his feet in
excitement.  "And YOUR strike?"

"Is still there!"

The next instant, and before another question could be asked, Slinn had
darted from the room.  In the exaltation of that supreme discovery he
regained the full control of his mind and body. Mulrady and Don Caesar,
no less excited, followed him precipitately, and with difficulty kept
up with his feverish speed.  Their way lay along the base of the hill
below Mulrady's shaft, and on a line with Masters' abandoned tunnel.
Only once he stopped to snatch a pick from the hand of an astonished
Chinaman at work in a ditch, as he still kept on his way, a quarter of
a mile beyond the shaft.  Here he stopped before a jagged hole in the
hillside.  Bared to the sky and air, the very openness of its
abandonment, its unpropitious position, and distance from the strike in
Mulrady's shaft had no doubt preserved its integrity from wayfarer or
prospector.

"You can't go in there alone, and without a light," said Mulrady,
laying his hand on the arm of the excited man.  "Let me get more help
and proper tools."

"I know every step in the dark as in the daylight," returned Slinn,
struggling.  "Let me go, while I have yet strength and reason! Stand
aside!"

He broke from them, and the next moment was swallowed up in the yawning
blackness.  They waited with bated breath until, after a seeming
eternity of night and silence, they heard his returning footsteps, and
ran forward to meet him.  As he was carrying something clasped to his
breast, they supported him to the opening. But at the same moment the
object of his search and his burden, a misshapen wedge of gold and
quartz, dropped with him, and both fell together with equal immobility
to the ground.  He had still strength to turn his fading eyes to the
other millionaire of Rough-and-Ready, who leaned over him.

"You--see," he gasped, brokenly, "I was not--crazy!"

No.  He was dead!

========================================
========================================

A WAIF OF THE PLAINS

by Bret Harte




CHAPTER I


A long level of dull gray that further away became a faint blue, with
here and there darker patches that looked like water. At times an open
space, blackened and burnt in an irregular circle, with a shred of
newspaper, an old rag, or broken tin can lying in the ashes. Beyond
these always a low dark line that seemed to sink into the ground at
night, and rose again in the morning with the first light, but never
otherwise changed its height and distance. A sense of always moving with
some indefinite purpose, but of always returning at night to the same
place--with the same surroundings, the same people, the same bedclothes,
and the same awful black canopy dropped down from above. A chalky taste
of dust on the mouth and lips, a gritty sense of earth on the fingers,
and an all-pervading heat and smell of cattle.

This was "The Great Plains" as they seemed to two children from the
hooded depth of an emigrant wagon, above the swaying heads of toiling
oxen, in the summer of 1852.

It had appeared so to them for two weeks, always the same and always
without the least sense to them of wonder or monotony. When they viewed
it from the road, walking beside the wagon, there was only the team
itself added to the unvarying picture. One of the wagons bore on
its canvas hood the inscription, in large black letters, "Off to
California!" on the other "Root, Hog, or Die," but neither of them
awoke in the minds of the children the faintest idea of playfulness or
jocularity. Perhaps it was difficult to connect the serious men, who
occasionally walked beside them and seemed to grow more taciturn and
depressed as the day wore on, with this past effusive pleasantry.

Yet the impressions of the two children differed slightly. The eldest, a
boy of eleven, was apparently new to the domestic habits and customs of
a life to which the younger, a girl of seven, was evidently native and
familiar. The food was coarse and less skillfully prepared than that to
which he had been accustomed. There was a certain freedom and roughness
in their intercourse, a simplicity that bordered almost on rudeness
in their domestic arrangements, and a speech that was at times almost
untranslatable to him. He slept in his clothes, wrapped up in blankets;
he was conscious that in the matter of cleanliness he was left to
himself to overcome the difficulties of finding water and towels. But it
is doubtful if in his youthfulness it affected him more than a novelty.
He ate and slept well, and found his life amusing. Only at times the
rudeness of his companions, or, worse, an indifference that made him
feel his dependency upon them, awoke a vague sense of some wrong that
had been done to him which while it was voiceless to all others and
even uneasily put aside by himself, was still always slumbering in his
childish consciousness.

To the party he was known as an orphan put on the train at "St. Jo" by
some relative of his stepmother, to be delivered to another relative at
Sacramento. As his stepmother had not even taken leave of him, but had
entrusted his departure to the relative with whom he had been lately
living, it was considered as an act of "riddance," and accepted as such
by her party, and even vaguely acquiesced in by the boy himself. What
consideration had been offered for his passage he did not know; he only
remembered that he had been told "to make himself handy." This he had
done cheerfully, if at times with the unskillfulness of a novice; but it
was not a peculiar or a menial task in a company where all took part in
manual labor, and where existence seemed to him to bear the charm of
a prolonged picnic. Neither was he subjected to any difference of
affection or treatment from Mrs. Silsbee, the mother of his little
companion, and the wife of the leader of the train. Prematurely old,
of ill-health, and harassed with cares, she had no time to waste in
discriminating maternal tenderness for her daughter, but treated the
children with equal and unbiased querulousness.

The rear wagon creaked, swayed, and rolled on slowly and heavily. The
hoofs of the draft-oxen, occasionally striking in the dust with a
dull report, sent little puffs like smoke on either side of the track.
Within, the children were playing "keeping store." The little girl, as
an opulent and extravagant customer, was purchasing of the boy, who sat
behind a counter improvised from a nail-keg and the front seat, most of
the available contents of the wagon, either under their own names or an
imaginary one as the moment suggested, and paying for them in the easy
and liberal currency of dried beans and bits of paper. Change was given
by the expeditious method of tearing the paper into smaller fragments.
The diminution of stock was remedied by buying the same article over
again under a different name. Nevertheless, in spite of these favorable
commercial conditions, the market seemed dull.

"I can show you a fine quality of sheeting at four cents a yard, double
width," said the boy, rising and leaning on his fingers on the counter
as he had seen the shopmen do. "All wool and will wash," he added, with
easy gravity.

"I can buy it cheaper at Jackson's," said the girl, with the intuitive
duplicity of her bargaining sex.

"Very well," said the boy. "I won't play any more."

"Who cares?" said the girl indifferently. The boy here promptly upset
the counter; the rolled-up blanket which had deceitfully represented the
desirable sheeting falling on the wagon floor. It apparently suggested
a new idea to the former salesman. "I say! let's play 'damaged stock.'
See, I'll tumble all the things down here right on top o' the others,
and sell 'em for less than cost."

The girl looked up. The suggestion was bold, bad, and momentarily
attractive. But she only said "No," apparently from habit, picked up her
doll, and the boy clambered to the front of the wagon. The incomplete
episode terminated at once with that perfect forgetfulness,
indifference, and irresponsibility common to all young animals. If
either could have flown away or bounded off finally at that moment, they
would have done so with no more concern for preliminary detail than a
bird or squirrel. The wagon rolled steadily on. The boy could see that
one of the teamsters had climbed up on the tail-board of the preceding
vehicle. The other seemed to be walking in a dusty sleep.

"Kla'uns," said the girl.

The boy, without turning his head, responded, "Susy."

"Wot are you going to be?" said the girl.

"Goin' to be?" repeated Clarence.

"When you is growed," explained Susy.

Clarence hesitated. His settled determination had been to become a
pirate, merciless yet discriminating. But reading in a bethumbed "Guide
to the Plains" that morning of Fort Lamarie and Kit Carson, he had
decided upon the career of a "scout," as being more accessible and
requiring less water. Yet, out of compassion for Susy's possible
ignorance, he said neither, and responded with the American boy's modest
conventionality, "President." It was safe, required no embarrassing
description, and had been approved by benevolent old gentlemen with
their hands on his head.

"I'm goin' to be a parson's wife," said Susy, "and keep hens, and
have things giv' to me. Baby clothes, and apples, and apple sass--and
melasses! and more baby clothes! and pork when you kill."

She had thrown herself at the bottom of the wagon, with her back towards
him and her doll in her lap. He could see the curve of her curly head,
and beyond, her bare dimpled knees, which were raised, and over which
she was trying to fold the hem of her brief skirt.

"I wouldn't be a President's wife," she said presently.

"You couldn't!"

"Could if I wanted to!"

"Couldn't!"

"Could now!"

"Couldn't!"

"Why?"

Finding it difficult to explain his convictions of her ineligibility,
Clarence thought it equally crushing not to give any. There was a long
silence. It was very hot and dusty. The wagon scarcely seemed to move.
Clarence gazed at the vignette of the track behind them formed by
the hood of the rear. Presently he rose and walked past her to the
tail-board. "Goin' to get down," he said, putting his legs over.

"Maw says 'No,'" said Susy.

Clarence did not reply, but dropped to the ground beside the slowly
turning wheels. Without quickening his pace he could easily keep his
hand on the tail-board.

"Kla'uns."

He looked up.

"Take me."

She had already clapped on her sun-bonnet and was standing at the edge
of the tail-board, her little arms extended in such perfect confidence
of being caught that the boy could not resist. He caught her cleverly.
They halted a moment and let the lumbering vehicle move away from them,
as it swayed from side to side as if laboring in a heavy sea. They
remained motionless until it had reached nearly a hundred yards, and
then, with a sudden half-real, half-assumed, but altogether delightful
trepidation, ran forward and caught up with it again. This they repeated
two or three times until both themselves and the excitement were
exhausted, and they again plodded on hand in hand. Presently Clarence
uttered a cry.

"My! Susy--look there!"

The rear wagon had once more slipped away from them a considerable
distance. Between it and them, crossing its track, a most extraordinary
creature had halted.

At first glance it seemed a dog--a discomfited, shameless, ownerless
outcast of streets and byways, rather than an honest stray of some
drover's train. It was so gaunt, so dusty, so greasy, so slouching,
and so lazy! But as they looked at it more intently they saw that the
grayish hair of its back had a bristly ridge, and there were great
poisonous-looking dark blotches on its flanks, and that the slouch of
its haunches was a peculiarity of its figure, and not the cowering of
fear. As it lifted its suspicious head towards them they could see that
its thin lips, too short to cover its white teeth, were curled in a
perpetual sneer.

"Here, doggie!" said Clarence excitedly. "Good dog! Come."

Susy burst into a triumphant laugh. "Et tain't no dog, silly; it's er
coyote."

Clarence blushed. It wasn't the first time the pioneer's daughter had
shown her superior knowledge. He said quickly, to hide his discomfiture,
"I'll ketch him, any way; he's nothin' mor'n a ki yi."

"Ye can't, tho," said Susy, shaking her sun-bonnet. "He's faster nor a
hoss!"

Nevertheless, Clarence ran towards him, followed by Susy. When they had
come within twenty feet of him, the lazy creature, without apparently
the least effort, took two or three limping bounds to one side, and
remained at the same distance as before. They repeated this onset three
or four times with more or less excitement and hilarity, the animal
evading them to one side, but never actually retreating before them.
Finally, it occurred to them both that although they were not catching
him they were not driving him away. The consequences of that thought
were put into shape by Susy with round-eyed significance.

"Kla'uns, he bites."

Clarence picked up a hard sun-baked clod, and, running forward, threw
it at the coyote. It was a clever shot, and struck him on his slouching
haunches. He snapped and gave a short snarling yelp, and vanished.
Clarence returned with a victorious air to his companion. But she was
gazing intently in the opposite direction, and for the first time he
discovered that the coyote had been leading them half round a circle.

"Kla'uns," said Susy, with a hysterical little laugh.

"Well?"

"The wagon's gone."

Clarence started. It was true. Not only their wagon, but the whole train
of oxen and teamsters had utterly disappeared, vanishing as completely
as if they had been caught up in a whirlwind or engulfed in the earth!
Even the low cloud of dust that usually marked their distant course by
day was nowhere to be seen. The long level plain stretched before them
to the setting sun, without a sign or trace of moving life or animation.
That great blue crystal bowl, filled with dust and fire by day, with
stars and darkness by night, which had always seemed to drop its rim
round them everywhere and shut them in, seemed to them now to have
been lifted to let the train pass out, and then closed down upon them
forever.




CHAPTER II


Their first sensation was one of purely animal freedom.

They looked at each other with sparkling eyes and long silent breaths.
But this spontaneous outburst of savage nature soon passed. Susy's
little hand presently reached forward and clutched Clarence's jacket.
The boy understood it, and said quickly,--

"They ain't gone far, and they'll stop as soon as they find us gone."

They trotted on a little faster; the sun they had followed every day and
the fresh wagon tracks being their unfailing guides; the keen, cool air
of the plains, taking the place of that all-pervading dust and smell of
the perspiring oxen, invigorating them with its breath.

"We ain't skeered a bit, are we?" said Susy.

"What's there to be afraid of?" said Clarence scornfully. He said this
none the less strongly because he suddenly remembered that they had been
often left alone in the wagon for hours without being looked after,
and that their absence might not be noticed until the train stopped to
encamp at dusk, two hours later. They were not running very fast, yet
either they were more tired than they knew, or the air was thinner, for
they both seemed to breathe quickly. Suddenly Clarence stopped.

"There they are now."

He was pointing to a light cloud of dust in the far-off horizon, from
which the black hulk of a wagon emerged for a moment and was lost. But
even as they gazed the cloud seemed to sink like a fairy mirage to the
earth again, the whole train disappeared, and only the empty stretching
track returned. They did not know that this seemingly flat and level
plain was really undulatory, and that the vanished train had simply
dipped below their view on some further slope even as it had once
before. But they knew they were disappointed, and that disappointment
revealed to them the fact that they had concealed it from each other.
The girl was the first to succumb, and burst into a quick spasm of
angry tears. That single act of weakness called out the boy's pride and
strength. There was no longer an equality of suffering; he had become
her protector; he felt himself responsible for both. Considering her no
longer his equal, he was no longer frank with her.

"There's nothin' to boo-boo for," he said, with a half-affected
brusqueness. "So quit, now! They'll stop in a minit, and send some one
back for us. Shouldn't wonder if they're doin' it now."

But Susy, with feminine discrimination detecting the hollow ring in his
voice, here threw herself upon him and began to beat him violently with
her little fists. "They ain't! They ain't! They ain't. You know it!
How dare you?" Then, exhausted with her struggles, she suddenly threw
herself flat on the dry grass, shut her eyes tightly, and clutched at
the stubble.

"Get up," said the boy, with a pale, determined face that seemed to have
got much older.

"You leave me be," said Susy.

"Do you want me to go away and leave you?" asked the boy.

Susy opened one blue eye furtively in the secure depths of her
sun-bonnet, and gazed at his changed face.

"Ye-e-s."

He pretended to turn away, but really to look at the height of the
sinking sun.

"Kla'uns!"

"Well?"

"Take me."

She was holding up her hands. He lifted her gently in his arms, dropping
her head over his shoulder. "Now," he said cheerfully, "you keep a good
lookout that way, and I this, and we'll soon be there."

The idea seemed to please her. After Clarence had stumbled on for a few
moments, she said, "Do you see anything, Kla'uns?"

"Not yet."

"No more don't I." This equality of perception apparently satisfied her.
Presently she lay more limp in his arms. She was asleep.

The sun was sinking lower; it had already touched the edge of the
horizon, and was level with his dazzled and straining eyes. At times it
seemed to impede his eager search and task his vision. Haze and black
spots floated across the horizon, and round wafers, like duplicates of
the sun, glittered back from the dull surface of the plains. Then he
resolved to look no more until he had counted fifty, a hundred,
but always with the same result, the return of the empty, unending
plains--the disk growing redder as it neared the horizon, the fire it
seemed to kindle as it sank, but nothing more.

Staggering under his burden, he tried to distract himself by fancying
how the discovery of their absence would be made. He heard the listless,
half-querulous discussion about the locality that regularly pervaded
the nightly camp. He heard the discontented voice of Jake Silsbee as he
halted beside the wagon, and said, "Come out o' that now, you two, and
mighty quick about it." He heard the command harshly repeated. He saw
the look of irritation on Silsbee's dusty, bearded face, that followed
his hurried glance into the empty wagon. He heard the query, "What's
gone o' them limbs now?" handed from wagon to wagon. He heard a few
oaths; Mrs. Silsbee's high rasping voice, abuse of himself, the hurried
and discontented detachment of a search party, Silsbee and one of the
hired men, and vociferation and blame. Blame always for himself, the
elder, who might have "known better!" A little fear, perhaps, but he
could not fancy either pity or commiseration. Perhaps the thought upheld
his pride; under the prospect of sympathy he might have broken down.

At last he stumbled, and stopped to keep himself from falling forward on
his face. He could go no further; his breath was spent; he was dripping
with perspiration; his legs were trembling under him; there was
a roaring in his ears; round red disks of the sun were scattered
everywhere around him like spots of blood. To the right of the trail
there seemed to be a slight mound where he could rest awhile, and yet
keep his watchful survey of the horizon. But on reaching it he found
that it was only a tangle of taller mesquite grass, into which he sank
with his burden. Nevertheless, if useless as a point of vantage, it
offered a soft couch for Susy, who seemed to have fallen quite naturally
into her usual afternoon siesta, and in a measure it shielded her from a
cold breeze that had sprung up from the west. Utterly exhausted himself,
but not daring to yield to the torpor that seemed to be creeping over
him, Clarence half sat, half knelt down beside her, supporting himself
with one hand, and, partly hidden in the long grass, kept his straining
eyes fixed on the lonely track.

The red disk was sinking lower. It seemed to have already crumbled away
a part of the distance with its eating fires. As it sank still lower,
it shot out long, luminous rays, diverging fan-like across the plain,
as if, in the boy's excited fancy, it too were searching for the lost
estrays. And as one long beam seemed to linger over his hiding-place,
he even thought that it might serve as a guide to Silsbee and the other
seekers, and was constrained to stagger to his feet, erect in its
light. But it soon sank, and with it Clarence dropped back again to his
crouching watch. Yet he knew that the daylight was still good for an
hour, and with the withdrawal of that mystic sunset glory objects became
even more distinct and sharply defined than at any other time. And with
the merciful sheathing of that flaming sword which seemed to have swayed
between him and the vanished train, his eyes already felt a blessed
relief.




CHAPTER III


With the setting of the sun an ominous silence fell. He could hear the
low breathing of Susy, and even fancied he could hear the beating of his
own heart in that oppressive hush of all nature. For the day's march had
always been accompanied by the monotonous creaking of wheels and axles,
and even the quiet of the night encampment had been always more or less
broken by the movement of unquiet sleepers on the wagon beds, or the
breathing of the cattle. But here there was neither sound nor motion.
Susy's prattle, and even the sound of his own voice, would have broken
the benumbing spell, but it was a part of his growing self-denial now
that he refrained from waking her even by a whisper. She would awaken
soon enough to thirst and hunger, perhaps, and then what was he to do?
If that looked-for help would only come now--while she still slept. For
it was part of his boyish fancy that if he could deliver her asleep and
undemonstrative of fear and suffering, he would be less blameful, and
she less mindful of her trouble. If it did not come--but he would not
think of that yet! If she was thirsty meantime--well, it might rain, and
there was always the dew which they used to brush off the morning grass;
he would take off his shirt and catch it in that, like a shipwrecked
mariner. It would be funny, and make her laugh. For himself he would not
laugh; he felt he was getting very old and grown up in this loneliness.

It was getting darker--they should be looking into the wagons now. A new
doubt began to assail him. Ought he not, now that he was rested, make
the most of the remaining moments of daylight, and before the glow faded
from the west, when he would no longer have any bearings to guide him?
But there was always the risk of waking her!--to what? The fear of being
confronted again with HER fear and of being unable to pacify her, at
last decided him to remain. But he crept softly through the grass, and
in the dust of the track traced the four points of the compass, as he
could still determine them by the sunset light, with a large printed W
to indicate the west! This boyish contrivance particularly pleased him.
If he had only had a pole, a stick, or even a twig, on which to tie his
handkerchief and erect it above the clump of mesquite as a signal to the
searchers in case they should be overcome by fatigue or sleep, he would
have been happy. But the plain was barren of brush or timber; he did
not dream that this omission and the very unobtrusiveness of his
hiding-place would be his salvation from a greater danger.

With the coming darkness the wind arose and swept the plain with a
long-drawn sigh. This increased to a murmur, till presently the whole
expanse--before sunk in awful silence--seemed to awake with vague
complaints, incessant sounds, and low moanings. At times he thought he
heard the halloaing of distant voices, at times it seemed as a whisper
in his own ear. In the silence that followed each blast he fancied he
could detect the creaking of the wagon, the dull thud of the oxen's
hoofs, or broken fragments of speech, blown and scattered even as he
strained his ears to listen by the next gust. This tension of the ear
began to confuse his brain, as his eyes had been previously dazzled by
the sunlight, and a strange torpor began to steal over his faculties.
Once or twice his head dropped.

He awoke with a start. A moving figure had suddenly uplifted itself
between him and the horizon! It was not twenty yards away, so clearly
outlined against the still luminous sky that it seemed even nearer.
A human figure, but so disheveled, so fantastic, and yet so mean and
puerile in its extravagance, that it seemed the outcome of a childish
dream. It was a mounted figure, but so ludicrously disproportionate to
the pony it bestrode, whose slim legs were stiffly buried in the dust in
a breathless halt, that it might have been a straggler from some vulgar
wandering circus. A tall hat, crownless and rimless, a castaway of
civilization, surmounted by a turkey's feather, was on its head; over
its shoulders hung a dirty tattered blanket that scarcely covered the
two painted legs which seemed clothed in soiled yellow hose. In one hand
it held a gun; the other was bent above its eyes in eager scrutiny of
some distant point beyond and east of the spot where the children lay
concealed. Presently, with a dozen quick noiseless strides of the pony's
legs, the apparition moved to the right, its gaze still fixed on that
mysterious part of the horizon. There was no mistaking it now! The
painted Hebraic face, the large curved nose, the bony cheek, the broad
mouth, the shadowed eyes, the straight long matted locks! It was an
Indian! Not the picturesque creature of Clarence's imagination, but
still an Indian! The boy was uneasy, suspicious, antagonistic, but
not afraid. He looked at the heavy animal face with the superiority of
intelligence, at the half-naked figure with the conscious supremacy of
dress, at the lower individuality with the contempt of a higher race.
Yet a moment after, when the figure wheeled and disappeared towards the
undulating west, a strange chill crept over him. Yet he did not know
that in this puerile phantom and painted pigmy the awful majesty of
Death had passed him by.

"Mamma!"

It was Susy's voice, struggling into consciousness. Perhaps she had been
instinctively conscious of the boy's sudden fears.

"Hush!"

He had just turned to the objective point of the Indian's gaze. There
WAS something! A dark line was moving along with the gathering darkness.
For a moment he hardly dared to voice his thoughts even to himself.
It was a following train overtaking them from the rear! And from the
rapidity of its movements a train with horses, hurrying forward to
evening camp. He had never dreamt of help from that quarter. This
was what the Indian's keen eyes had been watching, and why he had so
precipitately fled.

The strange train was now coming up at a round trot. It was evidently
well appointed with five or six large wagons and several outriders. In
half an hour it would be here. Yet he refrained from waking Susy, who
had fallen asleep again; his old superstition of securing her safety
first being still uppermost. He took off his jacket to cover her
shoulders, and rearranged her nest. Then he glanced again at the coming
train. But for some unaccountable reason it had changed its direction,
and instead of following the track that should have brought it to his
side it had turned off to the left! In ten minutes it would pass abreast
of him a mile and a half away! If he woke Susy now, he knew she would be
helpless in her terror, and he could not carry her half that distance.
He might rush to the train himself and return with help, but he would
never leave her alone--in the darkness. Never! If she woke she would die
of fright, perhaps, or wander blindly and aimlessly away. No! The train
would pass and with it that hope of rescue. Something was in his throat,
but he gulped it down and was quiet again albeit he shivered in the
night wind.

The train was nearly abreast of him now. He ran out of the tall grass,
waving his straw hat above his head in the faint hope of attracting
attention. But he did not go far, for he found to his alarm that when
he turned back again the clump of mesquite was scarcely distinguishable
from the rest of the plain. This settled all question of his going. Even
if he reached the train and returned with some one, how would he ever
find her again in this desolate expanse?

He watched the train slowly pass--still mechanically, almost hopelessly,
waving his hat as he ran up and down before the mesquite, as if he were
waving a last farewell to his departing hope. Suddenly it appeared to
him that three of the outriders who were preceding the first wagon had
changed their shape. They were no longer sharp, oblong, black blocks
against the horizon but had become at first blurred and indistinct,
then taller and narrower, until at last they stood out like exclamation
points against the sky. He continued to wave his hat, they continued to
grow taller and narrower. He understood it now--the three transformed
blocks were the outriders coming towards him.

This is what he had seen--

[Drawing of three black blocks]

This is what he saw now--

! ! !

He ran back to Susy to see if she still slept, for his foolish desire
to have her saved unconsciously was stronger than ever now that safety
seemed so near. She was still sleeping, although she had moved slightly.
He ran to the front again.

The outriders had apparently halted. What were they doing? Why wouldn't
they come on?

Suddenly a blinding flash of light seemed to burst from one of them.
Away over his head something whistled like a rushing bird, and sped
off invisible. They had fired a gun; they were signaling to
him--Clarence--like a grown-up man. He would have given his life at that
moment to have had a gun. But he could only wave his hat frantically.

One of the figures here bore away and impetuously darted forward again.
He was coming nearer, powerful, gigantic, formidable, as he loomed
through the darkness. All at once he threw up his arm with a wild
gesture to the others; and his voice, manly, frank, and assuring, came
ringing before him.

"Hold up! Good God! It's no Injun--it's a child!"

In another moment he had reined up beside Clarence and leaned over him,
bearded, handsome, powerful and protecting.

"Hallo! What's all this? What are you doing here?"

"Lost from Mr. Silsbee's train," said Clarence, pointing to the darkened
west.

"Lost?--how long?"

"About three hours. I thought they'd come back for us," said Clarence
apologetically to this big, kindly man.

"And you kalkilated to wait here for 'em?"

"Yes, yes--I did--till I saw you."

"Then why in thunder didn't you light out straight for us, instead of
hanging round here and drawing us out?"

The boy hung his head. He knew his reasons were unchanged, but all at
once they seemed very foolish and unmanly to speak out.

"Only that we were on the keen jump for Injins," continued the stranger,
"we wouldn't have seen you at all, and might hev shot you when we did.
What possessed you to stay here?"

The boy was still silent. "Kla'uns," said a faint, sleepy voice from the
mesquite, "take me." The rifle-shot had awakened Susy.

The stranger turned quickly towards the sound. Clarence started and
recalled himself. "There," he said bitterly, "you've done it now, you've
wakened her! THAT'S why I stayed. I couldn't carry her over there to
you. I couldn't let her walk, for she'd be frightened. I wouldn't wake
her up, for she'd be frightened, and I mightn't find her again. There!"
He had made up his mind to be abused, but he was reckless now that she
was safe.

The men glanced at each other. "Then," said the spokesman quietly, "you
didn't strike out for us on account of your sister?"

"She ain't my sister," said Clarence quickly. "She's a little girl.
She's Mrs. Silsbee's little girl. We were in the wagon and got down.
It's my fault. I helped her down."

The three men reined their horses closely round him, leaning forward
from their saddles, with their hands on their knees and their heads on
one side. "Then," said the spokesman gravely, "you just reckoned to stay
here, old man, and take your chances with her rather than run the risk
of frightening or leaving her--though it was your one chance of life!"

"Yes," said the boy, scornful of this feeble, grown-up repetition.

"Come here."

The boy came doggedly forward. The man pushed back the well-worn straw
hat from Clarence's forehead and looked into his lowering face. With his
hand still on the boy's head he turned him round to the others, and said
quietly,--

"Suthin of a pup, eh?"

"You bet," they responded.

The voice was not unkindly, although the speaker had thrown his lower
jaw forward as if to pronounce the word "pup" with a humorous suggestion
of a mastiff. Before Clarence could make up his mind if the epithet
was insulting or not, the man put out his stirruped foot, and, with a
gesture of invitation, said, "Jump up."

"But Susy," said Clarence, drawing back.

"Look; she's making up to Phil already."

Clarence looked. Susy had crawled out of the mesquite, and with her
sun-bonnet hanging down her back, her curls tossed around her face,
still flushed with sleep, and Clarence's jacket over her shoulders, was
gazing up with grave satisfaction in the laughing eyes of one of the men
who was with outstretched hands bending over her. Could he believe his
senses? The terror-stricken, willful, unmanageable Susy, whom he would
have translated unconsciously to safety without this terrible ordeal of
being awakened to the loss of her home and parents at any sacrifice
to himself--this ingenuous infant was absolutely throwing herself with
every appearance of forgetfulness into the arms of the first new-comer!
Yet his perception of this fact was accompanied by no sense of
ingratitude. For her sake he felt relieved, and with a boyish smile
of satisfaction and encouragement vaulted into the saddle before the
stranger.




CHAPTER IV


The dash forward to the train, securely held in the saddle by the arms
of their deliverers, was a secret joy to the children that seemed only
too quickly over. The resistless gallop of the fiery mustangs, the rush
of the night wind, the gathering darkness in which the distant wagons,
now halted and facing them, looked like domed huts in the horizon--all
these seemed but a delightful and fitting climax to the events of the
day. In the sublime forgetfulness of youth, all they had gone through
had left no embarrassing record behind it; they were willing to repeat
their experiences on the morrow, confident of some equally happy end.
And when Clarence, timidly reaching his hand towards the horse-hair
reins lightly held by his companion, had them playfully yielded up to
him by that hold and confident rider, the boy felt himself indeed a man.

But a greater surprise was in store for them. As they neared the wagons,
now formed into a circle with a certain degree of military formality,
they could see that the appointments of the strange party were larger
and more liberal than their own, or indeed anything they had ever known
of the kind. Forty or fifty horses were tethered within the circle, and
the camp fires were already blazing. Before one of them a large tent
was erected, and through the parted flaps could be seen a table actually
spread with a white cloth. Was it a school feast, or was this their
ordinary household arrangement? Clarence and Susy thought of their own
dinners, usually laid on bare boards beneath the sky, or under the low
hood of the wagon in rainy weather, and marveled. And when they finally
halted, and were lifted from their horses, and passed one wagon fitted
up as a bedroom and another as a kitchen, they could only nudge each
other with silent appreciation. But here again the difference already
noted in the quality of the sensations of the two children was
observable. Both were equally and agreeably surprised. But Susy's wonder
was merely the sense of novelty and inexperience, and a slight disbelief
in the actual necessity of what she saw; while Clarence, whether from
some previous general experience or peculiar temperament, had the
conviction that what he saw here was the usual custom, and what he had
known with the Silsbees was the novelty. The feeling was attended with a
slight sense of wounded pride for Susy, as if her enthusiasm had exposed
her to ridicule.

The man who had carried him, and seemed to be the head of the party, had
already preceded them to the tent, and presently reappeared with a lady
with whom he had exchanged a dozen hurried words. They seemed to refer
to him and Susy; but Clarence was too much preoccupied with the fact
that the lady was pretty, that her clothes were neat and thoroughly
clean, that her hair was tidy and not rumpled, and that, although she
wore an apron, it was as clean as her gown, and even had ribbons on it,
to listen to what was said. And when she ran eagerly forward, and with
a fascinating smile lifted the astonished Susy in her arms, Clarence, in
his delight for his young charge, quite forgot that she had not noticed
him. The bearded man, who seemed to be the lady's husband, evidently
pointed out the omission, with some additions that Clarence could not
catch; for after saying, with a pretty pout, "Well, why shouldn't he?"
she came forward with the same dazzling smile, and laid her small and
clean white hand upon his shoulder.

"And so you took good care of the dear little thing? She's such an
angel, isn't she? and you must love her very much."

Clarence colored with delight. It was true it had never occurred to him
to look at Susy in the light of a celestial visitant, and I fear he was
just then more struck with the fair complimenter than the compliment
to his companion, but he was pleased for her sake. He was not yet
old enough to be conscious of the sex's belief in its irresistible
domination over mankind at all ages, and that Johnny in his check apron
would be always a hopeless conquest of Jeannette in her pinafore, and
that he ought to have been in love with Susy.

Howbeit, the lady suddenly whisked her away to the recesses of her own
wagon, to reappear later, washed, curled, and beribboned like a new
doll, and Clarence was left alone with the husband and another of the
party.

"Well, my boy, you haven't told me your name yet."

"Clarence, sir."

"So Susy calls you, but what else?"

"Clarence Brant."

"Any relation to Colonel Brant?" asked the second man carelessly.

"He was my father," said the boy, brightening under this faint prospect
of recognition in his loneliness.

The two men glanced at each other. The leader looked at the boy
curiously, and said,--

"Are you the son of Colonel Brant, of Louisville?"

"Yes, sir," said the boy, with a dim stirring of uneasiness in his
heart. "But he's dead now," he added finally.

"Ah, when did he die?" said the man quickly.

"Oh, a long time ago. I don't remember him much. I was very little,"
said the boy, half apologetically.

"Ah, you don't remember him?"

"No," said Clarence shortly. He was beginning to fall back upon that
certain dogged repetition which in sensitive children arises from their
hopeless inability to express their deeper feelings. He also had an
instinctive consciousness that this want of a knowledge of his father
was part of that vague wrong that had been done him. It did not help his
uneasiness that he could see that one of the two men, who turned away
with a half-laugh, misunderstood or did not believe him.

"How did you come with the Silsbees?" asked the first man.

Clarence repeated mechanically, with a child's distaste of practical
details, how he had lived with an aunt at St. Jo, and how his stepmother
had procured his passage with the Silsbees to California, where he was
to meet his cousin. All this with a lack of interest and abstraction
that he was miserably conscious told against him, but he was yet
helpless to resist.

The first man remained thoughtful, and then glanced at Clarence's
sunburnt hands. Presently his large, good-humored smile returned.

"Well, I suppose you are hungry?"

"Yes," said Clarence shyly. "But--"

"But what?"

"I should like to wash myself a little," he returned hesitatingly,
thinking of the clean tent, the clean lady, and Susy's ribbons.

"Certainly," said his friend, with a pleased look. "Come with me."
Instead of leading Clarence to the battered tin basin and bar of yellow
soap which had formed the toilet service of the Silsbee party, he
brought the boy into one of the wagons, where there was a washstand, a
china basin, and a cake of scented soap. Standing beside Clarence, he
watched him perform his ablutions with an approving air which rather
embarrassed his protege. Presently he said, almost abruptly,--

"Do you remember your father's house at Louisville?"

"Yes, sir; but it was a long time ago."

Clarence remembered it as being very different from his home at St.
Joseph's, but from some innate feeling of diffidence he would have
shrunk from describing it in that way. He, however, said he thought it
was a large house. Yet the modest answer only made his new friend look
at him the more keenly.

"Your father was Colonel Hamilton Brant, of Louisville, wasn't he?" he
said, half-confidentially.

"Yes," said Clarence hopelessly.

"Well," said his friend cheerfully, as if dismissing an abstruse problem
from his mind, "Let's go to supper."

When they reached the tent again, Clarence noticed that the supper was
laid only for his host and wife and the second man--who was familiarly
called "Harry," but who spoke of the former always as "Mr. and Mrs.
Peyton"--while the remainder of the party, a dozen men, were at a second
camp fire, and evidently enjoying themselves in a picturesque fashion.
Had the boy been allowed to choose, he would have joined them, partly
because it seemed more "manly," and partly that he dreaded a renewal of
the questioning.

But here, Susy, sitting bolt upright on an extemporized high stool,
happily diverted his attention by pointing to the empty chair beside
her.

"Kla'uns," she said suddenly, with her usual clear and appalling
frankness, "they is chickens, and hamanaigs, and hot biksquits, and
lasses, and Mister Peyton says I kin have 'em all."

Clarence, who had begun suddenly to feel that he was responsible for
Susy's deportment and was balefully conscious that she was holding her
plated fork in her chubby fist by its middle, and, from his previous
knowledge of her, was likely at any moment to plunge it into the dish
before her, said softly,--

"Hush!"

"Yes, you shall, dear," said Mrs. Peyton, with tenderly beaming
assurance to Susy and a half-reproachful glance at the boy. "Eat what
you like, darling."

"It's a fork," whispered the still uneasy Clarence, as Susy now seemed
inclined to stir her bowl of milk with it.

"'Tain't, now, Kla'uns, it's only a split spoon," said Susy.

But Mrs. Peyton, in her rapt admiration, took small note of these
irregularities, plying the child with food, forgetting her own meal, and
only stopping at times to lift back the forward straying curls on Susy's
shoulders. Mr. Peyton looked on gravely and contentedly. Suddenly the
eyes of husband and wife met.

"She'd have been nearly as old as this, John," said Mrs. Peyton, in a
faint voice.

John Peyton nodded without speaking, and turned his eyes away into the
gathering darkness. The man "Harry" also looked abstractedly at his
plate, as if he was saying grace. Clarence wondered who "she" was, and
why two little tears dropped from Mrs. Peyton's lashes into Susy's milk,
and whether Susy might not violently object to it. He did not know until
later that the Peytons had lost their only child, and Susy comfortably
drained this mingled cup of a mother's grief and tenderness without
suspicion.

"I suppose we'll come up with their train early tomorrow, if some of
them don't find us to-night," said Mrs. Peyton, with a long sigh and a
regretful glance at Susy. "Perhaps we might travel together for a little
while," she added timidly.

Harry laughed, and Mr. Peyton replied gravely, "I am afraid we wouldn't
travel with them, even for company's sake; and," he added, in a lower
and graver voice, "it's rather odd the search party hasn't come upon
us yet, though I'm keeping Pete and Hank patrolling the trail to meet
them."

"It's heartless--so it is!" said Mrs. Peyton, with sudden indignation.
"It would be all very well if it was only this boy, who can take care of
himself; but to be so careless of a mere baby like this, it's shameful!"

For the first time Clarence tasted the cruelty of discrimination. All
the more keenly that he was beginning to worship, after his boyish
fashion, this sweet-faced, clean, and tender-hearted woman. Perhaps Mr.
Peyton noticed it, for he came quietly to his aid.

"Maybe they knew better than we in what careful hands they had left
her," he said, with a cheerful nod towards Clarence. "And, again, they
may have been fooled as we were by Injin signs and left the straight
road."

This suggestion instantly recalled to Clarence his vision in the
mesquite. Should he dare tell them? Would they believe him, or would
they laugh at him before her? He hesitated, and at last resolved to tell
it privately to the husband. When the meal was ended, and he was made
happy by Mrs. Peyton's laughing acceptance of his offer to help her
clear the table and wash the dishes, they all gathered comfortably in
front of the tent before the large camp fire. At the other fire the rest
of the party were playing cards and laughing, but Clarence no longer
cared to join them. He was quite tranquil in the maternal propinquity
of his hostess, albeit a little uneasy as to his reticence about the
Indian.

"Kla'uns," said Susy, relieving a momentary pause, in her highest voice,
"knows how to speak. Speak, Kla'uns!"

It appearing from Clarence's blushing explanation that this gift was not
the ordinary faculty of speech, but a capacity to recite verse, he was
politely pressed by the company for a performance.

"Speak 'em, Kla'uns, the boy what stood unto the burnin' deck, and said,
'The boy, oh, where was he?'" said Susy, comfortably lying down on Mrs.
Peyton's lap, and contemplating her bare knees in the air. "It's 'bout
a boy," she added confidentially to Mrs. Peyton, "whose father wouldn't
never, never stay with him on a burnin' ship, though he said, 'Stay,
father, stay,' ever so much."

With this clear, lucid, and perfectly satisfactory explanation of
Mrs. Hemans's "Casabianca," Clarence began. Unfortunately, his actual
rendering of this popular school performance was more an effort of
memory than anything else, and was illustrated by those wooden gestures
which a Western schoolmaster had taught him. He described the flames
that "roared around him," by indicating with his hand a perfect circle,
of which he was the axis; he adjured his father, the late Admiral
Casabianca, by clasping his hands before his chin, as if wanting to
be manacled in an attitude which he was miserably conscious was unlike
anything he himself had ever felt or seen before; he described that
father "faint in death below," and "the flag on high," with one
single motion. Yet something that the verses had kindled in his
active imagination, perhaps, rather than an illustration of the verses
themselves, at times brightened his gray eyes, became tremulous in
his youthful voice, and I fear occasionally incoherent on his lips. At
times, when not conscious of his affected art, the plain and all upon it
seemed to him to slip away into the night, the blazing camp fire at
his feet to wrap him in a fateful glory, and a vague devotion to
something--he knew not what--so possessed him that he communicated it,
and probably some of his own youthful delight in extravagant voice, to
his hearers, until, when he ceased with a glowing face, he was surprised
to find that the card players had deserted their camp fires and gathered
round the tent.




CHAPTER V


"You didn't say 'Stay, father, stay,' enough, Kla'uns," said Susy
critically. Then suddenly starting upright in Mrs. Peyton's lap, she
continued rapidly, "I kin dance. And sing. I kin dance High Jambooree."

"What's High Jambooree, dear?" asked Mrs. Peyton.

"You'll see. Lemme down." And Susy slipped to the ground.

The dance of High Jambooree, evidently of remote mystical African
origin, appeared to consist of three small skips to the right and
then to the left, accompanied by the holding up of very short skirts,
incessant "teetering" on the toes of small feet, the exhibition of
much bare knee and stocking, and a gurgling accompaniment of childish
laughter. Vehemently applauded, it left the little performer breathless,
but invincible and ready for fresh conquest.

"I kin sing, too," she gasped hurriedly, as if unwilling that the
applause should lapse. "I kin sing. Oh, dear! Kla'uns," piteously, "WHAT
is it I sing?"

"Ben Bolt," suggested Clarence.

"Oh, yes. Oh, don't you remember sweet Alers Ben Bolt?" began Susy, in
the same breath and the wrong key. "Sweet Alers, with hair so brown, who
wept with delight when you giv'd her a smile, and--" with knitted brows
and appealing recitative, "what's er rest of it, Kla'uns?"

"Who trembled with fear at your frown?" prompted Clarence.

"Who trembled with fear at my frown?" shrilled Susy. "I forget er rest.
Wait! I kin sing--"

"Praise God," suggested Clarence.

"Yes." Here Susy, a regular attendant in camp and prayer-meetings, was
on firmer ground.

Promptly lifting her high treble, yet with a certain acquired
deliberation, she began, "Praise God, from whom all blessings flow." At
the end of the second line the whispering and laughing ceased. A deep
voice to the right, that of the champion poker player, suddenly rose
on the swell of the third line. He was instantly followed by a dozen
ringing voices, and by the time the last line was reached it was given
with a full chorus, in which the dull chant of teamsters and drivers
mingled with the soprano of Mrs. Peyton and Susy's childish treble.
Again and again it was repeated, with forgetful eyes and abstracted
faces, rising and falling with the night wind and the leap and gleam of
the camp fires, and fading again like them in the immeasurable mystery
of the darkened plain.

In the deep and embarrassing silence that followed, at last the party
hesitatingly broke up, Mrs. Peyton retiring with Susy after offering
the child to Clarence for a perfunctory "good-night" kiss, an unusual
proceeding, which somewhat astonished them both--and Clarence found
himself near Mr. Peyton.

"I think," said Clarence timidly, "I saw an Injin to-day."

Mr. Peyton bent down towards him. "An Injin--where?" he asked quickly,
with the same look of doubting interrogatory with which he had received
Clarence's name and parentage.

The boy for a moment regretted having spoken. But with his old
doggedness he particularized his statement. Fortunately, being gifted
with a keen perception, he was able to describe the stranger accurately,
and to impart with his description that contempt for its subject
which he had felt, and which to his frontier auditor established its
truthfulness. Peyton turned abruptly away, but presently returned with
Harry and another man.

"You are sure of this?" said Peyton, half-encouragingly.

"Yes, sir."

"As sure as you are that your father is Colonel Brant and is dead?" said
Harry, with a light laugh.

Tears sprang into the boy's lowering eyes. "I don't lie," he said
doggedly.

"I believe you, Clarence," said Peyton quietly. "But why didn't you say
it before?"

"I didn't like to say it before Susy and--her!" stammered the boy.

"Her?"

"Yes, sir--Mrs. Peyton," said Clarence blushingly.

"Oh," said Harry sarcastically, "how blessed polite we are!"

"That'll do. Let up on him, will you?" said Peyton, roughly, to his
subordinate. "The boy knows what he's about. But," he continued,
addressing Clarence, "how was it the Injin didn't see you?"

"I was very still on account of not waking Susy," said Clarence, "and--"
He hesitated.

"And what?"

"He seemed more keen watching what YOU were doing," said the boy boldly.

"That's so," broke in the second man, who happened to be experienced,
"and as he was to wind'ard o' the boy he was off HIS scent and bearings.
He was one of their rear scouts; the rest o' them's ahead crossing our
track to cut us off. Ye didn't see anything else?"

"I saw a coyote first," said Clarence, greatly encouraged.

"Hold on!" said the expert, as Harry turned away with a sneer. "That's
a sign, too. Wolf don't go where wolf hez been, and coyote don't foller
Injins--there's no pickin's! How long afore did you see the coyote?"

"Just after we left the wagon," said Clarence.

"That's it," said the man, thoughtfully. "He was driven on ahead, or
hanging on their flanks. These Injins are betwixt us and that ar train,
or following it."

Peyton made a hurried gesture of warning, as if reminding the speaker
of Clarence's presence--a gesture which the boy noticed and wondered
at. Then the conversation of the three men took a lower tone, although
Clarence distinctly heard the concluding opinion of the expert.

"It ain't no good now, Mr. Peyton, and you'd be only exposing yourself
on their ground by breakin' camp agin to-night. And you don't know
that it ain't US they're watchin'. You see, if we hadn't turned off the
straight road when we got that first scare from these yer lost children,
we might hev gone on and walked plump into some cursed trap of those
devils. To my mind, we're just in nigger luck, and with a good watch and
my patrol we're all right to be fixed where we be till daylight."

Mr. Peyton presently turned away, taking Clarence with him. "As we'll
be up early and on the track of your train to-morrow, my boy, you had
better turn in now. I've put you up in my wagon, and as I expect to be
in the saddle most of the night, I reckon I won't trouble you much." He
led the way to a second wagon--drawn up beside the one where Susy and
Mrs. Peyton had retired--which Clarence was surprised to find fitted
with a writing table and desk, a chair, and even a bookshelf containing
some volumes. A long locker, fitted like a lounge, had been made up as
a couch for him, with the unwonted luxury of clean white sheets and
pillow-cases. A soft matting covered the floor of the heavy wagon bed,
which, Mr. Peyton explained, was hung on centre springs to prevent
jarring. The sides and roof of the vehicle were of lightly paneled wood,
instead of the usual hooked canvas frame of the ordinary emigrant wagon,
and fitted with a glazed door and movable window for light and air.
Clarence wondered why the big, powerful man, who seemed at home on
horseback, should ever care to sit in this office like a merchant or
a lawyer; and if this train sold things to the other trains, or took
goods, like the peddlers, to towns on the route; but there seemed to be
nothing to sell, and the other wagons were filled with only the goods
required by the party. He would have liked to ask Mr. Peyton who HE was,
and have questioned HIM as freely as he himself had been questioned. But
as the average adult man never takes into consideration the injustice
of denying to the natural and even necessary curiosity of childhood
that questioning which he himself is so apt to assume without right, and
almost always without delicacy, Clarence had no recourse. Yet the
boy, like all children, was conscious that if he had been afterwards
questioned about THIS inexplicable experience, he would have been
blamed for his ignorance concerning it. Left to himself presently, and
ensconced between the sheets, he lay for some moments staring about him.
The unwonted comfort of his couch, so different from the stuffy blanket
in the hard wagon bed which he had shared with one of the teamsters, and
the novelty, order, and cleanliness of his surroundings, while they were
grateful to his instincts, began in some vague way to depress him.
To his loyal nature it seemed a tacit infidelity to his former rough
companions to be lying here; he had a dim idea that he had lost that
independence which equal discomfort and equal pleasure among them had
given him. There seemed a sense of servitude in accepting this luxury
which was not his. This set him endeavoring to remember something of
his father's house, of the large rooms, drafty staircases, and far-off
ceilings, and the cold formality of a life that seemed made up of
strange faces; some stranger--his parents; some kinder--the servants;
particularly the black nurse who had him in charge. Why did Mr. Peyton
ask him about it? Why, if it were so important to strangers, had not
his mother told him more of it? And why was she not like this good woman
with the gentle voice who was so kind to--to Susy? And what did they
mean by making HIM so miserable? Something rose in his throat, but with
an effort he choked it back, and, creeping from the lounge, went softly
to the window, opened it to see if it "would work," and looked out. The
shrouded camp fires, the stars that glittered but gave no light, the dim
moving bulk of a patrol beyond the circle, all seemed to intensify the
darkness, and changed the current of his thoughts. He remembered what
Mr. Peyton had said of him when they first met. "Suthin of a pup, ain't
he?" Surely that meant something that was not bad! He crept back to the
couch again.

Lying there, still awake, he reflected that he wouldn't be a scout when
he grew up, but would be something like Mr. Peyton, and have a train
like this, and invite the Silsbees and Susy to accompany him. For this
purpose, he and Susy, early to-morrow morning, would get permission to
come in here and play at that game. This would familiarize him with the
details, so that he would be able at any time to take charge of it. He
was already an authority on the subject of Indians! He had once been
fired at--as an Indian. He would always carry a rifle like that hanging
from the hooks at the end of the wagon before him, and would eventually
slay many Indians and keep an account of them in a big book like that
on the desk. Susy would help him, having grown up a lady, and they would
both together issue provisions and rations from the door of the wagon to
the gathered crowds. He would be known as the "White Chief," his Indian
name being "Suthin of a Pup." He would have a circus van attached to
the train, in which he would occasionally perform. He would also have
artillery for protection. There would be a terrific engagement, and he
would rush into the wagon, heated and blackened with gunpowder; and
Susy would put down an account of it in a book, and Mrs. Peyton--for she
would be there in some vague capacity--would say, "Really, now, I don't
see but what we were very lucky in having such a boy as Clarence with
us. I begin to understand him better." And Harry, who, for purposes of
vague poetical retaliation, would also drop in at that moment, would
mutter and say, "He is certainly the son of Colonel Brant; dear me!" and
apologize. And his mother would come in also, in her coldest and most
indifferent manner, in a white ball dress, and start and say, "Good
gracious, how that boy has grown! I am sorry I did not see more of
him when he was young." Yet even in the midst of this came a confusing
numbness, and then the side of the wagon seemed to melt away, and he
drifted out again alone into the empty desolate plain from which even
the sleeping Susy had vanished, and he was left deserted and forgotten.
Then all was quiet in the wagon, and only the night wind moving round
it. But lo! the lashes of the sleeping White Chief--the dauntless
leader, the ruthless destroyer of Indians--were wet with glittering
tears!

Yet it seemed only a moment afterwards that he awoke with a faint
consciousness of some arrested motion. To his utter consternation,
the sun, three hours high, was shining in the wagon, already hot and
stifling in its beams. There was the familiar smell and taste of the
dirty road in the air about him. There was a faint creaking of boards
and springs, a slight oscillation, and beyond the audible rattle of
harness, as if the train had been under way, the wagon moving, and then
there had been a sudden halt. They had probably come up with the Silsbee
train; in a few moments the change would be effected and all of his
strange experience would be over. He must get up now. Yet, with the
morning laziness of the healthy young animal, he curled up a moment
longer in his luxurious couch.

How quiet it was! There were far-off voices, but they seemed suppressed
and hurried. Through the window he saw one of the teamsters run rapidly
past him with a strange, breathless, preoccupied face, halt a moment at
one of the following wagons, and then run back again to the front.

Then two of the voices came nearer, with the dull beating of hoofs in
the dust.

"Rout out the boy and ask him," said a half-suppressed, impatient voice,
which Clarence at once recognized as the man Harry's.

"Hold on till Peyton comes up," said the second voice, in a low tone;
"leave it to him."

"Better find out what they were like, at once," grumbled Harry.

"Wait, stand back," said Peyton's voice, joining the others; "I'LL ask
him."

Clarence looked wonderingly at the door. It opened on Mr. Peyton, dusty
and dismounted, with a strange, abstracted look in his face.

"How many wagons are in your train, Clarence?"

"Three, sir."

"Any marks on them?"

"Yes, sir," said Clarence, eagerly: "'Off to California' and 'Root, Hog,
or Die.'"

Mr. Peyton's eye seemed to leap up and hold Clarence's with a sudden,
strange significance, and then looked down.

"How many were you in all?" he continued.

"Five, and there was Mrs. Silsbee."

"No other woman?"

"No."

"Get up and dress yourself," he said gravely, "and wait here till I
come back. Keep cool and have your wits about you." He dropped his
voice slightly. "Perhaps something's happened that you'll have to show
yourself a little man again for, Clarence!"

The door closed, and the boy heard the same muffled hoofs and voices die
away towards the front. He began to dress himself mechanically, almost
vacantly, yet conscious always of a vague undercurrent of thrilling
excitement. When he had finished he waited almost breathlessly, feeling
the same beating of his heart that he had felt when he was following the
vanished train the day before. At last he could stand the suspense no
longer, and opened the door. Everything was still in the motionless
caravan, except--it struck him oddly even then--the unconcerned
prattling voice of Susy from one of the nearer wagons. Perhaps a
sudden feeling that this was something that concerned HER, perhaps an
irresistible impulse overcame him, but the next moment he had leaped to
the ground, faced about, and was running feverishly to the front.

The first thing that met his eyes was the helpless and desolate bulk of
one of the Silsbee wagons a hundred rods away, bereft of oxen and pole,
standing alone and motionless against the dazzling sky! Near it was the
broken frame of another wagon, its fore wheels and axles gone, pitched
forward on its knees like an ox under the butcher's sledge. Not far away
there were the burnt and blackened ruins of a third, around which the
whole party on foot and horseback seemed to be gathered. As the boy ran
violently on, the group opened to make way for two men carrying some
helpless but awful object between them. A terrible instinct made
Clarence swerve from it in his headlong course, but he was at the same
moment discovered by the others, and a cry arose of "Go back!" "Stop!"
"Keep him back!" Heeding it no more than the wind that whistled by him,
Clarence made directly for the foremost wagon--the one in which he
and Susy had played. A powerful hand caught his shoulder; it was Mr.
Peyton's.

"Mrs. Silsbee's wagon," said the boy, with white lips, pointing to it.
"Where is she?"

"She's missing," said Peyton, "and one other--the rest are dead."

"She must be there," said the boy, struggling, and pointing to the
wagon; "let me go."

"Clarence," said Peyton sternly, accenting his grasp upon the boy's arm,
"be a man! Look around you. Try and tell us who these are."

There seemed to be one or two heaps of old clothes lying on the ground,
and further on, where the men at a command from Peyton had laid down
their burden, another. In those ragged, dusty heaps of clothes, from
which all the majesty of life seemed to have been ruthlessly stamped
out, only what was ignoble and grotesque appeared to be left. There
was nothing terrible in this. The boy moved slowly towards them; and,
incredible even to himself, the overpowering fear of them that a moment
before had overcome him left him as suddenly. He walked from the one to
the other, recognizing them by certain marks and signs, and mentioning
name after name. The groups gazed at him curiously; he was conscious
that he scarcely understood himself, still less the same quiet purpose
that made him turn towards the furthest wagon.

"There's nothing there," said Peyton; "we've searched it." But the boy,
without replying, continued his way, and the crowd followed him.

The deserted wagon, more rude, disorderly, and slovenly than it had
ever seemed to him before, was now heaped and tumbled with broken bones,
cans, scattered provisions, pots, pans, blankets, and clothing in the
foul confusion of a dust-heap. But in this heterogeneous mingling the
boy's quick eye caught sight of a draggled edge of calico.

"That's Mrs. Silsbee's dress!" he cried, and leapt into the wagon.

At first the men stared at each other, but an instant later a dozen
hands were helping him, nervously digging and clearing away the rubbish.
Then one man uttered a sudden cry, and fell back with frantic but
furious eyes uplifted against the pitiless, smiling sky above him.

"Great God! look here!"

It was the yellowish, waxen face of Mrs. Silsbee that had been
uncovered. But to the fancy of the boy it had changed; the old familiar
lines of worry, care, and querulousness had given way to a look of
remote peace and statue-like repose. He had often vexed her in her
aggressive life; he was touched with remorse at her cold, passionless
apathy now, and pressed timidly forward. Even as he did so, the man,
with a quick but warning gesture, hurriedly threw his handkerchief
over the matted locks, as if to shut out something awful from his view.
Clarence felt himself drawn back; but not before the white lips of a
bystander had whispered a single word--

"Scalped, too! by God!"




CHAPTER VI


Then followed days and weeks that seemed to Clarence as a dream. At
first, an interval of hushed and awed restraint when he and Susy were
kept apart, a strange and artificial interest taken little note of by
him, but afterwards remembered when others had forgotten it; the burial
of Mrs. Silsbee beneath a cairn of stones, with some ceremonies that,
simple though they were, seemed to usurp the sacred rights of grief from
him and Susy, and leave them cold and frightened; days of frequent and
incoherent childish outbursts from Susy, growing fainter and rarer as
time went on, until they ceased, he knew not when; the haunting by night
of that morning vision of the three or four heaps of ragged clothes on
the ground and a half regret that he had not examined them more closely;
a recollection of the awful loneliness and desolation of the broken and
abandoned wagon left behind on its knees as if praying mutely when the
train went on and left it; the trundling behind of the fateful wagon
in which Mrs. Silsbee's body had been found, superstitiously shunned by
every one, and when at last turned over to the authorities at an outpost
garrison, seeming to drop the last link from the dragging chain of the
past. The revelation to the children of a new experience in that brief
glimpse of the frontier garrison; the handsome officer in uniform and
belted sword, an heroic, vengeful figure to be admired and imitated
hereafter; the sudden importance and respect given to Susy and himself
as "survivors"; the sympathetic questioning and kindly exaggerations
of their experiences, quickly accepted by Susy--all these, looking back
upon them afterwards, seemed to have passed in a dream.

No less strange and visionary to them seemed the real transitions they
noted from the moving train. How one morning they missed the changeless,
motionless, low, dark line along the horizon, and before noon found
themselves among the rocks and trees and a swiftly rushing river.
How there suddenly appeared beside them a few days later a great gray
cloud-covered ridge of mountains that they were convinced was that same
dark line that they had seen so often. How the men laughed at them, and
said that for the last three days they had been CROSSING that dark line,
and that it was HIGHER than the great gray-clouded range before them,
which it had always hidden from their view! How Susy firmly believed
that these changes took place in her sleep, when she always "kinder felt
they were crawlin' up," and how Clarence, in the happy depreciation of
extreme youth, expressed his conviction that they "weren't a bit high,
after all." How the weather became cold, though it was already summer,
and at night the camp fire was a necessity, and there was a stove in
the tent with Susy; and yet how all this faded away, and they were again
upon a dazzling, burnt, and sun-dried plain! But always as in a dream!

More real were the persons who composed the party--whom they seemed to
have always known--and who, in the innocent caprice of children, had
become to them more actual than the dead had even been. There was Mr.
Peyton, who they now knew owned the train, and who was so rich that he
"needn't go to California if he didn't want to, and was going to buy
a great deal of it if he liked it," and who was also a lawyer and
"policeman"--which was Susy's rendering of "politician"--and was called
"Squire" and "Judge" at the frontier outpost, and could order anybody to
be "took up if he wanted to," and who knew everybody by their Christian
names; and Mrs. Peyton, who had been delicate and was ordered by the
doctor to live in the open air for six months, and "never go into a
house or a town agin," and who was going to adopt Susy as soon as her
husband could arrange with Susy's relatives, and draw up the papers! How
"Harry" was Henry Benham, Mrs. Peyton's brother, and a kind of partner
of Mr. Peyton. And how the scout's name was Gus Gildersleeve, or the
"White Crow," and how, through his recognized intrepidity, an attack
upon their train was no doubt averted. Then there was "Bill," the
stock herder, and "Texas Jim," the vaquero--the latter marvelous and
unprecedented in horsemanship. Such were their companions, as
appeared through the gossip of the train and their own inexperienced
consciousness. To them, they were all astounding and important
personages. But, either from boyish curiosity or some sense of being
misunderstood, Clarence was more attracted by the two individuals of the
party who were least kind to him--namely, Mrs. Peyton and her brother
Harry. I fear that, after the fashion of most children, and some
grown-up people, he thought less of the steady kindness of Mr. Peyton
and the others than of the rare tolerance of Harry or the polite
concessions of his sister. Miserably conscious of this at times, he
quite convinced himself that if he could only win a word of approbation
from Harry, or a smile from Mrs. Peyton, he would afterwards revenge
himself by "running away." Whether he would or not, I cannot say. I am
writing of a foolish, growing, impressionable boy of eleven, of whose
sentiments nothing could be safely predicted but uncertainty.

It was at this time that he became fascinated by another member of the
party whose position had been too humble and unimportant to be included
in the group already noted. Of the same appearance as the other
teamsters in size, habits, and apparel, he had not at first exhibited to
Clarence any claim to sympathy. But it appeared that he was actually
a youth of only sixteen--a hopeless incorrigible of St. Joseph, whose
parents had prevailed on Peyton to allow him to join the party, by way
of removing him from evil associations and as a method of reform. Of
this Clarence was at first ignorant, not from any want of frankness on
the part of the youth, for that ingenious young gentleman later informed
him that he had killed three men in St. Louis, two in St. Jo, and that
the officers of justice were after him. But it was evident that to
precocious habits of drinking, smoking, chewing, and card-playing this
overgrown youth added a strong tendency to exaggeration of statement.
Indeed, he was known as "Lying Jim Hooker," and his various qualities
presented a problem to Clarence that was attractive and inspiring,
doubtful, but always fascinating. With the hoarse voice of early
wickedness and a contempt for ordinary courtesy, he had a round,
perfectly good-humored face, and a disposition that when not called
upon to act up to his self-imposed role of reckless wickedness, was not
unkindly.

It was only a few days after the massacre, and while the children were
still wrapped in the gloomy interest and frightened reticence which
followed it, that "Jim Hooker" first characteristically flashed upon
Clarence's perceptions. Hanging half on and half off the saddle of
an Indian pony, the lank Jim suddenly made his appearance, dashing
violently up and down the track, and around the wagon in which Clarence
was sitting, tugging desperately at the reins, with every indication of
being furiously run away with, and retaining his seat only with the most
dauntless courage and skill. Round and round they went, the helpless
rider at times hanging by a single stirrup near the ground, and again
recovering himself by--as it seemed to Clarence--almost superhuman
effort. Clarence sat open-mouthed with anxiety and excitement, and yet
a few of the other teamsters laughed. Then the voice of Mr. Peyton, from
the window of his car, said quietly,--

"There, that will do, Jim. Quit it!"

The furious horse and rider instantly disappeared. A few moments after,
the bewildered Clarence saw the redoubted horseman trotting along
quietly in the dust of the rear, on the same fiery steed, who in that
prosaic light bore an astounding resemblance to an ordinary team horse.
Later in the day he sought an explanation from the rider.

"You see," answered Jim gloomily, "thar ain't a galoot in this yer crowd
ez knows jist WHAT'S in that hoss! And them ez suspecks daren't say! It
wouldn't do for to hev it let out that the Judge hez a Morgan-Mexican
plug that's killed two men afore he got him, and is bound to kill
another afore he gets through! Why, on'y the week afore we kem up to
you, that thar hoss bolted with me at camping! Bucked and throwed me,
but I kept my holt o' the stirrups with my foot--so! Dragged me a matter
of two miles, head down, and me keepin' away rocks with my hand--so!"

"Why didn't you loose your foot and let go?" asked Clarence
breathlessly.

"YOU might," said Jim, with deep scorn; "that ain't MY style. I just
laid low till we kem to a steep pitched hill, and goin' down when the
hoss was, so to speak, kinder BELOW me, I just turned a hand spring, so,
and that landed me onter his back again."

This action, though vividly illustrated by Jim's throwing his hands down
like feet beneath him, and indicating the parabola of a spring in
the air, proving altogether too much for Clarence's mind to grasp, he
timidly turned to a less difficult detail.

"What made the horse bolt first, Mr. Hooker?"

"Smelt Injins!" said Jim, carelessly expectorating tobacco juice in
a curving jet from the side of his mouth--a singularly fascinating
accomplishment, peculiarly his own, "'n' likely YOUR Injins."

"But," argued Clarence hesitatingly, "you said it was a week
before--and--"

"Er Mexican plug kin smell Injins fifty, yes, a hundred miles away,"
said Jim, with scornful deliberation; "'n' if Judge Peyton had took my
advice, and hadn't been so mighty feared about the character of his hoss
gettin' out he'd hev played roots on them Injins afore they tetched ye.
But," he added, with gloomy dejection, "there ain't no sand in this yer
crowd, thar ain't no vim, thar ain't nothin'; and thar kan't be ez long
ez thar's women and babies, and women and baby fixin's, mixed up with
it. I'd hev cut the whole blamed gang ef it weren't for one or two
things," he added darkly.

Clarence, impressed by Jim's mysterious manner, for the moment forgot
his contemptuous allusion to Mr. Peyton, and the evident implication of
Susy and himself, and asked hurriedly, "What things?"

Jim, as if forgetful of the boy's presence in his fitful mood,
abstractedly half drew a glittering bowie knife from his bootleg,
and then slowly put it back again. "Thar's one or two old scores," he
continued, in a low voice, although no one was in hearing distance of
them, "one or two private accounts," he went on tragically, averting
his eyes as if watched by some one, "thet hev to be wiped out with blood
afore I leave. Thar's one or two men TOO MANY alive and breathin' in
this yer crowd. Mebbee it's Gus Gildersleeve; mebbee it's Harry Benham;
mebbee," he added, with a dark yet noble disinterestedness, "it's ME."

"Oh, no," said Clarence, with polite deprecation.

Far from placating the gloomy Jim, this seemed only to awake his
suspicions. "Mebbee," he said, dancing suddenly away from Clarence,
"mebbee you think I'm lyin'. Mebbee you think, because you're Colonel
Brant's son, yer kin run ME with this yer train. Mebbee," he continued,
dancing violently back again, "ye kalkilate, because ye run off'n'
stampeded a baby, ye kin tote me round too, sonny. Mebbee," he went
on, executing a double shuffle in the dust and alternately striking
his hands on the sides of his boots, "mebbee you're spyin' round and
reportin' to the Judge."

Firmly convinced that Jim was working himself up by an Indian war-dance
to some desperate assault on himself, but resenting the last unjust
accusation, Clarence had recourse to one of his old dogged silences.
Happily at this moment an authoritative voice called out, "Now, then,
you Jim Hooker!" and the desperate Hooker, as usual, vanished instantly.
Nevertheless, he appeared an hour or two later beside the wagon in which
Susy and Clarence were seated, with an expression of satiated vengeance
and remorseful bloodguiltiness in his face, and his hair combed Indian
fashion over his eyes. As he generously contented himself with only
passing a gloomy and disparaging criticism on the game of cards that
the children were playing, it struck Clarence for the first time that a
great deal of his real wickedness resided in his hair. This set him to
thinking that it was strange that Mr. Peyton did not try to reform him
with a pair of scissors, but not until Clarence himself had for at
least four days attempted to imitate Jim by combing his own hair in that
fashion.

A few days later, Jim again casually favored him with a confidential
interview. Clarence had been allowed to bestride one of the team leaders
postillionwise, and was correspondingly elevated, when Jim joined him,
on the Mexican plug, which appeared--no doubt a part of its wicked
art--heavily docile, and even slightly lame.

"How much," said Jim, in a tone of gloomy confidence,--"how much did you
reckon to make by stealin' that gal-baby, sonny?"

"Nothing," replied Clarence with a smile. Perhaps it was an evidence of
the marked influence that Jim was beginning to exert over him that
he already did not attempt to resent this fascinating implication of
grownup guilt.

"It orter bin a good job, if it warn't revenge," continued Jim moodily.

"No, it wasn't revenge," said Clarence hurriedly.

"Then ye kalkilated ter get er hundred dollars reward ef the old man and
old woman hadn't bin scelped afore yet got up to 'em?" said Jim. "That's
your blamed dodgasted luck, eh! Enyhow, you'll make Mrs. Peyton plank
down suthin' if she adopts the babby. Look yer, young feller," he said,
starting suddenly and throwing his face forward, glaring fiendishly
through his matted side-locks, "d'ye mean ter tell me it wasn't a
plant--a skin game--the hull thing?"

"A what?" said Clarence.

"D'ye mean to say"--it was wonderful how gratuitously husky his voice
became at this moment--"d'ye mean ter tell me ye didn't set on them
Injins to wipe out the Silsbees, so that ye could hev an out-an'-out gal
ORFEN on hand fer Mrs. Peyton ter adopt--eh?"

But here Clarence was forced to protest, and strongly, although Jim
contemptuously ignored it. "Don't lie ter me," he repeated mysteriously,
"I'm fly. I'm dark, young fel. We're cahoots in this thing?" And with
this artful suggestion of being in possession of Clarence's guilty
secret he departed in time to elude the usual objurgation of his
superior, "Phil," the head teamster.

Nor was his baleful fascination exercised entirely on Clarence. In
spite of Mrs. Peyton's jealously affectionate care, Clarence's frequent
companionship, and the little circle of admiring courtiers that always
surrounded Susy, it became evident that this small Eve had been secretly
approached and tempted by the Satanic Jim. She was found one day to
have a few heron's feathers in her possession with which she adorned her
curls, and at another time was discovered to have rubbed her face and
arms with yellow and red ochre, confessedly the free gift of Jim Hooker.
It was to Clarence alone that she admitted the significance and purport
of these offerings. "Jim gived 'em to me," she said, "and Jim's a kind
of Injin hisself that won't hurt me; and when bad Injins come, they'll
think I'm his Injin baby and run away. And Jim said if I'd just told the
Injins when they came to kill papa and mamma, that I b'longed to him,
they'd hev runned away."

"But," said the practical Clarence, "you could not; you know you were
with Mrs. Peyton all the time."

"Kla'uns," said Susy, shaking her head and fixing her round blue eyes
with calm mendacity on the boy, "don't you tell me. I WAS THERE!"

Clarence started back, and nearly fell over the wagon in hopeless dismay
at this dreadful revelation of Susy's powers of exaggeration. "But," he
gasped, "you know, Susy, you and me left before--"

"Kla'uns," said Susy calmly, making a little pleat in the skirt of her
dress with her small thumb and fingers, "don't you talk to me. I was
there. I'se a SERIVER! The men at the fort said so! The SERIVERS is
allus, allus there, and allus allus knows everythin'."

Clarence was too dumfounded to reply. He had a vague recollection
of having noticed before that Susy was very much fascinated by the
reputation given to her at Fort Ridge as a "survivor," and was trying
in an infantile way to live up to it. This the wicked Jim had evidently
encouraged. For a day or two Clarence felt a little afraid of her, and
more lonely than ever.

It was in this state, and while he was doggedly conscious that his
association with Jim did not prepossess Mrs. Peyton or her brother in
his favor, and that the former even believed him responsible for Susy's
unhallowed acquaintance with Jim, that he drifted into one of those
youthful escapades on which elders are apt to sit in severe but not
always considerate judgment. Believing, like many other children, that
nobody cared particularly for him, except to RESTRAIN him, discovering,
as children do, much sooner than we complacently imagine, that love and
preference have no logical connection with desert or character, Clarence
became boyishly reckless. But when, one day, it was rumored that a herd
of buffalo was in the vicinity, and that the train would be delayed the
next morning in order that a hunt might be organized, by Gildersleeve,
Benham, and a few others, Clarence listened willingly to Jim's
proposition that they should secretly follow it.

To effect their unhallowed purpose required boldness and duplicity.
It was arranged that shortly after the departure of the hunting party
Clarence should ask permission to mount and exercise one of the team
horses--a favor that had been frequently granted him; that in the
outskirts of the camp he should pretend that the horse ran away with
him, and Jim would start in pursuit. The absence of the shooting party
with so large a contingent of horses and men would preclude any further
detachment from the camp to assist them. Once clear, they would follow
the track of the hunters, and, if discovered by them, would offer the
same excuse, with the addition that they had lost their way to the camp.
The plan was successful. The details were carried out with almost too
perfect effect; as it appeared that Jim, in order to give dramatic
intensity to the fractiousness of Clarence's horse, had inserted a thorn
apple under the neck of his saddle, which Clarence only discovered
in time to prevent himself from being unseated. Urged forward by
ostentatious "Whoas!" and surreptitious cuts in the rear from Jim,
pursuer and pursued presently found themselves safely beyond the
half-dry stream and fringe of alder bushes that skirted the camp. They
were not followed. Whether the teamsters suspected and winked at this
design, or believed that the boys could take care of themselves, and ran
no risk of being lost in the proximity of the hunting party, there was
no general alarm.

Thus reassured, and having a general idea of the direction of the hunt,
the boys pushed hilariously forward. Before them opened a vast expanse
of bottom land, slightly sloping on the right to a distant half-filled
lagoon, formed by the main river overflow, on whose tributary they had
encamped. The lagoon was partly hidden by straggling timber and "brush,"
and beyond that again stretched the unlimitable plains--the pasture
of their mighty game. Hither, Jim hoarsely informed his companion, the
buffaloes came to water. A few rods further on, he started dramatically,
and, alighting, proceeded to slowly examine the ground. It seemed to
be scattered over with half-circular patches, which he pointed out
mysteriously as "buffalo chip." To Clarence's inexperienced perception
the plain bore a singular resemblance to the surface of an ordinary
unromantic cattle pasture that somewhat chilled his heroic fancy.
However, the two companions halted and professionally examined their
arms and equipments.

These, I grieve to say, though varied, were scarcely full or
satisfactory. The necessities of their flight had restricted Jim to an
old double-barreled fowling-piece, which he usually carried slung across
his shoulders; an old-fashioned "six-shooter," whose barrels revolved
occasionally and unexpectedly, known as "Allen's Pepper Box" on account
of its culinary resemblance; and a bowie-knife. Clarence carried an
Indian bow and arrow with which he had been exercising, and a hatchet
which he had concealed under the flanks of his saddle. To this Jim
generously added the six-shooter, taking the hatchet in exchange--a
transfer that at first delighted Clarence, until, seeing the warlike
and picturesque effect of the hatchet in Jim's belt, he regretted the
transfer. The gun, Jim meantime explained "extry charged," "chuck up"
to the middle with slugs and revolver bullets, could only be fired by
himself, and even then he darkly added, not without danger. This poverty
of equipment was, however, compensated by opposite statements from
Jim of the extraordinary results obtained by these simple weapons from
"fellers I knew:" how HE himself had once brought down a "bull" by a
bold shot with a revolver through its open bellowing mouth that pierced
his "innards;" how a friend of his--an intimate in fact--now in jail at
Louisville for killing a sheriff's deputy, had once found himself alone
and dismounted with a simple clasp-knife and a lariat among a herd of
buffaloes; how, leaping calmly upon the shaggy shoulders of the biggest
bull, he lashed himself with the lariat firmly to its horns, goading it
onward with his clasp-knife, and subsisting for days upon the flesh cut
from its living body, until, abandoned by its fellows and exhausted
by the loss of blood, it finally succumbed to its victor at the very
outskirts of the camp to which he had artfully driven it! It must be
confessed that this recital somewhat took away Clarence's breath, and
he would have liked to ask a few questions. But they were alone on the
prairie, and linked by a common transgression; the glorious sun was
coming up victoriously, the pure, crisp air was intoxicating their
nerves; in the bright forecast of youth everything WAS possible!

The surface of the bottom land that they were crossing was here and
there broken up by fissures and "potholes," and some circumspection in
their progress became necessary. In one of these halts, Clarence was
struck by a dull, monotonous jarring that sounded like the heavy regular
fall of water over a dam. Each time that they slackened their pace the
sound would become more audible, and was at last accompanied by that
slight but unmistakable tremor of the earth that betrayed the vicinity
of a waterfall. Hesitating over the phenomenon, which seemed to imply
that their topography was wrong and that they had blundered from the
track, they were presently startled by the fact that the sound was
actually APPROACHING them! With a sudden instinct they both galloped
towards the lagoon. As the timber opened before them Jim uttered a long
ecstatic shout. "Why, it's THEM!"

At a first glance it seemed to Clarence as if the whole plain beyond
was broken up and rolling in tumbling waves or furrows towards them. A
second glance showed the tossing fronts of a vast herd of buffaloes, and
here and there, darting in and out and among them, or emerging from the
cloud of dust behind, wild figures and flashes of fire. With the idea of
water still in his mind, it seemed as if some tumultuous tidal wave were
sweeping unseen towards the lagoon, carrying everything before it. He
turned with eager eyes, in speechless expectancy, to his companion.

Alack! that redoubtable hero and mighty hunter was, to all appearances,
equally speechless and astonished. It was true that he remained rooted
to the saddle, a lank, still heroic figure, alternately grasping his
hatchet and gun with a kind of spasmodic regularity. How long he would
have continued this would never be known, for the next moment, with a
deafening crash, the herd broke through the brush, and, swerving at the
right of the lagoon, bore down directly upon them. All further doubt or
hesitation on their part was stopped. The farseeing, sagacious Mexican
plug with a terrific snort wheeled and fled furiously with his rider.
Moved, no doubt, by touching fidelity, Clarence's humbler team-horse
instantly followed. In a few moments those devoted animals struggled
neck to neck in noble emulation.

"What are we goin' off this way for?" gasped the simple Clarence.

"Peyton and Gildersleeve are back there--and they'll see us," gasped Jim
in reply. It struck Clarence that the buffaloes were much nearer them
than the hunting party, and that the trampling hoofs of a dozen bulls
were close behind them, but with another gasp he shouted,

"When are we going to hunt 'em?"

"Hunt THEM!" screamed Jim, with a hysterical outburst of truth; "why,
they're huntin' US--dash it!"

Indeed, there was no doubt that their frenzied horses were flying before
the equally frenzied herd behind them. They gained a momentary advantage
by riding into one of the fissures, and out again on the other side,
while their pursuers were obliged to make a detour. But in a few minutes
they were overtaken by that part of the herd who had taken the other and
nearer side of the lagoon, and were now fairly in the midst of them. The
ground shook with their trampling hoofs; their steaming breath, mingling
with the stinging dust that filled the air, half choked and blinded
Clarence. He was dimly conscious that Jim had wildly thrown his hatchet
at a cow buffalo pressing close upon his flanks. As they swept down into
another gully he saw him raise his fateful gun with utter desperation.
Clarence crouched low on his horse's outstretched neck. There was a
blinding flash, a single stunning report of both barrels; Jim reeled in
one way half out of the saddle, while the smoking gun seemed to leap in
another over his head, and then rider and horse vanished in a choking
cloud of dust and gunpowder. A moment after Clarence's horse stopped
with a sudden check, and the boy felt himself hurled over its head into
the gully, alighting on something that seemed to be a bounding cushion
of curled and twisted hair. It was the shaggy shoulder of an enormous
buffalo! For Jim's desperate random shot and double charge had taken
effect on the near hind leg of a preceding bull, tearing away the flesh
and ham-stringing the animal, who had dropped in the gully just in front
of Clarence's horse.

Dazed but unhurt, the boy rolled from the lifted fore quarters of the
struggling brute to the ground. When he staggered to his feet again, not
only his horse was gone but the whole herd of buffaloes seemed to have
passed too, and he could hear the shouts of unseen hunters now ahead of
him. They had evidently overlooked his fall, and the gully had concealed
him. The sides before him were too steep for his aching limbs to climb;
the slope by which he and the bull had descended when the collision
occurred was behind the wounded animal. Clarence was staggering towards
it when the bull, by a supreme effort, lifted itself on three legs, half
turned, and faced him.

These events had passed too quickly for the inexperienced boy to
have felt any active fear, or indeed anything but wild excitement and
confusion. But the spectacle of that shaggy and enormous front, that
seemed to fill the whole gully, rising with awful deliberation between
him and escape, sent a thrill of terror through his frame. The great,
dull, bloodshot eyes glared at him with a dumb, wondering fury; the
large wet nostrils were so near that their first snort of inarticulate
rage made him reel backwards as from a blow. The gully was only a
narrow and short fissure or subsidence of the plain; a few paces more of
retreat and he would be at its end, against an almost perpendicular
bank fifteen feet high. If he attempted to climb its crumbling sides and
fell, there would be those short but terrible horns waiting to impale
him! It seemed too terrible, too cruel! He was so small beside this
overgrown monster. It wasn't fair! The tears started to his eyes, and
then, in a rage at the injustice of Fate, he stood doggedly still with
clenched fists. He fixed his gaze with half-hysterical, childish fury on
those lurid eyes; he did not know that, owing to the strange magnifying
power of the bull's convex pupils, he, Clarence, appeared much bigger
than he really was to the brute's heavy consciousness, the distance from
him most deceptive, and that it was to this fact that hunters so often
owed their escape. He only thought of some desperate means of attack.
Ah! the six-shooter. It was still in his pocket. He drew it nervously,
hopelessly--it looked so small compared with his large enemy!

He presented it with flashing eyes, and pulled the trigger. A feeble
click followed, another, and again! Even THIS had mocked him. He
pulled the trigger once more, wildly; there was a sudden explosion, and
another. He stepped back; the balls had apparently flattened themselves
harmlessly on the bull's forehead. He pulled again, hopelessly; there
was another report, a sudden furious bellow, and the enormous brute
threw his head savagely to one side, burying his left horn deep in the
crumbling bank beside him. Again and again he charged the bank, driving
his left horn home, and bringing down the stones and earth in showers.
It was some seconds before Clarence saw in a single glimpse of that
wildly tossing crest the reason of this fury. The blood was pouring from
his left eye, penetrated by the last bullet; the bull was blinded! A
terrible revulsion of feeling, a sudden sense of remorse that was for
the moment more awful than even his previous fear, overcame him. HE
had done THAT THING! As much to fly from the dreadful spectacle as
any instinct of self-preservation, he took advantage of the next mad
paroxysms of pain and blindness, that always impelled the suffering
beast towards the left, to slip past him on the right, reach the
incline, and scramble wildly up to the plain again. Here he ran
confusedly forward, not knowing whither--only caring to escape that
agonized bellowing, to shut out forever the accusing look of that huge
blood-weltering eye.

Suddenly he heard a distant angry shout. To his first hurried glance
the plain had seemed empty, but, looking up, he saw two horsemen rapidly
advancing with a led horse behind them--his own. With the blessed sense
of relief that overtook him now came the fevered desire for sympathy
and to tell them all. But as they came nearer he saw that they were
Gildersleeve, the scout, and Henry Benham, and that, far from sharing
any delight in his deliverance, their faces only exhibited irascible
impatience. Overcome by this new defeat, the boy stopped, again dumb and
dogged.

"Now, then, blank it all, WILL you get up and come along, or do
you reckon to keep the train waiting another hour over your blanked
foolishness?" said Gildersleeve savagely.

The boy hesitated, and then mounted mechanically, without a word.

"'Twould have served 'em right to have gone and left 'em," muttered
Benham vindictively.

For one wild instant Clarence thought of throwing himself from his
horse and bidding them go on and leave him. But before he could put his
thought into action the two men were galloping forward, with his horse
led by a lariat fastened to the horn of Gildersleeve's saddle.

In two hours more they had overtaken the train, already on the march,
and were in the midst of the group of outriders. Judge Peyton's face,
albeit a trifle perplexed, turned towards Clarence with a kindly,
half-tolerant look of welcome. The boy's heart instantly melted with
forgiveness.

"Well, my boy, let's hear YOUR story. What happened?"

Clarence cast a hurried glance around, and saw Jim, with face averted,
riding gloomily behind. Then nervously and hurriedly he told how he had
been thrown into the gully on the back of the wounded buffalo, and the
manner of his escape. An audible titter ran through the cavalcade.
Mr. Peyton regarded him gravely. "But how did the buffalo get so
conveniently into the gully?" he asked.

"Jim Hooker lamed him with a shotgun, and he fell over," said Clarence
timidly.

A roar of Homeric laughter went up from the party. Clarence looked up,
stung and startled, but caught a single glimpse of Jim Hooker's face
that made him forget his own mortification. In its hopeless, heart-sick,
and utterly beaten dejection--the first and only real expression he had
seen on it--he read the dreadful truth. Jim's REPUTATION had ruined him!
The one genuine and striking episode of his life, the one trustworthy
account he had given of it, had been unanimously accepted as the biggest
and most consummate lie of his record!




CHAPTER VII


With this incident of the hunt closed, to Clarence, the last remembered
episode of his journey. But he did not know until long after that it had
also closed to him what might have been the opening of a new career.
For it had been Judge Peyton's intention in adopting Susy to include a
certain guardianship and protection of the boy, provided he could get
the consent of that vague relation to whom he was consigned. But it
had been pointed out by Mrs. Peyton and her brother that Clarence's
association with Jim Hooker had made him a doubtful companion for Susy,
and even the Judge himself was forced to admit that the boy's apparent
taste for evil company was inconsistent with his alleged birth and
breeding. Unfortunately, Clarence, in the conviction of being hopelessly
misunderstood, and that dogged acquiescence to fate which was one of his
characteristics, was too proud to correct the impression by any of the
hypocracies of childhood. He had also a cloudy instinct of loyalty to
Jim in his disgrace, without, however, experiencing either the sympathy
of an equal or the zeal of a partisan, but rather--if it could be said
of a boy of his years--with the patronage and protection of a superior.
So he accepted without demur the intimation that when the train reached
California he would be forwarded from Stockton with an outfit and a
letter of explanation to Sacramento, it being understood that in the
event of not finding his relative he would return to the Peytons in one
of the southern valleys, where they elected to purchase a tract of land.

With this outlook, and the prospect of change, independence, and all
the rich possibilities that to the imagination of youth are included in
them, Clarence had found the days dragging. The halt at Salt Lake,
the transit of the dreary Alkali desert, even the wild passage of the
Sierras, were but a blurred picture in his memory. The sight of eternal
snows and the rolling of endless ranks of pines, the first glimpse of a
hillside of wild oats, the spectacle of a rushing yellow river that to
his fancy seemed tinged with gold, were momentary excitements, quickly
forgotten. But when, one morning, halting at the outskirts of a
struggling settlement, he found the entire party eagerly gathered around
a passing stranger, who had taken from his saddle-bags a small buckskin
pouch to show them a double handful of shining scales of metal, Clarence
felt the first feverish and overmastering thrill of the gold-seekers.
Breathlessly he followed the breathless questions and careless replies.
The gold had been dug out of a placer only thirty miles away. It might
be worth, say, a hundred and fifty dollars; it was only HIS share of a
week's work with two partners. It was not much; "the country was
getting played out with fresh arrivals and greenhorns." All this falling
carelessly from the unshaven lips of a dusty, roughly dressed man, with
a long-handled shovel and pickaxe strapped on his back, and a frying-pan
depending from his saddle. But no panoplied or armed knight ever seemed
so heroic or independent a figure to Clarence. What could be finer than
the noble scorn conveyed in his critical survey of the train, with its
comfortable covered wagons and appliances of civilization? "Ye'll hev to
get rid of them ther fixin's if yer goin' in for placer diggin'!" What
a corroboration of Clarence's real thoughts! What a picture of
independence was this! The picturesque scout, the all-powerful Judge
Peyton, the daring young officer, all crumbled on their clayey pedestals
before this hero in a red flannel shirt and high-topped boots. To stroll
around in the open air all day, and pick up those shining bits of metal,
without study, without method or routine--this was really life; to some
day come upon that large nugget "you couldn't lift," that was worth as
much as the train and horses--such a one as the stranger said was found
the other day at Sawyer's Bar--this was worth giving up everything for.
That rough man, with his smile of careless superiority, was the living
link between Clarence and the Thousand and One Nights; in him were
Aladdin and Sindbad incarnate.

Two days later they reached Stockton. Here Clarence, whose single suit
of clothes had been reinforced by patching, odds and ends from Peyton's
stores, and an extraordinary costume of army cloth, got up by the
regimental tailor at Fort Ridge, was taken to be refitted at a general
furnishing "emporium." But alas! in the selection of the clothing for
that adult locality scant provision seemed to have been made for a
boy of Clarence's years, and he was with difficulty fitted from an
old condemned Government stores with "a boy's" seaman suit and a
brass-buttoned pea-jacket. To this outfit Mr. Peyton added a small sum
of money for his expenses, and a letter of explanation to his cousin.
The stage-coach was to start at noon. It only remained for Clarence to
take leave of the party. The final parting with Susy had been discounted
on the two previous days with some tears, small frights and clingings,
and the expressed determination on the child's part "to go with him;"
but in the excitement of the arrival at Stockton it was still
further mitigated, and under the influence of a little present from
Clarence--his first disbursement of his small capital--had at last taken
the form and promise of merely temporary separation. Nevertheless, when
the boy's scanty pack was deposited under the stage-coach seat, and he
had been left alone, he ran rapidly back to the train for one moment
more with Susy. Panting and a little frightened, he reached Mrs.
Peyton's car.

"Goodness! You're not gone yet," said Mrs. Peyton sharply. "Do you want
to lose the stage?"

An instant before, in his loneliness, he might have answered, "Yes."
But under the cruel sting of Mrs. Peyton's evident annoyance at his
reappearance he felt his legs suddenly tremble, and his voice left him.
He did not dare to look at Susy. But her voice rose comfortably from the
depths of the wagon where she was sitting.

"The stage will be gone away, Kla'uns."

She too! Shame at his foolish weakness sent the yearning blood that had
settled round his heart flying back into his face.

"I was looking for--for--for Jim, ma'am," he said at last, boldly.

He saw a look of disgust pass over Mrs. Peyton's face, and felt a
malicious satisfaction as he turned and ran back to the stage. But here,
to his surprise, he actually found Jim, whom he really hadn't thought
of, darkly watching the last strapping of luggage. With a manner
calculated to convey the impression to the other passengers that he was
parting from a brother criminal, probably on his way to a state prison,
Jim shook hands gloomily with Clarence, and eyed the other passengers
furtively between his mated locks.

"Ef ye hear o' anythin' happenin', ye'll know what's up," he said, in a
low, hoarse, but perfectly audible whisper. "Me and them's bound to part
company afore long. Tell the fellows at Deadman's Gulch to look out for
me at any time."

Although Clarence was not going to Deadman's Gulch, knew nothing of it,
and had a faint suspicion that Jim was equally ignorant, yet as one or
two of the passengers glanced anxiously at the demure, gray-eyed boy
who seemed booked for such a baleful destination, he really felt the
half-delighted, half-frightened consciousness that he was starting in
life under fascinating immoral pretenses. But the forward spring of the
fine-spirited horses, the quickened motion, the glittering sunlight, and
the thought that he really was leaving behind him all the shackles of
dependence and custom, and plunging into a life of freedom, drove
all else from his mind. He turned at last from this hopeful, blissful
future, and began to examine his fellow passengers with boyish
curiosity. Wedged in between two silent men on the front seat, one of
whom seemed a farmer, and the other, by his black attire, a professional
man, Clarence was finally attracted by a black-mantled, dark-haired,
bonnetless woman on the back seat, whose attention seemed to be
monopolized by the jocular gallantries of her companions and the two
men before her in the middle seat. From her position he could see little
more than her dark eyes, which occasionally seemed to meet his frank
curiosity in an amused sort of way, but he was chiefly struck by the
pretty foreign sound of her musical voice, which was unlike anything
he had ever heard before, and--alas for the inconstancy of youth--much
finer than Mrs. Peyton's. Presently his farmer companion, casting a
patronizing glance on Clarence's pea-jacket and brass buttons, said
cheerily--

"Jest off a voyage, sonny?"

"No, sir," stammered Clarence; "I came across the plains."

"Then I reckon that's the rig-out for the crew of a prairie schooner,
eh?" There was a laugh at this which perplexed Clarence. Observing it,
the humorist kindly condescended to explain that "prairie schooner" was
the current slang for an emigrant wagon.

"I couldn't," explained Clarence, naively looking at the dark eyes on
the back seat, "get any clothes at Stockton but these; I suppose the
folks didn't think there'd ever be boys in California."

The simplicity of this speech evidently impressed the others, for
the two men in the middle seats turned at a whisper from the lady and
regarded him curiously. Clarence blushed slightly and became silent.
Presently the vehicle began to slacken its speed. They were ascending
a hill; on either bank grew huge cottonwoods, from which occasionally
depended a beautiful scarlet vine.

"Ah! eet ees pretty," said the lady, nodding her black-veiled head
towards it. "Eet is good in ze hair."

One of the men made an awkward attempt to clutch a spray from the
window. A brilliant inspiration flashed upon Clarence. When the stage
began the ascent of the next hill, following the example of an outside
passenger, he jumped down to walk. At the top of the hill he rejoined
the stage, flushed and panting, but carrying a small branch of the vine
in his scratched hands. Handing it to the man on the middle seat, he
said, with grave, boyish politeness--"Please--for the lady."

A slight smile passed over the face of Clarence's neighbors. The
bonnetless woman nodded a pleasant acknowledgment, and coquettishly
wound the vine in her glossy hair. The dark man at his side, who hadn't
spoken yet, turned to Clarence dryly.

"If you're goin' to keep up this gait, sonny, I reckon ye won't find
much trouble gettin' a man's suit to fit you by the time you reach
Sacramento."

Clarence didn't quite understand him, but noticed that a singular
gravity seemed to overtake the two jocular men on the middle seat, and
the lady looked out of the window. He came to the conclusion that he had
made a mistake about alluding to his clothes and his size. He must try
and behave more manly. That opportunity seemed to be offered two hours
later, when the stage stopped at a wayside hotel or restaurant.

Two or three passengers had got down to refresh themselves at the bar.
His right and left hand neighbors were, however, engaged in a drawling
conversation on the comparative merits of San Francisco sandhill
and water lots; the jocular occupants of the middle seat were still
engrossed with the lady. Clarence slipped out of the stage and entered
the bar-room with some ostentation. The complete ignoring of his person
by the barkeeper and his customers, however, somewhat disconcerted him.
He hesitated a moment, and then returned gravely to the stage door and
opened it.

"Would you mind taking a drink with me, sir?" said Clarence politely,
addressing the farmer-looking passenger who had been most civil to him.
A dead silence followed. The two men on the middle seat faced entirely
around to gaze at him.

"The Commodore asks if you'll take a drink with him," explained one of
the men to Clarence's friend with the greatest seriousness.

"Eh? Oh, yes, certainly," returned that gentleman, changing his
astonished expression to one of the deepest gravity, "seeing it's the
Commodore."

"And perhaps you and your friend will join, too?" said Clarence timidly
to the passenger who had explained; "and you too, sir?" he added to the
dark man.

"Really, gentlemen, I don't see how we can refuse," said the latter,
with the greatest formality, and appealing to the others. "A compliment
of this kind from our distinguished friend is not to be taken lightly."

"I have observed, sir, that the Commodore's head is level," returned the
other man with equal gravity.

Clarence could have wished they had not treated his first hospitable
effort quite so formally, but as they stepped from the coach with
unbending faces he led them, a little frightened, into the bar-room.
Here, unfortunately, as he was barely able to reach over the counter,
the barkeeper would have again overlooked him but for a quick glance
from the dark man, which seemed to change even the barkeeper's
perfunctory smiling face into supernatural gravity.

"The Commodore is standing treat," said the dark man, with unbroken
seriousness, indicating Clarence, and leaning back with an air of
respectful formality. "I will take straight whiskey. The Commodore,
on account of just changing climate, will, I believe, for the present
content himself with lemon soda."

Clarence had previously resolved to take whiskey, like the others, but
a little doubtful of the politeness of countermanding his guest's
order, and perhaps slightly embarrassed by the fact that all the other
customers seemed to have gathered round him and his party with equally
immovable faces, he said hurriedly:

"Lemon soda for me, please."

"The Commodore," said the barkeeper with impassive features, as he bent
forward and wiped the counter with professional deliberation, "is right.
No matter how much a man may be accustomed all his life to liquor, when
he is changing climate, gentlemen, he says 'Lemon soda for me' all the
time."

"Perhaps," said Clarence, brightening, "you will join too?"

"I shall be proud on this occasion, sir."

"I think," said the tall man, still as ceremoniously unbending as
before, "that there can be but one toast here, gentlemen. I give you the
health of the Commodore. May his shadow never be less."

The health was drunk solemnly. Clarence felt his cheeks tingle and
in his excitement drank his own health with the others. Yet he was
disappointed that there was not more joviality; he wondered if men
always drank together so stiffly. And it occurred to him that it would
be expensive. Nevertheless, he had his purse all ready ostentatiously
in his hand; in fact, the paying for it out of his own money was not
the least manly and independent pleasure he had promised himself. "How
much?" he asked, with an affectation of carelessness.

The barkeeper cast his eye professionally over the barroom. "I think you
said treats for the crowd; call it twenty dollars to make even change."

Clarence's heart sank. He had heard already of the exaggeration
of California prices. Twenty dollars! It was half his fortune.
Nevertheless, with an heroic effort, he controlled himself, and with
slightly nervous fingers counted out the money. It struck him, however,
as curious, not to say ungentlemanly, that the bystanders craned their
necks over his shoulder to look at the contents of his purse, although
some slight explanation was offered by the tall man.

"The Commodore's purse, gentlemen, is really a singular one. Permit me,"
he said, taking it from Clarence's hand with great politeness. "It is
one of the new pattern, you observe, quite worthy of inspection." He
handed it to a man behind him, who in turn handed it to another, while
a chorus of "suthin quite new," "the latest style," followed it in its
passage round the room, and indicated to Clarence its whereabouts.
It was presently handed back to the barkeeper, who had begged also to
inspect it, and who, with an air of scrupulous ceremony insisted upon
placing it himself in Clarence's side pocket, as if it were an
important part of his function. The driver here called "all aboard."
The passengers hurriedly reseated themselves, and the episode abruptly
ended. For, to Clarence's surprise, these attentive friends of a moment
ago at once became interested in the views of a new passenger concerning
the local politics of San Francisco, and he found himself utterly
forgotten. The bonnetless woman had changed her position, and her head
was no longer visible. The disillusion and depression that overcame him
suddenly were as complete as his previous expectations and hopefulness
had been extravagant. For the first time his utter unimportance in
the world and his inadequacy to this new life around him came upon him
crushingly.

The heat and jolting of the stage caused him to fall into a slight
slumber and when he awoke he found his two neighbors had just got out
at a wayside station. They had evidently not cared to waken him to say
"Good-by." From the conversation of the other passengers he learned that
the tall man was a well-known gambler, and the one who looked like a
farmer was a ship captain who had become a wealthy merchant. Clarence
thought he understood now why the latter had asked him if he came off a
voyage, and that the nickname of "Commodore" given to him, Clarence, was
some joke intended for the captain's understanding. He missed them, for
he wanted to talk to them about his relative at Sacramento, whom he was
now so soon to see. At last, between sleeping and waking, the end of
his journey was unexpectedly reached. It was dark, but, being "steamer
night," the shops and business places were still open, and Mr. Peyton
had arranged that the stage-driver should deliver Clarence at the
address of his relative in "J Street,"--an address which Clarence had
luckily remembered. But the boy was somewhat discomfited to find that
it was a large office or banking-house. He, however, descended from the
stage, and with his small pack in his hand entered the building as the
stage drove off, and, addressing one of the busy clerks, asked for "Mr.
Jackson Brant."

There was no such person in the office. There never had been any such
person. The bank had always occupied that building. Was there not some
mistake in the number? No; the name, number, and street had been deeply
engrafted in the boy's recollection. Stop! it might be the name of a
customer who had given his address at the bank. The clerk who made this
suggestion disappeared promptly to make inquiries in the counting-room.
Clarence, with a rapidly beating heart, awaited him. The clerk returned.
There was no such name on the books. Jackson Brant was utterly unknown
to every one in the establishment.

For an instant the counter against which the boy was leaning seemed to
yield with his weight; he was obliged to steady himself with both hands
to keep from falling. It was not his disappointment, which was terrible;
it was not a thought of his future, which seemed hopeless; it was not
his injured pride at appearing to have willfully deceived Mr. Peyton,
which was more dreadful than all else; but it was the sudden, sickening
sense that HE himself had been deceived, tricked, and fooled! For it
flashed upon him for the first time that the vague sense of wrong which
had always haunted him was this--that this was the vile culmination of
a plan to GET RID OF HIM, and that he had been deliberately lost and led
astray by his relatives as helplessly and completely as a useless cat or
dog!

Perhaps there was something of this in his face, for the clerk, staring
at him, bade him sit down for a moment, and again vanished into the
mysterious interior. Clarence had no conception how long he was absent,
or indeed anything but his own breathless thoughts, for he was conscious
of wondering afterwards why the clerk was leading him through a door in
the counter into an inner room of many desks, and again through a glass
door into a smaller office, where a preternaturally busy-looking man
sat writing at a desk. Without looking up, but pausing only to apply a
blotting-pad to the paper before him, the man said crisply--

"So you've been consigned to some one who don't seem to turn up, and
can't be found, eh? Never mind that," as Clarence laid Peyton's letter
before him. "Can't read it now. Well, I suppose you want to be shipped
back to Stockton?"

"No!" said the boy, recovering his voice with an effort.

"Eh, that's business, though. Know anybody here?"

"Not a living soul; that's why they sent me," said the boy, in sudden
reckless desperation. He was the more furious that he knew the tears
were standing in his eyes.

The idea seemed to strike the man amusingly. "Looks a little like it,
don't it?" he said, smiling grimly at the paper before him. "Got any
money?"

"A little."

"How much?"

"About twenty dollars," said Clarence hesitatingly. The man opened a
drawer at his side, mechanically, for he did not raise his eyes, and
took out two ten-dollar gold pieces. "I'll go twenty better," he said,
laying them down on the desk. "That'll give you a chance to look around.
Come back here, if you don't see your way clear." He dipped his pen into
the ink with a significant gesture as if closing the interview.

Clarence pushed back the coin. "I'm not a beggar," he said doggedly.

The man this time raised his head and surveyed the boy with two keen
eyes. "You're not, hey? Well, do I look like one?"

"No," stammered Clarence, as he glanced into the man's haughty eyes.

"Yet, if I were in your fix, I'd take that money and be glad to get it."

"If you'll let me pay you back again," said Clarence, a little ashamed,
and considerably frightened at his implied accusation of the man before
him.

"You can," said the man, bending over his desk again.

Clarence took up the money and awkwardly drew out his purse. But it was
the first time he had touched it since it was returned to him in the
bar-room, and it struck him that it was heavy and full--indeed, so
full that on opening it a few coins rolled out on to the floor. The man
looked up abruptly.

"I thought you said you had only twenty dollars?" he remarked grimly.

"Mr. Peyton gave me forty," returned Clarence, stupefied and blushing.
"I spent twenty dollars for drinks at the bar--and," he stammered,
"I--I--I don't know how the rest came here."

"You spent twenty dollars for DRINKS?" said the man, laying down his
pen, and leaning back in his chair to gaze at the boy.

"Yes--that is--I treated some gentlemen of the stage, sir, at Davidson's
Crossing."

"Did you treat the whole stage company?"

"No, sir, only about four or five--and the bar-keeper. But everything's
so dear in California. I know that."

"Evidently. But it don't seem to make much difference with YOU," said
the man, glancing at the purse.

"They wanted my purse to look at," said Clarence hurriedly, "and that's
how the thing happened. Somebody put HIS OWN MONEY back into MY purse by
accident."

"Of course," said the man grimly.

"Yes, that's the reason," said Clarence, a little relieved, but somewhat
embarrassed by the man's persistent eyes.

"Then, of course," said the other quietly, "you don't require my twenty
dollars now."

"But," returned Clarence hesitatingly, "this isn't MY money. I must
find out who it belongs to, and give it back again. Perhaps," he added
timidly, "I might leave it here with you, and call for it when I find
the man, or send him here."

With the greatest gravity he here separated the surplus from what was
left of Peyton's gift and the twenty dollars he had just received. The
balance unaccounted for was forty dollars. He laid it on the desk before
the man, who, still looking at him, rose and opened the door.

"Mr. Reed."

The clerk who had shown Clarence in appeared.

"Open an account with--" He stopped and turned interrogatively to
Clarence.

"Clarence Brant," said Clarence, coloring with excitement.

"With Clarence Brant. Take that deposit"--pointing to the money--"and
give him a receipt." He paused as the clerk retired with a wondering
gaze at the money, looked again at Clarence, said, "I think YOU'LL do,"
and reentered the private office, closing the door behind him.

I hope it will not be deemed inconceivable that Clarence, only a few
moments before crushed with bitter disappointment and the hopeless
revelation of his abandonment by his relatives, now felt himself lifted
up suddenly into an imaginary height of independence and manhood. He was
leaving the bank, in which he stood a minute before a friendless boy,
not as a successful beggar, for this important man had disclaimed the
idea, but absolutely as a customer! a depositor! a business man like
the grown-up clients who were thronging the outer office, and before the
eyes of the clerk who had pitied him! And he, Clarence, had been spoken
to by this man, whose name he now recognized as the one that was on the
door of the building--a man of whom his fellow-passengers had spoken
with admiring envy--a banker famous in all California! Will it be deemed
incredible that this imaginative and hopeful boy, forgetting all else,
the object of his visit, and even the fact that he considered this
money was not his own, actually put his hat a little on one side as he
strolled out on his way to the streets and prospective fortune?

Two hours later the banker had another visitor. It chanced to be the
farmer-looking man who had been Clarence's fellow-passenger. Evidently a
privileged person, he was at once ushered as "Captain Stevens" into the
presence of the banker. At the end of a familiar business interview the
captain asked carelessly--

"Any letters for me?"

The busy banker pointed with his pen to the letter "S" in a row of
alphabetically labeled pigeon-holes against the wall. The captain,
having selected his correspondence, paused with a letter in his hand.

"Look here, Carden, there are letters here for some chap called 'John
Silsbee.' They were here when I called, ten weeks ago."

"Well?"

"That's the name of that Pike County man who was killed by Injins in the
plains. The 'Frisco papers had all the particulars last night; may be
it's for that fellow. It hasn't got a postmark. Who left it here?"

Mr. Carden summoned a clerk. It appeared that the letter had been left
by a certain Brant Fauquier, to be called for.

Captain Stevens smiled. "Brant's been too busy dealin' faro to think of
'em agin, and since that shootin' affair at Angels' I hear he's skipped
to the southern coast somewhere. Cal Johnson, his old chum, was in the
up stage from Stockton this afternoon."

"Did you come by the up stage from Stockton this afternoon?" said
Carden, looking up.

"Yes, as far as Ten-mile Station--rode the rest of the way here."

"Did you notice a queer little old-fashioned kid--about so high--like a
runaway school-boy?"

"Did I? By G--d, sir, he treated me to drinks."

Carden jumped from his chair. "Then he wasn't lying!"

"No! We let him do it; but we made it good for the little chap
afterwards. Hello! What's up?"

But Mr. Carden was already in the outer office beside the clerk who had
admitted Clarence.

"You remember that boy Brant who was here?"

"Yes, sir."

"Where did he go?"

"Don't know, sir."

"Go and find him somewhere and somehow. Go to all the hotels,
restaurants, and gin-mills near here, and hunt him up. Take some one
with you, if you can't do it alone. Bring him back here, quick!"

It was nearly midnight when the clerk fruitlessly returned. It was the
fierce high noon of "steamer nights"; light flashed brilliantly from
shops, counting-houses, drinking-saloons, and gambling-hells. The
streets were yet full of eager, hurrying feet--swift of fortune,
ambition, pleasure, or crime. But from among these deeper harsher
footfalls the echo of the homeless boy's light, innocent tread seemed to
have died out forever.




CHAPTER VIII


When Clarence was once more in the busy street before the bank, it
seemed clear to his boyish mind that, being now cast adrift upon the
world and responsible to no one, there was no reason why he should not
at once proceed to the nearest gold mines! The idea of returning to
Mr. Peyton and Susy, as a disowned and abandoned outcast, was not to
be thought of. He would purchase some kind of an outfit, such as he had
seen the miners carry, and start off as soon as he had got his supper.
But although one of his most delightful anticipations had been the
unfettered freedom of ordering a meal at a restaurant, on entering the
first one he found himself the object of so much curiosity, partly
from his size and partly from his dress, which the unfortunate boy was
beginning to suspect was really preposterous, and he turned away with a
stammered excuse, and did not try another. Further on he found a baker's
shop, where he refreshed himself with some gingerbread and lemon soda.
At an adjacent grocery he purchased some herrings, smoked beef, and
biscuits, as future provisions for his "pack" or kit. Then began his
real quest for an outfit. In an hour he had secured--ostensibly for some
friend, to avoid curious inquiry--a pan, a blanket, a shovel and
pick, all of which he deposited at the baker's, his unostentatious
headquarters, with the exception of a pair of disguising high boots that
half hid his sailor trousers, which he kept to put on at the last. Even
to his inexperience the cost of these articles seemed enormous; when
his purchases were complete, of his entire capital scarcely four dollars
remained! Yet in the fond illusions of boyhood these rude appointments
seemed possessed of far more value than the gold he had given in
exchange for them, and he had enjoyed a child's delight in testing the
transforming magic of money.

Meanwhile, the feverish contact of the crowded street had, strange
to say, increased his loneliness, while the ruder joviality of its
dissipations began to fill him with vague uneasiness. The passing
glimpse of dancing halls and gaudily whirled figures that seemed only
feminine in their apparel; the shouts and boisterous choruses from
concert rooms; the groups of drunken roisterers that congregated around
the doors of saloons or, hilariously charging down the streets, elbowed
him against the wall, or humorously insisted on his company, discomposed
and frightened him. He had known rude companionship before, but it
was serious, practical, and under control. There was something in this
vulgar degradation of intellect and power--qualities that Clarence had
always boyishly worshiped--which sickened and disillusioned him. Later
on a pistol shot in a crowd beyond, the rush of eager men past him, the
disclosure of a limp and helpless figure against the wall, the closing
of the crowd again around it, although it stirred him with a fearful
curiosity, actually shocked him less hopelessly than their brutish
enjoyments and abandonment.

It was in one of these rushes that he had been crushed against a
swinging door, which, giving way to his pressure, disclosed to his
wondering eyes a long, glitteringly adorned, and brightly lit room,
densely filled with a silent, attentive throng in attitudes of decorous
abstraction and preoccupation, that even the shouts and tumult at its
very doors could not disturb. Men of all ranks and conditions, plainly
or elaborately clad, were grouped together under this magic spell of
silence and attention. The tables before them were covered with cards
and loose heaps of gold and silver. A clicking, the rattling of an ivory
ball, and the frequent, formal, lazy reiteration of some unintelligible
sentence was all that he heard. But by a sudden instinct he UNDERSTOOD
it all. It was a gambling saloon!

Encouraged by the decorous stillness, and the fact that everybody
appeared too much engaged to notice him, the boy drew timidly beside
one of the tables. It was covered with a number of cards, on which were
placed certain sums of money. Looking down, Clarence saw that he was
standing before a card that as yet had nothing on it. A single player at
his side looked up, glanced at Clarence curiously, and then placed half
a dozen gold pieces on the vacant card. Absorbed in the general aspect
of the room and the players, Clarence did not notice that his neighbor
won twice, and even THRICE, upon that card. Becoming aware, however,
that the player while gathering in his gains, was smilingly regarding
him he moved in some embarrassment to the other end of the table, where
there seemed another gap in the crowd. It so chanced that there was also
another vacant card. The previous neighbor of Clarence instantly shoved
a sum of money across the table on the vacant card and won! At this the
other players began to regard Clarence singularly, one or two of the
spectators smiled, and the boy, coloring, moved awkwardly away. But his
sleeve was caught by the successful player, who, detaining him gently,
put three gold pieces into his hand.

"That's YOUR share, sonny," he whispered.

"Share--for what?" stammered the astounded Clarence.

"For bringing me 'the luck,'" said the man.

Clarence stared. "Am I--to--to play with it?" he said, glancing at the
coins and then at the table, in ignorance of the stranger's meaning.

"No, no!" said the man hurriedly, "don't do that. You'll lose it, sonny,
sure! Don't you see, YOU BRING THE LUCK TO OTHERS, not to yourself. Keep
it, old man, and run home!"

"I don't want it! I won't have it!" said Clarence with a swift
recollection of the manipulation of his purse that morning, and a sudden
distrust of all mankind.

"There!" He turned back to the table and laid the money on the first
vacant card he saw. In another moment, as it seemed to him, it was raked
away by the dealer. A sense of relief came over him.

"There!" said the man, with an awed voice and a strange, fatuous look
in his eye. "What did I tell you? You see, it's allus so! Now," he added
roughly, "get up and get out o' this, afore you lose the boots and shirt
off ye."

Clarence did not wait for a second command. With another glance round
the room, he began to make his way through the crowd towards the front.
But in that parting glance he caught a glimpse of a woman presiding over
a "wheel of fortune" in a corner, whose face seemed familiar. He looked
again, timidly. In spite of an extraordinary head-dress or crown that
she wore as the "Goddess of Fortune," he recognized, twisted in its
tinsel, a certain scarlet vine which he had seen before; in spite of the
hoarse formula which she was continually repeating, he recognized the
foreign accent. It was the woman of the stage-coach! With a sudden dread
that she might recognize him, and likewise demand his services "for
luck," he turned and fled.

Once more in the open air, there came upon him a vague loathing
and horror of the restless madness and feverish distraction of this
half-civilized city. It was the more powerful that it was vague, and the
outcome of some inward instinct. He found himself longing for the pure
air and sympathetic loneliness of the plains and wilderness; he began to
yearn for the companionship of his humble associates--the teamster, the
scout Gildersleeve, and even Jim Hooker. But above all and before all
was the wild desire to get away from these maddening streets and
their bewildering occupants. He ran back to the baker's, gathered his
purchases together, took advantage of a friendly doorway to strap them
on his boyish shoulders, slipped into a side street, and struck out at
once for the outskirts.

It had been his first intention to take stage to the nearest mining
district, but the diminution of his small capital forbade that outlay,
and he decided to walk there by the highroad, of whose general direction
he had informed himself. In half an hour the lights of the flat,
struggling city, and their reflection in the shallow, turbid river
before it, had sunk well behind him. The air was cool and soft; a yellow
moon swam in the slight haze that rose above the tules; in the distance
a few scattered cottonwoods and sycamores marked like sentinels the
road. When he had walked some distance he sat down beneath one of them
to make a frugal supper from the dry rations in his pack, but in the
absence of any spring he was forced to quench his thirst with a glass of
water in a wayside tavern. Here he was good-humoredly offered
something stronger, which he declined, and replied to certain curious
interrogations by saying that he expected to overtake his friends in a
wagon further on. A new distrust of mankind had begun to make the boy
an adept in innocent falsehood, the more deceptive as his careless,
cheerful manner, the result of his relief at leaving the city, and his
perfect ease in the loving companionship of night and nature, certainly
gave no indication of his homelessness and poverty.

It was long past midnight, when, weary in body, but still hopeful and
happy in mind, he turned off the dusty road into a vast rolling expanse
of wild oats, with the same sense of security of rest as a traveler to
his inn. Here, completely screened from view by the tall stalks of grain
that rose thickly around him to the height of a man's shoulder, he beat
down a few of them for a bed, on which he deposited his blanket. Placing
his pack for a pillow, he curled himself up in his blanket, and speedily
fell asleep.

He awoke at sunrise, refreshed, invigorated, and hungry. But he was
forced to defer his first self-prepared breakfast until he had reached
water, and a less dangerous place than the wild-oat field to build
his first camp fire. This he found a mile further on, near some dwarf
willows on the bank of a half-dry stream. Of his various efforts to
prepare his first meal, the fire was the most successful; the coffee
was somewhat too substantially thick, and the bacon and herring lacked
definiteness of quality from having been cooked in the same vessel.
In this boyish picnic he missed Susy, and recalled, perhaps a little
bitterly, her coldness at parting. But the novelty of his situation, the
brilliant sunshine and sense of freedom, and the road already awakening
to dusty life with passing teams, dismissed everything but the future
from his mind. Readjusting his pack, he stepped on cheerily. At noon he
was overtaken by a teamster, who in return for a match to light his pipe
gave him a lift of a dozen miles. It is to be feared that Clarence's
account of himself was equally fanciful with his previous story, and
that the teamster parted from him with a genuine regret, and a hope that
he would soon be overtaken by his friends along the road. "And mind that
you ain't such a fool agin to let 'em make you tote their dod-blasted
tools fur them!" he added unsuspectingly, pointing to Clarence's mining
outfit. Thus saved the heaviest part of the day's journey, for the
road was continually rising from the plains during the last six miles,
Clarence was yet able to cover a considerable distance on foot before
he halted for supper. Here he was again fortunate. An empty lumber
team watering at the same spring, its driver offered to take Clarence's
purchases--for the boy had profited by his late friend's suggestion to
personally detach himself from his equipment--to Buckeye Mills for a
dollar, which would also include a "shakedown passage" for himself on
the floor of the wagon. "I reckon you've been foolin' away in Sacramento
the money yer parents give yer for return stage fare, eh? Don't
lie, sonny," he added grimly, as the now artful Clarence smiled
diplomatically, "I've been thar myself!" Luckily, the excuse that he was
"tired and sleepy" prevented further dangerous questioning, and the boy
was soon really in deep slumber on the wagon floor.

He awoke betimes to find himself already in the mountains. Buckeye
Mills was a straggling settlement, and Clarence prudently stopped any
embarrassing inquiry from his friend by dropping off the wagon with
his equipment as they entered it, and hurriedly saying "Good-by" from a
crossroad through the woods. He had learned that the nearest mining camp
was five miles away, and its direction was indicated by a long wooden
"flume," or water-way, that alternately appeared and disappeared on the
flank of the mountain opposite. The cooler and drier air, the grateful
shadow of pine and bay, and the spicy balsamic odors that everywhere
greeted him, thrilled and exhilarated him. The trail plunging sometimes
into an undisturbed forest, he started the birds before him like a
flight of arrows through its dim recesses; at times he hung breathlessly
over the blue depths of canyons where the same forests were repeated a
thousand feet below. Towards noon he struck into a rude road--evidently
the thoroughfare of the locality--and was surprised to find that it,
as well as the adjacent soil wherever disturbed, was a deep Indian red.
Everywhere, along its sides, powdering the banks and boles of trees with
its ruddy stain, in mounds and hillocks of piled dirt on the road, or
in liquid paint-like pools, when a trickling stream had formed a gutter
across it, there was always the same deep sanguinary color. Once or
twice it became more vivid in contrast with the white teeth of quartz
that peeped through it from the hillside or crossed the road in crumbled
strata. One of those pieces Clarence picked up with a quickening pulse.
It was veined and streaked with shining mica and tiny glittering cubes
of mineral that LOOKED like gold!

The road now began to descend towards a winding stream, shrunken by
drought and ditching, that glared dazzingly in the sunlight from its
white bars of sand, or glistened in shining sheets and channels. Along
its banks, and even encroaching upon its bed, were scattered a few mud
cabins, strange-looking wooden troughs and gutters, and here and there,
glancing through the leaves, the white canvas of tents. The stumps of
felled trees and blackened spaces, as of recent fires, marked the stream
on either side. A sudden sense of disappointment overcame Clarence. It
looked vulgar, common, and worse than all--FAMILIAR. It was like the
unlovely outskirts of a dozen other prosaic settlements he had seen in
less romantic localities. In that muddy red stream, pouring out of a
wooden gutter, in which three or four bearded, slouching, half-naked
figures were raking like chiffonniers, there was nothing to suggest
the royal metal. Yet he was so absorbed in gazing at the scene, and had
walked so rapidly during the past few minutes, that he was startled, on
turning a sharp corner of the road, to come abruptly upon an outlying
dwelling.

It was a nondescript building, half canvas and half boards. The interior
seen through the open door was fitted up with side shelves, a
counter carelessly piled with provisions, groceries, clothing, and
hardware--with no attempt at display or even ordinary selection--and a
table, on which stood a demijohn and three or four dirty glasses. Two
roughly dressed men, whose long, matted beards and hair left only their
eyes and lips visible in the tangled hirsute wilderness below their
slouched hats, were leaning against the opposite sides of the doorway,
smoking. Almost thrown against them in the rapid momentum of his
descent, Clarence halted violently.

"Well, sonny, you needn't capsize the shanty," said the first man,
without taking his pipe from his lips.

"If yer looking fur yer ma, she and yer Aunt Jane hev jest gone over to
Parson Doolittle's to take tea," observed the second man lazily. "She
allowed that you'd wait."

"I'm--I'm--going to--to the mines," explained Clarence, with some
hesitation. "I suppose this is the way."

The two men took their pipes from their lips, looked at each other,
completely wiped every vestige of expression from their faces with the
back of their hands, turned their eyes into the interior of the cabin,
and said, "Will yer come yer, now WILL yer?" Thus adjured, half a dozen
men, also bearded and carrying pipes in their mouths, straggled out of
the shanty, and, filing in front of it, squatted down, with their backs
against the boards, and gazed comfortably at the boy. Clarence began to
feel uneasy.

"I'll give," said one, taking out his pipe and grimly eying Clarence, "a
hundred dollars for him as he stands."

"And seein' as he's got that bran-new rig-out o' tools," said another,
"I'll give a hundred and fifty--and the drinks. I've been," he added
apologetically, "wantin' sunthin' like this a long time."

"Well, gen'lemen," said the man who had first spoken to him, "lookin'
at him by and large; takin' in, so to speak, the gin'ral gait of him in
single harness; bearin' in mind the perfect freshness of him, and the
coolness and size of his cheek--the easy downyness, previousness, and
utter don't-care-a-damnativeness of his coming yer, I think two hundred
ain't too much for him, and we'll call it a bargain."

Clarence's previous experience of this grim, smileless Californian chaff
was not calculated to restore his confidence. He drew away from the
cabin, and repeated doggedly, "I asked you if this was the way to the
mines."

"It ARE the mines, and these yere are the miners," said the first
speaker gravely. "Permit me to interdoose 'em. This yere's Shasta Jim,
this yere's Shotcard Billy, this is Nasty Bob, and this Slumgullion
Dick. This yere's the Dook o' Chatham Street, the Livin' Skeleton, and
me!"

"May we ask, fair young sir," said the Living Skeleton, who, however,
seemed in fairly robust condition, "whence came ye on the wings of the
morning, and whose Marble Halls ye hev left desolate?"

"I came across the plains, and got into Stockton two days ago on Mr.
Peyton's train," said Clarence, indignantly, seeing no reason now to
conceal anything. "I came to Sacramento to find my cousin, who isn't
living there any more. I don't see anything funny in THAT! I came here
to the mines to dig gold--because---because Mr. Silsbee, the man who was
to bring me here and might have found my cousin for me, was killed by
Indians."

"Hold up, sonny. Let me help ye," said the first speaker, rising to his
feet. "YOU didn't get killed by Injins because you got lost out of a
train with Silsbee's infant darter. Peyton picked you up while you was
takin' care of her, and two days arter you kem up to the broken-down
Silsbee wagons, with all the folks lyin' there slartered."

"Yes, sir," said Clarence, breathlessly with astonishment.

"And," continued the man, putting his hand gravely to his head as if
to assist his memory, "when you was all alone on the plains with that
little child you saw one of those redskins, as near to you as I be,
watchin' the train, and you didn't breathe or move while he was there?"

"Yes, sir," said Clarence eagerly.

"And you was shot at by Peyton, he thinkin' you was an Injun in the
mesquite grass? And you once shot a buffalo that had been pitched with
you down a gully--all by yourself?"

"Yes," said Clarence, crimson with wonder and pleasure. "You know me,
then?"

"Well, ye-e-es," said the man gravely, parting his mustache with his
fingers. "You see, YOU'VE BEEN HERE BEFORE."

"Before! Me?" repeated the astounded Clarence.

"Yes, before. Last night. You was taller then, and hadn't cut your hair.
You cursed a good deal more than you do now. You drank a man's share
of whiskey, and you borrowed fifty dollars to get to Sacramento with. I
reckon you haven't got it about you now, eh?"

Clarence's brain reeled in utter confusion and hopeless terror.

Was he going crazy, or had these cruel men learned his story from
his faithless friends, and this was a part of the plot? He staggered
forward, but the men had risen and quickly encircled him, as if to
prevent his escape. In vague and helpless desperation he gasped--

"What place is this?"

"Folks call it Deadman's Gulch."

Deadman's Gulch! A flash of intelligence lit up the boy's blind
confusion. Deadman's Gulch! Could it have been Jim Hooker who had really
run away, and had taken his name? He turned half-imploringly to the
first speaker.

"Wasn't he older than me, and bigger? Didn't he have a smooth, round
face and little eyes? Didn't he talk hoarse? Didn't he--" He stopped
hopelessly.

"Yes; oh, he wasn't a bit like you," said the man musingly. "Ye see,
that's the h-ll of it! You're altogether TOO MANY and TOO VARIOUS fur
this camp."

"I don't know who's been here before, or what they have said," said
Clarence desperately, yet even in that desperation retaining the dogged
loyalty to his old playmate, which was part of his nature. "I don't
know, and I don't care--there! I'm Clarence Brant of Kentucky; I started
in Silsbee's train from St. Jo, and I'm going to the mines, and you
can't stop me!"

The man who had first spoken started, looked keenly at Clarence, and
then turned to the others. The gentleman known as the living skeleton
had obtruded his huge bulk in front of the boy, and, gazing at him, said
reflectively, "Darned if it don't look like one of Brant's pups--sure!"

"Air ye any relation to Kernel Hamilton Brant of Looeyville?" asked the
first speaker.

Again that old question! Poor Clarence hesitated, despairingly. Was
he to go through the same cross-examination he had undergone with the
Peytons? "Yes," he said doggedly, "I am--but he's dead, and you know
it."

"Dead--of course." "Sartin." "He's dead." "The Kernel's planted," said
the men in chorus.

"Well, yes," reflected the Living Skeleton ostentatiously, as one who
spoke from experience. "Ham Brant's about as bony now as they make 'em."

"You bet! About the dustiest, deadest corpse you kin turn out,"
corroborated Slumgullion Dick, nodding his head gloomily to the others;
"in point o' fack, es a corpse, about the last one I should keer to go
huntin' fur."

"The Kernel's tech 'ud be cold and clammy," concluded the Duke of
Chatham Street, who had not yet spoken, "sure. But what did yer mammy
say about it? Is she gettin' married agin? Did SHE send ye here?"

It seemed to Clarence that the Duke of Chatham Street here received a
kick from his companions; but the boy repeated doggedly--

"I came to Sacramento to find my cousin, Jackson Brant; but he wasn't
there."

"Jackson Brant!" echoed the first speaker, glancing at the others. "Did
your mother say he was your cousin?"

"Yes," said Clarence wearily. "Good-by."

"Hullo, sonny, where are you going?"

"To dig gold," said the boy. "And you know you can't prevent me, if it
isn't on your claim. I know the law." He had heard Mr. Peyton discuss
it at Stockton, and he fancied that the men, who were whispering among
themselves, looked kinder than before, and as if they were no longer
"acting" to him. The first speaker laid his hand on his shoulder, and
said, "All right, come with me, and I'll show you where to dig."

"Who are you?" said Clarence. "You called yourself only 'me.'"

"Well, you can call me Flynn--Tom Flynn."

"And you'll show me where I can dig--myself?"

"I will."

"Do you know," said Clarence timidly, yet with a half-conscious smile,
"that I--I kinder bring luck?"

The man looked down upon him, and said gravely, but, as it struck
Clarence, with a new kind of gravity, "I believe you."

"Yes," said Clarence eagerly, as they walked along together, "I brought
luck to a man in Sacramento the other day." And he related with great
earnestness his experience in the gambling saloon. Not content with
that--the sealed fountains of his childish deep being broken up by
some mysterious sympathy--he spoke of his hospitable exploit with the
passengers at the wayside bar, of the finding of his Fortunatus purse
and his deposit at the bank. Whether that characteristic old-fashioned
reticence which had been such an important factor for good or ill in
his future had suddenly deserted him, or whether some extraordinary
prepossession in his companion had affected him, he did not know; but
by the time the pair had reached the hillside Flynn was in possession
of all the boy's history. On one point only was his reserve unshaken.
Conscious although he was of Jim Hooker's duplicity, he affected to
treat it as a comrade's joke.

They halted at last in the middle of an apparently fertile hillside.
Clarence shifted his shovel from his shoulders, unslung his pan, and
looked at Flynn. "Dig anywhere here, where you like," said his companion
carelessly, "and you'll be sure to find the color. Fill your pan with
the dirt, go to that sluice, and let the water run in on the top of the
pan--workin' it round so," he added, illustrating a rotary motion with
the vessel. "Keep doing that until all the soil is washed out of it, and
you have only the black sand at the bottom. Then work that the same way
until you see the color. Don't be afraid of washing the gold out of the
pan--you couldn't do it if you tried. There, I'll leave you here, and
you wait till I come back." With another grave nod and something like a
smile in the only visible part of his bearded face--his eyes--he strode
rapidly away.

Clarence did not lose time. Selecting a spot where the grass was less
thick, he broke through the soil and turned up two or three spadefuls of
red soil. When he had filled the pan and raised it to his shoulder, he
was astounded at its weight. He did not know that it was due to the red
precipitate of iron that gave it its color. Staggering along with his
burden to the running sluice, which looked like an open wooden gutter,
at the foot of the hill, he began to carefully carry out Flynn's
direction. The first dip of the pan in the running water carried off
half the contents of the pan in liquid paint-like ooze. For a moment he
gave way to boyish satisfaction in the sight and touch of this unctuous
solution, and dabbled his fingers in it. A few moments more of rinsing
and he came to the sediment of fine black sand that was beneath it.
Another plunge and swilling of water in the pan, and--could he believe
his eyes!--a few yellow tiny scales, scarcely larger than pins' heads,
glittered among the sand. He poured it off. But his companion was right;
the lighter sand shifted from side to side with the water, but the
glittering points remained adhering by their own tiny specific gravity
to the smooth surface of the bottom. It was "the color"--gold!

Clarence's heart seemed to give a great leap within him. A vision of
wealth, of independence, of power, sprang before his dazzled eyes,
and--a hand lightly touched him on the shoulder.

He started. In his complete preoccupation and excitement, he had not
heard the clatter of horse-hoofs, and to his amazement Flynn was already
beside him, mounted, and leading a second horse.

"You kin ride?" he said shortly.

"Yes" stammered Clarence; "but--"

"BUT--we've only got two hours to reach Buckeye Mills in time to catch
the down stage. Drop all that, jump up, and come with me!"

"But I've just found gold," said the boy excitedly.

"And I've just found your--cousin. Come!"

He spurred his horse across Clarence's scattered implements, half
helped, half lifted, the boy into the saddle of the second horse, and,
with a cut of his riata over the animal's haunches, the next moment they
were both galloping furiously away.




CHAPTER IX


Torn suddenly from his prospective future, but too much dominated by the
man beside him to protest, Clarence was silent until a rise in the road,
a few minutes later, partly abated their headlong speed, and gave him
chance to recover his breath and courage.

"Where is my cousin?" he asked.

"In the Southern county, two hundred miles from here."

"Are we going to him?"

"Yes."

They rode furiously forward again. It was nearly half an hour before
they came to a longer ascent. Clarence could see that Flynn was from
time to time examining him curiously under his slouched hat. This
somewhat embarrassed him, but in his singular confidence in the man no
distrust mingled with it.

"Ye never saw your--cousin?" he asked.

"No," said Clarence; "nor he me. I don't think he knew me much, any way.

"How old mout ye be, Clarence?"

"Eleven."

"Well, as you're suthin of a pup"--Clarence started, and recalled
Peyton's first criticism of him--"I reckon to tell ye suthin. Ye ain't
goin' to be skeert, or afeard, or lose yer sand, I kalkilate, for
skunkin' ain't in your breed. Well, wot ef I told ye that thish
yer--thish yer--COUSIN o' yours was the biggest devil onhung; that he'd
just killed a man, and had to lite out elsewhere, and THET'S why he
didn't show up in Sacramento--what if I told you that?"

Clarence felt that this was somehow a little too much. He was perfectly
truthful, and lifting his frank eyes to Flynn, he said,

"I should think you were talking a good deal like Jim Hooker!"

His companion stared, and suddenly reined up his horse; then, bursting
into a shout of laughter, he galloped ahead, from time to time shaking
his head, slapping his legs, and making the dim woods ring with his
boisterous mirth. Then as suddenly becoming thoughtful again, he rode on
rapidly for half an hour, only speaking to Clarence to urge him forward,
and assisting his progress by lashing the haunches of his horse.
Luckily, the boy was a good rider--a fact which Flynn seemed to
thoroughly appreciate--or he would have been unseated a dozen times.

At last the straggling sheds of Buckeye Mills came into softer purple
view on the opposite mountain. Then laying his hand on Clarence's
shoulder as he reined in at his side, Flynn broke the silence.

"There, boy," he said, wiping the mirthful tears from his eyes. "I was
only foolin'--only tryin' yer grit! This yer cousin I'm taking you to be
as quiet and soft-spoken and as old-fashioned ez you be. Why, he's
that wrapped up in books and study that he lives alone in a big adobe
rancherie among a lot o' Spanish, and he don't keer to see his own
countrymen! Why, he's even changed his name, and calles himself Don Juan
Robinson! But he's very rich; he owns three leagues of land and heaps of
cattle and horses, and," glancing approvingly at Clarence's seat in the
saddle, "I reckon you'll hev plenty of fun thar."

"But," hesitated Clarence, to whom this proposal seemed only a
repetition of Peyton's charitable offer, "I think I'd better stay here
and dig gold--WITH YOU."

"And I think you'd better not," said the man, with a gravity that was
very like a settled determination.

"But my cousin never came for me to Sacramento--nor sent, nor even
wrote," persisted Clarence indignantly.

"Not to YOU, boy; but he wrote to the man whom he reckoned would bring
you there--Jack Silsbee--and left it in the care of the bank. And
Silsbee, being dead, didn't come for the letter; and as you didn't ask
for it when you came, and didn't even mention Silsbee's name, that same
letter was sent back to your cousin through me, because the bank thought
we knew his whereabouts. It came to the gulch by an express rider,
whilst you were prospectin' on the hillside. Rememberin' your story, I
took the liberty of opening it, and found out that your cousin had told
Silsbee to bring you straight to him. So I'm only doin' now what Silsbee
would have done."

Any momentary doubt or suspicion that might have risen in Clarence's
mind vanished as he met his companion's steady and masterful eye.
Even his disappointment was forgotten in the charm of this new-found
friendship and protection. And as its outset had been marked by
an unusual burst of confidence on Clarence's part, the boy, in his
gratitude, now felt something of the timid shyness of a deeper feeling,
and once more became reticent.

They were in time to snatch a hasty meal at Buckeye Mills before the
stage arrived, and Clarence noticed that his friend, despite his rough
dress and lawless aspect, provoked a marked degree of respect from those
he met--in which, perhaps, a wholesome fear was mingled. It is certain
that the two best places in the stage were given up to them without
protest, and that a careless, almost supercilious invitation to drink
from Flynn was responded to with singular alacrity by all, including
even two fastidiously dressed and previously reserved passengers. I
am afraid that Clarence enjoyed this proof of his friend's singular
dominance with a boyish pride, and, conscious of the curious eyes of the
passengers, directed occasionally to himself, was somewhat ostentatious
in his familiarity with this bearded autocrat.

At noon the next day they left the stage at a wayside road station, and
Flynn briefly informed Clarence that they must again take horses. This
at first seemed difficult in that out-of-the-way settlement, where
they alone had stopped, but a whisper from the driver in the ear of
the station-master produced a couple of fiery mustangs, with the same
accompaniment of cautious awe and mystery. For the next two days they
traveled on horseback, resting by night at the lodgings of one or other
of Flynn's friends in the outskirts of a large town, where they arrived
in the darkness, and left before day. To any one more experienced
than the simple-minded boy it would have been evident that Flynn was
purposely avoiding the more traveled roads and conveyances; and when
they changed horses again the next day's ride was through an apparently
unbroken wilderness of scattered wood and rolling plain. Yet to
Clarence, with his pantheistic reliance and joyous sympathy with nature,
the change was filled with exhilarating pleasure. The vast seas of
tossing wild oats, the hillside still variegated with strange flowers,
the virgin freshness of untrodden woods and leafy aisles, whose floors
of moss or bark were undisturbed by human footprint, were a keen delight
and novelty. More than this, his quick eye, trained perceptions, and
frontier knowledge now stood him in good stead. His intuitive sense of
distance, instincts of woodcraft, and his unerring detection of those
signs, landmarks, and guideposts of nature, undistinguishable to aught
but birds and beasts and some children, were now of the greatest service
to his less favored companion. In this part of their strange pilgrimage
it was the boy who took the lead. Flynn, who during the past two days
seemed to have fallen into a mood of watchful reserve, nodded his
approbation. "This sort of thing's yer best holt, boy," he said. "Men
and cities ain't your little game."

At the next stopping-place Clarence had a surprise. They had again
entered a town at nightfall, and lodged with another friend of Flynn's
in rooms which from vague sounds appeared to be over a gambling saloon.
Clarence woke late in the morning, and, descending into the street to
mount for the day's journey, was startled to find that Flynn was not on
the other horse, but that a well-dressed and handsome stranger had taken
his place. But a laugh, and the familiar command, "Jump up, boy,"
made him look again. It WAS Flynn, but completely shaven of beard and
mustache, closely clipped of hair, and in a fastidiously cut suit of
black!

"Then you didn't know me?" said Flynn.

"Not till you spoke," replied Clarence.

"So much the better," said his friend sententiously, as he put spurs to
his horse. But as they cantered through the street, Clarence, who had
already become accustomed to the stranger's hirsute adornment, felt a
little more awe of him. The profile of the mouth and chin now exposed to
his sidelong glance was hard and stern, and slightly saturnine. Although
unable at the time to identify it with anybody he had ever known, it
seemed to the imaginative boy to be vaguely connected with some sad
experience. But the eyes were thoughtful and kindly, and the boy later
believed that if he had been more familiar with the face he would have
loved it better. For it was the last and only day he was to see it, as,
late that afternoon, after a dusty ride along more traveled highways,
they reached their journey's end.

It was a low-walled house, with red-tiled roofs showing against the dark
green of venerable pear and fig trees, and a square court-yard in the
centre, where they had dismounted. A few words in Spanish from Flynn to
one of the lounging peons admitted them to a wooden corridor, and thence
to a long, low room, which to Clarence's eyes seemed literally piled
with books and engravings. Here Flynn hurriedly bade him stay while he
sought the host in another part of the building. But Clarence did not
miss him; indeed, it may be feared, he forgot even the object of their
journey in the new sensations that suddenly thronged upon him, and the
boyish vista of the future that they seemed to open. He was dazed
and intoxicated. He had never seen so many books before; he had never
conceived of such lovely pictures. And yet in some vague way he thought
he must have dreamt of them at some time. He had mounted a chair, and
was gazing spellbound at an engraving of a sea-fight when he heard
Flynn's voice.

His friend had quietly reentered the room, in company with an oldish,
half-foreign-looking man, evidently his relation. With no helping
recollection, with no means of comparison beyond a vague idea that his
cousin might look like himself, Clarence stood hopelessly before him. He
had already made up his mind that he would have to go through the
usual cross-questioning in regard to his father and family; he had even
forlornly thought of inventing some innocent details to fill out his
imperfect and unsatisfactory recollection. But, glancing up, he was
surprised to find that his elderly cousin was as embarrassed as he was,
Flynn, as usual, masterfully interposed.

"Of course ye don't remember each other, and thar ain't much that either
of you knows about family matters, I reckon," he said grimly; "and as
your cousin calls himself Don Juan Robinson," he added to Clarence,
"it's just as well that you let 'Jackson Brant' slide. I know him better
than you, but you'll get used to him, and he to you, soon enough. At
least, you'd better," he concluded, with his singular gravity.

As he turned as if to leave the room with Clarence's embarrassed
relative--much to that gentleman's apparent relief--the boy looked up at
the latter and said timidly--

"May I look at those books?"

His cousin stopped, and glanced at him with the first expression of
interest he had shown.

"Ah, you read; you like books?"

"Yes," said Clarence. As his cousin remained still looking at him
thoughtfully, he added, "My hands are pretty clean, but I can wash them
first, if you like."

"You may look at them," said Don Juan smilingly; "and as they are
old books you can wash your hands afterwards." And, turning to Flynn
suddenly, with an air of relief, "I tell you what I'll do--I'll teach
him Spanish!"

They left the room together, and Clarence turned eagerly to the
shelves. They were old books, some indeed very old, queerly bound, and
worm-eaten. Some were in foreign languages, but others in clear, bold
English type, with quaint wood-cuts and illustrations. One seemed to
be a chronicle of battles and sieges, with pictured representations of
combatants spitted with arrows, cleanly lopped off in limb, or toppled
over distinctly by visible cannon-shot. He was deep in its perusal when
he heard the clatter of a horse's hoofs in the court-yard and the voice
of Flynn. He ran to the window, and was astonished to see his friend
already on horseback, taking leave of his host.

For one instant Clarence felt one of those sudden revulsions of feeling
common to his age, but which he had always timidly hidden under dogged
demeanor. Flynn, his only friend! Flynn, his only boyish confidant!
Flynn, his latest hero, was going away and forsaking him without a
word of parting! It was true that he had only agreed to take him to his
guardian, but still Flynn need not have left him without a word of hope
or encouragement! With any one else Clarence would probably have taken
refuge in his usual Indian stoicism, but the same feeling that had
impelled him to offer Flynn his boyish confidences on their first
meeting now overpowered him. He dropped his book, ran out into the
corridor, and made his way to the court-yard, just as Flynn galloped out
from the arch.

But the boy uttered a despairing shout that reached the rider. He drew
rein, wheeled, halted, and sat facing Clarence impatiently. To add
to Clarence's embarrassment his cousin had lingered in the corridor,
attracted by the interruption, and a peon, lounging in the archway,
obsequiously approached Flynn's bridle-rein. But the rider waved him
off, and, turning sternly to Clarence, said:--

"What's the matter now?"

"Nothing," said Clarence, striving to keep back the hot tears that rose
in his eyes. "But you were going away without saying 'good-by.' You've
been very kind to me, and--and--I want to thank you!"

A deep flush crossed Flynn's face. Then glancing suspiciously towards
the corridor, he said hurriedly,--

"Did HE send you?"

"No, I came myself. I heard you going."

"All right. Good-by." He leaned forward as if about to take Clarence's
outstretched hand, checked himself suddenly with a grim smile, and
taking from his pocket a gold coin handed it to the boy.

Clarence took it, tossed it with a proud gesture to the waiting peon,
who caught it thankfully, drew back a step from Flynn, and saying, with
white cheeks, "I only wanted to say good-by," dropped his hot eyes to
the ground. But it did not seem to be his own voice that had spoken, nor
his own self that had prompted the act.

There was a quick interchange of glances between the departing guest and
his late host, in which Flynn's eyes flashed with an odd, admiring fire,
but when Clarence raised his head again he was gone. And as the boy
turned back with a broken heart towards the corridor, his cousin laid
his hand upon his shoulder.

"Muy hidalgamente, Clarence," he said pleasantly. "Yes, we shall make
something of you!"




CHAPTER X


Then followed to Clarence three uneventful years. During that interval
he learnt that Jackson Brant, or Don Juan Robinson--for the tie of
kinship was the least factor in their relations to each other, and after
the departure of Flynn was tacitly ignored by both--was more Spanish
than American. An early residence in Lower California, marriage with a
rich Mexican widow, whose dying childless left him sole heir, and some
strange restraining idiosyncrasy of temperament had quite denationalized
him. A bookish recluse, somewhat superfastidious towards his own
countrymen, the more Clarence knew him the more singular appeared
his acquaintance with Flynn; but as he did not exhibit more
communicativeness on this point than upon their own kinship, Clarence
finally concluded that it was due to the dominant character of his
former friend, and thought no more about it. He entered upon the new
life at El Refugio with no disturbing past. Quickly adapting himself to
the lazy freedom of this hacienda existence, he spent the mornings
on horseback ranging the hills among his cousin's cattle, and the
afternoons and evenings busied among his cousin's books with equally
lawless and undisciplined independence. The easy-going Don Juan, it is
true, attempted to make good his rash promise to teach the boy Spanish,
and actually set him a few tasks; but in a few weeks the quick-witted
Clarence acquired such a colloquial proficiency from his casual
acquaintance with vaqueros and small traders that he was glad to
leave the matter in his young kinsman's hands. Again, by one of those
illogical sequences which make a lifelong reputation depend upon a
single trivial act, Clarence's social status was settled forever at El
Refugio Rancho by his picturesque diversion of Flynn's parting gift. The
grateful peon to whom the boy had scornfully tossed the coin repeated
the act, gesture, and spirit of the scene to his companion, and Don
Juan's unknown and youthful relation was at once recognized as hijo
de la familia, and undeniably a hidalgo born and bred. But in the
more vivid imagination of feminine El Refugio the incident reached its
highest poetic form. "It is true, Mother of God," said Chucha of the
Mill; "it was Domingo who himself relates it as it were the Creed. When
the American escort had arrived with the young gentleman, this escort,
look you, being not of the same quality, he is departing again without a
word of permission. Comes to him at this moment my little hidalgo. 'You
have yourself forgotten to take from me your demission,' he said. This
escort, thinking to make his peace with a mere muchacho, gives to him a
gold piece of twenty pesos. The little hidalgo has taken it SO, and
with the words, 'Ah! you would make of me your almoner to my cousin's
people,' has given it at the moment to Domingo, and with a grace and
fire admirable." But it is certain that Clarence's singular simplicity
and truthfulness, a faculty of being picturesquely indolent in a way
that suggested a dreamy abstraction of mind rather than any vulgar
tendency to bodily ease and comfort, and possibly the fact that he was
a good horseman, made him a popular hero at El Refugio. At the end of
three years Don Juan found that this inexperienced and apparently idle
boy of fourteen knew more of the practical ruling of the rancho than he
did himself; also that this unlettered young rustic had devoured nearly
all the books in his library with boyish recklessness of digestion.
He found, too, that in spite of his singular independence of action,
Clarence was possessed of an invincible loyalty of principle, and that,
asking no sentimental affection, and indeed yielding none, he was,
without presuming on his relationship, devoted to his cousin's interest.
It seemed that from being a glancing ray of sunshine in the house,
evasive but never obtrusive, he had become a daily necessity of comfort
and security to his benefactor.

Clarence was, however, astonished, when, one morning, Don Juan, with the
same embarrassed manner he had shown at their first meeting, suddenly
asked him, "what business he expected to follow." It seemed the more
singular, as the speaker, like most abstracted men, had hitherto always
studiously ignored the future, in their daily intercourse. Yet this
might have been either the habit of security or the caution of
doubt. Whatever it was, it was some sudden disturbance of Don Juan's
equanimity, as disconcerting to himself as it was to Clarence. So
conscious was the boy of this that, without replying to his cousin's
question, but striving in vain to recall some delinquency of his own, he
asked, with his usual boyish directness--

"Has anything happened? Have I done anything wrong?"

"No, no," returned Don Juan hurriedly. "But, you see, it's time that
you should think of your future--or at least prepare for it. I mean
you ought to have some more regular education. You will have to go to
school. It's too bad," he added fretfully, with a certain impatient
forgetfulness of Clarence's presence, and as if following his own
thought. "Just as you are becoming of service to me, and justifying
your ridiculous position here--and all this d--d nonsense that's gone
before--I mean, of course, Clarence," he interrupted himself, catching
sight of the boy's whitening cheek and darkening eye, "I mean, you
know--this ridiculousness of my keeping you from school at your age, and
trying to teach you myself--don't you see."

"You think it is--ridiculous," repeated Clarence, with dogged
persistency.

"I mean I am ridiculous," said Don Juan hastily. "There! there! let's
say no more about it. To-morrow we'll ride over to San Jose and see the
Father Secretary at the Jesuits' College about your entering at once.
It's a good school, and you'll always be near the rancho!" And so the
interview ended.

I am afraid that Clarence's first idea was to run away. There are
few experiences more crushing to an ingenuous nature than the sudden
revelation of the aspect in which it is regarded by others. The
unfortunate Clarence, conscious only of his loyalty to his cousin's
interest and what he believed were the duties of his position, awoke to
find that position "ridiculous." In an afternoon's gloomy ride through
the lonely hills, and later in the sleepless solitude of his room at
night, he concluded that his cousin was right. He would go to school;
he would study hard--so hard that in a little, a very little while, he
could make a living for himself. He awoke contented. It was the blessing
of youth that this resolve and execution seemed as one and the same
thing.

The next day found him installed as a pupil and boarder in the college.
Don Juan's position and Spanish predilections naturally made his
relation acceptable to the faculty; but Clarence could not help
perceiving that Father Sobriente, the Principal, regarded him at times
with a thoughtful curiosity that made him suspect that his cousin had
especially bespoken that attention, and that he occasionally questioned
him on his antecedents in a way that made him dread a renewal of the
old questioning about his progenitor. For the rest, he was a polished,
cultivated man; yet, in the characteristic, material criticism of youth,
I am afraid that Clarence chiefly identified him as a priest with large
hands, whose soft palms seemed to be cushioned with kindness, and whose
equally large feet, encased in extraordinary shapeless shoes of undyed
leather, seemed to tread down noiselessly--rather than to ostentatiously
crush--the obstacles that beset the path of the young student. In the
cloistered galleries of the court-yard Clarence sometimes felt himself
borne down by the protecting weight of this paternal hand; in the
midnight silence of the dormitory he fancied he was often conscious
of the soft browsing tread and snuffly muffled breathing of his
elephantine-footed mentor.

His relations with his school-fellows were at first far from pleasant.
Whether they suspected favoritism; whether they resented that old and
unsympathetic manner which sprang from his habits of association with
his elders; or whether they rested their objections on the broader
grounds of his being a stranger, I do not know, but they presently
passed from cruel sneers to physical opposition. It was then found that
this gentle and reserved youth had retained certain objectionable, rude,
direct, rustic qualities of fist and foot, and that, violating all rules
and disdaining the pomp and circumstance of school-boy warfare, of which
he knew nothing, he simply thrashed a few of his equals out of hand,
with or without ceremony, as the occasion or the insult happened. In
this emergency one of the seniors was selected to teach this youthful
savage his proper position. A challenge was given, and accepted by
Clarence with a feverish alacrity that surprised himself as much as his
adversary. This was a youth of eighteen, his superior in size and skill.

The first blow bathed Clarence's face in his own blood. But the
sanguinary chrism, to the alarm of the spectators, effected an
instantaneous and unhallowed change in the boy. Instantly closing with
his adversary, he sprang at his throat like an animal, and locking
his arm around his neck began to strangle him. Blind to the blows that
rained upon him, he eventually bore his staggering enemy by sheer onset
and surprise to the earth. Amidst the general alarm, the strength of
half a dozen hastily summoned teachers was necessary to unlock his hold.
Even then he struggled to renew the conflict. But his adversary
had disappeared, and from that day forward Clarence was never again
molested.

Seated before Father Sobriente in the infirmary, with swollen and
bandaged face, and eyes that still seemed to see everything in the murky
light of his own blood, Clarence felt the soft weight of the father's
hand upon his knee.

"My son," said the priest gently, "you are not of our religion, or I
should claim as a right to ask a question of your own heart at this
moment. But as to a good friend, Claro, a good friend," he continued,
patting the boy's knee, "you will tell me, old Father Sobriente,
frankly and truthfully, as is your habit, one little thing. Were you not
afraid?"

"No," said Clarence doggedly. "I'll lick him again to-morrow."

"Softly, my son! It was not of HIM I speak, but of something more
terrible and awful. Were you not afraid of--of--" he paused, and
suddenly darting his clear eyes into the very depths of Clarence's soul,
added--"of YOURSELF?"

The boy started, shuddered, and burst into tears.

"So, so," said the priest gently, "we have found our real enemy. Good!
Now, by the grace of God, my little warrior, we shall fight HIM and
conquer."

Whether Clarence profited by this lesson, or whether this brief
exhibition of his quality prevented any repetition of the cause, the
episode was soon forgotten. As his school-fellows had never been his
associates or confidants, it mattered little to him whether they feared
or respected him, or were hypocritically obsequious, after the fashion
of the weaker. His studies, at all events, profited by this lack of
distraction. Already his two years of desultory and omnivorous reading
had given him a facile familiarity with many things, which left
him utterly free of the timidity, awkwardness, or non-interest of a
beginner. His usually reserved manner, which had been lack of expression
rather than of conviction, had deceived his tutors. The audacity of a
mind that had never been dominated by others, and owed no allegiance to
precedent, made his merely superficial progress something marvelous.

At the end of the first year he was a phenomenal scholar, who seemed
capable of anything. Nevertheless, Father Sobriente had an interview
with Don Juan, and as a result Clarence was slightly kept back in his
studies, a little more freedom from the rules was conceded to him, and
he was even encouraged to take some diversion. Of such was the
privilege to visit the neighboring town of Santa Clara unrestricted and
unattended. He had always been liberally furnished with pocket-money,
for which, in his companionless state and Spartan habits, he had a
singular and unboyish contempt. Nevertheless, he always appeared dressed
with scrupulous neatness, and was rather distinguished-looking in his
older reserve and melancholy self-reliance.

Lounging one afternoon along the Alameda, a leafy avenue set out by the
early Mission Fathers between the village of San Jose and the convent
of Santa Clara, he saw a double file of young girls from the convent
approaching, on their usual promenade. A view of this procession
being the fondest ambition of the San Jose collegian, and especially
interdicted and circumvented by the good Fathers attending the college
excursions, Clarence felt for it the profound indifference of a boy who,
in the intermediate temperate zone of fifteen years, thinks that he
is no longer young and romantic! He was passing them with a careless
glance, when a pair of deep violet eyes caught his own under the broad
shade of a coquettishly beribboned hat, even as it had once looked at
him from the depths of a calico sunbonnet. Susy! He started, and would
have spoken; but with a quick little gesture of caution and a meaning
glance at the two nuns who walked at the head and foot of the file,
she indicated him to follow. He did so at a respectful distance, albeit
wondering. A little further on Susy dropped her handkerchief, and was
obliged to dart out and run back to the end of the file to recover it.
But she gave another swift glance of her blue eyes as she snatched it up
and demurely ran back to her place. The procession passed on, but when
Clarence reached the spot where she had paused he saw a three-cornered
bit of paper lying in the grass. He was too discreet to pick it up while
the girls were still in sight, but continued on, returning to it later.
It contained a few words in a schoolgirl's hand, hastily scrawled in
pencil: "Come to the south wall near the big pear-tree at six."

Delighted as Clarence felt, he was at the same time embarrassed. He
could not understand the necessity of this mysterious rendezvous.
He knew that if she was a scholar she was under certain conventual
restraints; but with the privileges of his position and friendship with
his teachers, he believed that Father Sobriente would easily procure him
an interview with this old play-fellow, of whom he had often spoken,
and who was, with himself, the sole survivor of his tragical past. And
trusted as he was by Sobriente, there was something in this clandestine
though innocent rendezvous that went against his loyalty. Nevertheless,
he kept the appointment, and at the stated time was at the south wall
of the convent, over which the gnarled boughs of the distinguishing
pear-tree hung. Hard by in the wall was a grated wicket door that seemed
unused.

Would she appear among the boughs or on the edge of the wall? Either
would be like the old Susy. But to his surprise he heard the sound
of the key turning in the lock. The grated door suddenly swung on its
hinges, and Susy slipped out. Grasping his hand, she said, "Let's run,
Clarence," and before he could reply she started off with him at a rapid
pace. Down the lane they flew--very much, as it seemed to Clarence's
fancy, as they had flown from the old emigrant wagon on the prairie,
four years before. He glanced at the fluttering, fairy-like figure
beside him. She had grown taller and more graceful; she was dressed in
exquisite taste, with a minuteness of luxurious detail that bespoke
the spoilt child; but there was the same prodigal outburst of rippling,
golden hair down her back and shoulders, violet eyes, capricious little
mouth, and the same delicate hands and feet he had remembered. He would
have preferred a more deliberate survey, but with a shake of her head
and an hysteric little laugh she only said, "Run, Clarence, run," and
again darted forward. Arriving at the cross-street, they turned the
corner, and halted breathlessly.

"But you're not running away from school, Susy, are you?" said Clarence
anxiously.

"Only a little bit. Just enough to get ahead of the other girls," she
said, rearranging her brown curls and tilted hat. "You see, Clarence,"
she condescended to explain, with a sudden assumption of older
superiority, "mother's here at the hotel all this week, and I'm allowed
to go home every night, like a day scholar. Only there's three or
four other girls that go out at the same time with me, and one of the
Sisters, and to-day I got ahead of 'em just to see YOU."

"But" began Clarence.

"Oh, it's all right; the other girls knew it, and helped me. They don't
start out for half an hour yet, and they'll say I've just run ahead, and
when they and the Sister get to the hotel I'll be there already--don't
you see?"

"Yes," said Clarence dubiously.

"And we'll go to an ice-cream saloon now, shan't we? There's a nice one
near the hotel. I've got some money," she added quickly, as Clarence
looked embarrassed.

"So have I," said Clarence, with a faint accession of color. "Let's go!"
She had relinquished his hand to smooth out her frock, and they were
walking side by side at a more moderate pace. "But," he continued,
clinging to his first idea with masculine persistence, and anxious to
assure his companion of his power, of his position, "I'm in the college,
and Father Sobriente, who knows your lady superior, is a good friend
of mine and gives me privileges; and--and--when he knows that you and
I used to play together--why, he'll fix it that we may see each other
whenever we want."

"Oh, you silly!" said Susy. "WHAT!--when you're--"

"When I'm WHAT?"

The young girl shot a violet blue ray from under her broad hat.
"Why--when we're grown up now?" Then with a certain precision, "Why,
they're VERY particular about young gentlemen! Why, Clarence, if they
suspected that you and I were--" Another violet ray from under the hat
completed this unfinished sentence.

Pleased and yet confused, Clarence looked straight ahead with deepening
color. "Why," continued Susy, "Mary Rogers, that was walking with me,
thought you were ever so old--and a distinguished Spaniard! And I,"
she said abruptly--"haven't I grown? Tell me, Clarence," with her old
appealing impatience, "haven't I grown? Do tell me!"

"Very much," said Clarence.

"And isn't this frock pretty--it's only my second best--but I've a
prettier one with lace all down in front; but isn't this one pretty,
Clarence, tell me?"

Clarence thought the frock and its fair owner perfection, and said
so. Whereat Susy, as if suddenly aware of the presence of passers-by,
assumed an air of severe propriety, dropped her hands by her side, and
with an affected conscientiousness walked on, a little further from
Clarence's side, until they reached the ice-cream saloon.

"Get a table near the back, Clarence," she said, in a confidential
whisper, "where they can't see us--and strawberry, you know, for the
lemon and vanilla here are just horrid!"

They took their seats in a kind of rustic arbor in the rear of the shop,
which gave them the appearance of two youthful but somewhat over-dressed
and over-conscious shepherds. There was an interval of slight
awkwardness, which Susy endeavored to displace. "There has been," she
remarked, with easy conversational lightness, "quite an excitement about
our French teacher being changed. The girls in our class think it most
disgraceful."

And this was all she could say after a separation of four years!
Clarence was desperate, but as yet idealess and voiceless. At last, with
an effort over his spoon, he gasped a floating recollection: "Do you
still like flapjacks, Susy?"

"Oh, yes," with a laugh, "but we don't have them now."

"And Mose" (a black pointer, who used to yelp when Susy sang), "does he
still sing with you?"

"Oh, HE'S been lost ever so long," said Susy composedly; "but I've got
a Newfoundland and a spaniel and a black pony;" and here, with a rapid
inventory of her other personal effects, she drifted into some desultory
details of the devotion of her adopted parents, whom she now
readily spoke of as "papa" and "mamma," with evidently no disturbing
recollection of the dead. From which it appeared that the Peytons were
very rich, and, in addition to their possessions in the lower country,
owned a rancho in Santa Clara and a house in San Francisco. Like all
children, her strongest impressions were the most recent. In the vain
hope to lead her back to this material yesterday, he said--

"You remember Jim Hooker?"

"Oh, HE ran away, when you left. But just think of it! The other day,
when papa and I went into a big restaurant in San Francisco, who should
be there WAITING on the table--yes, Clarence, a real waiter--but Jim
Hooker! Papa spoke to him; but of course," with a slight elevation of
her pretty chin, "I couldn't, you know; fancy--a waiter!"

The story of how Jim Hooker had personated him stopped short upon
Clarence's lips. He could not bring himself now to add that revelation
to the contempt of his small companion, which, in spite of its naivete,
somewhat grated on his sensibilities.

"Clarence," she said, suddenly turning towards him mysteriously, and
indicating the shopman and his assistants, "I really believe these
people suspect us."

"Of what?" said the practical Clarence.

"Don't be silly! Don't you see how they are staring?"

Clarence was really unable to detect the least curiosity on the part of
the shopman, or that any one exhibited the slightest concern in him or
his companion. But he felt a return of the embarrassed pleasure he was
conscious of a moment before.

"Then you're living with your father?" said Susy, changing the subject.

"You mean my COUSIN," said Clarence, smiling. "You know my father died
long before I ever knew you."

"Yes; that's what YOU used to say, Clarence, but papa says it isn't
so." But seeing the boy's wondering eyes fixed on her with a troubled
expression, she added quickly, "Oh, then, he IS your cousin!"

"Well, I think I ought to know," said Clarence, with a smile, that was,
however, far from comfortable, and a quick return of his old unpleasant
recollections of the Peytons. "Why, I was brought to him by one of his
friends." And Clarence gave a rapid boyish summary of his journey from
Sacramento, and Flynn's discovery of the letter addressed to Silsbee.
But before he had concluded he was conscious that Susy was by no means
interested in these details, nor in the least affected by the
passing allusion to her dead father and his relation to Clarence's
misadventures. With her rounded chin in her hand, she was slowly
examining his face, with a certain mischievous yet demure abstraction.
"I tell you what, Clarence," she said, when he had finished, "you
ought to make your cousin get you one of those sombreros, and a nice
gold-braided serape. They'd just suit you. And then--then you could ride
up and down the Alameda when we are going by."

"But I'm coming to see you at--at your house, and at the convent," he
said eagerly. "Father Sobriente and my cousin will fix it all right."

But Susy shook her head, with superior wisdom. "No; they must never know
our secret!--neither papa nor mamma, especially mamma. And they mustn't
know that we've met again--AFTER THESE YEARS!" It is impossible to
describe the deep significance which Susy's blue eyes gave to this
expression. After a pause she went on--

"No! We must never meet again, Clarence, unless Mary Rogers helps. She
is my best, my ONLIEST friend, and older than I; having had trouble
herself, and being expressly forbidden to see him again. You can speak
to her about Suzette--that's my name now; I was rechristened Suzette
Alexandra Peyton by mamma. And now, Clarence," dropping her voice and
glancing shyly around the saloon, "you may kiss me just once under my
hat, for good-by." She adroitly slanted her broad-brimmed hat towards
the front of the shop, and in its shadow advanced her fresh young cheek
to Clarence.

Coloring and laughing, the boy pressed his lips to it twice. Then Susy
arose, with the faintest affectation of a sigh, shook out her skirt,
drew on her gloves with the greatest gravity, and saying, "Don't follow
me further than the door--they're coming now," walked with supercilious
dignity past the preoccupied proprietor and waiters to the entrance.
Here she said, with marked civility, "Good-afternoon, Mr. Brant," and
tripped away towards the hotel. Clarence lingered for a moment to look
after the lithe and elegant little figure, with its shining undulations
of hair that fell over the back and shoulders of her white frock like a
golden mantle, and then turned away in the opposite direction.

He walked home in a state, as it seemed to him, of absurd perplexity.
There were many reasons why his encounter with Susy should have been of
unmixed pleasure. She had remembered him of her own free will, and, in
spite of the change in her fortune, had made the first advances. Her
doubts about her future interviews had affected him but little; still
less, I fear, did he think of the other changes in her character and
disposition, for he was of that age when they added only a piquancy and
fascination to her--as of one who, in spite of her weakness of nature,
was still devoted to him! But he was painfully conscious that this
meeting had revived in him all the fears, vague uneasiness, and sense
of wrong that had haunted his first boyhood, and which he thought he had
buried at El Refugio four years ago. Susy's allusion to his father and
the reiteration of Peyton's skepticism awoke in his older intellect the
first feeling of suspicion that was compatible with his open nature.
Was this recurring reticence and mystery due to any act of his father's?
But, looking back upon it in after-years, he concluded that the incident
of that day was a premonition rather than a recollection.




CHAPTER XI


When he reached the college the Angelus had long since rung. In the
corridor he met one of the Fathers, who, instead of questioning him,
returned his salutation with a grave gentleness that struck him. He
had turned into Father Sobriente's quiet study with the intention of
reporting himself, when he was disturbed to find him in consultation
with three or four of the faculty, who seemed to be thrown into some
slight confusion by his entrance. Clarence was about to retire hurriedly
when Father Sobriente, breaking up the council with a significant glance
at the others, called him back. Confused and embarrassed, with a dread
of something impending, the boy tried to avert it by a hurried account
of his meeting with Susy, and his hopes of Father Sobriente's counsel
and assistance. Taking upon himself the idea of suggesting Susy's
escapade, he confessed the fault. The old man gazed into his frank eyes
with a thoughtful, half-compassionate smile. "I was just thinking
of giving you a holiday with--with Don Juan Robinson." The unusual
substitution of this final title for the habitual "your cousin" struck
Clarence uneasily. "But we will speak of that later. Sit down, my son;
I am not busy. We shall talk a little. Father Pedro says you are
getting on fluently with your translations. That is excellent, my son,
excellent."

Clarence's face beamed with relief and pleasure. His vague fears began
to dissipate.

"And you translate even from dictation! Good! We have an hour to spare,
and you shall give to me a specimen of your skill. Eh? Good! I will walk
here and dictate to you in my poor English, and you shall sit there and
render it to me in your good Spanish. Eh? So we shall amuse and instruct
ourselves."

Clarence smiled. These sporadic moments of instruction and admonition
were not unusual to the good Father. He cheerfully seated himself at
the Padre's table before a blank sheet of paper, with a pen in his hand.
Father Sobriente paced the apartment, with his usual heavy but noiseless
tread. To his surprise, the good priest, after an exhaustive pinch of
snuff, blew his nose, and began, in his most lugubrious style of pulpit
exhortation:--

"It has been written that the sins of the father shall be visited upon
the children, and the unthinking and worldly have sought refuge from
this law by declaring it harsh and cruel. Miserable and blind! For do we
not see that the wicked man, who in the pride of his power and vainglory
is willing to risk punishment to HIMSELF--and believes it to be
courage--must pause before the awful mandate that condemns an equal
suffering to those he loves, which he cannot withhold or suffer for? In
the spectacle of these innocents struggling against disgrace, perhaps
disease, poverty, or desertion, what avails his haughty, all-defying
spirit? Let us imagine, Clarence."

"Sir?" said the literal Clarence, pausing in his exercise.

"I mean," continued the priest, with a slight cough, "let the thoughtful
man picture a father: a desperate, self-willed man, who scorned the laws
of God and society--keeping only faith with a miserable subterfuge he
called 'honor,' and relying only on his own courage and his knowledge of
human weakness. Imagine him cruel and bloody--a gambler by profession,
an outlaw among men, an outcast from the Church; voluntarily abandoning
friends and family,--the wife he should have cherished, the son he
should have reared and educated--for the gratification of his deadly
passions. Yet imagine that man suddenly confronted with the thought
of that heritage of shame and disgust which he had brought upon his
innocent offspring--to whom he cannot give even his own desperate
recklessness to sustain its vicarious suffering. What must be the
feelings of a parent--"

"Father Sobriente," said Clarence softly.

To the boy's surprise, scarcely had he spoken when the soft protecting
palm of the priest was already upon his shoulder, and the snuffy but
kindly upper lip, trembling with some strange emotion, close beside his
cheek.

"What is it, Clarence?" he said hurriedly. "Speak, my son, without fear!
You would ask--"

"I only wanted to know if 'padre' takes a masculine verb here," replied
Clarence naively.

Father Sobriente blew his nose violently. "Truly--though used for either
gender, by the context masculine," he responded gravely. "Ah," he added,
leaning over Clarence, and scanning his work hastily, "Good, very good!
And now, possibly," he continued, passing his hand like a damp sponge
over his heated brow, "we shall reverse our exercise. I shall deliver
to you in Spanish what you shall render back in English, eh? And--let us
consider--we shall make something more familiar and narrative, eh?"

To this Clarence, somewhat bored by these present solemn abstractions,
assented gladly, and took up his pen. Father Sobriente, resuming his
noiseless pacing, began:

"On the fertile plains of Guadalajara lived a certain caballero,
possessed of flocks and lands, and a wife and son. But, being also
possessed of a fiery and roving nature, he did not value them as he did
perilous adventure, feats of arms, and sanguinary encounters. To this
may be added riotous excesses, gambling and drunkenness, which in time
decreased his patrimony, even as his rebellious and quarrelsome spirit
had alienated his family and neighbors. His wife, borne down by shame
and sorrow, died while her son was still an infant. In a fit of equal
remorse and recklessness the caballero married again within the year.
But the new wife was of a temper and bearing as bitter as her consort.
Violent quarrels ensued between them, ending in the husband abandoning
his wife and son, and leaving St. Louis--I should say Guadalajara--for
ever. Joining some adventurers in a foreign land, under an assumed name,
he pursued his reckless course, until, by one or two acts of outlawry,
he made his return to civilization impossible. The deserted wife and
step-mother of his child coldly accepted the situation, forbidding his
name to be spoken again in her presence, announced that he was dead, and
kept the knowledge of his existence from his own son, whom she placed
under the charge of her sister. But the sister managed to secretly
communicate with the outlawed father, and, under a pretext, arranged
between them, of sending the boy to another relation, actually
dispatched the innocent child to his unworthy parent. Perhaps stirred by
remorse, the infamous man--"

"Stop!" said Clarence suddenly.

He had thrown down his pen, and was standing erect and rigid before the
Father.

"You are trying to tell me something, Father Sobriente," he said, with
an effort. "Speak out, I implore you. I can stand anything but this
mystery. I am no longer a child. I have a right to know all. This that
you are telling me is no fable--I see it in your face, Father Sobriente;
it is the story of--of--"

"Your father, Clarence!" said the priest, in a trembling voice.

The boy drew back, with a white face. "My father!" he repeated. "Living,
or dead?"

"Living, when you first left your home," said the old man hurriedly,
seizing Clarence's hand, "for it was he who in the name of your cousin
sent for you. Living--yes, while you were here, for it was he who for
the past three years stood in the shadow of this assumed cousin, Don
Juan, and at last sent you to this school. Living, Clarence, yes; but
living under a name and reputation that would have blasted you! And
now DEAD--dead in Mexico, shot as an insurgent and in a still desperate
career! May God have mercy on his soul!"

"Dead!" repeated Clarence, trembling, "only now?"

"The news of the insurrection and his fate came only an hour since,"
continued the Padre quickly; "his complicity with it and his identity
were known only to Don Juan. He would have spared you any knowledge of
the truth, even as this dead man would; but I and my brothers thought
otherwise. I have broken it to you badly, my son, but forgive me?"

An hysterical laugh broke from Clarence and the priest recoiled before
him. "Forgive YOU! What was this man to me?" he said, with boyish
vehemence. "He never LOVED me! He deserted me; he made my life a lie.
He never sought me, came near me, or stretched a hand to me that I could
take?"

"Hush! hush!" said the priest, with a horrified look, laying his huge
hand upon the boy's shoulder and bearing him down to his seat. "You know
not what you say. Think--think, Clarence! Was there none of all those
who have befriended you--who were kind to you in your wanderings--to
whom your heart turned unconsciously? Think, Clarence! You yourself
have spoken to me of such a one. Let your heart speak again, for his
sake--for the sake of the dead."

A gentler light suffused the boy's eyes, and he started. Catching
convulsively at his companion's sleeve, he said in an eager, boyish
whisper, "There was one, a wicked, desperate man, whom they all
feared--Flynn, who brought me from the mines. Yes, I thought that he
was my cousin's loyal friend--more than all the rest; and I told him
everything--all, that I never told the man I thought my cousin, or
anyone, or even you; and I think, I think, Father, I liked him best
of all. I thought since it was wrong," he continued, with a trembling
smile, "for I was foolishly fond even of the way the others feared him,
he that I feared not, and who was so kind to me. Yet he, too, left me
without a word, and when I would have followed him--" But the boy broke
down, and buried his face in his hands.

"No, no," said Father Sobriente, with eager persistence, "that was his
foolish pride to spare you the knowledge of your kinship with one so
feared, and part of the blind and mistaken penance he had laid upon
himself. For even at that moment of your boyish indignation, he never
was so fond of you as then. Yes, my poor boy, this man, to whom God led
your wandering feet at Deadman's Gulch; the man who brought you here,
and by some secret hold--I know not what--on Don Juan's past, persuaded
him to assume to be your relation; this man Flynn, this Jackson Brant
the gambler, this Hamilton Brant the outlaw--WAS YOUR FATHER! Ah,
yes! Weep on, my son; each tear of love and forgiveness from thee hath
vicarious power to wash away his sin."

With a single sweep of his protecting hand he drew Clarence towards
his breast, until the boy slowly sank upon his knees at his feet. Then,
lifting his eyes towards the ceiling, he said softly in an older tongue,
"And THOU, too, unhappy and perturbed spirit, rest!"

* * * * *

It was nearly dawn when the good Padre wiped the last tears from
Clarence's clearer eyes. "And now, my son," he said, with a gentle
smile, as he rose to his feet, "let us not forget the living. Although
your step-mother has, through her own act, no legal claim upon you, far
be it from me to indicate your attitude towards her. Enough that YOU are
independent." He turned, and, opening a drawer in his secretaire, took
out a bank-book, and placed it in the hands of the wondering boy.

"It was HIS wish, Clarence, that even after his death you should never
have to prove your kinship to claim your rights. Taking advantage of
the boyish deposit you had left with Mr. Carden at the bank, with his
connivance and in your name he added to it, month by month and year by
year; Mr. Carden cheerfully accepting the trust and management of the
fund. The seed thus sown has produced a thousandfold, Clarence, beyond
all expectations. You are not only free, my son, but of yourself and in
whatever name you choose--your own master."

"I shall keep my father's name," said the boy simply.

"Amen!" said Father Sobriente.


Here closes the chronicle of Clarence Brant's boyhood. How he sustained
his name and independence in after years, and who, of those already
mentioned in these pages, helped him to make or mar it, may be a matter
for future record.

========================================
========================================

NEW BURLESQUES


by

Bret Harte




CONTENTS

  RUPERT THE RESEMBLER [After Rupert of Hentzau and Prisoner of Zenda]

  THE STOLEN CIGAR CASE By A. CO--N D--LE

  GOLLY AND THE CHRISTIAN, OR THE MINX AND THE MANXMAN By H-LL C--NE

  THE ADVENTURES OF JOHN LONGBOWE, YEOMAN
    BEING A MODERN-ANTIQUE REALISTIC ROMANCE
    (COMPILED FROM SEVERAL EMINENT SOURCES)

  DAN'L BOREM BY E. N---S W--T---T

  STORIES THREE BY R-DY--D K-PL--G

  "ZUT-SKI" THE PROBLEM OF A WICKED FEME SOLE BY M-R-E C-R-LLI





RUPERT THE RESEMBLER

By A--TH--Y H-PE




CHAPTER I

RUDOLPH OF TRULYRURALANIA

When I state that I was own brother to Lord Burleydon, had an income of
two thousand a year, could speak all the polite languages fluently, was
a powerful swordsman, a good shot, and could ride anything from an
elephant to a clotheshorse, I really think I have said enough to
satisfy any feminine novel-reader of Bayswater or South Kensington that
I was a hero.  My brother's wife, however, did not seem to incline to
this belief.

"A more conceited, self-satisfied little cad I never met than you," she
said.  "Why don't you try to do something instead of sneering at others
who do?  You never take anything seriously--except yourself, which
isn't worth it.  You are proud of your red hair and peaked nose just
because you fondly believe that you got them from the Prince of
Trulyruralania, and are willing to think evil of your ancestress to
satisfy your snobbish little soul.  Let me tell you, sir, that there
was no more truth about that than there was in that silly talk of her
partiality for her husband's red-haired gamekeeper in Scotland.  Ah!
that makes you start--don't it?  But I have always observed that a mule
is apt to remember only the horse side of his ancestry!"

Whenever my pretty sister-in-law talks in this way I always try to
forget that she came of a family far inferior to our own, the
Razorbills.  Indeed, her people--of the Nonconformist stock--really had
nothing but wealth and rectitude, and I think my brother Bob, in his
genuine love for her, was willing to overlook the latter for the sake
of the former.

My pretty sister-in-law's interest in my affairs always made me believe
that she secretly worshiped me--although it was a fact, as will be seen
in the progress of this story, that most women blushed on my addressing
them.  I used to say it "was the reflection of my red hair on a
transparent complexion," which was rather neat--wasn't it?  And subtle?
But then, I was always saying such subtle things.

"My dear Rose," I said, laying down my egg spoon (the egg spoon really
had nothing to do with this speech, but it imparted such a delightfully
realistic flavor to the scene), "I'm not to blame if I resemble the
S'helpburgs."

"It's your being so beastly proud of it that I object to!" she replied.
"And for Heaven's sake, try to BE something, and not merely resemble
things!  The fact is you resemble too much--you're ALWAYS resembling.
You resemble a man of fashion, and you're not; a wit, and you're not; a
soldier, a sportsman, a hero--and you're none of 'em.  Altogether,
you're not in the least convincing.  Now, listen!  There's a good
chance for you to go as our attache with Lord Mumblepeg, the new
Ambassador to Cochin China.  In all the novels, you know, attaches are
always the confidants of Grand Duchesses, and know more state secrets
than their chiefs; in real life, I believe they are something like a
city clerk with a leaning to private theatricals.  Say you'll go!  Do!"

"I'll take a few months' holiday first," I replied, "and then," I added
in my gay, dashing way, "if the place is open--hang it if I don't go!"

"Good old bounder!" she said, "and don't think too much of that
precious Prince Rupert.  He was a bad lot."

She blushed again at me--as her husband entered.

"Take Rose's advice, Rupert, my boy," he said, "and go!"

And that is how I came to go to Trulyruralania.  For I secretly
resolved to take my holiday in traveling in that country and trying, as
dear Lady Burleydon put it, really to be somebody, instead of
resembling anybody in particular.  A precious lot SHE knew about it!



CHAPTER II

IN WHICH MY HAIR CAUSES A LOT OF THINGS

You go to Trulyruralania from Charing Cross.  In passing through Paris
we picked up Mlle. Beljambe, who was going to Kohlslau, the capital of
Trulyruralania, to marry the Grand Duke Michael, who, however, as I was
informed, was in love with the Princess Flirtia. She blushed on seeing
me--but, I was told afterwards, declined being introduced to me on any
account.  However, I thought nothing of this, and went on to Bock, the
next station to Kohlslau.  At the little inn in the forest I was
informed I was just in time to see the coronation of the new king the
next day.  The landlady and her daughter were very communicative, and,
after the fashion of the simple, guileless stage peasant, instantly
informed me what everybody was doing, and at once explained the
situation.  She told me that the Grand Duke Michael--or Black Michael
as he was called--himself aspired to the throne, as well as to the hand
of the Princess Flirtia, but was hated by the populace, who preferred
the young heir, Prince Rupert; because he had the hair and features of
the dynasty of the S'helpburgs, "which," she added, "are singularly
like your own."

"But is red hair so very peculiar here?" I asked.

"Among the Jews--yes, sire!  I mean yes, SIR," she corrected herself.
"You seldom see a red-headed Jew."

"The Jews!" I repeated in astonishment.

"Of course you know the S'helpburgs are descended directly from
Solomon--and have indeed some of his matrimonial peculiarities," she
said, blushing.

I was amazed--but recalled myself.  "But why do they call the Duke of
Kohlslau Black Michael?" I asked carelessly.

"Because he is nearly black, sir.  You see, when the great Prince
Rupert went abroad in the old time he visited England, Scotland, and
Africa.  They say he married an African lady there--and that the Duke
is really more in the direct line of succession than Prince Rupert."

But here the daughter showed me to my room.  She blushed, of course,
and apologized for not bringing a candle, as she thought my hair was
sufficiently illuminating.  "But," she added with another blush, "I do
SO like it."

I replied by giving her something of no value,--a Belgian nickel which
wouldn't pass in Bock, as I had found to my cost.  But my hair had
evidently attracted attention from others, for on my return to the
guest-room a stranger approached me, and in the purest and most precise
German--the Court or 'Olland Hof speech--addressed me:

"Have you the red hair of the fair King or the hair of your father?"

Luckily I was able to reply with the same purity and precision: "I have
both the hair of the fair King and my own.  But I have not the hair of
my father nor of Black Michael, nor of the innkeeper nor the
innkeeper's wife.  The red HEIR of the fair King would be a son."

Possibly this delicate mot on the approaching marriage of the King was
lost in the translation, for the stranger strode abruptly away. I
learned, however, that the King was actually then in Bock, at the
castle a few miles distant, in the woods.  I resolved to stroll thither.

It was a fine old mediaeval structure.  But as the singular incidents I
am about to relate combine the romantic and adventurous atmosphere of
the middle ages with all the appliances of modern times, I may briefly
state that the castle was lit by electricity, bad fire-escapes on each
of the turrets, four lifts, and was fitted up by one of the best West
End establishments.  The sanitary arrangements were excellent, and the
drainage of the most perfect order, as I had reason to know personally
later.  I was so affected by the peaceful solitude that I lay down
under a tree and presently fell asleep.  I was awakened by the sound of
voices, and, looking up, beheld two men bending over me.  One was a
grizzled veteran, and the other a younger dandyfied man; both were
dressed in shooting suits.

"Never saw such a resemblance before in all my life," said the elder
man.  "'Pon my soul! if the King hadn't got shaved yesterday because
the Princess Flirtia said his beard tickled her, I'd swear it was he!"

I could not help thinking how lucky it was--for this narrative--that
the King HAD shaved, otherwise my story would have degenerated into a
mere Comedy of Errors.  Opening my eyes, I said boldly:

"Now that you are satisfied who I resemble, gentlemen, perhaps you will
tell me who you are?"

"Certainly," said the elder curtly.  "I am Spitz--a simple colonel of
his Majesty's, yet, nevertheless, the one man who runs this whole
dynasty--and this young gentleman is Fritz, my lieutenant. And you
are--?"

"My name is Razorbill--brother to Lord Burleydon," I replied calmly.

"Good heavens! another of the lot!" he muttered.  Then, correcting
himself, he said brusquely: "Any relation to that Englishwoman who was
so sweet on the old Rupert centuries ago?"

Here, again, I suppose my sister-in-law would have had me knock down
the foreign insulter of my English ancestress--but I colored to the
roots of my hair, and even farther--with pleasure at this proof of my
royal descent!  And then a cheery voice was heard calling "Spitz!" and
"Fritz!" through the woods.

"The King!" said Spitz to Fritz quickly.  "He must not see him."

"Too late," said Fritz, as a young man bounded lightly out of the
bushes.

I was thunderstruck!  It was as if I had suddenly been confronted with
a mirror--and beheld myself!  Of course he was not quite so
good-looking, or so tall, but he was still a colorable imitation! I was
delighted.

Nevertheless, for a moment he did not seem to reciprocate my feeling.
He stared at me, staggered back and passed his hand across his
forehead.  "Can it be," he muttered thickly, "that I've got 'em agin?
Yet I only had--shingle glash!"

But Fritz quickly interposed.

"Your Majesty is all right--though," he added in a lower voice, "let
this be a warning to you for to-morrow!  This gentleman is Mr.
Razorbill--you know the old story of the Razorbills?--Ha! ha!"

But the King did not laugh; he extended his hand and said gently, "You
are welcome--my cousin!"  Indeed, my sister-in-law would have probably
said that--dissipated though he was--he was the only gentleman there.

"I have come to see the coronation, your Majesty," I said.

"And you shall," said the King heartily, "and shall go with us! The
show can't begin without us--eh, Spitz?" he added playfully, poking the
veteran in the ribs, "whatever Michael may do!"

Then he linked his arms in Spitz's and mine.  "Let's go to the hut--and
have some supper and fizz," he said gayly.

We went to the hut.  We had supper.  We ate and drank heavily.  We
danced madly around the table.  Nevertheless I thought that Spitz and
Fritz were worried by the King's potations, and Spitz at last went so
far as to remind his Majesty that they were to start early in the
morning for Kohlslau.  I noticed also that as the King drank his speech
grew thicker and Spitz and Fritz exchanged glances.  At last Spitz said
with stern significance:

"Your Majesty has not forgotten the test invariably submitted to the
King at his coronation?"

"Shertenly not," replied the King, with his reckless laugh.  "The King
mush be able to pronounsh--name of his country--intel-lillil-gibly:
mush shay (hic!): 'I'm King of--King of--Tootoo-tooral-looral-anyer.'"
He staggered, laughed, and fell under the table.

"He cannot say it!" gasped Fritz and Spitz in one voice.  "He is lost!"

"Unless," said Fritz suddenly, pointing at me with a flash of
intelligence, "HE can personate him, and say it.  Can you?" he turned
to me brusquely.

It was an awful moment.  I had been drinking heavily too, but I
resolved to succeed.  "I'm King of Trooly-rooly--" I murmured; but I
could not master it--I staggered and followed the King under the table.

"Is there no one here," roared Spitz, "who can shave thish dynasty, and
shay 'Tooral--'?  No! ---- it!  I mean 'Trularlooral--'" but he, too,
lurched hopelessly forward.

"No one can say 'Tooral-looral--'" muttered Fritz; and, grasping Spitz
in despair, they both rolled under the table.

How long we lay there, Heaven knows!  I was awakened by Spitz playing
the garden hose on me.  He was booted and spurred, with Fritz by his
side.  The King was lying on a bench, saying feebly: "Blesh you, my
chillen."

"By politely acceding to Black Michael's request to 'try our
one-and-six sherry,' he has been brought to this condition," said Spitz
bitterly.  "It's a trick to keep him from being crowned.  In this
country if the King is crowned while drunk, the kingdom instantly
reverts to a villain--no matter who.  But in this case the villain is
Black Michael.  Ha! What say you, lad?  Shall we frustrate the rascal,
by having YOU personate the King?"

I was--well!--intoxicated at the thought!  But what would my
sister-in-law say?  Would she--in her Nonconformist
conscience--consider it strictly honorable?  But I swept all scruples
aside.  A King was to be saved!  "I will go," I said.  "Let us on to
Kohlslau--riding like the wind!"  We rode like the wind, furiously,
madly.  Mounted on a wild, dashing bay--known familiarly as the "Bay of
Biscay" from its rough turbulence--I easily kept the lead. But our
horses began to fail.  Suddenly Spitz halted, clapped his hand to his
head, and threw himself from his horse.  "Fools!" he said, "we should
have taken the train!  It will get there an hour before we will!"  He
pointed to a wayside station where the 7.15 excursion train for
Kohlslau was waiting.

"But how dreadfully unmediaeval!--What will the public say?" I began.

"Bother the public!" he said gruffly.  "Who's running this dynasty--you
or I?  Come!"  With the assistance of Fritz he tied up my face with a
handkerchief to simulate toothache, and then, with a shout of defiance,
we three rushed madly into a closely packed third-class carriage.

Never shall I forget the perils, the fatigue, the hopes and fears of
that mad journey.  Panting, perspiring, packed together with cheap
trippers, but exalted with the one hope of saving the King, we at last
staggered out on the Kohlslau platform utterly exhausted.  As we did so
we heard a distant roar from the city. Fritz turned an ashen gray,
Spitz a livid blue.  "Are we too late?" he gasped, as we madly fought
our way into the street, where shouts of "The King!  The King!" were
rending the air.  "Can it be Black Michael?"  But here the crowd
parted, and a procession, preceded by outriders, flashed into the
square.  And there, seated in a carriage beside the most beautiful
red-haired girl I had ever seen, was the King,--the King whom we had
left two hours ago, dead drunk in the hut in the forest!



CHAPTERS III TO XXII (Inclusive)

IN WHICH THINGS GET MIXED

We reeled against each other aghast!  Spitz recovered himself first.
"We must fly!" he said hoarsely.  "If the King has discovered our
trick--we are lost!"

"But where shall we go?" I asked.

"Back to the hut."

We caught the next train to Bock.  An hour later we stood panting
within the hut.  Its walls and ceiling were splashed with sinister red
stains.  "Blood!" I exclaimed joyfully.  "At last we have a real
mediaeval adventure!"

"It's Burgundy, you fool," growled Spitz; "good Burgundy wasted!" At
this moment Fritz appeared dragging in the hut-keeper.

"Where is the King?" demanded Spitz fiercely of the trembling peasant.

"He was carried away an hour ago by Black Michael and taken to the
castle."

"And when did he LEAVE the castle?" roared Spitz.

"He never left the castle, sir, and, alas! I fear never will, alive!"
replied the man, shuddering.

We stared at each other!  Spitz bit his grizzled mustache.  "So," he
said bitterly, "Black Michael has simply anticipated us with the same
game!  We have been tricked.  I knew it could not be the King whom they
crowned!  No!" he added quickly, "I see it all--it was Rupert of
Glasgow!"

"Who is Rupert of Glasgow?" I cried.

"Oh, I really can't go over all that family rot again," grunted Spitz.
"Tell him, Fritz."

Then, taking me aside, Fritz delicately informed me that Rupert of
Glasgow--a young Scotchman--claimed equally with myself descent from
the old Rupert, and that equally with myself he resembled the King.
That Michael had got possession of him on his arrival in the country,
kept him closely guarded in the castle, and had hid his resemblance in
a black wig and false mustache; that the young Scotchman, however,
seemed apparently devoted to Michael and his plots; and there was
undoubtedly some secret understanding between them.  That it was
evidently Michael's trick to have the pretender crowned, and then, by
exposing the fraud and the condition of the real King, excite the
indignation of the duped people, and seat himself on the throne!
"But," I burst out, "shall this base-born pretender remain at Kohlslau
beside the beautiful Princess Flirtia? Let us to Kohlslau at once and
hurl him from the throne!"

"One pretender is as good as another," said Spitz dryly.  "But leave
HIM to me.  'Tis the King we must protect and succor!  As for that
Scotch springald, before midnight I shall have him kidnaped, brought
back to his master in a close carriage, and you--YOU shall take his
place at Kohlslau."

"I will," I said enthusiastically, drawing my sword; "but I have done
nothing yet.  Please let me kill something!"

"Aye, lad!" said Spitz, with a grim smile at my enthusiasm. "There's a
sheep in your path.  Go out and cleave it to the saddle. And bring the
saddle home!"

My sister-in-law might have thought me cruel--but I did it.



CHAP XXIII AND SOME OTHER CHAPS

I know not how it was compassed, but that night Rupert of Glasgow was
left bound and gagged against the door of the castle, and the
night-bell pulled.  And that night I was seated on the throne of the
S'helpburgs.  As I gazed at the Princess Flirtia, glowing in the
characteristic beauty of the S'helpburgs, and admired her striking
profile, I murmured softly and half audibly: "Her nose is as a tower
that looketh toward Damascus."

She looked puzzled, and knitted her pretty brows.  "Is that poetry?"
she asked.

"No" I said promptly.  "It's only part of a song of our great
Ancestor."  As she blushed slightly, I playfully flung around her fair
neck the jeweled collar of the Order of the S'helpburgs--three golden
spheres pendant, quartered from the arms of Lombardy---with the ancient
Syric motto, El Ess Dee.

She toyed with it a moment, and then said softly: "You have changed,
Rupert.  Do ye no ken hoo?"

I looked at her--as surprised at her dialect as at the imputation.

"You don't talk that way, as you did.  And you don't say, 'It WILL be
twelve o'clock,' when you mean, 'It IS twelve o'clock,' nor 'I will be
going out,' when you mean 'I AM.'  And you didn't say, 'Eh, sirs!' or
'Eh, mon,' to any of the Court--nor 'Hoot awa!' nor any of those
things.  And," she added with a divine little pout, "you haven't told
me I was 'sonsie' or 'bonnie' once."

I could with difficulty restrain myself.  Rage, indignation, and
jealousy filled my heart almost to bursting.  I understood it all; that
rascally Scotchman had made the most of his time, and dared to get
ahead of me!  I did not mind being taken for the King, but to be
confounded with this infernal descendant of a gamekeeper--was too much!
Yet with a superhuman effort I remained calm--and even smiled.

"You are not well?" said the Princess earnestly.  "I thought you were
taking too much of the Strasbourg pie at supper!  And you are not
going, surely--so soon?" she added, as I rose.

"I must go at once," I said.  "I have forgotten some important business
at Bock."

"Not boar hunting again?" she said poutingly.

"No, I'm hunting a red dear," I said with that playful subtlety which
would make her take it as a personal compliment, though I was only
thinking of that impostor, and longing to get at him, as I bowed and
withdrew.

In another hour I was before Black Michael's castle at Bock.  These are
lightning changes, I know--and the sovereignty of Trulyruralania WAS
somewhat itinerant--but when a kingdom and a beautiful Princess are at
stake, what are you to do?  Fritz had begged me to take him along, but
I arranged that he should come later, and go up unostentatiously in the
lift.  I was going by way of the moat.  I was to succor the King, but I
fear my real object was to get at Rupert of Glasgow.

I had noticed the day before that a large outside drain pipe, decreed
by the Bock County Council, ran from the moat to the third floor of the
donjon keep.  I surmised that the King was imprisoned on that floor.
Examining the pipe closely, I saw that it was really a pneumatic
dispatch tube, for secretly conveying letters and dispatches from the
castle through the moat beyond the castle walls.  Its extraordinary
size, however, gave me the horrible conviction that it was to be used
to convey the dead body of the King to the moat.  I grew cold with
horror--but I was determined.

I crept up the pipe.  As I expected, it opened funnel-wise into a room
where the poor King was playing poker with Black Michael.  It took me
but a moment to dash through the window into the room, push the King
aside, gag and bind Black Michael, and lower him by a stout rope into
the pipe he had destined for another.  Having him in my power, I
lowered him until I heard his body splash in the water in the lower
part of the pipe.  Then I proceeded to draw him up again, intending to
question him in regard to Rupert of Glasgow. But this was difficult, as
his saturated clothing made him fit the smooth pipe closely.  At last I
had him partly up, when I was amazed at a rush of water from the pipe
which flooded the room.  I dropped him and pulled him up again with the
same result.  Then in a flash I saw it all.  His body, acting like a
piston in the pipe, had converted it into a powerful pump.  Mad with
joy, I rapidly lowered and pulled him up again and again, until the
castle was flooded--and the moat completely drained!  I had created the
diversion I wished; the tenants of the castle were disorganized and
bewildered in trying to escape from the deluge, and the moat was
accessible to my friends.  Placing the poor King on a table to be out
of the water, and tying up his head in my handkerchief to disguise him
from Michael's guards, I drew my sword and plunged downstairs with the
cataract in search of the miscreant Rupert.  I reached the drawbridge,
when I heard the sounds of tumult and was twice fired at,--once, as I
have since learned, by my friends, under the impression that I was the
escaping Rupert of Glasgow, and once by Black Michael's myrmidons,
under the belief that I was the King.  I was struck by the fact that
these resemblances were confusing and unfortunate!  At this moment,
however, I caught sight of a kilted figure leaping from a lower window
into the moat.  Some instinct impelled me to follow it.  It rapidly
crossed the moat and plunged into the forest, with me in pursuit.  I
gained upon it; suddenly it turned, and I found myself again confronted
with MYSELF--and apparently the King!  But that very resemblance made
me recognize the Scotch pretender, Rupert of Glasgow.  Yet he would
have been called a "braw laddie," and his handsome face showed a
laughing good humor, even while he opposed me, claymore in hand.

"Bide a wee, Maister Rupert Razorbill," he said lightly, lowering his
sword, "before we slit ane anither's weasands.  I'm no claimin' any
descent frae kings, and I'm no acceptin' any auld wife's clavers
against my women forbears, as ye are!  I'm just paid gude honest siller
by Black Michael for the using of ma face and figure--sic time as his
Majesty is tae worse frae trink!  And I'm commeesioned frae Michael to
ask ye what price YE would take to join me in performing these
duties--turn and turn aboot.  Eh, laddie--but he would pay ye mair than
that daft beggar, Spitz."

Rage and disgust overpowered me.  "And THIS is my answer," I said,
rushing upon him.

I have said earlier in these pages that I was a "strong" swordsman. In
point of fact, I had carefully studied in the transpontine theatres
that form of melodramatic mediaeval sword-play known as "two up and two
down."  To my disgust, however, this wretched Scotchman did not seem to
understand it, but in a twinkling sent my sword flying over my head.
Before I could recover it, he had mounted a horse ready saddled in the
wood, and, shouting to me that he would take my "compleements" to the
Princess, galloped away. Even then I would have pursued him afoot, but,
hearing shouts behind me, I turned as Spitz and Fritz rode up.

"Has the King escaped to Kohlslau?" asked Fritz, staring at me.

"No," I said, "but Rupert of Glasgow"--

"--Rupert of Glasgow," growled Spitz.  "We've settled him!  He's gagged
and bound and is now on his way to the frontier in a close carriage."

"Rupert--on his way to the frontier?" I gasped.

"Yes.  Two of my men found him, disguised with a handkerchief over his
face, trying to escape from the castle.  And while we were looking for
the King, whom we supposed was with you, they have sent the rascally
Scotchman home."

"Fool!" I gasped.  "Rupert of Glasgow has just left me!  YOU HAVE
DEPORTED YOUR OWN KING."  And overcome by my superhuman exertions, I
sank unconscious to the ground.

When I came to, I found myself in a wagon lit, speeding beyond the
Trulyruralania frontier.  On my berth was lying a missive with the seal
of the S'helpburgs.  Tearing it open I recognized the handwriting of
the Princess Flirtia.


MY DEAR RUPERT,--Owing to the confusion that arises from there being so
many of you, I have concluded to accept the hand of the Duke Michael.
I may not become a Queen, but I shall bring rest to my country, and
Michael assures me in his playful manner that "three of a kind," "even
of the same color," do not always win at poker.  It will tranquilize
you somewhat to know that the Lord Chancellor assures me that on
examining the records of the dynasty he finds that my ancestor Rupert
never left his kingdom during his entire reign, and that consequently
your ancestress has been grossly maligned.  I am sending typewritten
copies of this to Rupert of Glasgow and the King.  Farewell.

FLIRTIA.


Once a year, at Christmastide, I receive a simple foreign hamper via
Charing Cross, marked "Return empty."  I take it in silence to my own
room, and there, opening it, I find--unseen by any other eyes but my
own--a modest pate de foie gras, of the kind I ate with the Princess
Flirtia.  I take out the pate, replace the label, and have the hamper
reconveyed to Charing Cross.




THE STOLEN CIGAR CASE

By A. CO--N D--LE

I found Hemlock Jones in the old Brook Street lodgings, musing before
the fire.  With the freedom of an old friend I at once threw myself in
my usual familiar attitude at his feet, and gently caressed his boot.
I was induced to do this for two reasons: one, that it enabled me to
get a good look at his bent, concentrated face, and the other, that it
seemed to indicate my reverence for his superhuman insight.  So
absorbed was he even then, in tracking some mysterious clue, that he
did not seem to notice me.  But therein I was wrong--as I always was in
my attempt to understand that powerful intellect.

"It is raining," he said, without lifting his head.

"You have been out, then?" I said quickly.

"No.  But I see that your umbrella is wet, and that your overcoat has
drops of water on it."

I sat aghast at his penetration.  After a pause he said carelessly, as
if dismissing the subject: "Besides, I hear the rain on the window.
Listen."

I listened.  I could scarcely credit my ears, but there was the soft
pattering of drops on the panes.  It was evident there was no deceiving
this man!

"Have you been busy lately?" I asked, changing the subject.  "What new
problem--given up by Scotland Yard as inscrutable--has occupied that
gigantic intellect?"

He drew back his foot slightly, and seemed to hesitate ere he returned
it to its original position.  Then he answered wearily: "Mere
trifles--nothing to speak of.  The Prince Kupoli has been here to get
my advice regarding the disappearance of certain rubies from the
Kremlin; the Rajah of Pootibad, after vainly beheading his entire
bodyguard, has been obliged to seek my assistance to recover a jeweled
sword.  The Grand Duchess of Pretzel-Brauntswig is desirous of
discovering where her husband was on the night of February 14; and last
night"--he lowered his voice slightly--"a lodger in this very house,
meeting me on the stairs, wanted to know why they didn't answer his
bell."

I could not help smiling--until I saw a frown gathering on his
inscrutable forehead.

"Pray remember," he said coldly, "that it was through such an
apparently trivial question that I found out Why Paul Ferroll Killed
His Wife, and What Happened to Jones!"

I became dumb at once.  He paused for a moment, and then suddenly
changing back to his usual pitiless, analytical style, he said: "When I
say these are trifles, they are so in comparison to an affair that is
now before me.  A crime has been committed,--and, singularly enough,
against myself.  You start," he said.  "You wonder who would have dared
to attempt it.  So did I; nevertheless, it has been done.  I have been
ROBBED!"

"YOU robbed!  You, Hemlock Jones, the Terror of Peculators!" I gasped
in amazement, arising and gripping the table as I faced him.

"Yes!  Listen.  I would confess it to no other.  But YOU who have
followed my career, who know my methods; you, for whom I have partly
lifted the veil that conceals my plans from ordinary humanity,--you,
who have for years rapturously accepted my confidences, passionately
admired my inductions and inferences, placed yourself at my beck and
call, become my slave, groveled at my feet, given up your practice
except those few unremunerative and rapidly decreasing patients to
whom, in moments of abstraction over MY problems, you have administered
strychnine for quinine and arsenic for Epsom salts; you, who have
sacrificed anything and everybody to me,--YOU I make my confidant!"

I arose and embraced him warmly, yet he was already so engrossed in
thought that at the same moment he mechanically placed his hand upon
his watch chain as if to consult the time.  "Sit down," he said.  "Have
a cigar?"

"I have given up cigar smoking," I said.

"Why?" he asked.

I hesitated, and perhaps colored.  I had really given it up because,
with my diminished practice, it was too expensive.  I could afford only
a pipe.  "I prefer a pipe," I said laughingly. "But tell me of this
robbery.  What have you lost?"

He arose, and planting himself before the fire with his hands under his
coattails, looked down upon me reflectively for a moment.  "Do you
remember the cigar case presented to me by the Turkish Ambassador for
discovering the missing favorite of the Grand Vizier in the fifth
chorus girl at the Hilarity Theatre?  It was that one. I mean the cigar
case.  It was incrusted with diamonds."

"And the largest one had been supplanted by paste," I said.

"Ah," he said, with a reflective smile, "you know that?"

"You told me yourself.  I remember considering it a proof of your
extraordinary perception.  But, by Jove, you don't mean to say you have
lost it?"

He was silent for a moment.  "No; it has been stolen, it is true, but I
shall still find it.  And by myself alone!  In your profession, my dear
fellow, when a member is seriously ill, he does not prescribe for
himself, but calls in a brother doctor.  Therein we differ.  I shall
take this matter in my own hands."

"And where could you find better?" I said enthusiastically.  "I should
say the cigar case is as good as recovered already."

"I shall remind you of that again," he said lightly.  "And now, to show
you my confidence in your judgment, in spite of my determination to
pursue this alone, I am willing to listen to any suggestions from you."

He drew a memorandum book from his pocket and, with a grave smile, took
up his pencil.

I could scarcely believe my senses.  He, the great Hemlock Jones,
accepting suggestions from a humble individual like myself!  I kissed
his hand reverently, and began in a joyous tone:

"First, I should advertise, offering a reward; I should give the same
intimation in hand-bills, distributed at the 'pubs' and the
pastry-cooks'.  I should next visit the different pawnbrokers; I should
give notice at the police station.  I should examine the servants.  I
should thoroughly search the house and my own pockets. I speak
relatively," I added, with a laugh.  "Of course I mean YOUR own."

He gravely made an entry of these details.

"Perhaps," I added, "you have already done this?"

"Perhaps," he returned enigmatically.  "Now, my dear friend," he
continued, putting the note-book in his pocket and rising, "would you
excuse me for a few moments?  Make yourself perfectly at home until I
return; there may be some things," he added with a sweep of his hand
toward his heterogeneously filled shelves, "that may interest you and
while away the time.  There are pipes and tobacco in that corner."

Then nodding to me with the same inscrutable face he left the room. I
was too well accustomed to his methods to think much of his
unceremonious withdrawal, and made no doubt he was off to investigate
some clue which had suddenly occurred to his active intelligence.

Left to myself I cast a cursory glance over his shelves.  There were a
number of small glass jars containing earthy substances, labeled
"Pavement and Road Sweepings," from the principal thoroughfares and
suburbs of London, with the sub-directions "for identifying
foot-tracks."  There were several other jars, labeled "Fluff from
Omnibus and Road Car Seats," "Cocoanut Fibre and Rope Strands from
Mattings in Public Places," "Cigarette Stumps and Match Ends from Floor
of Palace Theatre, Row A, 1 to 50." Everywhere were evidences of this
wonderful man's system and perspicacity.

I was thus engaged when I heard the slight creaking of a door, and I
looked up as a stranger entered.  He was a rough-looking man, with a
shabby overcoat and a still more disreputable muffler around his throat
and the lower part of his face.  Considerably annoyed at his intrusion,
I turned upon him rather sharply, when, with a mumbled, growling
apology for mistaking the room, he shuffled out again and closed the
door.  I followed him quickly to the landing and saw that he
disappeared down the stairs.  With my mind full of the robbery, the
incident made a singular impression upon me.  I knew my friend's habit
of hasty absences from his room in his moments of deep inspiration; it
was only too probable that, with his powerful intellect and magnificent
perceptive genius concentrated on one subject, he should be careless of
his own belongings, and no doubt even forget to take the ordinary
precaution of locking up his drawers.  I tried one or two and found
that I was right, although for some reason I was unable to open one to
its fullest extent.  The handles were sticky, as if some one had opened
them with dirty fingers.  Knowing Hemlock's fastidious cleanliness, I
resolved to inform him of this circumstance, but I forgot it, alas!
until--but I am anticipating my story.

His absence was strangely prolonged.  I at last seated myself by the
fire, and lulled by warmth and the patter of the rain on the window, I
fell asleep.  I may have dreamt, for during my sleep I had a vague
semi-consciousness as of hands being softly pressed on my pockets--no
doubt induced by the story of the robbery.  When I came fully to my
senses, I found Hemlock Jones sitting on the other side of the hearth,
his deeply concentrated gaze fixed on the fire.

"I found you so comfortably asleep that I could not bear to awaken
you," he said, with a smile.

I rubbed my eyes.  "And what news?" I asked.  "How have you succeeded?"

"Better than I expected," he said, "and I think," he added, tapping his
note-book, "I owe much to YOU."

Deeply gratified, I awaited more.  But in vain.  I ought to have
remembered that in his moods Hemlock Jones was reticence itself.  I
told him simply of the strange intrusion, but he only laughed.

Later, when I arose to go, he looked at me playfully.  "If you were a
married man," he said, "I would advise you not to go home until you had
brushed your sleeve.  There are a few short brown sealskin hairs on the
inner side of your forearm, just where they would have adhered if your
arm had encircled a seal-skin coat with some pressure!"

"For once you are at fault," I said triumphantly; "the hair is my own,
as you will perceive; I have just had it cut at the hairdresser's, and
no doubt this arm projected beyond the apron."

He frowned slightly, yet, nevertheless, on my turning to go he embraced
me warmly--a rare exhibition in that man of ice.  He even helped me on
with my overcoat and pulled out and smoothed down the flaps of my
pockets.  He was particular, too, in fitting my arm in my overcoat
sleeve, shaking the sleeve down from the armhole to the cuff with his
deft fingers.  "Come again soon!" he said, clapping me on the back.

"At any and all times," I said enthusiastically; "I only ask ten
minutes twice a day to eat a crust at my office, and four hours' sleep
at night, and the rest of my time is devoted to you always, as you
know."

"It is indeed," he said, with his impenetrable smile.

Nevertheless, I did not find him at home when I next called.  One
afternoon, when nearing my own home, I met him in one of his favorite
disguises,--a long blue swallow-tailed coat, striped cotton trousers,
large turn-over collar, blacked face, and white hat, carrying a
tambourine.  Of course to others the disguise was perfect, although it
was known to myself, and I passed him--according to an old
understanding between us--without the slightest recognition, trusting
to a later explanation.  At another time, as I was making a
professional visit to the wife of a publican at the East End, I saw
him, in the disguise of a broken-down artisan, looking into the window
of an adjacent pawnshop.  I was delighted to see that he was evidently
following my suggestions, and in my joy I ventured to tip him a wink;
it was abstractedly returned.

Two days later I received a note appointing a meeting at his lodgings
that night.  That meeting, alas! was the one memorable occurrence of my
life, and the last meeting I ever had with Hemlock Jones!  I will try
to set it down calmly, though my pulses still throb with the
recollection of it.

I found him standing before the fire, with that look upon his face
which I had seen only once or twice in our acquaintance--a look which I
may call an absolute concatenation of inductive and deductive
ratiocination--from which all that was human, tender, or sympathetic
was absolutely discharged.  He was simply an icy algebraic symbol!
Indeed, his whole being was concentrated to that extent that his
clothes fitted loosely, and his head was absolutely so much reduced in
size by his mental compression that his hat tipped back from his
forehead and literally hung on his massive ears.

After I had entered he locked the doors, fastened the windows, and even
placed a chair before the chimney.  As I watched these significant
precautions with absorbing interest, he suddenly drew a revolver and,
presenting it to my temple, said in low, icy tones:

"Hand over that cigar case!"

Even in my bewilderment my reply was truthful, spontaneous, and
involuntary.  "I haven't got it," I said.

He smiled bitterly, and threw down his revolver.  "I expected that
reply!  Then let me now confront you with something more awful, more
deadly, more relentless and convincing than that mere lethal
weapon,--the damning inductive and deductive proofs of your guilt!" He
drew from his pocket a roll of paper and a note-book.

"But surely," I gasped, "you are joking!  You could not for a moment
believe"--

"Silence!  Sit down!"  I obeyed.

"You have condemned yourself," he went on pitilessly.  "Condemned
yourself on my processes,--processes familiar to you, applauded by you,
accepted by you for years!  We will go back to the time when you first
saw the cigar case.  Your expressions," he said in cold, deliberate
tones, consulting his paper, "were, 'How beautiful!  I wish it were
mine.'  This was your first step in crime--and my first indication.
From 'I WISH it were mine' to 'I WILL have it mine,' and the mere
detail, 'HOW CAN I make it mine?' the advance was obvious.  Silence!
But as in my methods it was necessary that there should be an
overwhelming inducement to the crime, that unholy admiration of yours
for the mere trinket itself was not enough.  You are a smoker of
cigars."

"But," I burst out passionately, "I told you I had given up smoking
cigars."

"Fool!" he said coldly, "that is the SECOND time you have committed
yourself.  Of course you told me!  What more natural than for you to
blazon forth that prepared and unsolicited statement to PREVENT
accusation.  Yet, as I said before, even that wretched attempt to cover
up your tracks was not enough.  I still had to find that overwhelming,
impelling motive necessary to affect a man like you. That motive I
found in the strongest of all impulses--Love, I suppose you would call
it," he added bitterly, "that night you called!  You had brought the
most conclusive proofs of it on your sleeve."

"But--" I almost screamed.

"Silence!" he thundered.  "I know what you would say.  You would say
that even if you had embraced some Young Person in a sealskin coat,
what had that to do with the robbery?  Let me tell you, then, that that
sealskin coat represented the quality and character of your fatal
entanglement!  You bartered your honor for it--that stolen cigar case
was the purchaser of the sealskin coat!

"Silence!  Having thoroughly established your motive, I now proceed to
the commission of the crime itself.  Ordinary people would have begun
with that--with an attempt to discover the whereabouts of the missing
object.  These are not MY methods."

So overpowering was his penetration that, although I knew myself
innocent, I licked my lips with avidity to hear the further details of
this lucid exposition of my crime.

"You committed that theft the night I showed you the cigar case, and
after I had carelessly thrown it in that drawer.  You were sitting in
that chair, and I had arisen to take something from that shelf.  In
that instant you secured your booty without rising. Silence!  Do you
remember when I helped you on with your overcoat the other night?  I
was particular about fitting your arm in. While doing so I measured
your arm with a spring tape measure, from the shoulder to the cuff.  A
later visit to your tailor confirmed that measurement.  It proved to be
THE EXACT DISTANCE BETWEEN YOUR CHAIR AND THAT DRAWER!"

I sat stunned.

"The rest are mere corroborative details!  You were again tampering
with the drawer when I discovered you doing so!  Do not start!  The
stranger that blundered into the room with a muffler on--was myself!
More, I had placed a little soap on the drawer handles when I purposely
left you alone.  The soap was on your hand when I shook it at parting.
I softly felt your pockets, when you were asleep, for further
developments.  I embraced you when you left--that I might feel if you
had the cigar case or any other articles hidden on your body.  This
confirmed me in the belief that you had already disposed of it in the
manner and for the purpose I have shown you.  As I still believed you
capable of remorse and confession, I twice allowed you to see I was on
your track: once in the garb of an itinerant negro minstrel, and the
second time as a workman looking in the window of the pawnshop where
you pledged your booty."

"But," I burst out, "if you had asked the pawnbroker, you would have
seen how unjust"--

"Fool!" he hissed, "that was one of YOUR suggestions--to search the
pawnshops!  Do you suppose I followed any of your suggestions, the
suggestions of the thief?  On the contrary, they told me what to avoid."

"And I suppose," I said bitterly, "you have not even searched your
drawer?"

"No," he said calmly.

I was for the first time really vexed.  I went to the nearest drawer
and pulled it out sharply.  It stuck as it had before, leaving a part
of the drawer unopened.  By working it, however, I discovered that it
was impeded by some obstacle that had slipped to the upper part of the
drawer, and held it firmly fast.  Inserting my hand, I pulled out the
impeding object.  It was the missing cigar case!  I turned to him with
a cry of joy.

But I was appalled at his expression.  A look of contempt was now added
to his acute, penetrating gaze.  "I have been mistaken," he said
slowly; "I had not allowed for your weakness and cowardice!  I thought
too highly of you even in your guilt!  But I see now why you tampered
with that drawer the other night.  By some inexplicable means--possibly
another theft--you took the cigar case out of pawn and, like a whipped
hound, restored it to me in this feeble, clumsy fashion.  You thought
to deceive me, Hemlock Jones! More, you thought to destroy my
infallibility.  Go!  I give you your liberty.  I shall not summon the
three policemen who wait in the adjoining room--but out of my sight
forever!"

As I stood once more dazed and petrified, he took me firmly by the ear
and led me into the hall, closing the door behind him.  This reopened
presently, wide enough to permit him to thrust out my hat, overcoat,
umbrella, and overshoes, and then closed against me forever!

I never saw him again.  I am bound to say, however, that thereafter my
business increased, I recovered much of my old practice, and a few of
my patients recovered also.  I became rich.  I had a brougham and a
house in the West End.  But I often wondered, pondering on that
wonderful man's penetration and insight, if, in some lapse of
consciousness, I had not really stolen his cigar case!




GOLLY AND THE CHRISTIAN,

OR

THE MINX AND THE MANXMAN

By H-LL C--NE


BOOK I

Golly Coyle was the only granddaughter of a vague and somewhat simple
clergyman who existed, with an aunt, solely for Golly's epistolary
purposes.  There was, of course, intermediate ancestry,--notably a dead
mother who was French, and therefore responsible for any later
naughtiness in Golly,--but they have no purpose here. They lived in the
Isle of Man.  Golly knew a good deal of Man, for even at the age of
twelve she was in love with John Gale--only son of Lord Gale, who was
connected with the Tempests.  Gales, however, were frequent and
remarkable along the coast, so that it was not singular that one day
she found John "coming on" on a headland where she was sitting.  His
dog had "pointed" her.  "It's exceedingly impolite to point to anything
you want," said Golly. Touched by this, and overcome by a strange
emotion, John Gale turned away and went to Canada.  Slight as the
incident was, it showed that inborn chivalry to women, that desire for
the Perfect Life, that intense eagerness to incarnate Christianity in
modern society, which afterward distinguished him.  Golly loved him!
For all that, she still remained a "tomboy" as she was,--robbing
orchards, mimicking tramps and policemen, buttering the stairs and the
steps of houses, tying kettles to dogs' tails, and marching in a white
jersey, with the curate's hat on, through the streets of the village.
"Gol dern my skin!" said the dear old clergyman, as he tried to emerge
from a surplice which Golly had stitched together; "what spirits the
child DO have!"  Yet everybody loved her!  And when John Gale returned
from Canada, and looked into her big blue eyes one day at church, small
wonder that he immediately went off again to Paris, and an extended
Continental sojourn, with a serious leaning to theology!  Golly bore
his absence meekly but characteristically; got a boat, disported like a
duck in the water, attempted to elope with a boy appropriately named
Drake, but encountered a half gale at sea and a whole Gale in John on a
yacht, who rescued them both.  Convinced now that there was but one way
to escape from his Fate--Golly!--John Gale took holy orders and at once
started for London.  As he stood on the deck of the steamer he heard an
imbecile chuckle in his ear.  It was the simple old clergyman: "You are
going to London to join the Church, John; Golly is going there, too, as
hospital nurse.  There's a pair of you! He! he!  Look after her, John,
and protect her Manx simplicity." Before John could recover himself,
Golly was at his side executing the final steps of a "cellar-door flap
jig" to the light-hearted refrain:--

     "We are a simple family--we are--we are--we are!"


And even as her pure young voice arose above the screams of the
departure whistle, she threw a double back-somersault on the
quarterdeck, cleverly alighting on the spikes of the wheel before the
delighted captain.

"Jingle my electric bells," he said, looking at the bright young thing,
"but you're a regular minx--"

"I beg your pardon," interrupted John Gale, with a quick flush.

"I mean a regular MANX," said the captain hurriedly.

A singular paleness crossed the deeply religious face of John.  As the
vessel rose on the waves, he passed his hand hurriedly first across his
brows and then over his high-buttoned clerical waistcoat, that visible
sign of a devoted ascetic life!  Then murmuring in his low, deep voice,
"Brandy, steward," he disappeared below.


BOOK II

Glorious as were Golly's spirits, exquisitely simple her worldly
ignorance, and irresistible her powers of mimicry, strangely enough
they were considered out of place in St. Barabbas' Hospital.  A
light-hearted disposition to mistake a blister for a poultice; that
rare Manx conscientiousness which made her give double doses to the
patients as a compensation when she had omitted to give them a single
one, and the faculty of bursting into song at the bedside of a dying
patient, produced some liveliness not unmixed with perplexity among the
hospital staff.  It is true, however, that her performance of
clog-dancing during the night-watches drew a larger and more persistent
attendance of students and young surgeons than ever was seen before.
Yet everybody loved her!  Even her patients! "If it amooses you, miss,
to make me tyke the pills wot's meant for the lydy in the next ward, I
ain't complyning," said an East End newsboy.  "When ye tyke off the
style of the doctor wot wisits me, miss, and imitates his wyes, Lawd!
it does me as much good as his mixtures," said a consumptive charwoman.
Even thus, old and young basked in the radiant youth of Golly.  She
found time to write to her family:--


DEAR OLD PALS!  I'm here.  J'y suis! bet your boots!  While you're
wondering what has become of the Bright Young Thing, the B. Y. T. is
lookin' out of the winder of St. Barabbas' Hospital--just taking in all
of dear, roaring, dirty London in one gulp!  Such a place--Lordy!  I've
been waiting three hours to see the crowd go by, and they haven't gone
yet!  Such crowds, such busses,--all green and blue, only a penny fare,
and you can ride on top if you want to! Think of that, you dear old
Manx people!  But there--"the bell goes a-ringing for Sarah!"--they're
calling for Nurse!  That's the worst of this job: they're always
a-dyin' just as you're getting interested in something else!  Ta-ta!

GOLLY!


Then her dear old grandfather wrote:


I'm wondering where my diddleums, Golly, is!  We all miss you so much,
deary, though we don't miss so many little things as when you were
here.  My dear, conscientious, unselfish little girl!  You don't say
where John Gale is.  Is he still protecting you--he-he!--you giddy,
naughty thing!  People wonder on the island why I let you go alone to
London--they forget your dear mother was a Frenchwoman!  If you see
anything your dear old grandfather would like--send it on.

GRANFER.


Later, her aunt wrote:--


Have you seen the Queen yet, and does she wear her crown at breakfast?
You might get over the area railing at Buckingham Palace--it would be
nothing for a girl like you to do--and see if you can find out.


To these letters Golly answered, in her own light-hearted way:--


DEAR GRANKINS,--I haven't seen John much--but I think he's like the
Private Secretary at the play--he "don't like London."  Lordy!
there--I've let it out!  I've been to a theayter.  Nurse Jinny Jones
and me scrouged into the pit one night without paying, "pertendin'," as
we were in uniform, we had come to take out a "Lydy" that had fainted.
Such larks! and such a glorious theayter! I'll tell you another time.
Tell aunty the Queen's always out when I call.  But that's nothing,
everybody else is so affable and polite in London.  Gentlemen--"real
toffs," they call 'em--whom you don't know from Adam--think nothing of
speaking to you in the street.  Why, Nurse Jinny says--but there
another patient's going off who by rights oughter have died only
to-morrow.  "To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow," as that
barn-stormer actor said.  But they're always calling for that giddy
young thing.

Your GOLLY.


Meantime, John Gale, having abruptly left Golly at the door of St.
Barabbas' hospital, tactfully avoiding an unseemly altercation with the
cab-driver regarding her exact fare, pursued his way thoughtfully to
the residence of his uncle, the First Lord of the Admiralty.  He found
his Lordship in his bath-room.  He was leaning over the bath-tub, which
was half full of water, contemplating with some anxiety the model of a
line-of-battle ship which was floating on it, bottom upward.  "I don't
think it can be quite right--do you?" he said, nervously grasping his
nephew's hand as he pointed to the capsized vessel; "yet they always do
it.  Tell me!" he went on appealingly, "tell me, as a professing
Christian and a Perfect Man--is it quite right?"

"I should think, sir," responded John Gale, with uncompromising
truthfulness, "that the average vessel of commerce is not built in that
way."

"Yet," said the First Lord of the Admiralty, with a far-off look, "they
all do it!  And they don't steer!  The larger they are and the more
recent the model, the less they steer.  Dear me--you ought to see 'em
go round and round in that tub."  Then, apparently recalling the
probable purpose of John's visit, he led the way into his
dressing-room.  "So you are in London, dear boy.  Is there any little
thing you want?  I have," he continued, absently fumbling in the
drawers of his dressing-table, "a few curacies and a bishopric
somewhere, but with these blessed models--I can't think where they are.
Or what would you say to a nice chaplaincy in the navy, with a becoming
uniform, on one of those thingummies?"  He pointed to the bath-room.
"Stay," he continued, as he passed his hand over his perplexed brows,
"now I think of it--you're quite unorthodox! Dear me! that wouldn't do.
You see, Drake,"--he paused, as John Gale started,--"I mean Sir Francis
Drake, once suspended his chaplain for unorthodoxy, according to
Froude's book.  These admirals are dreadfully strict Churchmen.  No
matter!  Come again some other time," he added, gently pushing his
nephew downstairs and into the street, "and we'll see about it."

With a sinking heart, John turned his steps toward Westminster.  He
would go and see Golly; perhaps he had not looked after her as he
ought.  Suddenly a remembered voice, in mimicking accents, fell upon
his ear with the quotation, "Do you know?"  Then, in a hansom passing
swiftly by him, Golly, in hospital dress with flying ribbons, appeared,
sitting between Lord Brownstone Ewer and Francis Horatio Nelson Drake,
completely grown up.  And from behind floated the inexpressibly sad
refrain, "Hi tiddli hi!"

This is how it happened.  One morning, Jinny Jones, another hospital
nurse, had said to her, "Have you any objection, dear, to seeing a
friend of another gent, a friend of mine?"

"None in the least, dear," said Golly.  "I want to see all that can be
seen, and do all that can be done in London, and know the glory
thereof.  I only require that I shall be allowed to love John Gale
whenever he permits it, which isn't often, and that I may be permitted
to write simple letters to my doting relations at the rate of twelve
pages a day, giving an account--MY OWN account--of my doings.  There!
Go on now!  Bring on your bears."

They had visited the chambers which Lord Brownstone and Drake occupied
together, and in girlish innocence had put on the gentlemen's clothes
and danced before them.  Then they all went to the theatre, where
Golly's delightful simplicity and childish ignorance of the world had
charmed them.  Everything to her was new, strange, and thrilling.  She
even leaned from the carriage windows to see the "wheels go round."
She was surprised at the number of people in the theatre, and insisted
on knowing if it was church, because they all sat there in their best
clothes so quietly.  She believed that the play was real, and
frequently, from a stage box, interrupted the acting with explanations.
She informed the heroine of the design of the villain waiting at the
wings.  And when the aged mother of the heroine was dying of starvation
in a hovel, and she threw a bag of bonbons on the stage, with the
vociferous declaration that "Lord Brownstone had just given them to
her--but--Lordy!--SHE didn't want them," they were obliged to lead her
away, closely followed by an usher and a policeman.  "To think," she
wrote to John Gale, "that the audience only laughed and shouted, and
never offered to help!  And yet look at the churches in London, where
they dare to preach the gospel!"

Fired by this simple letter, and alarmed by Golly's simplicity, John
Gale went to his clerical chief, Archdeacon Luxury, and demanded
permission to preach next Sunday.  "Certainly," said the Archdeacon;
"you shall take my curate's place.  I shall inform the congregation
that you are the son of Lord Gale.  They are very particular
churchmen--all society people--and of course will be satisfied with the
work of the Lord, especially," he added, with a polite smile, "when
that work happens to be--the Lord Gale's son." Accordingly, the next
Sunday, John Gale occupied the pulpit of St. Swithin.  But an
unexpected event happened.  His pent-up eagerness to denounce the
present methods of Christianity, his fullness of utterance, defeated
his purpose.  He was overcome with a kind of pulpit fright.  His ideas
of time and place fled him.  After beginning, "Mr. Chairman, in rising
to propose the toast of our worthy Archdeacon--Fellow Manxmen--the
present moment--er--er--the proudest in my--er--life--Dearly beloved
Golly--unaccustomed as I am to public speaking," he abruptly delivered
the benediction and sat down.  The incident, however, provoked little
attention.  The congregation, accustomed to sleep through the sermon,
awoke at the usual time and went home.  Only a single Scotchwoman said
to him in passing: "Verra weel for a beginning, laddie.  But give it
hotter to 'em next time."  Discomfited and bewildered, he communed with
himself gloomily.  "I can't marry Golly.  I can't talk.  I hate
society.  What's to be done?  I have it!  I'll go into a monastery."

He went into a monastery in Bishopsgate Street, reached by a threepenny
'bus.  He gave out vaguely that he had got into "Something Good, in the
City."  Society was satisfied.  Only Golly suspected the truth.  She
wrote to her grandfather:--


"I saw John Gale the other day with a crowd following him in the
Strand.  He had on only a kind of brown serge dressing-gown, tied
around his waist by a rope, and a hood on his head.  I think his poor
'toe-toes' were in sandals, and I dare say his legs were cold, poor
dear.  However, if he calls THAT protection of Golly--I don't! I might
be run off at any moment--for all he'd help.  No matter! If this Court
understands herself, and she thinks she do, Golly can take care of
herself--you bet."


Nevertheless, Golly lost her place at the hospital through her heroic
defense of her friend Jinny Jones, who had been deceived by Lord
Brownstone Ewer.  "You would drive that poor girl into the street," she
said furiously to the Chairman of the Board, throwing her cap and apron
in their faces.  "You're a lot of rotten old hypocrites, and I'm glad
to get shut of you."  Not content with that, she went to Drake and
demanded that he should make his friend Lord Brownstone marry Jinny.

"Sorry--awfully sorry--my dear Golly, but he's engaged to a rich
American girl who is to pay his debts; but I'll see that he does
something handsome for Jinny.  And YOU, my child, what are YOU going to
do without a situation?" he added, with touching sympathy. "You see,
I've some vague idea of marrying you myself," he concluded meditatively.

"Thank you for nothing," interrupted Golly gayly, "but I can take care
of myself and follow out my mission like John Gale."

"There's a pair of you, certainly," said Drake, with a tinge of jealous
bitterness.

"You bet it's 'a pair' that will take your 'two knaves,' you and your
Lord Brownstone," returned Golly, dropping a mock courtesy. "Ta-ta; I'm
going on the stage."


BOOK III

She went first into a tobacconist's--and sold cigarettes. Sometimes she
suffered from actual want, and ate fried fish.  "Do you know how nice
fried fish tastes in London,--you on 'the Oilan'?" she wrote gayly.
"I'm getting on splendidly; so's John Gale, I suppose, though he's
looking cadaverous from starving himself all round.  Tell aunty I
haven't seen the Queen yet, though after all I really believe she has
not seen me."

Then, after a severe struggle, she succeeded in getting on the stage as
a song and dance girl.  She sang melodiously and danced divinely, so
remarkably that the ignorant public, knowing her to be a Manx girl, and
vaguely associating her with the symbol of the Isle of Man, supposed
she had three legs.  She was the success of the season; her cup of
ambition was filled.  It was slightly embittered by the news that her
friend Jinny Jones had killed herself in the church at the wedding of
her recreant lover and the American heiress.  But the affair was
scarcely alluded to by the Society papers--who were naturally shocked
at the bad taste of the deceased.  And even Golly forgot it all--on the
stage.


BOOK IV

Meanwhile John Gale, or Brother Boreas, as he was known in the
monastery, was submitting--among other rigors--to an exceptionally
severe winter in Bishopsgate Street, which seemed to have an Arctic
climate of its own,--possibly induced by the "freezing-out" process of
certain stock companies in its vicinity.

"You are miserable, and eager to get out in the wicked world again, my
son," said the delightful old Superior, as he sat by the only fire,
sipping a glass of mulled port, when John came in from shoveling snow
outside.  "I, therefore, merely to try you, shall make you gatekeeper.
The keys of the monastery front door are under the door-mat in my cell,
but I am a sound sleeper."  He smiled seraphically, and winked casually
as he sipped his port. "We will call it, if you please--a penance."

John threw himself in an agony of remorse and shame at the feet of the
Superior.  "It isn't of myself I'm thinking," he confessed wildly, "but
of that poor young man, Brother Bones, in the next cell to mine.  He is
a living skeleton, has got only one lung and an atrophied brain.  A
night out might do him good."

The Father Superior frowned.  "Do you know who he is?"

"No."

"His real name is Jones.  Why do you start?  You have heard it before?"

John had started, thinking of Jinny Jones, Golly's deserted and
self-immolated friend.

"It is an uncommon name," he stammered--"for a monastery, I mean."

"He is or was an uncommon man!" said the Superior gravely.  "But," he
added resignedly, "we cannot pick and choose our company here. Most of
us have done something and have our own reasons for this retreat.
Brother Polygamus escaped here from the persecutions of his sixth wife.
Even I," continued the Superior with a gentle smile, putting his feet
comfortably on the mantelpiece, "have had my little fling, and the dear
boys used to say--ahem!--but this is mere worldly vanity.  You alone,
my dear son," he went on with slight severity, "seem to be wanting in
some criminality, or--shall I say?--some appropriate besetting sin to
qualify you for this holy retreat.  An absolutely gratuitous and
blameless idiocy appears to be your only peculiarity, and for this you
must do penance.  From this day henceforth, I make you doorkeeper!  Go
on with your shoveling at present, and shut the door behind you;
there's a terrible draught in these corridors."

For three days John Gale underwent an agony of doubt and determination,
and it still snowed in Bishopsgate Street.

On the fourth evening he went to Brother Bones.

"Would you like to have an evening out?"

"I would," said Brother Bones.

"What would you do?"

"I would go to see my remaining sister."  His left eyelid trembled
slowly in his cadaverous face.

"But if you should hear she was ruined like the other?  What would you
do?"

A shudder passed over the man.  "I have not got my little knife," he
said vacantly.

True, he had not!  The Brotherhood had no pockets,--or rather only a
corporate one, which belonged to the Superior.  John Gale lifted his
eyes in sublime exaltation.  "You shall go out," he said with decision.
"Muffle up until you are well out of Bishopsgate Street, where it still
snows."

"But how did you get the keys?" said Brother Bones.

"From under the Father Superior's door-mat."

"But that was wrong, Brother."

"The mat bore the inscription, 'Salve,' which you know in Latin means
'Welcome,'" returned John Gale.  "It was logically a permission."

The two men gazed at each other silently.  A shudder passed over the
two left eyelids of their wan spiritual faces.

"But I have no money," said Brother Bones.

"Nor have I.  But here is a 'bus ticket and a free pass to the Gaiety.
You will probably find Golly somewhere about.  Tell her," he said in a
hollow voice, "that I'm getting on."

"I will," said Brother Bones, with a deep cough.

The gate opened and he disappeared in the falling snow.  The bloodhound
kept by the monastery--one of the real Bishopsgate breed--bayed twice,
and licked its huge jaws in ghastly anticipation.  "I wonder," said
John Gale as he resumed his shoveling, "if I have done exactly right.
Candor compels me to admit that it is an open question."


BOOK V

Early the next morning, Brother Bones was brought home by Policeman X,
his hat crushed, his face haggard, his voice husky and unintelligible.
He only said vaguely, "Washertime?"

"It is," said John Gale timidly, in explanation to Policeman X, "a case
of spiritual exhaustion following a vigil."

"That warn't her name," said Policeman X sternly.  "But don't let this
'ere appen again."

John Gale turned to Brother Bones.  "Then you saw her--Golly?"

"No," said Brother Bones.

"Why?  What on earth have you been doing?"

"Dunno!  Found myself in stashun--zis morning!  Thashall!"

Then John Gale sought the Superior in an agony of remorse, and
confessed all.  "I am unfit to remain doorkeeper.  Remove me," he
groaned bitterly.

The old man smiled gently.  "On the contrary, I should have given you
the keys myself.  Hereafter you can keep them.  The ways of our
Brotherhood are mysterious,--indeed, you may think idiotic,--but we are
not responsible for them.  It's all Brother Caine's doing--it's 'All
Caine!"


BOOK VI

Nevertheless, John Gale left the monastery.  "The Bishopsgate Street
winter does not suit me," he briefly explained to the Superior.  "I
must go south or southwest."

But he did neither.  He saw Golly, who was living west.  He upbraided
her for going on the stage.  She retorted: "Whose life is the more
artificial, yours or mine?  It is true that we are both imperfectly
clothed," she added, glancing at a photograph of herself in a short
skirt, "and not always in our right mind--but you've caught nothing but
a cold!  Nevertheless, I love you and you love me."

Then he begged her to go with him to the South Seas and take the place
of Father Damien among the colony of lepers.  "It is a beautiful place,
and inexpensive, for we shall live only a few weeks.  What do you say,
dearest?  You know," he added, with a faint, sad smile, glancing at
another photograph of her,--executing the high kick,--"you're quite a
leaper yourself."

But that night she received an offer of a new engagement.  She wrote to
John Gale: "The South Seas is rather an expensive trip to take simply
to die.  Couldn't we do it as cheaply at home?  Or couldn't you prevail
on your Father Superior to set up his monastery there?  I'm afraid I'm
not up to it.  Why don't you try the old 'Oilan,' nearer home?  There's
lots of measles and diphtheria about there lately."

When the heartbroken John Gale received this epistle, he also received
a letter from his uncle, the First Lord of the Admiralty. "I don't
fancy this Damien whim of yours.  If you're really in earnest about
killing yourself, why not take a brief trial trip in one of our latest
ironclads?  It's just as risky, although--as we are obliged to keep
these things quiet in the Office--you will not of course get that
publicity your noble soul craves."

Abandoned by all in his noble purposes, John Gale took the first
steamer to the Isle of Man.


BOOK VII

But he did not remain there long.  Once back in that epistolary island,
he wrote interminable letters to Golly.  When they began to bore each
other, he returned to London and entered the Salvation Army.  Crowds
flocked to hear him preach.  He inveighed against Society and
Wickedness as represented in his mind by Golly and her friends, and
praised a perfect Christianity represented by himself and HIS friends.
A panic of the same remarkable character as the Bishopsgate Street
winter took possession of London.  Old Moore's, Zadkiel's, and Mother
Shipton's prophecies were to be fulfilled at an early and fixed date,
with no postponement on account of weather.  Suddenly Society, John
Drake, and Antichrist generally combined by ousting him from his
church, and turning it into a music-hall for Golly!  Then John Gale
took his last and sublime resolve.  His duty as a perfect Christian was
to kill Golly!  His logic was at once inscrutable, perfect, and--John
Galish!

With this sublime and lofty purpose, he called upon Golly.  The heroic
girl saw his purpose in his eye--an eye at once black, murderous, and
Christian-like.  For an instant she thought it was better to succumb at
once and thus end this remarkable attachment. Suddenly through this
chaos of Spiritual, Religious, Ecstatic, Super-Egotistic whirl of
confused thought, darted a gleam of Common, Ordinary Horse Sense!  John
Gale saw it illumine her blue eyes, and trembled.  God in Mercy!  If it
came to THAT!

"Sit down, John," she said calmly.  Then, in her sweet, clear voice,
she said: "Did it ever occur to you, dearest, that a more ridiculous,
unconvincing, purposeless, insane, God-forsaken idiot than you never
existed?  That you eclipse the wildest dreams of insanity?  That you
are a mental and moral 'What-is-it?'"

"It has occurred to me," he replied simply.  "I began life with vast
asinine possibilities which fall to the lot of few men; yet I cannot
say that I have carried even THEM to a logical conclusion! But YOU,
love! YOU, darling! conceived in extravagance, born to impossibility, a
challenge to credulity, a problem to the intellect, a 'missing word'
for all ages,--are you aware of any one as utterly unsympathetic,
unreal, and untrue to nature as you are, existing on the face of the
earth, or in the waters under the earth?"

"You are right, dearest; there are none," she returned with the same
calm, level voice.  "It is true that I have at times tried to do
something real and womanly, and not, you know, merely to complicate
a--a"--her voice faltered--"theatrical situation--but I couldn't!
Something impelled me otherwise.  Now you know why I became an actress!
But even there I fail!  THEY are allowed reasoning power off the
stage--I have none at any time!  I laugh in the wrong place--I do the
unnecessary, extravagant thing.  Endowed by some strange power with
extraordinary attributes, I am supposed to make everybody love me, but
I don't--I satisfy nobody; I convince none!  I have no idea what will
happen to me next.  I am doomed to--I know not what."

"And I," he groaned bitterly, "I, in some rare and lucid moments, have
had a glimpse of this too.  We are in the hands of some inscrutable but
awful power.  Tell me, Golly, tell me, darling, who is it?"

Again that gleam of Common or Ordinary Horse Sense came in her eye.

"I have found out who," she whispered.  "I have found out who has
created us, and made us as puppets in his hands."

"Is it the Almighty?" he asked.

"No; it is"--she said, with a burst of real laughter--"it is--The 'All
Caine!"

"What! our countryman the Manxman?  The only great Novelist?  The
beloved of Gladstone?" he gasped.

"Yes--and he intends to kill YOU--and we're only to be married at your
deathbed!"

John Gale arose with a look of stern determination.  "I have suffered
much and idiotically--but I draw a line at this.  I shall kick!"

Golly clapped her hands joyfully.  "We will!"

"And we'll chuck him."

"We will."

They were choking with laughter.

"And go and get married in a natural, simple way like anybody else--and
try--to do our duty--to God--to each other--and to our
fellow-beings--and quit this--damned--nonsense--and in-fer-nal idiocy
forever!"

"Amen!"


PUBLISHER'S NOTE.--"In that supreme work of my life, 'The Christian,'"
said the gifted novelist to a reporter in speaking of his methods, "I
had endowed the characters of Golly and John Gale with such superhuman
vitality and absolute reality that--as is well known in the experience
of great writers--they became thinking beings, and actually criticised
my work, and even INTERFERED and REBELLED to the point of altering my
climax and the end!"  The present edition gives that ending, which of
course is the only real one.



THE ADVENTURES OF JOHN LONGBOWE, YEOMAN

BEING A MODERN-ANTIQUE REALISTIC ROMANCE

(COMPILED FROM SEVERAL EMINENT SOURCES)

It seemeth but fair that I, John Longbowe, should set down this account
of such hap and adventure as hath befallen me, without flourish,
vaporing, or cozening of speech, but as becometh one who, not being a
ready writer, goeth straight to the matter in hand in few words.  So,
though I offend some, I shall yet convince all, the which lieth closer
to my purpose.  Thus, it was in the year 1560, or 1650, or mayhap
1710--for my memory is not what it hath been and I ever cared little
for monkish calendars or such dry-as-dust matter, being active as
becometh one who hath to make his way in the world--yet I wot well it
was after the Great Plague, which I have great cause to remember, lying
at my cozen's in Wardour Street, London, in that lamentable year,
eating of gilly flowers, sulphur, hartes tongue and many stynking
herbes; touching neither man nor mayd, save with a great tongs steept
in pitch; wearing a fine maske of silk with a mouth piece of aromatic
stuff--by reason of which acts of hardihood and courage I was
miraculously preserved.  This much I shall say as to the time of these
happenings, and no more.  I am a plain, blunt man--mayhap rude of
speech should occasion warrant---so let them who require the exactness
of a scrivener or a pedagogue go elsewhere for their entertainment and
be hanged to them!

Howbeit, though no scholar, I am not one of those who misuse the
English speech, and, being foolishly led by the hasty custom of
scriveners and printers to write the letters "T" and "H" joined
together, which resembleth a "Y," do incontinently jump to the
conclusion the THE is pronounced "Ye,"--the like of which I never heard
in all England.  And though this be little toward those great
enterprises and happenings I shall presently shew, I set it down for
the behoof of such malapert wights as must needs gird at a man of
spirit and action--and yet, in sooth, know not their own letters.

So to my tale.  There was a great frost when my Lord bade me follow him
to the water gate near our lodgings in the Strand.  When we reached it
we were amazed to see that the Thames was frozen over and many citizens
disporting themselves on the ice--the like of which no man had seen
before.  There were fires built thereon, and many ships and barges were
stuck hard and fast, and my Lord thought it vastly pretty that the
people were walking under their bows and cabbin windows and climbing of
their sides like mermen, but I, being a plain, blunt man, had no joy in
such idlenesse, deeming it better that in these times of pith and
enterprise they should be more seemly employed.  My Lord, because of
one or two misadventures by reason of the slipperiness of the ice, was
fain to go by London Bridge, which we did; my Lord as suited his humor
ruffling the staid citizens as he passed or peering under the hoods of
their wives and daughters--as became a young gallant of the time.  I,
being a plain, blunt man, assisted in no such folly, but contented
myself, when they complayned to me, with damning their souls for greasy
interfering varlets.  For I shall now make no scruple in declaring that
my Lord was the most noble Earl of Southampton, being withheld from so
saying before through very plainness and bluntness, desiring as a
simple yeoman to make no boast of serving a man of so high quality.

We fared on over Bankside to the Globe playhouse, where my Lord bade me
dismount and deliver a secret message to the chief player--which
message was, "had he diligently perused and examined that he wot of,
and what said he thereof?"  Which I did.  Thereupon he that was called
the chief player did incontinently proceed to load mine arms and wallet
with many and divers rolls of manuscripts in my Lord's own hand, and
bade me say unto him that there was a great frost over London, but that
if he were to perform those plays and masques publickly, there would be
a greater frost there--to wit, in the Globe playhouse.  This I did
deliver with the Manuscripts to my Lord, who changed countenance
mightily at the sight of them, but could make nought of the message.
At which the lad who held the horses before the playhouse--one Will
Shakespeare--split with laughter.  Whereat my Lord cursed him for a
deer-stealing, coney-catching Warwickshire lout, and cuffed him
soundly.  I wot there will be those who remember that this Will
Shakespeare afterwards became a player and did write plays--which were
acceptable even to the Queen's Majesty's self--and I set this down not
from vanity to shew I have held converse with such, nor to give a
seemingness and colour to my story, but to shew what ill-judged,
misinformed knaves were they who did afterwards attribute friendship
between my Lord and this Will Shakespeare, even to the saying that he
made sonnets to my Lord.  Howbeit, my Lord was exceeding wroth, and I,
to beguile him, did propose that we should leave our horses and cargoes
of manuscript behind and cross on the ice afoot, which conceit pleased
him mightily.  In sooth it chanced well with what followed, for hardly
were we on the river when we saw a great crowd coming from Westminster,
before a caravan of strange animals and savages in masks, capering and
capricolling, dragging after them divers sledges quaintly fashioned
like swannes, in which were ladies attired as fairies and goddesses and
such like heathen and wanton trumpery, which I, as a plain, blunt man,
would have fallen to cursing, had not my Lord himself damned me under
his breath to hold my peace, for that he had recognized my Lord of
Leicester's colours and that he made no doubt they were of the Court.
As forsooth this did presently appear; also that one of the ladies was
her Gracious Majesty's self--masked to the general eye, the better to
enjoy these miscalled festivities.  I say miscalled, for, though a
loyal subject of her Majesty, and one who hath borne arms at Tilbury
Fort in defence of her Majesty, it inflamed my choler, as a plain and
blunt man, that her Mightiness should so degrade her dignity.  Howbeit,
as a man who hath his way to make in the world, I kept mine eyes well
upon the anticks of the Great, while my Lord joined the group of
maskers and their follies.  I recognized her Majesty's presence by her
discourse in three languages to as many Ambassadors that were
present--though I marked well that she had not forgotten her own
tongue, calling one of her ladies "a sluttish wench," nor her English
spirit in cuffing my Lord of Essex's ears for some indecorum--which, as
a plain man myself, curt in speech and action, did rejoice me greatly.
But I must relate one feat, the like of which I never saw in England
before or since.  There was a dance of the maskers, and in the midst of
it her Majesty asked the Ambassador from Spayne if he had seen the
latest French dance.  He replied that he had not.  Whereupon Her Most
Excellent Majesty skipt back a pace and forward a pace, and lifting her
hoop, delivered a kick at his Excellency's hat which sent it flying the
space of a good English ell above his head!  Howbeit so great was the
acclamation that her Majesty was graciously moved to repeat it to my
Lord of Leicester, but, tripping back, her high heels caught in her
farthingale, and she would have fallen on the ice, but for that my
Lord, with exceeding swiftness and dexterity, whisked his cloak from
his shoulder, spreading it under her, and so received her body in its
folds on the ice, without himself touching her Majesty's person.  Her
Majesty was greatly pleased at this, and bade my Lord buy another cloak
at her cost, though it swallowed an estate; but my Lord replyed, after
the lying fashion of the time, that it was honour enough for him to be
permitted to keep it after "it had received her Royal person."  I know
that this hap hath been partly related of another person--the shipman
Raleigh--but I tell such as deny me that they lie in their teeth, for
I, John Longbowe, have cause--miserable cause enough, I warrant--to
remember it, and my Lord can bear me out!  For, spite of his fair
speeches, when he was quit of the Royal presence, he threw me his wet
and bedraggled cloak and bade me change it with him for mine own, which
was dry and warm.  And it was this simple act which wrought the
lamentable and cruel deed of which I was the victim, for, as I followed
my Lord, thus apparelled, across the ice, I was suddenly set upon and
seized, a choke-pear clapt into my mouth so that I could not cry aloud,
mine eyes bandaged, mine elbows pinioned at my side in that fatall
cloak like to a trussed fowl, and so I was carried to where the ice was
broken, and thrust into a boat.  Thence I was conveyed in the same rude
sort to a ship, dragged up her smooth, wet side, and clapt under
hatches.  Here I lay helpless as in a swoon.  When I came to, it was
with a great trampling on the decks above and the washing of waves
below, and I made that the ship was moving--but where I knew not.
After a little space the hatch was lifted from where I lay, the
choke-pear taken from my mouth; but not the bandage from mine eyes, so
I could see nought around me.  But I heard a strange voice say: "What
coil is this?  This is my Lord's cloak in sooth, but not my Lord that
lieth in it!  Who is this fellow?"  At which I did naturally discover
the great misprise of those varlets who had taken me for my dear Lord,
whom I now damned in my heart for changing of the cloaks!  Howbeit,
when I had fetched my breath with difficulty, being well nigh spent by
reason of the gag, I replyed that I was John Longbowe, my Lord's true
yeoman, as good a man as any, as they should presently discover when
they set me ashore.  That I knew--  "Softly, friend," said the Voice,
"thou knowest too much for the good of England and too little for thine
own needs.  Thou shalt be sent where thou mayest forget the one and
improve thy knowledge of the other."  Then as if turning to those about
him, for I could not see by reason of the blindfold, he next said:
"Take him on your voyage, and see that he escape not till ye are quit
of England."  And with that they clapt to the hatch again, and I heard
him cast off from the ship's side. There was I, John Longbowe, an
English yeoman,--I, who but that day had held converse with Will
Shakespeare and been cognizant of the revels of Her Most Christian
Majesty even to the spying of her garter!--I was kidnapped at the age
of forty-five or thereabout--for I will not be certain of the year--and
forced to sea for that my Lord of Southampton had provoked the
jealousie and envy of divers other great nobles.



CHAPTERS I TO XX

I AM FORCED TO SEA AND TO BECOME A PIRATE!  I SUFFER LAMENTABLY FROM
SICKNESS BY REASON OF THE BIGNESSE OF THE WAVES.  I COMMIT MANY
CRUELTIES AND BLOODSHED.  BUT BY THE DIVINE INTERCESSION I EVENTUALLY
THROW THE WICKED CAPTAIN OVERBOARD AND AM ELECTED IN HIS STEAD.  I
DISCOVER AN ISLAND OF TREASURE, OBTAIN POSSESSION THEREOF BY A TRICKE,
AND PUT THE NATIVES TO THE SWORD.

I marvel much at those who deem it necessary in the setting down of
their adventures to gloze over the whiles between with much matter of
the country, the peoples, and even their own foolish reflections
thereon, hoping in this way to cozen the reader with a belief in their
own truthfulness, and encrease the extravagance of their deeds.  I,
being a plain, blunt man, shall simply say for myself that for many
days after being taken from the bilboes and made free of the deck, I
was grievously distempered by reason of the waves, and so collapsed in
the bowels that I could neither eat, stand, nor lie.  Being thus in
great fear of death, from which I was miraculously preserved, I, out of
sheer gratitude to my Maker, did incontinently make oath and sign
articles to be one of the crew--which were buccaneers.  I did this the
more readily as we were to attack the ships of Spayne only, and through
there being no state of Warre at that time between England and that
country, it was wisely conceived that this conduct would provoke it,
and we should thus be forearmed, as became a juste man in his quarrel.
For this we had the precious example of many great Captains.  We did
therefore heave to and burn many ships--the quality of those
engagements I do not set forth, not having a seaman's use of ship
speech, and despising, as a plain, blunt man, those who misuse it,
having it not.

But this I do know, that, having some conceit of a shipman's ways and
of pirates, I did conceive at this time a pretty song for my comradoes,
whereof the words ran thus:--

     Yo ho! when the Dog Watch bayeth loud
       In the light of a mid-sea moon!
     And the Dead Eyes glare in the stiffening Shroud,
       For that is the Pirate's noon!
     When the Night Mayres sit on the Dead Man's Chest
       Where no manne's breath may come--
     Then hey for a bottle of Rum! Rum! Rum!
       And a passage to Kingdom come!


I take no credit to myself for the same, except so far as it may shew a
touch of my Lord of Southampton's manner--we being intimate--but this I
know, that it was much acclaimed by the crew.  Indeed they, observing
that the Captain was of a cruel nature, would fain kill him and put me
in his stead, but I, objecting to the shedding of precious blood in
such behoof, did prevent such a lamentable and inhuman action by
stealthily throwing him by night from his cabbin window into the
sea--where, owing to the inconceivable distance of the ship from shore,
he was presently drowned.  Which untoward fate had a great effect upon
my fortunes, since, burthening myself with his goods and effects, I
found in his chest a printed proclamation from an aged and infirm
clergyman in the West of England covenanting that, for the sum of two
crowns, he would send to whoso offered, the chart of an island of great
treasure in the Spanish Main, whereof he had had confession from the
lips of a dying parishioner, and the amount gained thereby he would use
for the restoration of his parish church.  Now I, reading this, was
struck by a great remorse and admiration for our late Captain, for that
it would seem that he was, like myself, a staunch upholder of the
Protestant Faith and the Church thereof, as did appear by his
possession of the chart, for which he had no doubt paid the two good
crowns.  As an act of penance I resolved upon finding the same island
by the aid of the chart, and to that purpose sailed East many days, and
South, and North, and West as many other days--the manner whereof and
the latitude and longitude of which I shall not burden the reader with,
holding it, as a plain, blunt man, mere padding and impertinence to
fill out my narrative, which helpeth not the general reader.  So, I
say, when we sighted the Island, which seemed to be swarming with
savages, I ordered the masts to be stripped, save but for a single sail
which hung sadly and distractedly, and otherwise put the ship into the
likeness of a forlorn wreck, clapping the men, save one or two, under
hatches. This I did to prevent the shedding of precious blood, knowing
full well that the ignorant savages, believing the ship in sore
distress, would swim off to her with provisions and fruit, bearing no
arms.  Which they did, while we, as fast as they clomb the sides,
despatched them at leisure, without unseemly outcry or alarms.  Having
thus disposed of the most adventurous, we landed and took possession of
the island, finding thereon many kegs of carbuncles and rubies and
pieces of eight--the treasure store of those lawless pirates who infest
the seas, having no colour of war or teaching of civilisation to atone
for their horrid deeds.

I discovered also, by an omission in the chart, that this was not the
Island wot of by the good and aged Devonshire divine--and so we eased
our consciences of accounting for the treasure to him.  We then sailed
away, arriving after many years' absence at the Port of Bristol in
Merrie England, where I took leave of the "Jolly Roger," that being the
name of my ship; it was a strange conceit of seamen in after years ever
to call the device of my FLAG--to wit, a skull and bones made in the
sign of a Cross--by the NAME my ship bore, and if I have only corrected
the misuse of history by lying knaves, I shall be content with this
writing.  But alas! such are the uncertainties of time; I found my good
Lord of Southampton dead and most of his friends beheaded, and the
blessed King James of Scotland--if I mistake not, for these also be the
uncertainties of time--on the throne.  In due time I married Mistress
Marian Straitways.  I might have told more of trifling, and how she
fared, poor wench! in mine absence, even to the following of me in
another ship, in a shipboy's disguise, and how I rescued her from a
scheming Pagan villain; but, as a plain, blunt man, I am no hand at the
weaving of puling love tales and such trifling diversions for lovesick
mayds and their puny gallants--having only consideration for men and
their deeds, which I have here set down bluntly and even at mine
advanced years am ready to maintain with the hand that set it down.



DAN'L BOREM

BY E. N---S W--T---T


I

Dan'l Borem poured half of his second cup of tea abstractedly into his
lap.

"Guess you've got suthin' on yer mind, Dan'l," said his sister.

"Mor'n likely I've got suthin' on my pants," returned Dan'l with that
exquisitely dry, though somewhat protracted humor which at once
thrilled and bored his acquaintances.  "But--speakin' o' that hoss
trade"--

"For goodness' sake, don't!" interrupted his sister wearily; "yer allus
doin' it.  Jest tell me about that young man--the new clerk ye think o'
gettin'."

"Well, I telegraphed him to come over, arter I got this letter from
him," he returned, handing her a letter.  "Read it out loud."

But his sister, having an experienced horror of prolixity, glanced over
it.  "Far as I kin see he takes mor'n two hundred words to say you've
got to take him on trust, and sez it suthin' in a style betwixt a
business circular and them Polite Letter Writers.  I thought you
allowed he was a tony feller."

"Ef he does not brag much, ye see, I kin offer him small wages," said
Dan'l, with a wink.  "It's kinder takin' him at his own figger."

"And THAT mightn't pay!  But ye don't think o' bringin' him HERE in
this house?  'Cept you're thinkin' o' tellin' him that yarn o' yours
about the hoss trade to beguile the winter evenings.  I told ye ye'd
hev to pay yet to get folks to listen to it."

"Wrong agin--ez you'll see!  Wot ef I get a hundred thousand folks to
pay me for tellin' it?  But, speakin' o' this young feller, I
calkilated to send him to the Turkey Buzzard Hotel;" and he looked at
his sister with a shrewd yet humorous smile.

"What!" said his sister in alarm.  "The Turkey Buzzard!  Why, he'll be
starved or pizoned!  He won't stay there a week."

"Ef he's pizoned to death he won't be able to demand any wages; ef he
leaves because he can't stand it--it's proof positive he couldn't stand
me.  Ef he's only starved and made weak and miserable he'll be easy to
make terms with.  It may seem hard what I'm sayin', but what seems hard
on the other feller always comes mighty easy to you.  The thing is NOT
to be the 'other feller.'  Ye ain't listenin'.  Yet these remarks is
shrewd and humorous, and hez bin thought so by literary fellers."

"H'm!" said his sister.  "What's that ye was jest sayin' about folks
bein' willin' to pay ye for tellin' that hoss trade yarn o' yours?"

"Thet's only what one o' them smart New York publishers allowed it was
worth arter hearin' me tell it," said Dan'l dryly.

"Go way!  You or him must be crazy.  Why, it ain't ez good as that
story 'bout a man who had a balky hoss that could be made to go only by
buildin' a fire under him, and arter the man sells that hoss and the
secret, and the man wot bought him tries it on, the blamed hoss lies
down over the fire, and puts it out."

"I've allus allowed that the story ye hev to tell yourself is a blamed
sight funnier than the one ye're listenin' to," said Dan'l. "Put that
down among my sayin's, will ye?"

"But your story was never anythin' more than one o' them snippy things
ye see in the papers, drored out to no end by you.  It's only one o'
them funny paragraphs ye kin read in a minit in the papers that takes
YOU an hour to tell."

To her surprise Dan'l only looked at his sister with complacency.

"That," he said, "is jest what the New York publisher sez.  'The
'Merrikan people,' sez he, 'is ashamed o' bein' short and peart and
funny; it lacks dignity,' sez he; 'it looks funny,' sez he, 'but it
ain't deep-seated nash'nul literature,' sez he.  'Them snips o' funny
stories and short dialogues in the comic papers--they make ye laff,'
sez he, 'but laffin' isn't no sign o' deep morril purpose,' sez he,
'and it ain't genteel and refined.  Abraham Linkin with his pat
anecdotes ruined our standin' with dignified nashuns,' sez he. 'We
cultivated publishers is sick o' hearin' furrin' nashuns roarin' over
funny 'Merrikan stories; we're goin' to show 'em that, even ef we
haven't classes and titles and sich, we kin be dull. We're workin' the
historical racket for all that it's worth,--ef we can't go back mor'n a
hundred years or so, we kin rake in a Lord and a Lady when we do, and
we're gettin' in some ole-fashioned spellin' and "methinkses" and
"peradventures."  We're doin' the religious bizness ez slick ez Robert
Elsmere, and we find lots o' soul in folks--and heaps o quaint morril
characters,' sez he."

"Sakes alive, Dan'l!" broke in his sister; "what's all that got to do
with your yarn 'bout the hoss trade?"

"Everythin'," returned Dan'l.  "'For,' sez he, 'Mr. Borem,' sez he,
'you're a quaint morril character.  You've got protracted humor,' sez
he.  'You've bin an hour tellin' that yarn o' yours!  Ef ye could spin
it out to fill two chapters of a book--yer fortune's made!  For you'll
show that a successful hoss trade involves the highest nash'nul
characteristics.  That what common folk calls "selfishness," "revenge,"
"mean lyin'," and "low-down money-grubbin' ambishun" is really
"quaintness," and will go in double harness with the bizness of a
Christian banker,' sez he."

"Created goodness, Dan'l!  You're designin' ter"--

Dan'l Borem rose, coughed, expectorated carefully at the usual spot in
the fender, his general custom of indicating the conclusion of a
subject or an interview, and said dryly: "I'm thar!"


II

To return to the writer of the letter, whose career was momentarily cut
off by the episode of the horse trade (who, if he had previously
received a letter written by somebody else would have been an entirely
different person and not in this novel at all): John Lummox--known to
his family as "the perfect Lummox"--had been two years in college, but
thought it rather fine of himself--a habit of thought in which he
frequently indulged--to become a clerk, but finally got tired of it,
and to his father's relief went to Europe for a couple of years,
returning with some knowledge of French and German, and the cutting end
of a German student's blunted dueling sword.  Having, as he felt, thus
equipped himself for the hero of an American "Good Society" novel, he
went on board a "liner," where there would naturally be susceptible
young ladies. One he thought he recognized as a girl with whom he used
to play "forfeits" in the vulgar past of his boyhood.  She sat at his
table, accompanied by another lady whose husband seemed to be a
confirmed dyspeptic.  His remarks struck Lummox as peculiar.

"Shall I begin dinner with pudding and cheese or take the ordinary soup
first?  I quite forget which I did last night," he said anxiously to
his wife.

But Mrs. Starling hesitated.

"Tell me, Mary," he said, appealing to Miss Bike, the young lady.

"I should begin with the pudding," said Miss Bike decisively, "and
between that and the arrival of the cheese you can make up your mind,
and then, if you think better, go back to the soup."

"Thank you so much.  Now, as to drink?  Shall I take the
Friedrichshalle first or the Benedictine?  You know the doctor insists
upon the Friedrichshalle, but I don't think I did well to mix them as I
did yesterday.  Or shall I take simply milk and beer?"

"I should say simplicity was best.  Besides, you can always fill up
with champagne later."

How splendidly this clear-headed, clear-eyed girl dominated the man!
Lummox felt that REALLY he might renew her acquaintance!  He did so.

"I remembered you," she said.  "You've not changed a bit since you were
eight years old."

John, wishing to change the subject, said that he thought Mr. Starling
seemed an uncertain man.

"Very!  He's even now in his stateroom sitting in his pyjamas with a
rubber shoe on one foot and a pump on the other, wondering whether he
ought to put on golf knickerbockers with a dressing-gown and straw hat
before he comes on deck.  He has already put on and taken off about
twenty suits."

"He certainly is very trying," returned Lummox.  He paused and colored
deeply.  "I beg," he stammered, "I hope--you don't think me guilty of a
pun!  When I said 'trying' I referred entirely to the effect on your
sensitiveness of these tentative attempts toward clothing himself."

"I should never accuse YOU of levity, Mr. Lummox," said the young lady,
gazing thoughtfully upon his calm but somewhat heavy features,--"never."

Yet he would have liked to reclaim himself by a show of lightness. He
was leaning on the rail looking at the sea.  The scene was beautiful.

"I suppose," he said, rolling with the sea and his early studies of
Doctor Johnson, "that one would in the more superior manner show his
appreciation of all this by refraining from the obvious comment which
must needs be recognized as comparatively commonplace and vulgar; but
really this is so superb that I must express some of my emotion, even
at the risk of lowering your opinion of my good taste, provided, of
course, that you have any opinion on the one hand or any good taste on
the other."

"Without that undue depreciation of one's self which must ever be a
sign of self-conscious demerit," said the young girl lightly, "I may
say that I am not generally good at Johnsonese; but it may relieve your
mind to know that had you kept silence one instant longer, I should
have taken the risk of lowering your opinion of my taste, provided, of
course, that you have one to lower and are capable of that exertion--if
such indeed it may be termed--by remarking that this is perfectly
magnificent."

"Do you think," he said gloomily, still leaning on the rail, "that we
can keep this kind of thing up--perhaps I should say down--much longer?
For myself, I am feeling far from well; it may have been the
lobster--or that last sentence--but"--

They were both silent.  "Yet," she said, after a pause, "you can at
least take Mr. Starling and his dyspepsia off my hands.  You might be
equal to that exertion."

"I suppose that by this time I ought to be doing something for
somebody," he said thoughtfully.  "Yes, I will."

That evening after dinner he took Mr. Starling into the smoking-room
and card-room.  They had something hot.  At 4 A. M., with the
assistance of the steward, he projected Mr. Starling into Mrs.
Starling's stateroom, delicately withdrawing to evade the lady's
thanks.  At breakfast he saw Miss Bike.  "Thank you so much," she said;
"Mrs. Starling found Starling greatly improved.  He himself admitted he
was 'never berrer' and, far from worrying about what night-clothes he
should wear, went to bed AS HE WAS--even to his hat.  Mrs. Starling
calls you 'her preserver,' and Mr. Starling distinctly stated that you
were a 'jolly-good-fler.'"

"And you?" asked John Lummox.

"In your present condition of abnormal self-consciousness and
apperceptive egotism, I really shouldn't like to say."

When the voyage was ended Mr. Lummox went to see Mary Bike at her
house, and his father--whom he had not seen for ten years--at HIS
house.  With a refined absence of natural affection he contented
himself with inquiring of the servants as to his father's habits, and
if he still wore dress clothes at dinner.  The information thus
elicited forced him to the conclusion that the old gentleman's
circumstances were reduced, and that it was possible that he, John
Lummox, might be actually compelled to earn his own living.  He
communicated that suspicion to his father at dinner, and over the last
bottle of "Mouton," a circumstance which also had determined him in his
resolution.  "You might," said his father thoughtfully, "offer yourself
to some rising American novelist as a study for the new hero,--one
absolutely without ambition, capacity, or energy; willing, however, to
be whatever the novelist chooses to make him, so long as he hasn't to
choose for himself.  If your inordinate self-consciousness is still in
your way, I could give him a few points about you, myself."

"I had thought," said John, hesitatingly, "of going into your office
and becoming your partner in the business.  You could always look after
me, you know."

A shudder passed over the old man.  Then he tremblingly muttered to
himself:

"Thank heaven!  There is one way it may still be averted!" Retiring to
his room he calmly committed suicide, thoughtfully leaving the empty
poison bottle in the fender.

And this is how John Lummox came to offer himself as a clerk to Dan'l
Borem.  The ways of Providence are indeed strange, yet those of the
novelist are only occasionally novel.


III

John K. Lummox lived for a week at the Turkey Buzzard Hotel exclusively
on doughnuts and innuendoes.  He was informed by Mr. Borem's
clerk--whose place he was to fill--that he wouldn't be able to stand
it, and thus received the character of his employer from his last
employee.

"I suppose," said Dan'l Borem, chuckling, "that he said I was a old
skinflint, good only at a hoss trade, uneddicated, ignorant, and unable
to keep accounts, and an oppressor o' the widder and orphan. Allowed
that my cute sayin's was a kind o' ten-cent parody o' them proverbs in
Poor Richard's Almanack!"

"Omitting a few expletives, he certainly did," returned Lummox with
great delicacy.

"He allowed to me," said Dan'l thoughtfully, "that YOU was a poor
critter that hadn't a single reason to show for livin': that the
fool-killer had bin shadderin' you from your birth, and that you hadn't
paid a cent profit on your father's original investment in ye, nor on
the assessments he'd paid on ye ever since.  He seems to be a cute
feller arter all, and I'm rather sorry he's leavin'."

"I am quite willing to abandon my position in his favor, now," said
Lummox with alacrity.

"No," said Dan'l, rubbing his chin argumentatively; "the only way for
us to do is to circumvent him like in a hoss trade--with suthin'
unexpected.  When he thinks you're goin' to sleep in the shafts you'll
run away; and when he think's I'm vicious I'll let a woman or a child
drive me."


IV

"Well, Dan'l, how's that new clerk o' yours gettin' on?" said Mrs.
Bigby a week later.

"Purty fine!  He's good at accounts and hez got to know the Bank's
customers by this time.  But I allus reckoned he'd get stuck with some
o' them counterfeit notes--and he hez!  Ye see he ain't accustomed to
look at a five or a ten dollar note as sharp as some men, and he's
already taken in two tens and a five counterfeits."

"Gracious!" said Mrs. Bigsby.  "What did the poor feller do?"

"Oh, he ups and tells me, all right, after he discovered it.  And sez
he: 'I've charged my account with 'em,' sez he, 'so the Bank won't lose
it.'"

"Why, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby, "ye didn't let that poor feller"--

"You hol' on!" said her brother; "business is business; but I sez to
him: 'Ye oughter put it down to Profit and Loss account.  Or perhaps
we'll have a chance o' gettin' rid o' them,--not in Noo York, where
folks is sharp, but here in the country, and then ye kin credit
yourself with the amount arter you've got rid o' them.'"

"Laws!  I'm sorry ye did that, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby.

"With that he riz up," continued Dan'l, ignoring his sister, "and,
takin' them counterfeit notes from my hand, sez he: 'Them notes belong
to ME now,' sez he, 'and I'm goin' to destroy 'em.'  And with that he
walks over to the fire as stiff as a poker, and held them notes in it
until they were burnt clean up."

"Well, but that was honest and straightforward in him!" said Mrs.
Bigsby.

"Um! but it wasn't business--and ye see"--  Dan'l paused and rubbed his
chin.

"Well, go on!" said Mrs. Bigsby impatiently.

"Well, ye see, neither him nor me was very smart in detectin'
counterfeits, or even knowin' 'em, and"--

"Well!  For goodness' sake, Dan'l, speak out!"

"Well--THE DUM FOOL BURNT UP THREE GOOD BILLS, and we neither of us
knew it!"


V

The "unexpected" which Dan'l Borem had hinted might characterize his
future conduct was first intimated by his treatment of the "Widow
Cully," an aged and impoverished woman whose property was heavily
mortgaged to him.  He had curtly summoned her to come to his office on
Christmas Day and settle up.  Frightened, hopeless, and in the face of
a snowstorm, the old woman attended, but was surprised by receiving a
"satisfaction piece" in full from the banker, and a gorgeous Christmas
dinner.  "All the same," said Mrs. Bigsby to Lummox, "Dan'l might hev
done all this without frightenin' the poor old critter into a nervous
fever, chillin' her through by makin' her walk two miles through the
snow, and keepin' her on the ragged edge o' despair for two mortal
hours!  But it's his humorous way."

"Did he give any reason for being so lenient to the widow?" asked
Lummox.

"He said that her son had given him a core of his apple when they were
boys together.  Dan'l ez mighty thoughtful o' folks that was kind to
him in them days."

"Is that all?" said Lummox, astonished.

"Well--I've kinder thought suthin' else," said Mrs. Bigsby hesitatingly.

"What?"

"That its bein' Christmas Day--and as I've heard tell that's NO DAY IN
LAW, but just like Sunday--Dan'l mebbe thought that he might crawl
outer that satisfaction piece, ef he ever wanted ter!  Dan'l is mighty
cute."


VI

Mr. John Lummox was not behind his employer in developing unexpected
traits of character.  Hitherto holding aloof from his neighbors in Old
Folksville, he suddenly went to a social gathering, and distinguished
himself as the principal and popular guest of the evening.  As Dan'l
Borem afterward told his sister: "He was one o' them Combination
Minstrels and Variety Shows in one. He sang through a whole opery, made
the pianner jest howl, gave some recitations, Casabianker and Betsy and
I are Out; imitated all them tragedians; did tricks with cards and
fetched rabbits outer hats, besides liftin' the pianner with two men
sittin' on it, jest by his teeth.  Created snakes!" said Borem,
concluding his account, which here is necessarily abbreviated, "ef he
learnt all that in his two years in Europe I ain't sayin' anythin' more
agin' eddication and furrin' travel after this!  Why, the next day
there was quite a run on the Bank jest to see HIM.  He is makin' the
bizness pop'lar."

"Then ye think ye'll get along together?"

"I reckon we'll hitch hosses," said Dan'l, with a smile.

A few weeks later, one evening, Dan'l Borem sat with his sister alone.
John Lummox, who was now residing with them, was attending a social
engagement.  Mrs. Bigsby knew that Dan'l had something to communicate,
but knew that he would do so in his own way.

"Speakin' o' hoss trades," he began.

"We WASN'T and we ain't goin' to," said Mrs. Bigsby with great
promptness.  "I've heard enough of 'em."

"But this here one hez suthin' to do with your fr'en', John Lummox,"
said Dan'l, with a chuckle.

Mrs. Bigsby stared.  "Go on, then," she said, "but, for goodness' sake,
cut it short."

Dan'l threw away his quid and replenished it from his silver tobacco
box.  Mrs. Bigsby shuddered slightly as she recognized the usual
preliminary to prolixity, but determined, as far as possible, to make
her brother brief.

"It mout be two weeks ago," began Dan'l, "that I see John Lummox over
at Palmyra, where he'd bin visitin'.  He was drivin' a hoss, the
beautifulest critter--for color--I ever saw.  It was yaller, with mane
and tail a kinder golden, like the hair o' them British Blondes that
was here in the Variety Show."

"Dan'l!" exclaimed Mrs. Bigsby, horrified.  "And you allowed you never
went thar!"

"Saw 'em on the posters--and mebbe the color was a little brighter
thar," said Dan'l carelessly--"but who's interruptin' now?"

"Go on," said Mrs. Bigsby.

"'Got a fine hoss thar,' sez I; 'reckon I never see such a purty
color,' sez I.  'He is purty,' sez he, 'per'aps too purty for ME to be
a-drivin', but he isn't fast.'  'I ain't speakin' o' that,' sez I;
'it's his looks that I'm talkin' of; whar might ye hev got him?' 'He
was offered to me by a fr'en' o' me boyhood,' sez he; 'he's a pinto
mustang,' sez he, 'from Californy, whar they breed 'em.' 'What's a
pinto hoss?' sez I.  'The same ez a calico hoss,' sez he; 'what they
have in cirkises, but ye never see 'em that color.'  En he was right,
for when I looked him over I never DID see such a soft and silky coat,
and his mane and tail jest glistened.  'It IS a little too showy for
ye,' sez I, 'but I might take him at a fair price.  What's your fr'en'
askin'?'  'He won't sell him to anybody but me,' sez Lummox; 'he's a
horror o' hoss traders, anyway, and his price is more like a gift to a
fr'en'.'  'What might that price be, ef it's a fair question?' sez I,
for the more I looked at the hoss the more I liked him.  'A hundred and
fifty dollars,' sez he; 'but my fr'en' would ask YOU double that.'
'Couldn't YOU and ME make a trade?' sez I; 'I'll exchange ye that roan
mare, that's worth two hundred, for this hoss and fifty dollars.'  With
that he drew himself up, and sez he: 'Mr. Borem,' sez he, 'I share my
fr'en's opinion about hoss tradin', and I promised my mother I'd never
swap hosses.  You ought to know me by this time.'"

"That's so!" said Mrs. Bigsby; "I'm wonderin' ye dared to ax him."

Dan'l passed his hand over his mouth, and continued: "'I dunno but
you're right, Lummox,' sez I; 'per'aps it's jest as well as thar wasn't
TWO in the Bank in that bizness.'  But the more I looked at the hoss
the more I hankered arter him.  'Look here,' sez I, 'I tell ye what
I'll do!  I'll LEND you my hoss and you'll LEND me yourn.  I'll draw up
a paper to that effect, and provide that in case o' accidents, ef I
don't return you your hoss, I'll agree to pay you a hundred and fifty
dollars.  You'll give me the same kind o' paper about my hoss--with the
proviso that you pay me two hundred for him!'  'Excuse me, Mr. Borem,'
sez he, 'but that difference of fifty makes a hoss trade accordin' to
my mind.  It's agin' my principles to make such an agreement.'"

"An' he was right, Dan'l," said Mrs. Bigsby approvingly.

But Dan'l wiped his mouth again, leaving, however, a singular smile on
it.  "Well, ez I wanted that hoss, I jest thought and thought! I knew I
could get two hundred and fifty for him easy, and that Lummox didn't
know anythin' of his valoo, and I finally agreed to make the swap even.
'What do you call him?' sez I.  'Pegasus,' sez he,--'the poet's hoss,
on account o' his golden mane,' sez he. That made me laff, for I never
knew a poet ez could afford to hev a hoss,--much less one like that!
But I said: 'I'll borry Pegasus o' you on those terms.'  The next day I
took the hoss to Jonesville; Lummox was right: he wasn't FAST, but,
jest as I expected, he made a sensation!  Folks crowded round him
whenever I stopped; wimmin followed him and children cried for him.  I
could hev sold him for three hundred without leavin' town!  'So ye call
him Pegasus,' sez Doc Smith, grinnin'; 'I didn't known ye was subject
to the divine afflatus, Dan'l.'  'I don' offen hev it,' sez I, 'but
when I do I find a little straight gin does me good.'  'So did Byron,'
sez he, chucklin'.  But even if I had called him 'Beelzebub' the hull
town would hev bin jest as crazy over him.  Well, as it was comin' on
to rain I started jest after sundown for home.  But it came ter blow,
an' ter pour cats and dogs, an' I was nigh washed out o' the buggy,
besides losin' my way and gettin' inter ditches and puddles, and I hed
to stop at Staples' Half-Way House and put up for the night. In the
mornin' I riz up early and goes into the stable yard, and the first
thing I sees was the 'ostler.  'I hope ye giv' my hoss a good scrub
down,' I sez, 'as I told ye, for his color is that delicate the
smallest spot shows.  It's a very rare color for a hoss.'  'I was
hopin' it might be,' sez he.  I was a little huffed at that, and I sez:
'It's considered a very beautiful color.' 'Mebbe it is,' sez he, 'but I
never cared much for fireworks.' 'What yer mean?' sez I.  'Look here,
Squire!' sez he; 'I don't mind scourin' and rubbin' down a hoss that
will stay the same color TWICE, but when he gets to playin' a
kaladeoskope on me, I kick!' 'Trot him out,' sez I, beginnin' to feel
queer.  With that he fetched out the hoss!  For a minit I hed to ketch
on to the fence to keep myself from fallin'.  I swonny! ef he didn't
look like a case of measles on top o' yaller fever--'cept where the
harness had touched him, and that was kinder stenciled out all over
him.  Thar was places whar the 'ostler had washed down to the
foundation color, a kind o' chewed licorice!  Then I knew that somebody
had bin sold terrible, and I reckoned it might be me!  But I said
nothin' to the 'ostler, and waited until dark, when I drove him over
here, and put him in the stables, lettin' no one see him.  In the
mornin' Lummox comes to me, and sez he: 'I'm glad to see you back,' sez
he, 'for my conscience is troublin' me about that hoss agreement; it
looks too much like a hoss trade,' sez he, 'and I'm goin' to send the
hoss back.'  'Mebbe your conscience,' sez I, 'may trouble you a little
more ef you'll step this way;' and with that I takes his arm and leads
him round to the stable and brings out the hoss.

"Well, Lummox never changes ez much as a hair, ez he puts up his
eyeglasses.  'I'm not good at what's called "Pop'lar Art,"' sez he. 'Is
it a chromo, or your own work?' sez he, critical like.

"'It's YOUR HOSS,' sez I.

"He looks at me a minit and then drors a paper from his pocket. 'This
paper,' sez he in his quiet way, 'was drored up by you and is a
covenant to return to me a yaller hoss with golden mane and tail--or a
hundred and fifty dollars.  Ez I don't see the hoss anywhere--mebbe
you've got the hundred and fifty dollars handy?' sez he. 'Suppose I
hadn't the money?' sez I.  'I should be obliged,' sez he in a kind o'
pained Christian-martyr way, 'ter sell YOUR hoss for two hundred, and
send the money to my fr'en'.'  We looked at each other steddy for a
minit and then I counts him out a hundred and fifty.  He took the money
sad-like and then sez: 'Mr. Borem,' sez he, 'this is a great morril
lesson to us,' and went back to the office.  In the arternoon I called
in an old hoss dealer that I knew and shows him Pegasus.

"'He wants renewin',' sez he.

"'Wot's that?' sez I.

"'A few more bottles o' that British Blonde Hair Dye to set him up
ag'in.  That's wot they allus do in the cirkis, whar he kem from.'

"Then I went back to the office and I took down my sign.  'What's that
you re doin'?' sez Lummox, with a sickly kind o' smile.  'Are you goin'
out o' the bizness?'

"'No, I'm only goin' to change that sign from "Dan'l Borem" to "Borem
and Lummox,"' sez I.  'I've concluded it's cheaper for me to take you
inter partnership now than to continue in this way, which would only
end in your hevin' to take me in later.  I preferred to DO IT FUST.'"


VII

A rich man, and settled in business, John Lummox concluded that he
would marry Mary Bike.  With that far-sighted logic which had always
characterized him he reasoned that, having first met her on a liner, he
would find her again on one if he took passage to Europe.  He did--but
she was down on the passenger list as Mrs. Edwin Wraggles.  The result
of their interview was given to Mrs. Bigsby by Dan'l Borem in his own
dialect.

"Ez far as I kin see, it was like the Deacon's Sunday hoss trade, bein'
all 'Ef it wassent.'  'Ef ye wasn't Mrs. Wraggles,' sez Lummox, sez he,
'I'd be tellin' ye how I've loved ye ever sence I first seed ye.  Ef ye
wasn't Mrs. Wraggles, I'd be squeezin' yer hand,' sez he; 'ef ye wasn't
Mrs. Wraggles, I'd be askin' ye to marry me.'  Then the gal ups and
sez, sez she: 'But I AIN'T Mrs. Wraggles,' sez she; 'Mrs. Wraggles is
my sister, and couldn't come, so I'm travelin' on her ticket, and
that's how my name is Wraggles on the passenger list.'  'But why didn't
ye tell me so at once?' sez Lummox.  'This is an episoode o' protracted
humor,' sez she, 'and I'M bound to have a show in it somehow!'"

"Well!" said Mrs. Bigsby breathlessly; "then he DID marry her?"

"Darned ef I know.  He never said so straight out--but that's like
Lummox."




STORIES THREE

BY R-DY--D K-PL--G


I

FOR SIMLA REASONS

Some people say that improbable things don't necessarily happen in
India--but these people never find improbabilities anywhere.  This
sounds clever, but you will at once perceive that it really means the
opposite of what I intended to say.  So we'll drop it.  What I am
trying to tell you is that after Sparkley had that affair with Miss
Millikens a singular change came over him.  He grew abstracted and
solitary,--holding dark seances with himself,--which was odd, as
everybody knew he never cared a rap for the Millikens girl.  It was
even said that he was off his head--which is rhyme.  But his reason was
undoubtedly affected, for he had been heard to mutter incoherently at
the Club, and, strangest of all, to answer questions THAT WERE NEVER
ASKED!  This was so awkward in that Branch of the Civil Department of
which he was a high official--where the rule was exactly the
reverse--that he was presently invalided on full pay!  Then he
disappeared.  Clever people said it was because the Department was
afraid he had still much to answer for; stupid people simply envied him.

Mrs. Awksby, whom everybody knew had been the cause of breaking off the
match, was now wild to know the reason of Sparkley's retirement.  She
attacked heaven and earth, and even went a step higher--to the Viceroy.
At the vice-regal ball I saw, behind the curtains of a window, her
rolling violet-blue eyes with a singular glitter in them.  It was the
reflection of the Viceroy's star, although the rest of his Excellency
was hidden in the curtain.  I heard him saying, "Come now! really, now,
you are--you know you are!" in reply to her cooing questioning.  Then
she made a dash at me and captured me.

"What did you hear?"

"Nothing I should not have heard."

"Don't be like all the other men--you silly boy!" she answered.  "I was
only trying to find out something about Sparkley.  And I will find it
out too," she said, clinching her thin little hand.  "And what's more,"
she added, turning on me suddenly, "YOU shall help me!"

"I?" I said in surprise.

"Don't pretend!" she said poutingly.  "You're too clever to believe
he's cut up over the Millikens.  No--it's something awful or--another
woman!  Now, if I knew as much of India as you do--and wasn't a woman,
and could go where I liked--I'd go to Bungloore and find him."

"Oh! You have his address?" I said.

"Certainly!  What did you expect I was behind the curtain with the
Viceroy for?" she said, opening her violet eyes innocently.  "It's
Bungloore--First Turning to the Right--At the End of the passage."

Bungloore--near Ghouli Pass--in the Jungle!  I knew the place, a spot
of dank pestilence and mystery.  "You never could have gone there," I
said.

"You do not know WHAT I could do for a FRIEND," she said sweetly,
veiling her eyes in demure significance.

"Oh, come off the roof!" I said bluntly.

She could be obedient when it was necessary.  She came off.  Not
without her revenge.  "Try to remember you are not at school with the
Stalkies," she said, and turned away.

I went to Bungloore,--not on her account, but my own.  If you don't
know India, you won't know Bungloore.  It's all that and more.  An egg
dropped by a vulture, sat upon and addled by the Department. But I knew
the house and walked boldly in.  A lion walked out of one door as I
came in at another.  We did this two or three times--and found it
amusing.  A large cobra in the hall rose up, bowed as I passed, and
respectfully removed his hood.

I found the poor old boy at the end of the passage.  It might have been
the passage between Calais and Dover,--he looked so green, so limp and
dejected.  I affected not to notice it, and threw myself in a chair.

He gazed at me for a moment and then said, "Did you hear what the chair
was saying?"

It was an ordinary bamboo armchair, and had creaked after the usual
fashion of bamboo chairs.  I said so.

He cast his eyes to the ceiling.  "He calls it 'creaking,'" he
murmured.  "No matter," he continued aloud, "its remark was not of a
complimentary nature.  It's very difficult to get really polite
furniture."

The man was evidently stark, staring mad.  I still affected not to
observe it, and asked him if that was why he left Simla.

"There were Simla reasons, certainly," he replied.  "But you think I
came here for solitude!  SOLITUDE!" he repeated, with a laugh. "Why, I
hold daily conversations with any blessed thing in this house, from the
veranda to the chimney-stack, with any stick of furniture, from the
footstool to the towel-horse.  I get more out of it than the gabble at
the Club.  You look surprised.  Listen!  I took this thing up in my
leisure hours in the Department.  I had read much about the
conversation of animals.  I argued that if animals conversed, why
shouldn't inanimate things communicate with each other?  You cannot
prove that animals don't converse--neither can you prove that inanimate
objects DO NOT.  See?"

I was thunderstruck with the force of his logic.

"Of course," he continued, "there are degrees of intelligence, and that
makes it difficult.  For instance, a mahogany table would not talk like
a rush-bottomed kitchen chair."  He stopped suddenly, listened, and
replied, "I really couldn't say."

"I didn't speak," I said.

"I know YOU didn't.  But your chair asked me 'how long that fool was
going to stay.'  I replied as you heard.  Pray don't move--I intend to
change that chair for one more accustomed to polite society.  To
continue: I perfected myself in the language, and it was awfully jolly
at first.  Whenever I went by train, I heard not only all the engines
said, but what every blessed carriage thought, that joined in the
conversation.  If you chaps only knew what rot those whistles can get
off!  And as for the brakes, they can beat any mule driver in cursing.
Then, after a time, it got rather monotonous, and I took a short sea
trip for my health.  But, by Jove, every blessed inch of the whole
ship--from the screw to the bowsprit--had something to say, and the bad
language used by the garboard strake when the ship rolled was something
too awful!  You don't happen to know what the garboard strake is, do
you?"

"No," I replied.

"No more do I.  That's the dreadful thing about it.  You've got to
listen to chaps that you don't know.  Why, coming home on my bicycle
the other day there was an awful row between some infernal 'sprocket'
and the 'ball bearings' of the machine, and I never knew before there
were such things in the whole concern."

I thought I had got at his secret, and said carelessly: "Then I suppose
this was the reason why you broke off your engagement with Miss
Millikens?"

"Not at all," he said coolly.  "Nothing to do with it.  That is quite
another affair.  It's a very queer story; would you like to hear it?"

"By all means."  I took out my notebook.

"You remember that night of the Amateur Theatricals, got up by the
White Hussars, when the lights suddenly went out all over the house?"

"Yes," I replied, "I heard about it."

"Well, I had gone down there that evening with the determination of
proposing to Mary Millikens the first chance that offered.  She sat
just in front of me, her sister Jane next, and her mother, smart Widow
Millikens,--who was a bit larky on her own account, you remember,--the
next on the bench.  When the lights went out and the panic and
tittering began, I saw my chance!  I leaned forward, and in a voice
that would just reach Mary's ear I said, 'I have long wished to tell
you how my life is bound up with you, dear, and I never, never can be
happy without you'--when just then there was a mighty big shove down my
bench from the fellows beyond me, who were trying to get out.  But I
held on like grim death, and struggled back again into position, and
went on: 'You'll forgive my taking a chance like this, but I felt I
could no longer conceal my love for you,' when I'm blest if there
wasn't another shove, and though I'd got hold of her little hand and
had a kind of squeeze in return, I was drifted away again and had to
fight my way back.  But I managed to finish, and said, 'If the devotion
of a lifetime will atone for this hurried avowal of my love for you,
let me hope for a response,' and just then the infernal lights were
turned on, and there I was holding the widow's hand and she nestling on
my shoulder, and the two girls in hysterics on the other side.  You
see, I never knew that they were shoved down on their bench every time,
just as I was, and of course when I got back to where I was I'd just
skipped one of them each time!  Yes, sir!  I had made that proposal in
THREE sections--a part to each girl, winding up with the mother!  No
explanation was possible, and I left Simla next day.  Naturally, it
wasn't a thing they could talk about, either!"

"Then you think Mrs. Awksby had nothing to do with it?" I said.

"Nothing--absolutely nothing.  By the way, if you see that lady, you
might tell her that I have possession of that brocade easy-chair which
used to stand in the corner of her boudoir.  You remember it,--faded
white and yellow, with one of the casters off and a little frayed at
the back, but rather soft-spoken and amiable?  But of course you don't
understand THAT.  I bought it after she moved into her new bungalow."

"But why should I tell her that?" I asked in wonder.

"Nothing--except that I find it very amusing with its reminiscences of
the company she used to entertain, and her confidences generally.
Good-by--take care of the lion in the hall.  He always couches on the
left for a spring.  Ta-ta!"

I hurried away.  When I returned to Simla I told Mrs. Awksby of my
discoveries, and spoke of the armchair.

I fancied she colored slightly, but quickly recovered.

"Dear old Sparkley," she said sweetly; "he WAS a champion liar!"


II.

A PRIVATE'S HONOR

I had not seen Mulledwiney for several days.  Knowing the man--this
looked bad.  So I dropped in on the Colonel.  I found him in deep
thought.  This looked bad, too, for old Cockey Wax--as he was known to
everybody in the Hill districts but himself--wasn't given to thinking.
I guessed the cause and told him so.

"Yes," he said wearily, "you are right!  It's the old story.
Mulledwiney, Bleareyed, and Otherwise are at it again,--drink followed
by Clink.  Even now two corporals and a private are sitting on
Mulledwiney's head to keep him quiet, and Bleareyed is chained to an
elephant."

"Perhaps," I suggested, "you are unnecessarily severe."

"Do you really think so?  Thank you so much!  I am always glad to have
a civilian's opinion on military matters--and vice versa--it broadens
one so!  And yet--am I severe?  I am willing, for instance, to overlook
their raid upon a native village, and the ransom they demanded for a
native inspector!  I have overlooked their taking the horses out of my
carriage for their own use.  I am content also to believe that my fowls
meekly succumb to jungle fever and cholera.  But there are some things
I cannot ignore.  The carrying off of the great god Vishnu from the
Sacred Shrine at Ducidbad by The Three for the sake of the priceless
opals in its eyes"--

"But I never heard of THAT," I interrupted eagerly.  "Tell me."

"Ah!" said the Colonel playfully, "that--as you so often and so
amusingly say--is 'Another Story'!  Yet I would have overlooked the
theft of the opals if they had not substituted two of the Queen's
regimental buttons for the eyes of the god.  This, while it did not
deceive the ignorant priests, had a deep political and racial
significance.  You are aware, of course, that the great mutiny was
occasioned by the issue of cartridges to the native troops greased with
hog's fat--forbidden by their religion."

"But these three men could themselves alone quell a mutiny," I replied.

The Colonel grasped my hand warmly.  "Thank you.  So they could.  I
never thought of that."  He looked relieved.  For all that, he
presently passed his hand over his forehead and nervously chewed his
cheroot.

"There is something else," I said.

"You are right.  There is.  It is a secret.  Promise me it shall go no
further--than the Press?  Nay, swear that you will KEEP it for the
Press!"

"I promise."

"Thank you SO much.  It is a matter of my own and Mulledwiney's. The
fact is, we have had a PERSONAL difficulty."  He paused, glanced around
him, and continued in a low, agitated voice: "Yesterday I came upon him
as he was sitting leaning against the barrack wall.  In a spirit of
playfulness--mere playfulness, I assure you, sir--I poked him lightly
in the shoulder with my stick, saying 'Boo!'  He turned--and I shall
never forget the look he gave me."

"Good heavens!" I gasped, "you touched--absolutely
TOUCHED--Mulledwiney?"

"Yes," he said hurriedly, "I knew what you would say; it was against
the Queen's Regulations--and--there was his sensitive nature which
shrinks from even a harsh word; but I did it, and of course he has me
in his power."

"And you have touched him?" I repeated,--"touched his private honor!"

"Yes!  But I shall atone for it!  I have already arranged with him that
we shall have it out between ourselves alone, in the jungle, stripped
to the buff, with our fists--Queensberry rules!  I haven't fought since
I stood up against Spinks Major--you remember old Spinks, now of the
Bombay Offensibles?--at Eton."  And the old boy pluckily bared his
skinny arm.

"It may be serious," I said.

"I have thought of that.  I have a wife, several children, and an aged
parent in England.  If I fall, they must never know.  You must invent a
story for them.  I have thought of cholera, but that is played out; you
know we have already tried it on The Boy who was Thrown Away.  Invent
something quiet, peaceable and respectable--as far removed from
fighting as possible.  What do you say to measles?"

"Not half bad," I returned.

"Measles let it be, then!  Say I caught it from Wee Willie Winkie. You
do not think it too incredible?" he added timidly.

"Not more than YOUR story," I said.

He grasped my hand, struggling violently with his emotion.  Then he
struggled with me--and I left hurriedly.  Poor old boy!  The funeral
was well attended, however, and no one knew the truth, not even myself.


III

JUNGLE FOLK

It was high noon of a warm summer's day when Moo Kow came down to the
watering-place.  Miaow, otherwise known as "Puskat"--the warmth-loving
one--was crouching on a limb that overhung the pool, sunning herself.
Brer Rabbit--but that is Another Story by Another Person.

Three or four Gee Gees, already at the pool, moved away on the approach
of Moo Kow.

"Why do ye stand aside?" said the Moo Kow.

"Why do you say 'ye'?" said the Gee Gees together.

"Because it's more impressive than 'you.'  Don't you know that all
animals talk that way in English?" said the Moo Kow.

"And they also say 'thou,' and don't you forget it!" interrupted Miaow
from the tree.  "I learnt that from a Man Cub."

The animals were silent.  They did not like Miaow's slang, and were
jealous of her occasionally sitting on a Man Cub's lap.  Once Dunkee, a
poor relation of the Gee Gees, had tried it on, disastrously--but that
is also Another and a more Aged Story.

"We are ridden by The English--please to observe the Capital letters,"
said Pi Bol, the leader of the Gee Gees, proudly.  "They are a mighty
race who ride anything and everybody.  D'ye mind that--I mean, look ye
well to it!"

"What should they know of England who only England know?" said Miaow.

"Is that a conundrum?" asked the Moo Kow.

"No; it's poetry," said the Miaow.

"I know England," said Pi Bol prancingly.  "I used to go from the Bank
to Islington three times a day--I mean," he added hurriedly, "before I
became a screw--I should say, a screw-gun horse."

"And I," said the Moo Kow, "am terrible.  When the young women and
children in the village see me approach they fly shriekingly.  My
presence alone has scattered their sacred festival--The Sundes Kool
Piknik.  I strike terror to their inmost souls, and am more feared by
them than even Kreep-mows, the insidious!  And yet, behold!  I have
taken the place of the mothers of men, and I have nourished the mighty
ones of the earth!  But that," said the Moo Kow, turning her head aside
bashfully, "that is Anudder Story."

A dead silence fell on the pool.

"And I," said Miaow, lifting up her voice, "I am the horror and haunter
of the night season.  When I pass like the night wind over the roofs of
the houses men shudder in their beds and tremble. When they hear my
voice as I creep stealthily along their balconies they cry to their
gods for succor.  They arise, and from their windows they offer me
their priceless household treasures--the sacred vessels dedicated to
their great god Shiv--which they call 'Shivin Mugs'--the Kloes Brosh,
the Boo-jak, urging me to fly them! And yet," said Miaow mournfully,
"it is but my love-song!  Think ye what they would do if I were on the
war-path."

Another dead silence fell on the pool.  Then arose that strange,
mysterious, indefinable Thing, known as "The Scent."  The animals
sniffed.

"It heralds the approach of the Stalkies--the most famous of British
Skool Boaz," said the Moo Kow.  "They have just placed a decaying
guinea-pig, two white mice in an advanced state of decomposition, and a
single slice of Limburger cheese in the bed of their tutor.  They had
previously skillfully diverted the drains so that they emptied into the
drawing-room of the head-master.  They have just burned down his house
in an access of noble zeal, and are fighting among themselves for the
spoil.  Hark! do ye hear them?"

A wild medley of shrieks and howls had arisen, and an irregular mob of
strange creatures swept out of the distance toward the pool. Some were
like pygmies, some had bloody noses.  Their talk consisted of feverish,
breathless ejaculations,--a gibberish in which the words "rot," "oach,"
and "giddy" were preeminent.  Some were exciting themselves by chewing
a kind of "bhang" made from the plant called pappahmint; others had
their faces streaked with djam.

"But who is this they are ducking in the pool?" asked Pi Bol.

"It is one who has foolishly and wantonly conceived that his parents
have sent him here to study," said the Moo Kow; "but that is against
the rules of the Stalkies, who accept study only as a punishment."

"Then these be surely the 'Bander Log'--the monkey folk--of whom the
good Rhuddyidd has told us," said a Gee Gee--"the ones who have no
purpose--and forget everything."

"Fool!" said the Moo Kow.  "Know ye not that the great Rhuddyidd has
said that the Stalkies become Major-Generals, V. C.'s, and C. B's of
the English?  Truly, they are great.  Look now; ye shall see one of the
greatest traits of the English Stalky."

One of the pygmy Stalkies was offering a bun to a larger one, who
hesitated, but took it coldly.

"Behold! it is one of the greatest traits of this mighty race not to
show any emotion.  He WOULD take the bun--he HAS taken it!  He is
pleased--but he may not show it.  Observe him eat."

The taller Stalky, after eating the bun, quietly kicked the giver,
knocked off his hat, and turned away with a calm, immovable face.

"Good!" said the Moo Kow.  "Ye would not dream that he was absolutely
choking with grateful emotion?"

"We would not," said the animals.

"But why are they all running back the way they came?" asked Pi Bol.

"They are going back to punishment.  Great is its power.  Have ye not
heard the gospel of Rhuddyidd the mighty?  'Force is everything!
Gentleness won't wash, courtesy is deceitful. Politeness is foreign.
Be ye beaten that ye may beat.  Pass the kick on.'"

But here he was interrupted by the appearance of three soldiers who
were approaching the watering-place.

"Ye are now," said the Moo Kow, "with the main guard.  The first is
Bleareyed, who carries a raven in a cage, which he has stolen from the
wife of a deputy commissioner.  He will paint the bird snow white and
sell it as a dove to the same lady.  The second is Otherwise, who is
dragging a small garden engine, of which he has despoiled a native
gardener, whom he has felled with a single blow. The third is
Mulledwiney, swinging a cut-glass decanter of sherry which he has just
snatched from the table of his colonel. Mulledwiney and Otherwise will
play the engine upon Bleareyed, who is suffering from heat apoplexy and
djim-djams."

The three soldiers seated themselves in the pool.

"They are going to tell awful war stories now," said the Moo Kow,
"stories that are large and strong!  Some people are shocked--others
like 'em."

Then he that was called Mulledwiney told a story.  In the middle of it
Miaow got up from the limb of the tree, coughed slightly, and put her
paw delicately over her mouth.  "You must excuse me," she said faintly.
"I am taken this way sometimes--and I have left my salts at home.
Thanks!  I can get down myself!"  The next moment she had disappeared,
but was heard coughing in the distance.

Mulledwiney winked at his companions and continued his story:--

"Wid that we wor in the thick av the foight.  Whin I say 'thick' I mane
it, sorr!  We wor that jammed together, divil a bit cud we shoot or
cut!  At fur-rest, I had lashed two mushkits together wid the baynits
out so, like a hay fork, and getting the haymaker's lift on thim, I
just lifted two Paythians out--one an aych baynit--and passed 'em,
aisy-like, over me head to the rear rank for them to finish.  But what
wid the blud gettin' into me ois, I was blinded, and the pressure kept
incraysin' until me arrums was thrussed like a fowl to me sides, and
sorra a bit cud I move but me jaws!"

"And bloomin' well you knew how to use them," said Otherwise.

"Thrue for you--though ye don't mane it!" said Mulledwiney, playfully
tapping Otherwise on the head with a decanter till the cut glass slowly
shivered.  "So, begorra! there wor nothing left for me to do but to ATE
thim!  Wirra! but it was the crooel worruk."

"Excuse me, my lord," interrupted the gasping voice of Pi Bol as he
began to back from the pool, "I am but a horse, I know, and being built
in that way--naturally have the stomach of one--yet, really, my lord,
this--er"--  And his voice was gone.

The next moment he had disappeared.  Mulledwiney looked around with
affected concern.

"Save us!  But we've cleaned out the Jungle!  Sure, there's not a baste
left but ourselves!"

It was true.  The watering-place was empty.  Moo Kow, Miaow, and the
Gee Gees had disappeared.  Presently there was a booming crash and a
long, deep rumbling among the distant hills.  Then they knew they were
near the old Moulmein Pagoda, and the dawn had come up like thunder out
of China 'cross the bay.  It always came up that way there.  The strain
was too great, and day was actually breaking.




"ZUT-SKI"

THE PROBLEM OF A WICKED FEME SOLE

BY M-R-E C-R-LLI


I

The great pyramid towered up from the desert with its apex toward the
moon which hung in the sky.  For centuries it had stood thus,
disdaining the aid of gods or man, being, as the Sphinx herself
observed, able to stand up for itself.  And this was no small praise
from that sublime yet mysterious female who had seen the ages come and
go, empires rise and fall, novelist succeed novelist, and who, for eons
and cycles the cynosure and centre of admiration and men's idolatrous
worship, had yet--wonderful for a woman--through it all kept her head,
which now alone remained to survey calmly the present.  Indeed, at that
moment that magnificent and peaceful face seemed to have lost--with a
few unimportant features--its usual expression of speculative wisdom
and intense disdain; its mouth smiled, its left eyelid seemed to droop.
As the opal tints of dawn deepened upon it, the eyelid seemed to droop
lower, closed, and quickly recovered itself twice.  You would have
thought the Sphinx had winked.

Then arose a voice like a wind on the desert,--but really from the
direction of the Nile, where a hired dahabiyeh lay moored to the
bank,--"'Arry Axes!  'Arry Axes!"  With it came also a flapping,
trailing vision from the water--the sacred Ibis itself--and with wings
aslant drifted mournfully away to its own creaking echo: "K'raksis!
K'raksis!"  Again arose the weird voice: "'Arry Axes! Wotcher doin'
of?"  And again the Ibis croaked its wild refrain: "K'raksis!
K'raksis!"  Moonlight and the hour wove their own mystery (for which
the author is not responsible), and the voice was heard no more.  But
when the full day sprang in glory over the desert, it illuminated the
few remaining but sufficiently large features of the Sphinx with a
burning saffron radiance!  The Sphinx had indeed blushed!


II

It was the full season at Cairo.  The wealth and fashion of Bayswater,
South Kensington, and even the bosky Wood of the Evangelist had sent
their latest luxury and style to flout the tombs of the past with the
ghastly flippancy of to-day.  The cheap tripper was there--the latest
example of the Darwinian theory--apelike, flea and curio hunting!
Shamelessly inquisitive and always hungry, what did he know of the
Sphinx or the pyramids or the voice--and, for the matter of that, what
did they know of him? And yet he was not half bad in comparison with
the "swagger people,"--these people who pretend to have lungs and what
not, and instead of galloping on merry hunters through the frost and
snow of Piccadilly and Park, instead of enjoying the roaring fires of
piled logs in the evening, at the first approach of winter steal away
to the Land of the Sun, and decline to die, like honest Britons, on
British soil.  And then they know nothing of the Egyptians and are
horrified at "bakshish," which they really ought to pay for the
privilege of shocking the straight-limbed, naked-footed Arab in his
single rough garment with their baggy elephant-legged trousers! And
they know nothing of the mystic land of the old gods, filled with
profound enigmas of the supernatural, dark secrets yet unexplored
except in this book.  Well might the great Memnon murmur after this
lapse of these thousand years, "They're making me tired!"

Such was the blissful, self-satisfied ignorance of Sir Midas Pyle, or
as Lord Fitz-Fulke, with his delightful imitation of the East London
accent, called him, Sir "Myde His Pyle," as he leaned back on his divan
in the Grand Cairo Hotel.  He was the vulgar editor and proprietor of a
vulgar London newspaper, and had brought his wife with him, who was
vainly trying to marry off his faded daughters.  There was to be a
fancy-dress ball at the hotel that night, and Lady Pyle hoped that her
girls, if properly disguised, might have a better chance.  Here, too,
was Lady Fitz-Fulke, whose mother was immortalized by Byron--sixty if a
day, yet still dressing youthfully--who had sought the land of the
Sphinx in the faint hope that in the contiguity of that lady she might
pass for being young.  Alaster McFeckless, a splendid young
Scotchman,--already dressed as a Florentine sailor of the fifteenth
century, which enabled him to show his magnificent calves quite as well
as in his native highland dress, and who had added with characteristic
noble pride a sporran to his costume, was lolling on another divan.

"Oh, those exquisite, those magnificent eyes of hers!  Eh, sirs!" he
murmured suddenly, as waking from a dream.

"Oh, damn her eyes!" said Lord Fitz-Fulke languidly.  "Tell you what,
old man, you're just gone on that girl!"

"Ha!" roared McFeckless, springing to his feet, "ye will be using such
language of the bonniest"--

"You will excuse me, gentlemen," said Sir Midas,--who hated scenes
unless he had a trusted reporter with him,--"but I think it is time for
me to go upstairs and put on my Windsor uniform, which I find
exceedingly convenient for these mixed assemblies."  He withdrew,
caressing his protuberant paunch with some dignity, as the two men
glanced fiercely at each other.

In another moment they might have sprung at each other's throats. But
luckily at this instant a curtain was pushed aside as if by some
waiting listener, and a thin man entered, dressed in cap and
gown,--which would have been simply academic but for his carrying in
one hand behind him a bundle of birch twigs.  It was Dr. Haustus
Pilgrim, a noted London practitioner and specialist, dressed as "Ye
Olde-fashioned Pedagogue."  He was presumably spending his holiday on
the Nile in a large dahabiyeh with a number of friends, among whom he
counted the two momentary antagonists he had just interrupted; but
those who knew the doctor's far-reaching knowledge and cryptic
researches believed he had his own scientific motives.

The two men turned quickly as he entered; the angry light faded from
their eyes, and an awed and respectful submission to the intruder took
its place.  He walked quietly toward them, put a lozenge in the mouth
of one and felt the pulse of the other, gazing critically at both.

"We will be all right in a moment," he said with professional
confidence.

"I say!" said Fitz-Fulke, gazing at the doctor's costume, "you look
dooced smart in those togs, don'tcherknow."

"They suit me," said the doctor, with a playful swish of his birch
twigs, at which the two grave men shuddered.  "But you were speaking of
somebody's beautiful eyes."

"The Princess Zut-Ski's," returned McFeckless eagerly; "and this daft
callant said"--

"He didn't like them," put in Fitz-Fulke promptly.

"Ha!" said the doctor sharply, "and why not, sir?"  As Fitz-Fulke
hesitated, he added brusquely: "There!  Run away and play!  I've
business with this young man," pointing to McFeckless.

As Fitz-Fulke escaped gladly from the room, the doctor turned to
McFeckless.  "It won't do, my boy.  The Princess is not for you--you'll
only break your heart and ruin your family over her!  That's my advice.
Chuck her!"

"But I cannot," said McFeckless humbly.  "Think of her weirdly
beautiful eyes."

"I see," said the doctor meditatively; "sort of makes you feel creepy?
Kind of all-overishness, eh?  That's like her.  But whom have we here?"

He was staring at a striking figure that had just entered, closely
followed by a crowd of admiring spectators.  And, indeed, he seemed
worthy of the homage.  His magnificent form was closely attired in a
velveteen jacket and trousers, with a singular display of pearl buttons
along the seams, that were absolutely lavish in their quantity; a hat
adorned with feathers and roses completed his singularly picturesque
equipment.

"Chevalier!" burst out McFeckless in breathless greeting.

"Ah, mon ami!  What good chance?" returned the newcomer, rushing to him
and kissing him on both cheeks, to the British horror of Sir Midas, who
had followed.  "Ah, but you are perfect!" he added, kissing his fingers
in admiration of McFeckless's Florentine dress.

"But you?--what is this ravishing costume?" asked McFeckless, with a
pang of jealousy.  "You are god-like."

"It is the dress of what you call the Koster, a transplanted Phenician
tribe," answered the other.  "They who knocked 'em in the road of Old
Kent--know you not the legend?"  As he spoke, he lifted his superb form
to a warrior's height and gesture.

"But is this quite correct?" asked Fitz-Fulke of the doctor.

"Perfectly," said the doctor oracularly.  "The renowned ''Arry Axes'--I
beg his pardon," he interrupted himself hastily, "I mean the
Chevalier--is perfect in his archaeology and ethnology.  The Koster is
originally a Gypsy, which is but a corruption of the word 'Egyptian,'
and, if I mistake not, that gentleman is a lineal descendant."

"But he is called 'Chevalier,' and he speaks like a Frenchman," said
Fluffy.

"And, being a Frenchman, of course knows nothing outside of Paris,"
said Sir Midas.

"We are in the Land of Mystery," said the doctor gravely in a low
voice.  "You have heard of the Egyptian Hall and the Temple of Mystery?"

A shudder passed through many that were there; but the majority were
following with wild adulation the superb Koster, who, with elbows
slightly outward and hands turned inward, was passing toward the
ballroom.  McFeckless accompanied him with conflicting emotions.  Would
he see the incomparable Princess, who was lovelier and even still more
a mystery than the Chevalier?  Would she--terrible thought!--succumb to
his perfections?


III

The Princess was already there, surrounded by a crowd of admirers,
equal if not superior to those who were following the superb Chevalier.
Indeed, they met almost as rivals!  Their eyes sought each other in
splendid competition.  The Chevalier turned away, dazzled and
incoherent.  "She is adorable, magnificent!" he gasped to McFeckless.
"I love her on the instant!  Behold, I am transported, ravished!
Present me."

Indeed, as she stood there in a strange gauzy garment of exquisite
colors, apparently shapeless, yet now and then revealing her perfect
figure like a bather seen through undulating billows, she was lovely.
Two wands were held in her taper fingers, whose mystery only added to
the general curiosity, but whose weird and cabalistic uses were to be
seen later.  Her magnificent face--strange in its beauty--was stranger
still, since, with perfect archaeological Egyptian correctness, she
presented it only in profile, at whatever angle the spectator stood.
But such a profile!  The words of the great Poet-King rose to
McFeckless's lips: "Her nose is as a tower that looketh toward
Damascus."

He hesitated a moment, torn with love and jealousy, and then presented
his friend.  "You will fall in love with her--and then--you will fall
also by my hand," he hissed in his rival's ear, and fled tumultuously.

"Voulez-vous danser, mademoiselle?" whispered the Chevalier in the
perfect accent of the boulevardier.

"Merci, beaucoup," she replied in the diplomatic courtesies of the
Ambassadeurs.

They danced together, not once, but many times, to the admiration, the
wonder and envy of all; to the scandalized reprobation of a proper few.
Who was she?  Who was he?  It was easy to answer the last question: the
world rang with the reputation of "Chevalier the Artist."  But she was
still a mystery.

Perhaps they were not so to each other!  He was gazing deliriously into
her eyes.  She was looking at him in disdainful curiosity. "I've seen
you before somewhere, haven't I?" she said at last, with a crushing
significance.

He shuddered, he knew not why, and passed his hand over his high
forehead.  "Yes, I go there very often," he replied vacantly.  "But
you, mademoiselle--you--I have met before?"

"Oh, ages, ages ago!"  There was something weird in her emphasis.

"Ha!" said a voice near them, "I thought so!"  It was the doctor,
peering at them curiously.  "And you both feel rather dazed and
creepy?"  He suddenly felt their pulses, lingering, however, as the
Chevalier fancied, somewhat longer than necessary over the lady's wrist
and beautiful arm.  He then put a small round box in the Chevalier's
hand, saying, "One before each meal," and turning to the lady with
caressing professional accents said, "We must wrap ourselves closely
and endeavor to induce perspiration," and hurried away, dragging the
Chevalier with him.  When they reached a secluded corner, he said, "You
had just now a kind of feeling, don't you know, as if you'd sort of
been there before, didn't you?"

"Yes, what you call a--preexistence," said the Chevalier wonderingly.

"Yes; I have often observed that those who doubt a future state of
existence have no hesitation in accepting a previous one," said the
doctor dryly.  "But come, I see from the way the crowd are hurrying
that your divinity's number is up--I mean," he corrected himself
hastily, "that she is probably dancing again."

"Aha! with him, the imbecile McFeckless?" gasped the Chevalier.

"No, alone."

She was indeed alone, in the centre of the ballroom--with outstretched
arms revolving in an occult, weird, dreamy, mystic, druidical,
cabalistic circle.  They now for the first time perceived the meaning
of those strange wands which appeared to be attached to the many folds
of her diaphanous skirts and involved her in a fleecy, whirling cloud.
Yet in the wild convolutions of her garments and the mad gyrations of
her figure, her face was upturned with the seraphic intensity of a
devotee, and her lips parted as with the impassioned appeal for "Light!
more light!"  And the appeal was answered.  A flood of blue, crimson,
yellow, and green radiance was alternately poured upon her from the
black box of a mysterious Nubian slave in the gallery.  The effect was
marvelous; at one moment she appeared as a martyr in a sheet of flame,
at another as an angel wrapped in white and muffled purity, and again
as a nymph of the cerulean sea, and then suddenly a cloud of darkness
seemed to descend upon her, through which for an instant her figure, as
immaculate and perfect as a marble statue, showed distinctly--then the
light went out and she vanished!

The whole assembly burst into a rapturous cry.  Even the common Arab
attendants who were peeping in at the doors raised their melodious
native cry, "Alloe, Fullah!  Aloe, Fullah!" again and again.

A shocked silence followed.  Then the voice of Sir Midas Pyle was heard
addressing Dr. Haustus Pilgrim:

"May we not presume, sir, that what we have just seen is not unlike
that remarkable exhibition when I was pained to meet you one evening at
the Alhambra?"

The doctor coughed slightly.  "The Alhambra--ah, yes!--you--er--refer,
I presume, to Granada and the Land of the Moor, where we last met.  The
music and dance are both distinctly Moorish--which, after all, is akin
to the Egyptian.  I am gratified indeed that your memory should be so
retentive and your archaeological comparison so accurate.  But see! the
ladies are retiring.  Let us follow."


IV

The intoxication produced by the performance of the Princess naturally
had its reaction.  The British moral soul, startled out of its
hypocrisy the night before, demanded the bitter beer of
self-consciousness and remorse the next morning.  The ladies were now
openly shocked at what they had secretly envied.  Lady Pyle was,
however, propitiated by the doctor's assurance that the Princess was a
friend of Lady Fitz-Fulke, who had promised to lend her youthful age
and aristocratic prestige to the return ball which the Princess had
determined to give at her own home.  "Still, I think the Princess open
to criticism," said Sir Midas oracularly.

"Damn all criticism and critics!" burst out McFeckless, with the noble
frankness of a passionate and yet unfettered soul.  Sir Midas, who
employed critics in his business, as he did other base and ignoble
slaves, drew up himself and his paunch and walked away.

The Chevalier cast a superb look at McFeckless.  "Voila!  Regard me
well!  I shall seek out this Princess when she is with herself! Alone,
comprenez?  I shall seek her at her hotel in the Egyptian Hall!  Ha!
ha!  I shall seek Zut-Ski!  Zut!"  And he made that rapid yet graceful
motion of his palm against his thigh known only to the true Parisian.

"It's a rum hole where she lives, and nobody gets a sight of her," said
Flossy.  "It's like a beastly family vault, don't you know, outside,
and there's a kind of nigger doorkeeper that vises you and chucks you
out if you haven't the straight tip.  I'll show you the way, if you
like."

"Allons, en avant!" said the Chevalier gayly.  "I precipitate myself
there on the instant."

"Remember!" hissed McFeckless, grasping his arm, "you shall account to
me!"

"Bien!" said the Chevalier, shaking him off lightly.  "All
a-r-r-right."  Then, in that incomparable baritone, which had so often
enthralled thousands, he moved away, trolling the first verse of the
Princess's own faint, sweet, sad song of the "Lotus Lily," that
thrilled McFeckless even through the Chevalier's marked French accent:--

     "Oh, a hard zing to get is ze Lotus Lillee!
      She lif in ze swamp--in ze watair chillee;
      She make your foot wet--and you look so sillee,
      But you buy her for sixpence in Piccadillee!"


In half an hour the two men reached the remote suburb where the
Princess lived, a gloomy, windowless building.  Pausing under a low
archway over which in Egyptian characters appeared the faded legend,
"Sta Ged Oor," they found a Nubian slave blocking the dim entrance.

"I leave you here," said Flossy hurriedly, "as even I left once
before--only then I was lightly assisted by his sandaled foot," he
added, rubbing himself thoughtfully.  "But better luck to you."

As his companion retreated swiftly, the Chevalier turned to the slave
and would have passed in, but the man stopped him.  "Got a pass, boss?"

"No," said the Chevalier.

The man looked at him keenly.  "Oh, I see! one of de profesh."

The Chevalier nodded haughtily.  The man preceded him by devious,
narrow ways and dark staircases, coming abruptly upon a small apartment
where the Princess sat on a low divan.  A single lamp inclosed in an
ominous wire cage flared above her.  Strange things lay about the floor
and shelves, and from another door he could see hideous masks,
frightful heads, and disproportionate faces.  He shuddered slightly,
but recovered himself and fell on his knees before her.  "I lofe you,"
he said madly.  "I have always lofed you!"

"For how long?" she asked, with a strange smile.

He covertly consulted his shirt cuff.  "For tree tousand fife hundred
and sixty-two years," he said rapidly.

She looked at him disdainfully.  "The doctor has been putting you up to
that!  It won't wash!  I don't refer to your shirt cuff," she added
with deep satire.

"Adorable one!" he broke out passionately, attempting to embrace her,
"I have come to take you."  Without moving, she touched a knob in the
wall.  A trap-door beyond him sank, and out of the bowels of the earth
leaped three indescribable demons.  Then, rising, she took a cake of
chalk from the table and, drawing a mystic half circle on the floor,
returned to the divan, lit a cigarette, and leaning comfortably back,
said in a low, monotonous voice, "Advance one foot within that magic
line, and on that head, although it wore a crown, I launch the curse of
Rome."

"I--only wanted to take you--with a kodak," he said, with a light laugh
to conceal his confusion, as he produced the instrument from his
coat-tail pocket.

"Not with that cheap box," she said, rising with magnificent disdain.
"Come again with a decent instrument--and perhaps"-- Then, lightly
humming in a pure contralto, "I've been photographed like this--I've
been photographed like that," she summoned the slave to conduct him
back, and vanished through a canvas screen, which nevertheless seemed
to the dazed Chevalier to be the stony front of the pyramids.


V

"And you saw her?" said the doctor in French.

"Yes; but the three-thousand-year gag did not work!  She spotted you,
cher ami, on the instant.  And she wouldn't let me take her with my
kodak."

The doctor looked grave. "I see," he mused thoughtfully.  "You must
have my camera, a larger one and more bulky perhaps to carry; but she
will not object to that,--she who has stood for full lengths. I will
give you some private instructions."

"But, cher doctor, this previous-existence idea--at what do you arrive?"

"There is much to say for it," said the doctor oracularly.  "It has
survived in the belief of all ages.  Who can tell?  That some men in a
previous existence may have been goats or apes," continued the doctor,
looking at him curiously, "does not seem improbable!  From the time of
Pythagoras we have known that; but that the individual as an individual
ego has been remanded or projected, has harked back or anticipated
himself, is, we may say, with our powers of apperception,--that is, the
perception that we are perceiving,--is"--

But the Chevalier had fled.  "No matter," said the doctor, "I will see
McFeckless."  He did.  He found him gloomy, distraught, baleful.  He
felt his pulse.  "The mixture as before," he said briefly, "and a
little innocent diversion.  There is an Aunt Sally on the
esplanade--two throws for a penny.  It will do you good. Think no more
of this woman!  Listen,--I wish you well; your family have always been
good patients of mine.  Marry some good Scotch girl; I know one with
fifty thousand pounds.  Let the Princess go!"

"To him--never!  I will marry her!  Yet," he murmured softly to
himself, "feefty thousand pun' is nae small sum.  Aye!  Not that I care
for siller--but feefty thousand pun'!  Eh, sirs!"


VI

Dr. Haustus knew that the Chevalier had again visited the Princess,
although he had kept the visit a secret,--and indeed was himself
invisible for a day or two afterwards.  At last the doctor's curiosity
induced him to visit the Chevalier's apartment. Entering, he was
surprised--even in that Land of Mystery--to find the room profoundly
dark, smelling of Eastern drugs, and the Chevalier sitting before a
large plate of glass which he was examining by the aid of a lurid ruby
lamp,--the only light in the weird gloom.  His face was pale and
distraught, his locks were disheveled.

"Voila!" he said.  "Mon Dieu!  It is my third attempt.  Always the
same--hideous, monstrous, unearthly!  It is she, and yet it is not she!"

The doctor, professional man as he was and inured to such spectacles,
was startled!  The plate before him showed the Princess's face in all
its beautiful contour, but only dimly veiling a ghastly death's-head
below.  There was the whole bony structure of the head and the eyeless
sockets; even the graceful, swan-like neck showed the articulated
vertebral column that supported it in all its hideous reality.  The
beautiful shoulders were there, dimly as in a dream--but beneath was
the empty clavicle, the knotty joint, the hollow sternum, and the ribs
of a skeleton half length!

The doctor's voice broke the silence.  "My friend," he said dryly, "you
see only the truth!  You see what she really is, this peerless Princess
of yours.  You see her as she is to-day, and you see her kinship to the
bones that have lain for centuries in yonder pyramid.  Yet they were
once as fair as this, and this was as fair as they--in effect the same!
You that have madly, impiously adored her superficial beauty, the mere
dust of tomorrow, let this be a warning to you!  You that have no soul
to speak of, let that suffice you!  Take her and be happy.  Adieu!"

Yet, as he passed out of the fitting tomblike gloom of the apartment
and descended the stairs, he murmured to himself: "Odd that I should
have lent him my camera with the Rontgen-ray attachment still on.  No
matter!  It is not the first time that the Princess has appeared in two
parts the same evening."


VII

In spite of envy, jealousy, and malice, a certain curiosity greater
than all these drew everybody to the Princess Zut-Ski's ball.  Lady
Fitz-Fulke was there in virgin white, looking more youthful than ever,
in spite of her sixty-five years and the card labeled "Fresh Paint"
which somebody had playfully placed upon her enameled shoulder.  The
McFecklesses, the Pyles, Flossy, the doctor, and the Chevalier--looking
still anxious--were in attendance.

The mysterious Nubian doorkeeper admitted the guests through the same
narrow passages, much to the disgust of Lady Pyle and the discomfiture
of her paunchy husband; but on reaching a large circular interior hall,
a greater surprise was in store for them. It was found that the only
entrance to the body of the hall was along a narrow ledge against the
bare wall some distance from the floor, which obliged the guests to
walk slowly, in single file, along this precarious strip, giving them
the attitudes of an Egyptian frieze, which was suggested in the
original plaster above them.  It is needless to say that, while the
effect was ingenious and striking from the centre of the room, where
the Princess stood with a few personal friends, it was exceedingly
uncomfortable to the figures themselves, in their enforced march along
the ledge,--especially a figure of Sir Midas Pyle's proportions.
Suddenly an exclamation broke from the doctor.

"Do you see," he said to the Princess, pointing to the figure of the
Chevalier, who was filing along with his sinewy hands slightly turned
inward, "how surprisingly like he is to the first attendant on the King
in the real frieze above?  And that," added the doctor, "was none other
than 'Arry Axes, the Egyptian you are always thinking of."  And he
peered curiously at her.

"Goodness me!" murmured the Princess, in an Arabic much more soft and
fluent than the original gum.  "So he does--look like him."

"And do you know you look like him, too?  Would you mind taking a walk
around together?"

They did, amid the acclamations of the crowd.  The likeness was
perfect.  The Princess, however, was quite white as she eagerly
rejoined the doctor.

"And this means--?" she hissed in a low whisper.

"That he is the real 'Arry Axes!  Hush, not a word now!  We join the
dahabiyeh to-night.  At daybreak you will meet him at the fourth angle
of the pyramid, first turning from the Nile!"


VIII

The crescent moon hung again over the apex of the Great Pyramid, like a
silver cutting from the rosy nail of a houri.  The Sphinx--mighty
guesser of riddles, reader of rebuses and universal solver of missing
words--looked over the unfathomable desert and these few pages, with
the worried, hopeless expression of one who is obliged at last to give
it up.  And then the wailing voice of a woman, toiling up the steep
steps of the pyramid, was heard above the creaking of the Ibis: "'Arry
Axes!  Where are you?  Wait for me."

"J'y suis," said a voice from the very summit of the stupendous granite
bulk, "yet I cannot reach it."

And in that faint light the figure of a man was seen, lifting his arms
wildly toward the moon.

"'Arry Axes," persisted the voice, drifting higher, "wait for me; we
are pursued."

And indeed it was true.  A band of Nubians, headed by the doctor, was
already swarming like ants up the pyramid, and the unhappy pair were
secured.  And when the sun rose, it was upon the white sails of the
dahabiyeh, the vacant pyramid, and the slumbering Sphinx.


There was great excitement at the Cairo Hotel the next morning. The
Princess and the Chevalier had disappeared, and with them Alaster
McFeckless, Lady Fitz-Fulke, the doctor, and even his dahabiyeh!  A
thousand rumors had been in circulation.  Sir Midas Pyle looked up from
the "Times" with his usual I-told-you-so expression.

"It is the most extraordinary thing, don'tcherknow," said Fitz-Fulke.
"It seems that Dr. Haustus Pilgrim was here professionally--as a nerve
specialist--in the treatment of hallucinations produced by neurotic
conditions, you know."

"A mad doctor, here!" gasped Sir Midas.

"Yes.  The Princess, the Chevalier, McFeckless, and even my mother were
all patients of his on the dahabiyeh.  He believed, don'tcherknow, in
humoring them and letting them follow out their cranks, under his
management.  The Princess was a music-hall artist who imagined she was
a dead and gone Egyptian Princess; and the queerest of all, 'Arry Axes
was also a music-hall singer who imagined himself Chevalier--you know,
the great Koster artist--and that's how we took him for a Frenchman.
McFeckless and my poor old mother were the only ones with any real rank
and position--but you know what a beastly bounder Mac was, and the poor
mater DID overdo the youthful!  We never called the doctor in until the
day she wanted to go to a swell ball in London as Little Red
Riding-hood. But the doctor writes me that the experiment was a
success, and they'll be all right when they get back to London."

"Then, it seems, sir, that you and I were the only sane ones here,"
said Sir Midas furiously.

"Really it's as much as I can do to be certain about myself, old
chappie," said Fitz-Fulke, turning away.

========================================
========================================

version by Al Haines.









CONDENSED NOVELS


by

BRET HARTE




Contents:

  HANDSOME IS AS HANDSOME DOES
  LOTHAW, or THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN SEARCH OF A RELIGION
  MUCK-A-MUCK, A MODERN INDIAN NOVEL, AFTER JAMES FENIMORE COOPER
  TERENCE DENVILLE
  SELINA SEDILIA
  THE NINETY-NINE GUARDSMEN [AFTER THE THREE MUSKETEERS, BY DUMAS]
  THE HAUNTED MAN
  MISS MIX [AFTER CHARLOTTE BRONTE]
  GUY HEAVYSTONE; OR, "ENTIRE."
  MR. MIDSHIPMAN BREEZY
  JOHN JENKINS; OR, THE SMOKER REFORMED
  NO TITLE [AFTER WILKIE COLLINS]
    Contains:
    MARY JONES'S NARRATIVE
    THE SLIM YOUNG MAN'S STORY
    NO. 27 LIMEHOUSE ROAD
    COUNT MOSCOW'S NARRATIVE
    DR. DIGGS'S STATEMENT
  BEING A NOVEL IN THE FRENCH PARAGRAPHIC STYLE
  FANTINE
  LA FEMME
  MARY MCGILLUP, A SOUTHERN NOVEL, AFTER BELLE BOYD





HANDSOME IS AS HANDSOME DOES.

BY CH--S R--DE.


CHAPTER I.


The Dodds were dead.  For twenty year they had slept under the green
graves of Kittery churchyard.  The townfolk still spoke of them kindly.
The keeper of the alehouse, where David had smoked his pipe, regretted
him regularly, and Mistress Kitty, Mrs. Dodd's maid, whose trim figure
always looked well in her mistress's gowns, was inconsolable.  The
Hardins were in America.  Raby was aristocratically gouty; Mrs. Raby,
religious.  Briefly, then, we have disposed of--

1. Mr. and Mrs. Dodd (dead).

2. Mr. and Mrs. Hardin (translated).

3. Raby, baron et femme.  (Yet I don't know about the former; he came
of a long-lived family, and the gout is an uncertain disease.)

We have active at the present writing (place aux dames)--

1. Lady Caroline Coventry, niece of Sir Frederick.

2. Faraday Huxley Little, son of Henry and Grace Little, deceased.

Sequitur to the above, A HERO AND HEROINE.



CHAPTER II.

On the death of his parents, Faraday Little was taken to Raby Hall. In
accepting his guardianship, Mr. Raby struggled stoutly against two
prejudices: Faraday was plain-looking and sceptical.

"Handsome is as handsome does, sweetheart," pleaded Jael, interceding
for the orphan with arms that were still beautiful. "Dear knows, it is
not his fault if he does not look like--his father," she added with a
great gulp.  Jael was a woman, and vindicated her womanhood by never
entirely forgiving a former rival.

"It's not that alone, madam," screamed Raby, "but, d--m it, the little
rascal's a scientist,--an atheist, a radical, a scoffer! Disbelieves in
the Bible, ma'am; is full of this Darwinian stuff about natural
selection and descent.  Descent, forsooth!  In my day, madam, gentlemen
were content to trace their ancestors back to gentlemen, and not
to--monkeys!"

"Dear heart, the boy is clever," urged Jael.

"Clever!" roared Raby; "what does a gentleman want with cleverness?"



CHAPTER III.

Young Little WAS clever.  At seven he had constructed a telescope; at
nine, a flying-machine.  At ten he saved a valuable life.

Norwood Park was the adjacent estate,--a lordly domain dotted with red
deer and black trunks, but scrupulously kept with gravelled roads as
hard and blue as steel.  There Little was strolling one summer morning,
meditating on a new top with concealed springs.  At a little distance
before him he saw the flutter of lace and ribbons.  A young lady, a
very young lady,--say of seven summers,--tricked out in the crying
abominations of the present fashion, stood beside a low bush.  Her
nursery-maid was not present, possibly owing to the fact that John the
footman was also absent.

Suddenly Little came towards her.  "Excuse me, but do you know what
those berries are?"  He was pointing to the low bush filled with dark
clusters of shining--suspiciously shining--fruit.

"Certainly; they are blueberries."

"Pardon me; you are mistaken.  They belong to quite another family."

Miss Impudence drew herself up to her full height (exactly three feet
nine and a half inches), and, curling an eight of an inch of scarlet
lip, said, scornfully.  "YOUR family, perhaps."

Faraday Little smiled in the superiority of boyhood over girlhood.

"I allude to the classification.  That plant is the belladonna, or
deadly nightshade.  Its alkaloid is a narcotic poison."

Sauciness turned pale.  "I--have--just--eaten--some!"  And began to
whimper.  "O dear, what shall I do?"  Then did it, i. e. wrung her
small fingers and cried.

"Pardon me one moment."  Little passed his arm around her neck, and
with his thumb opened widely the patrician-veined lids of her sweet
blue eyes.  "Thank Heaven, there is yet no dilation of the pupil; it is
not too late!"  He cast a rapid glance around.  The nozzle and about
three feet of garden hose lay near him.

"Open your mouth, quick!"

It was a pretty, kissable mouth.  But young Little meant business. He
put the nozzle down her pink throat as far as it would go.

"Now, don't move."

He wrapped his handkerchief around a hoopstick.  Then he inserted both
in the other end of the stiff hose.  It fitted snugly.  He shoved it in
and then drew it back.

Nature abhors a vacuum.  The young patrician was as amenable to this
law as the child of the lowest peasant.

She succumbed.  It was all over in a minute.  Then she burst into a
small fury.

"You nasty, bad--UGLY boy."

Young Little winced, but smiled.

"Stimulants," he whispered to the frightened nursery-maid who
approached; "good evening."  He was gone.



CHAPTER IV.

The breach between young Little and Mr. Raby was slowly widening.
Little found objectionable features in the Hall.  "This black oak
ceiling and wainscoating is not as healthful as plaster; besides, it
absorbs the light.  The bedroom ceiling is too low; the Elizabethan
architects knew nothing of ventilation.  The color of that oak
panelling which you admire is due to an excess of carbon and the exuvia
from the pores of your skin--"

"Leave the house," bellowed Raby, "before the roof falls on your
sacrilegious head!"

As Little left the house, Lady Caroline and a handsome boy of about
Little's age entered.  Lady Caroline recoiled, and then--blushed.
Little glared; he instinctively felt the presence of a rival.



CHAPTER V.

Little worked hard.  He studied night and day.  In five years he became
a lecturer, then a professor.

He soared as high as the clouds, he dipped as low as the cellars of the
London poor.  He analyzed the London fog, and found it two parts smoke,
one disease, one unmentionable abominations.  He published a pamphlet,
which was violently attacked.  Then he knew he had done something.

But he had not forgotten Caroline.  He was walking one day in the
Zoological Gardens and he came upon a pretty picture,--flesh and blood
too.

Lady Caroline feeding buns to the bears!  An exquisite thrill passed
through his veins.  She turned her sweet face and their eyes met.  They
recollected their first meeting seven years before, but it was his turn
to be shy and timid.  Wonderful power of age and sex!  She met him with
perfect self-possession.

"Well meant, but indigestible I fear" (he alluded to the buns).

"A clever person like yourself can easily correct that" (she, the
slyboots, was thinking of something else).

In a few moments they were chatting gayly.  Little eagerly descanted
upon the different animals; she listened with delicious interest.  An
hour glided delightfully away.

After this sunshine, clouds.

To them suddenly entered Mr. Raby and a handsome young man.  The
gentlemen bowed stiffly and looked vicious,--as they felt.  The lady of
this quartette smiled amiably, as she did not feel.

"Looking at your ancestors, I suppose," said Mr. Raby, pointing to the
monkeys; "we will not disturb you.  Come."  And he led Caroline away.

Little was heart-sick.  He dared not follow them.  But an hour later he
saw something which filled his heart with bliss unspeakable.

Lady Caroline, with a divine smile on her face, feeding the monkeys!



CHAPTER VI.

Encouraged by love, Little worked hard upon his new flying-machine. His
labors were lightened by talking of the beloved one with her French
maid Therese, whom he had discreetly bribed.  Mademoiselle Therese was
venal, like all her class, but in this instance I fear she was not
bribed by British gold.  Strange as it may seem to the British mind, it
was British genius, British eloquence, British thought, that brought
her to the feet of this young savan.

"I believe," said Lady Caroline, one day, interrupting her maid in a
glowing eulogium upon the skill of "M. Leetell,"--"I believe you are in
love with this Professor."  A quick flush crossed the olive cheek of
Therese, which Lady Caroline afterward remembered.

The eventful day of trial came.  The public were gathered, impatient
and scornful as the pigheaded public are apt to be.  In the open area a
long cylindrical balloon, in shape like a Bologna sausage, swayed above
the machine, from which, like some enormous bird caught in a net, it
tried to free itself.  A heavy rope held it fast to the ground.

Little was waiting for the ballast, when his eye caught Lady Caroline's
among the spectators.  The glance was appealing.  In a moment he was at
her side.

"I should like so much to get into the machine," said the
arch-hypocrite, demurely.

"Are you engaged to marry young Raby," said Little, bluntly.

"As you please," she said with a courtesy; "do I take this as a
refusal?"

Little was a gentleman.  He lifted her and her lapdog into the car.

"How nice! it won't go off?"

"No, the rope is strong, and the ballast is not yet in."

A report like a pistol, a cry from the spectators, a thousand hands
stretched to grasp the parted rope, and the balloon darted upward.

Only one hand of that thousand caught the rope,--Little's!  But in the
same instant the horror-stricken spectators saw him whirled from his
feet and borne upward, still clinging to the rope, into space.



CHAPTER VII.*

* The right of dramatization of this and succeeding chapters is
reserved by the writer.


Lady Caroline fainted.  The cold watery nose of her dog on her cheek
brought her to herself.  She dared not look over the edge of the car;
she dared not look up to the bellying monster above her, bearing her to
death.  She threw herself on the bottom of the car, and embraced the
only living thing spared her,--the poodle.  Then she cried.  Then a
clear voice came apparently out of the circumambient air:--

"May I trouble you to look at the barometer?"

She put her head over the car.  Little was hanging at the end of a long
rope.  She put her head back again.

In another moment he saw her perplexed, blushing face over the
edge,--blissful sight.

"O, please don't think of coming up!  Stay there, do!"

Little stayed.  Of course she could make nothing out of the barometer,
and said so.  Little smiled.

"Will you kindly send it down to me?"

But she had no string or cord.  Finally she said, "Wait a moment."

Little waited.  This time her face did not appear.  The barometer came
slowly down at the end of--a stay-lace.

The barometer showed a frightful elevation.  Little looked up at the
valve and said nothing.  Presently he heard a sigh.  Then a sob.  Then,
rather sharply,--

"Why don't you do something?"



CHAPTER VIII.

Little came up the rope hand over hand.  Lady Caroline crouched in the
farther side of the car.  Fido, the poodle, whined.  "Poor thing," said
Lady Caroline, "it's hungry."

"Do you wish to save the dog?" said Little.

"Yes."

"Give me your parasol."

She handed Little a good-sized affair of lace and silk and whalebone.
(None of your "sunshades.")  Little examined its ribs carefully.

"Give me the dog."

Lady Caroline hurriedly slipped a note under the dog's collar, and
passed over her pet.

Little tied the dog to the handle of the parasol and launched them both
into space.  The next moment they were slowly, but tranquilly, sailing
to the earth.

"A parasol and a parachute are distinct, but not different.  Be not
alarmed, he will get his dinner at some farm-house."

"Where are we now?"

"That opaque spot you see is London fog.  Those twin clouds are North
and South America.  Jerusalem and Madagascar are those specks to the
right."

Lady Caroline moved nearer; she was becoming interested.  Then she
recalled herself and said freezingly, "How are we going to descend?"

"By opening the valve."

"Why don't you open it then?"

"BECAUSE THE VALVE-STRING IS BROKEN!"



CHAPTER IX.

Lady Caroline fainted.  When she revived it was dark.  They were
apparently cleaving their way through a solid block of black marble.
She moaned and shuddered.

"I wish we had a light."

"I have no lucifers," said Little.  "I observe, however, that you wear
a necklace of amber.  Amber under certain conditions becomes highly
electrical.  Permit me."

He took the amber necklace and rubbed it briskly.  Then he asked her to
present her knuckle to the gem.  A bright spark was the result.  This
was repeated for some hours.  The light was not brilliant, but it was
enough for the purposes of propriety, and satisfied the delicately
minded girl.

Suddenly there was a tearing, hissing noise and a smell of gas. Little
looked up and turned pale.  The balloon, at what I shall call the
pointed end of the Bologna sausage, was evidently bursting from
increased pressure.  The gas was escaping, and already they were
beginning to descend.  Little was resigned but firm.

"If the silk gives way, then we are lost.  Unfortunately I have no rope
nor material for binding it."

The woman's instinct had arrived at the same conclusion sooner than the
man's reason.  But she was hesitating over a detail.

"Will you go down the rope for a moment?" she said, with a sweet smile.

Little went down.  Presently she called to him.  She held something in
her hand,--a wonderful invention of the seventeenth century, improved
and perfected in this: a pyramid of sixteen circular hoops of light yet
strong steel, attached to each other by cloth bands.

With a cry of joy Little seized them, climbed to the balloon, and
fitted the elastic hoops over its conical end.  Then he returned to the
car.

"We are saved."

Lady Caroline, blushing, gathered her slim but antique drapery against
the other end of the car.



CHAPTER X.

They were slowly descending.  Presently Lady Caroline distinguished the
outlines of Raby Hall.  "I think I will get out here," she said.

Little anchored the balloon and prepared to follow her.

"Not so, my friend," she said, with an arch smile.  "We must not be
seen together.  People might talk.  Farewell."

Little sprang again into the balloon and sped away to America.  He came
down in California, oddly enough in front of Hardin's door, at Dutch
Flat.  Hardin was just examining a specimen of ore.

"You are a scientist; can you tell me if that is worth anything?" he
said, handing it to Little.

Little held it to the light.  "It contains ninety per cent of silver."

Hardin embraced him.  "Can I do anything for you, and why are you here?"

Little told his story.  Hardin asked to see the rope.  Then he examined
it carefully.

"Ah, this was cut, not broken!"

"With a knife?" asked Little.

"No.  Observe both sides are equally indented.  It was done with a
SCISSORS!"

"Just Heaven!" gasped Little.  "Therese!"



CHAPTER XI.

Little returned to London.  Passing through London one day he met a
dog-fancier.  "Buy a nice poodle, sir?"

Something in the animal attracted his attention.  "Fido!" he gasped.

The dog yelped.

Little bought him.  On taking off his collar a piece of paper rustled
to the floor.  He knew the handwriting and kissed it.  It ran:--


"TO THE HON. AUGUSTUS RABY--I cannot marry you.  If I marry any one"
(sly puss) "it will be the man who has twice saved my life,--Professor
Little.

"CAROLINE COVENTRY."


And she did.




LOTHAW;

OR,

THE ADVENTURES OF A YOUNG GENTLEMAN IN SEARCH OF A RELIGION.

BY MR. BENJAMINS.



CHAPTER I.

"I remember him a little boy," said the Duchess.  "His mother was a
dear friend of mine; you know she was one of my bridesmaids."

"And you have never seen him since, mamma?" asked the oldest married
daughter, who did not look a day older than her mother.

"Never; he was an orphan shortly after.  I have often reproached
myself, but it is so difficult to see boys."

This simple yet first-class conversation existed in the morning-room of
Plusham, where the mistress of the palatial mansion sat involved in the
sacred privacy of a circle of her married daughters.  One dexterously
applied golden knitting-needles to the fabrication of a purse of floss
silk of the rarest texture, which none who knew the almost fabulous
wealth of the Duke would believe was ever destined to hold in its
silken meshes a less sum than L1,000,000; another adorned a slipper
exclusively with seed pearls; a third emblazoned a page with rare
pigments and the finest quality of gold leaf.  Beautiful forms leaned
over frames glowing with embroidery, and beautiful frames leaned over
forms inlaid with mother-of-pearl.  Others, more remote, occasionally
burst into melody as they tried the passages of a new and exclusive air
given to them in MS. by some titled and devoted friend, for the private
use of the aristocracy alone, and absolutely prohibited for publication.

The Duchess, herself the superlative of beauty, wealth, and position,
was married to the highest noble in the Three Kingdoms. Those who
talked about such matters said that their progeny were exactly like
their parents,--a peculiarity of the aristocratic and wealthy.  They
all looked like brothers and sisters, except their parents, who, such
was their purity of blood, the perfection of their manners, and the
opulence of their condition, might have been taken for their own
children's elder son and daughter.  The daughters, with one exception,
were all married to the highest nobles in the land.  That exception was
the Lady Coriander, who, there being no vacancy above a marquis and a
rental of L1,000,000, waited.  Gathered around the refined and sacred
circle of their breakfast-table, with their glittering coronets, which,
in filial respect to their father's Tory instincts and their mother's
Ritualistic tastes, they always wore on their regal brows, the effect
was dazzling as it was refined.  It was this peculiarity and their
strong family resemblance which led their brother-in-law, the
good-humored St. Addlegourd, to say that, "'Pon my soul, you know, the
whole precious mob looked like a ghastly pack of court cards, you
know."  St. Addlegourd was a radical.  Having a rent-roll of
L15,000,000, and belonging to one of the oldest families in Britain, he
could afford to be.

"Mamma, I've just dropped a pearl," said the Lady Coriander, bending
over the Persian hearthrug.

"From your lips, sweet friend," said Lothaw, who came of age and
entered the room at the same moment.

"No, from my work.  It was a very valuable pearl, mamma; papa gave
Isaacs and Sons L50,000 for the two."

"Ah, indeed," said the Duchess, languidly rising; "let us go to
luncheon."

"But your Grace," interposed Lothaw, who was still quite young, and had
dropped on all-fours on the carpet in search of the missing gem,
"consider the value--"

"Dear friend," interposed the Duchess, with infinite tact, gently
lifting him by the tails of his dress-coat, "I am waiting for your arm."



CHAPTER II.

Lothaw was immensely rich.  The possessor of seventeen castles, fifteen
villas, nine shooting-boxes, and seven town houses, he had other
estates of which he had not even heard.

Everybody at Plusham played croquet, and none badly.  Next to their
purity of blood and great wealth, the family were famous for this
accomplishment.  Yet Lothaw soon tired of the game, and after seriously
damaging his aristocratically large foot in an attempt to "tight
croquet" the Lady Aniseed's ball, he limped away to join the Duchess.

"I'm going to the hennery," she said.

"Let me go with you, I dearly love fowls--broiled," he added,
thoughtfully.

"The Duke gave Lady Montairy some large Cochins the other day,"
continued the Duchess, changing the subject with delicate tact.


        "Lady Montairy,
         Quite contrairy,
     How do your cochins grow?"


sang Lothaw gayly.

The Duchess looked shocked.  After a prolonged silence, Lothaw abruptly
and gravely said:--

"If you please, ma'am, when I come into my property I should like to
build some improved dwellings for the poor, and marry Lady Coriander."

"You amaze me, dear friend, and yet both your aspirations are noble and
eminently proper," said the Duchess; "Coriander is but a child,--and
yet," she added, looking graciously upon her companion, "for the matter
of that, so are you."



CHAPTER III.

Mr. Putney Giles's was Lothaw's first grand dinner-party.  Yet, by
carefully watching the others, he managed to acquit himself creditably,
and avoided drinking out of the finger-bowl by first secretly testing
its contents with a spoon.  The conversation was peculiar and
singularly interesting.

"Then you think that monogamy is simply a question of the thermometer?"
said Mrs. Putney Giles to her companion.

"I certainly think that polygamy should be limited by isothermal
lines," replied Lothaw.

"I should say it was a matter of latitude," observed a loud talkative
man opposite.  He was an Oxford Professor with a taste for satire, and
had made himself very obnoxious to the company, during dinner, by
speaking disparagingly of a former well-known Chancellor of the
Exchequer,--a great statesman and brilliant novelist,--whom he feared
and hated.

Suddenly there was a sensation in the room; among the females it
absolutely amounted to a nervous thrill.  His Eminence, the Cardinal,
was announced.  He entered with great suavity of manner, and, after
shaking hands with everybody, asking after their relatives, and
chucking the more delicate females under the chin with a high-bred
grace peculiar to his profession, he sat down, saying, "And how do we
all find ourselves this evening, my dears?" in several different
languages, which he spoke fluently.

Lothaw's heart was touched.  His deeply religious convictions were
impressed.  He instantly went up to this gifted being, confessed, and
received absolution.  "To-morrow," he said to himself, "I will partake
of the communion, and endow the Church with my vast estates.  For the
present I'll let the improved cottages go."



CHAPTER IV.

As Lothaw turned to leave the Cardinal, he was struck by a beautiful
face.  It was that of a matron, slim but shapely as an Ionic column.
Her face was Grecian, with Corinthian temples; Hellenic eyes that
looked from jutting eyebrows, like dormer-windows in an Attic forehead,
completed her perfect Athenian outline.  She wore a black frock-coat
tightly buttoned over her bloomer trousers, and a standing collar.

"Your Lordship is struck by that face," said a social parasite.

"I am; who is she?"

"Her name is Mary Ann.  She is married to an American, and has lately
invented a new religion."

"Ah!" said Lothaw eagerly, with difficulty restraining himself from
rushing toward her.

"Yes; shall I introduce you?"

Lothaw thought of Lady Coriander's High Church proclivities, of the
Cardinal, and hesitated: "No, I thank you, not now."



CHAPTER V.

Lothaw was maturing.  He had attended two woman's rights conventions,
three Fenian meetings, had dined at White's, and had danced vis-a-vis
to a prince of the blood, and eaten off of gold plates at Crecy House.

His stables were near Oxford, and occupied more ground than the
University.  He was driving over there one day, when he perceived some
rustics and menials endeavoring to stop a pair of runaway horses
attached to a carriage in which a lady and gentleman were seated.
Calmly awaiting the termination of the accident, with high-bred
courtesy Lothaw forbore to interfere until the carriage was overturned,
the occupants thrown out, and the runaways secured by the servants,
when he advanced and offered the lady the exclusive use of his Oxford
stables.

Turning upon him a face whose perfect Hellenic details he remembered,
she slowly dragged a gentleman from under the wheels into the light and
presented him with ladylike dignity as her husband, Major-General
Camperdown, an American.

"Ah," said Lothaw, carelessly, "I believe I have some land there. If I
mistake not, my agent, Mr. Putney Giles, lately purchased the State
of--Illinois--I think you call it."

"Exactly.  As a former resident of the city of Chicago, let me
introduce myself as your tenant."

Lothaw bowed graciously to the gentleman, who, except that he seemed
better dressed than most Englishmen, showed no other signs of
inferiority and plebeian extraction.

"We have met before," said Lothaw to the lady as she leaned on his arm,
while they visited his stables, the University, and other places of
interest in Oxford.  "Pray tell me, what is this new religion of yours?"

"It is Woman Suffrage, Free Love, Mutual Affinity, and Communism.
Embrace it and me."

Lothaw did not know exactly what to do.  She however soothed and
sustained his agitated frame and sealed with an embrace his speechless
form.  The General approached and coughed slightly with gentlemanly
tact.

"My husband will be too happy to talk with you further on this
subject," she said with quiet dignity, as she regained the General's
side.  "Come with us to Oneida.  Brook Farm is a thing of the past."



CHAPTER VI.

As Lothaw drove toward his country-seat, "The Mural Enclosure," he
observed a crowd, apparently of the working class, gathered around a
singular-looking man in the picturesque garb of an Ethiopian serenader.
"What does he say?" inquired Lothaw of his driver.

The man touched his hat respectfully and said, "My Mary Ann."

"'My Mary Ann!'"  Lothaw's heart beat rapidly.  Who was this mysterious
foreigner?  He had heard from Lady Coriander of a certain Popish plot;
but could he connect Mr. Camperdown with it?

The spectacle of two hundred men at arms who advanced to meet him at
the gates of The Mural Enclosure drove all else from the still youthful
and impressible mind of Lothaw.  Immediately behind them, on the steps
of the baronial halls, were ranged his retainers, led by the chief cook
and bottle-washer, and head crumb-remover.  On either side were two
companies of laundry-maids, preceded by the chief crimper and fluter,
supporting a long Ancestral Line, on which depended the family linen,
and under which the youthful lord of the manor passed into the halls of
his fathers.  Twenty-four scullions carried the massive gold and silver
plate of the family on their shoulders, and deposited it at the feet of
their master. The spoons were then solemnly counted by the steward, and
the perfect ceremony ended.

Lothaw sighed.  He sought out the gorgeously gilded "Taj," or sacred
mausoleum erected to his grandfather in the second story front room,
and wept over the man he did not know.  He wandered alone in his
magnificent park, and then, throwing himself on a grassy bank, pondered
on the Great First Cause, and the necessity of religion.  "I will send
Mary Ann a handsome present," said Lothaw, thoughtfully.



CHAPTER VII.

"Each of these pearls, my Lord, is worth fifty thousand guineas," said
Mr. Amethyst, the fashionable jeweler, as he lightly lifted a large
shovelful from a convenient bin behind his counter.

"Indeed," said Lothaw, carelessly, "I should prefer to see some
expensive ones.

"Some number sixes, I suppose," said Mr. Amethyst, taking a couple from
the apex of a small pyramid that lay piled on the shelf. "These are
about the size of the Duchess of Billingsgate's, but they are in finer
condition.  The fact is, her Grace permits her two children, the
Marquis of Smithfield and the Duke of St. Giles,--two sweet pretty
boys, my Lord,--to use them as marbles in their games.  Pearls require
some attention, and I go down there regularly twice a week to clean
them.  Perhaps your Lordship would like some ropes of pearls?"

"About half a cable's length," said Lothaw, shortly, "and send them to
my lodgings."

Mr. Amethyst became thoughtful.  "I am afraid I have not the exact
number--that is--excuse me one moment.  I will run over to the Tower
and borrow a few from the crown jewels."  And before Lothaw could
prevent him, he seized his hat and left Lothaw alone.

His position certainly was embarrassing.  He could not move without
stepping on costly gems which had rolled from the counter; the rarest
diamonds lay scattered on the shelves; untold fortunes in priceless
emeralds lay within his grasp.  Although such was the aristocratic
purity of his blood and the strength of his religious convictions that
he probably would not have pocketed a single diamond, still he could
not help thinking that he might be accused of taking some.  "You can
search me, if you like," he said when Mr. Amethyst returned; "but I
assure you, upon the honor of a gentleman, that I have taken nothing."

"Enough, my Lord," said Mr. Amethyst, with a low bow; "we never search
the aristocracy."



CHAPTER VIII.

As Lothaw left Mr. Amethyst's, he ran against General Camperdown. "How
is Mary Ann?" he asked hurriedly.

"I regret to state that she is dying," said the general, with a grave
voice, as he removed his cigar from his lips, and lifted his hat to
Lothaw.

"Dying!" said Lothaw, incredulously.

"Alas, too true!" replied the General.  "The engagements of a long
lecturing season, exposure in travelling by railway during the winter,
and the imperfect nourishment afforded by the refreshments along the
road, have told on her delicate frame.  But she wants to see you before
she dies.  Here is the key of my lodging.  I will finish my cigar out
here."

Lothaw hardly recognized those wasted Hellenic outlines as he entered
the dimly lighted room of the dying woman.  She was already a classic
ruin,--as wrecked and yet as perfect as the Parthenon. He grasped her
hand silently.

"Open-air speaking twice a week, and saleratus bread in the rural
districts, have brought me to this," she said feebly; "but it is well.
The cause progresses.  The tyrant man succumbs."

Lothaw could only press her hand.

"Promise me one thing.  Don't--whatever you do--become a Catholic."

"Why?"

"The Church does not recognize divorce.  And now embrace me.  I would
prefer at this supreme moment to introduce myself to the next world
through the medium of the best society in this.  Good by. When I am
dead, be good enough to inform my husband of the fact."



CHAPTER IX.

Lothaw spent the next six months on an Aryan island, in an Aryan
climate, and with an Aryan race.

"This is an Aryan landscape," said his host, "and that is a Mary Ann
statue."  It was, in fact, a full-length figure in marble of Mrs.
General Camperdown!

"If you please, I should like to become a Pagan," said Lothaw, one day,
after listening to an impassioned discourse on Greek art from the lips
of his host.

But that night, on consulting a well-known spiritual medium, Lothaw
received a message from the late Mrs. General Camperdown, advising him
to return to England.  Two days later he presented himself at Plusham.

"The young ladies are in the garden," said the Duchess.  "Don't you
want to go and pick a rose?" she added with a gracious smile, and the
nearest approach to a wink that was consistent with her patrician
bearing and aquiline nose.

Lothaw went and presently returned with the blushing Coriander upon his
arm.

"Bless you, my children," said the Duchess.  Then, turning to Lothaw,
she said: "You have simply fulfilled and accepted your inevitable
destiny.  It was morally impossible for you to marry out of this
family.  For the present, the Church of England is safe."




MUCK-A-MUCK.

A MODERN INDIAN NOVEL.

AFTER COOPER.



CHAPTER I.

It was toward the close of a bright October day.  The last rays of the
setting sun were reflected from one of those sylvan lakes peculiar to
the Sierras of California.  On the right the curling smoke of an Indian
village rose between the columns of the lofty pines, while to the left
the log cottage of Judge Tompkins, embowered in buckeyes, completed the
enchanting picture.

Although the exterior of the cottage was humble and unpretentious, and
in keeping with the wildness of the landscape, its interior gave
evidence of the cultivation and refinement of its inmates.  An
aquarium, containing goldfishes, stood on a marble centre-table at one
end of the apartment, while a magnificent grand piano occupied the
other.  The floor was covered with a yielding tapestry carpet, and the
walls were adorned with paintings from the pencils of Van Dyke, Rubens,
Tintoretto, Michael Angelo, and the productions of the more modern
Turner, Kensett, Church, and Bierstadt.  Although Judge Tompkins had
chosen the frontiers of civilization as his home, it was impossible for
him to entirely forego the habits and tastes of his former life.  He
was seated in a luxurious arm-chair, writing at a mahogany ecritoire,
while his daughter, a lovely young girl of seventeen summers, plied her
crochet-needle on an ottoman beside him.  A bright fire of pine logs
flickered and flamed on the ample hearth.

Genevra Octavia Tompkins was Judge Tompkins's only child.  Her mother
had long since died on the Plains.  Reared in affluence, no pains had
been spared with the daughter's education.  She was a graduate of one
of the principal seminaries, and spoke French with a perfect Benicia
accent.  Peerlessly beautiful, she was dressed in a white moire antique
robe trimmed with tulle.  That simple rosebud with which most heroines
exclusively decorate their hair, was all she wore in her raven locks.

The Judge was the first to break the silence.

"Genevra, the logs which compose yonder fire seem to have been
incautiously chosen.  The sibilation produced by the sap, which exudes
copiously therefrom, is not conducive to composition."

"True, father, but I thought it would be preferable to the constant
crepitation which is apt to attend the combustion of more seasoned
ligneous fragments."

The Judge looked admiringly at the intellectual features of the
graceful girl, and half forgot the slight annoyances of the green wood
in the musical accents of his daughter.  He was smoothing her hair
tenderly, when the shadow of a tall figure, which suddenly darkened the
doorway, caused him to look up.



CHAPTER II.

It needed but a glance at the new-comer to detect at once the form and
features of the haughty aborigine,--the untaught and untrammelled son
of the forest.  Over one shoulder a blanket, negligently but gracefully
thrown, disclosed a bare and powerful breast, decorated with a quantity
of three-cent postage-stamps which he had despoiled from an Overland
Mail stage a few weeks previous.  A cast-off beaver of Judge
Tompkins's, adorned by a simple feather, covered his erect head, from
beneath which his straight locks descended.  His right hand hung
lightly by his side, while his left was engaged in holding on a pair of
pantaloons, which the lawless grace and freedom of his lower limbs
evidently could not brook.

"Why," said the Indian, in a low sweet tone,--"why does the Pale Face
still follow the track of the Red Man?  Why does he pursue him, even as
O-kee-chow, the wild-cat, chases Ka-ka, the skunk? Why are the feet of
Sorrel-top, the white chief, among the acorns of Muck-a-muck, the
mountain forest?  Why," he repeated, quietly but firmly abstracting a
silver spoon from the table,--"why do you seek to drive him from the
wigwams of his fathers?  His brothers are already gone to the happy
hunting-grounds.  Will the Pale Face seek him there?"  And, averting
his face from the Judge, he hastily slipped a silver cake-basket
beneath his blanket, to conceal his emotion.

"Muck-a-Muck has spoken," said Genevra, softly.  "Let him now listen.
Are the acorns of the mountain sweeter than the esculent and nutritious
bean of the Pale Face miner?  Does my brother prize the edible
qualities of the snail above that of the crisp and oleaginous bacon?
Delicious are the grasshoppers that sport on the hillside,--are they
better than the dried apples of the Pale Faces? Pleasant is the gurgle
of the torrent, Kish-Kish, but is it better than the cluck-cluck of old
Bourbon from the old stone bottle?"

"Ugh!" said the Indian,--"ugh! good.  The White Rabbit is wise. Her
words fall as the snow on Tootoonolo, and the rocky heart of
Muck-a-Muck is hidden.  What says my brother the Gray Gopher of Dutch
Flat?"

"She has spoken, Muck-a-Muck," said the Judge, gazing fondly on his
daughter.  "It is well.  Our treaty is concluded.  No, thank you,--you
need NOT dance the Dance of Snow Shoes, or the Moccasin Dance, the
Dance of Green Corn, or the Treaty Dance.  I would be alone.  A strange
sadness overpowers me."

"I go," said the Indian.  "Tell your great chief in Washington, the
Sachem Andy, that the Red Man is retiring before the footsteps of the
adventurous Pioneer.  Inform him, if you please, that westward the star
of empire takes its way, that the chiefs of the Pi-Ute nation are for
Reconstruction to a man, and that Klamath will poll a heavy Republican
vote in the fall."

And folding his blanket more tightly around him, Muck-a-Muck withdrew.



CHAPTER III.

Genevra Tompkins stood at the door of the log-cabin, looking after the
retreating Overland Mail stage which conveyed her father to Virginia
City.  "He may never return again," sighed the young girl as she
glanced at the frightfully rolling vehicle and wildly careering
horses,--"at least, with unbroken bones.  Should he meet with an
accident!  I mind me now a fearful legend, familiar to my childhood.
Can it be that the drivers on this line are privately instructed to
despatch all passengers maimed by accident, to prevent tedious
litigation?  No, no.  But why this weight upon my heart?"

She seated herself at the piano and lightly passed her hand over the
keys.  Then, in a clear mezzo-soprano voice, she sang the first verse
of one of the most popular Irish ballads:--


     "O Arrah, ma dheelish, the distant dudheen
      Lies soft in the moonlight, ma bouchal vourneen:
      The springing gossoons on the heather are still,
      And the caubeens and colleens are heard on the hills."


But as the ravishing notes of her sweet voice died upon the air, her
hands sank listlessly to her side.  Music could not chase away the
mysterious shadow from her heart.  Again she rose.  Putting on a white
crape bonnet, and carefully drawing a pair of lemon-colored gloves over
her taper fingers, she seized her parasol and plunged into the depths
of the pine forest.



CHAPTER IV.

Genevra had not proceeded many miles before a weariness seized upon her
fragile limbs, and she would fain seat herself upon the trunk of a
prostrate pine, which she previously dusted with her handkerchief.  The
sun was just sinking below the horizon, and the scene was one of
gorgeous and sylvan beauty.  "How beautiful is Nature!" murmured the
innocent girl, as, reclining gracefully against the root of the tree,
she gathered up her skirts and tied a handkerchief around her throat.
But a low growl interrupted her meditation.  Starting to her feet, her
eyes met a sight which froze her blood with terror.

The only outlet to the forest was the narrow path, barely wide enough
for a single person, hemmed in by trees and rocks, which she had just
traversed.  Down this path, in Indian file, came a monstrous grizzly,
closely followed by a California lion, a wild-cat, and a buffalo, the
rear being brought up by a wild Spanish bull.  The mouths of the three
first animals were distended with frightful significance; the horns of
the last were lowered as ominously.  As Genevra was preparing to faint,
she heard a low voice behind her.

"Eternally dog-gone my skin ef this ain't the puttiest chance yet."

At the same moment, a long, shining barrel dropped lightly from behind
her, and rested over her shoulder.

Genevra shuddered.

"Dern ye--don't move!"

Genevra became motionless.

The crack of a rifle rang through the woods.  Three frightful yells
were heard, and two sullen roars.  Five animals bounded into the air
and five lifeless bodies lay upon the plain.  The well-aimed bullet had
done its work.  Entering the open throat of the grizzly, it had
traversed his body only to enter the throat of the California lion, and
in like manner the catamount, until it passed through into the
respective foreheads of the bull and the buffalo, and finally fell
flattened from the rocky hillside.

Genevra turned quickly.  "My preserver!" she shrieked, and fell into
the arms of Natty Bumpo, the celebrated Pike Ranger of Donner Lake.



CHAPTER V.

The moon rose cheerfully above Donner Lake.  On its placid bosom a
dug-out canoe glided rapidly, containing Natty Bumpo and Genevra
Tompkins.

Both were silent.  The same thought possessed each, and perhaps there
was sweet companionship even in the unbroken quiet.  Genevra bit the
handle of her parasol and blushed.  Natty Bumpo took a fresh chew of
tobacco.  At length Genevra said, as if in half-spoken revery:--

"The soft shining of the moon and the peaceful ripple of the waves seem
to say to us various things of an instructive and moral tendency."

"You may bet yer pile on that, Miss," said her companion, gravely.
"It's all the preachin' and psalm-singin' I've heern since I was a boy."

"Noble being!" said Miss Tompkins to herself, glancing at the stately
Pike as he bent over his paddle to conceal his emotion. "Reared in this
wild seclusion, yet he has become penetrated with visible consciousness
of a Great First Cause."  Then, collecting herself, she said aloud:
"Methinks 'twere pleasant to glide ever thus down the stream of life,
hand in hand with the one being whom the soul claims as its affinity.
But what am I saying?"--and the delicate-minded girl hid her face in
her hands.

A long silence ensued, which was at length broken by her companion.

"Ef you mean you're on the marry," he said, thoughtfully, "I ain't in
no wise partikler!"

"My husband," faltered the blushing girl; and she fell into his arms.

In ten minutes more the loving couple had landed at Judge Tompkins's.



CHAPTER VI.

A year has passed away.  Natty Bumpo was returning from Gold Hill,
where he had been to purchase provisions.  On his way to Donner Lake,
rumors of an Indian uprising met his ears.  "Dern their pesky skins, ef
they dare to touch my Jenny," he muttered between his clenched teeth.

It was dark when he reached the borders of the lake.  Around a
glittering fire he dimly discerned dusky figures dancing.  They were in
war paint.  Conspicuous among them was the renowned Muck-a-Muck.  But
why did the fingers of Natty Bumpo tighten convulsively around his
rifle?

The chief held in his hand long tufts of raven hair.  The heart of the
pioneer sickened as he recognized the clustering curls of Genevra.  In
a moment his rifle was at his shoulder, and with a sharp "ping,"
Muck-a-Muck leaped into the air a corpse.  To knock out the brains of
the remaining savages, tear the tresses from the stiffening hand of
Muck-a-Muck, and dash rapidly forward to the cottage of Judge Tompkins,
was the work of a moment.

He burst open the door.  Why did he stand transfixed with open mouth
and distended eyeballs?  Was the sight too horrible to be borne?  On
the contrary, before him, in her peerless beauty, stood Genevra
Tompkins, leaning on her father's arm.

"Ye'r not scalped, then!" gasped her lover.

"No.  I have no hesitation in saying that I am not; but why this
abruptness?" responded Genevra.

Bumpo could not speak, but frantically produced the silken tresses.
Genevra turned her face aside.

"Why, that's her waterfall!" said the Judge.

Bumpo sank fainting to the floor.

The famous Pike chieftain never recovered from the deceit, and refused
to marry Genevra, who died, twenty years afterwards, of a broken heart.
Judge Tompkins lost his fortune in Wild Cat.  The stage passes twice a
week the deserted cottage at Donner Lake. Thus was the death of
Muck-a-Muck avenged.




TERENCE DENVILLE.

BY CH--L--S L--V--R.



CHAPTER I.

MY HOME.

The little village of Pilwiddle is one of the smallest and obscurest
hamlets on the western coast of Ireland.  On a lofty crag, overlooking
the hoarse Atlantic, stands "Denville's Shot Tower"--a corruption by
the peasantry of D'Enville's Chateau, so called from my
great-grandfather, Phelim St. Kemy d'Enville, who assumed the name and
title of a French heiress with whom he ran away.  To this fact my
familiar knowledge and excellent pronunciation of the French language
may be attributed, as well as many of the events which covered my after
life.

The Denvilles were always passionately fond of field sports.  At the
age of four, I was already the boldest rider and the best shot in the
country.  When only eight, I won the St. Remy Cup at the Pilwiddle
races,--riding my favorite bloodmare Hellfire.  As I approached the
stand amidst the plaudits of the assembled multitude, and cries of,
"Thrue for ye, Masther Terence," and "O, but it's a Dinville!" there
was a slight stir among the gentry, who surrounded the Lord Lieutenant,
and other titled personages whom the race had attracted thither.  "How
young he is,--a mere child; and yet how noble-looking," said a sweet
low voice, which thrilled my soul.

I looked up and met the full liquid orbs of the Hon. Blanche Fitzroy
Sackville, youngest daughter of the Lord Lieutenant.  She blushed
deeply.  I turned pale and almost fainted.  But the cold, sneering
tones of a masculine voice sent the blood back again into my youthful
cheek.

"Very likely the ragged scion of one of these banditti Irish gentry,
who has taken naturally to 'the road.'  He should be at school--though
I warrant me his knowledge of Terence will not extend beyond his own
name," said Lord Henry Somerset, aid-de-camp to the Lord Lieutenant.

A moment and I was perfectly calm, though cold as ice. Dismounting, and
stepping to the side of the speaker, I said in a low, firm voice:--

"Had your Lordship read Terence more carefully, you would have learned
that banditti are sometimes proficient in other arts beside
horsemanship," and I touched his holster significantly with my hand.  I
had not read Terence myself, but with the skilful audacity of my race I
calculated that a vague allusion, coupled with a threat, would
embarrass him.  It did.

"Ah--what mean you?" he said, white with rage.

"Enough, we are observed," I replied; "Father Tom will wait on you this
evening; and to-morrow morning, my lord, in the glen below Pilwiddle we
will meet again."

"Father Tom--glen!" ejaculated the Englishman, with genuine surprise.
"What? do priests carry challenges and act as seconds in your infernal
country?"

"Yes!" I answered, scornfully, "why should they not?  Their services
are more often necessary than those of a surgeon," I added
significantly, turning away.

The party slowly rode off, with the exception of the Hon. Blanche
Sackville, who lingered for a moment behind.  In an instant I was at
her side.  Bending her blushing face over the neck of her white filly,
she said hurriedly:--

"Words have passed between Lord Somerset and yourself.  You are about
to fight.  Don't deny it--but hear me.  You will meet him--I know your
skill of weapons.  He will be at your mercy.  I entreat you to spare
his life!"

I hesitated.  "Never!" I cried passionately; "he has insulted a
Denville!"

"Terence," she whispered, "Terence--FOR MY SAKE?"

The blood rushed to my cheeks, and her eyes sought the ground in
bashful confusion.

"You love him then?" I cried, bitterly.

"No, no," she said, agitatedly, "no, you do me wrong.  I--I--cannot
explain myself.  My father!--the Lady Dowager Sackville--the estate of
Sackville--the borough--my uncle, Fitzroy Somerset.  Ah! what am I
saying?  Forgive me.  O Terence," she said, as her beautiful head sank
on my shoulder, "you know not what I suffer!"

I seized her hand and covered it with passionate kisses.  But the
high-bred English girl, recovering something of her former hauteur,
said hastily, "Leave me, leave me, but promise!"

"I promise," I replied, enthusiastically; "I WILL spare his life!"

"Thanks, Terence,--thanks!" and disengaging her hand from my lips she
rode rapidly away.

The next morning, the Hon. Captain Henry Somerset and myself exchanged
nineteen shots in the glen, and at each fire I shot away a button from
his uniform.  As my last bullet shot off the last button from his
sleeve, I remarked quietly, "You seem now, my lord, to be almost as
ragged as the gentry you sneered at," and rode haughtily away.



CHAPTER II.

THE FIGHTING FIFTY-SIXTH.

When I was nineteen years old my father sold the Chateau d'Enville and
purchased my commission in the "Fifty-sixth" with the proceeds. "I say,
Denville," said young McSpadden, a boy-faced ensign, who had just
joined, "you'll represent the estate in the Army, if you won't in the
House."  Poor fellow, he paid for his meaningless joke with his life,
for I shot him through the heart the next morning. "You're a good
fellow, Denville," said the poor boy faintly, as I knelt beside him:
"good by!"  For the first time since my grandfather's death I wept.  I
could not help thinking that I would have been a better man if
Blanche--but why proceed?  Was she not now in Florence--the belle of
the English Embassy?

But Napoleon had returned from Elba.  Europe was in a blaze of
excitement.  The Allies were preparing to resist the Man of Destiny.
We were ordered from Gibraltar home, and were soon again en route for
Brussels.  I did not regret that I was to be placed in active service.
I was ambitious, and longed for an opportunity to distinguish myself.
My garrison life in Gibraltar had been monotonous and dull.  I had
killed five men in duel, and had an affair with the colonel of my
regiment, who handsomely apologized before the matter assumed a serious
aspect.  I had been twice in love.  Yet these were but boyish freaks
and follies.  I wished to be a man.

The time soon came,--the morning of Waterloo.  But why describe that
momentous battle, on which the fate of the entire world was hanging?
Twice were the Fifty-sixth surrounded by French cuirassiers, and twice
did we mow them down by our fire.  I had seven horses shot under me,
and was mounting the eighth, when an orderly rode up hastily, touched
his cap, and, handing me a despatch, galloped rapidly away.

I opened it hurriedly and read:--

"LET PICTON ADVANCE IMMEDIATELY ON THE RIGHT."

I saw it all at a glance.  I had been mistaken for a general officer.
But what was to be done?  Picton's division was two miles away, only
accessible through a heavy cross fire of artillery and musketry.  But
my mind was made up.

In an instant I was engaged with an entire squadron of cavalry, who
endeavored to surround me.  Cutting my way through them, I advanced
boldly upon a battery and sabred the gunners before they could bring
their pieces to bear.  Looking around, I saw that I had in fact
penetrated the French centre.  Before I was well aware of the locality,
I was hailed by a sharp voice in French,--

"Come here, sir!"

I obeyed, and advanced to the side of a little man in a cocked hat.

"Has Grouchy come?"

"Not yet, sire," I replied,--for it was the Emperor.

"Ha!" he said suddenly, bending his piercing eyes on my uniform; "a
prisoner?"

"No, sire," I said, proudly.

"A spy?"

I placed my hand upon my sword, but a gesture from the Emperor bade me
forbear.

"You are a brave man," he said.

I took my snuff-box from my pocket, and, taking a pinch, replied by
handing it, with a bow, to the Emperor.

His quick eye caught the cipher on the lid.  "What! a D'Enville? Ha!
this accounts for the purity of your accent.  Any relation to Roderick
d'Enville?"

"My father, sire."

"He was my school-fellow at the Ecole Polytechnique.  Embrace me!" And
the Emperor fell upon my neck in the presence of his entire staff.
Then, recovering himself, he gently placed in my hand his own
magnificent snuff-box, in exchange for mine, and hanging upon my breast
the cross of the Legion of Honor which he took from his own, he bade
one of his Marshals conduct me back to my regiment.

I was so intoxicated with the honor of which I had been the recipient,
that on reaching our lines I uttered a shout of joy and put spurs to my
horse.  The intelligent animal seemed to sympathize with my feelings,
and fairly flew over the ground.  On a rising eminence a few yards
before me stood a gray-haired officer, surrounded by his staff.  I
don't know what possessed me, but putting spurs to my horse, I rode at
him boldly, and with one bound cleared him, horse and all.  A shout of
indignation arose from the assembled staff.  I wheeled suddenly, with
the intention of apologizing, but my mare misunderstood me, and, again
dashing forward, once more vaulted over the head of the officer, this
time unfortunately uncovering him by a vicious kick of her hoof.
"Seize him!" roared the entire army.  I was seized.  As the soldiers
led me away, I asked the name of the gray-haired officer.  "That--why,
that's the DUKE OF WELLINGTON!"

I fainted.

        *        *        *        *        *

For six months I had brain-fever.  During my illness ten grapeshot were
extracted from my body which I had unconsciously received during the
battle.  When I opened my eyes I met the sweet glance of a Sister of
Charity.

"Blanche!" I stammered feebly.

"The same," she replied.

"You here?"

"Yes, dear; but hush!  It's a long story.  You see, dear Terence, your
grandfather married my great-aunt's sister, and your father again
married my grandmother's niece, who, dying without a will, was,
according to the French law--"

"But I do not comprehend," I said.

"Of course not," said Blanche, with her old sweet smile; "you've had
brain-fever; so go to sleep."

I understood, however, that Blanche loved me; and I am now, dear
reader, Sir Terence Sackville, K. C. B., and Lady Blanche is Lady
Sackville.




SELINA SEDILIA.

BY MISS M. E. B--DD--N AND MRS. H--N--Y W--D.



CHAPTER I.

The sun was setting over Sloperton Grange, and reddened the window of
the lonely chamber in the western tower, supposed to be haunted by Sir
Edward Sedilia, the founder of the Grange.  In the dreamy distance
arose the gilded mausoleum of Lady Felicia Sedilia, who haunted that
portion of Sedilia Manor, known as "Stiff-uns Acre." A little to the
left of the Grange might have been seen a mouldering ruin, known as
"Guy's Keep," haunted by the spirit of Sir Guy Sedilia, who was found,
one morning, crushed by one of the fallen battlements.  Yet, as the
setting sun gilded these objects, a beautiful and almost holy calm
seemed diffused about the Grange.

The Lady Selina sat by an oriel window, overlooking the park.  The sun
sank gently in the bosom of the German Ocean, and yet the lady did not
lift her beautiful head from the finely curved arm and diminutive hand
which supported it.  When darkness finally shrouded the landscape she
started, for the sound of horse-hoofs clattered over the stones of the
avenue.  She had scarcely risen before an aristocratic young man fell
on his knees before her.

"My Selina!"

"Edgardo!  You here?"

"Yes, dearest."

"And--you--you--have--seen nothing?" said the lady in an agitated voice
and nervous manner, turning her face aside to conceal her emotion.

"Nothing--that is nothing of any account," said Edgardo.  "I passed the
ghost of your aunt in the park, noticed the spectre of your uncle in
the ruined keep, and observed the familiar features of the spirit of
your great-grandfather at his usual post.  But nothing beyond these
trifles, my Selina.  Nothing more, love, absolutely nothing."

The young man turned his dark liquid orbs fondly upon the ingenuous
face of his betrothed.

"My own Edgardo!--and you still love me?  You still would marry me in
spite of this dark mystery which surrounds me?  In spite of the fatal
history of my race?  In spite of the ominous predictions of my aged
nurse?"

"I would, Selina"; and the young man passed his arm around her yielding
waist.  The two lovers gazed at each other's faces in unspeakable
bliss.  Suddenly Selina started.

"Leave me, Edgardo! leave me!  A mysterious something--a fatal
misgiving--a dark ambiguity--an equivocal mistrust oppresses me.  I
would be alone!"

The young man arose, and cast a loving glance on the lady.  "Then we
will be married on the seventeenth."

"The seventeenth," repeated Selina, with a mysterious shudder.

They embraced and parted.  As the clatter of hoofs in the court-yard
died away, the Lady Selina sank into the chair she had just quitted.

"The seventeenth," she repeated slowly, with the same fateful shudder.
"Ah!--what if he should know that I have another husband living?  Dare
I reveal to him that I have two legitimate and three natural children?
Dare I repeat to him the history of my youth? Dare I confess that at
the age of seven I poisoned my sister, by putting verdigris in her
cream-tarts,--that I threw my cousin from a swing at the age of twelve?
That the lady's-maid who incurred the displeasure of my girlhood now
lies at the bottom of the horse-pond?  No! no! he is too pure,--too
good,--too innocent, to hear such improper conversation!" and her whole
body writhed as she rocked to and fro in a paroxysm of grief.

But she was soon calm.  Rising to her feet, she opened a secret panel
in the wall, and revealed a slow-match ready for lighting.

"This match," said the Lady Selina, "is connected with a mine beneath
the western tower, where my three children are confined; another branch
of it lies under the parish church, where the record of my first
marriage is kept.  I have only to light this match and the whole of my
past life is swept away!" she approached the match with a lighted
candle.

But a hand was laid upon her arm, and with a shriek the Lady Selina
fell on her knees before the spectre of Sir Guy.



CHAPTER II.

"Forbear, Selina," said the phantom in a hollow voice.

"Why should I forbear?" responded Selina haughtily, as she recovered
her courage.  "You know the secret of our race?"

"I do.  Understand me,--I do not object to the eccentricities of your
youth.  I know the fearful destiny which, pursuing you, led you to
poison your sister and drown your lady's-maid.  I know the awful doom
which I have brought upon this house!  But if you make way with these
children--"

"Well," said the Lady Selina, hastily.

"They will haunt you!"

"Well, I fear them not," said Selina, drawing her superb figure to its
full height.

"Yes, but, my dear child, what place are they to haunt?  The ruin is
sacred to your uncle's spirit.  Your aunt monopolizes the park, and, I
must be allowed to state, not unfrequently trespasses upon the grounds
of others.  The horse-pond is frequented by the spirit of your maid,
and your murdered sister walks these corridors.  To be plain, there is
no room at Sloperton Grange for another ghost. I cannot have them in my
room,--for you know I don't like children. Think of this, rash girl,
and forbear!  Would you, Selina," said the phantom, mournfully,--"would
you force your great-grandfather's spirit to take lodgings elsewhere?"

Lady Selina's hand trembled; the lighted candle fell from her nerveless
fingers.

"No," she cried passionately; "never!" and fell fainting to the floor.



CHAPTER III

Edgardo galloped rapidly towards Sloperton.  When the outline of the
Grange had faded away in the darkness, he reined his magnificent steed
beside the ruins of Guy's Keep.

"It wants but a few minutes of the hour," he said, consulting his watch
by the light of the moon.  "He dare not break his word.  He will come."
He paused, and peered anxiously into the darkness. "But come what may,
she is mine," he continued, as his thoughts reverted fondly to the fair
lady he had quitted.  "Yet if she knew all.  If she knew that I were a
disgraced and ruined man,--a felon and an outcast.  If she knew that at
the age of fourteen I murdered my Latin tutor and forged my uncle's
will.  If she knew that I had three wives already, and that the fourth
victim of misplaced confidence and my unfortunate peculiarity is
expected to be at Sloperton by to-night's train with her baby.  But no;
she must not know it.  Constance must not arrive.  Burke the Slogger
must attend to that.

"Ha! here he is!  Well?"

These words were addressed to a ruffian in a slouched hat, who suddenly
appeared from Guy's Keep.

"I be's here, measter," said the villain, with a disgracefully low
accent and complete disregard of grammatical rules.

"It is well.  Listen: I'm in possession of facts that will send you to
the gallows.  I know of the murder of Bill Smithers, the robbery of the
tollgate-keeper, and the making away of the youngest daughter of Sir
Reginald de Walton.  A word from me, and the officers of justice are on
your track."

Burke the Slogger trembled.

"Hark ye! serve my purpose, and I may yet save you.  The 5.30 train
from Clapham will be due at Sloperton at 9.25.  IT MUST NOT ARRIVE!"

The villain's eyes sparkled as he nodded at Edgardo.

"Enough,--you understand; leave me!"



CHAPTER IV.

About half a mile from Sloperton Station the South Clapham and Medway
line crossed a bridge over Sloperton-on-Trent.  As the shades of
evening were closing, a man in a slouched hat might have been seen
carrying a saw and axe under his arm, hanging about the bridge.  From
time to time he disappeared in the shadow of its abutments, but the
sound of a saw and axe still betrayed his vicinity.  At exactly nine
o'clock he reappeared, and, crossing to the Sloperton side, rested his
shoulder against the abutment and gave a shove.  The bridge swayed a
moment, and then fell with a splash into the water, leaving a space of
one hundred feet between the two banks.  This done, Burke the
Slogger,--for it was he,--with a fiendish chuckle seated himself on the
divided railway track and awaited the coming of the train.

A shriek from the woods announced its approach.  For an instant Burke
the Slogger saw the glaring of a red lamp.  The ground trembled.  The
train was going with fearful rapidity.  Another second and it had
reached the bank.  Burke the Slogger uttered a fiendish laugh.  But the
next moment the train leaped across the chasm, striking the rails
exactly even, and, dashing out the life of Burke the Slogger, sped away
to Sloperton.

The first object that greeted Edgardo, as he rode up to the station on
the arrival of the train, was the body of Burke the Slogger hanging on
the cow-catcher; the second was the face of his deserted wife looking
from the windows of a second-class carriage.



CHAPTER V.

A nameless terror seemed to have taken possession of Clarissa, Lady
Selina's maid, as she rushed into the presence of her mistress.

"O my lady, such news!"

"Explain yourself," said her mistress, rising.

"An accident has happened on the railway, and a man has been killed."

"What--not Edgardo!" almost screamed Selina.

"No, Burke the Slogger!" your ladyship.

"My first husband!" said Lady Selina, sinking on her knees.  "Just
Heaven, I thank thee!"



CHAPTER VI.

The morning of the seventeenth dawned brightly over Sloperton.  "A fine
day for the wedding," said the sexton to Swipes, the butler of
Sloperton Grange.  The aged retainer shook his head sadly.  "Alas!
there's no trusting in signs!" he continued.  "Seventy-five years ago,
on a day like this, my young mistress--"  But he was cut short by the
appearance of a stranger.

"I would see Sir Edgardo," said the new-comer, impatiently.

The bridegroom, who, with the rest of the wedding-train, was about
stepping into the carriage to proceed to the parish church, drew the
stranger aside.

"It's done!" said the stranger, in a hoarse whisper.

"Ah! and you buried her?"

"With the others!"

"Enough.  No more at present.  Meet me after the ceremony, and you
shall have your reward."

The stranger shuffled away, and Edgardo returned to his bride.  "A
trifling matter of business I had forgotten, my dear Selina; let us
proceed."  And the young man pressed the timid hand of his blushing
bride as he handed her into the carriage.  The cavalcade rode out of
the court-yard.  At the same moment, the deep bell on Guy's Keep tolled
ominously.



CHAPTER VII.

Scarcely had the wedding-train left the Grange, than Alice Sedilia,
youngest daughter of Lady Selina, made her escape from the western
tower, owing to a lack of watchfulness on the part of Clarissa. The
innocent child, freed from restraint, rambled through the lonely
corridors, and finally, opening a door, found herself in her mother's
boudoir.  For some time she amused herself by examining the various
ornaments and elegant trifles with which it was filled. Then, in
pursuance of a childish freak, she dressed herself in her mother's
laces and ribbons.  In this occupation she chanced to touch a peg which
proved to be a spring that opened a secret panel in the wall.  Alice
uttered a cry of delight as she noticed what, to her childish fancy,
appeared to be the slow-match of a fire-work. Taking a lucifer match in
her hand she approached the fuse. She hesitated a moment.  What would
her mother and her nurse say?

Suddenly the ringing of the chimes of Sloperton parish church met her
ear.  Alice knew that the sound signified that the marriage party had
entered the church, and that she was secure from interruption.  With a
childish smile upon her lips, Alice Sedilia touched off the slow-match.



CHAPTER VIII.

At exactly two o'clock on the seventeenth, Rupert Sedilia, who had just
returned from India, was thoughtfully descending the hill toward
Sloperton manor.  "If I can prove that my aunt Lady Selina was married
before my father died, I can establish my claim to Sloperton Grange,"
he uttered, half aloud.  He paused, for a sudden trembling of the earth
beneath his feet, and a terrific explosion, as of a park of artillery,
arrested his progress.  At the same moment he beheld a dense cloud of
smoke envelop the churchyard of Sloperton, and the western tower of the
Grange seemed to be lifted bodily from its foundation.  The air seemed
filled with falling fragments, and two dark objects struck the earth
close at his feet. Rupert picked them up.  One seemed to be a heavy
volume bound in brass.

A cry burst from his lips.

"The Parish Records."  He opened the volume hastily.  It contained the
marriage of Lady Selina to "Burke the Slogger."

The second object proved to be a piece of parchment.  He tore it open
with trembling fingers.  It was the missing will of Sir James Sedilia!



CHAPTER IX.

When the bells again rang on the new parish church of Sloperton it was
for the marriage of Sir Rupert Sedilia and his cousin, the only
remaining members of the family.

Five more ghosts were added to the supernatural population of Sloperton
Grange.  Perhaps this was the reason why Sir Rupert sold the property
shortly afterward, and that for many years a dark shadow seemed to hang
over the ruins of Sloperton Grange.




THE NINETY-NINE GUARDSMEN.

BY AL--X--D--R D--M--S



CHAPTER I.

SHOWING THE QUALITY OF THE CUSTOMERS OF THE INNKEEPER OF PROVINS.

Twenty years after, the gigantic innkeeper of Provins stood looking at
a cloud of dust on the highway.

This cloud of dust betokened the approach of a traveller. Travellers
had been rare that season on the highway between Paris and Provins.

The heart of the innkeeper rejoiced.  Turning to Dame Perigord, his
wife, he said, stroking his white apron:--

"St. Denis! make haste and spread the cloth.  Add a bottle of
Charlevoix to the table.  This traveller, who rides so fast, by his
pace must be a Monseigneur."

Truly the traveller, clad in the uniform of a musketeer, as he drew up
to the door of the hostelry, did not seem to have spared his horse.
Throwing his reins to the landlord, he leaped lightly to the ground.
He was a young man of four-and-twenty, and spoke with a slight Gascon
accent.

"I am hungry, Morbleu!  I wish to dine!"

The gigantic innkeeper bowed and led the way to a neat apartment, where
a table stood covered with tempting viands.  The musketeer at once set
to work.  Fowls, fish, and pates disappeared before him. Perigord
sighed as he witnessed the devastations.  Only once the stranger paused.

"Wine!"  Perigord brought wine.  The stranger drank a dozen bottles.
Finally he rose to depart.  Turning to the expectant landlord, he
said:--

"Charge it."

"To whom, your highness?" said Perigord, anxiously.

"To his Eminence!"

"Mazarin!" ejaculated the innkeeper.

"The same.  Bring me my horse," and the musketeer, remounting his
favorite animal, rode away.

The innkeeper slowly turned back into the inn.  Scarcely had he reached
the courtyard before the clatter of hoofs again called him to the
doorway.  A young musketeer of a light and graceful figure rode up.

"Parbleu, my dear Perigord, I am famishing.  What have you got for
dinner?"

"Venison, capons, larks, and pigeons, your excellency," replied the
obsequious landlord, bowing to the ground.

"Enough!"  The young musketeer dismounted and entered the inn. Seating
himself at the table replenished by the careful Perigord, he speedily
swept it as clean as the first comer.

"Some wine, my brave Perigord," said the graceful young musketeer, as
soon as he could find utterance.

Perigord brought three dozen of Charlevoix.  The young man emptied them
almost at a draught.

"By-by, Perigord," he said lightly, waving his hand, as, preceding the
astonished landlord, he slowly withdrew.

"But, your highness,--the bill," said the astounded Perigord.

"Ah, the bill.  Charge it!"

"To whom?"

"The Queen!"

"What, Madame?"

"The same.  Adieu, my good Perigord."  And the graceful stranger rode
away.  An interval of quiet succeeded, in which the innkeeper gazed
wofully at his wife.  Suddenly he was startled by a clatter of hoofs,
and an aristocratic figure stood in the doorway.

"Ah," said the courtier good-naturedly.  "What, do my eyes deceive me?
No, it is the festive and luxurious Perigord.  Perigord, listen.  I
famish.  I languish.  I would dine."

The innkeeper again covered the table with viands.  Again it was swept
clean as the fields of Egypt before the miraculous swarm of locusts.
The stranger looked up.

"Bring me another fowl, my Perigord."

"Impossible, your excellency; the larder is stripped clean."

"Another flitch of bacon, then."

"Impossible, your highness; there is no more."

"Well, then, wine!"

The landlord brought one hundred and forty-four bottles.  The courtier
drank them all.

"One may drink if one cannot eat," said the aristocratic stranger,
good-humoredly.

The innkeeper shuddered.

The guest rose to depart.  The innkeeper came slowly forward with his
bill, to which he had covertly added the losses which he had suffered
from the previous strangers.

"Ah, the bill.  Charge it."

"Charge it! to whom?"

"To the King," said the guest.

"What! his Majesty?"

"Certainly.  Farewell, Perigord."

The innkeeper groaned.  Then he went out and took down his sign. Then
remarked to his wife:--

"I am a plain man, and don't understand politics.  It seems, however,
that the country is in a troubled state.  Between his Eminence the
Cardinal, his Majesty the King, and her Majesty the Queen, I am a
ruined man."

"Stay," said Dame Perigord, "I have an idea."

"And that is--"

"Become yourself a musketeer."



CHAPTER II.

THE COMBAT.

On leaving Provins the first musketeer proceeded to Nangis, where he
was reinforced by thirty-three followers.  The second musketeer,
arriving at Nangis at the same moment, placed himself at the head of
thirty-three more.  The third guest of the landlord of Provins arrived
at Nangis in time to assemble together thirty-three other musketeers.

The first stranger led the troops of his Eminence.

The second led the troops of the Queen.

The third led the troops of the King.

The fight commenced.  It raged terribly for seven hours.  The first
musketeer killed thirty of the Queen's troops.  The second musketeer
killed thirty of the King's troops.  The third musketeer killed thirty
of his Eminence's troops.

By this time it will be perceived the number of musketeers had been
narrowed down to four on each side.

Naturally the three principal warriors approached each other.

They simultaneously uttered a cry.

"Aramis!"

"Athos!"

"D'Artagnan!"

They fell into each other's arms.

"And it seems that we are fighting against each other, my children,"
said the Count de la Fere, mournfully.

"How singular!" exclaimed Aramis and D'Artagnan.

"Let us stop this fratricidal warfare," said Athos.

"We will!" they exclaimed together.

"But how to disband our followers?" queried D'Artagnan.

Aramis winked.  They understood each other.  "Let us cut 'em down!"

They cut 'em down.  Aramis killed three.  D'Artagnan three.  Athos
three.

The friends again embraced.  "How like old times," said Aramis. "How
touching!" exclaimed the serious and philosophic Count de la Fere.

The galloping of hoofs caused them to withdraw from each other's
embraces.  A gigantic figure rapidly approached.

"The innkeeper of Provins!" they cried, drawing their swords.

"Perigord, down with him!" shouted D'Artagnan.

"Stay," said Athos.

The gigantic figure was beside them.  He uttered a cry.

"Athos, Aramis, D'Artagnan!"

"Porthos!" exclaimed the astonished trio.

"The same."  They all fell in each other's arms.

The Count de la Fere slowly raised his hands to Heaven.  "Bless you!
Bless us, my children!  However different our opinion may be in regard
to politics, we have but one opinion in regard to our own merits.
Where can you find a better man than Aramus?"

"Than Porthos?" said Aramis.

"Than D'Artagnan?" said Porthos.

"Than Athos?" said D'Artagnan.



CHAPTER III.

SHOWING HOW THE KING OF FRANCE WENT UP A LADDER.

The King descended into the garden.  Proceeding cautiously along the
terraced walk, he came to the wall immediately below the windows of
Madame.  To the left were two windows, concealed by vines.  They opened
into the apartments of La Valliere.

The King sighed.

"It is about nineteen feet to that window," said the King.  "If I had a
ladder about nineteen feet long, it would reach to that window.  This
is logic."

Suddenly the King stumbled over something.  "St. Denis!" he exclaimed,
looking down.  It was a ladder, just nineteen feet long.

The King placed it against the wall.  In so doing, he fixed the lower
end upon the abdomen of a man who lay concealed by the wall The man did
not utter a cry or wince.  The King suspected nothing. He ascended the
ladder.

The ladder was too short.  Louis the Grand was not a tall man.  He was
still two feet below the window.

"Dear me!" said the King.

Suddenly the ladder was lifted two feet from below.  This enabled the
King to leap in the window.  At the farther end of the apartment stood
a young girl, with red hair and a lame leg.  She was trembling with
emotion.

"Louise!"

"The King!"

"Ah, my God, mademoiselle."

"Ah, my God, sire."

But a low knock at the door interrupted the lovers.  The King uttered a
cry of rage; Louise one of despair.

The door opened and D'Artagnan entered.

"Good evening, sire," said the musketeer.

The King touched a bell.  Porthos appeared in the doorway.

"Good evening, sire."

"Arrest M. D'Artagnan."

Porthos looked at D'Artagnan, and did not move.

The King almost turned purple with rage.  He again touched the bell.
Athos entered.

"Count, arrest Porthos and D'Artagnan."

The Count de la Fere glanced at Porthos and D'Artagnan, and smiled
sweetly.

"Sacre!  Where is Aramis?" said the King, violently.

"Here, sire," and Aramis entered.

"Arrest Athos, Porthos, and D'Artagnan."

Aramis bowed and folded his arms.

"Arrest yourself!"

Aramis did not move.

The King shuddered and turned pale.  "Am I not King of France?"

"Assuredly, sire, but we are also severally, Porthos, Aramis,
D'Artagnan, and Athos."

"Ah!" said the King.

"Yes, sire."

"What does this mean?"

"It means, your Majesty," said Aramis, stepping forward, "that your
conduct as a married man is highly improper.  I am an Abbe, and I
object to these improprieties.  My friends here, D'Artagnan, Athos, and
Porthos, pure-minded young men, are also terribly shocked. Observe,
sire, how they blush!"

Athos, Porthos, and D'Artagnan blushed.  "Ah," said the King,
thoughtfully.  "You teach me a lesson.  You are devoted and noble young
gentlemen, but your only weakness is your excessive modesty. From this
moment I make you all Marshals and Dukes, with the exception of Aramis."

"And me, sire?" said Aramis.

"You shall be an Archbishop!"

The four friends looked up and then rushed into each other's arms. The
King embraced Louise de la Valliere, by way of keeping them company.  A
pause ensued.  At last Athos spoke:--

"Swear, my children, that, next to yourselves, you will respect the
King of France; and remember that 'Forty years after' we will meet
again."




THE DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD.

BY SIR ED--D L--TT--N B--LW--R.



BOOK I.

THE PROMPTINGS OF THE IDEAL.

It was noon.  Sir Edward had stepped from his brougham and was
proceeding on foot down the Strand.  He was dressed with his usual
faultless taste, but in alighting from his vehicle his foot had
slipped, and a small round disk of conglomerated soil, which instantly
appeared on his high arched instep, marred the harmonious glitter of
his boots.  Sir Edward was fastidious.  Casting his eyes around, at a
little distance he perceived the stand of a youthful bootblack.
Thither he sauntered, and carelessly placing his foot on the low stool,
he waited the application of the polisher's art. "'Tis true," said Sir
Edward to himself, yet half aloud, "the contact of the Foul and the
Disgusting mars the general effect of the Shiny and the Beautiful--and,
yet, why am I here?  I repeat it, calmly and deliberately--why am I
here?  Ha!  Boy!"

The Boy looked up--his dark Italian eyes glanced intelligently at the
Philosopher, and as with one hand he tossed back his glossy curls, from
his marble brow, and with the other he spread the equally glossy Day &
Martin over the Baronet's boot, he answered in deep rich tones: "The
Ideal is subjective to the Real.  The exercise of apperception gives a
distinctiveness to idiocracy, which is, however, subject to the limits
of ME.  You are an admirer of the Beautiful, sir.  You wish your boots
blacked.  The Beautiful is attainable by means of the Coin."

"Ah," said Sir Edward thoughtfully, gazing upon the almost supernal
beauty of the Child before him; "you speak well.  You have read Kant."

The Boy blushed deeply.  He drew a copy of Kant from his blouse, but in
his confusion several other volumes dropped from his bosom on the
ground.  The Baronet picked them up.

"Ah!" said the Philosopher, "what's this?  Cicero's De Senectute, at
your age, too?  Martial's Epigrams, Caesar's Commentaries. What! a
classical scholar?"

"E pluribus Unum.  Nux vomica.  Nil desperandum.  Nihil fit!" said the
Boy, enthusiastically.  The Philosopher gazed at the Child.  A strange
presence seemed to transfuse and possess him.  Over the brow of the Boy
glittered the pale nimbus of the Student.

"Ah, and Schiller's Robbers, too?" queried the Philosopher.

"Das ist ausgespielt," said the Boy, modestly.

"Then you have read my translation of Schiller's Ballads?" continued
the Baronet, with some show of interest.

"I have, and infinitely prefer them to the original," said the Boy,
with intellectual warmth.  "You have shown how in Actual life we strive
for a Goal we cannot reach; how in the Ideal the Goal is attainable,
and there effort is victory.  You have given us the Antithesis which is
a key to the Remainder, and constantly balances before us the
conditions of the Actual and the privileges of the Ideal."

"My very words," said the Baronet; "wonderful, wonderful!" and he gazed
fondly at the Italian boy, who again resumed his menial employment.
Alas! the wings of the Ideal were folded.  The Student had been
absorbed in the Boy.

But Sir Edward's boots were blacked, and he turned to depart. Placing
his hand upon the clustering tendrils that surrounded the classic nob
of the infant Italian, he said softly, like a strain of distant music:--

"Boy, you have done well.  Love the Good.  Protect the Innocent.
Provide for The Indigent.  Respect the Philosopher. . . .  Stay! Can
you tell we what IS The True, The Beautiful, The Innocent, The
Virtuous?"

"They are things that commence with a capital letter," said the Boy,
promptly.

"Enough!  Respect everything that commences with a capital letter!
Respect ME!" and dropping a half-penny in the hand of the boy, he
departed.

The Boy gazed fixedly at the coin.  A frightful and instantaneous
change overspread his features.  His noble brow was corrugated with
baser lines of calculation.  His black eye, serpent-like, glittered
with suppressed passion.  Dropping upon his hands and feet, he crawled
to the curbstone and hissed after the retreating form of the Baronet,
the single word:--

"Bilk!"



BOOK II.

IN THE WORLD.

"Eleven years ago," said Sir Edward to himself, as his brougham slowly
rolled him toward the Committee Room; "just eleven years ago my natural
son disappeared mysteriously.  I have no doubt in the world but that
this little bootblack is he.  His mother died in Italy.  He resembles
his mother very much.  Perhaps I ought to provide for him.  Shall I
disclose myself?  No! no!  Better he should taste the sweets of Labor.
Penury ennobles the mind and kindles the Love of the Beautiful.  I will
act to him, not like a Father, not like a Guardian, not like a
Friend--but like a Philosopher!"

With these words, Sir Edward entered the Committee Room.  His Secretary
approached him.  "Sir Edward, there are fears of a division in the
House, and the Prime Minister has sent for you."

"I will be there," said Sir Edward, as he placed his hand on his chest
and uttered a hollow cough!

No one who heard the Baronet that night, in his sarcastic and withering
speech on the Drainage and Sewerage Bill, would have recognized the
lover of the Ideal and the Philosopher of the Beautiful.  No one who
listened to his eloquence would have dreamed of the Spartan resolution
this iron man had taken in regard to the Lost Boy--his own beloved
Lionel.  None!

"A fine speech from Sir Edward to-night," said Lord Billingsgate, as,
arm-and-arm with the Premier, he entered his carriage.

"Yes! but how dreadfully he coughs!"

"Exactly.  Dr. Bolus says his lungs are entirely gone; he breathes
entirely by an effort of will, and altogether independent of pulmonary
assistance."

"How strange!" and the carriage rolled away.



BOOK III.

THE DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD.

"ADON AI, appear! appear!"

And as the Seer spoke, the awful Presence glided out of Nothingness,
and sat, sphinx-like, at the feet of the Alchemist.

"I am come!" said the Thing.

"You should say, 'I have come,'--it's better grammar," said the
Boy-Neophyte, thoughtfully accenting the substituted expression.

"Hush, rash Boy," said the Seer, sternly.  "Would you oppose your
feeble knowledge to the infinite intelligence of the Unmistakable? A
word, and you are lost forever."

The Boy breathed a silent prayer, and, handing a sealed package to the
Seer, begged him to hand it to his father in case of his premature
decease.

"You have sent for me," hissed the Presence.  "Behold me,
Apokatharticon,--the Unpronounceable.  In me all things exist that are
not already coexistent.  I am the Unattainable, the Intangible, the
Cause, and the Effect.  In me observe the Brahma of Mr. Emerson; not
only Brahma himself, but also the sacred musical composition rehearsed
by the faithful Hindoo.  I am the real Gyges. None others are genuine."

And the veiled Son of the Starbeam laid himself loosely about the room,
and permeated Space generally.

"Unfathomable Mystery," said the Rosicrucian in a low, sweet voice.
"Brave Child with the Vitreous Optic!  Thou who pervadest all things
and rubbest against us without abrasion of the cuticle.  I command
thee, speak!"

And the misty, intangible, indefinite Presence spoke.



BOOK IV.

MYSELF.

After the events related in the last chapter, the reader will perceive
that nothing was easier than to reconcile Sir Edward to his son Lionel,
nor to resuscitate the beautiful Italian girl, who, it appears, was not
dead, and to cause Sir Edward to marry his first and boyish love, whom
he had deserted.  They were married in St. George's, Hanover Square.
As the bridal party stood before the altar, Sir Edward, with a sweet
sad smile, said, in quite his old manner:--

"The Sublime and Beautiful are the Real; the only Ideal is the
Ridiculous and Homely.  Let us always remember this.  Let us through
life endeavor to personify the virtues, and always begin 'em with a
capital letter.  Let us, whenever we can find an opportunity, deliver
our sentiments in the form of round-hand copies.  Respect the Aged.
Eschew Vulgarity.  Admire Ourselves. Regard the Novelist."




THE HAUNTED MAN.

A CHRISTMAS STORY.

BY CH--R--S D--CK--NS.



PART I.

THE FIRST PHANTOM.

Don't tell me that it wasn't a knocker.  I had seen it often enough,
and I ought to know.  So ought the three-o'clock beer, in dirty
high-lows, swinging himself over the railing, or executing a demoniacal
jig upon the doorstep; so ought the butcher, although butchers as a
general thing are scornful of such trifles; so ought the postman, to
whom knockers of the most extravagant description were merely human
weaknesses, that were to be pitied and used.  And so ought, for the
matter of that, etc., etc., etc.

But then it was SUCH a knocker.  A wild, extravagant, and utterly
incomprehensible knocker.  A knocker so mysterious and suspicious that
Policeman X 37, first coming upon it, felt inclined to take it
instantly in custody, but compromised with his professional instincts
by sharply and sternly noting it with an eye that admitted of no
nonsense, but confidently expected to detect its secret yet.  An ugly
knocker; a knocker with a hard, human face, that was a type of the
harder human face within.  A human face that held between its teeth a
brazen rod.  So hereafter, in the mysterious future should be held,
etc., etc.

But if the knocker had a fierce human aspect in the glare of day, you
should have seen it at night, when it peered out of the gathering
shadows and suggested an ambushed figure; when the light of the street
lamps fell upon it, and wrought a play of sinister expression in its
hard outlines; when it seemed to wink meaningly at a shrouded figure
who, as the night fell darkly, crept up the steps and passed into the
mysterious house; when the swinging door disclosed a black passage into
which the figure seemed to lose itself and become a part of the
mysterious gloom; when the night grew boisterous and the fierce wind
made furious charges at the knocker, as if to wrench it off and carry
it away in triumph.  Such a night as this.

It was a wild and pitiless wind.  A wind that had commenced life as a
gentle country zephyr, but wandering through manufacturing towns had
become demoralized, and reaching the city had plunged into extravagant
dissipation and wild excesses.  A roistering wind that indulged in
Bacchanalian shouts on the street corners, that knocked off the hats
from the heads of helpless passengers, and then fulfilled its duties by
speeding away, like all young prodigals,--to sea.

He sat alone in a gloomy library listening to the wind that roared in
the chimney.  Around him novels and story-books were strewn thickly; in
his lap he held one with its pages freshly cut, and turned the leaves
wearily until his eyes rested upon a portrait in its frontispiece.  And
as the wind howled the more fiercely, and the darkness without fell
blacker, a strange and fateful likeness to that portrait appeared above
his chair and leaned upon his shoulder.  The Haunted Man gazed at the
portrait and sighed.  The figure gazed at the portrait and sighed too.

"Here again?" said the Haunted Man.

"Here again," it repeated in a low voice.

"Another novel?"

"Another novel."

"The old story?"

"The old story."

"I see a child," said the Haunted Man, gazing from the pages of the
book into the fire,--"a most unnatural child, a model infant.  It is
prematurely old and philosophic.  It dies in poverty to slow music.  It
dies surrounded by luxury to slow music.  It dies with an accompaniment
of golden water and rattling carts to slow music. Previous to its
decease it makes a will; it repeats the Lord's Prayer, it kisses the
'boofer lady.'  That child--"

"Is mine," said the phantom.

"I see a good woman, undersized.  I see several charming women, but
they are all undersized.  They are more or less imbecile and idiotic,
but always fascinating and undersized.  They wear coquettish caps and
aprons.  I observe that feminine virtue is invariably below the medium
height, and that it is always simple and infantine.  These women--"

"Are mine."

"I see a haughty, proud, and wicked lady.  She is tall and queenly. I
remark that all proud and wicked women are tall and queenly. That
woman--"

"Is mine," said the phantom, wringing his hands.

"I see several things continually impending.  I observe that whenever
an accident, a murder, or death is about to happen, there is something
in the furniture, in the locality, in the atmosphere, that foreshadows
and suggests it years in advance.  I cannot say that in real life I
have noticed it,--the perception of this surprising fact belongs--"

"To me!" said the phantom.  The Haunted Man continued, in a despairing
tone:--

"I see the influence of this in the magazines and daily papers; I see
weak imitators rise up and enfeeble the world with senseless formula.
I am getting tired of it.  It won't do, Charles! it won't do!" and the
Haunted Man buried his head in his hands and groaned. The figure looked
down upon him sternly: the portrait in the frontispiece frowned as he
gazed.

"Wretched man," said the phantom, "and how have these things affected
you?"

"Once I laughed and cried, but then I was younger.  Now, I would forget
them if I could."

"Have then your wish.  And take this with you, man whom I renounce.
From this day henceforth you shall live with those whom I displace.
Without forgetting me, 't will be your lot to walk through life as if
we had not met.  But first you shall survey these scenes that
henceforth must be yours.  At one to-night, prepare to meet the phantom
I have raised.  Farewell!"

The sound of its voice seemed to fade away with the dying wind, and the
Haunted Man was alone.  But the firelight flickered gayly, and the
light danced on the walls, making grotesque figures of the furniture.

"Ha, ha!" said the Haunted Man, rubbing his hands gleefully; "now for a
whiskey punch and a cigar."



BOOK II.

THE SECOND PHANTOM.

One!  The stroke of the far-off bell had hardly died before the front
door closed with a reverberating clang.  Steps were heard along the
passage; the library door swung open of itself, and the Knocker--yes,
the Knocker--slowly strode into the room.  The Haunted Man rubbed his
eyes,--no! there could be no mistake about it,--it was the Knocker's
face, mounted on a misty, almost imperceptible body.  The brazen rod
was transferred from its mouth to its right hand, where it was held
like a ghostly truncheon.

"It's a cold evening," said the Haunted Man.

"It is," said the Goblin, in a hard, metallic voice.

"It must be pretty cold out there," said the Haunted Man, with vague
politeness.  "Do you ever--will you--take some hot water and brandy?"

"No," said the Goblin.

"Perhaps you'd like it cold, by way of change?" continued the Haunted
Man, correcting himself, as he remembered the peculiar temperature with
which the Goblin was probably familiar.

"Time flies," said the Goblin coldly.  "We have no leisure for idle
talk.  Come!"  He moved his ghostly truncheon toward the window, and
laid his hand upon the other's arm.  At his touch the body of the
Haunted Man seemed to become as thin and incorporeal as that of the
Goblin himself, and together they glided out of the window into the
black and blowy night.

In the rapidity of their flight the senses of the Haunted Man seemed to
leave him.  At length they stopped suddenly.

"What do you see?" asked the Goblin.

"I see a battlemented mediaeval castle.  Gallant men in mail ride over
the drawbridge, and kiss their gauntleted fingers to fair ladies, who
wave their lily hands in return.  I see fight and fray and tournament.
I hear roaring heralds bawling the charms of delicate women, and
shamelessly proclaiming their lovers.  Stay.  I see a Jewess about to
leap from a battlement.  I see knightly deeds, violence, rapine, and a
good deal of blood.  I've seen pretty much the same at Astley's."

"Look again."

"I see purple moors, glens, masculine women, bare-legged men, priggish
book-worms, more violence, physical excellence, and blood. Always
blood,--and the superiority of physical attainments."

"And how do you feel now?" said the Goblin.

The Haunted Man shrugged his shoulders.  "None the better for being
carried back and asked to sympathize with a barbarous age."

The Goblin smiled and clutched his arm; they again sped rapidly through
the black night and again halted.

"What do you see?" said the Goblin.

"I see a barrack room, with a mess table, and a group of intoxicated
Celtic officers telling funny stories, and giving challenges to duel.
I see a young Irish gentleman capable of performing prodigies of valor.
I learn incidentally that the acme of all heroism is the cornetcy of a
dragoon regiment.  I hear a good deal of French!  No, thank you," said
the Haunted Man hurriedly, as he stayed the waving hand of the Goblin;
"I would rather NOT go to the Peninsula, and don't care to have a
private interview with Napoleon."

Again the Goblin flew away with the unfortunate man, and from a strange
roaring below them he judged they were above the ocean.  A ship hove in
sight, and the Goblin stayed its flight.  "Look," he said, squeezing
his companion's arm.

The Haunted Man yawned.  "Don't you think, Charles, you're rather
running this thing into the ground?  Of course it's very moral and
instructive, and all that.  But ain't there a little too much pantomime
about it?  Come now!"

"Look!" repeated the Goblin, pinching his arm malevolently.  The
Haunted Man groaned.

"O, of course, I see her Majesty's ship Arethusa. Of course I am
familiar with her stern First Lieutenant, her eccentric Captain, her
one fascinating and several mischievous midshipmen.  Of course I know
it's a splendid thing to see all this, and not to be seasick.  O, there
the young gentlemen are going to play a trick on the purser.  For God's
sake, let us go," and the unhappy man absolutely dragged the Goblin
away with him.

When they next halted, it was at the edge of a broad and boundless
prairie, in the middle of an oak opening.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, without waiting for his cue, but
mechanically, and as if he were repeating a lesson which the Goblin had
taught him,--"I see the Noble Savage.  He is very fine to look at!  But
I observe under his war-paint, feathers, and picturesque blanket, dirt,
disease, and an unsymmetrical contour.  I observe beneath his inflated
rhetoric deceit and hypocrisy; beneath his physical hardihood, cruelty,
malice, and revenge.  The Noble Savage is a humbug.  I remarked the
same to Mr. Catlin."

"Come," said the phantom.

The Haunted Man sighed, and took out his watch.  "Couldn't we do the
rest of this another time?"

"My hour is almost spent, irreverent being, but there is yet a chance
for your reformation.  Come!"

Again they sped through the night, and again halted.  The sound of
delicious but melancholy music fell upon their ears.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, with something of interest in his
manner,--"I see an old moss-covered manse beside a sluggish, flowing
river.  I see weird shapes: witches, Puritans, clergymen, little
children, judges, mesmerized maidens, moving to the sound of melody
that thrills me with its sweetness and purity.  But, although carried
along its calm and evenly flowing current, the shapes are strange and
frightful: an eating lichen gnaws at the heart of each.  Not only the
clergymen, but witch, maiden, judge, and Puritan, all wear Scarlet
Letters of some kind burned upon their hearts.  I am fascinated and
thrilled, but I feel a morbid sensitiveness creeping over me.  I--I beg
your pardon."  The Goblin was yawning frightfully.  "Well, perhaps we
had better go."

"One more, and the last," said the Goblin.

They were moving home.  Streaks of red were beginning to appear in the
eastern sky.  Along the banks of the blackly flowing river by moorland
and stagnant fens, by low houses, clustering close to the water's edge,
like strange mollusks, crawled upon the beach to dry; by misty black
barges, the more misty and indistinct seen through its mysterious veil,
the river fog was slowly rising.  So rolled away and rose from the
heart of the Haunted Man, etc., etc.

They stopped before a quaint mansion of red brick.  The Goblin waved
his hand without speaking.

"I see," said the Haunted Man, "a gay drawing-room.  I see my old
friends of the club, of the college, of society, even as they lived and
moved.  I see the gallant and unselfish men, whom I have loved, and the
snobs whom I have hated.  I see strangely mingling with them, and now
and then blending with their forms, our old friends Dick Steele,
Addison, and Congreve.  I observe, though, that these gentlemen have a
habit of getting too much in the way.  The royal standard of Queen
Anne, not in itself a beautiful ornament, is rather too prominent in
the picture.  The long galleries of black oak, the formal furniture,
the old portraits, are picturesque, but depressing.  The house is damp.
I enjoy myself better here on the lawn, where they are getting up a
Vanity Fair.  See, the bell rings, the curtain is rising, the puppets
are brought out for a new play.  Let me see."

The Haunted Man was pressing forward in his eagerness, but the hand of
the Goblin stayed him, and pointing to his feet he saw, between him and
the rising curtain, a new-made grave.  And bending above the grave in
passionate grief, the Haunted Man beheld the phantom of the previous
night.

          *          *          *          *          *

The Haunted Man started, and--woke.  The bright sunshine streamed into
the room.  The air was sparkling with frost.  He ran joyously to the
window and opened it.  A small boy saluted him with "Merry Christmas."
The Haunted Man instantly gave him a Bank of England note.  "How much
like Tiny Tim, Tom, and Bobby that boy looked,--bless my soul, what a
genius this Dickens has!"

A knock at the door, and Boots entered.

"Consider your salary doubled instantly.  Have you read David
Copperfield?"

"Yezzur."

"Your salary is quadrupled.  What do you think of the Old Curiosity
Shop?"

The man instantly burst into a torrent of tears, and then into a roar
of laughter.

"Enough!  Here are five thousand pounds.  Open a porter-house, and call
it, 'Our Mutual Friend.'  Huzza!  I feel so happy!"  And the haunted
Man danced about the room.

And so, bathed in the light of that blessed sun, and yet glowing with
the warmth of a good action, the Haunted Man, haunted no longer, save
by those shapes which make the dreams of children beautiful, reseated
himself in his chair, and finished Our Mutual Friend.




MISS MIX.

BY CH--L--TTE BR--NTE.



CHAPTER I.

My earliest impressions are of a huge, misshapen rock, against which
the hoarse waves beat unceasingly.  On this rock three pelicans are
standing in a defiant attitude.  A dark sky lowers in the background,
while two sea-gulls and a gigantic cormorant eye with extreme disfavor
the floating corpse of a drowned woman in the foreground.  A few
bracelets, coral necklaces, and other articles of jewelry, scattered
around loosely, complete this remarkable picture.

It is one which, in some vague, unconscious way, symbolizes, to my
fancy, the character of a man.  I have never been able to explain
exactly why.  I think I must have seen the picture in some illustrated
volume, when a baby, or my mother may have dreamed it before I was born.

As a child I was not handsome.  When I consulted the triangular bit of
looking-glass which I always carried with me, it showed a pale, sandy,
and freckled face, shaded by locks like the color of seaweed when the
sun strikes it in deep water.  My eyes were said to be indistinctive;
they were a faint, ashen gray; but above them rose--my only beauty--a
high, massive, domelike forehead, with polished temples, like
door-knobs of the purest porcelain.

Our family was a family of governesses.  My mother had been one, and my
sisters had the same occupation.  Consequently, when, at the age of
thirteen, my eldest sister handed me the advertisement of Mr.
Rawjester, clipped from that day's "Times," I accepted it as my
destiny.  Nevertheless, a mysterious presentiment of an indefinite
future haunted me in my dreams that night, as I lay upon my little
snow-white bed.  The next morning, with two bandboxes tied up in silk
handkerchiefs, and a hair trunk, I turned my back upon Minerva Cottage
forever.



CHAPTER II.

Blunderbore Hall, the seat of James Rawjester, Esq., was encompassed by
dark pines and funereal hemlocks on all sides.  The wind sang weirdly
in the turrets and moaned through the long-drawn avenues of the park.
As I approached the house I saw several mysterious figures flit before
the windows, and a yell of demoniac laughter answered my summons at the
bell.  While I strove to repress my gloomy forebodings, the
housekeeper, a timid, scared-looking old woman, showed me into the
library.

I entered, overcome with conflicting emotions.  I was dressed in a
narrow gown of dark serge, trimmed with black bugles.  A thick green
shawl was pinned across my breast.  My hands were encased with black
half-mittens worked with steel beads; on my feet were large pattens,
originally the property of my deceased grandmother. I carried a blue
cotton umbrella.  As I passed before a mirror, I could not help
glancing at it, nor could I disguise from myself the fact that I was
not handsome.

Drawing a chair into a recess, I sat down with folded hands, calmly
awaiting the arrival of my master.  Once or twice a fearful yell rang
through the house, or the rattling of chains, and curses uttered in a
deep, manly voice, broke upon the oppressive stillness.  I began to
feel my soul rising with the emergency of the moment.

"You look alarmed, miss.  You don't hear anything, my dear, do you?"
asked the housekeeper nervously.

"Nothing whatever," I remarked calmly, as a terrific scream, followed
by the dragging of chairs and tables in the room above, drowned for a
moment my reply.  "It is the silence, on the contrary, which has made
me foolishly nervous."

The housekeeper looked at me approvingly, and instantly made some tea
for me.

I drank seven cups; as I was beginning the eighth, I heard a crash, and
the next moment a man leaped into the room through the broken window.



CHAPTER III.

The crash startled me from my self-control.  The housekeeper bent
toward me and whispered:--

"Don't be excited.  It's Mr. Rawjester,--he prefers to come in
sometimes in this way.  It's his playfulness, ha! ha! ha!"

"I perceive," I said calmly.  "It's the unfettered impulse of a lofty
soul breaking the tyrannizing bonds of custom."  And I turned toward
him.

He had never once looked at me.  He stood with his back to the fire,
which set off the herculean breadth of his shoulders.  His face was
dark and expressive; his under jaw squarely formed, and remarkably
heavy.  I was struck with his remarkable likeness to a Gorilla.

As he absently tied the poker into hard knots with his nervous fingers,
I watched him with some interest.  Suddenly he turned toward me:--

"Do you think I'm handsome, young woman?"

"Not classically beautiful," I returned calmly; "but you have, if I may
so express myself, an abstract manliness,--a sincere and wholesome
barbarity which, involving as it does the naturalness--" But I stopped,
for he yawned at that moment,--an action which singularly developed the
immense breadth of his lower jaw,--and I saw he had forgotten me.
Presently he turned to the housekeeper:--

"Leave us."

The old woman withdrew with a courtesy.

Mr. Rawjester deliberately turned his back upon me and remained silent
for twenty minutes.  I drew my shawl the more closely around my
shoulders and closed my eyes.

"You are the governess?" at length he said.

"I am, sir."

"A creature who teaches geography, arithmetic, and the use of the
globes--ha!--a wretched remnant of femininity,--a skimp pattern of
girlhood with a premature flavor of tea-leaves and morality.  Ugh!"

I bowed my head silently.

"Listen to me, girl!" he said sternly; "this child you have come to
teach--my ward--is not legitimate.  She is the offspring of my
mistress,--a common harlot.  Ah!  Miss Mix, what do you think of me
now?"

"I admire," I replied calmly, "your sincerity.  A mawkish regard for
delicacy might have kept this disclosure to yourself.  I only recognize
in your frankness that perfect community of thought and sentiment which
should exist between original natures."

I looked up; he had already forgotten my presence, and was engaged in
pulling off his boots and coat.  This done, he sank down in an
arm-chair before the fire, and ran the poker wearily through his hair.
I could not help pitying him.

The wind howled dismally without, and the rain beat furiously against
the windows.  I crept toward him and seated myself on a low stool
beside his chair.

Presently he turned, without seeing me, and placed his foot absently in
my lap.  I affected not to notice it.  But he started and looked down.

"You here yet--Carrothead?  Ah, I forgot.  Do you speak French?"

"Oui, Monsieur."

"Taisez-vous!" he said sharply, with singular purity of accent.  I
complied.  The wind moaned fearfully in the chimney, and the light
burned dimly.  I shuddered in spite of myself.  "Ah, you tremble, girl!"

"It is a fearful night."

"Fearful!  Call you this fearful, ha! ha! ha!  Look! you wretched
little atom, look!" and he dashed forward, and, leaping out of the
window, stood like a statue in the pelting storm, with folded arms. He
did not stay long, but in a few minutes returned by way of the hall
chimney.  I saw from the way that he wiped his feet on my dress that he
had again forgotten my presence.

"You are a governess.  What can you teach?" he asked, suddenly and
fiercely thrusting his face in mine.

"Manners!" I replied, calmly.

"Ha! teach ME!"

"You mistake yourself," I said, adjusting my mittens.  "Your manners
require not the artificial restraint of society.  You are radically
polite; this impetuosity and ferociousness is simply the sincerity
which is the basis of a proper deportment.  Your instincts are moral;
your better nature, I see, is religious.  As St. Paul justly
remarks--see chap. 6, 8, 9, and 10--"

He seized a heavy candlestick, and threw it at me.  I dodged it
submissively but firmly.

"Excuse me," he remarked, as his under jaw slowly relaxed.  "Excuse me,
Miss Mix--but I can't stand St. Paul!  Enough--you are engaged."



CHAPTER IV.

I followed the housekeeper as she led the way timidly to my room. As we
passed into a dark hall in the wing, I noticed that it was closed by an
iron gate with a grating.  Three of the doors on the corridor were
likewise grated.  A strange noise, as of shuffling feet and the howling
of infuriated animals, rang through the hall. Bidding the housekeeper
good night, and taking the candle, I entered my bedchamber.

I took off my dress, and, putting on a yellow flannel nightgown, which
I could not help feeling did not agree with my complexion, I composed
myself to rest by reading Blair's Rhetoric and Paley's Moral
Philosophy.  I had just put out the light, when I heard voices in the
corridor.  I listened attentively.  I recognized Mr. Rawjester's stern
tones.

"Have you fed No. 1?" he asked.

"Yes, sir," said a gruff voice, apparently belonging to a domestic.

"How's No. 2?"

"She's a little off her feed, just now, but will pick up in a day or
two!"

"And No. 3?"

"Perfectly furious, sir.  Her tantrums are ungovernable."

"Hush!"

The voices died away, and I sank into a fitful slumber.

I dreamed that I was wandering through a tropical forest.  Suddenly I
saw the figure of a gorilla approaching me.  As it neared me, I
recognized the features of Mr. Rawjester.  He held his hand to his side
as if in pain.  I saw that he had been wounded.  He recognized me and
called me by name, but at the same moment the vision changed to an
Ashantee village, where, around the fire, a group of negroes were
dancing and participating in some wild Obi festival.  I awoke with the
strain still ringing in my ears.

"Hokee-pokee wokee fum!"

Good Heavens! could I be dreaming?  I heard the voice distinctly on the
floor below, and smelt something burning.  I arose, with an indistinct
presentiment of evil, and hastily putting some cotton in my ears and
tying a towel about my head, I wrapped myself in a shawl and rushed
down stairs.  The door of Mr. Rawjester's room was open.  I entered.

Mr. Rawjester lay apparently in a deep slumber, from which even the
clouds of smoke that came from the burning curtains of his bed could
not rouse him.  Around the room a large and powerful negress, scantily
attired, with her head adorned with feathers, was dancing wildly,
accompanying herself with bone castanets.  It looked like some terrible
fetich.

I did not lose my calmness.  After firmly emptying the pitcher, basin,
and slop-jar on the burning bed, I proceeded cautiously to the garden,
and, returning with the garden-engine, I directed a small stream at Mr.
Rawjester.

At my entrance the gigantic negress fled.  Mr. Rawjester yawned and
woke.  I explained to him, as he rose dripping from the bed, the reason
of my presence.  He did not seem to be excited, alarmed, or
discomposed.  He gazed at me curiously.

"So you risked your life to save mine, eh? you canary-colored teacher
of infants."

I blushed modestly, and drew my shawl tightly over my yellow flannel
nightgown.

"You love me, Mary Jane,--don't deny it!  This trembling shows it!" He
drew me closely toward him, and said, with his deep voice tenderly
modulated:--

"How's her pooty tootens,--did she get her 'ittle tootens wet,--bess
her?"

I understood his allusion to my feet.  I glanced down and saw that in
my hurry I had put on a pair of his old india-rubbers.  My feet were
not small or pretty, and the addition did not add to their beauty.

"Let me go, sir," I remarked quietly.  "This is entirely improper; it
sets a bad example for your child."  And I firmly but gently extricated
myself from his grasp.  I approached the door.  He seemed for a moment
buried in deep thought.

"You say this was a negress?"

"Yes, sir."

"Humph, No. 1, I suppose?"

"Who is Number One, sir?"

"My FIRST," he remarked, with a significant and sarcastic smile. Then,
relapsing into his old manner, he threw his boots at my head, and bade
me begone.  I withdrew calmly.



CHAPTER V.

My pupil was a bright little girl, who spoke French with a perfect
accent.  Her mother had been a French ballet-dancer, which probably
accounted for it.  Although she was only six years old, it was easy to
perceive that she had been several times in love.  She once said to
me:--

"Miss Mix, did you ever have the grande passion?  Did you ever feel a
fluttering here?" and she placed her hand upon her small chest, and
sighed quaintly, "a kind of distaste for bonbons and caromels, when the
world seemed as tasteless and hollow as a broken cordial drop."

"Then you have felt it, Nina?" I said quietly.  "O dear, yes. There was
Buttons,--that was our page, you know,--I loved him dearly, but papa
sent him away.  Then there was Dick, the groom, but he laughed at me,
and I suffered misery!" and she struck a tragic French attitude.
"There is to be company here to-morrow," she added, rattling on with
childish naivete, "and papa's sweetheart--Blanche Marabout--is to be
here.  You know they say she is to be my mamma."

What thrill was this shot through me?  But I rose calmly, and,
administering a slight correction to the child, left the apartment.

Blunderbore House, for the next week, was the scene of gayety and
merriment.  That portion of the mansion closed with a grating was
walled up, and the midnight shrieks no longer troubled me.

But I felt more keenly the degradation of my situation.  I was obliged
to help Lady Blanche at her toilet and help her to look beautiful.  For
what?  To captivate him?  O--no, no,--but why this sudden thrill and
faintness?  Did he really love her?  I had seen him pinch and swear at
her.  But I reflected that he had thrown a candlestick at my head, and
my foolish heart was reassured.

It was a night of festivity, when a sudden message obliged Mr.
Rawjester to leave his guests for a few hours.  "Make yourselves merry,
idiots," he added, under his breath, as he passed me.  The door closed
and he was gone.

An half-hour passed.  In the midst of the dancing a shriek was heard,
and out of the swaying crowd of fainting women and excited men a wild
figure strode into the room.  One glance showed it to be a highwayman,
heavily armed, holding a pistol in each hand.

"Let no one pass out of this room!" he said, in a voice of thunder.
"The house is surrounded and you cannot escape.  The first one who
crosses yonder threshold will be shot like a dog.  Gentlemen, I'll
trouble you to approach in single file, and hand me your purses and
watches."

Finding resistance useless, the order was ungraciously obeyed.

"Now, ladies, please to pass up your jewelry and trinkets."

This order was still more ungraciously complied with.  As Blanche
handed to the bandit captain her bracelet, she endeavored to conceal a
diamond necklace, the gift of Mr. Rawjester, in her bosom.  But, with a
demoniac grin, the powerful brute tore it from its concealment, and,
administering a hearty box on the ear of the young girl, flung her
aside.

It was now my turn.  With a beating heart I made my way to the robber
chieftain, and sank at his feet.  "O sir, I am nothing but a poor
governess, pray let me go."

"O ho!  A governess?  Give me your last month's wages, then.  Give me
what you have stolen from your master!" and he laughed fiendishly.

I gazed at him quietly, and said, in a low voice: "I have stolen
nothing from you, Mr. Rawjester!"

"Ah, discovered!  Hush! listen, girl!" he hissed, in a fiercer whisper,
"utter a syllable to frustrate my plans and you die; aid me, and--"
But he was gone.

In a few moments the party, with the exception of myself, were gagged
and locked in the cellar.  The next moment torches were applied to the
rich hangings, and the house was in flames.  I felt a strong hand seize
me, and bear me out in the open air and place me upon the hillside,
where I could overlook the burning mansion. It was Mr. Rawjester.

"Burn!" he said, as he shook his fist at the flames.  Then sinking on
his knees before me, he said hurriedly:--

"Mary Jane, I love you; the obstacles to our union are or will be soon
removed.  In yonder mansion were confined my three crazy wives.  One of
them, as you know, attempted to kill me!  Ha! this is vengeance!  But
will you be mine?"

I fell, without a word, upon his neck.




GUY HEAVYSTONE;

OR,

"ENTIRE."

A MUSCULAR NOVEL.

BY THE AUTHOR or "SWORD AND GUN."



CHAPTER I.

"Nerei repandirostrum incurvicervicum pecus."


A dingy, swashy, splashy afternoon in October; a school-yard filled
with a mob of riotous boys.  A lot of us standing outside.

Suddenly came a dull, crashing sound from the school-room.  At the
ominous interruption I shuddered involuntarily, and called to
Smithsye:--

"What's up, Smithums?"

"Guy's cleaning out the fourth form," he replied.

At the same moment George de Coverly passed me, holding his nose, from
whence the bright Norman blood streamed redly.  To him the plebeian
Smithsye laughingly:--

"Cully! how's his nibs?"

I pushed the door of the school-room open.  There are some spectacles
which a man never forgets.  The burning of Troy probably seemed a
large-sized conflagration to the pious Aeneas, and made an impression
on him which he carried away with the feeble Anchises.

In the centre of the room, lightly brandishing the piston-rod of a
steam-engine, stood Guy Heavystone alone.  I say alone, for the pile of
small boys on the floor in the corner could hardly be called company.

I will try and sketch him for the reader.  Guy Heavystone was then only
fifteen.  His broad, deep chest, his sinewy and quivering flank, his
straight pastern, showed him to be a thoroughbred. Perhaps he was a
trifle heavy in the fetlock, but he held his head haughtily erect.  His
eyes were glittering but pitiless.  There was a sternness about the
lower part of his face,--the old Heavystone look,--a sternness,
heightened, perhaps, by the snaffle-bit which, in one of his strange
freaks, he wore in his mouth to curb his occasional ferocity.  His
dress was well adapted to his square-set and herculean frame.  A
striped knit undershirt, close-fitting striped tights, and a few
spangles set off his figure; a neat Glengarry cap adorned his head.  On
it was displayed the Heavystone crest, a cock regardant on a dunghill
or, and the motto, "Devil a better!"

I thought of Horatius on the bridge, of Hector before the walls.  I
always make it a point to think of something classical at such times.

He saw me, and his sternness partly relaxed.  Something like a smile
struggled through his grim lineaments.  It was like looking on the
Jungfrau after having seen Mont Blanc,--a trifle, only a trifle less
sublime and awful.  Resting his hand lightly on the shoulder of the
head-master, who shuddered and collapsed under his touch, he strode
toward me.

His walk was peculiar.  You could not call it a stride.  It was like
the "crest-tossing Bellerophon,"--a kind of prancing gait. Guy
Heavystone pranced toward me.



CHAPTER II.

  "Lord Lovel he stood at the garden gate,
  A-combing his milk-white steed."


It was the winter of 186- when I next met Guy Heavystone.  He had left
the University and had entered the 76th "Heavies."  "I have exchanged
the gown for the sword, you see," he said, grasping my hand, and
fracturing the bones of my little finger, as he shook it.

I gazed at him with unmixed admiration.  He was squarer, sterner, and
in every way smarter and more remarkable than ever.  I began to feel
toward this man as Phalaster felt towards Phyrgino, as somebody must
have felt toward Archididasculus, as Boswell felt toward Johnson.

"Come into my den," he said, and lifting me gently by the seat of my
pantaloons he carried me up stairs and deposited me, before I could
apologize, on the sofa.  I looked around the room.  It was a bachelor's
apartment, characteristically furnished in the taste of the proprietor.
A few claymores and battle-axes were ranged against the wall, and a
culverin, captured by Sir Ralph Heavystone, occupied the corner, the
other end of the room being taken up by a light battery.  Foils,
boxing-gloves, saddles, and fishing-poles lay around carelessly.  A
small pile of billets-doux lay upon a silver salver.  The man was not
an anchorite, nor yet a Sir Galahad.

I never could tell what Guy thought of women.  "Poor little beasts," he
would often say when the conversation turned on any of his fresh
conquests.  Then, passing his hand over his marble brow, the old look
of stern fixedness of purpose and unflinching severity would straighten
the lines of his mouth, and he would mutter, half to himself, "S'death!"

"Come with me to Heavystone Grange.  The Exmoor Hounds throw off
to-morrow.  I'll give you a mount," he said, as he amused himself by
rolling up a silver candlestick between his fingers.  "You shall have
Cleopatra.  But stay," he added, thoughtfully; "now I remember, I
ordered Cleopatra to be shot this morning."

"And why?" I queried.

"She threw her rider yesterday and fell on him--"

"And killed him?"

"No.  That's the reason why I have ordered her to be shot.  I keep no
animals that are not dangerous--I should add--DEADLY!"  He hissed the
last sentence between his teeth, and a gloomy frown descended over his
calm brow.

I affected to turn over the tradesman's bills that lay on the table,
for, like all of the Heavystone race, Guy seldom paid cash, and said:--

"You remind me of the time when Leonidas--"

"O, bother Leonidas and your classical allusions.  Come!"

We descended to dinner.



CHAPTER III.

  "He carries weight, he rides a race,
  'Tis for a thousand pound."


"There is Flora Billingsgate, the greatest coquette and hardest rider
in the country," said my companion, Ralph Mortmain, as we stood upon
Dingleby Common before the meet.

I looked up and beheld Guy Heavystone bending haughtily over the
saddle, as he addressed a beautiful brunette.  She was indeed a
splendidly groomed and high-spirited woman.  We were near enough to
overhear the following conversation, which any high-toned reader will
recognize as the common and natural expression of the higher classes.

"When Diana takes the field the chase is not wholly confined to objects
ferae naturae," said Guy, darting a significant glance at his
companion.  Flora did not shrink either from the glance or the meaning
implied in the sarcasm.

"If I were looking for an Endymion, now--" she said archly, as she
playfully cantered over a few hounds and leaped a five-barred gate.

Guy whispered a few words, inaudible to the rest of the party, and,
curvetting slightly, cleverly cleared two of the huntsmen in a flying
leap, galloped up the front steps of the mansion, and dashing at full
speed through the hall leaped through the drawing-room window and
rejoined me, languidly, on the lawn.

"Be careful of Flora Billingsgate," he said to me, in low stern tones,
while his pitiless eye shot a baleful fire.  "Gardez vous!"

"Gnothi seauton," I replied calmly, not wishing to appear to be behind
him in perception or verbal felicity.

Guy started off in high spirits.  He was well carried.  He and the
first whip, a ten-stone man, were head and head at the last fence,
while the hounds were rolling over their fox a hundred yards farther in
the open.

But an unexpected circumstance occurred.  Coming back, his chestnut
mare refused a ten-foot wall.  She reared and fell backward.  Again he
led her up to it lightly; again she refused, falling heavily from the
coping.  Guy started to his feet.  The old pitiless fire shone in his
eyes; the old stern look settled around his mouth. Seizing the mare by
the tail and mane he threw her over the wall. She landed twenty feet on
the other side, erect and trembling. Lightly leaping the same obstacle
himself, he remounted her.  She did not refuse the wall the next time.



CHAPTER IV.

"He holds him by his glittering eye."


Guy was in the North of Ireland, cock-shooting.  So Ralph Mortmain told
me, and also that the match between Mary Brandagee and Guy had been
broken off by Flora Billingsgate.  "I don't like those Billingsgates,"
said Ralph, "they're a bad stock.  Her father, Smithfield de
Billingsgate, had an unpleasant way of turning up the knave from the
bottom of the pack.  But nous verrons; let us go and see Guy."

The next morning we started for Fin-ma-Coul's Crossing.  When I reached
the shooting-box, where Guy was entertaining a select company of
friends, Flora Billingsgate greeted me with a saucy smile.

Guy was even squarer and sterner than ever.  His gusts of passion were
more frequent, and it was with difficulty that he could keep an
able-bodied servant in his family.  His present retainers were more or
less maimed from exposure to the fury of their master. There was a
strange cynicism, a cutting sarcasm in his address, piercing through
his polished manner.  I thought of Timon, etc., etc.

One evening, we were sitting over our Chambertin, after a hard day's
work, and Guy was listlessly turning over some letters, when suddenly
he uttered a cry.  Did you ever hear the trumpeting of a wounded
elephant?  It was like that.

I looked at him with consternation.  He was glancing at a letter which
he held at arm's length, and snorting, as it were, at it as he gazed.
The lower part of his face was stern, but not as rigid as usual.  He
was slowly grinding between his teeth the fragments of the glass he had
just been drinking from.  Suddenly he seized one of his servants, and,
forcing the wretch upon his knees, exclaimed, with the roar of a
tiger:--

"Dog! why was this kept from me?"

"Why, please, sir, Miss Flora said as how it was a reconciliation from
Miss Brandagee, and it was to be kept from you where you would not be
likely to see it,--and--and--"

"Speak, dog! and you--"

"I put it among your bills, sir!"

With a groan, like distant thunder, Guy fell swooning to the floor.

He soon recovered, for the next moment a servant came rushing into the
room with the information that a number of the ingenuous peasantry of
the neighborhood were about to indulge that evening in the national
pastime of burning a farm-house and shooting a landlord.  Guy smiled a
fearful smile, without, however, altering his stern and pitiless
expression.

"Let them come," he said calmly; "I feel like entertaining company."

We barricaded the doors and windows, and then chose our arms from the
armory.  Guy's choice was a singular one: it was a landing net with a
long handle, and a sharp cavalry sabre.

We were not destined to remain long in ignorance of its use.  A howl
was heard from without, and a party of fifty or sixty armed men
precipitated themselves against the door.

Suddenly the window opened.  With the rapidity of lightning, Guy
Heavystone cast the net over the head of the ringleader, ejaculated
"Habet!" and with a back stroke of his cavalry sabre severed the member
from its trunk, and, drawing the net back again, cast the gory head
upon the floor, saying quietly:--

"One."

Again the net was cast, the steel flashed, the net was withdrawn, and
an ominous "Two!" accompanied the head as it rolled on the floor.

"Do you remember what Pliny says of the gladiator?" said Guy, calmly
wiping his sabre.  "How graphic is that passage commencing 'Inter nos,
etc.'"  The sport continued until the heads of twenty desperadoes had
been gathered in.  The rest seemed inclined to disperse.  Guy
incautiously showed himself at the door; a ringing shot was heard, and
he staggered back, pierced through the heart. Grasping the door-post in
the last unconscious throes of his mighty frame, the whole side of the
house yielded to that earthquake tremor, and we had barely time to
escape before the whole building fell in ruins.  I thought of Samson,
the Giant Judge, etc., etc.; but all was over.

Guy Heavystone had died as he had lived,--HARD.




MR. MIDSHIPMAN BREEZY.

A NAVAL OFFICER.

BY CAPTAIN M--RRY--T, R. N.



CHAPTER I.

My father was a north-country surgeon.  He had retired, a widower, from
her Majesty's navy many years before, and had a small practice in his
native village.  When I was seven years old he employed me to carry
medicines to his patients.  Being of a lively disposition, I sometimes
amused myself; during my daily rounds, by mixing the contents of the
different phials.  Although I had no reason to doubt that the general
result of this practice was beneficial, yet, as the death of a
consumptive curate followed the addition of a strong mercurial lotion
to his expectorant, my father concluded to withdraw me from the
profession and send me to school.

Grubbins, the schoolmaster, was a tyrant, and it was not long before my
impetuous and self-willed nature rebelled against his authority.  I
soon began to form plans of revenge.  In this I was assisted by Tom
Snaffle,--a schoolfellow.  One day Tom suggested:--

"Suppose we blow him up.  I've got two pounds of powder!"

"No, that's too noisy," I replied.

Tom was silent for a minute, and again spoke:--

"You remember how you flattened out the curate, Pills!  Couldn't you
give Grubbins something--something to make him leathery sick--eh?"

A flash of inspiration crossed my mind.  I went to the shop of the
village apothecary.  He knew me; I had often purchased vitriol, which I
poured into Grubbins's inkstand to corrode his pens and burn up his
coat-tail, on which he was in the habit of wiping them. I boldly asked
for an ounce of chloroform.  The young apothecary winked and handed me
the bottle.

It was Grubbins's custom to throw his handkerchief over his head,
recline in his chair and take a short nap during recess.  Watching my
opportunity, as he dozed, I managed to slip his handkerchief from his
face and substitute my own, moistened with chloroform.  In a few
minutes he was insensible.  Tom and I then quickly shaved his head,
beard, and eyebrows, blackened his face with a mixture of vitriol and
burnt cork, and fled.  There was a row and scandal the next day.  My
father always excused me by asserting that Grubbins had got drunk,--but
somehow found it convenient to procure me an appointment in her
Majesty's navy at an early day.



CHAPTER II.

An official letter, with the Admiralty seal, informed me that I was
expected to join H. M. ship Belcher, Captain Boltrope, at Portsmouth,
without delay.  In a few days I presented myself to a tall,
stern-visaged man, who was slowly pacing the leeward side of the
quarter-deck.  As I touched my hat he eyed me sternly:--

"So ho!  Another young suckling.  The service is going to the devil.
Nothing but babes in the cockpit and grannies in the board. Boatswain's
mate, pass the word for Mr. Cheek!"

Mr. Cheek, the steward, appeared and touched his hat.  "Introduce Mr.
Breezy to the young gentlemen.  Stop!  Where's Mr. Swizzle?"

"At the masthead, sir."

"Where's Mr. Lankey?"

"At the masthead, sir."

"Mr. Briggs?"

"Masthead, too, sir."

"And the rest of the young gentlemen?" roared the enraged officer.

"All masthead, sir."

"Ah!" said Captain Boltrope, as he smiled grimly, "under the
circumstances, Mr. Breezy, you had better go to the masthead too."



CHAPTER III.

At the masthead I made the acquaintance of two youngsters of about my
own age, one of whom informed me that he had been there three hundred
and thirty-two days out of the year.

"In rough weather, when the old cock is out of sorts, you know, we
never come down," added a young gentleman of nine years, with a dirk
nearly as long as himself, who had been introduced to me as Mr. Briggs.
"By the way, Pills," he continued, "how did you come to omit giving the
captain a naval salute?"

"Why, I touched my hat," I said, innocently.

"Yes, but that isn't enough, you know.  That will do very well at other
times.  He expects the naval salute when you first come on
board--greeny!"

I began to feel alarmed, and begged him to explain.

"Why, you see, after touching your hat, you should have touched him
lightly with your forefinger in his waistcoat, so, and asked, 'How's
his nibs?'--you see?"

"How's his nibs?" I repeated.

"Exactly.  He would have drawn back a little, and then you should have
repeated the salute remarking, 'How's his royal nibs?' asking
cautiously after his wife and family, and requesting to be introduced
to the gunner's daughter."

"The gunner's daughter?"

"The same; you know she takes care of us young gentlemen; now don't
forget, Pillsy!"

When we were called down to the deck I thought it a good chance to
profit by this instruction.  I approached Captain Boltrope and repeated
the salute without conscientiously omitting a single detail.  He
remained for a moment, livid and speechless.  At length he gasped out:--

"Boatswain's mate?"

"If you please, sir," I asked, tremulously, "I should like to be
introduced to the gunner's daughter!"

"O, very good, sir!" screamed Captain Boltrope, rubbing his hands and
absolutely capering about the deck with rage.  "O d--n you!  Of course
you shall!  O ho! the gunner's daughter!  O, h--ll! this is too much!
Boatswain's mate!"  Before I well knew where I was, I was seized, borne
to an eight-pounder, tied upon it and flogged!



CHAPTER IV.

As we sat together in the cockpit, picking the weevils out of our
biscuit, Briggs consoled me for my late mishap, adding that the "naval
salute," as a custom, seemed just then to be honored more in the BREACH
than the observance.  I joined in the hilarity occasioned by the
witticism, and in a few moments we were all friends.  Presently Swizzle
turned to me:--

"We have been just planning how to confiscate a keg of claret, which
Nips, the purser, keeps under his bunk.  The old nipcheese lies there
drunk half the day, and there's no getting at it."

"Let's get beneath the state-room and bore through the deck, and so tap
it," said Lankey.

The proposition was received with a shout of applause.  A long
half-inch auger and bit was procured from Chips, the carpenter's mate,
and Swizzle, after a careful examination of the timbers beneath the
ward-room, commenced operations.  The auger at last disappeared, when
suddenly there was a slight disturbance on the deck above.  Swizzle
withdrew the auger hurriedly; from its point a few bright red drops
trickled.

"Huzza! send her up again!" cried Lankey.

The auger was again applied.  This time a shriek was heard from the
purser's cabin.  Instantly the light was doused, and the party
retreated hurriedly to the cockpit.  A sound of snoring was heard as
the sentry stuck his head into the door.  "All right, sir," he replied
in answer to the voice of the officer of the deck.

The next morning we heard that Nips was in the surgeon's hands, with a
bad wound in the fleshy part of his leg, and that the auger had NOT
struck claret.



CHAPTER V.

"Now, Pills, you'll have a chance to smell powder," said Briggs as he
entered the cockpit and buckled around his waist an enormous cutlass.
"We have just sighted a French ship."

We went on deck.  Captain Boltrope grinned as we touched our hats. He
hated the purser.  "Come, young gentlemen, if you're boring for french
claret, yonder's a good quality.  Mind your con, sir," he added,
turning to the quartermaster, who was grinning.

The ship was already cleared for action.  The men, in their eagerness,
had started the coffee from the tubs and filled them with shot.
Presently the Frenchman yawed, and a shot from a long thirty-two came
skipping over the water.  It killed the quartermaster and took off both
of Lankey's legs.  "Tell the purser our account is squared," said the
dying boy, with a feeble smile.

The fight raged fiercely for two hours.  I remember killing the French
Admiral, as we boarded, but on looking around for Briggs, after the
smoke had cleared away, I was intensely amused at witnessing the
following novel sight:--

Briggs had pinned the French captain against the mast with his cutlass,
and was now engaged, with all the hilarity of youth, in pulling the
captain's coat-tails between his legs, in imitation of a dancing-jack.
As the Frenchman lifted his legs and arms, at each jerk of Briggs's, I
could not help participating in the general mirth.

"You young devil, what are you doing?" said a stifled voice behind me.
I looked up and beheld Captain Boltrope, endeavoring to calm his stern
features, but the twitching around his mouth betrayed his intense
enjoyment of the scene.  "Go to the masthead--up with you, sir!" he
repeated sternly to Briggs.

"Very good, sir," said the boy, coolly preparing to mount the shrouds.
"Good by, Johnny Crapaud.  Humph!" he added, in a tone intended for my
ear, "a pretty way to treat a hero.  The service is going to the devil!"

I thought so too.



CHAPTER VI.

We were ordered to the West Indies.  Although Captain Boltrope's manner
toward me was still severe, and even harsh, I understood that my name
had been favorably mentioned in the despatches.

Reader, were you ever at Jamaica?  If so, you remember the negresses,
the oranges, Port Royal Tom--the yellow fever.  After being two weeks
at the station, I was taken sick of the fever.  In a month I was
delirious.  During my paroxysms, I had a wild distempered dream of a
stern face bending anxiously over my pillow, a rough hand smoothing my
hair, and a kind voice saying:--

"Bess his 'ittle heart!  Did he have the naughty fever?"  This face
seemed again changed to the well-known stern features of Captain
Boltrope.

When I was convalescent, a packet edged in black was put in my hand.
It contained the news of my father's death, and a sealed letter which
he had requested to be given to me on his decease.  I opened it
tremblingly.  It read thus:--


"My dear Boy:--I regret to inform you that in all probability you are
not my son.  Your mother, I am grieved to say, was a highly improper
person.  Who your father may be, I really cannot say, but perhaps the
Honorable Henry Boltrope, Captain R. N., may be able to inform you.
Circumstances over which I have no control have deferred this important
disclosure.

"YOUR STRICKEN PARENT."


And so Captain Boltrope was my father.  Heavens!  Was it a dream? I
recalled his stern manner, his observant eye, his ill-concealed
uneasiness when in my presence.  I longed to embrace him. Staggering to
my feet, I rushed in my scanty apparel to the deck, where Captain
Boltrope was just then engaged in receiving the Governor's wife and
daughter.  The ladies shrieked; the youngest, a beautiful girl, blushed
deeply.  Heeding them not, I sank at his feet, and, embracing them,
cried:--

"My father!"

"Chuck him overboard!" roared Captain Boltrope.

"Stay," pleaded the soft voice of Clara Maitland, the Governor's
daughter.

"Shave his head! he's a wretched lunatic!" continued Captain Boltrope,
while his voice trembled with excitement.

"No, let me nurse and take care of him," said the lovely girl, blushing
as she spoke.  "Mamma, can't we take him home?"

The daughter's pleading was not without effect.  In the mean time I had
fainted.  When I recovered my senses I found myself in Governor
Maitland's mansion.



CHAPTER VII.

The reader will guess what followed.  I fell deeply in love with Clara
Maitland, to whom I confided the secret of my birth.  The generous girl
asserted that she had detected the superiority of my manner at once.
We plighted our troth, and resolved to wait upon events.

Briggs called to see me a few days afterward.  He said that the purser
had insulted the whole cockpit, and all the midshipmen had called him
out.  But he added thoughtfully: "I don't see how we can arrange the
duel.  You see there are six of us to fight him."

"Very easily," I replied.  "Let your fellows all stand in a row, and
take his fire; that, you see, gives him six chances to one, and he must
be a bad shot if he can't hit one of you; while, on the other hand, you
see, he gets a volley from you six, and one of you'll be certain to
fetch him."

"Exactly"; and away Briggs went, but soon returned to say that the
purser had declined,--"like a d--d coward," he added.

But the news of the sudden and serious illness of Captain Boltrope put
off the duel.  I hastened to his bedside, but too late,--an hour
previous he had given up the ghost.

I resolved to return to England.  I made known the secret of my birth,
and exhibited my adopted father's letter to Lady Maitland, who at once
suggested my marriage with her daughter, before I returned to claim the
property.  We were married, and took our departure next day.

I made no delay in posting at once, in company with my wife and my
friend Briggs, to my native village.  Judge of my horror and surprise
when my late adopted father came out of his shop to welcome me.

"Then you are not dead!" I gasped.

"No, my dear boy."

"And this letter?"

My father--as I must still call him--glanced on the paper, and
pronounced it a forgery.  Briggs roared with laughter.  I turned to him
and demanded an explanation.

"Why, don't you see, Greeny, it's all a joke,--a midshipman's joke!"

"But--" I asked.

"Don't be a fool.  You've got a good wife,--be satisfied."

I turned to Clara, and was satisfied.  Although Mrs. Maitland never
forgave me, the jolly old Governor laughed heartily over the joke, and
so well used his influence that I soon became, dear reader, Admiral
Breezy, K. C. B.




JOHN JENKINS;

OR,

THE SMOKER REFORMED.

BY T. S. A--TH--R.



CHAPTER I.

"One cigar a day!" said Judge Boompointer.

"One cigar a day!" repeated John Jenkins, as with trepidation he
dropped his half-consumed cigar under his work-bench.

"One cigar a day is three cents a day," remarked Judge Boompointer,
gravely; "and do you know, sir, what one cigar a day, or three cents a
day, amounts to in the course of four years?"

John Jenkins, in his boyhood, had attended the village school, and
possessed considerable arithmetical ability.  Taking up a shingle which
lay upon his work-bench, and producing a piece of chalk, with a feeling
of conscious pride he made an exhaustive calculation.

"Exactly forty-three dollars and eighty cents," he replied, wiping the
perspiration from his heated brow, while his face flushed with honest
enthusiasm.

"Well, sir, if you saved three cents a day, instead of wasting it, you
would now be the possessor of a new suit of clothes, an illustrated
Family Bible, a pew in the church, a complete set of Patent Office
Reports, a hymn-book, and a paid subscription to Arthur's Home
Magazine, which could be purchased for exactly forty-three dollars and
eighty cents; and," added the Judge, with increasing sternness, "if you
calculate leap-year, which you seem to have strangely omitted, you have
three cents more, sir; THREE CENTS MORE!  What would that buy you, sir?"

"A cigar," suggested John Jenkins; but, coloring again deeply, he hid
his face.

"No, sir," said the Judge, with a sweet smile of benevolence stealing
over his stern features; "properly invested, it would buy you that
which passeth all price.  Dropped into the missionary-box, who can tell
what heathen, now idly and joyously wantoning in nakedness and sin,
might be brought to a sense of his miserable condition, and made,
through that three cents, to feel the torments of the wicked?"

With these words the Judge retired, leaving John Jenkins buried in
profound thought.  "Three cents a day," he muttered.  "In forty years I
might be worth four hundred and thirty-eight dollars and ten
cents,--and then I might marry Mary.  Ah, Mary!"  The young carpenter
sighed, and, drawing a twenty-five cent daguerreotype from his
vest-pocket, gazed long and fervidly upon the features of a young girl
in book muslin and a coral necklace.  Then, with a resolute expression,
he carefully locked the door of his workshop and departed.

Alas! his good resolutions were too late.  We trifle with the tide of
fortune which too often nips us in the bud and casts the dark shadow of
misfortune over the bright lexicon of youth!  That night the
half-consumed fragment of John Jenkins's cigar set fire to his workshop
and burned it up, together with all his tools and materials.  There was
no insurance.



CHAPTER II.

THE DOWNWARD PATH.

"Then you still persist in marrying John Jenkins?" queried Judge
Boompointer, as he playfully, with paternal familiarity, lifted the
golden curls of the village belle, Mary Jones.

"I do," replied the fair young girl, in a low voice, that resembled
rock candy in its saccharine firmness,--"I do.  He has promised to
reform.  Since he lost all his property by fire--"

"The result of his pernicious habit, though he illogically persists in
charging it to me," interrupted the Judge.

"Since then," continued the young girl, "he has endeavored to break
himself of the habit.  He tells me that he has substituted the stalks
of the Indian ratan, the outer part of a leguminous plant called the
smoking-bean, and the fragmentary and unconsumed remainder of cigars
which occur at rare and uncertain intervals along the road, which, as
he informs me, though deficient in quality and strength, are
comparatively inexpensive."  And, blushing at her own eloquence, the
young girl hid her curls on the Judge's arm.

"Poor thing!" muttered Judge Boompointer.  "Dare I tell her all? Yet I
must."

"I shall cling to him," continued the young girl, rising with her
theme, "as the young vine clings to some hoary ruin.  Nay, nay, chide
me not, Judge Boompointer.  I will marry John Jenkins!"

The Judge was evidently affected.  Seating himself at the table, he
wrote a few lines hurriedly upon a piece of paper, which he folded and
placed in the fingers of the destined bride of John Jenkins.

"Mary Jones," said the Judge, with impressive earnestness, "take this
trifle as a wedding gift from one who respects your fidelity and
truthfulness.  At the altar let it be a reminder of me."  And covering
his face hastily with a handkerchief, the stern and iron-willed man
left the room.  As the door closed, Mary unfolded the paper.  It was an
order on the corner grocery for three yards of flannel, a paper of
needles, four pounds of soap, one pound of starch, and two boxes of
matches!

"Noble and thoughtful man!" was all Mary Jones could exclaim, as she
hid her face in her hands and burst into a flood of tears.

          *          *         *          *          *

The bells of Cloverdale are ringing merrily.  It is a wedding. "How
beautiful they look!" is the exclamation that passes from lip to lip,
as Mary Jones, leaning timidly on the arm of John Jenkins, enters the
church.  But the bride is agitated, and the bridegroom betrays a
feverish nervousness.  As they stand in the vestibule, John Jenkins
fumbles earnestly in his vest-pocket.  Can it be the ring he is anxious
about?  No.  He draws a small brown substance from his pocket, and
biting off a piece, hastily replaces the fragment and gazes furtively
around.  Surely no one saw him?  Alas! the eyes of two of that wedding
party saw the fatal act.  Judge Boompointer shook his head sternly.
Mary Jones sighed and breathed a silent prayer.  Her husband chewed!



CHAPTER III.

AND LAST.

"What! more bread?" said John Jenkins, gruffly.  "You're always asking
for money for bread.  D--nation!  Do you want to ruin me by your
extravagance?" and as he uttered these words he drew from his pocket a
bottle of whiskey, a pipe, and a paper of tobacco. Emptying the first
at a draught, he threw the empty bottle at the head of his eldest boy,
a youth of twelve summers.  The missile struck the child full in the
temple, and stretched him a lifeless corpse.  Mrs. Jenkins, whom the
reader will hardly recognize as the once gay and beautiful Mary Jones,
raised the dead body of her son in her arms, and carefully placing the
unfortunate youth beside the pump in the back yard, returned with
saddened step to the house. At another time, and in brighter days, she
might have wept at the occurrence.  She was past tears now.

"Father, your conduct is reprehensible!" said little Harrison Jenkins,
the youngest boy.  "Where do you expect to go when you die?"

"Ah!" said John Jenkins, fiercely; "this comes of giving children a
liberal education; this is the result of Sabbath schools.  Down, viper!"

A tumbler thrown from the same parental fist laid out the youthful
Harrison cold.  The four other children had, in the mean time, gathered
around the table with anxious expectancy.  With a chuckle, the now
changed and brutal John Jenkins produced four pipes, and, filling them
with tobacco, handed one to each of his offspring and bade them smoke.
"It's better than bread!" laughed the wretch hoarsely.

Mary Jenkins, though of a patient nature, felt it her duty now to
speak.  "I have borne much, John Jenkins," she said.  "But I prefer
that the children should not smoke.  It is an unclean habit, and soils
their clothes.  I ask this as a special favor!"

John Jenkins hesitated,--the pangs of remorse began to seize him.

"Promise me this, John!" urged Mary upon her knees.

"I promise!" reluctantly answered John.

"And you will put the money in a savings-bank?"

"I will," repeated her husband; "and I'LL give up smoking, too."

"'Tis well, John Jenkins!" said Judge Boompointer, appearing suddenly
from behind the door, where he had been concealed during this
interview.  "Nobly said! my man.  Cheer up!  I will see that the
children are decently buried."  The husband and wife fell into each
other's arms.  And Judge Boompointer, gazing upon the affecting
spectacle, burst into tears.

From that day John Jenkins was an altered man.




NO TITLE.

By W--LK--E C--LL--NS.


PROLOGUE.

The following advertisement appeared in the "Times" of the 17th of
June, 1845:--


WANTED.--A few young men for a light genteel employment.
         Address                           J. W., P. O.


In the same paper, of same date, in another column:--


TO LET.--That commodious and elegant family mansion, No. 27 Limehouse
Road, Pultneyville, will be rented low to a respectable tenant if
applied for immediately, the family being about to remove to the
continent.


Under the local intelligence, in another column:--


MISSING.--An unknown elderly gentleman a week ago left his lodgings in
the Kent Road, since which nothing has been heard of him.  He left no
trace of his identity except a portmanteau containing a couple of
shirts marked "209, WARD."


To find the connection between the mysterious disappearance of the
elderly gentleman and the anonymous communication, the relevancy of
both these incidents to the letting of a commodious family mansion, and
the dead secret involved in the three occurrences, is the task of the
writer of this history.

A slim young man with spectacles, a large hat, drab gaiters, and a
note-book, sat late that night with a copy of the "Times" before him,
and a pencil which he rattled nervously between his teeth in the
coffee-room of the "Blue Dragon."



CHAPTER I.

MARY JONES'S NARRATIVE.

I am upper housemaid to the family that live at No. 27 Limehouse Road,
Pultneyville.  I have been requested by Mr. Wilkey Collings, which I
takes the liberty of here stating is a gentleman born and bred, and has
some consideration for the feelings of servants, and is not above
rewarding them for their trouble, which is more than you can say for
some who ask questions and gets short answers enough, gracious knows,
to tell what I know about them.  I have been requested to tell my story
in my own langwidge, though, being no schollard, mind cannot conceive.
I think my master is a brute. Do not know that he has ever attempted to
poison my missus,--which is too good for him, and how she ever came to
marry him, heart only can tell,--but believe him to be capable of any
such hatrosity. Have heard him swear dreadful because of not having his
shaving-water at nine o'clock precisely.  Do not know whether he ever
forged a will or tried to get my missus' property, although, not having
confidence in the man, should not be surprised if he had done so.
Believe that there was always something mysterious in his conduct.
Remember distinctly how the family left home to go abroad.  Was putting
up my back hair, last Saturday morning, when I heard a ring.  Says
cook, "That's missus' bell, and mind you hurry or the master 'ill know
why."  Says I, "Humbly thanking you, mem, but taking advice of them as
is competent to give it, I'll take my time."  Found missus dressing
herself and master growling as usual. Says missus, quite calm and easy
like, "Mary, we begin to pack to-day."  "What for, mem?" says I, taken
aback.  "What's that hussy asking?" says master from the bedclothes
quite savage like.  "For the Continent--Italy," says missus--"Can you
go Mary?"  Her voice was quite gentle and saintlike, but I knew the
struggle it cost, and says I, "With YOU mem, to India's torrid clime,
if required, but with African Gorillas," says I, looking toward the
bed, "never."  "Leave the room," says master, starting up and catching
of his bootjack.  "Why Charles!" says missus, "how you talk!" affecting
surprise.  "Do go Mary," says she, slipping a half-crown into my hand.
I left the room scorning to take notice of the odious wretch's conduct.

Cannot say whether my master and missus were ever legally married. What
with the dreadful state of morals nowadays and them stories in the
circulating libraries, innocent girls don't know into what society they
might be obliged to take situations.  Never saw missus' marriage
certificate, though I have quite accidental-like looked in her desk
when open, and would have seen it.  Do not know of any lovers missus
might have had.  Believe she had a liking for John Thomas, footman, for
she was always spiteful-like--poor lady--when we were together--though
there was nothing between us, as Cook well knows, and dare not deny,
and missus needn't have been jealous.  Have never seen arsenic or
Prussian acid in any of the private drawers--but have seen paregoric
and camphor.  One of my master's friends was a Count Moscow, a Russian
papist--which I detested.



CHAPTER II.

THE SLIM YOUNG MAN'S STORY.

I am by profession a reporter, and writer for the press.  I live at
Pultneyville.  I have always had a passion for the marvellous, and have
been distinguished for my facility in tracing out mysteries, and
solving enigmatical occurrences.  On the night of the 17th June, 1845,
I left my office and walked homeward.  The night was bright and
starlight.  I was revolving in my mind the words of a singular item I
had just read in the "Times."  I had reached the darkest portion of the
road, and found my self mechanically repeating: "An elderly gentleman a
week ago left his lodgings on the Kent Road," when suddenly I heard a
step behind me.

I turned quickly, with an expression of horror in my face, and by the
light of the newly risen moon beheld an elderly gentleman, with green
cotton umbrella, approaching me.  His hair, which was snow white, was
parted over a broad, open forehead.  The expression of his face, which
was slightly flushed, was that of amiability verging almost upon
imbecility.  There was a strange, inquiring look about the widely
opened mild blue eye,--a look that might have been intensified to
insanity, or modified to idiocy.  As he passed me, he paused and partly
turned his face, with a gesture of inquiry.  I see him still, his white
locks blowing in the evening breeze, his hat a little on the back of
his head, and his figure painted in relief against the dark blue sky.

Suddenly he turned his mild eye full upon me.  A weak smile played
about his thin lips.  In a voice which had something of the
tremulousness of age and the self-satisfied chuckle of imbecility in
it, he asked, pointing to the rising moon, "Why?--hush!"

He had dodged behind me, and appeared to be looking anxiously down the
road.  I could feel his aged frame shaking with terror as he laid his
thin hands upon my shoulders and faced me in the direction of the
supposed danger.

"Hush! did you not hear them coming?"

I listened; there was no sound but the soughing of the roadside trees
in the evening wind.  I endeavored to reassure him, with such success
that in a few moments the old weak smile appeared on his benevolent
face.

"Why?--"  But the look of interrogation was succeeded by a hopeless
blankness.

"Why!" I repeated with assuring accents.

"Why," he said, a gleam of intelligence flickering over his face, "is
yonder moon, as she sails in the blue empyrean, casting a flood of
light o'er hill and dale, like--  Why," he repeated, with a feeble
smile, "is yonder moon, as she sails in the blue empyrean--" He
hesitated,--stammered,--and gazed at me hopelessly, with the tears
dripping from his moist and widely opened eyes.

I took his hand kindly in my own.  "Casting a shadow o'er hill and
dale," I repeated quietly, leading him up the subject, "like--  Come,
now."

"Ah!" he said, pressing my hand tremulously, "you know it?"

"I do.  Why is it like--the--eh--the commodious mansion on the
Limehouse Road?"

A blank stare only followed.  He shook his head sadly.  "Like the young
men wanted for a light, genteel employment?"

He wagged his feeble old head cunningly.

"Or, Mr. Ward," I said, with bold confidence, "like the mysterious
disappearance from the Kent Road?"

The moment was full of suspense.  He did not seem to hear me. Suddenly
he turned.

"Ha!"

I darted forward.  But he had vanished in the darkness.



CHAPTER III.

NO. 27 LIMEHOUSE ROAD.

It was a hot midsummer evening.  Limehouse Road was deserted save by
dust and a few rattling butchers' carts, and the bell of the muffin and
crumpet man.  A commodious mansion, which stood on the right of the
road as you enter Pultneyville, surrounded by stately poplars and a
high fence surmounted by a chevaux de frise of broken glass, looked to
the passing and footsore pedestrian like the genius of seclusion and
solitude.  A bill announcing in the usual terms that the house was to
let, hung from the bell at the servants' entrance.

As the shades of evening closed, and the long shadows of the poplars
stretched across the road, a man carrying a small kettle stopped and
gazed, first at the bill and then at the house.  When he had reached
the corner of the fence, he again stopped and looked cautiously up and
down the road.  Apparently satisfied with the result of his scrutiny,
he deliberately sat himself down in the dark shadow of the fence, and
at once busied himself in some employment, so well concealed as to be
invisible to the gaze of passers-by.  At the end of an hour he retired
cautiously.

But not altogether unseen.  A slim young man, with spectacles and
note-book, stepped from behind a tree as the retreating figure of the
intruder was lost in the twilight, and transferred from the fence to
his note-book the freshly stencilled inscription, "S--T--1860--X."



CHAPTER IV.

COUNT MOSCOW'S NARRATIVE.

I am a foreigner.  Observe!  To be a foreigner in England is to be
mysterious, suspicious, intriguing.  M. Collins has requested the
history of my complicity with certain occurrences.  It is nothing, bah!
absolutely nothing.

I write with ease and fluency.  Why should I not write?  Tra la la? I
am what you English call corpulent.  Ha, ha!  I am a pupil of
Macchiavelli.  I find it much better to disbelieve everything, and to
approach my subject and wishes circuitously, than in a direct manner.
You have observed that playful animal, the cat.  Call it, and it does
not come to you directly, but rubs itself against all the furniture in
the room, and reaches you finally--and scratches. Ah, ha, scratches!  I
am of the feline species.  People call me a villain--bah!

I know the family, living No. 27 Limehouse Road.  I respect the
gentleman,--a fine, burly specimen of your Englishman,--and madame,
charming, ravishing, delightful.  When it became known to me that they
designed to let their delightful residence, and visit foreign shores, I
at once called upon them.  I kissed the hand of madame. I embraced the
great Englishman.  Madame blushed slightly.  The great Englishman shook
my hand like a mastiff.

I began in that dexterous, insinuating manner, of which I am truly
proud.  I thought madame was ill.  Ah, no.  A change, then, was all
that was required.  I sat down at the piano and sang.  In a few minutes
madame retired.  I was alone with my friend.

Seizing his hand, I began with every demonstration of courteous
sympathy.  I do not repeat my words, for my intention was conveyed more
in accent, emphasis, and manner, than speech.  I hinted to him that he
had another wife living.  I suggested that this was balanced--ha!--by
his wife's lover.  That, possibly, he wished to fly; hence the letting
of his delightful mansion.  That he regularly and systematically beat
his wife in the English manner, and that she repeatedly deceived me.  I
talked of hope, of consolation, of remedy.  I carelessly produced a
bottle of strychnine and a small vial of stramonium from my pocket, and
enlarged on the efficiency of drugs.  His face, which had gradually
become convulsed, suddenly became fixed with a frightful expression.
He started to his feet, and roared: "You d--d Frenchman!"

I instantly changed my tactics, and endeavored to embrace him.  He
kicked me twice, violently.  I begged permission to kiss madame's hand.
He replied by throwing me down stairs.

I am in bed with my head bound up, and beef-steaks upon my eyes, but
still confident and buoyant.  I have not lost faith in Macchiavelli.
Tra la la! as they sing in the opera.  I kiss everybody's hands.



CHAPTER V.

DR. DIGGS'S STATEMENT.

My name is David Diggs.  I am a surgeon, living at No. 9 Tottenham
Court.  On the 15th of June, 1854, I was called to see an elderly
gentleman lodging on the Kent Road.  Found him highly excited, with
strong febrile symptoms, pulse 120, increasing.  Repeated incoherently
what I judged to be the popular form of a conundrum. On closer
examination found acute hydrocephalus and both lobes of the brain
rapidly filling with water.  In consultation with an eminent
phrenologist, it was further discovered that all the organs were more
or less obliterated, except that of Comparison.  Hence the patient was
enabled to only distinguish the most common points of resemblance
between objects, without drawing upon other faculties, such as Ideality
or Language, for assistance.  Later in the day found him
sinking,--being evidently unable to carry the most ordinary conundrum
to a successful issue.  Exhibited Tinct. Val., Ext. Opii, and Camphor,
and prescribed quiet and emollients. On the 17th the patient was
missing.



CHAPTER LAST.

STATEMENT OF THE PUBLISHER.

On the 18th of June, Mr. Wilkie Collins left a roll of manuscript with
us for publication, without title or direction, since which time he has
not been heard from.  In spite of the care of the proof-readers, and
valuable literary assistance, it is feared that the continuity of the
story has been destroyed by some accidental misplacing of chapters
during its progress.  How and what chapters are so misplaced, the
publisher leaves to an indulgent public to discover.




N N.

BEING A NOVEL IN THE FRENCH PARAGRAPHIC STYLE.


--Mademoiselle, I swear to you that I love you.

--You who read these pages.  You who turn your burning eyes upon these
words--words that I trace--  Ah, Heaven! the thought maddens me.

--I will be calm.  I will imitate the reserve of the festive
Englishman, who wears a spotted handkerchief which he calls a Belchio,
who eats biftek, and caresses a bulldog.  I will subdue myself like him.

--Ha!  Poto-beer!  All right--Goddam!

--Or, I will conduct myself as the free-born American--the gay Brother
Jonathan!  I will whittle me a stick.  I will whistle to myself "Yankee
Doodle," and forget my passion in excessive expectoration.

--Hoho!--wake snakes and walk chalks.


The world is divided into two great divisions,--Paris and the
provinces.  There is but one Paris.  There are several provinces, among
which may be numbered England, America, Russia, and Italy.

N N. was a Parisian.

But N N. did not live in Paris.  Drop a Parisian in the provinces, and
you drop a part of Paris with him.  Drop him in Senegambia, and in
three days he will give you an omelette soufflee, or a pate de foie
gras, served by the neatest of Senegambian filles, whom he will call
Mademoiselle.  In three weeks he will give you an opera.

N N. was not dropped in Senegambia, but in San Francisco,--quite as
awkward.

They find gold in San Francisco, but they don't understand gilding.

N N. existed three years in this place.  He became bald on the top of
his head, as all Parisians do.  Look down from your box at the Opera
Comique, Mademoiselle, and count the bald crowns of the fast young men
in the pit.  Ah--you tremble!  They show where the arrows of love have
struck and glanced off.

N N. was also near-sighted, as all Parisians finally become.  This is a
gallant provision of Nature to spare them the mortification of
observing that their lady friends grow old.  After a certain age every
woman is handsome to a Parisian.

One day, N N. was walking down Washington street.  Suddenly he stopped.

He was standing before the door of a mantuamaker.  Beside the counter,
at the farther extremity of the shop, stood a young and elegantly
formed woman.  Her face was turned from N N.  He entered. With a
plausible excuse, and seeming indifference, he gracefully opened
conversation with the mantuamaker as only a Parisian can. But he had to
deal with a Parisian.  His attempts to view the features of the fair
stranger by the counter were deftly combated by the shop-woman.  He was
obliged to retire.

N N. went home and lost his appetite.  He was haunted by the elegant
basque and graceful shoulders of the fair unknown, during the whole
night.

The next day he sauntered by the mantuamaker.  Ah! Heavens!  A thrill
ran through his frame, and his fingers tingled with a delicious
electricity.  The fair inconnue was there!  He raised his hat
gracefully.  He was not certain, but he thought that a slight motion of
her faultless bonnet betrayed recognition.  He would have wildly darted
into the shop, but just then the figure of the mantuamaker appeared in
the doorway.

--Did Monsieur wish anything?

Misfortune!  Desperation.  N N. purchased a bottle of Prussic acid, a
sack of charcoal, and a quire of pink note-paper, and returned home.
He wrote a letter of farewell to the closely fitting basque, and opened
the bottle of Prussic acid.

Some one knocked at his door.  It was a Chinaman, with his weekly linen.

These Chinese are docile, but not intelligent.  They are ingenious, but
not creative.  They are cunning in expedients, but deficient in tact.
In love they are simply barbarous.  They purchase their wives openly,
and not constructively by attorney.  By offering small sums for their
sweethearts, they degrade the value of the sex.

Nevertheless, N N. felt he was saved.  He explained all to the faithful
Mongolian, and exhibited the letter he had written.  He implored him to
deliver it.

The Mongolian assented.  The race are not cleanly or sweet-savored, but
N N. fell upon his neck.  He embraced him with one hand, and closed his
nostrils with the other.  Through him, he felt he clasped the
close-fitting basque.

The next day was one of agony and suspense.  Evening came, but no
Mercy.  N N. lit the charcoal.  But, to compose his nerves, he closed
his door and first walked mildly up and down Montgomery Street.  When
he returned, he found the faithful Mongolian on the steps.

--All lity!

These Chinese are not accurate in their pronunciation.  They avoid the
r, like the English nobleman.

N N. gasped for breath.  He leaned heavily against the Chinaman.

--Then you have seen her, Ching Long?

--Yes.  All lity.  She cum.  Top side of house.

The docile barbarian pointed up the stairs, and chuckled.

--She here--impossible!  Ah, Heaven! do I dream?

--Yes.  All lity,--top side of house.  Good by, John.

This is the familiar parting epithet of the Mongolian.  It is
equivalent to our au revoir.

N N. gazed with a stupefied air on the departing servant.

He placed his hand on his throbbing heart.  She here,--alone beneath
this roof.  O Heavens, what happiness!

But how?  Torn from her home.  Ruthlessly dragged, perhaps, from her
evening devotions, by the hands of a relentless barbarian. Could she
forgive him?

He dashed frantically up the stairs.  He opened the door.  She was
standing beside his couch with averted face.

A strange giddiness overtook him.  He sank upon his knees at the
threshold.

--Pardon, pardon.  My angel, can you forgive me?

A terrible nausea now seemed added to the fearful giddiness.  His
utterance grew thick and sluggish.

--Speak, speak, enchantress.  Forgiveness is all I ask.  My Love, my
Life!

She did not answer.  He staggered to his feet.  As he rose, his eyes
fell on the pan of burning charcoal.  A terrible suspicion flashed
across his mind.  This giddiness,--this nausea.  The ignorance of the
barbarian.  This silence.  O merciful heavens! she was dying!

He crawled toward her.  He touched her.  She fell forward with a
lifeless sound upon the floor.  He uttered a piercing shriek, and threw
himself beside her.

          *          *          *          *         *

A file of gendarmes, accompanied by the Chef Burke, found him the next
morning lying lifeless upon the floor.  They laughed brutally,--these
cruel minions of the law,--and disengaged his arm from the waist of the
wooden dummy which they had come to reclaim for the mantuamaker.

Emptying a few bucketfuls of water over his form, they finally
succeeded in robbing him, not only of his mistress, but of that Death
he had coveted without her.

Ah! we live in a strange world, Messieurs.




FANTINE.

AFTER THE FRENCH OF VICTOR HUGO.



PROLOGUE.

As long as there shall exist three paradoxes, a moral Frenchman, a
religious Atheist, and a believing sceptic; so long, in fact, as
booksellers shall wait--say twenty-five years--for a new gospel; so
long as paper shall remain cheap and ink three sous a bottle, I have no
hesitation in saying that such books as these are not utterly
profitless.

VICTOR HUGO.



I.

To be good is to be queer.  What is a good man?  Bishop Myriel.

My friend, you will possibly object to this.  You will say you know
what a good man is.  Perhaps you will say your clergyman is a good man,
for instance.

Bah! you are mistaken; you are an Englishman, and an Englishman is a
beast.

Englishmen think they are moral when they are only serious.  These
Englishmen also wear ill-shaped hats, and dress horribly!

Bah! they are canaille.

Still, Bishop Myriel was a good man,--quite as good as you.  Better
than you, in fact.

One day M. Myriel was in Paris.  This angel used to walk about the
streets like any other man.  He was not proud, though fine-looking.
Well, three gamins de Paris called him bad names.  Says one:--

"Ah, mon Dieu! there goes a priest; look out for your eggs and
chickens!"

What did this good man do?  He called to them kindly.

"My children," said he, "this is clearly not your fault.  I recognize
in this insult and irreverence only the fault of your immediate
progenitors.  Let us pray for your immediate progenitors."

They knelt down and prayed for their immediate progenitors.

The effect was touching.

The Bishop looked calmly around.

"On reflection," said he, gravely, "I was mistaken; this is clearly the
fault of Society.  Let us pray for Society."

They knelt down and prayed for Society.

The effect was sublimer yet.  What do you think of that?  You, I mean.

Everybody remembers the story of the Bishop and Mother Nez Retrousse.
Old Mother Nez Retrouse sold asparagus.  She was poor; there's a great
deal of meaning in that word, my friend.  Some people say "poor but
honest."  I say, Bah!

Bishop Myriel bought six bunches of asparagus.  This good man had one
charming failing; he was fond of asparagus.  He gave her a franc and
received three sous change.

The sous were bad,--counterfeit.  What did this good Bishop do?  He
said: "I should not have taken change from a poor woman."

Then afterwards, to his housekeeper: "Never take change from a poor
woman."

Then he added to himself: "For the sous will probably be bad."



II.

When a man commits a crime, society claps him in prison.  A prison is
one of the worst hotels imaginable.  The people there are low and
vulgar.  The butter is bad, the coffee is green.  Ah, it is horrible!

In prison, as in a bad hotel, a man soon loses, not only his morals,
but what is much worse to a Frenchman, his sense of refinement and
delicacy.

Jean Valjean came from prison with confused notions of society.  He
forgot the modern peculiarities of hospitality.  So he walked off with
the Bishop's candlesticks.

Let us consider: candlesticks were stolen; that was evident. Society
put Jean Valjean in prison; that was evident, too.  In prison, Society
took away his refinement; that is evident, likewise.

Who is Society?

You and I are Society.

My friend, you and I stole those candlesticks!



III.

The Bishop thought so, too.  He meditated profoundly for six days. On
the morning of the seventh he went to the Prefecture of Police.

He said: "Monsieur, have me arrested.  I have stolen candlesticks."

The official was governed by the law of Society, and refused.

What did this Bishop do?

He had a charming ball and chain made, affixed to his leg, and wore it
the rest of his life.

This is a fact!



IV.

Love is a mystery.

A little friend of mine down in the country, at Auvergne, said to me
one day: "Victor, Love is the world,--it contains everything."

She was only sixteen, this sharp-witted little girl, and a beautiful
blonde.  She thought everything of me.

Fantine was one of those women who do wrong in the most virtuous and
touching manner.  This is a peculiarity of French grisettes.

You are an Englishman, and you don't understand.  Learn, my friend,
learn.  Come to Paris and improve your morals.

Fantine was the soul of modesty.  She always wore high-neck dresses.
High-neck dresses are a sign of modesty.

Fantine loved Tholmoyes.  Why?  My God!  What are you to do?  It was
the fault of her parents, and she hadn't any.  How shall you teach her?
You must teach the parent if you wish to educate the child.  How would
you become virtuous?

Teach your grandmother!



V.

When Tholmoyes ran away from Fantine,--which was done in a charming,
gentlemanly manner,--Fantine became convinced that a rigid sense of
propriety might look upon her conduct as immoral. She was a creature of
sensitiveness,--and her eyes were opened.

She was virtuous still, and resolved to break off the liaison at once.

So she put up her wardrobe and baby in a bundle.  Child as she was, she
loved them both.  Then left Paris.



VI.

Fantine's native place had changed.

M. Madeline--an angel, and inventor of jet work--had been teaching the
villagers how to make spurious jet.

This is a progressive age.  Those Americans,--children of the
West,--they make nutmegs out of wood.

I, myself, have seen hams made of pine, in the wigwams of those
children of the forest.

But civilization has acquired deception too.  Society is made up of
deception.  Even the best French society.

Still there was one sincere episode.

Eh?

The French Revolution!



VII.

M. Madeline was, if anything, better than Myriel.

M. Myriel was a saint.  M. Madeline a good man.

M. Myriel was dead.  M. Madeline was living.

That made all the difference.

M. Madeline made virtue profitable.  I have seen it written:--

"Be virtuous and you will be happy."

Where did I see this written?  In the modern Bible?  No.  In the Koran?
No.  In Rousseau?  No.  Diderot?  No.  Where then?

In a copy-book.



VIII.

M. Madeline was M. le Maire.

This is how it came about.

For a long time he refused the honor.  One day an old woman, standing
on the steps, said:--

"Bah, a good mayor is a good thing.

"You are a good thing.

"Be a good mayor."

This woman was a rhetorician.  She understood inductive ratiocination.



IX.

When this good M. Madeline, whom the reader will perceive must have
been a former convict, and a very bad man, gave himself up to justice
as the real Jean Valjean, about this same time, Fantine was turned away
from the manufactory, and met with a number of losses from society.
Society attacked her, and this is what she lost:--

First her lover.

Then her child.

Then her place.

Then her hair.

Then her teeth.

Then her liberty.

Then her life.

What do you think of society after that?  I tell you the present social
system is a humbug.



X.

This is necessarily the end of Fantine.  There are other things that
will be stated in other volumes to follow.  Don't be alarmed; there are
plenty of miserable people left.

Au revoir--my friend.




"LA FEMME."

AFTER THE FRENCH OF M. MICHELET.



I.

WOMEN AS AN INSTITUTION.

"If it were not for women, few of us would at present be in existence."
This is the remark of a cautious and discreet writer. He was also
sagacious and intelligent.

Woman!  Look upon her and admire her.  Gaze upon her and love her. If
she wishes to embrace you, permit her.  Remember she is weak and you
are strong.

But don't treat her unkindly.  Don't make love to another woman before
her face, even if she be your wife.  Don't do it.  Always be polite,
even should she fancy somebody better than you.

If your mother, my dear Amadis, had not fancied your father better than
somebody, you might have been that somebody's son.  Consider this.
Always be a philosopher, even about women.

Few men understand women.  Frenchmen, perhaps, better than any one
else.  I am a Frenchman.



II.

THE INFANT.

She is a child--a little thing--an infant.

She has a mother and father.  Let us suppose, for example, they are
married.  Let us be moral if we cannot be happy and free--they are
married--perhaps--they love one another--who knows?

But she knows nothing of this; she is an infant--a small thing--a
trifle!

She is not lovely at first.  It is cruel, perhaps, but she is red, and
positively ugly.  She feels this keenly and cries.  She weeps. Ah, my
God, how she weeps!  Her cries and lamentations now are really
distressing.

Tears stream from her in floods.  She feels deeply and copiously like
M. Alphonse de Lamartine in his Confessions.

If you are her mother, Madame, you will fancy worms; you will examine
her linen for pins, and what not.  Ah, hypocrite! you, even YOU,
misunderstand her.

Yet she has charming natural impulses.  See how she tosses her dimpled
arms.  She looks longingly at her mother.  She has a language of her
own.  She says, "goo goo," and "ga ga."

She demands something--this infant!

She is faint, poor thing.  She famishes.  She wishes to be restored.
Restore her, Mother!

It is the first duty of a mother to restore her child!



III.

THE DOLL.

She is hardly able to walk; she already totters under the weight of a
doll.

It is a charming and elegant affair.  It has pink cheeks and
purple-black hair.  She prefers brunettes, for she has already, with
the quick knowledge of a French infant, perceived she is a blonde, and
that her doll cannot rival her.  Mon Dieu, how touching!  Happy child!
She spends hours in preparing its toilet. She begins to show her taste
in the exquisite details of its dress. She loves it madly, devotedly.
She will prefer it to bonbons.  She already anticipates the wealth of
love she will hereafter pour out on her lover, her mother, her father,
and finally, perhaps, her husband.

This is the time the anxious parent will guide these first outpourings.
She will read her extracts from Michelet's L'Amour, Rousseau's Heloise,
and the Revue des deux Mondes.



IV.

THE MUD PIE.

She was in tears to-day.

She had stolen away from her bonne and was with some rustic infants.
They had noses in the air, and large, coarse hands and feet.

They had seated themselves around a pool in the road, and were
fashioning fantastic shapes in the clayey soil with their hands. Her
throat swelled and her eyes sparkled with delight as, for the first
time, her soft palms touched the plastic mud.  She made a graceful and
lovely pie.  She stuffed it with stones for almonds and plums.  She
forgot everything.  It was being baked in the solar rays, when madame
came and took her away.

She weeps.  It is night, and she is weeping still.



V.

HER FIRST LOVE.

She no longer doubts her beauty.  She is loved.  She saw him secretly.
He is vivacious and sprightly.  He is famous.  He has already had an
affair with Finfin, the fille de chambre, and poor Finfin is desolate.
He is noble.  She knows he is the son of Madame la Baronne Couturiere.
She adores him.

She affects not to notice him.  Poor little thing!  Hippolyte is
distracted--annihilated--inconsolable and charming.

She admires his boots, his cravat, his little gloves his exquisite
pantaloons--his coat, and cane.

She offers to run away with him.  He is transported, but magnanimous.
He is wearied, perhaps.  She sees him the next day offering flowers to
the daughter of Madame la Comtesse Blanchisseuse.

She is again in tears.

She reads Paul et Virginie.  She is secretly transported.  When she
reads how the exemplary young woman laid down her life rather than
appear en deshabille to her lover, she weeps again.  Tasteful and
virtuous Bernardine de St. Pierre!--the daughters of France admire you!

All this time her doll is headless in the cabinet.  The mud pie is
broken on the road.



VI.

THE WIFE.

She is tired of loving and she marries.

Her mother thinks it, on the whole, the best thing.  As the day
approaches, she is found frequently in tears.  Her mother will not
permit the affianced one to see her, and he makes several attempts to
commit suicide.

But something happens.  Perhaps it is winter, and the water is cold.
Perhaps there are not enough people present to witness his heroism.

In this way her future husband is spared to her.  The ways of
Providence are indeed mysterious.  At this time her mother will talk
with her.  She will offer philosophy.  She will tell her she was
married herself.

But what is this new and ravishing light that breaks upon her?  The
toilet and wedding clothes!  She is in a new sphere.

She makes out her list in her own charming writing.  Here it is. Let
every mother heed it.*

          *          *          *          *          *

          *          *          *          *          *

She is married.  On the day after, she meets her old lover, Hippolyte.
He is again transported.


* The delicate reader will appreciate the omission of certain articles
for which English synonymes are forbidden.



VII.

HER OLD AGE.

A Frenchwoman never grows old.




MARY MCGILLUP.

A SOUTHERN NOVEL.

AFTER BELLE BOYD.

WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY G. A. S--LA.



INTRODUCTION.

"Will you write me up?"

The scene was near Temple Bar.  The speaker was the famous rebel Mary
McGillup,--a young girl of fragile frame, and long, lustrous black
hair.  I must confess that the question was a peculiar one, and, under
the circumstances, somewhat puzzling.  It was true I had been kindly
treated by the Northerners, and, though prejudiced against them, was to
some extent under obligations to them.  It was true that I knew little
or nothing of American politics, history, or geography.  But when did
an English writer ever weigh such trifles?  Turning to the speaker, I
inquired with some caution the amount of pecuniary compensation offered
for the work.

"Sir!" she said, drawing her fragile form to its full height, "you
insult me,--you insult the South."

"But look ye here, d'ye see--the tin--the blunt--the ready--the stiff;
you know.  Don't ye see, we can't do without that, you know!"

"It shall be contingent on the success of the story," she answered
haughtily.  "In the mean time take this precious gem."  And drawing a
diamond ring from her finger, she placed it with a roll of MSS. in my
hands and vanished.

Although unable to procure more than L1 2s. 6 d. from an intelligent
pawnbroker to whom I stated the circumstances and with whom I pledged
the ring, my sympathies with the cause of a downtrodden and chivalrous
people were at once enlisted.  I could not help wondering that in rich
England, the home of the oppressed and the free, a young and lovely
woman like the fair author of those pages should be obliged to thus
pawn her jewels--her marriage gift--for the means to procure her bread!
With the exception of the English aristocracy,--who much resemble
them,--I do not know of a class of people that I so much admire as the
Southern planters. May I become better acquainted with both!

Since writing the above, the news of Mr. Lincoln's assassination has
reached me.  It is enough for me to say that I am dissatisfied with the
result.  I do not attempt to excuse the assassin.  Yet there will be
men who will charge this act upon the chivalrous South.  This leads me
to repeat a remark once before made by me in this connection which has
become justly celebrated.  It is this:--

"It is usual, in cases of murder, to look for the criminal among those
who expect to be benefited by the crime.  In the death of Lincoln, his
immediate successor in office alone receives the benefit of his dying."

If her Majesty Queen Victoria were assassinated, which Heaven forbid,
the one most benefited by her decease would, of course, be his Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales, her immediate successor. It would be
unnecessary to state that suspicion would at once point to the real
culprit, which would of course be his Royal Highness. This is logic.

But I have done.  After having thus stated my opinion in favor of the
South, I would merely remark that there is One who judgeth all
things,--who weigheth the cause between brother and brother,--and
awardeth the perfect retribution; and whose ultimate decision I, as a
British subject, have only anticipated.

G. A. S.



CHAPTER I.

Every reader of Belle Boyd's narrative will remember an allusion to a
"lovely, fragile-looking girl of nineteen," who rivalled Belle Boyd in
devotion to the Southern cause, and who, like her, earned the enviable
distinction of being a "rebel spy."

I am that "fragile" young creature.  Although on friendly terms with
the late Miss Boyd, now Mrs. Hardinge, candor compels me to state that
nothing but our common politics prevents me from exposing the
ungenerous spirit she has displayed in this allusion. To be dismissed
in a single paragraph after years of--  But I anticipate.  To put up
with this feeble and forced acknowledgment of services rendered would
be a confession of a craven spirit, which, thank God, though "fragile"
and only "nineteen," I do not possess.  I may not have the "blood of a
Howard" in my veins, as some people, whom I shall not disgrace myself
by naming, claim to have, but I have yet to learn that the race of
McGillup ever yet brooked slight or insult.  I shall not say that
attention in certain quarters seems to have turned SOME PEOPLE'S heads;
nor that it would have been more delicate if certain folks had kept
quiet on the subject of their courtship, and the rejection of certain
offers, when it is known that their forward conduct was all that
procured them a husband!  Thank heaven, the South has some daughters
who are above such base considerations!  While nothing shall tempt me
to reveal the promises to share equally the fame of certain
enterprises, which were made by one who shall now be nameless, I have
deemed it only just to myself to put my own adventures upon record.  If
they are not equal to those of another individual, it is because,
though "fragile," my education has taught me to have some consideration
for the truth.  I am done.



CHAPTER II.

I was born in Missouri.  My dislike for the Northern scum was inherent.
This was shown, at an early age, in the extreme distaste I exhibited
for Webster's spelling-book,--the work of a well-known Eastern
Abolitionist.  I cannot be too grateful for the consideration shown by
my chivalrous father,--a gentleman of the old school,--who resisted to
the last an attempt to introduce Mitchell's Astronomy and Geography
into the public school of our district.  When I state that this same
Mitchell became afterward a hireling helot in the Yankee Army, every
intelligent reader will appreciate the prophetic discrimination of this
true son of the South.

I was eight years old when I struck the first blow for Southern freedom
against the Northern Tyrant.  It is hardly necessary to state that in
this instance the oppressor was a pale, overworked New England
"schoolmarm."  The principle for which I was contending, I felt,
however, to be the same.  Resenting an affront put upon me, I one day
heaved a rock* at the head of the Vandal schoolmistress.  I was seized
and overpowered.  My pen falters as I reach the climax.  English
readers will not give credit to this sickening story,--the civilized
world will avert its head,--but I, Mary McGillup, was publicly SPANKED!


* NOTE, BY G. A. S.--In the Southwest, any stone larger than a pea is
termed "a rock."



CHAPTER III.

But the chaotic vortex of civil war approached, and fell destruction,
often procrastinated, brooded in storm.*  As the English people may
like to know what was really the origin of the rebellion, I have no
hesitation in giving them the true and only cause.  Slavery had nothing
to do with it, although the violation of the Declaration of
Independence, in the disregard by the North of the Fugitive Slave
Law,** might have provoked a less fiery people than the Southrons.  At
the inception of the struggle a large amount of Southern indebtedness
was held by the people of the North.  To force payment from the
generous but insolvent debtor--to obtain liquidation from the Southern
planter--was really the soulless and mercenary object of the craven
Northerners.  Let the common people of England look to this.  Let the
improvident literary hack; the starved impecunious Grub Street debtor;
the newspaper frequenter of sponging-houses, remember this in their
criticisms of the vile and slavish Yankee.


* I make no pretension to fine writing, but perhaps Mrs. Hardinge can
lay over that.  O, of course!  M. McG.

** The Declaration of Independence grants to each subject "the pursuit
of life, liberty, and happiness."  A fugitive slave may be said to
personify "life, liberty, and happiness."  Hence his pursuit is really
legal.  This is logic.  G. A. S.



CHAPTER IV.

The roasting of an Abolitionist, by a greatly infuriated community, was
my first taste of the horrors of civil war.  Heavens!  Why will the
North persist in this fratricidal warfare?  The expulsion of several
Union refugees, which soon followed, now fairly plunged my beloved
State in the seething vortex.

I was sitting at the piano one afternoon, singing that stirring
refrain, so justly celebrated, but which a craven spirit, unworthy of
England, has excluded from some of her principal restaurants, and was
dwelling with some enthusiasm on the following line:--


     "Huzza! she spurns the Northern scum!"


when a fragment of that scum, clothed in that detestable blue uniform
which is the symbol of oppression, entered the apartment. "I have the
honor of addressing the celebrated rebel spy, Miss McGillup," said the
Vandal officer.

In a moment I was perfectly calm.  With the exception of slightly
expectorating twice in the face of the minion, I did not betray my
agitation.  Haughtily, yet firmly, I replied:--

"I am."

"You looked as if you might be," the brute replied, as he turned on his
heel to leave the apartment.

In an instant I threw myself before him.  "You shall not leave here
thus," I shrieked, grappling him with an energy which no one, seeing my
frail figure, would have believed.  "I know the reputation of your
hireling crew.  I read your dreadful purpose in your eye.  Tell me not
that your designs are not sinister.  You came here to insult me,--to
kiss me, perhaps.  You sha'n't,--you naughty man.  Go away!"

The blush of conscious degradation rose to the cheek of the Lincoln
hireling as he turned his face away from mine.

In an instant I drew my pistol from my belt, which, in anticipation of
some such outrage, I always carried, and shot him.



CHAPTER V.

     "Thy forte was less to act than speak,
                                      Maryland!
      Thy politics were changed each week,
                                      Maryland!
      With Northern Vandals thou wast meek,
      With sympathizers thou wouldst shriek,
      I know thee--O, 'twas like thy cheek!
                        Maryland! my Maryland!"


After committing the act described in the preceding chapter, which
every English reader will pardon, I went up stairs, put on a clean pair
of stockings, and, placing a rose in my lustrous black hair, proceeded
at once to the camp of Generals Price and Mosby to put them in
possession of information which would lead to the destruction of a
portion of the Federal Army.  During a great part of my flight I was
exposed to a running fire from the Federal pickets of such coarse
expressions as, "Go it, Sally Reb," "Dust it, my Confederate beauty,"
but I succeeded in reaching the glorious Southern camp uninjured.

In a week afterwards I was arrested, by a lettre de cachet of Mr.
Stanton, and placed in the Bastile.  British readers of my story will
express surprise at these terms, but I assure them that not only these
articles but tumbrils, guillotines, and conciergeries were in active
use among the Federals.  If substantiation be required, I refer to the
Charleston Mercury, the only reliable organ, next to the New York Daily
News, published in the country. At the Bastile I made the acquaintance
of the accomplished and elegant author of Guy Livingstone,* to whom I
presented a curiously carved thigh-bone of a Union officer, and from
whom I received the following beautiful acknowledgment:--


"Demoiselle:--Should I ever win hame to my ain countrie, I make mine
avow to enshrine in my reliquaire this elegant bijouterie and offering
of La Belle Rebelle.  Nay, methinks this fraction of man's anatomy were
some compensation for the rib lost by the 'grand old gardener,' Adam."


* The recent conduct of Mr. Livingstone renders him unworthy of my
notice.  His disgusting praise of Belle Boyd, and complete ignoring of
my claims, show the artfulness of some females and puppyism of some
men.  M. McG.



CHAPTER VI.

Released at last from durance vile and placed on board of an Erie
canal-boat, on my way to Canada, I for a moment breathed the sweets of
liberty.  Perhaps the interval gave me opportunity to indulge in
certain reveries which I had hitherto sternly dismissed.  Henry
Breckinridge Folair, a consistent copperhead, captain of the
canal-boat, again and again pressed that suit I had so often rejected.

It was a lovely moonlight night.  We sat on the deck of the gliding
craft.  The moonbeam and the lash of the driver fell softly on the
flanks of the off horse, and only the surging of the tow-rope broke the
silence.  Folair's arm clasped my waist.  I suffered it to remain.
Placing in my lap a small but not ungrateful roll of checkerberry
lozenges, he took the occasion to repeat softly in my ear the words of
a motto he had just unwrapped--with its graceful covering of the tissue
paper--from a sugar almond.  The heart of the wicked little rebel, Mary
McGillup, was won!

The story of Mary McGillup is done.  I might have added the journal of
my husband, Henry Breckinridge Folair, but as it refers chiefly to his
freights, and a schedule of his passengers, I have been obliged,
reluctantly, to suppress it.

It is due to my friends to say that I have been requested not to write
this book.  Expressions have reached my ears, the reverse of
complimentary.  I have been told that its publication will probably
insure my banishment for life.  Be it so.  If the cause for which I
labored have been subserved, I am content.

LONDON, May, 1865.

========================================
========================================

A WARD OF THE GOLDEN GATE


by

Bret Harte


JTABLE 5 9 1

PROLOGUE.


In San Francisco the "rainy season" had been making itself a reality to
the wondering Eastern immigrant.  There were short days of drifting
clouds and flying sunshine, and long succeeding nights of incessant
downpour, when the rain rattled on the thin shingles or drummed on the
resounding zinc of pioneer roofs.  The shifting sand-dunes on the
outskirts were beaten motionless and sodden by the onslaught of
consecutive storms; the southeast trades brought the saline breath of
the outlying Pacific even to the busy haunts of Commercial and Kearney
streets; the low-lying Mission road was a quagmire; along the City
Front, despite of piles and pier and wharf, the Pacific tides still
asserted themselves in mud and ooze as far as Sansome Street; the
wooden sidewalks of Clay and Montgomery streets were mere floating
bridges or buoyant pontoons superposed on elastic bogs; Battery Street
was the Silurian beach of that early period on which tin cans,
packing-boxes, freight, household furniture, and even the runaway crews
of deserted ships had been cast away.  There were dangerous and unknown
depths in Montgomery Street and on the Plaza, and the wheels of a
passing carriage hopelessly mired had to be lifted by the volunteer
hands of a half dozen high-booted wayfarers, whose wearers were
sufficiently content to believe that a woman, a child, or an invalid
was behind its closed windows, without troubling themselves or the
occupant by looking through the glass.

It was a carriage that, thus released, eventually drew up before the
superior public edifice known as the City Hall.  From it a woman,
closely veiled, alighted, and quickly entered the building. A few
passers-by turned to look at her, partly from the rarity of the female
figure at that period, and partly from the greater rarity of its being
well formed and even ladylike.

As she kept her way along the corridor and ascended an iron staircase,
she was passed by others more preoccupied in business at the various
public offices.  One of these visitors, however, stopped as if struck
by some fancied resemblance in her appearance, turned, and followed
her.  But when she halted before a door marked "Mayor's Office," he
paused also, and, with a look of half humorous bewilderment and a
slight glance around him as if seeking for some one to whom to impart
his arch fancy, he turned away.  The woman then entered a large
anteroom with a certain quick feminine gesture of relief, and, finding
it empty of other callers, summoned the porter, and asked him some
question in a voice so suppressed by the official severity of the
apartment as to be hardly audible.  The attendant replied by entering
another room marked "Mayor's Secretary," and reappeared with a
stripling of seventeen or eighteen, whose singularly bright eyes were
all that was youthful in his composed features.  After a slight
scrutiny of the woman--half boyish, half official--he desired her to be
seated, with a certain exaggerated gravity as if he was over-acting a
grown-up part, and, taking a card from her, reentered his office.
Here, however, he did NOT stand on his head or call out a confederate
youth from a closet, as the woman might have expected.  To the left was
a green baize door, outlined with brass-studded rivets like a cheerful
coffin-lid, and bearing the mortuary inscription, "Private."  This he
pushed open, and entered the Mayor's private office.

The municipal dignitary of San Francisco, although an erect,
soldier-like man of strong middle age, was seated with his official
chair tilted back against the wall and kept in position by his feet on
the rungs of another, which in turn acted as a support for a second
man, who was seated a few feet from him in an easy-chair. Both were
lazily smoking.

The Mayor took the card from his secretary, glanced at it, said
"Hullo!" and handed it to his companion, who read aloud "Kate Howard,"
and gave a prolonged whistle.

"Where is she?" asked the Mayor.

"In the anteroom, sir."

"Any one else there?"

"No, sir."

"Did you say I was engaged?"

"Yes, sir; but it appears she asked Sam who was with you, and when he
told her, she said, All right, she wanted to see Colonel Pendleton too."

The men glanced interrogatively at each other, but Colonel Pendleton,
abruptly anticipating the Mayor's functions, said, "Have her in," and
settled himself back in his chair.

A moment later the door opened, and the stranger appeared.  As she
closed the door behind her she removed her heavy veil, and displayed
the face of a very handsome woman of past thirty.  It is only necessary
to add that it was a face known to the two men, and all San Francisco.

"Well, Kate," said the Mayor, motioning to a chair, but without rising
or changing his attitude.  "Here I am, and here is Colonel Pendleton,
and these are office hours.  What can we do for you?"

If he had received her with magisterial formality, or even politely,
she would have been embarrassed, in spite of a certain boldness of her
dark eyes and an ever present consciousness of her power.  It is
possible that his own ease and that of his companion was part of their
instinctive good nature and perception.  She accepted it as such, took
the chair familiarly, and seated herself sideways upon it, her right
arm half encircling its back and hanging over it; altogether an easy
and not ungraceful pose.

"Thank you, Jack--I mean, Mr. Mayor--and you, too, Harry.  I came on
business.  I want you two men to act as guardians for my little
daughter."

"Your what?" asked the two men simultaneously.

"My daughter," she repeated, with a short laugh, which, however, ended
with a note of defiance.  "Of course you don't know.  Well," she added
half aggressively, and yet with the air of hurrying over a compromising
and inexplicable weakness, "the long and short of it is I've got a
little girl down at the Convent of Santa Clara, and have had--there!
I've been taking care of her--GOOD care, too, boys--for some time.  And
now I want to put things square for her for the future.  See?  I want
to make over to her all my property--it's nigh on to seventy-five
thousand dollars, for Bob Snelling put me up to getting those water
lots a year ago--and, you see, I'll have to have regular guardians,
trustees, or whatever you call 'em, to take care of the money for her."

"Who's her father?" asked the Mayor.

"What's that to do with it?" she said impetuously.

"Everything--because he's her natural guardian."

"Suppose he isn't known?  Say dead, for instance."

"Dead will do," said the Mayor gravely.  "Yes, dead will do," repeated
Colonel Pendleton.  After a pause, in which the two men seemed to have
buried this vague relative, the Mayor looked keenly at the woman.

"Kate, have you and Bob Ridley had a quarrel?"

"Bob Ridley knows too much to quarrel with me," she said briefly.

"Then you are doing this for no motive other than that which you tell
me?"

"Certainly.  That's motive enough--ain't it?"

"Yes."  The Mayor took his feet off his companion's chair and sat
upright.  Colonel Pendleton did the same, also removing his cigar from
his lips.  "I suppose you'll think this thing over?" he added.

"No--I want it done NOW--right here--in this office."

"But you know it will be irrevocable."

"That's what I want it--something might happen afterwards."

"But you are leaving nothing for yourself, and if you are going to
devote everything to this daughter and lead a different life, you'll"--

"Who said I was?"

The two men paused, and looked at her.  "Look here, boys, you don't
understand.  From the day that paper is signed, I've nothing to do with
the child.  She passes out of my hands into yours, to be schooled,
educated, and made a rich girl out of--and never to know who or what or
where I am.  She doesn't know now.  I haven't given her and myself away
in that style--you bet!  She thinks I'm only a friend.  She hasn't seen
me more than once or twice, and not to know me again.  Why, I was down
there the other day, and passed her walking out with the Sisters and
the other scholars, and she didn't know me--though one of the Sisters
did.  But they're mum--THEY are, and don't let on.  Why, now I think of
it, YOU were down there, Jack, presiding in big style as Mr. Mayor at
the exercises.  You must have noticed her.  Little thing, about
nine--lot of hair, the same color as mine, and brown eyes.  White and
yellow sash.  Had a necklace on of real pearls I gave her.  I BOUGHT
THEM, you understand, myself at Tucker's--gave two hundred and fifty
dollars for them--and a big bouquet of white rosebuds and lilacs I sent
her."

"I remember her now on the platform," said the Mayor gravely.  "So that
is your child?"

"You bet--no slouch either.  But that's neither here nor there. What I
want now is you and Harry to look after her and her property the same
as if I didn't live.  More than that, as if I had NEVER LIVED.  I've
come to you two boys, because I reckon you're square men and won't give
me away.  But I want to fix it even firmer than that.  I want you to
take hold of this trust not as Jack Hammersley, but as the MAYOR OF SAN
FRANCISCO!  And when you make way for a new Mayor, HE takes up the
trust by virtue of his office, you see, so there's a trustee all along.
I reckon there'll always be a San Francisco and always a Mayor--at
least till the child's of age; and it gives her from the start a
father, and a pretty big one too.  Of course the new man isn't to know
the why and wherefore of this.  It's enough for him to take on that
duty with his others, without asking questions.  And he's only got to
invest that money and pay it out as it's wanted, and consult Harry at
times."

The two men looked at each other with approving intelligence.  "But
have you thought of a successor for ME, in case somebody shoots me on
sight any time in the next ten years?" asked Pendleton, with a gravity
equal to her own.

"I reckon, as you're President of the El Dorado Bank, you'll make that
a part of every president's duty too.  You'll get the directors to
agree to it, just as Jack here will get the Common Council to make it
the Mayor's business."

The two men had risen to their feet, and, after exchanging glances,
gazed at her silently.  Presently the Mayor said:--

"It can be done, Kate, and we'll do it for you--eh, Harry?"

"Count me in," said Pendleton, nodding.  "But you'll want a third man."

"What's that for?"

"The casting vote in case of any difficulty."

The woman's face fell.  "I reckoned to keep it a secret with only you
two," she said half bitterly.

"No matter.  We'll find some one to act, or you'll think of somebody
and let us know."

"But I wanted to finish this thing right here," she said impatiently.
She was silent for a moment, with her arched black brows knitted.  Then
she said abruptly, "Who's that smart little chap that let me in?  He
looks as if he might be trusted."

"That's Paul Hathaway, my secretary.  He's sensible, but too young.
Stop! I don't know about that.  There's no legal age necessary, and
he's got an awfully old head on him," said the Mayor thoughtfully.

"And I say his youth's in his favor," said Colonel Pendleton, promptly.
"He's been brought up in San Francisco, and he's got no d--d
old-fashioned Eastern notions to get rid of, and will drop into this as
a matter of business, without prying about or wondering.  I'LL serve
with him."

"Call him in!" said the woman.

He came.  Very luminous of eye, and composed of lip and brow.  Yet with
the same suggestion of "making believe" very much, as if to offset the
possible munching of forbidden cakes and apples in his own room, or the
hidden presence of some still in his pocket.

The Mayor explained the case briefly, but with business-like precision.
"Your duty, Mr. Hathaway," he concluded, "at present will be merely
nominal and, above all, confidential.  Colonel Pendleton and myself
will set the thing going."  As the youth--who had apparently taken in
and "illuminated" the whole subject with a single bright-eyed
glance--bowed and was about to retire, as if to relieve himself of his
real feelings behind the door, the woman stopped him with a gesture.

"Let's have this thing over now," she said to the Mayor.  "You draw up
something that we can all sign at once."  She fixed her eyes on Paul,
partly to satisfy her curiosity and justify her predilection for him,
and partly to detect him in any overt act of boyishness. But the youth
simply returned her glance with a cheerful, easy prescience, as if her
past lay clearly open before him.  For some minutes there was only the
rapid scratching of the Mayor's pen over the paper.  Suddenly he
stopped and looked up.

"What's her name?"

"She mustn't have mine," said the woman quickly.  "That's a part of my
idea.  I give that up with the rest.  She must take a new name that
gives no hint of me.  Think of one, can't you, you two men? Something
that would kind of show that she was the daughter of the city, you
know."

"You couldn't call her 'Santa Francisca,' eh?" said Colonel Pendleton,
doubtingly.

"Not much," said the woman, with a seriousness that defied any ulterior
insinuation.

"Nor Chrysopolinia?" said the Mayor, musingly.

"But that's only a FIRST name.  She must have a family name," said the
woman impatiently.

"Can YOU think of something, Paul?" said the Mayor, appealing to
Hathaway.  "You're a great reader, and later from your classics than I
am."  The Mayor, albeit practical and Western, liked to be
ostentatiously forgetful of his old Alma Mater, Harvard, on occasions.

"How would YERBA BUENA do, sir?" responded the youth gravely. "It's the
old Spanish title of the first settlement here.  It comes from the name
that Father Junipero Serra gave to the pretty little vine that grows
wild over the sandhills, and means 'good herb.'  He called it 'A balm
for the wounded and sore.'"

"For the wounded and sore?" repeated the woman slowly.

"That's what they say," responded Hathaway.

"You ain't playing us, eh?" she said, with a half laugh that, however,
scarcely curved the open mouth with which she had been regarding the
young secretary.

"No," said the Mayor, hurriedly.  "It's true.  I've often heard it. And
a capital name it would be for her too.  YERBA the first name. BUENA
the second.  She could be called Miss Buena when she grows up."

"Yerba Buena it is," she said suddenly.  Then, indicating the youth
with a slight toss of her handsome head, "His head's level--you can see
that."

There was a silence again, and the scratching of the Mayor's pen
continued.  Colonel Pendleton buttoned up his coat, pulled his long
moustache into shape, slightly arranged his collar, and walked to the
window without looking at the woman.  Presently the Mayor arose from
his seat, and, with a certain formal courtesy that had been wanting in
his previous manner, handed her his pen and arranged his chair for her
at the desk.  She took the pen, and rapidly appended her signature to
the paper.  The others followed; and, obedient to a sign from him, the
porter was summoned from the outer office to witness the signatures.
When this was over, the Mayor turned to his secretary.  "That's all
just now, Paul."

Accepting this implied dismissal with undisturbed gravity, the newly
made youthful guardian bowed and retired.  When the green baize door
had closed upon him, the Mayor turned abruptly to the woman with the
paper in his hand.

"Look here, Kate; there is still time for you to reconsider your
action, and tear up this solitary record of it.  If you choose to do
so, say so, and I promise you that this interview, and all you have
told us, shall never pass beyond these walls.  No one will be the wiser
for it, and we will give you full credit for having attempted something
that was too much for you to perform."

She had half risen from her chair when he began, but fell back again in
her former position and looked impatiently from him to his companion,
who was also regarding her earnestly.

"What are you talking about?" she said sharply.

"YOU, Kate," said the Mayor.  "You have given everything you possess to
this child.  What provision have you made for yourself?"

"Do I look played out?" she said, facing them.

She certainly did not look like anything but a strong, handsome,
resolute woman, but the men did not reply.

"That is not all, Kate," continued the Mayor, folding his arms and
looking down upon her.  "Have you thought what this means?  It is the
complete renunciation not only of any claim but any interest in your
child.  That is what you have just signed, and what it will be our duty
now to keep you to.  From this moment we stand between you and her, as
we stand between her and the world.  Are you ready to see her grow up
away from you, losing even the little recollection she has had of your
kindness--passing you in the street without knowing you, perhaps even
having you pointed out to her as a person she should avoid?  Are you
prepared to shut your eyes and ears henceforth to all that you may hear
of her new life, when she is happy, rich, respectable, a courted
heiress--perhaps the wife of some great man?  Are you ready to accept
that she will never know--that no one will ever know--that you had any
share in making her so, and that if you should ever breathe it abroad
we shall hold it our duty to deny it, and brand the man who takes it up
for you as a liar and the slanderer of an honest girl?"

"That's what I came here for," she said curtly, then, regarding them
curiously, and running her ringed hand up and down the railed back of
her chair, she added, with a half laugh, "What are you playin' me for,
boys?"

"But," said Colonel Pendleton, without heeding her, "are you ready to
know that in sickness or affliction you will be powerless to help her;
that a stranger will take your place at her bedside, that as she has
lived without knowing you she will die without that knowledge, or that
if through any weakness of yours it came to her then, it would embitter
her last thoughts of earth and, dying, she would curse you?"

The smile upon her half-open mouth still fluttered around it, and her
curved fingers still ran up and down the rails of the chair-back as if
they were the cords of some mute instrument, to which she was trying to
give voice.  Her rings once or twice grated upon them as if she had at
times gripped them closely.  But she rose quickly when he paused, said
"Yes," sharply, and put the chair back against the wall.

"Then I will send you copies of this tomorrow, and take an assignment
of the property."

"I've got the check here for it now," she said, drawing it from her
pocket and laying it upon the desk.  "There, I reckon that's finished.
Good-by!"

The Mayor took up his hat, Colonel Pendleton did the same; both men
preceded her to the door, and held it open with grave politeness for
her to pass.

"Where are you boys going?" she asked, glancing from the one to the
other.

"To see you to your carriage, Mrs. Howard," said the Mayor, in a voice
that had become somewhat deeper.

"Through the whole building?  Past all the people in the hall and on
the stairs?  Why, I passed Dan Stewart as I came in."

"If you will allow us?" he said, turning half appealing to Colonel
Pendleton, who, without speaking, made a low bow of assent.

A slight flush rose to her face--the first and only change in the even
healthy color she had shown during the interview.

"I reckon I won't trouble you, boys, if it's all the same to you," she
said, with her half-strident laugh.  "YOU mightn't mind being seen--but
I would--  Good-by."

She held out a hand to each of the men, who remained for an instant
silently holding them.  Then she passed out of the door, slipping on
her close black veil as she did so with a half-funereal suggestion, and
they saw her tall, handsome figure fade into the shadows of the long
corridor.

"Paul," said the Mayor, reentering the office and turning to his
secretary, "do you know who that woman is?"

"Yes, sir."

"She's one in a million!  And now forget that you have ever seen her."



CHAPTER I.

The principal parlor of the New Golden Gate Hotel in San Francisco,
fairly reported by the local press as being "truly palatial" in its
appointments, and unrivaled in its upholstery, was, nevertheless, on
August 5, 1860, of that startling newness that checked any familiarity,
and evidently had produced some embarrassment on the limbs of four
visitors who had just been ushered into its glories. After hesitating
before one or two gorgeous fawn-colored brocaded easy-chairs of
appalling and spotless virginity, one of them seated himself
despairingly on a tete-a-tete sofa in marked and painful isolation,
while another sat uncomfortably upright on a sofa.  The two others
remained standing, vaguely gazing at the ceiling, and exchanging
ostentatiously admiring but hollow remarks about the furniture in
unnecessary whispers.  Yet they were apparently men of a certain habit
of importance and small authority, with more or less critical attitude
in their speech.

To them presently entered a young man of about five-and-twenty, with
remarkably bright and singularly sympathetic eyes.  Having swept the
group in a smiling glance, he singled out the lonely occupier of the
tete-a-tete, and moved pleasantly towards him.  The man rose instantly
with an eager gratified look.

"Well, Paul, I didn't allow you'd remember me.  It's a matter of four
years since we met at Marysville.  And now you're bein' a great man
you've"--

No one could have known from the young man's smiling face that he
really had not recognized his visitor at first, and that his greeting
was only an exhibition of one of those happy instincts for which he was
remarkable.  But, following the clew suggested by his visitor, he was
able to say promptly and gayly:--

"I don't know why I should forget Tony Shear or the Marysville boys,"
turning with a half-confiding smile to the other visitors, who, after
the human fashion, were beginning to be resentfully impatient of this
special attention.

"Well, no,--for I've allus said that you took your first start from
Marysville.  But I've brought a few friends of our party that I
reckoned to introduce to you.  Cap'n Stidger, Chairman of our Central
Committee, Mr. Henry J. Hoskins, of the firm of Hoskins and Bloomer,
and Joe Slate, of the 'Union Press,' one of our most promising
journalists.  Gentlemen," he continued, suddenly and without warning
lifting his voice to an oratorical plane in startling contrast to his
previous unaffected utterance, "I needn't say that this is the
honorable Paul Hathaway, the youngest state senator in the Legislature.
You know his record!"  Then, recovering the ordinary accents of
humanity, he added, "We read of your departure last night from
Sacramento, and I thought we'd come early, afore the crowd."

"Proud to know you, sir," said Captain Stidger, suddenly lifting the
conversation to the platform again.  "I have followed your career, sir.
I've read your speech, Mr. Hathaway, and, as I was telling our mutual
friend, Mr. Shear, as we came along, I don't know any man that could
state the real party issues as squarely. Your castigating exposition of
so-called Jeffersonian principles, and your relentless indictment of
the resolutions of '98, were--were"--coughed the captain, dropping into
conversation again--"were the biggest thing out.  You have only to
signify the day, sir, that you will address us, and I can promise you
the largest audience in San Francisco."

"I'm instructed by the proprietor of the 'Union Press,'" said Mr.
Slate, feeling for his notebook and pencil, "to offer you its columns
for any explanations you may desire to make in the form of a personal
letter or an editorial in reply to the 'Advertiser's' strictures on
your speech, or to take any information you may have for the benefit of
our readers and the party."

"If you are ever down my way, Mr. Hathaway," said Mr. Hoskins, placing
a large business card in Hathaway's hand, "and will drop in as a
friend, I can show you about the largest business in the way of canned
provisions and domestic groceries in the State, and give you a look
around Battery Street generally.  Or if you'll name your day, I've got
a pair of 2.35 Blue Grass horses that'll spin you out to the Cliff
House to dinner and back.  I've had Governor Fiske, and Senator Doolan,
and that big English capitalist who was here last year, and they--well,
sir,--they were PLEASED!  Or if you'd like to see the town--if this is
your first visit--I'm a hand to show you."

Nothing could exceed Mr. Hathaway's sympathetic acceptance of their
courtesies, nor was there the least affectation in it.  Thoroughly
enjoying his fellowmen, even in their foibles, they found him
irresistibly attractive.  "I lived here seven years ago," he said,
smiling, to the last speaker.

"When the water came up to Montgomery Street," interposed Mr. Shear, in
a hoarse but admiring aside.

"When Mr. Hammersley was mayor," continued Hathaway.

"Had an official position--private secretary--afore he was twenty,"
explained Shear, in perfectly audible confidence.

"Since then the city has made great strides, leaping full-grown, sir,
in a single night," said Captain Stidger, hastily ascending the rostrum
again with a mixed metaphor, to the apparent concern of a party of
handsomely dressed young ladies who had recently entered the parlor.
"Stretching from South Park to Black Point, and running back to the
Mission Dolores and the Presidio, we are building up a metropolis, sir,
worthy to be placed beside the Golden Gate that opens to the broad
Pacific and the shores of far Cathay!  When the Pacific Railroad is
built we shall be the natural terminus of the Pathway of Nations!"

Mr. Hathaway's face betrayed no consciousness that he had heard
something like this eight years before, and that much of it had come
true, as he again sympathetically responded.  Neither was his attention
attracted by a singular similarity which the attitude of the group of
ladies on the other side of the parlor bore to that of his own party.
They were clustered around one of their own number--a striking-looking
girl--who was apparently receiving their mingled flatteries and
caresses with a youthful yet critical sympathy, which, singularly
enough, was not unlike his own.  It was evident also that an odd sort
of rivalry seemed to spring up between the two parties, and that, in
proportion as Hathaway's admirers became more marked and ostentatious
in their attentions, the supporters of the young girl were equally
effusive and enthusiastic in their devotion.  As usual in such cases,
the real contest was between the partisans themselves; each successive
demonstration on either side was provocative or retaliatory, and when
they were apparently rendering homage to their idols they were really
distracted by and listening to each other.  At last, Hathaway's party
being reinforced by fresh visitors, a tall brunette of the opposition
remarked in a professedly confidential but perfectly audible tone:--

"Well, my dear, as I don't suppose you want to take part in a political
caucus, perhaps we'd better return to the Ladies' Boudoir, unless
there's a committee sitting there too."

"I know how valuable your time must be, as you are all business men,"
said Hathaway, turning to his party, in an equally audible tone; "but
before you go, gentlemen, you must let me offer you a little
refreshment in a private room," and he moved naturally towards the
door.  The rival fair, who had already risen at their commander's
suggestion, here paused awkwardly over an embarrassing victory.  Should
they go or stay?  The object of their devotion, however, turned
curiously towards Hathaway.  For an instant their eyes met.  The young
girl turned carelessly to her companions and said, "No; stay here--it's
the public parlor;" and her followers, evidently accustomed to her
authority, sat down again.

"A galaxy of young ladies from the Convent of Santa Clara, Mr.
Hathaway," explained Captain Stidger, naively oblivious of any
discourtesy on their part, as he followed Hathaway's glance and took
his arm as they moved away.  "Not the least of our treasures, sir.
Most of them daughters of pioneers--and all Californian bred and
educated.  Connoisseurs have awarded them the palm, and declare that
for Grace, Intelligence, and Woman's Highest Charms the East cannot
furnish their equal!"  Having delivered this Parthian compliment in an
oratorical passage through the doorway, the captain descended, outside,
into familiar speech.  "But I suppose you will find that out for
yourself if you stay here long.  San Francisco might furnish a fitting
bride to California's youngest senator."

"I am afraid that my stay here must be brief, and limited to business,"
said Hathaway, who had merely noticed that the principal girl was
handsome and original-looking.  "In fact, I am here partly to see an
old acquaintance--Colonel Pendleton."

The three men looked at each other curiously.  "Oh! Harry Pendleton,"
said Mr. Hoskins, incredulously "You don't know HIM?"

"An old pioneer--of course," interposed Shear, explanatorily and
apologetically.  "Why, in Paul's time the colonel was a big man here."

"I understand the colonel has been unfortunate," said Hathaway,
gravely; "but in MY time he was President of the El Dorado Bank."

"And the bank hasn't got through its settlement yet," said Hoskins "I
hope YOU ain't expecting to get anything out of it?"

"No," said Hathaway, smiling; "I was a boy at that time, and lived up
to my salary.  I know nothing of his bank difficulties, but it always
struck me that Colonel Pendleton was himself an honorable man."

"It ain't that," said Captain Stidger energetically, "but the trouble
with Harry Pendleton is that he hasn't grown with the State, and never
adjusted himself to it.  And he won't.  He thinks the Millennium was
between the fall of '49 and the spring of '50, and after that
everything dropped.  He belongs to the old days, when a man's simple
WORD was good for any amount if you knew him; and they say that the old
bank hadn't a scrap of paper for half that was owing to it.  That was
all very well, sir, in '49 and '50, and--Luck; but it won't do for '59
and '60, and--Business!  And the old man can't see it."

"But he is ready to fight for it now, as in the old time," said Mr.
Slate, "and that's another trouble with his chronology.  He's done more
to keep up dueling than any other man in the State, and don't know the
whole spirit of progress and civilization is against it."

It was impossible to tell from Paul Hathaway's face whether his
sympathy with Colonel Pendleton's foibles or his assent to the
criticisms of his visitors was the truer.  Both were no doubt equally
sincere.  But the party was presently engaged in the absorption of
refreshment, which, being of a purely, spirituous and exhilarating
quality, tended to increase their good humor with the host till they
parted.  Even then a gratuitous advertisement of his virtues and their
own intentions in calling upon him was oratorically voiced from
available platforms and landings, in the halls and stairways, until it
was pretty well known throughout the Golden Gate Hotel that the Hon.
Mr. Paul Hathaway had arrived from Sacramento and had received a
"spontaneous ovation."

Meantime the object of it had dropped into an easy-chair by the window
of his room, and was endeavoring to recall a less profitable memory.
The process of human forgetfulness is not a difficult one between the
ages of eighteen and twenty-six, and Paul Hathaway had not only
fulfilled the Mayor's request by forgetting the particulars of a
certain transfer that he had witnessed in the Mayor's office, but in
the year succeeding that request, being about to try his fortunes in
the mountains, he had formally constituted Colonel Pendleton to act as
his proxy in the administration of Mrs. Howard's singular Trust, in
which, however, he had never participated except yearly to sign his
name.  He was, consequently, somewhat astonished to have received a
letter a few days before from Colonel Pendleton, asking him to call and
see him regarding it.

He vaguely remembered that it was eight years ago, and eight years had
worked considerable change in the original trustees, greatest of all in
his superior officer, the Mayor, who had died the year following,
leaving his trusteeship to his successor in office, whom Paul Hathaway
had never seen.  The Bank of El Dorado, despite Mrs. Howard's sanguine
belief, had long been in bankruptcy, and, although Colonel Pendleton
still survived it, it was certain that no other president would succeed
to his office as trustee, and that the function would lapse with him.
Paul himself, a soldier of fortune, although habitually lucky, had only
lately succeeded to a profession--if his political functions could be
so described.  Even with his luck, energy, and ambition, while
everything was possible, nothing was secure.  It seemed, therefore, as
if the soulless official must eventually assume the duties of the two
sympathizing friends who had originated them, and had stood in loco
parentis to the constructive orphan.  The mother, Mrs. Howard, had
disappeared a year after the Trust had been made--it was charitably
presumed in order to prevent any complications that might arise from
her presence in the country.  With these facts before him, Paul
Hathaway was more concerned in wondering what Pendleton could want with
him than, I fear, any direct sympathy with the situation.  On the
contrary, it appeared to him more favorable for keeping the secret of
Mrs. Howard's relationship, which would now die with Colonel Pendleton
and himself; and there was no danger of any emotional betrayal of it in
the cold official administration of a man who had received the Trust
through the formal hands of successive predecessors.  He had forgotten
the time limited for the guardianship, but the girl must soon be of age
and off their hands. If there had ever been any romantic or chivalrous
impression left upon his memory by the scene in the mayor's office, I
fear he had put it away with various other foolish illusions of his
youth, to which he now believed he was superior.

Nevertheless, he would see the colonel, and at once, and settle the
question.  He looked at the address, "St. Charles Hotel."  He
remembered an old hostelry of that name, near the Plaza.  Could it be
possible that it had survived the alterations and improvements of the
city?  It was an easy walk through remembered streets, yet with changed
shops and houses and faces.  When he reached the Plaza, scarce
recognizable in its later frontages of brick and stone, he found the
old wooden building still intact, with its villa-like galleries and
verandas incongruously and ostentatiously overlooked by two new and
aspiring erections on either side.  For an instant he tried to recall
the glamour of old days.  He remembered when his boyish eyes regarded
it as the crowning work of opulence and distinction; he remembered a
ball given there on some public occasion, which was to him the acme of
social brilliancy and display.  How tawdry and trivial it looked beside
those later and more solid structures!  How inconsistent were those
long latticed verandas and balconies, pathetic record of that first
illusion of the pioneers that their climate was a tropical one!  A
restaurant and billiard-saloon had aggrandized all of the lower story;
but there was still the fanlight, over which the remembered title of
"St. Charles," in gilded letters, was now reinforced by the too
demonstrative legend, "Apartments and Board, by the Day or Week." Was
it possible that this narrow, creaking staircase had once seemed to him
the broad steps of Fame and Fortune?  On the first landing, a
preoccupied Irish servant-girl, with a mop, directed him to a door at
the end of the passage, at which he knocked.  The door was opened by a
grizzled negro servant, who was still holding a piece of oily
chamois-leather in his hand; and the contents of a dueling-case,
scattered upon a table in the centre of the room, showed what had been
his occupation.  Admitting Hathaway with great courtesy, he said:--

"Marse Harry bin havin' his ole trubble, sah, and bin engaged just dis
momen' on his toylet; ef yo'll accommodate yo'self on de sofa, I inform
him yo' is heah."

As the negro passed into the next room, Paul cast a hasty glance around
the apartment.  The furniture, originally rich and elegant, was now
worn threadbare and lustreless.  A book-case, containing, among other
volumes, a few law books--there being a vague tradition, as Paul
remembered, that Colonel Pendleton had once been connected with the
law--a few French chairs of tarnished gilt, a rifle in the corner, a
presentation sword in a mahogany case, a few classical prints on the
walls, and one or two iron deed-boxes marked "El Dorado Bank," were the
principal objects.  A mild flavor of dry decay and methylated spirits
pervaded the apartment.  Yet it was scrupulously clean and well kept,
and a few clothes neatly brushed and folded on a chair bore witness to
the servant's care. As Paul, however, glanced behind the sofa, he was
concerned to see a coat, which had evidently been thrust hurriedly in a
corner, with the sleeve lining inside out, and a needle and thread
still sticking in the seam.  It struck him instantly that this had been
the negro's occupation, and that the pistol-cleaning was a polite
fiction.

"Yo' 'll have to skuse Marse Harry seein' yo in bed, but his laig's
pow'ful bad to-day, and he can't stand," said the servant reentering
the room.  "Skuse me, sah," he added in a dignified confidential
whisper, half closing the door with his hand, "but if yo' wouldn't mind
avoidin' 'xcitin' or controversical topics in yo' conversation, it
would be de better fo' him."

Paul smilingly assented, and the black retainer, with even more than
the usual solemn ceremonious exaggeration of his race, ushered him into
the bedroom.  It was furnished in the same faded glory as the
sitting-room, with the exception of a low, iron camp-bedstead, in which
the tall, soldierly figure of Colonel Pendleton, clad in threadbare
silk dressing-gown, was stretched.  He had changed in eight years: his
hair had become gray, and was thinned over the sunken temples, but his
iron-gray moustache was still particularly long and well pointed.  His
face bore marks of illness and care; there were deep lines down the
angle of the nostril that spoke of alternate savage outbreak and
repression, and gave his smile a sardonic rigidity.  His dark eyes,
that shone with the exaltation of fever, fixed Paul's on entering, and
with the tyranny of an invalid never left them.

"Well, Hathaway?"

With the sound of that voice Paul felt the years slip away, and he was
again a boy, looking up admiringly to the strong man, who now lay
helpless before him.  He had entered the room with a faint sense of
sympathizing superiority and a consciousness of having had experience
in controlling men.  But all this fled before Colonel Pendleton's
authoritative voice; even its broken tones carried the old dominant
spirit of the man, and Paul found himself admiring a quality in his old
acquaintance that he missed in his newer friends.

"I haven't seen you for eight years, Hathaway.  Come here and let me
look at you."

Paul approached the bedside with boyish obedience.  Pendleton took his
hand and gazed at him critically.

"I should have recognized you, sir, for all your moustache and your
inches.  The last time I saw you was in Jack Hammersley's office. Well,
Jack's dead, and here I am, little better, I reckon.  You remember
Hammersley's house?"

"Yes," said Paul, albeit wondering at the question.

"Something like this, Swiss villa style.  I remember when Jack put it
up.  Well, the last time I was out, I passed there.  And what do you
think they've done to it?"

Paul could not imagine.

"Well, sir," said the colonel gravely, "they've changed it into a
church missionary shop and young men's Christian reading-room!  But
that's 'progress' and 'improvement'!"  He paused, and, slowly
withdrawing his hand from Paul's, added with grim apology, "You're
young, and belong to the new school, perhaps.  Well, sir, I've read
your speech; I don't belong to your party--mine died ten years ago--but
I congratulate you.  George!  Confound it where's that boy gone?"

The negro indicated by this youthful title, although he must have been
ten years older than his master, after a hurried shuffling in the
sitting-room eventually appeared at the door.

"George, champagne and materials for cocktails for the gentleman. The
BEST, you understand.  No new-fangled notions from that new barkeeper."

Paul, who thought he observed a troubled blinking in George's eyelid,
and referred it to a fear of possible excitement for his patient, here
begged his host not to trouble himself--that he seldom took anything in
the morning.

"Possibly not, sir; possibly not," returned the colonel, hastily. "I
know the new ideas are prohibitive, and some other blank thing, but
you're safe here from your constituents, and by gad, sir, I shan't
force you to take it!  It's MY custom, Hathaway--an old one--played
out, perhaps, like all the others, but a custom nevertheless, and I'm
only surprised that George, who knows it, should have forgotten it."

"Fack is, Marse Harry," said George, with feverish apology, "it bin
gone 'scaped my mind dis mo'nin' in de prerogation ob business, but I'm
goin' now, shuah!" and he disappeared.

"A good boy, sir, but beginning to be contaminated.  Brought him here
from Nashville over ten years ago.  Eight years ago they proved to him
that he was no longer a slave, and made him d--d unhappy until I
promised him it should make no difference to him and he could stay.  I
had to send for his wife and child--of course, a dead loss of eighteen
hundred dollars when they set foot in the State--but I'm blanked if he
isn't just as miserable with them here, for he has to take two hours in
the morning and three in the afternoon every day to be with 'em.  I
tried to get him to take his family to the mines and make his fortune,
like those fellows they call bankers and operators and stockbrokers
nowadays; or to go to Oregon where they'll make him some kind of a
mayor or sheriff--but he won't.  He collects my rents on some little
property I have left, and pays my bills, sir, and, if this blank
civilization would only leave him alone, he'd be a good enough boy."

Paul couldn't help thinking that the rents George collected were
somewhat inconsistent with those he was evidently mending when he
arrived, but at that moment the jingle of glasses was heard in the
sitting-room, and the old negro reappeared at the door.  Drawing
himself up with ceremonious courtesy, he addressed Paul.  "Wo'd yo'
mind, sah, taking a glance at de wine for yo' choice?"  Paul rose, and
followed him into the sitting-room, when George carefully closed the
door.  To his surprise Hathaway beheld a tray with two glasses of
whiskey and bitters, but no wine.  "Skuse me, sah," said the old man
with dignified apology, "but de Kernel won't have any but de best
champagne for hono'ble gemmen like yo'self, and I'se despaired to say
it can't be got in de house or de subburbs.  De best champagne dat we
gives visitors is de Widder Glencoe.  Wo'd yo' mind, sah, for de sake
o' not 'xcitin' de Kernel wid triflin' culinary matter, to say dat yo'
don' take but de one brand?"

"Certainly," said Paul, smiling.  "I really don't care for anything so
early;" then, returning to the bedroom, he said carelessly, "You'll
excuse me taking the liberty, colonel, of sending away the champagne
and contenting myself with whiskey.  Even the best brand--the Widow
Cliquot"--with a glance at the gratified George--"I find rather trying
so early in the morning."

"As you please, Hathaway," said the colonel, somewhat stiffly.  "I dare
say there's a new fashion in drinks now, and a gentleman's stomach is a
thing of the past.  Then, I suppose, we can spare the boy, as this is
his time for going home.  Put that tin box with the Trust papers on the
bed, George, and Mr. Hathaway will excuse your waiting."  As the old
servant made an exaggerated obeisance to each, Paul remarked, as the
door closed upon him, "George certainly keeps his style, colonel, in
the face of the progress you deplore."

"He was always a 'dandy nigger,'" returned Pendleton, his face slightly
relaxing as he glanced after his grizzled henchman, "but his
exaggeration of courtesy is a blank sight more natural and manly than
the exaggeration of discourtesy which your superior civilized 'helps'
think is self-respect.  The excuse of servitude of any kind is its
spontaneity and affection.  When you know a man hates you and serves
you from interest, you know he's a cur and you're a tyrant.  It's your
blank progress that's made menial service degrading by teaching men to
avoid it.  Why, sir, when I first arrived here, Jack Hammersley and
myself took turns as cook to the party.  I didn't consider myself any
the worse master for it.  But enough of this."  He paused, and, raising
himself on his elbow, gazed for some seconds half cautiously, half
doubtfully, upon his companion.  "I've got something to tell you,
Hathaway," he said, slowly.  "You've had an easy time with this Trust;
your share of the work hasn't worried you, kept you awake nights, or
interfered with your career.  I understand perfectly," he continued, in
reply to Hathaway's deprecating gesture.  "I accepted to act as your
proxy, and I HAVE.  I'm not complaining.  But it is time that you
should know what I've done, and what you may still have to do.  Here is
the record.  On the day after that interview in the Mayor's office, the
El Dorado Bank, of which I was, and still am, president, received
seventy-five thousand dollars in trust from Mrs. Howard.  Two years
afterwards, on that same day, the bank had, by lucky speculations,
increased that sum to the credit of the trust one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, or double the original capital.  In the following
year the bank suspended payment."



CHAPTER II.

In an instant the whole situation and his relations to it flashed upon
Paul with a terrible, but almost grotesque, completeness. Here he was,
at the outset of his career, responsible for the wasted fortune of the
daughter of a social outcast, and saddled with her support!  He now
knew why Colonel Pendleton had wished to see him; for one shameful
moment he believed he also knew why he had been content to take his
proxy!  The questionable character of the whole transaction, his own
carelessness, which sprang from that very confidence and trust that
Pendleton had lately extolled--what WOULD, what COULD not be made of
it!  He already heard himself abused by his opponents--perhaps, more
terrible still, faintly excused by his friends.  All this was visible
in his pale face and flashing eyes as he turned them on the helpless
invalid.

Colonel Pendleton received his look with the same critical,
half-curious scrutiny that had accompanied his speech.  At last his
face changed slightly, a faint look of disappointment crossed his eyes,
and a sardonic smile deepened the lines of his mouth.

"There, sir," he said hurriedly, as if dismissing an unpleasant
revelation; "don't alarm yourself!  Take a drink of that whiskey. You
look pale.  Well; turn your eyes on those walls.  You don't see any of
that money laid out here--do you?  Look at me.  I don't look like a man
enriched with other people's money--do I?  Well, let that content you.
Every dollar of that Trust fund, Hathaway, with all the interests and
profits that have accrued to it, is SAFE! Every cent of it is locked up
in government bonds with Rothschild's agent.  There are the receipts,
dated a week before the bank suspended.  But enough of THAT--THAT isn't
what I asked you to come and see me for."

The blood had rushed back to Paul's cheeks uncomfortably.  He saw now,
as impulsively as he had previously suspected his co-trustee, that the
man had probably ruined himself to save the Trust.  He stammered that
he had not questioned the management of the fund nor asked to withdraw
his proxy.

"No matter, sir," said the colonel, impatiently; "you had the right,
and I suppose," he added with half-concealed scorn, "it was your duty.
But let that pass.  The money is safe enough; but, Mr. Hathaway,--and
this is the point I want to discuss with you,--it begins to look as if
the SECRET was safe no longer!"  He had raised himself with some pain
and difficulty to draw nearer to Paul, and had again fixed his eyes
eagerly upon him.  But Paul's responsive glance was so vague that he
added quickly, "You understand, sir; I believe that there are hounds--I
say hounds!--who would be able to blurt out at any moment that that
girl at Santa Clara is Kate Howard's daughter."

At any other moment Paul might have questioned the gravity of any such
contingency, but the terrible earnestness of the speaker, his dominant
tone, and a certain respect which had lately sprung up in his breast
for him, checked him, and he only asked with as much concern as he
could master for the moment:--

"What makes you think so?"

"That's what I want to tell you, Hathaway, and how I, and I alone, am
responsible for it.  When the bank was in difficulty and I made up my
mind to guard the Trust with my own personal and private capital, I
knew that there might be some comment on my action.  It was a delicate
matter to show any preference or exclusion at such a moment, and I took
two or three of my brother directors whom I thought I could trust into
my confidence.  I told them the whole story, and how the Trust was
sacred.  I made a mistake, sir," continued Pendleton sardonically, "a
grave mistake.  I did not take into account that even in three years
civilization and religion had gained ground here.  There was a hound
there--a blank Judas in the Trust.  Well; he didn't see it.  I think he
talked Scripture and morality.  He said something about the wages of
sin being infamous, and only worthy of confiscation.  He talked about
the sins of the father being visited upon the children, and justly.  I
stopped him. Well!  Do you know what's the matter with my ankle?
Look!"  He stopped and, with some difficulty and invincible gravity,
throwing aside his dressing-gown, turned down his stocking, and exposed
to Paul's gaze the healed cicatrix of an old bullet-wound.  "Troubled
me damnably near a year.  Where I hit HIM--hasn't troubled him at all
since!

"I think," continued the colonel, falling back upon the pillow with an
air of relief, "that he told others--of his own kidney, sir,--though it
was a secret among gentlemen.  But they have preferred to be silent
now--than AFTERWARDS.  They know that I'm ready.  But I can't keep this
up long; some time, you know, they're bound to improve in practice and
hit higher up!  As far as I'm concerned," he added, with a grim glance
around the faded walls and threadbare furniture, "it don't mind; but
mine isn't the mouth to be stopped." He paused, and then abruptly, yet
with a sudden and pathetic dropping of his dominant note, said:
"Hathaway, you're young, and Hammersley liked you--what's to be done?
I thought of passing over my tools to you.  You can shoot, and I hear
you HAVE.  But the h--l of it is that if you dropped a man or two
people would ask WHY, and want to know what it was about; while, when I
do, nobody here thinks it anything but MY WAY!  I don't mean that it
would hurt you with the crowd to wipe out one or two of these hounds
during the canvass, but the trouble is that they belong to YOUR PARTY,
and," he added grimly, "that wouldn't help your career."

"But," said Paul, ignoring the sarcasm, "are you not magnifying the
effect of a disclosure?  The girl is an heiress, excellently brought
up.  Who will bother about the antecedents of the mother, who has
disappeared, whom she never knew, and who is legally dead to her?"

"In my day, sir, no one who knew the circumstances," returned the
colonel, quickly.  "But we are living in a blessed era of Christian
retribution and civilized propriety, and I believe there are a lot of
men and women about who have no other way of showing their own virtue
than by showing up another's vice.  We're in a reaction of reform.
It's the old drunkards who are always more clamorous for total
abstinence than the moderately temperate.  I tell you, Hathaway, there
couldn't be an unluckier moment for our secret coming out."

"But she will be of age soon."

"In two months."

"And sure to marry."

"Marry!" repeated Pendleton, with grim irony.  "Would YOU marry her?"

"That's another question," said the young man, promptly, "and one of
individual taste; but it does not affect my general belief that she
could easily find a husband as good and better."

"Suppose she found one BEFORE the secret is out.  Ought he be told?"

"Certainly."

"And that would imply telling HER?"

"Yes," said Paul, but not so promptly.  "And you consider THAT
fulfilling the promise of the Trust--the pledges exchanged with that
woman?" continued Pendleton, with glittering eyes and a return to his
own dominant tone.

"My dear colonel," said Paul, somewhat less positively, but still
smiling, "you have made a romantic, almost impossible compact with Mrs.
Howard that, you yourself are now obliged to admit, circumstances may
prevent your carrying out substantially.  You forget, also, that you
have just told me that you have already broken your pledge--under
circumstances, it is true, that do you honor--and that now your
desperate attempts to retrieve it have failed.  Now, I really see
nothing wrong in your telling to a presumptive well-wisher of the girl
what you have told to her enemy."

There was a dead silence.  The prostrate man uttered a slight groan, as
if in pain, and drew up his leg to change his position. After a pause,
he said, in a restrained voice, "I differ from you, Mr. Hathaway; but
enough of this for the present.  I have something else to say.  It will
be necessary for one of us to go at once to Santa Clara and see Miss
Yerba Buena."

"Good heavens!" said Paul, quickly.  "Do you call her THAT?"

"Certainly, sir.  You gave her the name.  Have you forgotten?"

"I only suggested it," returned Paul, hopelessly; "but no matter--go
on."

"I cannot go there, as you see," continued Pendleton, with a weary
gesture towards his crippled ankle; "and I should particularly like you
to see her before we make the joint disposition of her affairs with the
Mayor, two months hence.  I have some papers you can show her, and I
have already written a letter introducing you to the Lady Superior at
the convent, and to her.  You have never seen her?"

"No," said Paul.  "But of course you have?"

"Not for three years."

Paul's eyes evidently expressed some wonder, for a moment after the
colonel added, "I believe, Hathaway, I am looked upon as a queer
survival of a rather lawless and improper past.  At least, I have
thought it better not socially to compromise her by my presence. The
Mayor goes there--at the examinations and exercises, I believe, sir;
they make a sort of reception for him--with a--a--banquet--lemonade and
speeches."

"I had intended to leave for Sacramento to-morrow night," said Paul,
glancing curiously at the helpless man; "but I will go there if you
wish."

"Thank you.  It will be better."

There were a few words of further explanation of the papers, and
Pendleton placed the packet in his visitor's hands.  Paul rose.
Somehow, it appeared to him that the room looked more faded and
forgotten than when he entered it, and the figure of the man before him
more lonely, helpless, and abandoned.  With one of his sympathetic
impulses he said:--

"I don't like to leave you here alone.  Are you sure you can help
yourself without George?  Can I do anything before I go?"

"I am quite accustomed to it," said Pendleton, quietly.  "It happens
once or twice a year, and when I go out--well--I miss more than I do
here."

He took Paul's proffered hand mechanically, with a slight return of the
critical, doubting look he had cast upon him when he entered. His
voice, too, had quite recovered its old dominance, as he said, with
half-patronizing conventionality, "You'll have to find your way out
alone.  Let me know how you have sped at Santa Clara, will you?
Good-by."

The staircase and passage seemed to have grown shabbier and meaner as
Paul, slowly and hesitatingly, descended to the street.  At the foot of
the stairs he paused irresolutely, and loitered with a vague idea of
turning back on some pretense, only that he might relieve himself of
the sense of desertion.  He had already determined upon making that
inquiry into the colonel's personal and pecuniary affairs which he had
not dared to offer personally, and had a half-formed plan of testing
his own power and popularity in a certain line of relief that at once
satisfied his sympathies and ambitions.  Nevertheless, after reaching
the street, he lingered a moment, when an odd idea of temporizing with
his inclinations struck him.  At the farther end of the hotel--one of
the parasites living on its decayed fortunes--was a small barber's
shop.  By having his hair trimmed and his clothes brushed he could
linger a little longer beneath the same roof with the helpless
solitary, and perhaps come to some conclusion.  He entered the clean
but scantily furnished shop, and threw himself into one of the nearest
chairs, hardly noting that there were no other customers, and that a
single assistant, stropping a razor behind a glass door, was the only
occupant.  But there was a familiar note of exaggerated politeness
about the voice of this man as he opened the door and came towards the
back of the chair with the formula:--

"Mo'nin', sah!  Shall we hab de pleshure of shavin' or hah-cuttin' dis
mo'nin'?"  Paul raised his eyes quickly to the mirror before him.  It
reflected the black face and grizzled hair of George.

More relieved at finding the old servant still near his master than
caring to comprehend the reason, Hathaway said pleasantly, "Well,
George, is this the way you look after your family?"

The old man started; for an instant his full red lips seemed to become
dry and ashen, the whites of his eyes were suffused and staring, as he
met Paul's smiling face in the glass.  But almost as quickly he
recovered himself, and, with a polite but deprecating bow, said,--"For
God sake, sah!  I admit de sarkumstances is agin me, but de simple fack
is dat I'm temper'ly occupyin' de place of an ole frien', sah, who is
called round de cornah."

"And I'm devilish glad of any fact, George, that gives me a chance of
having my hair cut by Colonel Pendleton's right-hand man.  So fire
away!"

The gratified smile which now suddenly overspread the whole of the old
man's face, and seemed to quickly stiffen the rugged and wrinkled
fingers that had at first trembled in drawing a pair of shears from a
ragged pocket, appeared to satisfy Paul's curiosity for the present.
But after a few moments' silent snipping, during which he could detect
in the mirror some traces of agitation still twitching the negro's
face, he said with an air of conviction:--

"Look here, George--why don't you regularly use your leisure moments in
this trade?  You'd make your fortune by your taste and skill at it."

For the next half minute the old man's frame shook with silent
childlike laughter behind Paul's chair.  "Well, Marse Hathaway, yo's an
ole frien' o' my massa, and a gemman yo'self, sah, and a senetah, and I
do'an mind tellin' yo'--dat's jess what I bin gone done!  It makes a
little ready money for de ole woman and de chilleren.  But de Kernel
don' no'.  Ah, sah! de Kernel kill me or hisself if he so much as
'spicioned me.  De Kernel is high-toned, sah!--bein' a gemman yo'self,
yo' understand.  He wouldn't heah ob his niggah worken' for two
massas--for all he's willen' to lemme go and help myse'f.  But, Lord
bless yo', sah, dat ain't in de category!  De Kernel couldn't get along
widout me."

"You collect his rents, don't you?" said Paul, quietly.

"Yes, sah."

"Much?"

"Well, no, sah; not so much as fom'ly, sah!  Yo' see, de Kernel's
prop'ty lies in de ole parts ob de town, where de po' white folks lib,
and dey ain't reg'lar.  De Kernel dat sof' in his heart, he dare n'
press 'em; some of 'em is ole fo'ty-niners, like hisself, sah; and some
is Spanish, sah, and dey is sof' too, and ain't no more gumption dan
chilleren, and tink it's ole time come ag'in, and dey's in de ole
places like afo' de Mexican wah! and dey don' bin payin' noffin'.  But
we gets along, sah,--we gets along,--not in de prima facie style, sah!
mebbe not in de modden way dut de Kernel don't like; but we keeps
ourse'f, sah, and has wine fo' our friends.  When yo' come again, sah,
yo' 'll find de Widder Glencoe on de sideboard."

"Has the colonel many friends here?"

"Mos' de ole ones bin done gone, sah, and de Kernel don' cotton to de
new.  He don' mix much in sassiety till de bank settlements bin gone
done.  Skuse me, sah!--but you don' happen to know when dat is?  It
would be a pow'ful heap off de Kernel's mind if it was done.  Bein' a
high and mighty man in committees up dah in Sacramento, sah, I didn't
know but what yo' might know as it might come befo' yo'."

"I'll see about it," said Paul, with an odd, abstracted smile.

"Shampoo dis mornen', sah?"

"Nothing more in this line," said Paul, rising from his chair, "but
something more, perhaps, in the line of your other duties.  You're a
good barber for the public, George, and I don't take back what I said
about your future; but JUST NOW I think the colonel wants all your
service.  He's not at all well.  Take this," he said, putting a
twenty-dollar gold piece in the astonished servant's hand, "and for the
next three or four days drop the shop, and under some pretext or
another arrange to be with him.  That money will cover what you lose
here, and as soon as the colonel's all right again you can come back to
work.  But are you not afraid of being recognized by some one?"

"No, sah, dat's just it.  On'y strangers dat don't know no better come
yere."

"But suppose your master should drop in?  It's quite convenient to his
rooms."

"Marse Harry in a barber-shop!" said the old man with a silent laugh.
"Skuse me, sah," he added, with an apologetic mixture of respect and
dignity, "but fo' twenty years no man hez touched de Kernel's chin but
myself.  When Marse Harry hez to go to a barber's shop, it won't make
no matter who's dar."

"Let's hope he will not," said Paul gayly; then, anxious to evade the
gratitude which, since his munificence, he had seen beaming in the old
negro's eye and evidently trying to find polysyllabic and elevated
expression on his lips, he said hurriedly, "I shall expect to find you
with the colonel when I call again in a day or two," and smilingly
departed.

At the end of two hours George's barber-employer returned to relieve
his assistant, and, on receiving from him an account and a certain
percentage of the afternoon's fees (minus the gift from Paul), was
informed by George that he should pretermit his attendance for a few
days.  "Udder private and personal affairs," explained the old negro,
who made no social distinction in his vocabulary, "peroccupyin' dis
niggah's time."  The head barber, unwilling to lose a really good
assistant, endeavored to dissuade him by the offer of increased
emolument, but George was firm.

As he entered the sitting-room the colonel detected his step, and
called him in.

"Another time, George, never allow a guest of mine to send away wine.
If he don't care for it, put it on the sideboard."

"Yes, sah; but as yo' didn't like it yo'self, Marse Harry, and de wine
was de most 'xpensive quality ob Glencoe"--

"D--n the expense!" He paused, and gazed searchingly at his old
retainer.

"George," he said suddenly, yet in a gentle voice, "don't lie to me,
or"--in a still kinder voice--"I'll flog the black skin off you!
Listen to me.  HAVE you got any money left?"

"'Deed, sah, dere IS," said the negro earnestly.  "I'll jist fetch it
wid de accounts."

"Hold on!  I've been thinking, lying here, that if the Widow Molloy
can't pay because she sold out, and that tobacconist is ruined, and
we've had to pay the water tax for old Bill Soames, the rent last week
don't amount to much, while there's the month's bill for the restaurant
and that blank druggist's account for lotions and medicines to come out
of it.  It strikes me we're pretty near touching bottom.  I've
everything I want here, but, by God, sir, if I find YOU skimping
yourself or lying to me or borrowing money"--

"Yes, Marse Harry, but the Widder Molloy done gone and paid up dis
afernoon.  I'll bring de books and money to prove it;" and he hurriedly
reentered the sitting-room.

Then with trembling hands he emptied his pockets on the table,
including Paul's gift and the fees he had just received, and opening a
desk-drawer took from it a striped cotton handkerchief, such as negro
women wear on their heads, containing a small quantity of silver tied
up in a hard knot, and a boy's purse.  This he emptied on the table
with his own money.

They were the only rents of Colonel Henry Pendleton!  They were
contributed by "George Washington Thomson;" his wife, otherwise known
as "Aunt Dinah," washerwoman; and "Scipio Thomson," their son, aged
fourteen, bootblack.  It did not amount to much.  But in that happy
moisture that dimmed the old man's eyes, God knows it looked large
enough.



CHAPTER III.

Although the rays of an unclouded sun were hot in the Santa Clara roads
and byways, and the dry, bleached dust had become an impalpable powder,
the perspiring and parched pedestrian who rashly sought relief in the
shade of the wayside oak was speedily chilled to the bone by the
northwest trade-winds that on those August afternoons swept through the
defiles of the Coast Range, and even penetrated the pastoral valley of
San Jose.  The anomaly of straw hats and overcoats with the occupants
of buggies and station wagons was thus accounted for, and even in the
sheltered garden of "El Rosario" two young girls in light summer
dresses had thrown wraps over their shoulders as they lounged down a
broad rose-alley at right angles with the deep, long veranda of the
casa.  Yet, in spite of the chill, the old Spanish house and gardens
presented a luxurious, almost tropical, picture from the roadside.
Banks, beds, and bowers of roses lent their name and color to the
grounds; tree-like clusters of hanging fuchsias, mound-like masses of
variegated verbena, and tangled thickets of ceanothus and spreading
heliotrope were set in boundaries of venerable olive, fig, and pear
trees.  The old house itself, a picturesque relief to the glaring
newness of the painted villas along the road, had been tastefully
modified to suit the needs and habits of a later civilization; the
galleries of the inner courtyard, or patio, had been transferred to the
outside walls in the form of deep verandas, while the old adobe walls
themselves were hidden beneath flowing Cape jessamine or bestarred
passion vines, and topped by roofs of cylindrical red tiles.

"Miss Yerba!" said a dry, masculine voice from the veranda.

The taller young girl started, and drew herself suddenly behind a large
Castilian rose-tree, dragging her companion with her, and putting her
finger imperatively upon a pretty but somewhat passionate mouth.  The
other girl checked a laugh, and remained watching her friend's wickedly
leveled brows in amused surprise.

The call was repeated from the veranda.  After a moment's pause there
was the sound of retreating footsteps, and all was quiet again.

"Why, for goodness' sake, didn't you answer, Yerba?" asked the shorter
girl.

"Oh, I hate him!" responded Yerba.  "He only wanted to bore me with his
stupid, formal, sham-parental talk.  Because he's my official guardian
he thinks it necessary to assume this manner towards me when we meet,
and treats me as if I were something between his stepdaughter and an
almshouse orphan or a police board.  It's perfectly ridiculous, for
it's only put on while he is in office, and he knows it, and I know it,
and I'm tired of making believe. Why, my dear, they change every
election; I've had seven of them, all more or less of this kind, since
I can remember."

"But I thought there were two others, dear, that were not official,"
said her companion, coaxingly.

Yerba sighed.  "No; there was another, who was president of a bank, but
that was also to be official if he died.  I used to like him, he seemed
to be the only gentleman among them; but it appears that he is
dreadfully improper; shoots people now and then for nothing at all, and
burst up his bank--and, of course, he's impossible, and, as there's no
more bank, when he dies there'll be no more trustee."

"And there's the third, you know--a stranger, who never appears?"
suggested the younger girl.

"And who do you suppose HE turns out to be?  Do you remember that
conceited little wretch--that 'Baby Senator,' I think they called
him--who was in the parlor of the Golden Gate the other morning
surrounded by his idiotic worshipers and toadies and ballot-box
stuffers?  Well, if you please, THAT'S Mr. Paul Hathaway--the Honorable
Paul Hathaway, who washed his hands of me, my dear, at the beginning!"

"But really, Yerba, I thought that he looked and acted"--

"You thought of nothing at all, Milly," returned Yerba, with authority.
"I tell you he's a mass of conceit.  What else can you expect of a
Man--toadied and fawned upon to that extent?  It made me sick!  I could
have just shaken them!"

As if to emphasize her statement, she grasped one of the long willowy
branches of the enormous rose-bush where she stood, and shook it
lightly.  The action detached a few of the maturer blossoms, and sent
down a shower of faded pink petals on her dark hair and yellow dress.
"I can't bear conceit," she added.

"Oh, Yerba, just stand as you are!  I do wish the girls could see you.
You make the LOVELIEST picture!"

She certainly did look very pretty as she stood there--a few leaves
lodged in her hair, clinging to her dress, and suggesting by reflection
the color that her delicate satin skin would have resented in its own
texture.  But she turned impatiently away--perhaps not before she had
allowed this passing vision to impress the mind of her devoted
adherent--and said, "Come along, or that dreadful man will be out on
the veranda again."

"But, if you dislike him so, why did you accept the invitation to meet
him here at luncheon?" said the curious Milly.

"I didn't accept; the Mother Superior did for me, because he's the
Mayor of San Francisco visiting your uncle, and she's always anxious to
placate the powers that be.  And I thought he might have some
information that I could get out of him.  And it was better than being
in the convent all day.  And I thought I could stand HIM if you were
here."

Milly gratefully accepted this doubtful proof of affection by squeezing
her companion's arm.  "And you didn't get any information, dear?"

"Of course not!  The idiot knows only the old tradition of his
office--that I was a mysterious Trust left in Mayor Hammersley's hands.
He actually informed me that 'Buena' meant 'Good'; that it was likely
the name of the captain of some whaler, that put into San Francisco in
the early days, whose child I was, and that, if I chose to call myself
'Miss Good,' he would allow it, and get a bill passed in the
Legislature to legalize it.  Think of it, my dear! 'Miss Good,' like
one of Mrs. Barbauld's stories, or a moral governess in the 'Primary
Reader.'"

"'Miss Good,'" repeated Milly, innocently.  "Yes, you might put an e at
the end--G-double-o-d-e.  There are Goodes in Philadelphia. And then
you won't have to sacrifice that sweet pretty 'Yerba,' that's so
stylish and musical, for you'd still be 'Yerba Good.' But," she added,
as Yerba made an impatient gesture, "why do you worry yourself about
THAT?  You wouldn't keep your own name long, whatever it was.  An
heiress like you, dear,--lovely and accomplished,--would have the best
names as well as the best men in America to choose from."

"Now please don't repeat that idiot's words.  That's what HE says;
that's what they ALL say!" returned Yerba, pettishly.  "One would
really think it was necessary for me to get married to become anybody
at all, or have any standing whatever.  And, whatever you do, don't go
talking of me as if I were named after a vegetable. 'Yerba Buena' is
the name of an island in the bay just off San Francisco.  I'm named
after that."

"But I don't see the difference, dear.  The island was named after the
vine that grows on it."

"YOU don't see the difference?" said Yerba, darkly.  "Well, I do. But
what are you looking at?"

Her companion had caught her arm, and was gazing intently at the house.

"Yerba," she said quickly, "there's the Mayor, and uncle, and a strange
gentleman coming down the walk.  They're looking for us. And, as I
live, Yerb! the strange gentleman is that young senator, Mr. Hathaway!"

"Mr. Hathaway?  Nonsense!"

"Look for yourself."

Yerba glanced at the three gentlemen, who, a hundred yards distant,
were slowly advancing in the direction of the ceanothus-hedge, behind
which the girls had instinctively strayed during their conversation.

"What are you going to do?" said Milly, eagerly.  "They're coming
straight this way.  Shall we stay here and let them pass, or make a run
for the house?"

"No," said Yerba, to Milly's great surprise.  "That would look as if we
cared.  Besides, I don't know that Mr. Hathaway has come to see ME.
We'll stroll out and meet them accidentally."

Milly was still more astonished.  However, she said, "Wait a moment,
dear!" and, with the instinctive deftness of her sex, in three small
tugs and a gentle hitch, shook Yerba's gown into perfect folds, passed
her fingers across her forehead and over her ears, securing, however,
with a hairpin on their passage three of the rose petals where they had
fallen.  Then, discharging their faces of any previous expression,
these two charming hypocrites sallied out innocently into the walk.
Nothing could be more natural than their manner: if a criticism might
be ventured upon, it was that their elbows were slightly drawn inwards
and before them, leaving their hands gracefully advanced in the line of
their figures, an attitude accepted throughout the civilized world of
deportment as indicating fastidious refinement not unmingled with
permissible hauteur.

The three gentlemen lifted their hats at this ravishing apparition, and
halted.  The Mayor advanced with great politeness.

"I feared you didn't hear me call you, Miss Yerba, so we ventured to
seek you."  As the two girls exchanged almost infantile glances of
surprise, he continued: "Mr. Paul Hathaway has done us the honor of
seeking you here, as he did not find you at the convent.  You may have
forgotten that Mr. Hathaway is the third one of your trustees."

"And so inefficient and worthless that I fear he doesn't count," said
Paul, "but," raising his eyes to Yerba's, "I fancy that I have already
had the pleasure of seeing you, and, I fear, the mortification of
having disturbed you and your friends in the parlor of the Golden Gate
Hotel yesterday."

The two girls looked at each other with the same childlike surprise.
Yerba broke the silence by suddenly turning to Milly. "Certainly, you
remember how greatly interested we were in the conversation of a party
of gentlemen who were there when we came in.  I am afraid our foolish
prattle must have disturbed YOU.  I know that we were struck with the
intelligent and eloquent devotion of your friends."

"Oh, perfectly," chimed in the loyal but somewhat infelix Milly, "and
it was so kind and thoughtful of Mr. Hathaway to take them away as he
did."

"I felt the more embarrassed," continued Hathaway, smiling, but still
critically examining Yerba for an indication of something
characteristic, beyond this palpable conventionality, "as I
unfortunately must present my credentials from a gentleman as much of a
stranger as myself--Colonel Pendleton."

The trade-wind was evidently making itself felt even in this pastoral
retreat, for the two gentlemen appeared to shrink slightly within
themselves, and a chill seemed to have passed over the group.  The
Mayor coughed.  The avuncular Woods gazed abstractedly at a large
cactus.  Even Paul, prepared by previous experience, stopped short.

"Colonel Pendleton!  Oh, do tell me all about him!" flashed out Yerba,
suddenly, with clasped hands and eager girlish breath.

Paul cast a quick grateful glance at the girl.  Whether assumed or not,
her enthusiastic outburst was effective.  The Mayor looked uneasily at
Woods, and turned to Paul.

"Ah, yes!  You and he are original co-trustees.  I believe Pendleton is
in reduced circumstances.  Never quite got over that bank trouble."

"That is only a question of legislative investigation and relief," said
Paul lightly, yet with purposely vague official mystery of manner.
Then, turning quickly to Yerba, as if replying to the only real
question at issue, he continued pointedly, "I am sorry to say the
colonel's health is so poor that it keeps him quite a recluse. I have a
letter from him and a message for you."  His bright eyes added
plainly--"as soon as we can get rid of those people."

"Then you think that a bill"--began the Mayor, eagerly.

"I think, my dear sir," said Paul plaintively, "that I and my friends
have already tried the patience of these two young ladies quite enough
yesterday with politics and law-making.  I have to catch the
six-o'clock train to San Francisco this evening, and have already lost
the time I hoped to spend with Miss Yerba by missing her at the
convent.  Let me stroll on here, if you like, and if I venture to
monopolize the attention of this young lady for half an hour, you, my
dear Mr. Mayor, who have more frequent access to her, I know, will not
begrudge it to me."

He placed himself beside Yerba and Milly, and began an entertaining,
although, I fear, slightly exaggerated, account of his reception by the
Lady Superior, and her evident doubts of his identity with the trustee
mentioned in Pendleton's letter of introduction.  "I confess she
frightened me," he continued, "when she remarked that, according to my
statement, I could have been only eighteen years old when I became your
guardian, and as much in want of one as you were.  I think that only
her belief that Mr. Woods and the Mayor would detect me as an impostor
provoked her at last to tell me your whereabouts."

"But why DID they ever make you a trustee, for goodness' sake?" said
Milly, naively.  "Was there no one grown up at that time that they
could have called upon?"

"Those were the EARLY days of California," responded Paul, with great
gravity, although he was conscious that Yerba was regarding him
narrowly, "and I probably looked older and more intelligent than I
really was.  For, candidly," with the consciousness of Yerba's eyes
still upon him, "I remember very little about it.  I dare say I was
selected, as you kindly suggest, 'for goodness' sake.'"

"After all," said the volatile Milly, who seemed inclined, as
chaperone, to direct the conversation, "there was something pretty and
romantic about it.  You two poor young things taking care of each
other, for of course there were no women here in those days."

"Of course there WERE women here" interrupted Yerba, quickly, with a
half-meaning, half-interrogative glance at Paul that made him
instinctively uneasy.  "You later comers"--to Milly--"always seem to
think that there was nothing here before you!"  She paused, and then
added, with a naive mixture of reproach and coquetry that was as
charming as it was unexpected, "As to taking care of each other, Mr.
Hathaway very quickly got rid of me, I believe."

"But I left you in better hands, Miss Yerba; and let me thank you now,"
he added in a lower tone, "for recognizing it as you did a moment ago.
I'm glad that you instinctively liked Colonel Pendleton.  Had you known
him better, you would have seen how truthful that instinct was.  His
chief fault in the eyes of our worthy friends is that he reminds them
of a great deal they can't perpetuate and much they would like to
forget."  He checked himself abruptly.  "But here is your letter," he
resumed, drawing Colonel Pendleton's missive from his pocket, "perhaps
you would like to read it now, in case you have any message to return
by me.  Miss Woods and I will excuse you."

They had reached the end of the rose-alley, where a summer-house that
was in itself a rose-bower partly disclosed itself.  The other
gentlemen had lagged behind.  "I will amuse MYSELF, and console your
other guardian, dear," said the vivacious Milly, with a rapid exchange
of glances with Yerba, "until this horrid business is over.  Besides,"
she added with cheerful vagueness, "after so long a separation you must
have a great deal to say to each other."

Paul smiled as she rustled away, and Yerba, entering the summer-house,
sat down and opened the letter.  The young man remained leaning against
the rustic archway, occasionally glancing at her and at the moving
figures in the gardens.  He was conscious of an odd excitement which he
could trace to no particular cause.  It was true that he had been
annoyed at not finding the young girl at the convent, and at having to
justify himself to the Lady Superior for what he conceived to be an act
of gratuitous kindness; nor was he blind to the fact that his
persistence in following her was more an act of aggression against the
enemies of Pendleton than of concern for Yerba.  She was certainly
pretty, he could not remember her mother sufficiently to trace any
likeness, and he had never admired the mother's pronounced beauty.  She
had flashed out for an instant into what seemed originality and
feeling.  But it had passed, and she had asked no further questions in
regard to the colonel.

She had hurriedly skimmed through the letter, which seemed to be
composed of certain figures and accounts.  "I suppose it's all right,"
she said; "at least you can say so if he asks you.  It's only an
explanation why he has transferred my money from the bank to
Rothschild's agent years ago.  I don't see why it should interest me
NOW."

Paul made no doubt that it was the same transfer that had shipwrecked
the colonel's fortune and alienated his friends, and could not help
replying somewhat pointedly, "But I think it should, Miss Yerba.  I
don't know what the colonel explained to you--doubtless, not the whole
truth, for he is not a man to praise himself; but, the fact is, the
bank was in difficulties at the time of that transfer, and, to make it,
he sacrificed his personal fortune, and, I think, awakened some of that
ill-feeling you have just noticed."  He checked himself too late: he
had again lost not only his tact and self-control, but had nearly
betrayed himself. He was surprised that the girl's justifiable
ignorance should have irritated him.  Yet she had evidently not
noticed, or misunderstood it, for she said, with a certain precision
that was almost studied:--

"Yes, I suppose it would have been a terrible thing to him to have been
suspected of misappropriating a Trust confided to him by parties who
had already paid him the high compliment of confiding to his care a
secret and a fortune."

Paul glanced at her quickly with astonishment.  Was this ignorance, or
suspicion?  Her manner, however, suddenly changed, with the charming
capriciousness of youth and conscious beauty.  "He speaks of you in
this letter," she said, letting her dark eyes rest on him provokingly.

"That accounts for your lack of interest then," said Paul gayly,
relieved to turn a conversation fraught with so much danger.

"But he speaks very flatteringly," she went on.  "He seems to be
another one of your admirers.  I'm sure, Mr. Hathaway, after that scene
in the hotel parlor yesterday, YOU, at least, cannot complain of having
been misrepresented before ME.  To tell you the truth, I think I hated
you a little for it."

"You were quite right," returned Paul.  "I must have been insufferable!
And I admit that I was slightly piqued against YOU for the idolatries
showered upon you at the same moment by your friends."

Usually, when two young people have reached the point of confidingly
exchanging their first impressions of each other, some progress has
been made in first acquaintance.  But it did not strike Paul in that
way, and Yerba's next remark was discouraging.

"But I'm rather disappointed, for all that.  Colonel Pendleton tells me
you know nothing of my family or of the secret."

Paul was this time quite prepared, and withstood the girl's scrutiny
calmly.  "Do you think," he asked lightly, "that even HE knows?"

"Of course he does," she returned quickly.  "Do you suppose he would
have taken all that trouble you have just talked about if he didn't
know it?  And feared the consequences, perhaps?" she added, with a
slight return of her previous expressive manner.

Again Paul was puzzled and irritated, he knew not why.  But he only
said pleasantly, "I differ from you there.  I am afraid that such a
thing as fear never entered into Colonel Pendleton's calculations on
any subject.  I think he would act the same towards the highest and the
lowest, the powerful or the most weak."  As she glanced at him quickly
and mischievously, he added, "I am quite willing to believe that his
knowledge of you made his duty pleasanter."

He was again quite sincere, and his slight sympathy had that
irresistible quality of tone and look which made him so dangerous. For
he was struck with the pretty, soothed self-complacency that had shone
in her face since he had spoken of Pendleton's equal disinterestedness.
It seemed, too, as if what he had taken for passion or petulance in her
manner had been only a resistance to some continual aggression of
condition.  With that remainder held in check, a certain latent
nobility was apparent, as of her true self.  In this moment of pleased
abstraction she had drawn through the lattice-work of one of the
windows a spray of roses clinging to the vine, and with her graceful
head a little on one side, was softly caressing her cheek with it.  She
certainly was very pretty. From the crown of her dark little head to
the narrow rosetted slippers that had been idly tapping the ground, but
now seemed to press it more proudly, with arched insteps and small
ankles, she was pleasant to look upon.

"But you surely have something else to think about, Miss Yerba?" said
the young man, with conviction.  "In a few months you will be of age,
and rid of those dreadfully stupid guardians; with your"--

The loosened rose-spray flew from her hand out of the window as she
made a gesture, half real, half assumed, of imploring supplication.
"Oh, please, Mr. Hathaway, for Heaven's sake don't YOU begin too! You
are going to say that, with my wealth, my accomplishments, my beauty,
my friends, what more can I want?  What do I care about a secret that
can neither add to them nor take them away?  Yes, you were!  It's the
regular thing to say--everybody says it.  Why, I should have thought
'the youngest senator' could afford to have been more original."

"I plead guilty to ALL the weaknesses of humanity," said Paul, warmly,
again beginning to believe that he had been most unjust to her
independence.

"Well, I forgive you, because you have forgotten to say that, if I
don't like the name of Yerba Buena, I could SO easily change that too."

"But you DO like it," said Paul, touched with this first hearing of her
name in her own musical accents, "or would like it if you heard
yourself pronounce it."  It suddenly recurred to him, with a strange
thrill of pleasure, that he himself had given it to her. It was as if
he had created some musical instrument to which she had just given
voice.  In his enthusiasm he had thrown himself on the bench beside her
in an attitude that, I fear, was not as dignified as became his elderly
office.

"But you don't think that is my NAME," said the girl, quickly.

"I beg your pardon?" said Paul, hesitatingly.

"You don't think that anybody would have been so utterly idiotic as to
call me after a ground-vine--a vegetable?" she continued petulantly.

"Eh?" stammered Paul.

"A name that could be so easily translated," she went on, half
scornfully, "and when translated, was no possible title for anybody?
Think of it--Miss Good Herb!  It is too ridiculous for anything."

Paul was not usually wanting in self-possession in an emergency, or in
skill to meet attack.  But he was so convinced of the truth of the
girl's accusation, and now recalled so vividly his own consternation on
hearing the result of his youthful and romantic sponsorship for the
first time from Pendleton, that he was struck with confusion.

"But what do you suppose it was intended for?" he said at last,
vaguely.  "It was certainly 'Yerba Buena' in the Trust.  At least, I
suppose so," he corrected himself hurriedly.

"It is only a supposition," she said quietly, "for you know it cannot
be proved.  The Trust was never recorded, and the only copy could not
be found among Mr. Hammersley's papers.  It is only part of the name,
of which the first is lost."

"Part of the name?" repeated Paul, uneasily.

"Part of it.  It is a corruption of de la Yerba Buena,--of the Yerba
Buena,--and refers to the island of Yerba Buena in the bay, and not to
the plant.  That island was part of the property of my family--the
Arguellos--you will find it so recorded in the Spanish grants.  My name
is Arguello de la Yerba Buena."

It is impossible to describe the timid yet triumphant, the
half-appealing yet complacent, conviction of the girl's utterance.  A
moment before, Paul would have believed it impossible for him to have
kept his gravity and his respect for his companion under this egregious
illusion.  But he kept both.  For a sudden conviction that she
suspected the truth, and had taken this audacious and original plan of
crushing it, overpowered all other sense.  The Arguellos, it flashed
upon him, were an old Spanish family, former owners of Yerba Buena
Island, who had in the last years become extinct.  There had been a
story that one of them had eloped with an American ship captain's wife
at Monterey.  The legendary history of early Spanish California was
filled with more remarkable incidents, corroborated with little
difficulty from Spanish authorities, who, it was alleged, lent
themselves readily to any fabrication or forgery.  There was no racial
pride: on the contrary, they had shown an eager alacrity to ally
themselves with their conquerors.  The friends of the Arguellos would
be proud to recognize and remember in the American heiress the
descendant of their countrymen.  All this passed rapidly through his
mind after the first moment of surprise; all this must have been the
deliberate reasoning of this girl of seventeen, whose dark eyes were
bent upon him.  Whether she was seeking corroboration or complicity he
could not tell.

"Have you found this out yourself?" he asked, after a pause.

"Yes.  One of my friends at the convent was Josita Castro; she knew all
the history of the Arguellos.  She is perfectly satisfied."

For an instant Paul wondered if it was a joint conception of the two
schoolgirls.  But, on reflection, he was persuaded that Yerba would
commit herself to no accomplice--of her own sex.  She might have
dominated the girl, and would make her a firm partisan, while the girl
would be convinced of it herself, and believe herself a free agent.  He
had had such experience with men himself.

"But why have you not spoken of it before--and to Colonel Pendleton?"

"He did not choose to tell ME," said Yerba, with feminine dexterity.
"I have preferred to keep it myself a secret till I am of age."

"When Colonel Pendleton and some of the other trustees have no right to
say anything," thought Paul quickly.  She had evidently trusted him.
Yet, fascinated as he had been by her audacity, he did not know whether
to be pleased, or the reverse.  He would have preferred to be placed on
an equal footing with Josita Castro.  She anticipated his thoughts by
saying, with half-raised eyelids:--

"What do YOU think of it?"

"It seems to be so natural and obvious an explanation of the mystery
that I only wonder it was not thought of before," said Paul, with that
perfect sincerity that made his sympathy so effective.

"You see,"--still under her pretty eyelids, and the tender promise of a
smile parting her little mouth,--"I'm believing that you tell the truth
when you say you don't know anything about it."

It was a desperate moment with Paul, but his sympathetic instincts, and
possibly his luck, triumphed.  His momentary hesitation easily
simulated the caution of a conscientious man; his knit eyebrows and
bright eyes, lowered in an effort of memory, did the rest.  "I remember
it all so indistinctly," he said, with literal truthfulness; "there was
a veiled lady present, tall and dark, to whom Mayor Hammersley and the
colonel showed a singular, and, it struck me, as an almost
superstitious, respect.  I remember now, distinctly, I was impressed
with the reverential way they both accompanied her to the door at the
end of the interview."  He raised his eyes slightly; the young girl's
red lips were parted; that illumination of the skin, which was her
nearest approach to color, had quite transfigured her face.  He felt,
suddenly, that she believed it, yet he had no sense of remorse.  He
half believed it himself; at least, he remembered the nobility of the
mother's self-renunciation and its effect upon the two men.  Why should
not the daughter preserve this truthful picture of her mother's
momentary exaltation?  Which was the most truthful--that, or the
degrading facts?  "You speak of a secret," he added.  "I can remember
little more than that the Mayor asked me to forget from that moment the
whole occurrence.  I did not know at the time how completely I should
fulfill his request.  You must remember, Miss Yerba, as your Lady
Superior has, that I was absurdly young at the time.  I don't know but
that I may have thought, in my youthful inexperience, that this sort of
thing was of common occurrence. And then, I had my own future to
make--and youth is brutally selfish.  I was quite friendless and
unknown when I left San Francisco for the mines, at the time you
entered the convent as Yerba Buena."

She smiled, and made a slight impulsive gesture, as if she would have
drawn nearer to him, but checked herself, still smiling, and without
embarrassment.  It may have been a movement of youthful camaraderie,
and that occasional maternal rather than sisterly instinct which
sometimes influences a young girl's masculine friendship, and elevates
the favored friend to the plane of the doll she has outgrown.  As he
turned towards her, however, she rose, shook out her yellow dress, and
said with pretty petulance:--

"Then you must go so soon--and this your first and last visit as my
guardian?"

"No one could regret that more than I," looking at her with undefined
meaning.

"Yes," she said, with a tantalizing coquetry that might have suggested
an underlying seriousness.  "I think you HAVE lost a good deal.
Perhaps, so have I.  We might have been good friends in all these
years.  But that is past."

"Why?  Surely, I hope, my shortcomings with Miss Yerba Buena will not
be remembered by Miss Arguello?" sail Paul, earnestly.

"Ah!  SHE may be a very different person."

"I hope not," said the young man, warmly.  "But HOW different?"

"Well, she may not put herself in the way of receiving such point-blank
compliments as that," said the young girl, demurely.

"Not from her guardian?"

"She will have no guardian then."  She said this gravely, but almost at
the same moment turned and sat down again, throwing her linked hands
over her knee, and looked at him mischievously.  "You see what you have
lost, sir."

"I see," said Paul, but with all the gravity that she had dropped.

"No; but you don't see all.  I had no brother--no friend.  You might
have been both.  You might have made me what you liked.  You might have
educated me far better than these teachers, or, at least given me some
pride in my studies.  There were so many things I wanted to know that
they couldn't teach me; so many times I wanted advice from some one
that I could trust.  Colonel Pendleton was very good to me when he
came; he always treated me like a princess even when I wore short
frocks.  It was his manner that first made me think he knew my family;
but I never felt as if I could tell him anything, and I don't think,
with all his chivalrous respect, he ever understood me.  As to the
others--the Mayors--well, you may judge from Mr. Henderson.  It is a
wonder that I did not run away or do something desperate.  Now, are you
not a LITTLE sorry?"

Her voice, which had as many capricious changes as her manner, had been
alternately coquettish, petulant, and serious, had now become playful
again.  But, like the rest of her sex, she was evidently more alert to
her surroundings at such a moment than her companion, for before he
could make any reply, she said, without apparently looking, "But there
is a deputation coming for you, Mr. Hathaway. You see, the case is
hopeless.  You never would be able to give to one what is claimed by
the many."

Paul glanced down the rose-alley, and saw that the deputation in
question was composed of the Mayor, Mr. Woods, a thin, delicate-looking
woman,--evidently Mrs. Woods,--and Milly.  The latter managed to reach
the summer-house first, with apparently youthful alacrity, but really
to exchange, in a single glance, some mysterious feminine signal with
Yerba.  Then she said with breathless infelicity:--

"Before you two get bored with each other now, I must tell you there's
a chance of you having more time.  Aunty has promised to send off a
note excusing you to the Reverend Mother, if she can persuade Mr.
Hathaway to stay over to-night.  But here they are. [To Yerba]  Aunty
is most anxious, and won't hear of his going."

Indeed, it seemed as if Mrs. Woods was, after a refined fashion, most
concerned that a distinguished visitor like Mr. Hathaway should have to
use her house as a mere accidental meeting-place with his ward, without
deigning to accept her hospitality.  She was reinforced by Mr. Woods,
who enunciated the same idea with more masculine vigor; and by the
Mayor, who expressed his conviction that a slight of this kind to
Rosario would be felt in the Santa Clara valley.  "After dinner, my
dear Hathaway," concluded Mr. Woods, "a few of our neighbors may drop
in, who would be glad to shake you by the hand--no formal meeting, my
boy--but, hang it! THEY expect it."

Paul looked around for Yerba.  There was really no reason why he
shouldn't accept, although an hour ago the idea had never entered his
mind.  Yet, if he did, he would like the girl to know that it was for
HER sake.  Unfortunately, far from exhibiting any concern in the
matter, she seemed to be preoccupied with Milly, and only the charming
back of her head was visible behind Mrs. Woods.  He accepted, however,
with a hesitation that took some of the graciousness from his yielding,
and a sense that he was giving a strange importance to a trivial
circumstance.

The necessity of attaching himself to his hostess, and making a more
extended tour of the grounds, for a while diverted him from an uneasy
consideration of his past interview.  Mrs. Woods had known Yerba
through the school friendship of Milly, and, as far as the religious
rules of the convent would allow, had always been delighted to show her
any hospitality.  She was a beautiful girl--did not Mr. Hathaway think
so?--and a girl of great character.  It was a pity, of course, that she
had never known a mother's care, and that the present routine of a
boarding-school had usurped the tender influences of home.  She
believed, too, that the singular rotation of guardianship had left the
girl practically without a counseling friend to rely upon, except,
perhaps, Colonel Pendleton; and while she, Mrs. Woods, did not for a
moment doubt that the colonel might be a good friend and a pleasant
companion of MEN, really he, Mr. Hathaway, must admit that, with his
reputation and habits, he was hardly a fit associate for a young lady.
Indeed, Mr. Woods would have never allowed Milly to invite Yerba here
if Colonel Pendleton was to have been her escort.  Of course, the poor
girl could not choose her own guardian, but Mr. Woods said HE had a
right to choose who should be his niece's company.  Perhaps Mr. Woods
was prejudiced,--most men were,--yet surely Mr. Hathaway, although a
loyal friend of Colonel Pendleton's, must admit that when it was an
open scandal that the colonel had fought a duel about a notoriously
common woman, and even blasphemously defended her before a party of
gentlemen, it was high time, as Mr. Woods said, that he should be
remanded to their company exclusively.  No; Mrs. Woods could not admit
that this was owing to the injustice of her own sex!  Men are really
the ones who make the fuss over those things, just as they, as Mr.
Hathaway well knew, made the laws! No; it was a great pity, as she and
her husband had just agreed, that Mr. Hathaway, of all the guardians,
could not have been always the help and counselor--in fact, the elder
brother--of poor Yerba! Paul was conscious that he winced slightly,
consistently and conscientiously, at the recollection of certain
passages of his youth; inconsistently and meanly, at this suggestion of
a joint relationship with Yerba's mother.

"I think, too," continued Mrs. Woods, "she has worried foolishly about
this ridiculous mystery of her parentage--as if it could make the
slightest difference to a girl with a quarter of a million, or as if
that didn't show quite conclusively that she WAS somebody!"

"Certainly," said Paul, quickly, with a relief that he nevertheless
felt was ridiculous.

"And, of course, I dare say it will all come out when she is of age.  I
suppose you know if any of the family are still living?"

"I really do not."

"I beg your pardon," said Mrs. Woods, with a smile.  "I forgot it's a
profound secret until then.  But here we are at the house; I see the
girls have walked over to our neighbors'.  Perhaps you would like to
have a few moments to yourself before you dress for dinner, and your
portmanteau, which has been sent for, comes from your hotel.  You must
be tired of seeing so many people."

Paul was glad to accept any excuse for being alone, and, thanking his
hostess, followed a servant to his room--a low-ceilinged but
luxuriously furnished apartment on the first floor.  Here he threw
himself on a cushioned lounge that filled the angle of the deep
embrasure--the thickness of the old adobe walls--that formed a part of
the wooden-latticed window.  A Cape jessamine climbing beside it filled
the room with its subtle, intoxicating perfume.  It was so strong, and
he felt himself so irresistibly overpowered and impelled towards a
merely idle reverie, that, in order to think more clearly and shut out
some strange and unreasoning enthrallment of his senses, he rose and
sharply closed the window.  Then he sat down and reflected.

What was he doing here? and what was the meaning of all this?  He had
come simply to fulfill a duty to his past, and please a helpless and
misunderstood old acquaintance.  He had performed that duty.  But he
had incidentally learned a certain fact that might be important to this
friend, and clearly his duty was simply to go back and report it.  He
would gain nothing more in the way of corroboration of it by staying
now, if further corroboration were required.  Colonel Pendleton had
already been uselessly and absurdly perplexed about the possible
discovery of the girl's parentage, and its effect upon her fortunes and
herself.  She had just settled that of her own accord, and, without
committing herself or others, had suggested a really sensible plan by
which all trouble would be avoided in future.  That was the
common-sense way of looking at it.  He would lay the plan before the
colonel, have him judge of its expediency and its ethics--and even the
question whether she already knew the real truth, or was self-deceived.
That done, he would return to his own affairs in Sacramento.  There was
nothing difficult in this, or that need worry him, only he could have
done it just as well an hour ago.

He opened the window again.  The scent of the jessamine came in as
before, but mingled with the cooler breath of the roses.  There was
nothing intoxicating or unreal in it now; rather it seemed a gentle
aromatic stimulant--of thought.  Long shadows of unseen poplars beyond
barred the garden lanes and alleys with bands of black and yellow.  A
slanting pencil of sunshine through the trees was for a moment focussed
on a bed of waxen callas before a hedge of ceanothus, and struck into
dazzling relief the cold white chalices of the flowers and the vivid
shining green of their background. Presently it slid beyond to a tiny
fountain, before invisible, and wrought a blinding miracle out of its
flashing and leaping spray. Yet even as he gazed the fountain seemed to
vanish slowly, the sunbeam slipped on, and beyond it moved the shimmer
of white and yellow dresses.  It was Yerba and Milly returning to the
house. Well, he would not interrupt his reflections by idly watching
them; he would, probably, see a great deal of Yerba that evening, and
by that time he would have come to some conclusion in regard to her.

But he had not taken into consideration her voice, which, always
musical in its Southern intonation and quite audible in the quiet
garden, struck him now as being full of joyous sweetness.  Well, she
was certainly very happy--or very thoughtless.  She was actually
romping with Milly, and was now evidently being chased down the
rose-alley by that volatile young woman.  Then these swift Camillas
apparently neared the house, there was the rapid rustle of skirts, the
skurrying of little feet on the veranda, a stumble, a mouse-like shriek
from Milly, and HER voice, exhausted, dying, happy, broken with
half-hushed laughter, rose to him on the breath of the jessamine and
rose.

Surely she WAS a child, and, if a child, how he had misjudged her! What
if all that he had believed was mature deliberation was only the
innocent imaginings of a romantic girl, all that he had taken seriously
only a school-girl's foolish dream!  Instead of combating it, instead
of reasoning with her, instead of trying to interest her in other
things, he had even helped on her illusions.  He had treated her as if
the taint of her mother's worldliness and knowledge of evil was in her
pure young flesh.  He had recognized her as the daughter of an
adventuress, and not as his ward, appealing to his chivalry through her
very ignorance--it might be her very childish vanity.  He had brought
to a question of tender and pathetic interest only his selfish opinion
of the world and the weaknesses of mankind.  The blood came to his
cheeks--with all his experienced self-control, he had not lost the
youthful trick of blushing--and he turned away from the window as if it
had breathed a reproach.

But ought he have even contented himself with destroying her
illusions--ought he not have gone farther and told her the whole truth?
Ought he not first have won her confidence--he remembered bitterly,
now, how she had intimated that she had no one to confide in--and,
after revealing her mother's history, have still pledged himself to
keep the secret from all others, and assisted her in her plan?  It
would not have altered the state of affairs, except so far as she was
concerned; they could have combined together; his ready wit would have
helped him; and his sympathy would have sustained her; but--

How and in what way could he have told her?  Leaving out the delicate
and difficult periphrase by which her mother's shame would have to be
explained to an innocent school-girl--what right could he have assumed
to tell it?  As the guardian who had never counseled or protected her?
As an acquaintance of hardly an hour ago?  Who would have such a right?
A lover--on whose lips it would only seem a tacit appeal to her
gratitude or her fears, and whom no sensitive girl could accept
thereafter?  No.  A husband?  Yes!  He remembered, with a sudden start,
what Pendleton had said to him. Good Heavens!  Had Pendleton that idea
in his mind?  And yet--it seemed the only solution.

A knock at his door was followed by the appearance of Mr. Woods. Mr.
Hathaway's portmanteau had come, and Mrs. Woods had sent a message,
saying that in view of the limited time that Mr. Hathaway would have
with his ward, Mrs. Woods would forego her right to keep him at her
side at dinner, and yield her place to Yerba.  Paul thanked him with a
grave inward smile.  What if he made his dramatic disclosure to her
confidentially over the soup and fish? Yet, in his constantly recurring
conviction of the girl's independence, he made no doubt she would have
met his brutality with unflinching pride and self-possession.  He began
to dress slowly, at times almost forgetting himself in a new kind of
pleasant apathy, which he attributed to the odor of the flowers, and
the softer hush of twilight that had come on with the dying away of the
trade winds, and the restful spice of the bay-trees near his window.
He presently found himself not so much thinking of Yerba as of SEEING
her.  A picture of her in the summer-house caressing her cheek with the
roses seemed to stand out from the shadows of the blank wall opposite
him.  When he passed into the dressing-room beyond, it was not his own
face he saw in the glass, but hers.  It was with a start, as if he had
heard HER voice, that he found upon his dressing-table a small vase
containing a flower for his coat, with the penciled words on a card in
a school-girl's hand, "From Yerba, with thanks for staying."  It must
have been placed there by a servant while he was musing at the window.

Half a dozen people were already in the drawing-room when Paul
descended.  It appeared that Mr. Woods had invited certain of his
neighbors--among them a Judge Baker and his wife, and Don Caesar
Briones, of the adjacent Rancho of Los Pajaros, and his sister, the
Dona Anna.  Milly and Yerba had not yet appeared.  Don Caesar, a young
man of a toreador build, roundly bland in face and murky in eye, seemed
to notice their absence, and kept his glances towards the door, while
Paul engaged in conversation with Dona Anna--if that word could convey
an impression of a conventionality which that good-humored young lady
converted into an animated flirtation at the second sentence with a
single glance and two shakes of her fan.  And then Milly fluttered
in--a vision of school-girl freshness and white tulle, and a moment
later--with a pause of expectation--a tall, graceful figure, that at
first Paul scarcely recognized.

It is a popular conceit of our sex that we are superior to any effect
of feminine adornment, and that a pretty girl is equally pretty in the
simplest frock.  Yet there was not a man in the room who did not
believe that Yerba in her present attire was not only far prettier than
before, but that she indicated a new and more delicate form of beauty.
It was not the mere revelation of contour and color of an ordinary
decollete dress, it was a perfect presentment of pure symmetry and
carriage.  In this black grenadine dress, trimmed with jet, not only
was the delicate satin sheen of her skin made clearer by contrast, but
she looked every inch her full height, with an ideal exaltation of
breeding and culture.  She wore no jewelry except a small necklace of
pearls--so small it might have been a child's--that fitted her slender
throat so tightly that it could scarcely be told from the flesh that it
clasped.  Paul did not know that it was the gift of the mother to the
child that she had forsworn only a few weeks before she parted from her
forever; but he had a vague feeling that, in that sable dress that
seemed like mourning, she walked at the funeral of her mother's past.
A few white flowers in her corsage, the companions of the solitary one
in his button-hole, were the only relief.

Their eyes met for a single moment, the look of admiration in Paul's
being answered by the naive consciousness in Yerba's of a woman looking
her best; but the next moment she appeared preoccupied with the others,
and the eager advances of Don Caesar.

"Your brother seems to admire Miss Yerba," said Paul.

"Ah, ye--es," returned Dona Anna.  "And you?"

"Oh!" said Paul, gayly, "I?  I am her guardian--with me it is simple
egotism, you know."

"Ah!" returned the arch Dona Anna, "you are then already SO certain of
her?  Good!  I shall warn him."

A precaution that did seem necessary; as later, when Paul, at a signal
from his hostess, offered his arm to Yerba, the young Spaniard regarded
him with a look of startled curiosity.

"I thank you for selecting me to wear your colors," said Paul with a
glance at the flowers in her corsage, as they sat at table, "and I
think I deserve them, since, but for you, I should have been on my way
to San Francisco at this moment.  Shall I have an opportunity of
talking to you a few minutes later in the evening?" he added, in a
lower tone.

"Why not now?" returned Yerba, mischievously.  "We are set here
expressly for that purpose."

"Surely not to talk of our own business--I should say, of our FAMILY
affairs," said Paul, looking at her with equal playfulness; "though I
believe your friend Don Caesar, opposite, would be more pleased if he
were sure that was all we did."

"And you think his sister would share in that pleasure?" retorted
Yerba.  "I warn you, Mr. Hathaway, that you have been quite justifying
the Reverend Mother's doubts about your venerable pretensions.
Everybody is staring at you now."

Paul looked up mechanically.  It was true.  Whether from some occult
sympathy, from a human tendency to admire obvious fitness and symmetry,
or the innocent love with which the world regards innocent lovers, they
were all observing Yerba and himself with undisguised attention.  A
good talker, he quickly led the conversation to other topics.  It was
then that he discovered that Yerba was not only accomplished, but that
this convent-bred girl had acquired a singular breadth of knowledge
apart from the ordinary routine of the school curriculum.  She spoke
and thought with independent perceptions and clearness, yet without the
tactlessness and masculine abruptness that is apt to detract from
feminine originality of reflection.  By some tacit understanding that
had the charm of mutual confidence, they both exerted themselves to
please the company rather than each other, and Paul, in the interchange
of sallies with Dona Anna, had a certain pleasure in hearing Yerba
converse in Spanish with Don Caesar.  But in a few moments he observed,
with some uneasiness, that they were talking of the old Spanish
occupation, and presently of the old Spanish families.  Would she
prematurely expose an ignorance that might be hereafter remembered
against her, or invite some dreadful genealogical reminiscence that
would destroy her hopes and raze her Spanish castles?  Or was she
simply collecting information?  He admired the dexterity with which,
without committing herself, she made Don Caesar openly and even
confidentially communicative.  And yet he was on thorns; at times it
seemed as if he himself were playing a part in this imposture of
Yerba's.  He was aware that his wandering attention was noticed by the
quick-witted Dona Anna, when he regained his self-possession by what
appeared to be a happy diversion.  It was the voice of Mrs. Judge Baker
calling across the table to Yerba.  By one of the peculiar accidents of
general conversation, it was the one apparently trivial remark that in
a pause challenged the ears of all.

"We were admiring your necklace, Miss Yerba."

Every eye was turned upon the slender throat of the handsome girl. The
excuse was so natural.

Yerba put her hand to her neck with a smile.  "You are joking, Mrs.
Baker.  I know it is ridiculously small, but it is a child's necklace,
and I wear it because it was a gift from my mother."

Paul's heart sank again with consternation.  It was the first time he
had heard the girl distinctly connect herself with her actual mother,
and for an instant he felt as startled as if the forgotten Outcast
herself had returned and taken a seat at the board.

"I told you it couldn't be so?" remarked Mrs. Baker, to her husband.

Everybody naturally looked inquiringly upon the couple, and Mrs. Baker
explained with a smile: "Bob thinks he's seen it before; men are so
obstinate."

"Pardon me, Miss Yerba," said the Judge, blandly, "would you mind
showing it to me, if it is not too much trouble?"

"Not at all," said Yerba, smiling, and detaching the circlet from her
neck.  "I'm afraid you'll find it rather old-fashioned."

"That's just what I hope to find it," said Judge Baker, with a
triumphant glance at his wife.  "It was eight years ago when I saw it
in Tucker's jewelry shop.  I wanted to buy it for my little Minnie, but
as the price was steep I hesitated, and when I did make up my mind he
had disposed of it to another customer.  Yes," he added, examining the
necklace which Yerba had handed to him.  "I am certain it is the same:
it was unique, like this.  Odd, isn't it?"

Everybody said it WAS odd, and looked upon the occurrence with that
unreasoning satisfaction with which average humanity receives the most
trivial and unmeaning coincidences.  It was left to Don Caesar to give
it a gallant application.

"I have not-a the pleasure of knowing-a the Miss Minnie, but the
jewelry, when she arrives, to the throat-a of Miss Yerba, she has not
lost the value--the beauty--the charm."

"No," said Woods, cheerily.  "The fact is, Baker, you were too slow.
Miss Yerba's folks gobbled up the necklace while you were thinking.
You were a new-comer.  Old 'forty-niners' did not hesitate over a thing
they wanted."

"You never knew who was your successful rival, eh?" said Dona Anna,
turning to Judge Baker with a curious glance at Paul's pale face in
passing.

"No," said Baker, "but"--he stopped with a hesitating laugh and some
little confusion.  "No, I've mixed it up with something else. It's so
long ago.  I never knew, or if I did I've forgotten.  But the necklace
I remember."  He handed it back to Yerba with a bow, and the incident
ended.

Paul had not looked at Yerba during this conversation, an unreasoning
instinct that he might confuse her, an equally unreasoning dread that
he might see her confused by others, possessing him.  And when he did
glance at her calm, untroubled face, that seemed only a little
surprised at his own singular coldness, he was by no means relieved.
He was only convinced of one thing.  In the last five minutes he had
settled upon the irrevocable determination that his present relations
with the girl could exist no longer.  He must either tell her
everything, or see her no more.  There was no middle course.  She was
on the brink of an exposure at any moment, either through her ignorance
or her unhappy pretension.  In his intolerable position, he was equally
unable to contemplate her peril, accept her defense, or himself defend
her.

As if, with some feminine instinct, she had attributed his silence to
some jealousy of Don Caesar's attentions, she more than once turned
from the Spaniard to Paul with an assuring smile.  In his anxiety, he
half accepted the rather humiliating suggestion, and managed to say to
her, in a lower tone:--

"On this last visit of your American guardian, one would think, you
need not already anticipate your Spanish relations."

He was thrilled with the mischievous yet faintly tender pleasure that
sparkled in her eyes as she said,--

"You forget it is my American guardian's FIRST visit, as well as his
last."

"And as your guardian," he went on, with half-veiled seriousness, "I
protest against your allowing your treasures, the property of the
Trust," he gazed directly into her beautiful eyes, "being handled and
commented upon by everybody."

When the ladies had left the table, he was, for a moment, relieved. But
only for a moment.  Judge Baker drew his chair beside Paul's, and,
taking his cigar from his lips, said, with a perfunctory laugh:--

"I say, Hathaway, I pulled up just in time to save myself from making
an awful speech, just now, to your ward."

Paul looked at him with cold curiosity.

"Yes.  Gad!  Do you know WHO was my rival in that necklace transaction?"

"No," said Paul, with frigid carelessness.

"Why, Kate Howard!  Fact, sir.  She bought it right under my nose--and
overbid me, too."

Paul did not lose his self-possession.  Thanks to the fact that Yerba
was not present, and that Don Caesar, who had overheard the speech,
moved forward with a suggestive and unpleasant smile, his agitation
congealed into a coldly placid fury.

"And I suppose," he returned, with perfect calmness, "that, after the
usual habit of this class of women, the necklace very soon found its
way back, through the pawnbroker, to the jeweler again. It's a common
fate."

"Yes, of course," said Judge Baker, cheerfully.  "You're quite right.
That's undoubtedly the solution of it.  But," with a laugh, "I had a
narrow escape from saying something--eh?"

"A very narrow escape from an apparently gratuitous insult," said Paul,
gravely, but fixing his eyes, now more luminous than ever with anger,
not on the speakers but on the face of Don Caesar, who was standing at
his side.  "You were about to say,"--

"Eh--oh--ah! this Kate Howard?  So!  I have heard of her--yees! And
Miss Yerba--ah--she is of my country--I think.  Yes--we shall claim
her--of a truth--yes."

"Your countrymen, I believe, are in the habit of making claims that are
more often founded on profit than verity," said Paul, with smileless
and insulting deliberation.  He knew perfectly what he was saying, and
the result he expected.  Only twenty-four hours before he had smiled at
Pendleton's idea of averting scandal and discovery by fighting, yet he
was endeavoring to pick a quarrel with a man, merely on suspicion, for
the same purpose, and he saw nothing strange in it.  A vague idea, too,
that this would irrevocably confirm him in opposition to Yerba's
illusions probably determined him.

But Don Caesar, albeit smiling lividly, did not seem inclined to pick
up the gauntlet, and Woods interfered hastily.  "Don Caesar means that
your ward has some idea herself that she is of Spanish origin--at
least, Milly says so.  But of course, as one of the oldest trustees,
YOU know the facts."

In another moment Paul would have committed himself.  "I think we'll
leave Miss Yerba out of the question," he said, coldly.  "My remark was
a general one, although, of course, I am responsible for any personal
application of it."

"Spoken like a politician, Hathaway," said Judge Baker, with an
effusive enthusiasm, which he hoped would atone for the alarming
results of his infelicitous speech.  "That's right, gentlemen!  You
can't get the facts from him before he is ready to give them.  Keep
your secret, Mr. Hathaway, the court is with you."

Nevertheless, as they passed out of the room to join the ladies, the
Mayor lingered a little behind with Woods.  "It's easy to see the
influence of that Pendleton on our young friend," he said,
significantly.  "Somebody ought to tell him that it's played out down
here--as Pendleton is.  It's quite enough to ruin his career."

Paul was too observant not to notice this, but it brought him no sense
of remorse; and his youthful belief in himself and his power kept him
from concern.  He felt as if he had done something, if only to show Don
Caesar that the girl's weakness or ignorance could not be traded upon
with impunity.  But he was still undecided as to the course he should
pursue.  But he should determine that to-night.  At present there
seemed no chance of talking to her alone--she was unconcernedly
conversing with Milly and Mrs. Woods, and already the visitors who had
been invited to this hurried levee in his honor were arriving.  In view
of his late indiscretion, he nervously exerted his fullest powers, and
in a very few minutes was surrounded by a breathless and admiring group
of worshipers.  A ludicrous resemblance to the scene in the Golden Gate
Hotel passed through his mind; he involuntarily turned his eyes to seek
Yerba in the half-fear, half-expectation of meeting her mischievous
smile. Their glances met; to his surprise hers was smileless, and
instantly withdrawn, but not until he had been thrilled by an
unconscious prepossession in its luminous depths that he scarcely dared
to dwell upon.  What mattered now this passage with Don Caesar or the
plaudits of his friends?  SHE was proud of him!

Yet, after that glance, she was shy, preoccupying herself with Milly,
or even listening sweetly to Judge Baker's somewhat practical and
unromantic reminiscences of the deprivations and the hardships of
California early days, as if to condone his past infelicity.  She was
pleasantly unaffected with Don Caesar, although she managed to draw
Dona Anna into the conversation; she was unconventional, Paul fancied,
to all but himself.  Once or twice, when he had artfully drawn her
towards the open French window that led to the moonlit garden and
shadowed veranda, she had managed to link Milly's arm in her own, and
he was confident that a suggestion to stroll with him in the open air
would be followed by her invitation to Milly to accompany them.
Disappointed and mortified as he was, he found some solace in her
manner, which he still believed suggested the hope that she might be
made accessible to his persuasions.  Persuasions to what?  He did not
know.

The last guest had departed; he lingered on the veranda with a cigar,
begging his host and hostess not to trouble themselves to keep him
company.  Milly and Yerba had retired to the former's boudoir, but, as
they had not yet formally bade him good night, there was a chance of
their returning.  He still stayed on in this hope for half an hour, and
then, accepting Yerba's continued absence as a tacit refusal of his
request, he turned abruptly away. But as he glanced around the garden
before reentering the house, he was struck by a singular
circumstance--a white patch, like a forgotten shawl, which he had
observed on the distant ceanothus hedge, and which had at first
thrilled him with expectation, had certainly CHANGED ITS POSITION.
Before, it seemed to be near the summer-house; now it was, undoubtedly,
farther away.  Could they, or SHE alone, have slipped from the house
and be awaiting him there?  With a muttered exclamation at his
stupidity he stepped hastily from the veranda and walked towards it.
But he had scarcely proceeded a dozen yards before it disappeared.  He
reached the summer-house--it was empty; he followed the line of
hedge--no one was there.  It could not have been her, or she would have
waited, unless he were the victim of a practical joke.  He turned
impatiently back to the house, reentered the drawing-room by the French
window, and was crossing the half-lit apartment, when he heard a slight
rustle in the shadow of the window.  He looked around quickly, and saw
that it was Yerba, in a white, loose gown, for which she had already
exchanged her black evening dress, leaning back composedly on the sofa,
her hands clasped behind her shapely head.

"I am waiting for Milly," she said, with a faint smile on her lips. He
fancied, in the moonlight that streamed upon her, that her beautiful
face was pale.  "She has gone to the other wing to see one of the
servants who is ill.  We thought you were on the veranda smoking and I
should have company, until I saw you start off, and rush up and down
the hedge like mad."

Paul felt that he was losing his self-possession, and becoming nervous
in her presence.  "I thought it was YOU," he stammered.

"Me!  Out in the garden at this hour, alone, and in the broad
moonlight?  What are you thinking of, Mr. Hathaway?  Do you know
anything of convent rules, or is that your idea of your ward's
education?"

He fancied that, though she smiled faintly, her voice was as tremulous
as his own.

"I want to speak with you," he said, with awkward directness.  "I even
thought of asking you to stroll with me in the garden."

"Why not talk here?" she returned, changing her position, pointing to
the other end of the sofa, and drawing the whole overflow of her skirt
to one side.  "It is not so very late, and Milly will return in a few
moments."

Her face was in shadow now, but there was a glow-worm light in her
beautiful eyes that seemed faintly to illuminate her whole face. He
sank down on the sofa at her side, no longer the brilliant and
ambitious politician, but, it seemed to him, as hopelessly a dreaming,
inexperienced boy as when he had given her the name that now was all he
could think of, and the only word that rose to his feverish lips.

"Yerba!"

"I like to hear you say it," she said quickly, as if to gloss over his
first omission of her formal prefix, and leaning a little forward, with
her eyes on his.  "One would think you had created it.  You almost make
me regret to lose it."

He stopped.  He felt that the last sentence had saved him.  "It is of
that I want to speak," he broke out suddenly and almost rudely. "Are
you satisfied that it means nothing, and can mean nothing, to you?
Does it awaken no memory in your mind--recall nothing you care to know?
Think!  I beg you, I implore you to be frank with me!"

She looked at him with surprise.

"I have told you already that my present name must be some absurd
blunder, or some intentional concealment.  But why do you want to know
NOW?" she continued, adding her faint smile to the emphasis.

"To help you!" he said, eagerly.  "For that alone!  To do all I can to
assist you, if you really believe, and want to believe, that you have
another.  To ask you to confide in me; to tell me all you have been
told, all that you know, think you know, or WANT to know about your
relationship to the Arguellos--or to--any one.  And then to devote
myself entirely to proving what you shall say is your desire.  You see,
I am frank with you, Yerba.  I only ask you to be as frank with me; to
let me know your doubts, that I may counsel you; your fears, that I may
give you courage."

"Is that all you came here to tell me?" she asked quietly.

"No, Yerba," he said, eagerly, taking her unresisting but indifferent
hand, "not all; but all that I must say, all that I have the right to
say, all that you, Yerba, would permit me to tell you NOW.  But let me
hope that the day is not far distant when I can tell you ALL, when you
will understand that this silence has been the hardest sacrifice of the
man who now speaks to you."

"And yet not unworthy of a rising politician," she added, quickly
withdrawing her hand.  "I agree," she went on, looking towards the
door, yet without appearing to avoid his eager eyes, "and when I have
settled upon 'a local habitation and a name' we shall renew this
interesting conversation.  Until then, as my fourth official guardian
used to say--he was a lawyer, Mr. Hathaway, like yourself--when he was
winding up his conjectures on the subject--all that has passed is to be
considered 'without prejudice.'"

"But Yerba"--began Paul, bitterly.

She slightly raised her hand as if to check him with a warning gesture.
"Yes, dear," she said suddenly, lifting her musical voice, with a
mischievous side-glance at Paul, as if to indicate her conception of
the irony of a possible application, "this way. Here we are waiting for
you."  Her listening ear had detected Milly's step in the passage, and
in another moment that cheerful young woman discreetly stopped on the
threshold of the room, with every expression of apologetic indiscretion
in her face.

"We have finished our talk, and Mr. Hathaway has been so concerned
about my having no real name that he has been promising me everything,
but his own, for a suitable one.  Haven't you, Mr. Hathaway?"  She rose
slowly and, going over to Milly, put her arm around her waist and stood
for one instant gazing at him between the curtains of the doorway.
"Good night.  My very proper chaperon is dreadfully shocked at this
midnight interview, and is taking me away.  Only think of it, Milly; he
actually proposed to me to walk in the garden with him!  Good night,
or, as my ancestors--don't forget, MY ANCESTORS--used to say: 'Buena
noche--hasta manana!'" She lingered over the Spanish syllables with an
imitation of Dona Anna's lisp, and with another smile, but more faint
and more ghostlike than before; vanished with her companion.

At eight o'clock the next morning Paul was standing beside his
portmanteau on the veranda.

"But this is a sudden resolution of yours, Hathaway," said Mr. Woods.
"Can you not possibly wait for the next train?  The girls will be down
then, and you can breakfast comfortably."

"I have much to do--more than I imagined--in San Francisco before I
return," said Paul, quickly.  "You must make my excuses to them and to
your wife."

"I hope," said Woods, with an uneasy laugh, "you have had no more words
with Don Caesar, or he with you?"

"No," said Paul, with a reassuring smile, "nothing more, I assure you."

"For you know you're a devilish quick fellow, Hathaway," continued
Woods, "quite as quick as your friend Pendleton.  And, by the way,
Baker is awfully cut up about that absurd speech of his, you know. Came
to me last night and wondered if anybody could think it was
intentional.  I told him it was d--d stupid, that was all.  I guess his
wife had been at him.  Ha! ha!  You see, he remembers the old times,
when everybody talked of these things, and that woman Howard was quite
a character.  I'm told she went off to the States years ago."

"Possibly," said Paul, carelessly.  After a pause, as the carriage
drove up to the door, he turned to his host.  "By the way, Woods, have
you a ghost here?"

"The house is old enough for one.  But no.  Why?"

"I'll swear I saw a figure moving yonder, in the shrubbery, late last
evening; and when I came up to it, it most unaccountably disappeared."

"One of Don Caesar's servants, I dare say.  There is one of them, an
Indian, prowling about here, I've been told, at all hours.  I'll put a
stop to it.  Well, you must go then?  Dreadfully sorry you couldn't
stop longer!  Good-by!"



CHAPTER IV.

It was two months later that Mr. Tony Shear, of Marysville, but lately
confidential clerk to the Hon. Paul Hathaway, entered his employer's
chambers in Sacramento, and handed the latter a letter.

"I only got back from San Francisco this morning; but Mr. Slate said I
was to give you that, and if it satisfied you, and was what you wanted,
you would send it back to him."

Paul took the envelope and opened it.  It contained a printer's
proof-slip, which he hurriedly glanced over.  It read as follows:--

"Those of our readers who are familiar with the early history of San
Francisco will be interested to know that an eccentric and irregular
trusteeship, vested for the last eight years in the Mayor of San
Francisco and two of our oldest citizens, was terminated yesterday by
the majority of a beautiful and accomplished young lady, a pupil of the
convent of Santa Clara.  Very few, except the original trustees, were
cognizant of the fact that the administration of the trustees has been
a recognized function of the successive Mayors of San Francisco during
this period; and the mystery surrounding it has been only lately
divulged.  It offers a touching and romantic instance of a survival of
the old patriarchal duties of the former Alcaldes and the simplicity of
pioneer days. It seems that, in the unsettled conditions of the Mexican
land-titles that followed the American occupation, the consumptive
widow of a scion of one of the oldest Californian families intrusted
her property and the custody of her infant daughter virtually to the
city of San Francisco, as represented by the trustees specified, until
the girl should become of age.  Within a year, the invalid mother died.
With what loyalty, sagacity, and prudence these gentlemen fulfilled
their trust may be gathered from the fact that the property left in
their charge has not only been secured and protected, but increased a
hundredfold in value; and that the young lady, who yesterday attained
her majority, is not only one of the richest landed heiresses on the
Pacific Slope, but one of the most accomplished and thoroughly educated
of her sex.  It is now no secret that this favored child of Chrysopolis
is the Dona Maria Concepcion de Arguello de la Yerba Buena, so called
from her ancestral property on the island, now owned by the Federal
government.  But it is an affecting and poetic tribute to the parent of
her adoption that she has preferred to pass under the old, quaintly
typical name of the city, and has been known to her friends simply as
'Miss Yerba Buena.'  It is a no less pleasant and suggestive
circumstance that our 'youngest senator,' the Honorable Paul Hathaway,
formerly private secretary to Mayor Hammersley, is one of the original
unofficial trustees; while the chivalry of the older days is
perpetuated in the person of Colonel Harry Pendleton, the remaining
trustee."

As soon as he had finished, Paul took a pencil and crossed out the last
sentence; but instead of laying the proof aside, or returning it to the
waiting secretary, he remained with it in his hand, his silent, set
face turned towards the window.  Whether the merely human secretary was
tired of waiting, or the devoted partisan saw something on his young
chief's face that disturbed him, he turned to Paul with that
exaggerated respect which his functions as secretary had grafted upon
his affection for his old associate, and said:--

"I hope nothing's wrong, sir.  Not another of those scurrilous attacks
on you for putting that bill through to relieve Colonel Pendleton?  Yet
it was a risky thing for you, sir."

Paul started, recovered himself as if from some remote abstraction,
and, with a smile, said: "No,--nothing.  Quite the reverse.  Write to
Mr. Slate, thank him, and say that it will do very well--with the
exception of the lines I have marked out.  Then bring me the letter,
and I will add this inclosure.  Did you call on Colonel Pendleton?"

"Yes, sir.  He was at Santa Clara, and had not yet returned,--at least,
that's what that dandy nigger of his told me.  The airs and graces that
that creature puts on since the colonel's affairs have been
straightened out is a little too much for a white man to stand.  Why,
sir! d--d if he didn't want to patronize YOU, and allowed to me that
'de Kernel' had a 'fah ideah' of you, 'and thought you a promisin'
young man.'  The fact is, sir, the party is making a big mistake trying
to give votes to that kind of cattle--it would only be giving two votes
to the other side, for, slave or free, they're the chattels of their
old masters.  And as to the masters' gratitude for what you've done
affecting a single vote of their party--you're mistaken."

"Colonel Pendleton belongs to no party," said Paul, curtly; "but if his
old constituents ever try to get into power again, they've lost their
only independent martyr."

He presently became abstracted again, and Shear produced from his
overcoat pocket a series of official-looking documents.

"I've brought the reports, sir."

"Eh?" said Paul, absently.

The secretary stared.  "The reports of the San Francisco Chief of
Police that you asked me to get."  His employer was certainly very
forgetful to-day.

"Oh, yes; thank you.  You can lay them on my desk.  I'll look them over
in Committee.  You can go now, and if any one calls to see me say I'm
busy."

The secretary disappeared in the adjoining room, and Paul leaned back
in his chair, thinking.  He had, at last, effected the work he had
resolved upon when he left Rosario two months ago; the article he had
just read, and which would appear as an editorial in the San Francisco
paper the day after tomorrow, was the culmination of quietly persistent
labor, inquiry, and deduction, and would be accepted, hereafter, as
authentic history, which, if not thoroughly established, at least could
not be gainsaid.  Immediately on arriving at San Francisco, he had
hastened to Pendleton's bedside, and laid the facts and his plan before
him.  To his mingled astonishment and chagrin, the colonel had objected
vehemently to this "saddling of anybody's offspring on a gentleman who
couldn't defend himself," and even Paul's explanation that the putative
father was a myth scarcely appeased him.  But Paul's timely
demonstration, by relating the scene he had witnessed of Judge Baker's
infelicitous memory, that the secret was likely to be revealed at any
moment, and that if the girl continued to cling to her theory, as he
feared she would, even to the parting with her fortune, they would be
forced to accept it, or be placed in the hideous position of publishing
her disgrace, at last convinced him. On the other hand, there was less
danger of her POSITIVE imposition being discovered than of the VAGUE
AND IMPOSITIVE truth.  The real danger lay in the present uncertainty
and mystery, which courted surmise and invited discovery.  Paul,
himself, was willing to take all the responsibility, and at last
extracted from the colonel a promise of passive assent.  The only
revelation he feared was from the interference of the mother, but
Pendleton was strong in the belief that she had not only utterly
abandoned the girl to the care of her guardians, but that she would
never rescind her resolution to disclaim her relationship; that she had
gone into self-exile for that purpose; and that if she HAD changed her
mind, he would be the first to know of it.  On this day they had
parted.  Meantime, Paul had not forgotten another resolution he had
formed on his first visit to the colonel, and had actually succeeded in
getting legislative relief for the Golden Gate Bank, and restoring to
the colonel some of his private property that had been in the hands of
a receiver.

This had been the background of Paul's meditation, which only threw
into stronger relief the face and figure that moved before him as
persistently as it had once before in the twilight of his room at
Rosario.  There were times when her moonlit face, with its faint,
strange smile, stood out before him as it had stood out of the shadows
of the half-darkened drawing-room that night; as he had seen it--he
believed for the last time--framed for an instant in the parted
curtains of the doorway, when she bade him "Goodnight." For he had
never visited her since, and, on the attainment of her majority, had
delegated his passing functions to Pendleton, whom he had induced to
accompany the Mayor to Santa Clara for the final and formal ceremony.
For the present she need not know how much she had been indebted to him
for the accomplishment of her wishes.

With a sigh he at last recalled himself to his duty, and, drawing the
pile of reports which Shear had handed him, he began to examine them.
These, again, bore reference to his silent, unobtrusive inquiries.  In
his function as Chairman of Committee he had taken advantage of a kind
of advanced moral legislation then in vogue, and particularly in
reference to a certain social reform, to examine statistics,
authorities, and witnesses, and in this indirect but exhaustive manner
had satisfied himself that the woman "Kate Howard," alias "Beverly,"
alias "Durfree," had long passed beyond the ken of local police
supervision, and that in the record there was no trace or indication of
her child.  He was going over those infelix records of early
transgressions with the eye of trained experience, making notes from
time to time for his official use, and yet always watchful of his
secret quest, when suddenly he stopped with a quickened pulse.  In the
record of an affray at a gambling-house, one of the parties had sought
refuge in the rooms of "Kate Howard," who was represented before the
magistrate by HER PROTECTOR, JUAN DE ARGUELLO.  The date given was
contemporary with the beginning of the Trust, but that proved nothing.
But the name--had it any significance, or was it a grim coincidence,
that spoke even more terribly and hopelessly of the woman's promiscuous
frailty?  He again attacked the entire report, but there was no other
record of her name.  Even that would have passed any eye less eager and
watchful than his own.

He laid the reports aside, and took up the proof-slip again.  Was there
any man living but himself and Pendleton who would connect these two
statements?  That her relations with this Arguello were brief and not
generally known was evident from Pendleton's ignorance of the fact.
But he must see him again, and at once. Perhaps he might have acquired
some information from Yerba; the young girl might have given to his age
that confidence she had withheld from the younger man; indeed, he
remembered with a flush it was partly in that hope he had induced the
colonel to go to Santa Clara.  He put the proof-slip in his pocket and
stepped to the door of the next room.

"You need not write that letter to Slate, Tony.  I will see him myself.
I am going to San Francisco to-night."

"And do you want anything copied from the reports, sir?"

Paul quickly swept them from the table into his drawer, and locked it.
"Not now, thank you.  I'll finish my notes later."

The next morning Paul was in San Francisco, and had again crossed the
portals of the Golden Gate Hotel.  He had been already told that the
doom of that palatial edifice was sealed by the laying of the
cornerstone of a new erection in the next square that should utterly
eclipse it; he even fancied that it had already lost its freshness, and
its meretricious glitter had been tarnished.  But when he had ordered
his breakfast he made his way to the public parlor, happily deserted at
that early hour.  It was here that he had first seen her.  She was
standing there, by that mirror, when their eyes first met in a sudden
instinctive sympathy.  She herself had remembered and confessed it.  He
recalled the pleased yet conscious, girlish superiority with which she
had received the adulation of her friends; his memory of her was broad
enough now even to identify Milly, as it repeopled the vacant and
silent room.

An hour later he was making his way to Colonel Pendleton's lodgings,
and half expecting to find the St. Charles Hotel itself transformed by
the eager spirit of improvement.  But it was still there in all its
barbaric and provincial incongruity.  Public opinion had evidently
recognized that nothing save the absolute razing of its warped and
flimsy walls could effect a change, and waited for it to collapse
suddenly like the house of cards it resembled.  Paul wondered for a
moment if it were not ominous of its lodgers' hopeless inability to
accept changed conditions, and it was with a feeling of doubt that he
even now ascended the creaking staircase.  But it was instantly
dissipated on the threshold of the colonel's sitting-room by the
appearance of George and his reception of his master's guest.

The grizzled negro was arrayed in a surprisingly new suit of blue cloth
with a portentous white waistcoat and an enormous crumpled white
cravat, that gave him the appearance of suffering from a glandular
swelling.  His manner had, it seemed to Paul, advanced in exaggeration
with his clothes.  Dusting a chair and offering it to the visitor, he
remained gracefully posed with his hand on the back of another.

"Yo' finds us heah yet, Marse Hathaway," he began, elegantly toying
with an enormous silver watch-chain, "fo' de Kernel he don' bin find
contagious apartments dat at all approximate, and he don' build, for
his mind's not dat settled dat he ain't goin' to trabbel.  De place is
low down, sah, and de fo'ks is low down, and dah's a heap o' white
trash dat has congested under de roof ob de hotel since we came.  But
we uses it temper'ly, sah, fo' de present, and in a dissolutory
fashion."

It struck Paul that the contiguity of a certain barber's shop and its
dangerous reminiscences had something to do with George's lofty
depreciation of his surroundings, and he could not help saying:--

"Then you don't find it necessary to have it convenient to the barber's
shop any more?  I am glad of that, George."

The shot told.  The unfortunate George, after an endeavor to collect
himself by altering his pose two or three times in rapid succession,
finally collapsed, and, with an air of mingled pain and dignity, but
without losing his ceremonious politeness or unique vocabulary, said:--

"Yo' got me dah, sah!  Yo' got me dah!  De infirmities o' human
natcheh, sah, is de common p'operty ob man, and a gemplum like yo'self,
sah, a legislato' and a pow'ful speakah, is de lass one to hol' it agin
de individal pusson.  I confess, sah, de circumstances was propiskuous,
de fees fahly good, and de risks inferior.  De gemplum who kept de shop
was an artess hisself, and had been niggah to Kernel Henderson of
Tennessee, and do gemplum I relieved was a Mr. Johnson.  But de Kernel,
he wouldn't see it in dat light, sah, and if yo' don' mind, sah"--

"I haven't the slightest idea of telling the colonel or anybody,
George," said Paul, smiling; "and I am glad to find on your own account
that you are able to put aside any work beyond your duty here."

"Thank yo', sah.  If yo' 'll let me introduce yo' to de refreshment,
yo' 'll find it all right now.  De Glencoe is dah.  De Kernel will be
here soon, but he would be pow'ful mo'tified, sah, if yo' didn't hab
something afo' he come."  He opened a well-filled sideboard as he
spoke.  It was the first evidence Paul had seen of the colonel's
restored fortunes.  He would willingly have contented himself with this
mere outward manifestation, but in his desire to soothe the ruffled
dignity of the old man he consented to partake of a small glass of
spirits.  George at once became radiant and communicative.  "De Kernel
bin gone to Santa Clara to see de young lady dat's finished her
edercation dah--de Kernel's only ward, sah. She's one o' dose
million-heiresses and highly connected, sah, wid de old Mexican
Gobbermen, I understand.  And I reckon dey's bin big goin's on doun
dar, foh de Mayer kem hisself fo' de Kernel.  Looks like des might bin
a proceshon, sah.  Yo' don' know of a young lady bin hab a title, sah?
I won't be shuah, his Honah de Mayer or de Kernel didn't say someting
about a 'Donna'."

"Very likely," said Paul, turning away with a faint smile.  So it was
already in the air!  Setting aside the old negro's characteristic
exaggeration, there had already been some conversation between the
colonel and the Mayor, which George had vaguely overheard.  He might be
too late, the alternative might be no longer in his hands.  But his
discomposure was heightened a moment later by the actual apparition of
the returning Pendleton.

He was dressed in a tightly buttoned blue frock-coat, which fairly
accented his tall, thin military figure, although the top lappel was
thrown far enough back to show a fine ruffled cambric shirt and checked
gingham necktie, and was itself adorned with a white rosebud in the
button-hole.  Fawn-colored trousers strapped over narrow patent-leather
boots, and a tall white hat, whose broad mourning-band was a perpetual
memory of his mother, who had died in his boyhood, completed his festal
transformation.  Yet his erect carriage, high aquiline nose, and long
gray drooping moustache lent a distinguishing grace to this survival of
a bygone fashion, and over-rode any irreverent comment.  Even his
slight limp seemed to give a peculiar character to his massive
gold-headed stick, and made it a part of his formal elegance.

Handing George his stick and a military cape he carried easily over his
left arm, he greeted Paul warmly, yet with a return of his old dominant
manner.

"Glad to see you, Hathaway, and glad to see the boy has served you
better than the last time.  If I had known you were coming, I would
have tried to get back in time to have breakfast with you.  But your
friends at 'Rosario'--I think they call it; in my time it was owned by
Colonel Briones, and HE called it 'The Devil's Little Canyon'--detained
me with some d--d civilities.  Let's see--his name is Woods, isn't it?
Used to sell rum to runaway sailors on Long Wharf, and take stores in
exchange?  Or was it Baker?--Judge Baker?  I forget which.  Well, sir,
they wished to be remembered."

It struck Paul, perhaps unreasonably, that the colonel's indifference
and digression were both a little assumed, and he asked abruptly,--

"And you fulfilled your mission?"

"I made the formal transfer, with the Mayor, of the property to Miss
Arguello."

"To Miss Arguello?"

"To the Dona Maria Concepcion de Arguello de la Yerba Buena--to speak
precisely," said the colonel, slowly.  "George, you can take that hat
to that blank hatter--what's his blanked name?  I read it only
yesterday in a list of the prominent citizens here--and tell him, with
my compliments, that I want a GENTLEMAN'S mourning band around my hat,
and not a child's shoelace.  It may be HIS idea of the value of his own
parents--if he ever had any--but I don't care for him to appraise mine.
Go!"

As the door closed upon George, Paul turned to the colonel--

"Then am I to understand that you have agreed to her story?"

The colonel rose, picked up the decanter, poured out a glass of
whiskey, and holding it in his hand, said:--

"My dear Hathaway, let us understand each other.  As a gentleman, I
have made a point through life never to question the age, name, or
family of any lady of my acquaintance.  Miss Yerba Buena came of age
yesterday, and, as she is no longer my ward, she is certainly entitled
to the consideration I have just mentioned.  If she, therefore, chooses
to tack to her name the whole Spanish directory, I don't see why I
shouldn't accept it."

Characteristic as this speech appeared to be of the colonel's ordinary
manner, it struck Paul as being only an imitation of his usual frank
independence, and made him uneasily conscious of some vague desertion
on Pendleton's part.  He fixed his bright eyes on his host, who was
ostentatiously sipping his liquor, and said:--

"Am I to understand that you have heard nothing more from Miss Yerba,
either for or against her story?  That you still do not know whether
she has deceived herself, has been deceived by others, or is deceiving
us?"

"After what I have just told you, Mr. Hathaway," said the colonel, with
an increased exaggeration of manner which Paul thought must be apparent
even to himself, "I should have but one way of dealing with questions
of that kind from anybody but yourself."

This culminating extravagance--taken in connection with Pendleton's
passing doubts--actually forced a laugh from Paul in spite of his
bitterness.

Colonel Pendleton's face flushed quickly.  Like most positive
one-idea'd men, he was restricted from any possible humorous
combination, and only felt a mysterious sense of being detected in some
weakness.  He put down his glass.

"Mr. Hathaway," he began, with a slight vibration in his usual dominant
accents, "you have lately put me under a sense of personal obligation
for a favor which I felt I could accept without derogation from a
younger man, because it seemed to be one not only of youthful
generosity but of justice, and was not unworthy the exalted ambition of
a young man like yourself or the simple deserts of an old man such as I
am.  I accepted it, sir, the more readily, because it was entirely
unsolicited by me, and seemed to be the spontaneous offering of your
own heart.  If I have presumed upon it to express myself freely on
other matters in a way that only excites your ridicule, I can but offer
you an apology, sir.  If I have accepted a favor I can neither renounce
nor return, I must take the consequences to myself, and even beg YOU,
sir, to put up with them."

Remorseful as Paul felt, there was a singular resemblance between the
previous reproachful pose of George and this present attitude of his
master, as if the mere propinquity of personal sacrifice had made them
alike, that struck him with a mingled pathos and ludicrousness.  But he
said warmly, "It is I who must apologize, my dear colonel.  I am not
laughing at your conclusions, but at this singular coincidence with a
discovery I have made."

"As how, sir?"

"I find in the report of the Chief of the Police for the year 1850 that
Kate Howard was under the protection of a man named Arguello."

The colonel's exaggeration instantly left him.  He stared blankly at
Paul.  "And you call this a laughing matter, sir?" he said sternly, but
in his more natural manner.

"Perhaps not, but I don't think, if you will allow me to say so, my
dear colonel, that YOU have been treating the whole affair very
seriously.  I left you two months ago utterly opposed to views which
you are now treating as of no importance.  And yet you wish me to
believe that nothing has happened, and that you have no further
information than you had then.  That this is so, and that you are
really no nearer the FACTS, I am willing to believe from your ignorance
of what I have just told you, and your concern at it.  But that you
have not been influenced in your JUDGMENT of what you do know, I cannot
believe?"  He drew nearer Pendleton, and laid his hand upon his arm.
"I beg you to be frank with me, for the sake of the person whose
interests I see you have at heart.  In what way will the discovery I
have just made affect them?  You are not so far prejudiced as to be
blind to the fact that it may be dangerous because it seems
corroborative."

Pendleton coughed, rose, took his stick, and limped up and down the
room, finally dropping into an armchair by the window, with his cane
between his knees, and the drooping gray silken threads of his long
moustache curled nervously between his fingers.

"Mr. Hathaway, I WILL be frank with you.  I know nothing of this blank
affair--blank it all!--but what I've told you.  Your discovery may be a
coincidence, nothing more.  But I HAVE been influenced,
sir,--influenced by one of the most perfect goddess-like--yes, sir; one
of the most simple girlish creatures that God ever sent upon earth.  A
woman that I should be proud to claim as my daughter, a woman that
would always be the superior of any man who dare aspire to be her
husband!  A young lady as peerless in her beauty as she is in her
accomplishments, and whose equal don't walk this planet!  I know, sir,
YOU don't follow me; I know, Mr. Hathaway, your Puritan prejudices;
your Church proclivities, your worldly sense of propriety; and, above
all, sir, the blanked hypocritical Pharisaic doctrines of your party--I
mean no offense to YOU, sir, personally--blind you to that girl's
perfections. She, poor child, herself has seen it and felt it, but
never, in her blameless innocence and purity, suspecting the cause,
'There is,' she said to me last night, confidentially, 'something
strangely antagonistic and repellent in our natures, some undefined and
nameless barrier between our ever understanding each other.'  You
comprehend, Mr. Hathaway, she does full justice to your intentions and
your unquestioned abilities.  'I am not blind,' she said, 'to Mr.
Hathaway's gifts, and it is very possible the fault lies with me.'  Her
very words, sir."

"Then you believe she is perfectly ignorant of her real mother?" asked
Paul, with a steady voice, but a whitening face.

"As an unborn child," said the colonel, emphatically.  "The snow on the
Sierras is not more spotlessly pure of any trace or contamination of
the mud of the mining ditches, than she of her mother and her past.
The knowledge of it, the mere breath of suspicion of it, in her
presence would be a profanation, sir!  Look at her eye--open as the sky
and as clear; look at her face and figure--as clean, sir, as a
Blue-Grass thoroughbred!  Look at the way she carries herself, whether
in those white frillings of her simple school-gown, or that black
evening dress that makes her look like a princess!  And, blank me, if
she isn't one!  There's no poor stock there--no white trash--no mixed
blood, sir.  Blank it all, sir, if it comes to THAT--the Arguellos--if
there's a hound of them living--might go down on their knees to have
their name borne by such a creature!  By the Eternal, sir, if one of
them dared to cross her path with a word that wasn't abject--yes, sir,
ABJECT, I'd wipe his dust off the earth and send it back to his
ancestors before he knew where he was, or my name isn't Harry
Pendleton!"

Hopeless and inconsistent as all this was, it was a wonderful sight to
see the colonel, his dark stern face illuminated with a zealot's
enthusiasm, his eyes on fire, the ends of his gray moustache curling
around his set jaw, his head thrown back, his legs astride, and his
gold-headed stick held in the hollow of his elbow, like a lance at
rest!  Paul saw it, and knew that this Quixotic transformation was part
of HER triumph, and yet had a miserable consciousness that the charms
of this Dulcinea del Toboso had scarcely been exaggerated.  He turned
his eyes away, and said quietly,--

"Then you don't think this coincidence will ever awaken any suspicion
in regard to her real mother?"

"Not in the least, sir--not in the least," said the colonel, yet,
perhaps, with more doggedness than conviction of accent.  "Nobody but
yourself would ever notice that police report, and the connection of
that woman's name with his was not notorious, or I should have known
it."

"And you believe," continued Paul hopelessly, "that Miss Yerba's
selection of the name was purely accidental?"

"Purely--a school-girl's fancy.  Fancy, did I say?  No, sir; by Jove,
an inspiration!"

"And," continued Paul, almost mechanically, "you do not think it may be
some insidious suggestion of an enemy who knew of this transient
relation that no one suspected?"

To his final amazement Pendleton's brow cleared!  "An enemy?  Gad! you
may be right.  I'll look into it; and, if that is the case, which I
scarcely dare hope for, Mr. Hathaway, you can safely leave him to ME."

He looked so supremely confident in his fatuous heroism that Paul could
say no more.  He rose and, with a faint smile upon his pale face, held
out his hand.  "I think that is all I have to say.  When you see Miss
Yerba again,--as you will, no doubt,--you may tell her that I am
conscious of no misunderstanding on my part, except, perhaps, as to the
best way I could serve her, and that, but for what she has told YOU, I
should certainly have carried away no remembrance of any
misunderstanding of HERS."

"Certainly," said the colonel, with cheerful philosophy, "I will carry
your message with pleasure.  You understand how it is, Mr. Hathaway.
There is no accounting for these instincts--we can only accept them as
they are.  But I believe that your intentions, sir, were strictly
according to what you conceived to be your duty.  You won't take
something before you go?  Well, then--good-by."

Two weeks later Paul found among his morning letters an envelope
addressed in Colonel Pendleton's boyish scrawling hand.  He opened it
with an eagerness that no studied self-control nor rigid preoccupation
of his duties had yet been able to subdue, and glanced hurriedly at its
contents:--


DEAR SIR,--As I am on the point of sailing to Europe to-morrow to
escort Miss Arguello and Miss Woods on an extended visit to England and
the Continent, I am desirous of informing you that I have thus far been
unable to find any foundation for the suggestions thrown out by you in
our last interview.  Miss Arguello's Spanish acquaintances have been
very select, and limited to a few school friends and Don Caesar and
Dona Anna Briones, tried friends, who are also fellow-passengers with
us to Europe.  Miss Arguello suggests that some political difference
between you and Don Caesar, which occurred during your visit to Rosario
three months ago, may have, perhaps, given rise to your supposition.
She joins me in best wishes for your public career, which even in the
distraction of foreign travel and the obligations of her position she
will follow from time to time with the greatest interest.

Very respectfully yours,

HARRY PENDLETON.



CHAPTER V.

It was on the 3d of August, 1863, that Paul Hathaway resigned himself
and his luggage to the care of the gold-laced, ostensible porter of the
Strudle Bad Hof, not without some uncertainty, in a land of uniforms,
whether he would be eventually conducted to the barracks, the police
office, or the Conservatoire.  He was relieved when the omnibus drove
into the courtyard of the Bad Hof, and the gold-chained chamberlain,
flanked by two green tubs of oleanders, received him with a gravity
calculated to check any preconceived idea he might have that traveling
was a trifling affair, or that an arrival at the Bad Hof was not of
serious moment.  His letters had not yet arrived, for he had, in a fit
of restlessness, shortened his route, and he strolled listlessly into
the reading-room.  Two or three English guests were evidently occupied
in eminently respectable reading and writing; two were sitting by the
window engaged in subdued but profitable conversation; and two
Americans from Boston were contentedly imitating them on the other side
of the room.  A decent restraint, as of people who were not for a
moment to be led into any foreign idea of social gayety at a
watering-place, was visible everywhere.  A spectacled Prussian officer
in full uniform passed along the hall, halted for a moment at the
doorway as if contemplating an armed invasion, thought better of it,
and took his uniform away into the sunlight of the open square, where
it was joined by other uniforms, and became by contrast a miracle of
unbraced levity.  Paul stood the Polar silence for a few moments, until
one of the readers arose and, taking his book--a Murray--in his hand,
walked slowly across the room to a companion, mutely pointed to a
passage in the book, remained silent until the other had dumbly perused
it, and then walked back again to his seat, having achieved the
incident without a word.  At which Paul, convinced of his own
incongruity, softly withdrew with his hat in his hand, and his eyes
fixed devotionally upon it.

It was good after that to get into the slanting sunlight and checkered
linden shadows of the Allee; to see even a tightly jacketed cavalryman
naturally walking with Clarchen and her two round-faced and drab-haired
young charges; to watch the returning invalid procession, very real and
very human, each individual intensely involved in the atmosphere of his
own symptoms; and very good after that to turn into the Thiergarten,
where the animals, were, however, chiefly of his own species, and
shamelessly and openly amusing themselves.  It was pleasant to contrast
it with his first visit to the place three months before, and correct
his crude impressions.  And it was still more pleasant suddenly to
recognize, under the round flat cap of a general officer, a former
traveler who was fond of talking with him about America with an
intelligence and understanding of it that Paul had often missed among
his own traveled countrymen.  It was pleasant to hear his unaffected
and simple greeting, to renew their old acquaintance, and to saunter
back to the hotel together through the long twilight.

They were only a few squares from the hotel, when Paul's attention was
attracted by the curiosity and delight of two or three children before
him, who appeared to be following a quaint-looking figure that was
evidently not unfamiliar to them.  It appeared to be a servant in a
striking livery of green with yellow facings and crested silver
buttons, but still more remarkable for the indescribable mingling of
jaunty ease and conscious dignity with which he carried off his finery.
There was something so singular and yet so vaguely reminiscent in his
peculiar walk and the exaggerated swing of his light bamboo cane that
Paul could not only understand the childish wonder of the passers-by,
who turned to look after him, but was stirred with a deeper curiosity.
He quickened his pace, but was unable to distinguish anything of the
face or features of the stranger, except that his hair under his cocked
hat appeared to be tightly curled and powdered.  Paul's companion, who
was amused at what seemed to be the American's national curiosity, had
seen the figure before.  "A servant in the suite of some Eastern
Altesse visiting the baths.  You will see stranger things, my friend,
in the Strudle Bad.  Par example, your own countrymen, too; the one who
has enriched himself by that pork of Chicago, or that soap, or this
candle, in a carriage with the crest of the title he has bought in
Italy with his dollars, and his beautiful daughters, who are seeking
more titles with possible matrimonial contingencies."

After an early dinner, Paul found his way to the little theatre. He had
already been struck by a highly colored poster near the Bahnhof,
purporting that a distinguished German company would give a
representation of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," and certain peculiarities in the
pictorial advertisement of the tableaux gave promise of some
entertainment.  He found the theatre fairly full; there was the usual
contingent of abonnirte officers, a fair sprinkling of English and
German travelers, but apparently none of his own countrymen.  He had no
time to examine the house more closely, for the play, commencing with
simple punctuality, not only far exceeded the promise of the posters,
but of any previous performance of the play he had witnessed.
Transported at once to a gorgeous tropical region--the slave States of
America--resplendent with the fruits and palms of Mauritius, and
peopled exclusively with Paul and Virginia's companions in striped
cotton, Hathaway managed to keep a composed face, until the arrival of
the good Southern planter St. Clair as one of the earlier portraits of
Goethe, in top boots, light kerseymere breeches, redingote and loose
Byron collar, compelled him to shrink into the upper corner of the box
with his handkerchief to his face.  Luckily, the action passed as the
natural effect upon a highly sympathetic nature of religious interviews
between a round-faced flaxen-haired "Kleine Eva" and "Onkeel Tome,"
occasionally assisted by a Dissenting clergyman in Geneva bands; of
excessive brutality with a cattle whip by a Zamiel-like Legree; of the
sufferings of a runaway negro Zimmermadchen with a child three shades
lighter than herself; and of a painted canvas "man-hunt," where
apparently four well known German composers on horseback, with flowing
hair, top boots, and a Cor de chasse, were pursuing, with the aid of a
pack of fox hounds, "the much too deeply abused and yet spiritually
elevated Onkeel Tome."  Paul did not wait for the final apotheosis of
"der Kleine Eva," but, in the silence of a hushed audience, made his
way into the corridor and down the staircase.  He was passing an open
door marked "Direction," when his attention was sharply attracted by a
small gathering around it and the sounds of indignant declamation. It
was the voice of a countryman--more than that, it was a familiar voice,
that he had not heard for three years--the voice of Colonel Harry
Pendleton!

"Tell him," said Pendleton, in scathing tones, to some invisible
interpreter,--"tell, him, sir, that a more infamous caricature of the
blankest caricature that ever maligned a free people, sir, I never
before had the honor of witnessing.  Tell him that I, sir--I, Harry
Pendleton, of Kentucky, a Southerner, sir--an old slaveholder, sir,
declare it to be a tissue of falsehoods unworthy the credence of a
Christian civilization like this--unworthy the attention of the
distinguished ladies and gentlemen that are gathered here to-night.
Tell him, sir, he has been imposed upon. Tell him I am
responsible--give him my card and address--personally responsible for
what I say.  If he wants proofs--blank it all!--tell him you yourself
have been a slave--MY slave, sir!  Take off your hat, sir!  Ask him to
look at you--ask him if he thinks you ever looked or could look like
that lop-eared, psalm-singing, white-headed hypocrite on the stage!
Ask him, sir, if he thinks that blank ringmaster they call St. Clair
looks like ME!"

At this astounding exordium Paul eagerly pressed forward and entered
the bureau.  There certainly was Colonel Pendleton, in spotless evening
dress; erect, flashing, and indignant; his aquiline nose lifted like a
hawk's beak over his quarry, his iron-gray moustache, now white and
waxed, parted like a swallow's tail over his handsome mouth, and
between him and the astounded "Direction" stood the apparition of the
Allee--George!  There was no mistaking him now.  What Paul had thought
was a curled wig or powder was the old negro's own white knotted wool,
and the astounding livery he wore was carried off as no one but George
could carry it.

But he was still more amazed when the old servant, in a German as
exaggerated, as incoherent, but still as fluent and persuasive as his
own native speech, began an extravagant but perfectly dignified and
diplomatic translation of his master's protests.  Where and when, by
what instinct, he had assimilated and made his own the grotesque
inversions and ponderous sentimentalities of Teutonic phrasing, Paul
could not guess; but it was with breathless wonder that he presently
became aware that, so perfect and convincing was the old man's style
and deportment, not only the simple officials but even the bystanders
were profoundly impressed by this farrago of absurdity.  A happy word
here and there, the full title and rank given, even with a slight
exaggeration, to each individual, brought a deep and guttural "So!"
from lips that would have found it difficult to repeat a line of his
ceremonious idiocy.

In their preoccupation neither the colonel nor George had perceived
Paul's entrance, but, as the old servant turned with magnificent
courtesy towards the bystanders, his eyes fell upon Paul.  A flash of
surprise, triumph, and satisfaction lit up his rolling eyes. Paul
instantly knew that he not only recognized him, but that he had already
heard of and thoroughly appreciated a certain distinguished position
that Paul had lately held, and was quick to apply it.  Intensifying for
a moment the grandiloquence of his manner, he called upon his master's
most distinguished and happily arrived old friend, the Lord Lieutenant
Governor of the Golden Californias, to corroborate his statement.
Colonel Pendleton started, and grasped Paul's hand warmly.  Paul turned
to the already half-mollified Director with the diplomatic suggestion
that the vivid and realistic acting of the admirable company which he
himself had witnessed had perhaps unduly excited his old friend, even
as it had undoubtedly thrown into greater relief the usual
exaggerations of dramatic representation, and the incident terminated
with a profusion of apologies, and the most cordial expressions of
international good feeling on both sides.

Yet, as they turned away from the theatre together, Paul could not help
noticing that, although the colonel's first greeting had been
spontaneous and unaffected, it was succeeded by an uneasy reserve. Paul
made no attempt to break it, and confined himself to a few general
inquiries, ending by inviting the colonel to sup with him at the hotel.
Pendleton hesitated.  "At any other time, Mr. Hathaway, I should have
insisted upon you, as the stranger, supping with me; but since the
absence of--of--the rest of my party--I have given up my suite of rooms
at the Bad Hof, and have taken smaller lodgings for myself and the boy
at the Schwartze Adler.  Miss Woods and Miss Arguello have accepted an
invitation to spend a few days at the villa of the Baron and Baroness
von Schilprecht--an hour or two from here."  He lingered over the title
with an odd mingling of impressiveness and inquiry, and glanced at
Paul.  But Hathaway exhibiting neither emotion nor surprise at the
mention of Yerba's name or the title of her host, he continued, "Miss
Arguello, I suppose you know, is immensely admired: she has been, sir,
the acknowledged belle of Strudle Bad."

"I can readily believe it," said Paul, simply.

"And has taken the position--the position, sir, to which she is
entitled."

Without appearing to notice the slight challenge in Pendleton's tone,
Paul returned, "I am glad to hear it.  The more particularly as, I
believe, the Germans are great sticklers for position and pedigree."

"You are right, sir--quite right: they are," said the colonel,
proudly--"although"--with a certain premeditated deliberation--"I have
been credibly informed that the King can, in certain cases, if he
chooses, supply--yes, sir--SUPPLY a favored person with ancestors--yes,
sir, with ANCESTORS!"

Paul cast a quick glance at his companion.

"Yes, sir--that is, we will say, in the case of a lady of inferior
rank--or even birth, the King of these parts can, on her marriage with
a nobleman--blank it all!--ennoble her father and mother, and their
fathers and mothers, though they've been dead, or as good as dead, for
years."

"I am afraid that's a slight exaggeration of the rare custom of
granting 'noble lands,' or estates that carry hereditary titles with
them," said Paul, more emphatically, perhaps, than the occasion
demanded.

"Fact, sir--George there knows it all," said Pendleton.  "He gets it
from the other servants.  I don't speak the language, sir, but HE does.
Picked it up in a year."

"I must compliment him on his fluency, certainly," said Paul, looking
at George.

The old servant smiled, and not without a certain condescension. "Yes,
sah; I don' say to a scholar like yo'self, sah, dat I'se got de
grandmatical presichion; but as fah, sah--as fah as de IDIOTISMS ob de
language goes.  Sah--it's gen'lly allowed I'm dar!  As to what Marse
Harry says ob de ignobling ob predecessors, I've had it, sah, from de
best autority, sah--de furst, I may say, sah--de real prima facie
men--de gemplum ob his Serene Highness, in de korse eb ordinary
conversashun, sah."

"That'll do, George," said Pendleton, with paternal brusqueness. "Run
on ahead and tell that blank chamberlain that Mr. Hathaway is one of my
friends--and have supper accordingly."  As the negro hastened away he
turned to Paul: "What he says is true: he's the most popular man or boy
in all Strudle Bad--a devilish sight more than his master--and goes
anywhere where I can't go.  Princes and princesses stop and talk to him
in the street; the Grand Duke asked permission to have him up in his
carriage at the races the other day; and, by the Eternal, sir, he gives
the style to all the flunkeys in town!"

"And I see, he dresses the character," observed Paul.

"His own idea--entirely.  And, by Jove! he proves to be right.  You
can't do anything here without a uniform.  And they tell me he's got
everything correct, down to the crest on the buttons."

They walked on in silence for a few moments, Pendleton retaining a
certain rigidity of step and bearing which Paul had come to recognize
as indicating some uneasiness or mental disturbance on his part.
Hathaway had no intention of precipitating the confidence of his
companion.  Perhaps experience had told him it would come soon enough.
So he spoke carelessly of himself.  How the need of a year's relaxation
and change had brought him abroad, his journeyings, and, finally, how
he had been advised by his German physician to spend a few weeks at
Strudle Bad preparatory to the voyage home.  Yet he was perfectly aware
that the colonel from time to time cast a furtive glance at his face.
"And YOU," he said in conclusion--"when do you intend to return to
California?"

The colonel hesitated slightly.  "I shall remain in Europe until Miss
Arguello is settled--I mean," he added hurriedly, "until she
has--ahem!--completed her education in foreign ways and customs. You
see, Hathaway, I have constituted myself, after a certain fashion, I
may say--still, her guardian.  I am an old man, with neither kith nor
kin myself, sir--I'm a little too old-fashioned for the boys over
there"--with a vague gesture towards the west, which, however, told
Paul how near it still was to him.  "But then, among the old fogys
here--blank it all!--it isn't noticed.  So I look after her, you see,
or rather make myself responsible for her generally--although, of
course, she has other friends and associates, you understand, more of
her own age and tastes."

"And I've no doubt she's perfectly satisfied," said Paul in a tone of
conviction.

"Well, yes, sir, I presume so," said the colonel slowly; "but I've
sometimes thought, Mr. Hathaway, that it would have been better if
she'd have had a woman's care--the protection you understand, of an
elderly woman of society.  That seems to be the style here, you know--a
chaperon, they call it.  Now, Milly Woods, you see, is about the same
age, and the Dona Anna, of course, is older, but--blank it!--she's as
big a flirt as the rest--I mean," he added, correcting himself sharply,
"she lacks balance, sir, and--what shall I call it?--self-abnegation."

"Then Dona Anna is still of your party?" asked Paul.

"She is, sir, and her brother, Don Caesar.  I have thought it
advisable, on Yerba's account, to keep up as much as possible the
suggestion of her Spanish relationship--although by reason of their
absurd ignorance of geography and political divisions out here, there
is a prevailing impression that she is a South American.  A fact, sir.
I have myself been mistaken for the Dictator of one of these infernal
Republics, and I have been pointed out as ruling over a million or two
of niggers like George!"

There was no trace of any conception of humor in the colonel's face,
although he uttered a short laugh, as if in polite acceptance of the
possibility that Paul might have one.  Far from that, his companion,
looking at the striking profile and erect figure at his side--at the
long white moustache which drooped from his dark cheeks, and
remembering his own sensations at first seeing George--thought the
popular belief not so wonderful.  He was even forced to admit that the
perfect unconsciousness on the part of master and man of any
incongruity or peculiarity in themselves assisted the public
misconception.  And it was, I fear, with a feeling of wicked delight
that, on entering the hotel, he hailed the evident consternation of
those correct fellow-countrymen from whom he had lately fled, at what
they apparently regarded as a national scandal.  He overheard their
hurried assurance to their English friends that his companions were NOT
from Boston, and enjoyed their mortification that this explanation did
not seem to detract from the interest and relief with which the Britons
surveyed them, or the open admiration of the Germans.

Although Pendleton somewhat unbent during supper, he did not allude to
the secret of Yerba's parentage, nor of any tardy confidence of hers.
To all appearance the situation remained as it was three years ago.  He
spoke of her great popularity as an heiress and a beautiful woman, and
the marked attentions she received.  He doubted not that she had
rejected very distinguished offers, but she kept that to herself.  She
was perfectly competent to do so. She was no giddy girl, to be
flattered or deceived; on the contrary, he had never known a cooler or
more sensible woman.  She knew her own worth.  When she met the man who
satisfied her ambition and understanding, she would marry, and not
before.  He did not know what that ambition was; it was something
exalted, of course.  He could only say, of his own knowledge, that last
year, when they were on the Italian lakes, there was a certain
prince--Mr. Hathaway would understand why he did not mention names--who
was not only attentive to her, but attentive to HIM, sir, by Jove! and
most significant in his inquiries.  It was the only occasion when he,
the colonel, had ever spoken to her on such subjects; and, knowing that
she was not indifferent to the fellow, who was not bad of his kind, he
had asked her why she had not encouraged his suit. She had said, with a
laugh, that he couldn't marry her unless he gave up his claim of
succession to a certain reigning house; and she wouldn't accept him
WITHOUT IT.  Those were her words, sir, and he could only say that the
prince left a few days afterwards, and they had never seen him since.
As to the princelings and counts and barons, she knew to a day the date
of their patents of nobility, and what privileges they were entitled
to; she could tell to a dot the value of their estates, the amount of
their debts, and, by Jove! sir, the amount of mortgages she was
expected to pay off before she married them.  She knew the amount of
income she had to bring to the Prussian Army, from the general to the
lieutenant. She understood her own value and her rights.  There was a
young English lordling she met on the Rhine, whose boyish ways and
simplicity seemed to please her.  They were great friends; but he
wanted him--the colonel--to induce her to accept an invitation for both
to visit his mother's home in England, that his people might see her.
But she declined, sir!  She declined to pass in review before his
mother.  She said it was for HIM to pass in review before HER mother.

"Did she say that?" interrupted Paul, fixing his bright eyes upon the
colonel.

"If she had one, if she had one," corrected the colonel, hastily. "Of
course it was only an illustration.  That she is an orphan is generally
known, sir."

There was a dead silence for a few moments.  The colonel leaned back in
his chair and pulled his moustache.  Paul turned away his eyes, and
seemed absorbed in reflection.  After a moment the colonel coughed,
pushed aside his glass, and, leaning across the table, said, "I have a
favor to ask of you, Mr. Hathaway."

There was such a singular change in the tone of his voice, an
unexpected relaxation of some artificial tension,--a relaxation which
struck Paul so pathetically as being as much physical as mental, as if
he had suddenly been overtaken in some exertion by the weakness of
age,--that he looked up quickly.  Certainly, although still erect and
lightly grasping his moustache, the colonel looked older.

"By all means, my dear colonel," said Paul warmly.

"During the time you remain here you can hardly help meeting Miss
Arguello, perhaps frequently.  It would be strange if you did not; it
would appear to everybody still stranger.  Give me your word as a
gentleman that you will not make the least allusion to her of the
past--nor reopen the subject."

Paul looked fixedly at the colonel.  "I certainly had no intention of
doing so," he said after a pause, "for I thought it was already settled
by you beyond disturbance or discussion.  But do I understand you, that
SHE has shown any uneasiness regarding it? From what you have just told
me of her plans and ambition, I can scarcely imagine that she has any
suspicion of the real facts."

"Certainly not," said the colonel hurriedly.  "But I have your promise."

"I promise you," said Paul, after a pause, "that I shall neither
introduce nor refer to the subject myself, and that if SHE should
question me again regarding it, which is hardly possible, I will reveal
nothing without your consent."

"Thank you," said Pendleton, without, however, exhibiting much relief
in his face.  "She will return here to-morrow."

"I thought you said she was absent for some days," said Paul.

"Yes; but she is coming back to say good-by to Dona Anna, who arrives
here with her brother the same day, on their way to Paris."

It flashed through Paul's mind that the last time he had seen her was
in the company of the Briones.  It was not a pleasant coincidence.  Yet
he was not aware that it had affected him, until he saw the colonel
watching him.

"I believe you don't fancy the brother," said Pendleton.

For an instant Paul was strongly tempted to avow his old vague
suspicions of Don Caesar, but the utter hopelessness of reopening the
whole subject again, and his recollection of the passage in Pendleton's
letter that purported to be Yerba's own theory of his dislike, checked
him in time.  He only said, "I don't remember whether I had any cause
for disliking Don Caesar; I can tell better when I see him again," and
changed the subject.  A few moments later the colonel summoned George
from some lower region of the hotel, and rose to take his leave.  "Miss
Arguello, with her maid and courier, will occupy her old suite of rooms
here," he remarked, with a return of his old imperiousness.  "George
has given the orders for her.  I shall not change my present lodgings,
but of course will call every day.  Goodnight!"



CHAPTER VI.

The next morning Paul could not help noticing an increased and even
exaggerated respect paid him by the hotel attendants.  He was asked if
his EXCELLENCY would be served with breakfast in a private room, and
his condescension in selecting the public coffee-room struck the
obsequious chamberlain, but did not prevent him from preceding Paul
backwards to the table, and summoning a waiter to attend specially upon
"milor."  Surmising that George and the colonel might be in some way
connected with this extravagance, he postponed an investigation till he
should have seen them again.  And, although he hardly dared to confess
it to himself, the unexpected prospect of meeting Yerba again fully
preoccupied his thoughts.  He had believed that he would eventually see
her in Europe, in some vague and indefinite way and hour: it had been
in his mind when he started from California.  That it would be so soon,
and in such a simple and natural manner, he had never conceived.

He had returned from his morning walk to the Brunnen, and was sitting
idly in his room, when there was a knock at the door.  It opened to a
servant bearing a salver with a card.  Paul lifted it with a slight
tremor, not at the engraved name of "Maria Concepcion de Arguellos de
la Yerba Buena," but at the remembered school-girl hand that had
penciled underneath the words, "wishes the favor of an audience with
his Excellency the Lord Lieutenant-Governor of the Californias."

Paul looked inquiringly at the servant.  "The gnadige Fraulein was in
her own salon.  Would EXCELLENCY walk that way?  It was but a step; in
effect, the next apartment."

Paul followed him into the hall with wondering steps.  The door of the
next room was open, and disclosed a handsomely furnished salon. A tall
graceful figure rose quickly from behind a writing-table, and advanced
with outstretched hands and a frank yet mischievous smile.  It was
Yerba.

Standing there in a grayish hat, mantle, and traveling dress, all of
one subdued yet alluring tone, she looked as beautiful as when he had
last seen her--and yet--unlike.  For a brief bitter moment his
instincts revolted at this familiar yielding up in his fair
countrywomen of all that was distinctively original in them to alien
tastes and habits, and he resented the plastic yet characterless
mobility which made Yerba's Parisian dress and European manner fit her
so charmingly and yet express so little. For a brief critical moment he
remembered the placid, unchanging simplicity of German, and the
inflexible and ingrained reserve of English, girlhood, in opposition to
this indistinctive cosmopolitan grace.  But only for a moment.  As soon
as she spoke, a certain flavor of individuality seemed to return to her
speech.

"Confess," she said, "it was a courageous thing for me to do.  You
might have been somebody else--a real Excellency--or heaven knows what!
Or, what is worse in your new magnificence, you might have forgotten
one of your oldest, most humble, but faithful subjects." She drew back
and made him a mock ceremonious curtsy, that even in its charming
exaggeration suggested to Paul, however, that she had already made it
somewhere seriously.

"But what does it all mean?" he asked, smiling, feeling not only his
doubts and uneasiness vanish, but even the years of separation melt
away in her presence.  "I know I went to bed last night a very humble
individual, and yet I seem to awaken this morning a very exalted
personage.  Am I really Commander of the Faithful, or am I dreaming?
Might I trouble you, as my predecessor Abou Hassan did Sweetlips, to
bite my little finger?"

"Do you mean to say you have not seen the 'Auzeiger?'" she returned,
taking a small German printed sheet from the table and pointing to a
paragraph.  Paul took the paper.  Certainly there was the plain
announcement among the arrivals of "His Excellency Paul Hathaway, Lord
Lieutenant-Governor of the Californias."  A light flashed upon him.

"This is George's work.  He and Colonel Pendleton were here with me
last night."

"Then you have seen the colonel already?" she said, with a scarcely
perceptible alteration of expression, which, however, struck Paul.

"Yes.  I met him at the theatre last evening."  He was about to plunge
into an animated description of the colonel's indignation, but checked
himself, he knew not why.  But he was thankful the next moment that he
had.

"That accounts for everything," she said, lifting her pretty shoulders
with a slight shrug of weariness.  "I had to put a step to George's
talking about ME three months ago,--his extravagance is something TOO
awful.  And the colonel, who is completely in his hands,--trusting him
for everything, even the language,--doesn't see it."

"But he is extravagant in the praise of his friends only, and you
certainly justify all he can say."

She was taking off her hat, and stopped for a moment to look at him
thoughtfully, with the soft tendrils of her hair clinging to her
forehead.  "Did the colonel talk much about me?"

"A great deal.  In fact, I think we talked of nothing else.  He has
told me of your triumphs and your victims; of your various campaigns
and your conquests.  And yet I dare say he has not told me all--and I
am dying to hear more."

She had laid down her hat and unloosed a large bow of her mantle, but
stopped suddenly in the midst of it and sat down again.

"I wish you'd do something for me."

"You have only to name it."

"Well, drop all this kind of talk!  Try to think of me as if I had just
come from California--or, better, as if you had never known anything of
me at all--and we met for the first time.  You could, I dare say, make
yourself very agreeable to such a young lady who was willing to be
pleased--why not to me?  I venture to say you have not ever troubled
yourself about me since we last met.  No--hear me through--why, then,
should you wish to talk over what didn't concern you at the time?
Promise me you will stop this reminiscent gossip, and I promise you I
will not only not bore you with it, but take care that it is not
intruded upon you by others.  Make yourself pleasant to me by talking
about yourself and your prospects--anything but ME--and I will throw
over those princes and barons that the colonel has raved about and
devote myself to you while you are here.  Does that suit your
Excellency?"  She had crossed her knees, and, with her hands clasped
over them, and the toe of her small boot advanced beyond her skirt,
leaned forward in the attitude he remembered to have seen her take in
the summer-house at Rosario.

"Perfectly," he said.

"How long will you be here?"

"About three weeks: that, I believe, is the time allotted for my cure."

"Are you really ill," she said quietly, "or imagine yourself so?"

"It amounts to about the same thing.  But my cure may not take so
long," he added, fixing his bright eyes upon her.

She returned his gaze thoughtfully, and they remained looking at each
other silently.

"Then you are stronger than you give yourself credit for.  That is very
often the case," she said quietly.  "There," she added in another tone,
"it is settled.  You will come and go as you like, using this salon as
your own.  Stay, we can do something today. What do you say to a ride
in the forest this afternoon?  Milly isn't here yet, but it will be
quite proper for you to accompany me on horseback, though, of course,
we couldn't walk a hundred yards down the Allee together unless we were
verlobt."

"But," said Paul, "you are expecting company this afternoon.  Don
Caesar--I mean Miss Briones and her brother are coming here to say
good-by."

She regarded him curiously, but without emotion.

"Colonel Pendleton should have added that they were to remain here
overnight as my guests," she said composedly.  "And of course we shall
be back in time for dinner.  But that is nothing to you.  You have only
to be ready at three o'clock.  I will see that the horses are ordered.
I often ride here, and the people know my tastes and habits.  We will
have a pleasant ride and a good long talk together, and I'll show you a
ruin and a distant view of the villa where I have been staying."  She
held out her hand with a frank girlish smile, and even a girlish
anticipation of pleasure in her brown eyes.  He bent over her slim
fingers for a moment, and withdrew.

When he was in his own room again, he was conscious only of a strong
desire to avoid the colonel until after his ride with Yerba. He would
keep his word so far as to abstain from allusion to her family or her
past: indeed, he had his own opinion of its futility. But it would be
strange if, with his past experience, he could not find some other way
to determine her convictions or win her confidence during those two
hours of companionship.  He would accept her terms fairly; if she had
any ulterior design in her advances, he would detect it; if she had the
least concern for him, she could not continue long an artificial
friendship.  But he must not think of that!

By absenting himself from the hotel he managed to keep clear of
Pendleton until the hour arrived.  He was gratified to find Yerba in
the simplest and most sensible of habits, as if she had already divined
his tastes and had wished to avoid attracting undue attention.
Nevertheless, it very prettily accented her tall graceful figure, and
Paul, albeit, like most artistic admirers of the sex, not recognizing a
woman on a horse as a particularly harmonious spectacle, was forced to
admire her.  Both rode well, and naturally--having been brought up in
the same Western school--the horses recognized it, and instinctively
obeyed them, and their conversation had the easy deliberation and
inflection of a tete-a-tete. Paul, in view of her previous hint, talked
to her of himself and his fortunes, of which she appeared, however, to
have some knowledge.  His health had obliged him lately to abandon
politics and office; he had been successful in some ventures, and had
become a junior partner in a bank with foreign correspondence.  She
listened to him for some time with interest and attention, but at last
her face became abstracted and thoughtful.  "I wish I were a man!" she
said suddenly.

Paul looked at her quickly.  For the first time he detected in the ring
of her voice something of the passionate quality he fancied he had
always seen in her face.

"Except that it might give you better control of your horse, I don't
see why," said Paul.  "And I don't entirely believe you."

"Why?"

"Because no woman really wishes to be a man unless she is conscious of
her failure as a woman."

"And how do you know I'm not?" she said, checking her horse and looking
in his face.  A quick conviction that she was on the point of some
confession sprang into his mind, but unfortunately showed in his face.
She beat back his eager look with a short laugh. "There, don't speak,
and don't look like that.  That remark was worthy the usual artless
maiden's invitation to a compliment, wasn't it?  Let us keep to the
subject of yourself.  Why, with your political influence, don't you get
yourself appointed to some diplomatic position over here?"

"There are none in our service.  You wouldn't want me to sink myself in
some absurd social functions, which are called by that name, merely to
become the envy and hatred of a few rich republicans, like your friends
who haunt foreign courts?"

"That's not a pretty speech--but I suppose I invited THAT too. Don't
apologize.  I'd rather see you flare out like that than pay
compliments.  Yet I fancy you're a diplomatist, for all that."

"You did me the honor to believe I was one once, when I was simply the
most palpable ass and bungler living," said Paul bitterly.

She was still sweetly silent, apparently preoccupied in smoothing out
the mane of her walking horse.  "Did I?" she said softly.  He drew
close beside her.

"How different the vegetation is here from what it is with us!" she
said with nervous quickness, directing his attention to the grass road
beneath them, without lifting her eyes.  "I don't mean what is
cultivated,--for I suppose it takes centuries to make the lawns they
have in England,--but even here the blades of grass seem to press
closer together, as if they were crowded or overpopulated, like the
country; and this forest, which has been always wild and was a hunting
park, has a blase look, as if it was already tired of the unchanging
traditions and monotony around it.  I think over there Nature affects
and influences us: here, I fancy, it is itself affected by the people."

"I think a good deal of Nature comes over from America for that
purpose," he said dryly.

"And I think you are breaking your promise--besides being a goose!" she
retorted smartly.  Nevertheless, for some occult reason they both
seemed relieved by this exquisite witticism, and trotted on amicably
together.  When Paul lifted his eyes to hers he could see that they
were suffused with a tender mischief, as of a reproving yet secretly
admiring sister, and her strangely delicate complexion had taken on
itself that faint Alpine glow that was more of an illumination than a
color.  "There," she said gayly, pointing with her whip as the wood
opened upon a glade through which the parted trees showed a long blue
curvature of distant hills, "you see that white thing lying like a
snowdrift on the hills?"

"Or the family washing on a hedge."

"As you please.  Well, that is the villa."

"And you were very happy there?" said Paul, watching her girlishly
animated face.

"Yes; and as you don't ask questions, I'll tell you why.  There is one
of the sweetest old ladies there that I ever met--the perfection of
old-time courtliness with all the motherishness of a German woman.  She
was very kind to me, and, as she had no daughter of her own, I think
she treated me as if I was one.  At least, I can imagine how one would
feel to her, and what a woman like that could make of any girl.  You
laugh, Mr. Hathaway, you don't understand--but you don't know what an
advantage it would be to a girl to have a mother like that, and know
that she could fall back on her and hold her own against anybody.
She's equipped from the start, instead of being handicapped.  It's all
very well to talk about the value of money.  It can give you everything
but one thing--the power to do without it."

"I think its purchasing value would include even the gnadige Frau,"
said Paul, who had laughed only to hide the uneasiness that Yerba's
approach to the tabooed subject had revived in him.  She shook her
head; then, recovering her tone of gentle banter, said, "There--I've
made a confession.  If the colonel talks to you again about my
conquests, you will know that at present my affections are centred on
the Baron's mother.  I admit it's a strong point in his--in
ANYBODY'S--favor, who can show an unblemished maternal pedigree. What a
pity it is you are an orphan, like myself, Mr. Hathaway! For I fancy
your mother must have been a very perfect woman.  A great deal of her
tact and propriety has descended to you.  Only it would have been nicer
if she had given it to you, like pocket money, as occasion
required--which you might have shared with me--than leaving it to you
in one thumping legacy."

It was impossible to tell how far the playfulness of her brown eyes
suggested any ulterior meaning, for as Paul again eagerly drew towards
her, she sent her horse into a rapid canter before him. When he was at
her side again, she said, "There is still the ruin to see on our way
home.  It is just off here to the right.  But if you wish to go over it
we will have to dismount at the foot of the slope and walk up.  It
hasn't any story or legend that I know of; I looked over the guide-book
to cram for it before you came, but there was nothing.  So you can
invent what you like."

They dismounted at the beginning of a gentle acclivity, where an
ancient wagon-road, now grass-grown, rose smooth as a glacis. Tying
their horses to two moplike bushes, they climbed the slope hand in hand
like children.  There were a few winding broken steps, part of a fallen
archway, a few feet of vaulted corridor, a sudden breach--the sky
beyond--and that was all!  Not all; for before them, overlooked at
first, lay a chasm covering half an acre, in which the whole of the
original edifice--tower turrets, walls, and battlements--had been
apparently cast, inextricably mixed and mingled at different depths and
angles, with here and there, like mushrooms from a dust-heap, a score
of trees upspringing.

"This is not Time--but gunpowder," said Paul, leaning over a parapet of
the wall and gazing at the abyss, with a slight grimace.

"It don't look very romantic, certainly," said Yerba.  "I only saw it
from the road before.  I'm dreadfully sorry," she added, with mock
penitence.  "I suppose, however, SOMETHING must have happened here."

"There may have been nobody in the house at the time," said Paul
gravely.  "The family may have been at the baths."

They stood close together, their elbows resting upon the broken wall,
and almost touching.  Beyond the abyss and darker forest they could see
the more vivid green and regular lines of the plane-trees of Strudle
Bad, the glitter of a spire, or the flash of a dome. From the abyss
itself arose a cool odor of moist green leaves, the scent of some
unseen blossoms, and around the baking vines on the hot wall the hum of
apparently taskless and disappointed bees. There was nobody in sight in
the forest road, no one working in the bordering fields, and no
suggestion of the present.  There might have been three or four
centuries between them and Strudle Bad.

"The legend of this place," said Paul, glancing at the long brown
lashes and oval outline of the cheek so near his own, "is simple, yet
affecting.  A cruel, remorseless, but fascinating Hexie was once loved
by a simple shepherd.  He had never dared to syllable his hopeless
affection, or claim from her a syllabled--perhaps I should say a
one-syllabled--reply.  He had followed her from remote lands, dumbly
worshiping her, building in his foolish brain an air-castle of
happiness, which by reason of her magic power she could always see
plainly in his eyes.  And one day, beguiling him in the depths of the
forest, she led him to a fair-seeming castle, and, bidding him enter
its portals, offered to show him a realization of his dream.  But, lo!
even as he entered the stately corridor it seemed to crumble away
before him, and disclosed a hideous abyss beyond, in which the whole of
that goodly palace lay in heaped and tangled ruins--the fitting symbol
of his wrecked and shattered hopes."

She drew back a little way from him, but still holding on to the top of
the broken wall with one slim gauntleted hand, and swung herself to one
side, while she surveyed him with smiling, parted lips and conscious
eyelids.  He promptly covered her hand with his own, but she did not
seem to notice it.

"That is not the story," she said, in a faint voice that even her
struggling sauciness could not make steadier.  "The true story is
called 'The Legend of the Goose-Girl of Strudle Bad, and the
enterprising Gosling.'  There was once a goose-girl of the plain who
tried honestly to drive her geese to market, but one eccentric and
willful gosling--  Mr. Hathaway!  Stop--please--I beg you let me go!"

He had caught her in his arms--the one encircling her waist, the other
hand still grasping hers.  She struggled, half laughing; yielded for a
breathless moment as his lips brushed her cheek, and--threw him off.
"There!" she said, "that will do: the story was not illustrated."

"But, Yerba," he said, with passionate eagerness, "hear me--it is all
God's truth.--I love you!"

She drew back farther, shaking the dust of the wall from the folds of
her habit.  Then, with a lower voice and a paler cheek, as if his lips
had sent her blood and utterance back to her heart, she said, "Come,
let us go."

"But not until you've heard me, Yerba."

"Well, then--I believe you--there!" she said, looking at him.

"You believe me?" he repeated eagerly, attempting to take her hand
again.

She drew back still farther.  "Yes," she said, "or I shouldn't be here
now.  There! that must suffice you.  And if you wish me still to
believe you, you will not speak of this again while we are out
together.  Come, let us go back to the horses."

He looked at her with all his soul.  She was pale, but composed,
and--he could see--determined.  He followed her without a word. She
accepted his hand to support her again down the slope without
embarrassment or reminiscent emotion.  The whole scene through which
she had just passed might have been buried in the abyss and ruins
behind her.  As she placed her foot in his hand to remount, and for a
moment rested her weight on his shoulder, her brown eyes met his
frankly and without a tremor.

Nor was she content with this.  As Paul at first rode on silently, his
heart filled with unsatisfied yearning, she rallied him mischievously.
Was it kind in him on this, their first day together, to sulk in this
fashion?  Was it a promise for their future excursions?  Did he intend
to carry this lugubrious visage through the Allee and up to the
courtyard of the hotel to proclaim his sentimental condition to the
world?  At least, she trusted he would not show it to Milly, who might
remember that this was only the SECOND TIME they had met each other.
There was something so sweetly reasonable in this, and withal not
without a certain hopefulness for the future, to say nothing of the
half-mischievous, half-reproachful smile that accompanied it, that Paul
exerted himself, and eventually recovered his lost gayety.  When they
at last drew up in the courtyard, with the flush of youth and exercise
in their faces, Paul felt he was the object of envy to the loungers,
and of fresh gossip to Strudle Bad.  It struck him less pleasantly that
two dark faces, which had been previously regarding him in the gloom of
the corridor and vanished as he approached, reappeared some moments
later in Yerba's salon as Don Caesar and Dona Anna, with a benignly
different expression.  Dona Anna especially greeted him with so much of
the ostentatious archness of a confident and forgiving woman to a
momentarily recreant lover, that he felt absurdly embarrassed in
Yerba's presence.  He was thinking how he could excuse himself, when he
noticed a beautiful basket of flowers on the table and a tiny note
bearing a baron's crest.  Yerba had put it aside with--as it seemed to
him at the moment--an almost too pronounced indifference--and an
indifference that was strongly contrasted to Dona Anna's eagerly
expressed enthusiasm over the offering, and her ultimate supplications
to Paul and her brother to admire its beauties and the wonderful taste
of the donor.

All this seemed so incongruous with Paul's feelings, and above all with
the recollection of his scene with Yerba, that he excused himself from
dining with the party, alleging an engagement with his old
fellow-traveler the German officer, whose acquaintance he had renewed.
Yerba did not press him; he even fancied she looked relieved.  Colonel
Pendleton was coming; Paul was not loath, in his present frame of mind,
to dispense with his company.  A conviction that the colonel's counsel
was not the best guide for Yerba, and that in some vague way their
interests were antagonistic, had begun to force itself upon him.  He
had no intention of being disloyal to her old guardian, but he felt
that Pendleton had not been frank with him since his return from
Rosario.  Had he ever been so with HER?  He sometimes doubted his
disclaimer.

He was lucky in finding the General disengaged, and together they dined
at a restaurant and spent the evening at the Kursaal.  Later, at the
Residenz Club, the General leaned over his beer-glass and smilingly
addressed his companion.

"So I hear you, too, are a conquest of the beautiful South American."

For an instant Paul, recognizing only Dona Anna under that epithet,
looked puzzled.

"Come, my friend," said the General regarding him with some amusement,
"I am an older man than you, yet I hardly think I could have ridden out
with such a goddess without becoming her slave."

Paul felt his face flush in spite of himself.  "Ah! you mean Miss
Arguello," he said hurriedly, his color increasing at his own mention
of that name as if he were imposing it upon his honest companion.  "She
is an old acquaintance of mine--from my own State--California."

"Ah, so," said the General, lifting his eyebrows in profound apology.
"A thousand pardons."

"Surely," said Paul, with a desperate attempt to recover his
equanimity, "YOU ought to know our geography better."

"So, I am wrong.  But still the name--Arguello--surely that is not
American?  Still, they say she has no accent, and does not look like a
Mexican."

For an instant Paul was superstitiously struck with the fatal
infelicity of Yerba's selection of a foreign name, that now seemed only
to invite that comment and criticism which she should have avoided.
Nor could he explain it at length to the General without assisting and
accenting the deception, which he was always hoping in some vague way
to bring to an end.  He was sorry he had corrected the General; he was
furious that he had allowed himself to be confused.

Happily his companion had misinterpreted his annoyance, and with
impulsive German friendship threw himself into what he believed to be
Paul's feelings.  "Donnerwetter!  Your beautiful countrywoman is made
the subject of curiosity just because that stupid baron is persistent
in his serious attentions.  That is quite enough, my good friend, to
make Klatschen here among those animals who do not understand the
freedom of an American girl, or that an heiress may have something else
to do with her money than to expend it on the Baron's mortgages.
But"--he stopped, and his simple, honest face assumed an air of
profound and sagacious cunning--"I am glad to talk about it with you,
who of course are perfectly familiar with the affair.  I shall now be
able to know what to say.  My word, my friend, has some weight here,
and I shall use it.  And now you shall tell me WHO is our lovely
friend, and WHO were her parents and her kindred in her own home.  Her
associates here, you possibly know, are an impossible colonel and his
never-before-approached valet, with some South American Indian
planters, and, I believe, a pork-butcher's daughter.  But of THEM--it
makes nothing.  Tell me of HER people."

With his kindly serious face within a few inches of Paul's, and
sympathizing curiosity beaming from his pince-nez, he obliged the
wretched and conscience-stricken Hathaway to respond with a detailed
account of Yerba's parentage as projected by herself and indorsed by
Colonel Pendleton.  He dwelt somewhat particularly on the romantic
character of the Trust, hoping to draw the General's attention away
from the question of relationship, but he was chagrined to find that
the honest warrior evidently confounded the Trust with some
eleemosynary institution and sympathetically glossed it over.  "Of
course," he said, "the Mexican Minister at Berlin would know all about
the Arguello family: so there would be no question there."

Paul was not sorry when the time came to take leave of his friend; but
once again in the clear moonlight and fresh, balmy air of the Allee, he
forgot the unpleasantness of the interview.  He found himself thinking
only of his ride with Yerba.  Well! he had told her that he loved her.
She knew it now, and although she had forbidden him to speak further,
she had not wholly rejected it.  It must be her morbid consciousness of
the mystery of her birth that withheld a return of her
affections,--some half-knowledge, perhaps, that she would not divulge,
yet that kept her unduly sensitive of accepting his love.  He was
satisfied there was no entanglement; her heart was virgin.  He even
dared to hope that she had ALWAYS cared for him.  It was for HIM to
remove all obstacles--to prevail upon her to leave this place and
return to America with him as her husband, the guardian of her good
name, and the custodian of her secret.  At times the strains of a
dreamy German waltz, played in the distance, brought back to him the
brief moment that his arm had encircled her waist by the crumbling
wall, and his pulses grew languid, only to leap firmer the next moment
with more desperate resolve.  He would win her, come what may!  He
could never have been in earnest before: he loathed and hated himself
for his previous passive acquiescence to her fate.  He had been a weak
tool of the colonel's from the first: he was even now handicapped by a
preposterous promise he had given him!  Yes, she was right to
hesitate--to question his ability to make her happy!  He had found her
here, surrounded by stupidity and cupidity--to give it no other
name--so patent that she was the common gossip, and had offered nothing
but a boyish declaration!  As he strode into the hotel that night it
was well that he did not meet the unfortunate colonel on the staircase!

It was very late, although there was still visible a light in Yerba's
salon, shining on her balcony, which extended before and included his
own window.  From time to time he could hear the murmur of voices.  It
was too late to avail himself of the invitation to join them, even if
his frame of mind had permitted it.  He was too nervous and excited to
go to bed, and, without lighting his candle, he opened the French
window that gave upon the balcony, drew a chair in the recess behind
the curtain, and gazed upon the night.  It was very quiet; the moon was
high, the square was sleeping in a trance of checkered shadows, like a
gigantic chessboard, with black foreshortened trees for pawns.  The
click of a cavalry sabre, the sound of a footfall on the pavement of
the distant Konigsstrasse, were distinctly audible; a far-off railway
whistle was startling in its abruptness.  In the midst of this calm the
opening of the door of the salon, with the sudden uplifting of voices
in the hall, told Paul that Yerba's guests were leaving.  He heard Dona
Anna's arch accents--arch even to Colonel Pendleton's monotonous
baritone!--Milly's high, rapid utterances, the suave falsetto of Don
Caesar, and HER voice, he thought a trifle wearied,--the sound of
retiring footsteps, and all was still again.

So still that the rhythmic beat of the distant waltz returned to him,
with a distinctiveness that he could idly follow.  He thought of
Rosario and the rose-breath of the open windows with a strange longing,
and remembered the half-stifled sweetness of her happy voice rising
with it from the veranda.  Why had he ever let it pass from him then
and waft its fragrance elsewhere?  Why--  What was that?

The slight turning of a latch!  The creaking of the French window of
the salon, and somebody had slipped softly half out on the balcony.
His heart stopped beating.  From his position in the recess of his own
window, with his back to the partition of the salon, he could see
nothing.  Yet he did not dare to move.  For with the quickened senses
of a lover he felt the diffused and perfumed aura of HER presence, of
HER garments, of HER flesh, flow in upon him through the open window,
and possess his whole breathless being!  It was SHE!  Like him,
perhaps, longing to enjoy the perfect night--like him, perhaps,
thinking of--

"So you ar-range to get rid of me--ha! lik thees?  To tur-rn me off
from your heels like a dog who have follow you--but without a
word--without a--a--thanks--without a 'ope!  Ah!--we have ser-rved
you--me and my sister; we are the or-range dry--now we can go!  Like
the old shoe, we are to be flung away!  Good!  But I am here again--you
see.  I shall speak, and you shall hear-r."

Don Caesar's voice--alone with her!  Paul gripped his chair and sat
upright.

"Stop!  Stay where you are!  How dared you return here?"  It was
Yerba's voice, on the balcony, low and distinct.

"Shut the window!  I shall speak with you what you will not the world
to hear."

"I prefer to keep where I am, since you have crept into this room like
a thief!"

"A thief!  Good!"  He broke out in Spanish, and, as if no longer
fearful of being overheard, had evidently drawn nearer to the window.
"A thief.  Ha! muy bueno--but it is not I, you understand--I, Caesar
Briones, who am the thief!  No!  It is that swaggering espadachin--that
fanfarron of a Colonel Pendleton--that pattern of an official, Mr.
Hathaway--that most beautiful heiress of the Californias, Miss
ARGUELLO--that are thieves!  Yes--of a NAME--Miss Arguello--of a NAME!
The name of Arguello!"

Paul rose to his feet.

"Ah, so!  You start--you turn pale--you flash your eyes, senora, but
you think you have deceived me all these years.  You think I did not
see your game at Rosario--yes, even when that foolish Castro muchacha
first put that idea in your head.  Who furnished you the facts you
wanted?  I--Mother of God! SUCH FACTS!--I, who knew the Arguello
pedigree--I, who know it was as impossible for you to be a daughter of
them as--what? let me think--as--as it is impossible for you to be the
wife of that baron whom you would deceive with the rest!  Ah, yes; it
was a high flight for you, Mees--Mees--Dona Fulana--a noble game for
you to bring down!"

Why did she not speak?  What was she doing?  If she had but uttered a
single word of protest, of angry dismissal, Paul would have flown to
her side.  It could not be the paralysis of personal fear: the balcony
was wide; she could easily pass to the end; she could even see his open
window.

"Why did I do this?  Because I loved you, senora--and you knew it! Ah!
you can turn your face away now; you can pretend to misunderstand me,
as you did a moment ago; you can part from me now like a mere
acquaintance--but it was not always so!  No, it was YOU who brought me
here; your eyes that smiled into mine--and drove home the colonel's
request that I and my sister should accompany you.  God! I was weak
then!  You smile, senora; you think you have succeeded--you and your
pompous colonel and your clever governor! You think you have
compromised me, and perjured ME, because of this.  You are wrong!  You
think I dare not speak to this puppet of a baron, and that I have no
proofs.  You are wrong!"

"And even if you can produce them, what care I?" said Yerba
unexpectedly, yet in a voice so free from excitement and passion that
the weariness which Paul had at first noticed seemed to be the only
dominant tone.  "Suppose you prove that I am not an Arguello. Good! you
have yet to show that a connection with any of your race would be
anything but a disgrace."

"Ah! you defy me, little one!  Caramba!  Listen, then!  You do not know
all!  When you thought I was only helping you to fabricate your claim
to the Arguellos' name, I was finding out WHO YOU REALLY WERE!  Ah!  It
was not so difficult as you fondly hope, senora.  We were not all
brutes and fools in the early days, though we stood aside to let your
people run their vulgar course.  It was your hired bully--your
respected guardian--this dog of an espadachin, who let out a hint of
the secret--with a prick of his blade--and a scandal.  One of my peon
women was a servant at the convent when you were a child, and
recognized the woman who put you there and came to see you as a friend.
She overheard the Mother Superior say it was your mother, and saw a
necklace that was left for you to wear.  Ah! you begin to believe!
When I had put this and that together I found that Pepita could not
identify you with the child that she had seen.  But you, senora, you
YOURSELF supplied the missing proof!  Yes! you supplied it with the
NECKLACE that you wore that evening at Rosario, when you wished to do
honor to this young Hathaway--the guardian who had always thrown you
off! Ah!--you now suspect why, perhaps!  It was your mother's necklace
that you wore, and you said so!  That night I sent the good Pepita to
identify it; to watch through the window from the garden when you were
wearing it; to make it sure as the Creed.  I sent her to your room late
that night when you had changed your dress, that she might examine it
among your jewels.  And she did and will swear--look you!--SWEAR that
it is the one given you as a child by the woman at the convent, who was
your mother!  And who was that woman--eh?  Who was the mother of the
Arguello de la Yerba Buena?--who this noble ancestress?"

"Excuse me--but perhaps you are not aware that you are raising your
voice in a lady's drawing-room, and that although you are speaking a
language no one here understands, you are disturbing the hotel."

It was Paul, quiet, pale in the moonlight, erect on the balcony before
the window.  As Yerba, with a start, retreated quickly into the room,
Don Caesar stepped forward angrily and suspiciously towards the window.
He had his hand reached forward towards the handle as if to close the
swinging sash against the intruder, when in an instant he was seized by
Paul, tightly locked in a desperate grip, and whirled out on the
balcony.  Before he could gain breath to utter a cry, Hathaway had
passed his right arm around the Mexican's throat, effectively stopping
his utterance, and, with a supreme effort of strength, dragged him
along the wall, falling with him into the open window of his own room.
As he did so, to his inexpressible relief he heard the sash closed and
the bolt drawn of the salon window, and regained his feet, collected,
quiet, and triumphant.

"I am sorry," he said, coolly dusting his clothes, "to have been
obliged to change the scene of this discussion so roughly, but you will
observe that you can speak more freely HERE, and that any altercation
WE may have in this room will be less likely to attract comment."

"Assassin!" said Don Caesar chokingly, as he struggled to his feet.

"Thank you.  Relieve your feelings as much as you like here; in fact,
if you would speak a little louder you would oblige me.  The guests are
beginning to be awake," continued Paul, with a wicked smile, indicating
the noise of an opening door and footsteps in the passage, "and are now
able to locate without difficulty the scene of the disturbance."

Briones apparently understood his meaning and the success of his
stratagem.  "You think you have saved HER from disgrace," he said, with
a livid smile, in a lower tone and a desperate attempt to imitate
Paul's coolness.  "For the present--ah--yees! perhaps in this hotel and
this evening.  But you have not stop my mouth for--a--to-morrow--and
the whole world, Mr. Hathaway."

"Well," said Paul, looking at him critically, "I don't know about that.
Of course, there's the equal chance that you may kill me--but that's a
question for to-morrow, too."

The Mexican cast a quick glance at the door and window.  Paul, as if
carelessly, changed the key of the former from one pocket to the other,
and stepped before the window.

"So this is a plot to murder me!  Have a care!  You are not in your own
brigand California!"

"If you think so, alarm the house.  They will find us quarreling, and
you will only precipitate matters by receiving the insult that will
make you fight--before them."

"I am r-ready, sir, when and where you will," said Briones, with a
swaggering air but a shifting, furtive eye.  "Open--a--the door."

"Pardon me.  We will leave this room TOGETHER in an hour for the
station.  We will board the night express that will take us in three
hours beyond the frontier, where we can each find a friend."

"But my affairs here--my sister--I must see her."

"You shall write a note to her at that table, saying that important
business--a dispatch--has called you away, and we will leave it with
the porter to be delivered IN THE MORNING.  Or--I do not restrict
you--you can say what you like, provided she don't get it until we have
left."

"And you make of me a prisoner, sir?"

"No; a visitor, Don Caesar--a visitor whose conversation is so
interesting that I am forced to detain him to hear more.  You can pass
the time pleasantly by finishing the story I was obliged to interrupt a
moment ago.  Do you know this mother of Miss Yerba, of whom you spoke?"

"That's m--my affair."

"That means you don't know her.  If you did, you'd have had her within
call.  And, as she is the only person who is able to say that Miss
Yerba is NOT an Arguello, you have been very remiss."

"Ah, bah! I am not one of your--a--lawyers."

"No; or you would know that, with no better evidence than you have, you
might be sued for slander."

"Ah!  Why does not Miss Yerba sue, then?"

"Because she probably expects that somebody will shoot you."

"As YOU for instance?"

"Perhaps."

"And if you do NOT--eh?--you have not stop my mouth, but your own. And
if you DO, you help her to marry the Baron, your rival.  You are not
wise, friend Hathaway."

"May I remind you that you have not yet written to your sister, and you
may prefer to do it carefully and deliberately?"

Don Caesar arose with a vindictive glance at Paul, and pulled a chair
before the table, as the latter placed pen, ink, and paper before him.
"Take your time," he added, folding his arms and walking towards the
window.  "Say what you like, and don't let my presence restrain you."

The Mexican began to write furiously, then spasmodically, then slowly
and reluctantly.  "I war-r-n you, I shall expose all," he said suddenly.

"As you please."

"And shall say that if I disappear, you are my murderer--you
understand--my MURDERER!"

"Don't consult me on a question of epithets, but go on."

Don Caesar recommenced his writing with a malign smile.  There was a
sudden sharp rap at the door.

Don Caesar leaped to his feet, grasped his papers, and rushed to the
door; but Paul was before him.  "Who is there?" he demanded.

"Pendleton."

At the sound of the colonel's voice Don Caesar fell back.  Paul opened
the door, admitted the tall figure of the colonel, and was about to
turn the key again.  But Pendleton lifted his hand in grim deprecation.

"That will do, Mr. Hathaway.  I know all.  But I wish to speak with
Briones elsewhere, alone."

"Excuse me, Colonel Pendleton," said Paul firmly, "but I have the prior
claim.  Words have passed between this gentleman and myself which we
are now on our way to the station and the frontier to settle.  If you
are willing to accompany us, I shall give you every opportunity to
converse with him alone, and arrange whatever business you may have
with him, provided it does not interfere with mine."

"My business," said Pendleton, "is of a personal nature, that will not
interfere with any claim of yours that Mr. Briones may choose to admit,
but is of a private quality that must be transacted between us now."
His face was pale, and his voice, although steady and self-controlled,
had that same strange suggestion of sudden age in it which Paul had
before noticed.  Whether Don Caesar detected it, or whether he had some
other instinctive appreciation of greater security, Paul could not
tell.  He seemed to recover his swagger again, as he said,--

"I shall hear what Colonel Pendleton has to say first.  But I shall
hold myself in readiness to meet you afterwards--you shall not fear,
sir!"

Paul remained looking from the one to the other without speaking. It
was Don Caesar who returned his glance boldly and defiantly, Colonel
Pendleton who, with thin white fingers pulling his moustache, evaded
it.  Then Paul unlocked the door, and said slowly, "In five minutes I
leave this house for the station.  I shall wait there until the train
arrives.  If this gentleman does not join me, I shall be better able to
understand all this and take measures accordingly."

"And I tell to you, Meester Hathaway, sir," said Don Caesar, striking
an attitude in the doorway, "you shall do as I please--Caramba!--and
shall beg"--

"Hold your tongue, sir--or, by the Eternal!"--burst out Pendleton
suddenly, bringing down his thin hand on the Mexican's shoulder. He
stopped as suddenly.  "Gentlemen, this is childish.  Go, sir!" to Don
Caesar, pointing with a gaunt white finger into the darkened hall.  "I
will follow you.  Mr. Hathaway, as an older man, and one who has seen a
good deal of foolish altercation, I regret, sir, deeply regret, to be a
witness to this belligerent quality in a law-maker and a public man;
and I must deprecate, sir--deprecate, your demand on that gentleman for
what, in the folly of youth, you are pleased to call personal
satisfaction."

As he moved with dignity out of the room, Paul remained blankly staring
after him.  Was it all a dream?--or was this Colonel Pendleton the
duelist?  Had the old man gone crazy, or was he merely acting to veil
some wild purpose?  His sudden arrival showed that Yerba must have sent
for him and told him of Don Caesar's threats; would he be wild enough
to attempt to strangle the man in some remote room or in the darkness
of the passage?  He stepped softly into the hall: he could still hear
the double tread of the two men: they had reached the staircase--they
were DESCENDING!  He heard the drowsy accents of the night porter and
the swinging of the door--they were in the street!

Wherever they were going, or for what purpose, HE must be at the
station, as he had warned them he would be.  He hastily threw a few
things into his valise, and prepared to follow them.  When he went
downstairs he informed the porter that owing to an urgent call of
business he should try to catch the through express at three o'clock,
but they must retain his room and luggage until they heard from him.
He remembered Don Caesar's letter.  Had either of the gentlemen, his
friends who had just gone out, left a letter or message?  No,
Excellency; the gentlemen were talking earnestly--he believed, in the
South American language--and had not spoken to him.

Perhaps it was this that reminded Paul, as he crossed the square again,
that he had made no preparation for any possible fatal issue to himself
in this adventure.  SHE would know it, however, and why he had
undertaken it.  He tried to think that perhaps some interest in himself
had prompted her to send the colonel to him.  Yet, mingled with this
was an odd sense of a certain ridiculousness in his position: there was
the absurdity of his prospective antagonist being even now in
confidential consultation with his own friend and ally, whose functions
he had usurped, and in whose interests he was about to risk his life.
And as he walked away through the silent streets, the conviction more
than once was forced upon him that he was going to an appointment that
would not be kept.

He reached the station some ten minutes before the train was due. Two
or three half-drowsy, wrapped-up passengers were already on the
platform; but neither Don Caesar nor Colonel Pendleton was among them.
He explored the waiting-rooms and even the half-lit buffet, but with no
better success.  Telling the Bahnhof Inspector that his passage was
only contingent upon the arrival of one or two companions, and
describing them minutely to prevent mistakes, he began gloomily to pace
before the ticket-office.  Five minutes passed--the number of
passengers did not increase; ten minutes; a distant shriek--the hoarse
inquiry of the inspector--had the Herr's companions yet gekommt? the
sudden glare of a Cyclopean eye in the darkness, the ongliding of the
long-jointed and gleaming spotted serpent, the train--a hurried glance
around the platform, one or two guttural orders, the slamming of doors,
the remounting of black uniformed figures like caryatides along the
marchepieds, a puff of vapor, and the train had come and gone without
them.

Yet he would give his adversary fifteen minutes more to allow for
accident or delay, or the possible arrival of the colonel with an
explanation, and recommenced his gloomy pacing, as the Bahnhof sank
back into half-lit repose.  At the end of five minutes there was
another shriek.  Paul turned quickly to the inspector.  Ah, then, there
was another train?  No; it was only the up express for Basle, going the
other way and stopping at the Nord Station, half a mile away.  It would
not stop here, but the Herr would see it pass in a few moments at full
speed.

It came presently, with a prolonged despairing shriek, out of the
darkness; a flash, a rush and roar at his side, a plunge into the
darkness again with the same despairing cry; a flutter of something
white from one of the windows, like a loosened curtain, that at last
seemed to detach itself, and, after a wild attempt to follow, suddenly
soared aloft, whirled over and over, dropped, and drifted slowly,
slantwise, to the ground.

The inspector had seen it, ran down the line, and picked it up. Then he
returned with it to Paul with a look of sympathizing concern.  It was a
lady's handkerchief, evidently some signal waved to the well-born Herr,
who was the only passenger on the platform. So, possibly, it might be
from his friends, who by some stupid mischance had gone to the wrong
station, and--Gott im Himmel!--it was hideously stupid, yet possible,
got on the wrong train!

The Herr, a little pale, but composed, thought it WAS possible. No; he
would not telegraph to the next station--not yet--he would inquire.

He walked quickly away, reaching the hotel breathlessly, yet in a space
that seemed all too brief for his disconnected thought. There were
signs of animation in the hall, and an empty carriage was just
reentering the courtyard.  The hall-porter met him with demonstrative
concern and apology.  Ah! if he had only understood his Excellency
better, he could have saved him all this trouble. Evidently his
Excellency was going with the Arguello party, who had ordered a
carriage, doubtless, for the same important journey, an hour before,
yet had left only a few moments after his Excellency, and his
Excellency, it would appear, had gone to the wrong station.

Paul pushed hurriedly past the man and ascended to his room.  Both
windows were open, and in the faint moonlight he could see that
something white was pinned to his pillow.  With nervous fingers he
relit his candles, and found it was a note in Yerba's handwriting. As
he opened it, a tiny spray of the vine that had grown on the crumbling
wall fell at his feet.  He picked it up, pressed it to his lips, and
read, with dim eyes, as follows:--


"You know now why I spoke to you as I did to-day, and why the other
half of this precious spray is the only memory I care to carry with me
out of this crumbling ruin of all my hopes.  You were right, Paul: my
taking you there WAS AN OMEN--not to you, who can never be anything but
proud, beloved, and true--but to ME of all the shame and misery.  Thank
you for all you have done--for all you would do, my friend, and don't
think me ungrateful, only because I am unworthy of it.  Try to forgive
me, but don't forget me, even if you must hate me.  Perhaps, if you
knew all--you might still love a little the poor girl to whom you have
already given the only name she can ever take from you--YERBA BUENA!"



CHAPTER VII.

It was already autumn, and in the city of New York an early Sunday
morning breeze was sweeping up the leaves that had fallen from the
regularly planted ailantus trees before the brown-stone frontage of a
row of monotonously alike five-storied houses on one of the principal
avenues.  The Pastor of the Third Presbyterian Church, that uplifted
its double towers on the corner, stopped before one of these dwellings,
ran up the dozen broad steps, and rang the bell.  He was presently
admittted to the sombre richness of a hall and drawing-room with
high-backed furniture of dark carved woods, like cathedral stalls, and,
hat in hand, somewhat impatiently awaited the arrival of his hostess
and parishioner.  The door opened to a tall, white-haired woman in
lustreless black silk.  She was regular and resolute in features, of
fine but unbending presence, and, though somewhat past middle age,
showed no signs of either the weakness or mellowness of years.

"I am sorry to disturb your Sabbath morning meditations, Sister
Argalls, nor would I if it were not in the line of Christian duty; but
Sister Robbins is unable today to make her usual Sabbath hospital
visit, and I thought if you were excused from the Foreign Missionary
class and Bible instruction at three you might undertake her functions.
I know, my dear old friend," he continued, with bland deprecation of
her hard-set eyes, "how distasteful this promiscuous mingling with the
rough and ungodly has always been to you, and how reluctant you are to
be placed in the position of being liable to hear coarse, vulgar, or
irreverent speech.  I think, too, in our long and pleasant pastoral
relations, you have always found me mindful of it.  I admit I have
sometimes regretted that your late husband had not more generally
familiarized you with the ways of the world.  But so it is--we all have
our weaknesses. If not one thing, another.  And as Envy and
Uncharitableness sometimes find their way in even Christian hearts, I
should like you to undertake this office for the sake of example.
There are some, dear Sister Argalls, who think that the rich widow who
is most liberal in the endowment of the goods that Providence has
intrusted to her hands claims therefore to be exempt from labor in the
Christian vineyard.  Let us teach them how unjust they are."

"I am willing," said the lady, with a dry, determined air.  "I suppose
these patients are not professedly bad characters?"

"By no means.  A few, perhaps; but the majority are
unfortunates--dependent either upon public charity or some small
provision made by their friends."

"Very well."

"And you understand that though they have the privilege of rejecting
your Christian ministrations, dear Sister Argalls, you are free to
judge when you may be patient or importunate with them?"

"I understand."

The Pastor was not an unkindly man, and, as he glanced at the
uncompromising look in Mrs. Argalls's eyes, felt for a moment some
inconsistency between his humane instincts and his Christian duty.
"Some of them may require, and be benefited by, a stern monitress, and
Sister Robbins, I fear, was weak," he said consolingly to himself, as
he descended the steps again.

At three o'clock Mrs. Argalls, with a reticule and a few tracts, was at
the door of St. John's Hospital.  As she displayed her testimonials and
announced that she had taken Mrs. Robbins's place, the officials
received her respectfully, and gave some instructions to the
attendants, which, however, did not stop some individual comments.

"I say, Jim, it doesn't seem the square thing to let that grim old girl
loose among them poor convalescents."

"Well, I don't know: they say she's rich and gives a lot o' money away,
but if she tackles that swearing old Kentuckian in No. 3, she'll have
her hands full."

However, the criticism was scarcely fair, for Mrs. Argalls, although
moving rigidly along from bed to bed of the ward, equipped with a
certain formula of phrases, nevertheless dropped from time to time some
practical common-sense questions that showed an almost masculine
intuition of the patients' needs and requirements.  Nor did she betray
any of that over-sensitive shrinking from coarseness which the good
Pastor had feared, albeit she was quick to correct its exhibition.  The
languid men listened to her with half-aggressive, half-amused interest,
and some of the satisfaction of taking a bitter but wholesome tonic.
It was not until she reached the bed at the farther end of the ward
that she seemed to meet with any check.

It was occupied by a haggard man, with a long white moustache and
features that seemed wasted by inward struggle and fever.  At the first
sound of her voice he turned quickly towards her, lifted himself on his
elbow, and gazed fixedly in her face.

"Kate Howard--by the Eternal!" he said, in a low voice.

Despite her rigid self-possession the woman started, glanced hurriedly
around, and drew nearer to him.

"Pendleton!" she said, in an equally suppressed voice, "What, in God's
name, are you doing here?"

"Dying, I reckon--sooner or later," he said grimly, "that's what they
do here."

"But--what," she went on hurriedly, still glancing over her shoulder as
if she suspected some trick--"what has brought you to this?"

"YOU!" said the colonel, dropping back exhaustedly on his pillow. "You
and your daughter."

"I don't understand you," she said quickly, yet regarding him with
stern rigidity.  "You know perfectly well I have NO daughter.  You know
perfectly well that I've kept the word I gave you ten years ago, and
that I have been dead to her as she has been to me."

"I know," said the colonel, "that within the last three months I have
paid away my last cent to keep the mouth of an infernal scoundrel shut
who KNOWS that you are her mother, and threatens to expose her to her
friends.  I know that I'm dying here of an old wound that I got when I
shut the mouth of another hound who was ready to bark at her two years
after you disappeared.  I know that between you and her I've let my old
nigger die of a broken heart, because I couldn't keep him to suffer
with me, and I know that I'm here a pauper on the State.  I know that,
Kate, and when I say it I don't regret it.  I've kept my word to YOU,
and, by the Eternal, your daughter's worth it!  For if there ever was a
fair and peerless creature--it's your child!"

"And she--a rich woman--unless she squandered the fortune I gave
her--lets you lie here!" said the woman grimly.

"She don't know it."

"She SHOULD know it!  Have you quarreled?"  She was looking at him
keenly.

"She distrusts me, because she half suspects the secret, and I hadn't
the heart to tell her all."

"All?  What does she know?  What does this man know?  What has been
told her?" she said rapidly.

"She only knows that the name she has taken she has no right to."

"Right to?  Why, it was written on the Trust--Yerba Buena."

"No, not that.  She thought it was a mistake.  She took the name of
Arguello."

"What?" said Mrs. Argalls, suddenly grasping the invalid's wrist with
both hands.  "What name?" her eyes were startled from their rigid
coldness, her lips were colorless.

"Arguello!  It was some foolish schoolgirl fancy which that hound
helped to foster in her.  Why--what's the matter, Kate?"

The woman dropped the helpless man's wrist, then, with an effort,
recovered herself sufficiently to rise, and, with an air of increased
decorum, as if the spiritual character of their interview excluded
worldly intrusion, adjusted the screen around his bed, so as partly to
hide her own face and Pendleton's.  Then, dropping into the chair
beside him, she said, in her old voice, from which the burden of ten
long years seemed to have been lifted,--

"Harry, what's that you're playing on me?"

"I don't understand you," said Pendleton amazedly.

"Do you mean to say you don't know it, and didn't tell her yourself?"
she said curtly.

"What?  Tell her what?" he repeated impatiently.

"That Arguello WAS her father!"

"Her father?"  He tried to struggle to his elbow again, but she laid
her hand masterfully upon his shoulder and forced him back. "Her
father!" he repeated hurriedly.  "Jose Arguello!  Great God!--are you
sure?"

Quietly and yet mechanically gathering the scattered tracts from the
coverlet, and putting them back, one by one in her reticule, she closed
it and her lips with a snap as she uttered--"Yes."

Pendleton remained staring at her silently, "Yes," he muttered, "it may
have been some instinct of the child's, or some diabolical fancy of
Briones'.  But," he said bitterly, "true or not, she has no right to
his name."

"And I say she HAS."

She had risen to her feet, with her arms folded across her breast, in
an attitude of such Puritan composure that the distant spectators might
have thought she was delivering an exordium to the prostrate man.

"I met Jose Arguello, for the second time, in New Orleans," she said
slowly, "eight years ago.  He was still rich, but ruined in health by
dissipation.  I was tired of my way of life.  He proposed that I should
marry him to take care of him and legitimatize our child.  I was forced
to tell him what I had done with her, and that the Trust could not be
disturbed until she was of age and her own mistress.  He assented.  We
married, but he died within a year.  He died, leaving with me his
acknowledgment of her as his child, and the right to claim her if I
chose."

"And?"--interrupted the colonel with sparkling eyes.

"I DON'T CHOOSE.

"Hear me!" she continued firmly.  "With his name and my own mistress,
and the girl, as I believed, properly provided for and ignorant of my
existence, I saw no necessity for reopening the past.  I resolved to
lead a new life as his widow.  I came north. In the little New England
town where I first stopped, the country people contracted my name to
Mrs. Argalls.  I let it stand so.  I came to New York and entered the
service of the Lord and the bonds of the Church, Henry Pendleton, as
Mrs. Argalls, and have remained so ever since."

"But you would not object to Yerba knowing that you lived, and rightly
bore her father's name?" said Pendleton eagerly.

The woman looked at him with compressed lips.  "I should.  I have
buried all my past, and all its consequences.  Let me not seek to
reopen it or recall them."

"But if you knew that she was as proud as yourself, and that this very
uncertainty as to her name and parentage, although she has never known
the whole truth, kept her from taking the name and becoming the wife of
a man whom she loves?"

"Whom she loves!"

"Yes; one of her guardians---Hathaway--to whom you intrusted her when
she was a child."

"Paul Hathaway--but HE knew it."

"Yes.  But SHE does not know he does.  He has kept the secret
faithfully, even when she refused him."

She was silent for a moment, and then said,--

"So be it.  I consent."

"And you'll write to her?" said the colonel eagerly.

"No.  But YOU may, and if you want them I will furnish you with such
proofs as you may require."

"Thank you."  He held out his hand with such a happy yet childish
gratitude upon his worn face that her own trembled slightly as she took
it.  "Good-by!"

"I shall see you soon," she said.

"I shall be here," he said grimly.

"I think not," she returned, with the first relaxation of her smileless
face, and moved away.

As she passed out she asked to see the house surgeon.  How soon did he
think the patient she had been conversing with could be removed from
the hospital with safety?  Did Mrs. Argalls mean "far?"  Mrs. Argalls
meant as far as THAT--tendering her card and eminently respectable
address.  Ah!--perhaps in a week.  Not before?  Perhaps before, unless
complications ensued; the patient had been much run down physically,
though, as Mrs. Argalls had probably noticed, he was singularly strong
in nervous will force.  Mrs. Argalls HAD noticed it, and considered it
an extraordinary case of conviction--worthy of the closest watching and
care.  When he was able to be moved she would send her own carriage and
her own physician to superintend his transfer.  In the mean time he was
to want for nothing.  Certainly, he had given very little trouble, and,
in fact, wanted very little.  Just now he had only asked for paper,
pens, and ink.



CHAPTER VIII.

As Mrs. Argalls's carriage rolled into Fifth Avenue, it for a moment
narrowly grazed another carriage, loaded with luggage, driving up to a
hotel.  The abstracted traveler within it was Paul Hathaway, who had
returned from Europe that morning.

Paul entered the hotel, and, going to the register mechanically, turned
its leaves for the previous arrivals, with the same hopeless patience
that had for the last six weeks accompanied this habitual preliminary
performance on his arrival at the principal European hotels.  For he
had lost all trace of Yerba, Pendleton, Milly, and the Briones from the
day of their departure.  The entire party seemed to have separated at
Basle, and, in that eight-hours' start they had of him, to have
disappeared to the four cardinal points. He had lingered a few days in
London to transact some business; he would linger a few days longer in
New York before returning to San Francisco.

The daily papers already contained his name in the list of the steamer
passengers who arrived that morning.  It might meet HER eye, although
he had been haunted during the voyage by a terrible fancy that she was
still in Europe, and had either hidden herself in some obscure
provincial town with the half-crazy Pendleton, or had entered a
convent, or even, in reckless despair, had accepted the name and title
of some penniless nobleman.  It was this miserable doubt that had made
his homeward journey at times seem like a cruel desertion of her, while
at other moments the conviction that Milly's Californian relatives
might give him some clew to her whereabouts made him feverishly fearful
of delaying an hour on his way to San Francisco.  He did not believe
that she had tolerated the company of Briones a single moment after the
scene at the Bad Hof, and yet he had no confidence in the colonel's
attitude towards the Mexican.  Hopeless of the future as her letter
seemed, still its naive and tacit confession of her feelings at the
moment was all that sustained him.

Two days passed, and he still lingered aimlessly in New York.  In two
days more the Panama steamer would sail--yet in his hesitation he had
put off securing his passage.  He visited the offices of the different
European steamer lines, and examined the recent passenger lists, but
there was no record of any of the party.  What made his quest seem the
more hopeless was his belief that, after Briones' revelation, she had
cast off the name of Arguello and taken some other.  She might even be
in New York under that new name now.

On the morning of the third day, among his letters was one that bore
the postmark of a noted suburban settlement of wealthy villa-owners on
the Hudson River.  It was from Milly Woods, stating that her father had
read of his arrival in the papers, and begged he would dine and stay
the next night with them at "Under Cliff," if he "still had any
interest in the fortunes of old friends.  Of course," added the
perennially incoherent Milly, "if it bores you we sha'n't expect you."
The quick color came to Paul's careworn cheek.  He telegraphed assent,
and at sunset that afternoon stepped off the train at a little private
woodland station--so abnormally rustic and picturesque in its
brown-bark walls covered with scarlet Virginia creepers that it looked
like a theatrical erection.

Mr. Woods's station wagon was in waiting, but Paul, handing the driver
his valise, and ascertaining the general direction of the house, and
that it was not far distant, told him to go on and he would follow
afoot.  The tremor of vague anticipation had already come upon him;
something that he knew not whether he feared or longed for, only that
it was inevitable, had begun to possess him. He would soon recover
himself in the flaring glory of this woodland, and the invigoration of
this hale October air.

It was a beautiful and brilliant sunset, yet not so beautiful and
brilliant but that the whole opulent forest around him seemed to
challenge and repeat its richest as well as its most delicate dyes. The
reddening west, seen through an opening of scarlet maples, was no
longer red; the golden glory of the sun, sinking over a promontory of
gleaming yellow sumach that jutted out into the noble river, was shorn
of its intense radiance; at times in the thickest woods he seemed
surrounded by a yellow nimbus; at times so luminous was the glow of
these translucent leaves that the position of the sun itself seemed
changed, or the shadows cast in defiance of its glory.  As he walked
on, long reaches of the lordly placid stream at his side were visible,
as far as the terraces of the opposite shore, lifted on basaltic
columns, themselves streaked and veined with gold and fire.  Paul had
seen nothing like this since his boyhood; for an instant the great
heroics of the Sierran landscape were forgotten in this magnificent
harlequinade.

A dim footpath crossed the road in the direction of the house, which
for the last few moments had been slowly etching itself as a soft
vignette in a tinted aureole of walnut and maple upon the steel blue of
the river.  He was hesitating whether to take this short cut or
continue on by the road, when he heard the rustling of quick footsteps
among the fallen leaves of the variegated thicket through which it
stole.  He stopped short, the leafy screen shivered and parted, and a
tall graceful figure, like a draped and hidden Columbine, burst through
its painted foliage.  It was Yerba!

She ran quickly towards him, with parted lips, shining eyes, and a few
scarlet leaves clinging to the stuff of her worsted dress in a way that
recalled the pink petals of Rosario.

"When I saw you were not in the wagon and knew you were walking I
slipped out to intercept you, as I had something to tell you before you
saw the others.  I thought you wouldn't mind."  She stopped, and
suddenly hesitated.

What was this new strange shyness that seemed to droop her eyelids, her
proud head, and even the slim hand that had been so impulsively and
frankly outstretched towards him?  And he--Paul--what was he doing?
Where was this passionate outburst that had filled his heart for nights
and days?  Where this eager tumultuous questioning that his feverish
lips had rehearsed hour by hour?  Where this desperate courage that
would sweep the whole world away if it stood between them?  Where,
indeed?  He was standing only a few feet from her--cold, silent, and
tremulous!

She drew back a step, lifted her head with a quick toss that seemed to
condense the moisture in her shining eyes, and sent what might have
been a glittering dew-drop flying into the loosed tendrils of her hair.
Calm and erect again, she put her little hand to her jacket pocket.

"I only wanted you to read a letter I got yesterday," she said, taking
out an envelope.

The spell was broken.  Paul caught eagerly at the hand that held the
letter, and would have drawn her to him; but she put him aside gravely
but sweetly.

"Read that letter!"

"Tell me of YOURSELF first!" he broke out passionately.  "Why you fled
from me, and why I now find you here, by the merest chance, without a
word of summons from yourself, Yerba?  Tell me who is with you?  Are
you free and your own mistress--free to act for yourself and me?
Speak, darling--don't be cruel!  Since that night I have longed for
you, sought for you, and suffered for you every day and hour.  Tell me
if I find you the same Yerba who wrote"--

"Read that letter!"

"I care for none but the one you left me.  I have read and reread it,
Yerba--carried it always with me.  See!  I have it here!"  He was in
the act of withdrawing it from his breast-pocket, when she put up her
hand piteously.

"Please, Paul, please--read this letter first!"

There was something in her new supplicating grace, still retaining the
faintest suggestion of her old girlish archness, that struck him.  He
took the letter and opened it.  It was from Colonel Pendleton.

Plainly, concisely, and formally, without giving the name of his
authority or suggesting his interview with Mrs. Argalls, he had
informed Yerba that he had documentary testimony that she was the
daughter of the late Jose de Arguello, and legally entitled to bear his
name.  A copy of the instructions given to his wife, recognizing Yerba
Buena, the ward of the San Francisco Trust, as his child and hers, and
leaving to the mother the choice of making it known to her and others,
was inclosed.

Paul turned an unchanged face upon Yerba, who was watching him eagerly,
uneasily, almost breathlessly.

"And you think this concerns ME!" he said bitterly.  "You think only of
this, when I speak of the precious letter that bade me hope, and
brought me to you?"

"Paul," said the girl, with wondering eyes and hesitating lips; "do you
mean to say that--that--this is--nothing to you?"

"Yes--but forgive me, darling!" he broke out again, with a sudden vague
remorsefulness, as he once more sought her elusive hand.  "I am a
brute--an egotist!  I forgot that it might be something to YOU."

"Paul," continued the girl, her voice quivering with a strange joy, "do
you say that you--YOU yourself, care nothing for this?"

"Nothing," he answered, gazing at her transfigured face with admiring
wonder.

"And"--more timidly, as a faint aurora kindled in her checks--"that you
don't care--that--that--I am coming to you WITH A NAME, to give you
in--exchange?"

He started.

"Yerba, you are not mocking me?  You will be my wife?"

She smiled, yet moving softly backwards with the grave stateliness of a
vanishing yet beckoning goddess, until she reached the sumach-bush from
which she had emerged.  He followed.  Another backward step, and it
yielded to let her through; but even as it did so she caught him in her
arms, and for a single moment it closed upon them both, and hid them in
its glory.  A still lingering song-bird, possibly convinced that he had
mistaken the season, and that spring had really come, flew out with a
little cry to carry the message south; but even then Paul and Yerba
emerged with such innocent, childlike gravity, and, side by side,
walked so composedly towards the house, that he thought better of it.



CHAPTER IX.

It was only the THIRD time they had ever met--did Paul consider that
when he thought her cold?  Did he know now why she had not understood
him at Rosario?  Did he understand now how calculating and selfish he
had seemed to her that night?  Could he look her in the face now--no,
he must be quiet--they were so near the house, and everybody could see
them!--and say that he had ever believed her capable of making up that
story of the Arguellos?  Could he not have guessed that she had some
memory of that name in her childish recollections, how or where she
knew not?  Was it strange that a daughter should have an instinct of
her father?  Was it kind to her to know all this himself and yet reveal
nothing?  Because her mother and father had quarreled, and her mother
had run away with somebody and left her a ward to strangers--was that
to be concealed from her, and she left without a name?  This, and much
more, tenderly reproachful, bewildering and sweetly illogical, yet
inexpressibly dear to Paul, as they walked on in the gloaming.

More to the purpose, however, the fact that Briones, as far as she
knew, did not know her mother, and never before the night at Strudle
Bad had ever spoken of her.  Still more to the purpose, that he had
disappeared after an interview with the colonel that night, and that
she believed always that the colonel had bought him off.  It was not
with HER money.  She had sometimes thought that the colonel and he were
in confidence, and that was why she had lately distrusted Pendleton.
But she had refused to take the name of Arguello again after that
scene, and had called herself only by the name he had given her--would
he forgive her for ever speaking of it as she had?--Yerba Buena.  But
on shipboard, at Milly's suggestion, and to keep away from Briones, her
name had appeared on the passenger list as Miss Good, and they had
come, not to New York, but Boston.

It was possible that the colonel had extracted the information he sent
her FROM Briones.  They had parted from Pendleton in London, as he was
grumpy and queer, and, as Milly thought, becoming very miserly and
avaricious as he grew older, for he was always quarreling over the
hotel bills.  But he had Mrs. Woods's New York address at Under Cliff,
and, of course, guessed where she was. There was no address on his
letter: he had said he would write again.

Thus much until they reached the steps of the veranda, and Milly,
flying down, was ostentatiously overwhelmed with the unexpected
appearance of Mr. Paul Hathaway and Yerba, whom she had been watching
from the window for the last ten minutes.  Then the appearance of Mr.
Woods, Californian and reminiscent, and Mrs. Woods, metropolitan,
languid, and forgetful, and the sudden and formal retirement of the
girls.  An arch and indefinable mystery in the air whenever Paul and
Yerba appeared together--of which even the servants were discreetly
conscious.

At dinner Mr. Woods again became retrospective and Californian, and
dwelt upon the changes he had noticed.  It appeared the old pioneers
had in few cases attained a comfortable fortune for their old age.  "I
know," he added, "that your friend Colonel Pendleton has dropped a good
deal of money over in Europe.  Somebody told me that he actually was
reduced to take a steerage passage home.  It looks as if he might
gamble--it's an old Californian complaint." As Paul, who had become
suddenly grave again, did not speak, Mrs. Woods reminded them that she
had always doubted the colonel's moral principles.  Old as he was, he
had never got over that freedom of life and social opinion which he had
imbibed in early days.  For her part, she was very glad he had not
returned from Europe with the girls, though, of course, the presence of
Don Caesar and his sister during their European sojourn was a
corrective.  As Paul's face grew darker during this languid criticism,
Yerba, who had been watching it with a new and absorbing sympathy,
seized the first moment when they left the table to interrogate him
with heartbreaking eyes.

"You don't think, Paul, that the colonel is really poor?"

"God only knows," said Paul.  "I tremble to think how that scoundrel
may have bled him."

"And all for me!  Paul, dear, you know you were saying in the woods
that you would never, never touch my money.  What"--exultingly--"if we
gave it to him?"

What answer Paul made did not transpire, for it seemed to have been
indicated by an interval of profound silence.

But the next morning, as he and Mr. Woods were closeted in the library,
Yerba broke in upon them with a pathetic face and a telegram in her
hand.  "Oh, Paul--Mr. Hathaway--IT'S TRUE!"

Paul seized the telegram quickly: it had no signature, only the line:
"Colonel Pendleton is dangerously ill at St. John's Hospital."

"I must go at once," said Paul, rising.

"Oh, Paul"--imploringly---"let me go with you!  I should never forgive
myself if--AND IT'S ADDRESSED TO ME, and what would he think if I
didn't come?"

Paul hesitated.  "Mrs. Woods will let Milly go with us and she can stay
at the hotel.  Say yes," she continued, seeking his eyes eagerly.

He consented, and in half an hour they were in the train for New York.
Leaving Milly at the hotel, ostensibly in deference to the Woods's
prejudices, but really to save the presence of a third party at this
meeting, Paul drove with Yerba rapidly to the hospital.  They were
admitted to an anteroom.  The house surgeon received them respectfully,
but doubtingly.  The patient was a little better this morning, but very
weak.  There was a lady now with him--a member of a religious and
charitable guild, who had taken the greatest interest in him--indeed,
she had wished to take him to her own home--but he had declined at
first, and now he was too weak to be removed.

"But I received this telegram: it must have been sent at his request,"
protested Yerba.

The house surgeon looked at the beautiful face.  He was mortal.  He
would see if the patient was able to stand another interview; possibly
the regular visitor might withdraw.

When he had gone, an attendant volunteered the information that the old
gentleman was perhaps a little excited at times.  He was a wonderful
man; he had seen a great deal; he talked much of California and the
early days; he was very interesting.  Ah, it would be all right now if
the doctor found him well enough, for the lady was already going--that
was she, coming through the hall.

She came slowly towards them--erect, gray, grim--a still handsome
apparition.  Paul started.  To his horror, Yerba ran impulsively
forward, and said eagerly: "Is he better?  Can he see us now?"

The woman halted an instant, seemed to gather the prayer-book and
reticule she was carrying closer to her breast, but was otherwise
unchanged.  Replying to Paul rather than the young girl, she said
rigidly: "The patient is able to see Mr. Hathaway and Miss Yerba
Buena," and passed slowly on.  But as she reached the door she unloosed
her black mourning veil from her bonnet, and seemed to drop it across
her face with the gesture that Paul remembered she had used twelve
years ago.

"She frightens me!" said Yerba, turning a suddenly startled face on
Paul.  "Oh, Paul, I hope it isn't an omen, but she looked like some one
from the grave!"

"Hush!" said Paul, turning away a face that was whiter than her own.
"They are coming now."

The house surgeon had returned a trifle graver.  They might see him
now, but they must be warned that he wandered at times a little; and,
if he might suggest, if it was anything of family importance, they had
better make the most of their time and his lucid intervals.  Perhaps if
they were old friends--VERY old friends--he would recognize them.  He
was wandering much in the past--always in the past.

They found him in the end of the ward, but so carefully protected and
partitioned off by screens that the space around his cot had all the
privacy and security of an apartment.  He was very much changed; they
would scarcely have known him, but for the delicately curved aquiline
profile and the long white moustache--now so faint and etherealized as
to seem a mere spirit wing that rested on his pillow.  To their
surprise he opened his eyes with a smile of perfect recognition, and,
with thin fingers beyond the coverlid, beckoned to them to approach.
Yet there was still a shadow of his old reserve in his reception of
Paul, and, although one hand interlocked the fingers of Yerba--who had
at first rushed impulsively forward and fallen on her knees beside the
bed--and the other softly placed itself upon her head, his eyes were
fixed upon the young man's with the ceremoniousness due to a stranger.

"I am glad to see, sir," he began in a slow, broken, but perfectly
audible voice, "that now you are--satisfied with the right--of this
young lady--to bear the name of--Arguello--and her
relationship--sir--to one of the oldest"--

"But, my dear old friend," broke out Paul, earnestly, "I NEVER cared
for that--I beg you to believe"--

"He never--never--cared for it--dear, dear colonel," sobbed Yerba,
passionately: "it was all my fault--he thought only of me--you wrong
him!"

"I think otherwise," said the colonel, with grim and relentless
deliberation.  "I have a vivid--impression--sir--of an--interview I had
with you--at the St. Charles--where you said"--  He was silent for a
moment, and then in a quite different voice called faintly--

"George!"

Paul and Yerba glanced quickly at each other.

"George, set out some refreshment for the Honorable Paul Hathaway. The
best, sir--you understand....  A good nigger, sir--a good boy; and he
never leaves me, sir.  Only, by gad! sir, he will starve himself and
his family to be with me.  I brought him with me to California away
back in the fall of 'forty-nine.  Those were the early days, sir--the
early days."

His head had fallen back quite easily on the pillow now; but a slight
film seemed to be closing over his dark eyes, like the inner lid of an
eagle when it gazes upon the sun.

"They were the old days, sir--the days of Men--when a man's WORD was
enough for anything, and his trigger-finger settled any doubt. When the
Trust that he took from Man, Woman, or Child was never broken.  When
the tide, sir, that swept through the Golden Gate came up as far as
Montgomery Street."

He did not speak again.  But they who stood beside him knew that the
tide had once more come up to Montgomery Street, and was carrying Harry
Pendleton away with it.

========================================
========================================

MARUJA


by

BRET HARTE




MARUJA



CHAPTER I

Morning was breaking on the high road to San Jose.  The long lines of
dusty, level track were beginning to extend their vanishing point in
the growing light; on either side the awakening fields of wheat and
oats were stretching out and broadening to the sky.  In the east and
south the stars were receding before the coming day; in the west a few
still glimmered, caught among the bosky hills of the canada del
Raimundo, where night seemed to linger.  Thither some obscure,
low-flying birds were slowly winging; thither a gray coyote, overtaken
by the morning, was awkwardly limping.  And thither a tramping wayfarer
turned, plowing through the dust of the highway still unslaked by the
dewless night, to climb the fence and likewise seek the distant cover.

For some moments man and beast kept an equal pace and gait with a
strange similarity of appearance and expression; the coyote bearing
that resemblance to his more civilized and harmless congener, the dog,
which the tramp bore to the ordinary pedestrians, but both exhibiting
the same characteristics of lazy vagabondage and semi-lawlessness; the
coyote's slouching amble and uneasy stealthiness being repeated in the
tramp's shuffling step and sidelong glances. Both were young, and
physically vigorous, but both displayed the same vacillating and
awkward disinclination to direct effort.  They continued thus half a
mile apart unconscious of each other, until the superior faculties of
the brute warned him of the contiguity of aggressive civilization, and
he cantered off suddenly to the right, fully five minutes before the
barking of dogs caused the man to make a detour to the left to avoid
entrance upon a cultivated domain that lay before him.

The trail he took led to one of the scant water-courses that issued,
half spent, from the canada, to fade out utterly on the hot June plain.
It was thickly bordered with willows and alders, that made an arbored
and feasible path through the dense woods and undergrowth.  He
continued along it as if aimlessly; stopping from time to time to look
at different objects in a dull mechanical fashion, as if rather to
prolong his useless hours, than from any curious instinct, and to
occasionally dip in the unfrequent pools of water the few crusts of
bread he had taken from his pocket. Even this appeared to be suggested
more by coincidence of material in the bread and water, than from the
promptings of hunger.  At last he reached a cup-like hollow in the
hills lined with wild clover and thick with resinous odors.  Here he
crept under a manzanita-bush and disposed himself to sleep.  The act
showed he was already familiar with the local habits of his class, who
used the unfailing dry starlit nights for their wanderings, and spent
the hours of glaring sunshine asleep or resting in some wayside shadow.

Meanwhile the light quickened, and gradually disclosed the form and
outline of the adjacent domain.  An avenue cut through a park-like
wood, carefully cleared of the undergrowth of gigantic ferns peculiar
to the locality, led to the entrance of the canada.  Here began a vast
terrace of lawn, broken up by enormous bouquets of flower-beds
bewildering in color and profusion, from which again rose the flowering
vines and trailing shrubs that hid pillars, veranda, and even the long
facade of a great and dominant mansion. But the delicacy of floral
outlines running to the capitals of columns and at times mounting to
the pediment of the roof, the opulence of flashing color or the massing
of tropical foliage, could not deprive it of the imperious dignity of
size and space. Much of this was due to the fact that the original
casa--an adobe house of no mean pretensions, dating back to the early
Spanish occupation--had been kept intact, sheathed in a shell of
dark-red wood, and still retaining its patio; or inner court-yard,
surrounded by low galleries, while additions, greater in extent than
the main building, had been erected--not as wings and projections, but
massed upon it on either side, changing its rigid square outlines to a
vague parallelogram.  While the patio retained the Spanish conception
of al fresco seclusion, a vast colonnade of veranda on the southern
side was a concession to American taste, and its breadth gave that
depth of shadow to the inner rooms which had been lost in the thinner
shell of the new erection.  Its cloistered gloom was lightened by the
red fires of cardinal flowers dropping from the roof, by the yellow
sunshine of the jessamine creeping up the columns, by billows of
heliotropes breaking over its base as a purple sea.  Nowhere else did
the opulence of this climate of blossoms show itself as vividly.  Even
the Castilian roses, that grew as vines along the east front, the
fuchsias, that attained the dignity of trees, in the patio, or the four
or five monster passion-vines that bestarred the low western wall, and
told over and over again their mystic story--paled before the sensuous
glory of the south veranda.

As the sun arose, that part of the quiet house first touched by its
light seemed to waken.  A few lounging peons and servants made their
appearance at the entrance of the patio, occasionally reinforced by an
earlier life from the gardens and stables.  But the south facade of the
building had not apparently gone to bed at all: lights were still
burning dimly in the large ball-room; a tray with glasses stood upon
the veranda near one of the open French windows, and further on, a
half-shut yellow fan lay like a fallen leaf.  The sound of
carriage-wheels on the gravel terrace brought with it voices and
laughter and the swiftly passing vision of a char-a-bancs filled with
muffled figures bending low to avoid the direct advances of the sun.

As the carriage rolled away, four men lounged out of a window on the
veranda, shading their eyes against the level beams.  One was still in
evening dress, and one in the uniform of a captain of artillery; the
others had already changed their gala attire, the elder of the party
having assumed those extravagant tweeds which the tourist from Great
Britain usually offers as a gentle concession to inferior yet more
florid civilization.  Nevertheless, he beamed back heartily on the sun,
and remarked, in a pleasant Scotch accent, that:  Did they know it was
very extraordinary how clear the morning was, so free from clouds and
mist and fog?  The young man in evening dress fluently agreed to the
facts, and suggested, in idiomatic French-English, that one
comprehended that the bed was an insult to one's higher nature and an
ingratitude to their gracious hostess, who had spread out this lovely
garden and walks for their pleasure; that nothing was more beautiful
than the dew sparkling on the rose, or the matin song of the little
birds.

The other young man here felt called upon to point out the fact that
there was no dew in California, and that the birds did not sing in that
part of the country.  The foreign young gentleman received this
statement with pain and astonishment as to the fact, with passionate
remorse as to his own ignorance.  But still, as it was a charming day,
would not his gallant friend, the Captain here, accept the challenge of
the brave Englishman, and "walk him" for the glory of his flag and a
thousand pounds?

The gallant Captain, unfortunately, believed that if he walked out in
his uniform he would suffer some delay from being interrogated by
wayfarers as to the locality of the circus he would be pleasantly
supposed to represent, even if he escaped being shot as a rare
California bird by the foreign sporting contingent.  In these
circumstances, he would simply lounge around the house until his
carriage was ready.

Much as it pained him to withdraw from such amusing companions, the
foreign young gentleman here felt that he, too, would retire for the
present to change his garments, and glided back through the window at
the same moment that the young officer carelessly stepped from the
veranda and lounged towards the shrubbery.

"They've been watching each other for the last hour.  I wonder what's
up?" said the young man who remained.

The remark, without being confidential, was so clearly the first
sentence of natural conversation that the Scotchman, although relieved,
said, "Eh, man?" a little cautiously.

"It's as clear as this sunshine that Captain Carroll and Garnier are
each particularly anxious to know what the other is doing or intends to
do this morning."

"Why did they separate, then?" asked the other.

"That's a mere blind.  Garnier's looking through his window now at
Carroll, and Carroll is aware of it."

"Eh!" said the Scotchman, with good-humored curiosity.  "Is it a
quarrel?  Nothing serious, I hope.  No revolvers and bowie-knives, man,
before breakfast, eh?"

"No," laughed the younger man.  "No!  To do Maruja justice, she
generally makes a fellow too preposterous to fight.  I see you don't
understand.  You're a stranger; I'm an old habitue of the house--let me
explain.  Both of these men are in love with Maruja; or, worse than
that, they firmly believe her to be in love with THEM."

"But Miss Maruja is the eldest daughter of our hostess, is she not?"
said the Scotchman; "and I understood from one of the young ladies that
the Captain had come down from the Fort particularly to pay court to
Miss Amita, the beauty."

"Possibly.  But that wouldn't prevent Maruja from flirting with him."

"Eh! but are you not mistaken, Mr. Raymond?  Certainly a more quiet,
modest, and demure young lassie I never met."

"That's because she sat out two waltzes with you, and let you do the
talking, while she simply listened."

The elder man's fresh color for an instant heightened, but he recovered
himself with a good-humored laugh.  "Likely--likely. She's a capital
good listener."

"You're not the first man that found her eloquent.  Stanton, your
banking friend, who never talks of anything but mines and stocks, says
she's the only woman who has any conversation; and we can all swear
that she never said two words to him the whole time she sat next to him
at dinner.  But she looked at him as if she had.  Why, man, woman, and
child all give her credit for any grace that pleases themselves.  And
why?  Because she's clever enough not to practice any one of them--as
graces.  I don't know the girl that claims less and gets more.  For
instance, you don't call her pretty?" ...

"Wait a bit.  Ye'll not get on so fast, my young friend; I'm not
prepared to say that she's not," returned the Scotchman, with
good-humored yet serious caution.

"But you would have been prepared yesterday, and have said it.  She can
produce the effect of the prettiest girl here, and without challenging
comparison.  Nobody thinks of her--everybody experiences her."

"You're an enthusiast, Mr. Raymond.  As an habitue of the house, of
course, you--"

"Oh, my time came with the rest," laughed the young man, with
unaffected frankness.  "It's about two years ago now."

"I see--you were not a marrying man."

"Pardon me--it was because I was."

The Scotchman looked at him curiously.

"Maruja is an heiress.  I am a mining engineer."

"But, my dear fellow, I thought that in your country--"

"In MY country, yes.  But we are standing on a bit of old Spain. This
land was given to Dona Maria Saltonstall's ancestors by Charles V.
Look around you.  This veranda, this larger shell of the ancient casa,
is the work of the old Salem whaling captain that she married, and is
all that is American here.  But the heart of the house, as well as the
life that circles around the old patio, is Spanish.  The Dona's family,
the Estudillos and Guitierrez, always looked down upon this alliance
with the Yankee captain, though it brought improvement to the land, and
increased its value forty-fold, and since his death ever opposed any
further foreign intervention.  Not that that would weigh much with
Maruja if she took a fancy to any one; Spanish as she is throughout, in
thought and grace and feature, there is enough of the old Salem
witches' blood in her to defy law and authority in following an
unhallowed worship.  There are no sons; she is the sole heiress of the
house and estate--though, according to the native custom, her sisters
will be separately portioned from the other property, which is very
large."

"Then the Captain might still make a pretty penny on Amita," said the
Scotchman.

"If he did not risk and lose it all on Maruja.  There is enough of the
old Spanish jealousy in the blood to make even the gentle Amita never
forgive his momentary defection."

Something in his manner made the Scotchman think that Raymond spoke
from baleful experience.  How else could this attractive young fellow,
educated abroad and a rising man in his profession, have failed to
profit by his contiguity to such advantages, and the fact of his being
an evident favorite?

"But with this opposition on the part of the relatives to any further
alliances with your countrymen, why does our hostess expose her
daughters to their fascinating influence?" said the elder man, glancing
at his companion.  "The girls seem to have the usual American freedom."

"Perhaps they are therefore the less likely to give it up to the first
man who asks them.  But the Spanish duenna still survives in the
family--the more awful because invisible.  It's a mysterious fact that
as soon as a fellow becomes particularly attached to any one--except
Maruja--he receives some intimation from Pereo."

"What! the butler?  That Indian-looking fellow?  A servant?"

"Pardon me--the mayordomo.  The old confidential servitor who stands in
loco parentis.  No one knows what he says.  If the victim appeals to
the mistress, she is indisposed; you know she has such bad health.  If
in his madness he makes a confidante of Maruja, that finishes him."

"How?"

"Why, he ends by transferring his young affections to her--with the
usual result."

"Then you don't think our friend the Captain has had this confidential
butler ask his intentions yet?"

"I don't think it will be necessary," said the other, dryly.

"Umph!  Meantime, the Captain has just vanished through yon shrubbery.
I suppose that's the end of the mysterious espionage you have
discovered.  No!  De'il take it! but there's that Frenchman popping out
of the myrtlebush.  How did the fellow get there?  And, bless me!
here's our lassie, too!"

"Yes!" said Raymond, in a changed voice, "It's Maruja!"

She had approached so noiselessly along the bank that bordered the
veranda, gliding from pillar to pillar as she paused before each to
search for some particular flower, that both men felt an uneasy
consciousness.  But she betrayed no indication of their presence by
look or gesture.  So absorbed and abstracted she seemed that, by a
common instinct, they both drew nearer the window, and silently waited
for her to pass or recognize them.

She halted a few paces off to fasten a flower in her girdle.  A small
youthful figure, in a pale yellow dress, lacking even the maturity of
womanly outline.  The full oval of her face, the straight line of her
back, a slight boyishness in the contour of her hips, the infantine
smallness of her sandaled feet and narrow hands, were all suggestive of
fresh, innocent, amiable youth--and nothing more.

Forgetting himself, the elder man mischievously crushed his companion
against the wall in mock virtuous indignation.  "Eh, sir," he
whispered, with an accent that broadened with his feelings.  "Eh, but
look at the puir wee lassie!  Will ye no be ashamed o' yerself for
putting the tricks of a Circe on sic a honest gentle bairn?  Why, man,
you'll be seein' the sign of a limb of Satan in a bit thing with the
mother's milk not yet out of her! She a flirt, speerin' at men, with
that modest downcast air?  I'm ashamed of ye, Mister Raymond.  She's
only thinking of her breakfast, puir thing, and not of yon callant.
Another sacrilegious word and I'll expose you to her.  Have ye no pity
on youth and innocence?"

"Let me up," groaned Raymond, feebly, "and I'll tell you how old she
is.  Hush--she's looking."

The two men straightened themselves.  She had, indeed, lifted her eyes
towards the window.  They were beautiful eyes, and charged with
something more than their own beauty.  With a deep brunette setting
even to the darkened cornea, the pupils were blue as the sky above
them.  But they were lit with another intelligence.  The soul of the
Salem whaler looked out of the passion-darkened orbits of the mother,
and was resistless.

She smiled recognition of the two men with sedate girlishness and a
foreign inclination of the head over the flowers she was holding. Her
straight, curveless mouth became suddenly charming with the parting of
her lips over her white teeth, and left the impress of the smile in a
lighting of the whole face even after it had passed. Then she moved
away.  At the same moment Garnier approached her.

"Come away, man, and have our walk," said the Scotchman, seizing
Raymond's arm.  "We'll not spoil that fellow's sport."

"No; but she will, I fear.  Look, Mr. Buchanan, if she hasn't given him
her flowers to carry to the house while she waits here for the Captain!"

"Come away, scoffer!" said Buchanan, good-humoredly, locking his arm in
the young man's and dragging him from the veranda towards the avenue,
"and keep your observations for breakfast."



CHAPTER II

In the mean time, the young officer, who had disappeared in the
shrubbery, whether he had or had not been a spectator of the scene,
exhibited some signs of agitation.  He walked rapidly on, occasionally
switching the air with a wand of willow, from which he had impatiently
plucked the leaves, through an alley of ceanothus, until he reached a
little thicket of evergreens, which seemed to oppose his further
progress.  Turning to one side, however, he quickly found an entrance
to a labyrinthine walk, which led him at last to an open space and a
rustic summer-house that stood beneath a gnarled and venerable
pear-tree.  The summerhouse was a quaint stockade of dark madrono
boughs thatched with red-wood bark, strongly suggestive of deeper
woodland shadow.  But in strange contrast, the floor, table, and
benches were thickly strewn with faded rose-leaves, scattered as if in
some riotous play of children.  Captain Carroll brushed them aside
hurriedly with his impatient foot, glanced around hastily, then threw
himself on the rustic bench at full length and twisted his mustache
between his nervous fingers.  Then he rose as suddenly, with a few
white petals impaled on his gilded spurs and stepped quickly into the
open sunlight.

He must have been mistaken!  Everything was quiet around him, the
far-off sound of wheels in the avenue came faintly, but nothing more.

His eye fell upon the pear-tree, and even in his preoccupation he was
struck with the signs of its extraordinary age.  Twisted out of all
proportion, and knotted with excrescences, it was supported by iron
bands and heavy stakes, as if to prop up its senile decay.  He tried to
interest himself in the various initials and symbols deeply carved in
bark, now swollen and half obliterated.  As he turned back to the
summer-house, he for the first time noticed that the ground rose behind
it into a long undulation, on the crest of which the same singular
profusion of rose-leaves were scattered. It struck him as being
strangely like a gigantic grave, and that the same idea had occurred to
the fantastic dispenser of the withered flowers.  He was still looking
at it, when a rustle in the undergrowth made his heart beat
expectantly.  A slinking gray shadow crossed the undulation and
disappeared in the thicket.  It was a coyote.  At any other time the
extraordinary appearance of this vivid impersonation of the wilderness,
so near a centre of human civilization and habitation, would have
filled him with wonder.  But he had room for only a single thought now.
Would SHE come?

Five minutes passed.  He no longer waited in the summer-house, but
paced impatiently before the entrance to the labyrinth.  Another five
minutes.  He was deceived, undoubtedly.  She and her sisters were
probably waiting for him and laughing at him on the lawn.  He ground
his heel into the clover, and threw his switch into the thicket.  Yet
he would give her one--only one moment more.

"Captain Carroll!"

The voice had been and was to HIM the sweetest in the world; but even a
stranger could not have resisted the spell of its musical inflection.
He turned quickly.  She was advancing towards him from the summer-house.

"Did you think I was coming that way--where everybody could follow me?"
she laughed, softly.  "No; I came through the thicket over there,"
indicating the direction with her flexible shoulder, "and nearly lost
my slipper and my eyes--look!"  She threw back the inseparable lace
shawl from her blond head, and showed a spray of myrtle clinging like a
broken wreath to her forehead.  The young officer remained gazing at
her silently.

"I like to hear you speak my name," he said, with a slight hesitation
in his breath.  "Say it again."

"Car-roll, Car-roll, Car-roll," she murmured gently to herself two or
three times, as if enjoying her own native trilling of the r's. "It's a
pretty name.  It sounds like a song.  Don Carroll, eh!  El Capitan Don
Carroll."

"But my first name is Henry," he said, faintly.

"'Enry--that's not so good.  Don Enrico will do.  But El Capitan
Carroll is best of all.  I must have it always: El Capitan Carroll!"

"Always?"  He colored like a boy.

"Why not?"  He was confusedly trying to look through her brown lashes;
she was parrying him with the steel of her father's glance. "Come!
Well!  Captain Carroll!  It was not to tell me your name--that I knew
already was pretty--Car-roll!" she murmured again, caressing him with
her lashes; "it was not for this that you asked me to meet you face to
face in this--cold"--she made a movement of drawing her lace over her
shoulders--"cold daylight.  That belonged to the lights and the dance
and the music of last night.  It is not for this you expect me to leave
my guests, to run away from Monsieur Garnier, who pays compliments, but
whose name is not pretty--from Mr. Raymond, who talks OF me when he
can't talk TO me. They will say, This Captain Carroll could say all
that before them."

"But if they knew," said the young officer, drawing closer to her with
a paling face but brightening eyes, "if they knew I had anything else
to say, Miss Saltonstall--something--pardon me--did I hurt your
hand?--something for HER alone--is there one of them that would have
the right to object?  Do not think me foolish, Miss Saltonstall--but--I
beg--I implore you to tell me before I say more."

"Who would have a right?" said Maruja, withdrawing her hand but not her
dangerous eyes.  "Who would dare forbid you talking to me of my sister?
I have told you that Amita is free--as we all are."

Captain Carroll fell back a few steps and gazed at her with a troubled
face.  "It is possible that you have misunderstood, Miss Saltonstall?"
he faltered.  "Do you still think it is Amita that I"--he stopped and
added passionately, "Do you remember what I told you?--have you
forgotten last night?"

"Last night was--last night!" said Maruja, slightly lifting her
shoulders.  "One makes love at night--one marries in daylight.  In the
music, in the flowers, in the moonlight, one says everything; in the
morning one has breakfast--when one is not asked to have councils of
war with captains and commandantes.  You would speak of my sister,
Captain Car-roll--go on.  Dona Amita Carroll sounds very, very pretty.
I shall not object."  She held out both her hands to him, threw her
head back, and smiled.

He seized her hands passionately.  "No, no! you shall hear me--you
shall understand me.  I love YOU, Maruja--you, and you alone.  God
knows I can not help it--God knows I would not help it if I could. Hear
me.  I will be calm.  No one can hear us where we stand.  I am not mad.
I am not a traitor!  I frankly admired your sister.  I came here to see
her.  Beyond that, I swear to you, I am guiltless to her--to you.  Even
she knows no more of me than that.  I saw you, Maruja.  From that
moment I have thought of nothing--dreamed of nothing else."

"That is--three, four, five days and one afternoon ago!  You see, I
remember.  And now you want--what?"

"To let me love you, and you only.  To let me be with you.  To let me
win you in time, as you should be won.  I am not mad, though I am
desperate.  I know what is due to your station and mine--even while I
dare to say I love you.  Let me hope, Maruja, I only ask to hope."

She looked at him until she had absorbed all the burning fever of his
eyes, until her ears tingled with his passionate voice, and then--she
shook her head.

"It can not be, Carroll--no! never!"

He drew himself up under the blow with such simple and manly dignity
that her eyes dropped for the moment.  "There is another, then?" he
said, sadly.

"There is no one I care for better than you.  No!  Do not be foolish.
Let me go.  I tell you that because you can be nothing to me--you
understand, to ME.  To my sister Amita, yes."

The young soldier raised his head coldly.  "I have pressed you hard,
Miss Saltonstall--too hard, I know, for a man who has already had his
answer; but I did not deserve this.  Good-by."

"Stop," she said, gently.  "I meant not to hurt you, Captain Carroll.
If I had, it is not thus I would have done.  I need not have met you
here.  Would you have loved me the less if I had avoided this meeting?"

He could not reply.  In the depths of his miserable heart, he knew that
he would have loved her the same.

"Come," she said, laying her hand softly on his arm, "do not be angry
with me for putting you back only five days to where you were when you
first entered our house.  Five days is not much of happiness or sorrow
to forget, is it, Carroll--Captain Carroll?" Her voice died away in a
faint sigh.  "Do not be angry with me, if--knowing you could be nothing
more--I wanted you to love my sister, and my sister to love you.  We
should have been good friends--such good friends."

"Why do you say, 'Knowing it could he nothing more'?" said Carroll,
grasping her hand suddenly.  "In the name of Heaven, tell me what you
mean!"

"I mean I can not marry unless I marry one of my mother's race. That is
my mother's wish, and the will of her relations.  You are an American,
not of Spanish blood."

"But surely this is not your determination?"

She shrugged her shoulders.  "What would you?  It is the determination
of my people."

"But knowing this"--he stopped; the quick blood rose to his face.

"Go on, Captain Carroll.  You would say, Knowing this, why did I not
warn you?  Why did I not say to you when we first met, You have come to
address my sister; do not fall in love with me--I can not marry a
foreigner."

"You are cruel, Maruja.  But, if that is all, surely this prejudice can
be removed?  Why, your mother married a foreigner--an American."

"Perhaps that is why," said the girl, quietly.  She cast down her long
lashes, and with the point of her satin slipper smoothed out the soft
leaves of the clover at her feet.  "Listen; shall I tell you the story
of our house?  Stop! some one is coming.  Don't move; remain as you
are.  If you care for me, Carroll, collect yourself, and don't let that
man think he has found US ridiculous."  Her voice changed from its tone
of slight caressing pleading to one of suppressed pride.  "HE will not
laugh much, Captain Carroll; truly, no."

The figure of Garnier, bright, self-possessed, courteous, appeared at
the opening of the labyrinth.  Too well-bred to suggest, even in
complimentary raillery, a possible sentimental situation, his
politeness went further.  It was so kind in them to guide an awkward
stranger by their voices to the places where he could not stupidly
intrude!

"You are just in time to interrupt or to hear a story that I have been
threatening to tell," she said, composedly; "an old Spanish legend of
this house.  You are in the majority now, you two, and can stop me if
you choose.  Thank you.  I warn you it is stupid; it isn't new; but it
has the excuse of being suggested by this very spot."  She cast a quick
look of subtle meaning at Carroll, and throughout her recital appealed
more directly to him, in a manner delicately yet sufficiently marked to
partly soothe his troubled spirit.

"Far back, in the very old times, Caballeros," said Maruja, standing by
the table in mock solemnity, and rapping upon it with her fan, "this
place was the home of the coyote.  Big and little, father and mother,
Senor and Senora Coyotes, and the little muchacho coyotes had their
home in the dark canada, and came out over these fields, yellow with
wild oats and red with poppies, to seek their prey.  They were happy.
For why?  They were the first; they had no history, you comprehend, no
tradition.  They married as they liked" (with a glance at Carroll),
"nobody objected; they increased and multiplied.  But the plains were
fertile; the game was plentiful; it was not fit that it should be for
the beasts alone.  And so, in the course of time, an Indian chief, a
heathen, Koorotora, built his wigwam here."

"I beg your pardon," said Garnier, in apparent distress, "but I caught
the gentleman's name imperfectly."

Fully aware that the questioner only wished to hear again her musical
enunciation of the consonants, she repeated, "Koorotora," with an
apologetic glance at Carroll, and went on.  "This gentleman had no
history or tradition to bother him, either; whatever Senor Coyote
thought of the matter, he contented himself with robbing Senor
Koorotora's wigwam when he could, and skulking around the Indian's camp
at night.  The old chief prospered, and made many journeys round the
country, but always kept his camp here.  This lasted until the time
when the holy Fathers came from the South, and Portala, as you have all
read, uplifted the wooden Cross on the sea-coast over there, and left
it for the heathens to wonder at. Koorotora saw it on one of his
journeys, and came back to the canada full of this wonder.  Now,
Koorotora had a wife."

"Ah, we shall commence now.  We are at the beginning.  This is better
than Senora Coyota," said Garnier, cheerfully.

"Naturally, she was anxious to see the wonderful object.  She saw it,
and she saw the holy Fathers, and they converted her against the
superstitious heathenish wishes of her husband.  And more than that,
they came here--"

"And converted the land also; is it not so?  It was a lovely site for a
mission," interpolated Garnier, politely.

"They built a mission and brought as many of Koorotora's people as they
could into the sacred fold.  They brought them in in a queer fashion
sometimes, it is said; dragoons from the Presidio, Captain Carroll,
lassoing them and bringing them in at the tails of their horses.  All
except Koorotora.  He defied them; he cursed them and his wife in his
wicked heathenish fashion, and said that they too should lose the
mission through the treachery of some woman, and that the coyote should
yet prowl through the ruined walls of the church.  The holy Fathers
pitied the wicked man--and built themselves a lovely garden.  Look at
that pear-tree!  There is all that is left of it!"

She turned with a mock heroic gesture, and pointed her fan to the
pear-tree.  Garnier lifted his hands in equally simulated wonder. A
sudden recollection of the coyote of the morning recurred to Carroll
uneasily.  "And the Indians," he said, with an effort to shake off the
feeling; "they, too, have vanished."

"All that remained of them is in yonder mound.  It is the grave of the
chief and his people.  He never lived to see the fulfillment of his
prophecy.  For it was a year after his death that our ancestor, Manuel
Guitierrez, came from old Spain to the Presidio with a grant of twenty
leagues to settle where he chose.  Dona Maria Guitierrez took a fancy
to the canada.  But it was a site already in possession of the Holy
Church.  One night, through treachery, it was said, the guards were
withdrawn and the Indians entered the mission, slaughtered the lay
brethren, and drove away the priests. The Commandant at the Presidio
retook the place from the heathens, but on representation to the
Governor that it was indefensible for the peaceful Fathers without a
large military guard, the official ordered the removal of the mission
to Santa Cruz, and Don Manuel settled his twenty leagues grant in the
canada.  Whether he or Dona Maria had anything to do with the Indian
uprising, no one knows; but Father Pedro never forgave them.  He is
said to have declared at the foot of the altar that the curse of the
Church was on the land, and that it should always pass into the hands
of the stranger."

"And that was long ago, and the property is still in the family," said
Carroll, hurriedly, answering Maruja's eyes.

"In the last hundred years there have been no male heirs," continued
Maruja, still regarding Carroll.  "When my mother, who was the eldest
daughter, married Don Jose Saltonstall against the wishes of the
family, it was said that the curse would fall.  Sure enough,
Caballeros, it was that year that the forged grants of Micheltorrena
were discovered; and in our lawsuit your government, Captain, handed
over ten leagues of the llano land to the Doctor West, our neighbor."

"Ah, the gray-headed gentleman who lunched here the other day?  You are
friends, then?  You bear no malice?" said Garnier.

"What would you?" said Maruja, with a slight shrug of her shoulders.
"He paid his money to the forger.  Your corregidores upheld him, and
said it was no forgery," she continued, to Carroll.

In spite of the implied reproach, Carroll felt relieved.  He began to
be impatient of Garnier's presence, and longed to renew his suit.
Perhaps his face showed something of this, for Maruja added, with mock
demureness, "It's always dreadful to be the eldest sister; but think
what it is to be in the direct line of a curse! Now, there's
Amita--SHE'S free to do as she likes, with no family responsibility;
while poor me!"  She dropped her eyes, but not until they had again
sought and half-reproved the brightening eyes of Carroll.

"But," said Garnier, with a sudden change from his easy security and
courteous indifference to an almost harsh impatience, "you do not mean
to say, Mademoiselle, that you have the least belief in this rubbish,
this ridiculous canard?"

Maruja's straight mouth quickly tightened over her teeth.  She shot a
significant glance at Carroll, but instantly resumed her former manner.

"It matters little what a foolish girl like myself believes.  The rest
of the family, even the servants and children, all believe it. It is a
part of their religion.  Look at these flowers around the pear-tree,
and scattered on that Indian mound.  They regularly find their way
there on saints' days and festas.  THEY are not rubbish, Monsieur
Garnier; they are propitiatory sacrifices.  Pereo would believe that a
temblor would swallow up the casa if we should ever forego these
customary rites.  Is it a mere absurdity that forced my father to build
these modern additions around the heart of the old adobe house, leaving
it untouched, so that the curse might not be fulfilled even by
implication?"

She had assumed an air of such pretty earnestness and passion; her
satin face was illuminated as by some softly sensuous light within more
bewildering than mere color, that Garnier, all devoted eyes and
courteous blandishment, broke out: "But this curse must fall harmlessly
before the incarnation of blessing; Miss Saltonstall has no more to
fear than the angels.  She is the one predestined through her charm,
through her goodness, to lift it forever."

Carroll could not have helped echoing the aspirations of his rival, had
not the next words of his mistress thrilled him with superstitious
terror.

"A thousand thanks, Senor.  Who knows?  But I shall have warning when
it falls.  A day or two before the awful invader arrives, a coyote
suddenly appears in broad daylight, mysteriously, near the casa.  This
midnight marauder, now banished to the thickest canyon, comes again to
prowl around the home of his ancestors.  Caramba! Senor Captain, what
are you staring at?  You frighten me!  Stop it, I say!"

She had turned upon him, stamping her little foot in quite a
frightened, childlike way.

"Nothing," laughed Carroll, the quick blood returning to his cheek.
"But you must not be angry with one for being quite carried away with
your dramatic intensity.  By Jove!  I thought I could see the WHOLE
thing while you were speaking--the old Indian, the priest, and the
coyote!"  His eyes sparkled.  The wild thought had occurred to him that
perhaps, in spite of himself, he was the young woman's predestined
fate; and in the very selfishness of his passion he smiled at the mere
material loss of lands and prestige that would follow it.  "Then the
coyote has always preceded some change in the family fortunes?" he
asked, boldly.

"On my mother's wedding-day," said Maruja, in a lower voice, "after the
party had come from church to supper in the old casa, my father asked,
'What dog is that under the table?'  When they lifted the cloth to
look, a coyote rushed from the very midst of the guests and dashed out
across the patio.  No one knew how or when he entered."

"Heaven grant that we do not find he has eaten our breakfast!" said
Garnier, gayly, "for I judge it is waiting us.  I hear your sister's
voice among the others crossing the lawn.  Shall we tear ourselves away
from the tombs of our ancestors, and join them?"

"Not as I am looking now, thank you," said Maruja, throwing the lace
over her head.  "I shall not submit myself to a comparison of their
fresher faces and toilets by you two gentlemen.  Go you both and join
them.  I shall wait and say an Ave for the soul of Koorotora, and slip
back alone the way I came."

She had steadily evaded the pleading glance of Carroll, and though her
bright face and unblemished toilet showed the inefficiency of her
excuse, it was evident that her wish to be alone was genuine and
without coquetry.  They could only lift their hats and turn regretfully
away.

As the red cap of the young officer disappeared amidst the evergreen
foliage, the young woman uttered a faint sigh, which she repeated a
moment after as a slight nervous yawn.  Then she opened and shut her
fan once or twice, striking the sticks against her little pale palm,
and then, gathering the lace under her oval chin with one hand, and
catching her fan and skirt with the other, bent her head and dipped
into the bushes.  She came out on the other side near a low fence, that
separated the park from a narrow lane which communicated with the high
road beyond.  As she neared the fence, a slinking figure limped along
the lane before her.  It was the tramp of the early morning.

They raised their heads at the same moment and their eyes met.  The
tramp, in that clearer light, showed a spare, but bent figure, roughly
clad in a miner's shirt and canvas trousers, splashed and streaked with
soil, and half hidden in a ragged blue cast-off army overcoat lazily
hanging from one shoulder.  His thin sun-burnt face was not without a
certain sullen, suspicious intelligence, and a look of half-sneering
defiance.  He stopped, as a startled, surly animal might have stopped
at some unusual object, but did not exhibit any other discomposure.
Maruja stopped at the same moment on her side of the fence.

The tramp looked at her deliberately, and then slowly lowered his eyes.
"I'm looking for the San Jose road, hereabouts.  Ye don't happen to
know it?" he said, addressing himself to the top of the fence.

It had been said that it was not Maruja's way to encounter man, woman,
or child, old or young, without an attempt at subjugation. Strong in
her power and salient with fascination, she leaned gently over the
fence, and with the fan raised to her delicate ear, made him repeat his
question under the soft fire of her fringed eyes. He did so, but
incompletely, and with querulous laziness.

"Lookin'--for--San Jose road--here'bouts."

"The road to San Jose," said Maruja, with gentle slowness, as if not
unwilling to protract the conversation, "is about two miles from here.
It is the high road to the left fronting the plain. There is another
way, if--"

"Don't want it!  Mornin'."

He dropped his head suddenly forward, and limped away in the sunlight.



CHAPTER III

Breakfast, usually a movable feast at La Mision Perdida, had been
prolonged until past midday; the last of the dance guests had flown,
and the home party--with the exception of Captain Carroll, who had
returned to duty at his distant post--were dispersing; some as riding
cavalcades to neighboring points of interest; some to visit certain
notable mansions which the wealth of a rapid civilization had erected
in that fertile valley.  One of these in particular, the work of a
breathless millionaire, was famous for the spontaneity of its growth
and the reckless extravagance of its appointments.

"If you go to Aladdin's Palace," said Maruja, from the top step of the
south porch, to a wagonette of guests, "after you've seen the stables
with mahogany fittings for one hundred horses, ask Aladdin to show you
the enchanted chamber, inlaid with California woods and paved with gold
quartz."

"We would have a better chance if the Princess of China would only go
with us," pleaded Garnier, gallantly.

"The Princess will stay at home with her mother, like a good girl,"
returned Maruja, demurely.

"A bad shot of Garnier's this time," whispered Raymond to Buchanan, as
the vehicle rolled away with them.  "The Princess is not likely to
visit Aladdin again."

"Why?"

"The last time she was there, Aladdin was a little too Persian in his
extravagance: offered her his house, stables, and himself."

"Not a bad catch--why, he's worth two millions, I hear."

"Yes; but his wife is as extravagant as himself."

"His WIFE, eh?  Ah, are you serious; or must you say something
derogatory of the lassie's admirers too?" said Buchanan, playfully
threatening him with his cane.  "Another word, and I'll throw you from
the wagon."

After their departure, the outer shell of the great house fell into a
profound silence, so hollow and deserted that one might have thought
the curse of Koorotora had already descended upon it.  Dead leaves of
roses and fallen blossoms from the long line of vine-wreathed columns
lay thick on the empty stretch of brown veranda, or rustled and crept
against the sides of the house, where the regular breath of the
afternoon "trades" began to arise.  A few cardinal flowers fell like
drops of blood before the open windows of the vacant ball-room, in
which the step of a solitary servant echoed faintly.  It was Maruja's
maid, bringing a note to her young mistress, who, in a flounced morning
dress, leaned against the window.  Maruja took it, glanced at it
quietly, folded it in a long fold, and put it openly in her belt.
Captain Carroll, from whom it came, might have carried one of his
despatches as methodically. The waiting-woman noticed the act, and was
moved to suggest some more exciting confidences.

"The Dona Maruja has, without doubt, noticed the bouquet on her
dressing-room table from the Senor Garnier?"

The Dona Maruja had.  The Dona Maruja had also learned with pain that,
bribed by Judas-like coin, Faquita had betrayed the secrets of her
wardrobe to the extent of furnishing a ribbon from a certain yellow
dress to the Senor Buchanan to match with a Chinese fan. This was
intolerable!

Faquita writhed in remorse, and averred that through this solitary act
she had dishonored her family.

The Dona Maruja, however, since it was so, felt that the only thing
left to do was to give her the polluted dress, and trust that the Devil
might not fly away with her.

Leaving the perfectly consoled Faquita, Maruja crossed the large hall,
and, opening a small door, entered a dark passage through the thick
adobe wall of the old casa, and apparently left the present century
behind her.  A peaceful atmosphere of the past surrounded her not only
in the low vaulted halls terminating in grilles or barred windows; not
only in the square chambers whose dark rich but scanty furniture was
only a foil to the central elegance of the lace-bordered bed and
pillows; but in a certain mysterious odor of dried and desiccated
religious respectability that penetrated everywhere, and made the
grateful twilight redolent of the generations of forgotten Guitierrez
who had quietly exhaled in the old house.  A mist as of incense and
flowers that had lost their first bloom veiled the vista of the long
corridor, and made the staring blue sky, seen through narrow windows
and loopholes, glitter like mirrors let into the walls.  The chamber
assigned to the young ladies seemed half oratory and half
sleeping-room, with a strange mingling of the convent in the bare white
walls, hung only with crucifixes and religious emblems, and of the
seraglio in the glimpses of lazy figures, reclining in the deshabille
of short silken saya, low camisa, and dropping slippers.  In a broad
angle of the corridor giving upon the patio, its balustrade hung with
brightly colored serapes and shawls, surrounded by voluble domestics
and relations, the mistress of the casa half reclined in a hammock and
gave her noonday audience.

Maruja pushed her way through the clustered stools and cushions to her
mother's side, kissed her on the forehead, and then lightly perched
herself like a white dove on the railing.  Mrs. Saltonstall, a dark,
corpulent woman, redeemed only from coarseness by a certain softness of
expression and refinement of gesture, raised her heavy brown eyes to
her daughter's face.

"You have not been to bed, Mara?"

"No, dear.  Do I look it?"

"You must lie down presently.  They tell me that Captain Carroll
returned suddenly this morning."

"Do you care?"

"Who knows?  Amita does not seem to fancy Jose, Esteban, Jorge, or any
of her cousins.  She won't look at Juan Estudillo.  The Captain is not
bad.  He is of the government.  He is--"

"Not more than ten leagues from here," said Maruja, playing with the
Captain's note in her belt.  "You can send for him, dear little mother.
He will be glad."

"You will ever talk lightly--like your father!  She was not then
grieved--our Amita--eh?"

"She and Dorotea and the two Wilsons went off with Raymond and your
Scotch friend in the wagonette.  She did not cry--to Raymond."

"Good," said Mrs. Saltonstall, leaning back in her hammock. "Raymond is
an old friend.  You had better take your siesta now, child, to be
bright for dinner.  I expect a visitor this afternoon--Dr. West."

"Again!  What will Pereo say, little mother?"

"Pereo," said the widow, sitting up again in her hammock, with
impatience, "Pereo is becoming intolerable.  The man is as mad as Don
Quixote; it is impossible to conceal his eccentric impertinence and
interference from strangers, who can not understand his confidential
position in our house or his long service.  There are no more
mayordomos, child.  The Vallejos, the Briones, the Castros, do without
them now.  Dr. West says, wisely, they are ridiculous survivals of the
patriarchal system."

"And can be replaced by intelligent strangers," interrupted Maruja,
demurely.

"The more easily if the patriarchal system has not been able to
preserve the respect due from children to parents.  No, Maruja! No; I
am offended.  Do not touch me!  And your hair is coming down, and your
eyes have rings like owls.  You uphold this fanatical Pereo because he
leaves YOU alone and stalks your poor sisters and their escorts like
the Indian, whose blood is in his veins.  The saints only can tell if
he did not disgust this Captain Carroll into flight.  He believes
himself the sole custodian of the honor of our family--that he has a
sacred mission from this Don Fulano of Koorotora to avert its fate.
Without doubt he keeps up his delusions with aguardiente, and passes
for a prophet among the silly peons and servants.  He frightens the
children with his ridiculous stories, and teaches them to decorate that
heathen mound as if it were a shrine of Our Lady of Sorrows.  He was
almost rude to Dr. West yesterday."

"But you have encouraged him in his confidential position here," said
Maruja.  "You forget, my mother, how you got him to 'duena' Euriqueta
with the Colonel Brown; how you let him frighten the young Englishman
who was too attentive to Dorotea; how you set him even upon poor
Raymond, and failed so dismally that I had to take him myself in hand."

"But if I choose to charge him with explanations that I can not make
myself without derogating from the time-honored hospitality of the
casa, that is another thing.  It is not," said Dona Maria, with a
certain massive dignity, that, inconsistent as it was with the weakness
of her argument, was not without impressiveness, "it is not yet,
Blessed Santa Maria, that we are obliged to take notice ourself of the
pretensions of every guest beneath our roof like the match-making,
daughter-selling English and Americans.  And THEN Pereo had tact and
discrimination.  Now he is mad!  There are strangers and strangers.
The whole valley is full of them--one can discriminate, since the old
families year by year are growing less."

"Surely not," said Maruja, innocently.  "There is the excellent
Ramierrez, who has lately almost taken him a wife from the singing-hall
in San Francisco; he may yet be snatched from the fire.  There is the
youthful Jose Castro, the sole padrono of our national bull-fight at
Soquel, the famous horse-breaker, and the winner of I know not how many
races.  And have we not Vincente Peralta, who will run, it is said, for
the American Congress.  He can read and write--truly I have a letter
from him here."  She turned back the folded slip of Captain Carroll's
note and discovered another below.

Mrs. Saltonstall tapped her daughter's hand with her fan.  "You jest at
them, yet you uphold Pereo!  Go, now, and sleep yourself into a better
frame of mind.  Stop!  I hear the Doctor's horse. Run and see that
Pereo receives him properly."

Maruja had barely entered the dark corridor when she came upon the
visitor,--a gray, hard-featured man of sixty,--who had evidently
entered without ceremony.  "I see you did not wait to be announced,"
she said, sweetly.  "My mother will be flattered by your impatience.
You will find her in the patio."

"Pereo did not announce me, as he was probably still under the effect
of the aguardiente he swallowed yesterday," said the Doctor, dryly.  "I
met him outside the tienda on the highway the other night, talking to a
pair of cut-throats that I would shoot on sight."

"The mayordomo has many purchases to make, and must meet a great many
people," said Maruju.  "What would you?  We can not select HIS
acquaintances; we can hardly choose our own," she added, sweetly.

The Doctor hesitated, as if to reply, and then, with a grim
"Good-morning," passed on towards the patio.  Maruja did not follow
him. Her attention was suddenly absorbed by a hitherto unnoticed
motionless figure, that seemed to be hiding in the shadow of an angle
of the passage, as if waiting for her to pass.  The keen eyes of the
daughter of Joseph Saltonstall were not deceived.  She walked directly
towards the figure, and said, sharply, "Pereo!"

The figure came hesitatingly forward into the light of the grated
window.  It was that of an old man, still tall and erect, though the
hair had disappeared from his temples, and hung in two or three
straight, long dark elf-locks on his neck.  His face, over which one of
the bars threw a sinister shadow, was the yellow of a dried
tobacco-leaf, and veined as strongly.  His garb was a strange mingling
of the vaquero and the ecclesiastic--velvet trousers, open from the
knee down, and fringed with bullion buttons; a broad red sash around
his waist, partly hidden by a long, straight chaqueta; with a circular
sacerdotal cape of black broadcloth slipped over his head through a
slit-like opening braided with gold.  His restless yellow eyes fell
before the young girl's; and the stiff, varnished, hard-brimmed
sombrero he held in his wrinkled hands trembled.

"You are spying again, Pereo," said Maruja, in another dialect than the
one she had used to her mother.  "It is unworthy of my father's trusted
servant."

"It is that man--that coyote, Dona Maruja, that is unworthy of your
father, of your mother, of YOU!" he gesticulated, in a fierce whisper.
"I, Pereo, do not spy.  I follow, follow the track of the prowling,
stealing brute until I run him down.  Yes, it was I, Pereo, who warned
your father he would not be content with the half of the land he stole!
It was I, Pereo, who warned your mother that each time he trod the soil
of La Mision Perdida he measured the land he could take away!"  He
stopped pantingly, with the insane abstraction of a fixed idea
glittering in his eyes.

"And it was YOU, Pereo," she said, caressingly, laying her soft hand on
his heaving breast, "YOU who carried me in your arms when I was a
child.  It was you, Pereo, who took me before you on your pinto horse
to the rodeo, when no one knew it but ourselves, my Pereo, was it not?"
He nodded his head violently.  "It was you who showed me the gallant
caballeros, the Pachecos, the Castros, the Alvarados, the Estudillos,
the Peraltas, the Vallejos."  His head kept time with each name as the
fire dimmed in his wet eyes.  "You made me promise I would not forget
them for the Americanos who were here.  Good!  That was years ago!  I
am older now.  I have seen many Americans.  Well, I am still free!"

He caught her hand, and raised it to his lips with a gesture almost
devotional.  His eyes softened; as the exaltation of passion passed,
his voice dropped into the querulousness of privileged age. "Ah,
yes!--you, the first-born, the heiress--of a verity, yes!  You were
ever a Guitierrez.  But the others?  Eh, where are they now? And it was
always: 'Eh, Pereo, what shall we do to-day?  Pereo, good Pereo, we are
asked to ride here and there; we are expected to visit the new people
in the valley--what say you, Pereo?  Who shall we dine to-day?'  Or:
'Enquire me of this or that strange caballero--and if we may speak.'
Ah, it is but yesterday that Amita would say: 'Lend me thine own horse,
Pereo, that I may outstrip this swaggering Americano that clings ever
to my side,' ha! ha!  Or the grave Dorotea would whisper: 'Convey to
this Senor Presumptuous Pomposo that the daughters of Guitierrez do not
ride alone with strangers!'  Or even the little Liseta would say, he!
he!  'Why does the stranger press my foot in his great hand when he
helps me into the saddle?  Tell him that is not the way, Pereo.' Ha!
ha!"  He laughed childishly, and stopped.  "And why does Senorita Amita
now--look--complain that Pereo, old Pereo, comes between her and this
Senor Raymond---this maquinista?  Eh, and why does SHE, the lady
mother, the Castellana, shut Pereo from her councils?" he went on, with
rising excitement.  "What are these secret meetings, eh?--what these
appointments, alone with this Judas--without the family--without ME!"

"Hearken, Pereo," said the young girl, again laying her hand on the old
man's shoulder; "you have spoken truly--but you forget--the years pass.
These are no longer strangers; old friends have gone--these have taken
their place.  My father forgave the Doctor--why can not you?  For the
rest, believe in me--me--Maruja"--she dramatically touched her heart
over the international complications of the letters of Captain Carroll
and Peralta.  "I will see that the family honor does not suffer.  And
now, good Pereo, calm thyself.  Not with aguardiente, but with a bottle
of old wine from the Mision refectory that I will send to thee.  It was
given to me by thy friend, Padre Miguel, and is from the old vines that
were here.  Courage, Pereo!  And thou sayest that Amita complains that
thou comest between her and Raymond.  So!  What matter?  Let it cheer
thy heart to know that I have summoned the Peraltas, the Pachecos, the
Estudillos, all thy old friends, to dine here to-day. Thou wilt hear
the old names, even if the faces are young to thee. Courage!  Do thy
duty, old friend; let them see that the hospitality of La Mision
Perdida does not grow old, if its mayordomo does.  Faquita will bring
thee the wine.  No; not that way; thou needest not pass the patio, nor
meet that man again. Here, give me thy hand.  I will lead thee.  It
trembles, Pereo! These are not the sinews that only two years ago
pulled down the bull at Soquel with thy single lasso!  Why, look!  I
can drag thee; see!" and with a light laugh and a boyish gesture, she
half pulled, half dragged him along, until their voices were lost in
the dark corridor.

Maruja kept her word.  When the sun began to cast long shadows along
the veranda, not only the outer shell of La Mision Perdida, but the
dark inner heart of the old casa, stirred with awakened life.  Single
horsemen and carriages began to arrive; and, mingled with the modern
turnouts of the home party and the neighboring Americans, were a few of
the cumbrous vehicles and chariots of fifty years ago, drawn by gayly
trapped mules with bizarre postilions, and occasionally an outrider.
Dark faces looked from the balcony of the patio, a light cloud of
cigarette-smoke made the dark corridors the more obscure, and mingled
with the forgotten incense.  Bare-headed pretty women, with roses
starring their dark hair, wandered with childish curiosity along the
broad veranda and in and out of the French windows that opened upon the
grand saloon. Scrupulously shaved men with olive complexion, stout men
with accurately curving whiskers meeting at their dimpled chins,
lounged about with a certain unconscious dignity that made them
contentedly indifferent to any novelty of their surroundings.  For a
while the two races kept mechanically apart; but, through the tactful
gallantry of Garnier, the cynical familiarity of Raymond, and the
impulsive recklessness of Aladdin, who had forsaken his enchanted
Palace on the slightest of invitations, and returned with the party in
the hope of again seeing the Princess of China, an interchange of
civilities, of gallantries, and even of confidences, at last took
place.  Jovita Castro had heard (who had not?) of the wonders of
Aladdin's Palace, and was it of actual truth that the ladies had a
bouquet and a fan to match their dress presented to them every morning,
and that the gentlemen had a champagne cocktail sent to their rooms
before breakfast?  "Just you come, Miss, and bring your father and your
brothers, and stay a week and you'll see," responded Aladdin,
gallantly.  "Hold on!  What's your father's first name?  I'll send a
team over there for you to-morrow."  "And is it true that you
frightened the handsome Captain Carroll away from Amita?" said Dolores
Briones, over the edge of her fan to Raymond.  "Perfectly," said
Raymond, with ingenuous frankness.  "I made it a matter of life or
death.  He was a soldier, and naturally preferred the former as giving
him a better chance for promotion." "Ah! we thought it was Maruja you
liked best."  "That was two years ago," said Raymond, gravely.  "And
you Americanos can change in that time?"  "I have just experienced that
it can be done in less," he responded, over the fan, with bewildering
significance.  Nor were these confidences confined to only one
nationality.  "I always thought you Spanish gentlemen were very dark,
and wore long mustaches and a cloak," said pretty little Miss Walker,
gazing frankly into the smooth round face of the eldest Pacheco--"why,
you are as fair as I am,"  "Eaf I tink that, I am for ever mizzarable,"
he replied, with grave melancholy.  In the dead silence that followed
he was enabled to make his decorous point.  "Because I shall not ezcape
ze fate of Narcissus."  Mr. Buchanan, with the unrestrained and
irresponsible enjoyment of a traveler, entered fully into the spirit of
the scene.  He even found words of praise for Aladdin, whose
extravagance had at first seemed to him almost impious.  "Eh, but I'm
not prepared to say he is a fool, either," he remarked to his friend
the San Francisco banker.  "Those who try to pick him up for one,"
returned the banker, "will find themselves mistaken.  His is the
prodigality that loosens others' purse-strings besides his own,
Everybody contents himself with criticising his way of spending money,
but is ready to follow his way of making it."

The dinner was more formal, and when the mistress of the house, massive
in black silk, velvet and gold embroidery, moved like a pageant to the
head of her table, where she remained like a sacerdotal effigy, not
even the presence of the practical Scotchman at her side could remove
the prevailing sense of restraint.  For a while the conversation of the
relatives might have been brought with them in their antique vehicles
of fifty years ago, so faded, so worn, and so springless it was.
General Pico related the festivities at Monterey, on the occasion of
the visit of Sir George Simpson early in the present century, of which
he was an eyewitness, with great precision of detail.  Don Juan
Estudillo was comparatively frivolous, with anecdotes of Louis
Philippe, whom he had seen in Paris.  Far-seeing Pedro Guitierrez was
gloomily impressed with a Mongolian invasion of California by the
Chinese, in which the prevailing religion would be supplanted by
heathen temples, and polygamy engrafted on the Constitution.  Everybody
agreed however, that the vital question of the hour was the settlement
of land titles--Americans who claimed under preemption and the native
holders of Spanish grants were equally of the opinion.

In the midst of this the musical voice of Maruja was heard saying,
"What is a tramp?"

Raymond, on her right, was ready but not conclusive.

A tramp, if he could sing, would be a troubadour; if he could pray,
would be a pilgrim friar--in either case a natural object of womanly
solicitude.  But as he could do neither, he was simply a curse.

"And you think that is not an object of womanly solicitude?  But that
does not tell me WHAT he is."

A dozen gentlemen, swept in the radius of those softly-inquiring eyes,
here started to explain.  From them it appeared that there was no such
thing in California as a tramp, and there were also a dozen varieties
of tramp in California.

"But is he always very uncivil?" asked Maruja.

Again there were conflicting opinions.  You might have to shoot him on
sight, and you might have him invariably run from you.  When the
question was finally settled, Maruja was found to have become absorbed
in conversation with some one else.

Amita, a taller copy of Maruja, and more regularly beautiful, had built
up a little pile of bread crumbs between herself and Raymond, and was
listening to him with a certain shy, girlish interest that was as
inconsistent with the serene regularity of her face as Maruja's
self-possessed, subtle intelligence was incongruous to her youthful
figure.  Raymond's voice, when he addressed Amita, was low and earnest;
not from any significance of matter, but from its frank confidential
quality.

"They are discussing the new railroad project, and your relations are
all opposed to it; to-morrow they will each apply privately to Aladdin
for the privilege of subscribing."

"I have never seen a railroad," said Amita, slightly coloring; "but you
are an engineer, and I know they must be some thing very clever."

Notwithstanding the coolness of the night, a full moon drew the guests
to the veranda, where coffee was served, and where, mysteriously
muffled in cloaks and shawls, the party took upon itself the appearance
of groups of dominoed masqueraders, scattered along the veranda and on
the broad steps of the porch in gypsy-like encampments, from whose
cloaked shadow the moonlight occasionally glittered upon a varnished
boot or peeping satin slipper.  Two or three of these groups had
resolved themselves into detached couples, who wandered down the acacia
walk to the sound of a harp in the grand saloon or the occasional
uplifting of a thin Spanish tenor.  Two of these couples were Maruja
and Garnier, followed by Amita and Raymond.

"You are restless to-night, Maruja," said Amita, shyly endeavoring to
make a show of keeping up with her sister's boyish stride, in spite of
Raymond's reluctance.  "You are paying for your wakefulness to-day."

The same idea passed through the minds of both men.  She was missing
the excitement of Captain Carroll's presence.

"The air is so refreshing away from the house," responded Maruja, with
a bright energy that belied any suggestion of fatigue or moral
disquietude.  "I'm tired of running against those turtle-doves in the
walks and bushes.  Let us keep on to the lane.  If you are tired, Mr.
Raymond will give you his arm."

They kept on, led by the indomitable little figure, who, for once, did
not seem to linger over the attentions, both piquant and tender, with
which Garnier improved his opportunity.  Given a shadowy lane, a
lovers' moon, a pair of bright and not unkindly eyes, a charming and
not distant figure--what more could he want? Yet he wished she hadn't
walked so fast.  One might be vivacious, audacious, brilliant, at an
Indian trot; but impassioned--never! The pace increased; they were
actually hurrying.  More than that, Maruja had struck into a little
trot; her lithe body swaying from side to side, her little feet
straight as an arrow before her; accompanying herself with a quaint
musical chant, which she obligingly explained had been taught her as a
child by Pereo.  They stopped only at the hedge, where she had that
morning encountered the tramp.

There is little doubt that the rest of the party was disconcerted:
Amita, whose figure was not adapted to this Camilla-like exercise;
Raymond, who was annoyed at the poor girl's discomfiture; and Garnier,
who had lost a golden opportunity, with the faint suspicion of having
looked ridiculous.  Only Maruja's eyes, or rather the eyes of her
lamented father, seemed to enjoy it.

"You are too effeminate," she said, leaning against the fence, and
shading her eyes with her fan, as she glanced around in the staring
moonlight.  "Civilization has taken away your legs.  A man ought to be
able to trust to his feet all day, and to nothing else."

"In fact--a tramp," suggested Raymond.

"Possibly.  I think I should like to have been a gypsy, and to have
wandered about, finding a new home every night."

"And a change of linen on the early morning hedges," said Raymond. "But
do you think seriously that you and your sister are suitably clad to
commence to-night.  It is bitterly cold," he added, turning up his
collar.  "Could you begin by showing a pal the nearest haystack or
hen-roost?"

"Sybarite!"  She cast a long look over the fields and down the lane.
Suddenly she started.  "What is that?"

She pointed to a tall erect figure slowly disappearing on the other
side of the hedge.

"It's Pereo, only Pereo.  I knew him by his long serape," said Garnier,
who was nearest the hedge, complacently.  "But what is surprising, he
was not there when we came, nor did he come out of that open field.  He
must have been walking behind us on the other side of the hedge."

The eyes of the two girls sought each other simultaneously, but not
without Raymond's observant glance.  Amita's brow darkened as she moved
to her sister's side, and took her arm with a confidential pressure
that was returned.  The two men, with a vague consciousness of some
contretemps, dropped a pace behind, and began to talk to each other,
leaving the sisters to exchange a few words in a low tone as they
slowly returned to the house.

Meanwhile, Pereo's tall figure had disappeared in the shrubbery, to
emerge again in the open area by the summer-house and the old
pear-tree. The red sparks of two or three cigarettes in the shadow of
the summer-house, and the crouching forms of two shawled women came
forward to greet him.

"And what hast thou heard, Pereo?" said one of the women.

"Nothing," said Pereo, impatiently.  "I told thee I would answer for
this little primogenita with my life.  She is but leading this
Frenchman a dance, as she has led the others, and the Dona Amita and
her Raymond are but wax in her hands.  Besides, I have spoken with the
little 'Ruja to-day, and spoke my mind, Pepita, and she says there is
nothing."

"And whilst thou wert speaking to her, my poor Pereo, the devil of an
American Doctor was speaking to her mother, thy mistress--our mistress,
Pereo!  Wouldst thou know what he said?  Oh, it was nothing."

"Now, the curse of Koorotora on thee, Pepita!" said Pereo, excitedly.
"Speak, fool, if thou knowest anything!"

"Of a verity, no.  Let Faquita, then, speak: she heard it."  She
reached out her hand, and dragged Maruja's maid, not unwilling, before
the old man.

"Good!  'Tis Faquita, daughter of Gomez, and a child of the land.
Speak, little one.  What said this coyote to the mother of thy
mistress?"

"Truly, good Pereo, it was but accident that befriended me."

"Truly, for thy mistress's sake, I hoped it had been more.  But let
that go.  Come, what said he, child?"

"I was hanging up a robe behind the curtain in the oratory when Pepita
ushered in the Americano.  I had no time to fly."

"Why shouldst thou fly from a dog like this?" said one of the
cigarette-smokers who had drawn near.

"Peace!" said the old man.

"When the Dona Maria joined him they spoke of affairs.  Yes, Pereo,
she, thy mistress, spoke of affairs to this man--ay, as she might have
talked to THEE.  And, could he advise this? and could he counsel that?
and should the cattle be taken from the lower lands, and the fields
turned to grain? and had he a purchaser for Los Osos?"

"Los Osos!  It is the boundary land--the frontier--the line of the
arroyo--older than the Mision," muttered Pereo.

"Ay, and he talked of the--the--I know not what it is!--the
r-r-rail-r-road."

"The railroad," gasped the old man.  "I will tell thee what it is! It
is the cut of a burning knife through La Mision Perdida--as long as
eternity, as dividing as death.  On either side of that gash life is
blasted; wherever that cruel steel is laid the track of it is livid and
barren; it cuts down all barriers; leaps all boundaries, be they canada
or canyon; it is a torrent in the plain, a tornado in the forest; its
very pathway is destruction to whoso crosses it--man or beast; it is
the heathenish God of the Americanos; they build temples for it, and
flock there and worship it whenever it stops, breathing fire and flame
like a very Moloch."

"Eh!  St. Anthony preserve us!" said Faquita, shuddering; "and yet they
spoke of it as 'shares' and 'stocks,' and said it would double the
price of corn."

"Now, Judas pursue thee and thy railroad, Pereo," said Pepita,
impatiently.  "It is not such bagatela that Faquita is here to relate.
Go on, child, and tell all that happened."

"And then," continued Faquita, with a slight affectation of maiden
bashfulness, in the closer-drawing circle of cigarettes, "and then they
talked of other things and of themselves; and, of a verity, this
gray-bearded Doctor will play the goat and utter gallant speeches, and
speak of a lifelong devotion and of the time he should have a right to
protect--"

"The right, girl!  Didst thou say the right?  No, thou didst mistake.
It was not THAT he meant?"

"Thy life to a quarter peso that the little Faquita does not mistake,"
said the evident satirist of the household.  "Trust to Gomez' muchacha
to understand a proposal."

When the laugh was over, and the sparks of the cigarette, cleverly
whipped out of the speaker's lips by Faquita's fan, had disappeared in
the darkness, she resumed, pettishly, "I know not what you call it when
he kissed her hand and held it to his heart."

"Judas!" gasped Pereo.  "But," he added, feverishly, "she, the Dona
Maria, thy mistress, SHE summoned thee at once to call me to cast out
this dust into the open air; thou didst fly to her assistance? What!
thou sawest this, and did nothing--eh?"  He stopped, and tried to peer
into the girl's face.  "No!  Ah, I see; I am an old fool.  Yes; it was
Maruja's own mother that stood there.  He! he! he!" he laughed
piteously; "and she smiled and smiled and broke the coward's heart, as
Maruja might.  And when he was gone, she bade thee bring her water to
wash the filthy Judas stain from her hand."

"Santa Ana!" said Faquita, shrugging her shoulders.  "She did what the
veriest muchacha would have done.  When he had gone, she sat down and
cried."

The old man drew back a step, and steadied himself by the table. Then,
with a certain tremulous audacity, he began: "So! that is all you have
to tell--nothing!  Bah!  A lazy slut sleeps at her duty, and dreams
behind a curtain!  Yes, dreams!--you understand--dreams! And for this
she leaves her occupations, and comes to gossip here! Come," he
continued, steadily working himself into a passion, "come, enough of
this!  Get you gone!--you, and Pepita, and Andreas, and Victor--all of
you--back to your duty.  Away!  Am I not master here?  Off!  I say!"

There was no mistaking the rising anger of his voice.  The cowed group
rose in a frightened way and disappeared one by one silently through
the labyrinth.  Pereo waited until the last had vanished, and then,
cramming his stiff sombrero over his eyes with an ejaculation, brushed
his way through the shrubbery in the direction of the stables.

Later, when the full glory of the midnight moon had put out every
straggling light in the great house; when the long veranda slept in
massive bars of shadow, and even the tradewinds were hushed to repose,
Pereo silently issued from the stable-yard in vaquero's dress, mounted
and caparisoned.  Picking his way cautiously along the turf-bordered
edge of the gravel path, he noiselessly reached a gate that led to the
lane.  Walking his spirited mustang with difficulty until the house had
at last disappeared in the intervening foliage, he turned with an easy
canter into a border bridle-path that seemed to lead to the canada.  In
a quarter of an hour he had reached a low amphitheatre of meadows, shut
in a half circle of grassy treeless hills.

Here, putting spurs to his horse, he entered upon a singular exercise.
Twice he made a circuit of the meadow at a wild gallop, with flying
serape and loosened rein, and twice returned.  The third time his speed
increased; the ground seemed to stream from under him; in the distance
the limbs of his steed became invisible in their furious action, and,
lying low forward on his mustang's neck, man and horse passed like an
arrowy bolt around the circle. Then something like a light ring of
smoke up-curved from the saddle before him, and, slowly uncoiling
itself in mid air, dropped gently to the ground as he passed.  Again,
and once again, the shadowy coil sped upward and onward, slowly
detaching its snaky rings with a weird deliberation that was in strange
contrast to the impetuous onset of the rider, and yet seemed a part of
his fury.  And then turning, Pereo trotted gently to the centre of the
circle.

Here he divested himself of his serape, and, securing it in a
cylindrical roll, placed it upright on the ground and once more sped
away on his furious circuit.  But this time he wheeled suddenly before
it was half completed and bore down directly upon the unconscious
object.  Within a hundred feet he swerved slightly; the long detaching
rings again writhed in mid air and softly descended as he thundered
past.  But when he had reached the line of circuit again, he turned and
made directly for the road he had entered.  Fifty feet behind his
horse's heels, at the end of a shadowy cord, the luckless serape was
dragging and bounding after him!

"The old man is quiet enough this morning," said Andreas, as he groomed
the sweat-dried skin of the mustang the next day.  "It is easy to see,
friend Pinto, that he has worked off his madness on thee."



CHAPTER IV

The Rancho of San Antonio might have been a characteristic asylum for
its blessed patron, offering as it did a secure retreat from
temptations for the carnal eye, and affording every facility for
uninterrupted contemplation of the sky above, unbroken by tree or
elevation.  Unlike La Mision Perdida, of which it had been part, it was
a level plain of rich adobe, half the year presenting a billowy sea of
tossing verdure breaking on the far-off horizon line, half the year
presenting a dry and dusty shore, from which the vernal sea had ebbed,
to the low sky that seemed to mock it with a visionary sea beyond.  A
row of rough, irregular, and severely practical sheds and buildings
housed the machinery and the fifty or sixty men employed in the
cultivation of the soil, but neither residential mansion nor farmhouse
offered any nucleus of rural comfort or civilization in the midst of
this wild expanse of earth and sky.  The simplest adjuncts of country
life were unknown: milk and butter were brought from the nearest town;
weekly supplies of fresh meat and vegetables came from the same place;
in the harvest season, the laborers and harvesters lodged and boarded
in the adjacent settlement and walked to their work.  No cultivated
flower bloomed beside the unpainted tenement, though the fields were
starred in early spring with poppies and daisies; the humblest garden
plant or herb had no place in that prolific soil.  The serried ranks of
wheat pressed closely round the straggling sheds and barns and hid the
lower windows.  But the sheds were fitted with the latest agricultural
machinery; a telegraphic wire connected the nearest town with an office
in the wing of one of the buildings, where Dr. West sat, and in the
midst of the wilderness severely checked his accounts with nature.

Whether this strict economy of domestic outlay arose from an
ostentatious contempt of country life and the luxurious habits of the
former landholders, or whether it was a purely business principle of
Dr. West, did not appear.  Those who knew him best declared that it was
both.  Certain it was that unqualified commercial success crowned and
dignified his method.  A few survivors of the old native families came
to see his strange machinery, that did the work of so many idle men and
horses.  It is said that he offered to "run" the distant estate of
Joaquin Padilla from his little office amidst the grain of San Antonio.
Some shook their heads, and declared that he only sucked the juices of
the land for a few brief years to throw it away again; that in his
fierce haste he skimmed the fatness of ages of gentle cultivation on a
soil that had been barely tickled with native oaken plowshares.

His own personal tastes and habits were as severe and practical as his
business: the little wing he inhabited contained only his office, his
living room or library, his bedroom, and a bath-room. This last
inconsistent luxury was due to a certain cat-like cleanliness which was
part of his nature.  His iron-gray hair--a novelty in this country of
young Americans--was always scrupulously brushed, and his linen
spotless.  A slightly professional and somewhat old-fashioned
respectability in his black clothes was also characteristic.  His one
concession to the customs of his neighbors was the possession of two or
three of the half-broken and spirited mustangs of the country, which he
rode with the fearlessness, if not the perfect security and ease, of a
native.  Whether the subjection of this lawless and powerful survival
of a wild and unfettered nature around him was part of his plan, or
whether it was only a lingering trait of some younger prowess, no one
knew; but his grim and decorous figure, contrasting with the
picturesque and flowing freedom of the horse he bestrode, was a
frequent spectacle in road and field.

It was the second day after his visit to La Mision Perdida.  He was
sitting by his desk, at sunset, in the faint afterglow of the western
sky, which flooded the floor through the open door.  He was writing,
but presently lifted his head, with an impatient air, and called out,
"Harrison!"

The shadow of Dr. West's foreman appeared at the door.

"Who's that you're talking to?"

"Tramp, Sir."

"Hire him, or send him about his business.  Don't stand gabbling there."

"That's just it, sir.  He won't hire for a week or a day.  He says
he'll do an odd job for his supper and a shakedown, but no more."

"Pack him off! ...  Stay....  What's he like?"

"Like the rest of 'em, only a little lazier, I reckon."

"Umph!  Fetch him in."

The foreman disappeared, and returned with the tramp already known to
the reader.  He was a little dirtier and grimier than on the morning he
had addressed Maruja at La Mision Perdida; but he wore the same air of
sullen indifference, occasionally broken by furtive observation.  His
laziness--or weariness--if the term could describe the lassitude of
perfect physical condition, seemed to have increased; and he leaned
against the door as the Doctor regarded him with slow contempt.  The
silence continuing, he deliberately allowed himself to slip down into a
sitting position in the doorway, where he remained.

"You seem to have been born tired," said the Doctor, grimly.

"Yes."

"What have you got to say for yourself?"

"I told HIM," said the tramp, nodding his head towards the foreman,
"what I'd do for a supper and a bed.  I don't want anything but that."

"And if you don't get what you want on your own conditions, what'll you
do?" asked the Doctor, dryly.

"Go."

"Where did you come from?"

"States."

"Where are you going?"

"On."

"Leave him to me," said Dr. West to his foreman.  The man smiled, and
withdrew.

The Doctor bent his head again over his accounts.  The tramp, sitting
in the doorway, reached out his hand, pulled a young wheat-stalk that
had sprung up near the doorstep, and slowly nibbled it. He did not
raise his eyes to the Doctor, but sat, a familiar culprit awaiting
sentence, without fear, without hope, yet not without a certain
philosophical endurance of the situation.

"Go into that passage," said the Doctor, lifting his head as he turned
a page of his ledger, "and on the shelf you'll find some clothing
stores for the men.  Pick out something to fit you."

The tramp arose, moved towards the passage, and stopped.  "It's for the
job only, you understand?" he said.

"For the job," answered the Doctor.

The tramp returned in a few moments with overalls and woolen shirt
hanging on his arm and a pair of boots and socks in his hand.  The
Doctor had put aside his pen.  "Now go into that room and change. Stop!
First wash the dust from your feet in that bath-room."

The tramp obeyed, and entered the room.  The Doctor walked to the door,
and looked out reflectively on the paling sky.  When he turned again he
noticed that the door of the bath-room was opened, and the tramp, who
had changed his clothes by the fading light, was drying his feet.  The
Doctor approached, and stood for a moment watching him.

"What's the matter with your foot?"[1] he asked, after a pause.

"Born so."

The first and second toe were joined by a thin membrane.

"Both alike?" asked the Doctor.

"Yes," said the young man, exhibiting the other foot.

"What did you say your name was?"

"I didn't say it.  It's Henry Guest, same as my father's."

"Where were you born?"

"Dentville, Pike County, Missouri."

"What was your mother's name?"

"Spalding, I reckon."

"Where are your parents now?"

"Mother got divorced from father, and married again down South,
somewhere.  Father left home twenty years ago.  He's somewhere in
California--if he ain't dead."

"He isn't dead."

"How do you know?"

"Because I am Henry Guest, of Dentville, and"--he stopped, and, shading
his eyes with his hand as he deliberately examined the tramp, added
coldly--"your father, I reckon."

There was a slight pause.  The young man put down the boot he had taken
up.  "Then I'm to stay here?"

"Certainly not.  Here my name is only West, and I have no son. You'll
go on to San Jose, and stay there until I look into this thing.  You
haven't got any money, of course?" he asked, with a scarcely suppressed
sneer.

"I've got a little," returned the young man.

"How much?"

The tramp put his hand into his breast, and drew out a piece of folded
paper containing a single gold coin.

"Five dollars.  I've kept it a month; it doesn't cost much to live as I
do," he added, dryly.

"There's fifty more.  Go to some hotel in San Jose, and let me know
where you are.  You've got to live, and you don't want to work. Well,
you don't seem to be a fool; so I needn't tell you that if you expect
anything from me, you must leave this matter in my hands.  I have
chosen to acknowledge you to-day of my own free will: I can as easily
denounce you as an impostor to-morrow, if I choose.  Have you told your
story to any one in the valley?"

"No."

"See that you don't, then.  Before you go, you must answer me a few
more questions."

He drew a chair to his table, and dipped a pen in the ink, as if to
take down the answers.  The young man, finding the only chair thus
occupied, moved the Doctor's books aside, and sat down on the table
beside him.

The questions were repetitions of those already asked, but more in
detail, and thoroughly practical in their nature.  The answers were
given straightforwardly and unconcernedly, as if the subject was not
worth the trouble of invention or evasion.  It was difficult to say
whether questioner or answerer took least pleasure in the
interrogation, which might have referred to the concerns of a third
party.  Both, however, spoke disrespectfully of their common family,
with almost an approach to sympathetic interest.

"You might as well be going now," said the Doctor, finally rising. "You
can stop at the fonda, about two miles further on, and get your supper
and bed, if you like."

The young man slipped from the table, and lounged to the door.  The
Doctor put his hands in his pockets and followed him.  The young man,
as if in unconscious imitation, had put HIS hands in his pockets also,
and looked at him.

"I'll hear from you, then, when you are in San Jose?" said Dr. West,
looking past him into the grain, with a slight approach to constraint
in his indifference.

"Yes--if that's agreed upon," returned the young man, pausing on the
threshold.  A faint sense of some purely conventional responsibility in
their position affected them both.  They would have shaken hands if
either had offered the initiative.  A sullen consciousness of
gratuitous rectitude in the selfish mind of the father; an equally
sullen conviction of twenty years of wrong in the son, withheld them
both.  Unpleasantly observant of each other's awkwardness, they parted
with a feeling of relief.

Dr. West closed the door, lit his lamp, and, going to his desk, folded
the paper containing the memoranda he had just written and placed it in
his pocket.  Then he summoned his foreman.  The man entered, and
glanced around the room as if expecting to see the Doctor's guest still
there.

"Tell one of the men to bring round 'Buckeye.'"

The foreman hesitated.  "Going to ride to-night, sir?"

"Certainly; I may go as far as Saltonstall's.  If I do, you needn't
expect me back till morning."

"Buckeye's mighty fresh to-night, boss.  Regularly bucked his saddle
clean off an hour ago, and there ain't a man dare exercise him."

"I'll bet he don't buck his saddle off with me on it," said the Doctor,
grimly.  "Bring him along."

The man turned to go.  "You found the tramp pow'ful lazy, didn't ye?"

"I found a heap more in him than in some that call themselves smart,"
said Dr. West, unconsciously setting up an irritable defense of the
absent one.  "Hurry up that horse!"

The foreman vanished.  The Doctor put on a pair of leather leggings,
large silver spurs, and a broad soft-brimmed hat, but made no other
change in his usual half-professional conventional garb.  He then went
to the window and glanced in the direction of the highway.  Now that
his son was gone, he felt a faint regret that he had not prolonged the
interview.  Certain peculiarities in his manner, certain suggestions of
expression in his face, speech, and gesture, came back to him now with
unsatisfied curiosity.  "No matter," he said to himself; "he'll turn up
soon again--as soon as I want him, if not sooner.  He thinks he's got a
mighty soft thing here, and he isn't going to let it go.  And there's
that same d--d sullen dirty pride of his mother, for all he doesn't
cotton to her. Wonder I didn't recognize it at first.  And hoarding up
that five dollars!  That's Jane's brat, all over!  And, of course," he
added, bitterly, "nothing of ME in him.  No; nothing!  Well, well,
what's the difference?"  He turned towards the door, with a certain
sullen defiance in his face so like the man he believed he did not
resemble, that his foreman, coming upon him suddenly, might have been
startled at the likeness.  Fortunately, however, Harrison was too much
engrossed with the antics of the irrepressible Buckeye, which the
ostler had just brought to the door, to notice anything else.  The
arrival of the horse changed the Doctor's expression to one of more
practical and significant resistance.  With the assistance of two men
at the head of the restive brute, he managed to vault into the saddle.
A few wild plunges only seemed to settle him the firmer in his
seat--each plunge leaving its record in a thin red line on the animal's
flanks, made by the cruel spurs of its rider.  Any lingering desire of
following his son's footsteps was quickly dissipated by Buckeye, who
promptly bolted in the opposite direction, and, before Dr. West could
gain active control over him, they were half a mile on their way to La
Mision Perdida.

Dr. West did not regret it.  Twenty years ago he had voluntarily
abandoned a legal union of mutual unfaithfulness and misconduct, and
allowed his wife to get the divorce he might have obtained for equal
cause.  He had abandoned to her the issue of that union--an infant son.
Whatever he chose to do now was purely gratuitous; the only hold which
this young stranger had on his respect was that HE also recognized that
fact with a cold indifference equal to his own.  At present the
half-savage brute he bestrode occupied all his attention.  Yet he could
not help feeling his advancing years tell upon him more heavily that
evening; fearless as he was, his strength was no longer equal when
measured with the untiring youthful malevolence of his unbroken
mustang.  For a moment he dwelt regretfully on the lazy half-developed
sinews of his son; for a briefer instant there flashed across him the
thought that those sinews ought to replace his own; ought to be HIS to
lean upon--that thus, and thus only, could he achieve the old miracle
of restoring his lost youth by perpetuating his own power in his own
blood; and he, whose profound belief in personality had rejected all
hereditary principle, felt this with a sudden exquisite pain.  But his
horse, perhaps recognizing a relaxing grip, took that opportunity to
"buck."  Curving his back like a cat, and throwing himself into the air
with an unexpected bound, he came down with four stiff, inflexible
legs, and a shock that might have burst the saddle-girths, had not the
wily old man as quickly brought the long rowels of his spurs together
and fairly locked his heels under Buckeye's collapsing barrel.  It was
the mustang's last rebellions struggle.  The discomfited brute gave in,
and darted meekly and apologetically forward, and, as it were, left all
its rider's doubts and fears far behind in the vanishing distance.



[1] This apparent classical plagiarism is actually a fact of
identification on record in the California Law Reports.  It is
therefore unnecessary for me to add that the attendant circumstances
and characters are purely fictitious.--B. H.



CHAPTER V

Meanwhile, the subject of Dr. West's meditations was slowly making his
way along the high-road towards the fonda.  He walked more erect and
with less of a shuffle in his gait; but whether this was owing to his
having cast the old skin of garments adapted to his slouch, and because
he was more securely shod, or whether it was from the sudden
straightening of some warped moral quality, it would have been
difficult to say.  The expression of his face certainly gave no
evidence of actual and prospective good fortune; if anything, the lines
of discontent around his brow and mouth were more strongly drawn.
Apparently, his interview with his father had only the effect of
reviving and stirring into greater activity a certain dogged sentiment
that, through long years, had become languidly mechanical.  He was no
longer a beaten animal, but one roused by a chance success into a
dangerous knowledge of his power. In his honest workman's dress, he was
infinitely more to be feared than in his rags; in the lifting of his
downcast eye, there was the revelation of a baleful intelligence.  In
his changed condition, civilization only seemed to have armed him
against itself.

The fonda, a long low building, with a red-tiled roof extending over a
porch or whitewashed veranda, in which drunken vaqueros had been known
to occasionally disport their mustangs, did not offer a very reputable
appearance to the eye of young Guest as he approached it in the
gathering shadows.  One or two half-broken horses were securely
fastened to the stout cross-beams of some heavy posts driven in the
roadway before it, and a primitive trough of roughly excavated stone
stood near it.  Through a broken gate at the side there was a glimpse
of a grass-grown and deserted courtyard piled with the disused
packing-cases and barrels of the tienda, or general country shop, which
huddled under the same roof at the other end of the building.  The
opened door of the fonda showed a low-studded room fitted up with a
rude imitation of an American bar on one side, and containing a few
small tables, at which half a dozen men were smoking, drinking, and
playing cards. The faded pictorial poster of the last bull-fight at
Monterey, and an American "Sheriff's notice" were hung on the wall and
in the door-way.  A thick yellow atmosphere of cigarette smoke, through
which the inmates appeared like brown shadows, pervaded the room.

The young man hesitated before this pestilential interior, and took a
seat on a bench on the veranda.  After a moment's interval, the yellow
landlord came to the door with a look of inquiry, which Guest answered
by a demand for lodging and supper.  When the landlord had vanished
again in the cigarette fog, the several other guests, one after the
other, appeared at the doorway, with their cigarettes in their mouths
and their cards still in their hands, and gazed upon him.

There may have been some excuse for their curiosity.  As before hinted,
Guest's appearance in his overalls and woolen shirt was somewhat
incongruous, and, for some inexplicable reason, the same face and
figure which did not look inconsistent in rags and extreme poverty now
at once suggested a higher social rank both of intellect and refinement
than his workman's dress indicated.  This, added to his surliness of
manner and expression, strengthened a growing suspicion in the mind of
the party that he was a fugitive from justice--a forger, a derelict
banker, or possibly a murderer. It is only fair to say that the moral
sense of the spectators was not shocked at the suspicion, and that a
more active sympathy was only withheld by his reticence.  An
unfortunate incident seemed to complete the evidence against him.  In
impatiently responding to the landlord's curt demand for prepayment of
his supper, he allowed three or four pieces of gold to escape from his
pocket on the veranda.  In the quick glances of the party, as he
stooped to pick them up, he read the danger of his carelessness.

His sullen self-possession did not seem to be shaken.  Calling to the
keeper of the tienda, who had appeared at his door in time to witness
the Danae-like shower, he bade him approach, in English.

"What sort of knives have you got?"

"Knives, Senor?"

"Yes; bowie-knives or dirks.  Knives like that," he said, making an
imaginary downward stroke at the table before him.

The shopkeeper entered the tienda, and presently reappeared with three
or four dirks in red leather sheaths.  Guest selected the heaviest, and
tried its point on the table.

"How much?"

"Tres pesos."

The young man threw him one of his gold pieces, and slipped the knife
and its sheath in his boot.  When he had received his change from the
shopkeeper, he folded his arms and leaned back against the wall in
quiet indifference.

The simple act seemed to check aggressive, but not insinuating,
interference.  In a few moments one of the men appeared at the doorway.

"It is fine weather for the road, little comrade!"

Guest did not reply.

"Ah! the night, it ess splendid," he repeated, in broken English,
rubbing his hands, as if washing in the air.

Still no reply.

"You shall come from Sank Hosay?"

"I sha'ant."

The stranger muttered something in Spanish, but the landlord, who
reappeared to place Guest's supper on a table on the veranda, here felt
the obligation of interfering to protect a customer apparently so
aggressive and so opulent.  He pushed the inquisitor aside, with a few
hasty words, and, after Guest had finished his meal, offered to show
him his room.  It was a dark vaulted closet on the ground-floor,
gaining light from the stable-yard through a barred iron grating.  At
the first glimpse it looked like a prison cell; looking more
deliberately at the black tresseled bed, and the votive images hanging
on the wall, it might have been a tomb.

"It is the best," said the landlord.  "The Padre Vincento will have
none other on his journey."

"I suppose God protects him," said Guest; "that door don't."  He
pointed to the worm-eaten door, without bolt or fastening.

"Ah, what matter!  Are we not all friends?"

"Certainly," responded Guest, with his surliest manner, as he returned
to the veranda.  Nevertheless, he resolved not to occupy the cell of
the reverend Padre; not from any personal fear of his disreputable
neighbors, though he was fully alive to their peculiarities, but from
the nomadic instinct which was still strong in his blood.  He felt he
could not yet bear the confinement of a close room or the propinquity
of his fellow-man.  He would rest on the veranda until the moon was
fairly up, and then he would again take to the road.

He was half reclining on the bench, with the slowly closing and opening
lids of some tired but watchful animal, when the sound of wheels,
voices, and clatter of hoofs on the highway arrested his attention, and
he sat upright.  The moon was slowly lifting itself over the limitless
stretch of grain-fields before him on the other side of the road, and
dazzling him with its level lustre.  He could barely discern a
cavalcade of dark figures and a large vehicle rapidly approaching,
before it drew up tumultuously in front of the fonda.

It was a pleasure party of ladies and gentlemen on horseback and in a
four-horsed char-a-bancs returning to La Mision Perdida. Buchanan,
Raymond, and Garnier were there; Amita and Dorotea in the body of the
char-a-bancs, and Maruja seated on the box.  Much to his own
astonishment and that of some others of the party, Captain Carroll was
among the riders.  Only Maruja and her mother knew that he was recalled
to refute a repetition of the gossip already circulated regarding his
sudden withdrawal; only Maruja alone knew the subtle words which made
that call so potent yet so hopeless.

Maruja's quick eyes, observant of everything, even under the double
fire of Captain Carroll and Garnier, instantly caught those of the
erect figure on the bench in the veranda.  Surely that was the face of
the tramp she had spoken to! and yet there was a change, not only in
the dress but in the general resemblance.  After the first glance,
Guest withdrew his eyes and gazed at the other figures in the
char-a-bancs without moving a muscle.

Maruja's whims and caprices were many and original; and when, after a
sudden little cry and a declaration that she could stand her cramped
position no longer, she leaped from the box into the road, no one was
surprised.  Garnier and Captain Carroll quickly followed.

"I should like to look into the fonda while the horses are being
watered," she said, laughingly, "just to see what it is that attracts
Pereo there so often."  Before any one could restrain this new caprice,
she was already upon the veranda.

To reach the open door, she had to pass so near Guest that her soft
white flounces brushed his knees, and the flowers in her girdle left
their perfume in his face.  But he neither moved nor raised his eyes.
When she had passed, he rose quietly and stepped into the road.

On her nearer survey, Maruja was convinced it was the same man. She
remained for an instant, with a little hand on the door-post. "What a
horrid place, and what dreadful people!" she said in audible English as
she glanced quickly after Guest.  "Really, Pereo ought to be warned
against keeping such company.  Come, let us go."

She contrived to pass Guest again in regaining the carriage; but in the
few moments' further delay he walked on down the road before them, and,
by the time they were ready to start, he was slowly sauntering some
hundred yards ahead.  They passed him at a rapid trot, but the next
moment the char-a-bancs was suddenly pulled up.

"My fan!" cried Maruja.  "Blessed Santa Maria!--my fan!"

A small black object, seen distinctly in the moonlight, was lying on
the road, directly in the track of the sauntering stranger. Garnier
attempted to alight; Carroll reined in his horse.

"Stop, all of you!" said Maruja; "that man will bring it to me."

It seemed as if he would.  He stopped and picked it up, and approached
the carriage.  Maruja stood up in her seat, with her veil thrown back,
her graceful hand extended, her eyes and mouth tremulous with an
irresistible smile.  The stranger came nearer, singled out Captain
Carroll, tossed the fan to him with a slight nod, and passed on the
other side.

"One moment," said Maruja, almost harshly, to the driver.  "One
moment," she continued, drawing her purse from her pocket brusquely.
"Let me reward this civil gentleman of the road!  Here, sir;" but,
before she could continue, Carroll wheeled to her side, and interposed.
"Pray collect yourself, Miss Saltonstall," he said, hurriedly; "you can
not tell who this man may be.  He does not seem to be one who would
insult you, or whom YOU would insult gratuitously."

"Give me the fan, Captain Carroll," she said, with a soft and caressing
smile.  "Thank you."  She took it, and, breaking it through the middle
between her gloved hands, tossed it into the highway.  "You are
right--it smells of the fonda--and the road. Thank you, again.  You are
so thoughtful for me, Captain Carroll," she murmured, raising her eyes
gently to his, and then suddenly withdrawing them with a half sigh.
"But I am keeping you all.  Go on."

The carriage rolled away and Guest returned from the hedge to the
middle of the road.  San Jose lay in the opposite direction from the
disappearing cavalcade; but, on leaving the fonda, he had determined to
lead his inquisitors astray by doubling and making a circuit of the
hostelry through the fields hidden in the tall grain.  This he did,
securely passing them within sound of their voices, and was soon well
on his way again.  He avoided the highway, and, striking a trail
through the meadows, diverged to the right, where the low towers and
brown walls of a ruined mission church rose above the plain.  This
would enable him to escape any direct pursuit on the high road,
besides, from its slight elevation, giving him a more extended view of
the plain.  As he neared it, he was surprised to see that, although it
was partly dismantled, and the roof had fallen in the central aisle, a
part of it was still used as a chapel, and a light was burning behind a
narrow opening, partly window and partly shrine.  He was almost upon
it, when the figure of a man who had been kneeling beneath, with his
back towards him, rose, crossed himself devoutly, and stood upright.
Before he could turn, Guest disappeared round the angle of the wall,
and the tall erect figure of the solitary worshiper passed on without
heeding him.

But if Guest had been successful in evading the observation of the man
he had come so suddenly upon, he was utterly unconscious of another
figure that had been tracking HIM for the last ten minutes through the
tall grain, and had even succeeded in gaining the shadow of the wall
behind him; and it was this figure, and not his own, that eventually
attracted the attention of the tall stranger. The pursuing figure was
rapidly approaching the unconscious Guest; in another moment it would
have been upon him, when it was suddenly seized from behind by the tall
devotee.  There was a momentary struggle, and then it freed itself,
with the exclamation, "Pereo!"

"Yes--Pereo!" said the old man, panting from his exertions.  "And thou
art Miguel.  So thou wouldst murder a man for a few pesos!" he said,
pointing to the knife which the desperado had hurriedly hid in his
jacket, "and callest thyself a Californian!"

"'Tis only an Americano--a runaway, with some ill-gotten gold," said
Miguel, sullenly, yet with unmistakable fear of the old man. "Besides,
it was only to frighten him, the braggart.  But since thou fearest to
touch a hair of those interlopers--"

"Fearest!" said Pereo, fiercely, clutching him by the throat, and
forcing him against the wall.  "Fearest! sayest thou.  I, Pereo, fear?
Dost thou think I would soil these hands, that might strike a higher
quarry, with blood of thy game?"

"Forgive me, padrono," gasped Miguel, now thoroughly alarmed at the old
man's awakened passion; "pardon; I meant that, since thou knowest him--"

"I know him?" repeated Pereo scornfully, contemptuously throwing Miguel
aside, who at once took that opportunity to increase his distance from
the old man's arm.  "I know him?  Thou shalt see. Come hither, child,"
he called, beckoning to Guest.  "Come hither, thou hast nothing to fear
now."

Guest, who had been attracted by the sound of altercation behind him,
but who was utterly unconscious of its origin or his own relation to
it, came forward impatiently.  As he did so, Miguel took to his heels.
The act did not tend to mollify Guest's surly suspicions, and, pausing
a few feet from the old man, he roughly demanded his business with him.

Pereo raised his head, with the dignity of years and habits of command.
The face of the young man confronting him was clearly illuminated by
the moonlight.  Pereo's eyes suddenly dilated, his mouth stiffened, he
staggered back against the wall.

"Who are you?" he gasped, in uncertain English.

Believing himself the subject of some drunkard's pastime, Guest
replied, savagely, "One who has enough of this d--d nonsense, and will
stand no more of it from any one, young or old," and turned abruptly on
his heel.

"Stay, one moment, Senor, for the love of God!"

Some keen accent of agony in the old man's voice touched even Guest's
selfish nature.  He halted.

"You are--a stranger here?"--faltered Pereo.  "Yes?"

"I am."

"You do not live here?--you have no friends?"

"I told you I am a stranger.  I never was here before in my life," said
Guest, impatiently.

"True; I am a fool," said the old man, hurriedly, to himself.  "I am
mad--mad!  It is not HIS voice.  No!  It is not HIS look, now that his
face changes.  I am crazy."  He stopped, and passed his trembling hands
across his eyes.  "Pardon, Senor," he continued, recalling himself with
a humility that was almost ironical in its extravagance.  "Pardon,
pardon!  Yet, perhaps it is not too much to have wanted to know who was
the man one has saved."

"Saved!" repeated Guest, with incredulous contempt.

"Ay!" said Pereo, haughtily, drawing his figure erect; "ay, saved!
Senor."  He stopped and shrugged his shoulders.  "But let it pass--I
say--let it pass.  Take an old man's advice, friend: show not your gold
hereafter to strangers lightly, no matter how lightly you have come by
it.  Good-night!"

Guest for a moment hesitated whether to resent the old man's speech, or
to let it pass as the incoherent fancy of a brain maddened by drink.
Then he ended the discussion by turning his back abruptly and
continuing his way to the high-road.

"So!" said Pereo, looking after him with abstracted eyes, "so! it was
only a fancy.  And yet--even now, as he turned away, I saw the same
cold insolence in his eye.  Caramba!  Am I mad--mad--that I must keep
forever before my eyes, night and day, the image of that dog in every
outcast, every ruffian, every wayside bully that I meet?  No, no, good
Pereo!  Softly! this is mere madness, good Pereo," he murmured to
himself; "thou wilt have none of it; none, good Pereo.  Come, come!"
He let his head fall slowly forward on his breast, and in that action,
seeming to take up again the burden of a score more years upon his
shoulders, he moved slowly away.

When he entered the fonda half an hour later, the awe in which he was
held by the half superstitious ruffians appeared to have increased.
Whatever story the fugitive Miguel had told his companions regarding
Pereo's protection of the young stranger, it was certain that it had
its full effect.  Obsequious to the last degree, the landlord was so
profoundly touched, when Pereo, not displeased with this evidence of
his power over his countrymen, condescendingly offered to click glasses
with him, that he endeavored to placate him still further.

"It is a pity your worship was not here earlier," he began, with a
significant glance at the others, "to have seen a gallant young
stranger that was here.  A spice of wickedness about him, truly--a kind
of Don Caesar--but bearing himself like a very caballero always.  It
would have pleased your worship, who likes not those canting Puritans
such as our neighbor yonder."

"Ah," said Pereo, reflectively, warming under the potent fires of
flattery and aguardiente, "possibly I HAVE seen him.  He was like--"

"Like none of the dogs thou hast seen about San Antonio," interrupted
the landlord.  "Scarcely did he seem Americano, though he spoke no
Spanish."

The old man chuckled to himself viciously.  "And thou, thou old fool,
Pereo, must needs see a likeness to thine enemy in this poor runaway
child--this fugitive Don Juan!  He! he!"  Nevertheless, he still felt a
vague terror of the condition of mind which had produced this fancy,
and drank so deeply to dispel his nervousness that it was with
difficulty he could mount his horse again.  The exaltation of liquor,
however, appeared only to intensify his characteristics: his face
became more lugubrious and melancholy; his manner more ceremonious and
dignified; and, erect and stiff in his saddle from the waist upwards,
but leaning from side to side with the motion of his horse, like the
tall mast of some laboring sloop, he "loped" away towards the House of
the Lost Mission.  Once or twice he broke into sentimental song.
Strangely enough, his ditty was a popular Spanish refrain of some
matador's aristocratic inamorata:--

     Do you see my black eyes?
     I am Manuel's Duchess,--

sang Pereo, with infinite gravity.  His horse's hoofs seemed to keep
time with the refrain, and he occasionally waved in the air the long
leather thong of his bridle-rein.

It was quite late when he reached La Mision Perdida.  Turning into the
little lane that led to the stable-yard, he dismounted at a gate in the
hedge which led to the summerhouse of the old Mision garden, and,
throwing his reins on his mustang's neck, let the animal precede him to
the stables.  The moon shone full on the inclosure as he emerged from
the labyrinth.  With uncovered head he approached the Indian mound, and
sank on his knees before it.

The next moment he rose, with an exclamation of terror, and his hat
dropped from his trembling hand.  Directly before him, a small, gray,
wolfish-looking animal had stopped half-way down the mound on
encountering his motionless figure.  Frightened by his outcry, and
unable to retreat, the shadowy depredator had fallen back on his
slinking haunches with a snarl, and bared teeth that glittered in the
moonlight.

In an instant the expression of terror on the old man's ashen face
turned into a fixed look of insane exaltation.  His white lips moved;
he advanced a step further, and held out both hands towards the
crouching animal.

"So!  It is thou--at last!  And comest thou here thy tardy Pereo to
chide?  Comest THOU, too, to tell the poor old man his heart is cold,
his limbs are feeble, his brain weak and dizzy? that he is no longer
fit to do thy master's work?  Ay, gnash thy teeth at him! Curse
him!--curse him in thy throat!  But listen!--listen, good friend--I
will tell thee a secret--ay, good gray friar, a secret--such a secret!
A plan, all mine--fresh from this old gray head; ha! ha!--all mine!  To
be wrought by these poor old arms; ha! ha! All mine!  Listen!"

He stealthily made a step nearer the affrighted animal.  With a sudden
sidelong snap, it swiftly bounded by his side, and vanished in the
thicket; and Pereo, turning wildly, with a moan sank down helplessly on
the grave of his forefathers.



CHAPTER VI

To the open chagrin of most of the gentlemen and the unexpected relief
of some of her own sex, Maruja, after an evening of more than usual
caprice and willfulness, retired early to her chamber. Here she
beguiled Enriquita, a younger sister, to share her solitude for an
hour, and with a new and charming melancholy presented her with mature
counsel and some younger trinkets and adornments.

"Thou wilt find them but folly, 'Riquita; but thou art young, and wilt
outgrow them as I have.  I am sick of the Indian beads, everybody wears
them; but they seem to suit thy complexion.  Thou art not yet quite old
enough for jewelry; but take thy choice of these."  "'Ruja," replied
Enriquita, eagerly, "surely thou wilt not give up this necklace of
carved amber, that was brought thee from Manilla--it becomes thee so!
Everybody says it.  All the caballeros, Raymond and Victor, swear that
it sets off thy beauty like nothing else."  "When thou knowest men
better," responded Maruja, in a deep voice, "thou wilt care less for
what they say, and despise what they do.  Besides, I wore it
to-day--and--I hate it."  "But what fan wilt thou keep thyself?  The
one of sandal-wood thou hadst to-day?" continued Enriquita, timidly
eying the pretty things upon the table.  "None," responded Maruja,
didactically, "but the simplest, which I shall buy myself.  Truly, it
is time to set one's self against this extravagance.  Girls think
nothing of spending as much upon a fan as would buy a horse and saddle
for a poor man."  "But why so serious tonight, my sister?" said the
little Enriquita, her eyes filling with ready tears.  "It grieves me,"
responded Maruja, promptly, "to find thee, like the rest, giving thy
soul up to the mere glitter of the world.  However, go, child, take the
heads, but leave the amber; it would make thee yellower than thou art;
which the blessed Virgin forbid! Good-night!"

She kissed her affectionately, and pushed her from the room.
Nevertheless, after a moment's survey of her lonely chamber, she
hastily slipped on a pale satin dressing-gown, and, darting across the
passage, dashed into the bedroom of the youngest Miss Wilson, haled
that sentimental brunette from her night toilet, dragged her into her
own chamber, and, enwrapping her in a huge mantle of silk and gray fur,
fed her with chocolates and chestnuts, and, reclining on her
sympathetic shoulder, continued her arraignment of the world and its
follies until nearly daybreak.

It was past noon when Maruja awoke, to find Faquita standing by her
bedside with ill-concealed impatience.

"I ventured to awaken the Dona Maruja," she said, with vivacious
alacrity, "for news!  Terrible news!  The American, Dr. West, is found
dead this morning in the San Jose road!"

"Dr. West dead!" repeated Maruja, thoughtfully, but without emotion.

"Surely dead--very dead.  He was thrown from his horse and dragged by
the stirrups--how far, the Blessed Virgin only knows.  But he is found
dead--this Dr. West--his foot in the broken stirrup, his hand holding a
piece of the bridle!  I thought I would waken the Dona Maruja, that no
one else should break it to the Dona Maria."

"That no one else should break it to my mother?" repeated Maruja,
coldly.  "What mean you, girl?"

"I mean that no stranger should tell her," stammered Faquita, lowering
her bold eyes.

"You mean," said Maruja, slowly, "that no silly, staring,
tongue-wagging gossip should dare to break upon the morning devotions
of the lady mother with open-mouthed tales of horror!  You are wise,
Faquita!  I will tell her myself.  Help me to dress."

But the news had already touched the outer shell of the great house,
and little groups of the visitors were discussing it upon the veranda.
For once, the idle badinage of a pleasure-seeking existence was
suspended; stupid people with facts came to the fore; practical people
with inquiring minds became interesting; servants were confidentially
appealed to; the local expressman became a hero, and it was even
noticed that he was intelligent and good-looking.

"What makes it more distressing," said Raymond, joining one of the
groups, "is, that it appears the Doctor visited Mrs. Saltonstall last
evening, and left the casa at eleven.  Sanchez, who was perhaps the
last person who saw him alive, says that he noticed his horse was very
violent, and the Doctor did not seem able to control him.  The accident
probably happened half an hour later, as he was picked up about three
miles from here, and from appearances must have been dragged, with his
foot in the stirrup, fully half a mile before the girth broke and freed
the saddle and stirrup together. The mustang, with nothing on but his
broken bridle, was found grazing at the rancho as early as four
o'clock, an hour before the body of his master was discovered by the
men sent from the rancho to look for him."

"Eh, but the man must have been clean daft to have trusted himself to
one of those savage beasts of the country," said Mr. Buchanan. "And he
was no so young either--about sixty, I should say.  It didna look even
respectable, I remember, when we met him the other day, careering over
the country for all the world like one of those crazy Mexicans.  And
yet he seemed steady and sensible enough when he didna let his schemes
of 'improvements' run away with him like yon furious beastie.  Eh well,
puir man--it was a sudden ending! And his family--eh?"

"I don't think he has one--at least here," said Raymond.  "You can't
always tell in California.  I believe he was a widower."

"Ay, man, but the heirs; there must be considerable property?" said
Buchanan, impatiently.

"Oh, the heirs.  If he's made no will, which doesn't look like so
prudent and practical a man as he was--the heirs will probably crop up
some day."

"PROBABLY! crop up some day," repeated Buchanan, aghast.

"Yes.  You must remember that WE don't take heirs quite as much into
account as you do in the old country.  The loss of the MAN, and how to
replace HIM, is much more to us than the disposal of his property.
Now, Doctor West was a power far beyond his actual possessions--and we
will know very soon how much those were dependent upon him."

"What do you mean?" asked Buchanan, anxiously.

"I mean that five minutes after the news of the Doctor's death was
confirmed, your friend Mr. Stanton sent a messenger with a despatch to
the nearest telegraphic office, and that he himself drove over to catch
Aladdin before the news could reach him."

Buchanan looked uneasy; so did one or two of the native Californians
who composed the group, and who had been listening attentively.  "And
where is this same telegraphic office?" asked Buchanan, cautiously.

"I'll drive you over there presently," responded Raymond, grimly.
"There'll be nothing doing here to-day.  As Dr. West was a near
neighbor of the family, his death suspends our pleasure-seeking until
after the funeral."

Mr. Buchanan moved away.  Captain Carroll and Garnier drew nearer the
speaker.  "I trust it will not withdraw from us the society of Miss
Saltonstall," said Garnier, lightly--"at least, that she will not be
inconsolable."

"She did not seem to be particularly sympathetic with Dr. West the
other day," said Captain Carroll, coloring slightly with the
recollection of the morning in the summer-house, yet willing, in his
hopeless passion, even to share that recollection with his rival.  "Did
you not think so, Monsieur Garnier?"

"Very possibly; and, as Miss Saltonstall is quite artless and childlike
in the expression of her likes and dislikes," said Raymond, with the
faintest touch of irony, "you can judge as well as I can."

Garnier parried the thrust lightly.  "You are no kinder to our follies
than you are to the grand passions of these gentlemen. Confess, you
frightened them horribly.  You are---what is called--a bear--eh?  You
depreciate in the interests of business."

Raymond did not at first appear to notice the sarcasm.  "I only
stated," he said, gravely, "that which these gentlemen will find out
for themselves before they are many hours older.  Dr. West was the
brain of the county, as Aladdin is its life-blood.  It only remains to
be seen how far the loss of that brain affects the county.  The Stock
Exchange market in San Francisco will indicate that today in the shares
of the San Antonio and Soquel Railroad and the West Mills and
Manufacturing Co.  It is a matter that may affect even our friends
here.  Whatever West's social standing was in this house, lately he was
in confidential business relations with Mrs. Saltonstall."  He raised
his eyes for the first time to Garnier as he added, slowly, "It is to
be hoped that if our hostess has no social reasons to deplore the loss
of Dr. West, she at least will have no other."

With a lover's instinct, conscious only of some annoyance to Maruja, in
all this, Carroll anxiously looked for her appearance among the others.
He was doomed to disappointment, however.  His half-timid inquiries
only resulted in the information that Maruja was closeted with her
mother.  The penetralia of the casa was only accessible to the family;
yet, as he wandered uneasily about, he could not help passing once or
twice before the quaint low archway, with its grated door, that opened
from the central hall.  His surprise may be imagined when he suddenly
heard his name uttered in a low voice; and, looking up, he beheld the
soft eyes of Maruja at the grating.

She held the door partly open with one little hand, and made a sign for
him to enter with the other.  When he had done so, she said, "Come with
me," and preceded him down the dim corridor.  His heart beat thickly;
the incense of this sacred inner life, with its faint suggestion of
dead rose-leaves, filled him with a voluptuous languor; his breath was
lost, as if a soft kiss had taken it away; his senses swam in the light
mist that seemed to suffuse everything.  His step trembled as she
suddenly turned aside, and, opening a door, ushered him into a small
vaulted chamber.

In the first glance it seemed to be an oratory or chapel.  A large gold
and ebony crucifix hung on the wall.  There was a prie-dieu of heavy
dark mahogany in the centre of the tiled floor; there was a low ottoman
or couch, covered with a mantle of dark violet velvet, like a pall;
there were two quaintly carved stiff chairs; a religious, almost
ascetic, air pervaded the apartment; but no dreamy eastern seraglio
could have affected him with an intoxication so profoundly and
mysteriously sensuous.

Maruja pointed to a chair, and then, with a peculiarly feminine
movement, placed herself sideways upon the ottoman, half reclining on
her elbow on a high cushion, her deep billowy flounces partly veiling
the funereal velvet below.  Her oval face was pale and melancholy, her
eyes moist as if with recent tears; an expression as of troubled
passion lurked in their depths and in the corners of her mouth.
Scarcely knowing why, Carroll fancied that thus she might appear if she
were in love; and the daring thought made him tremble.

"I wanted to speak with you alone," she said, gently, as if in
explanation; "but don't look at me so.  I have had a bad night, and now
this calamity"--she stopped and then added, softly, "I want you to do a
favor for--my mother?"

Captain Carroll, with an effort, at last found his voice.  "But YOU are
in trouble; YOU are suffering.  I had no idea this unfortunate affair
came so near to you."

"Nor did I," said Maruja, closing her fan with a slight snap.  "I knew
nothing of it until my mother told me this morning.  To be frank with
you, it now appears that Dr. West was her most intimate business
adviser.  All her affairs were in his hands.  I cannot explain how, or
why, or when; but it is so."

"And is that all?" said Carroll, with boyish openness of relief. "And
you have no other sorrow?"

In spite of herself, a tender smile, such as she might have bestowed on
an impulsive boy, broke on her lips.  "And is that not enough?  What
would you?  No--sit where you are!  We are here to talk seriously.  And
you do not ask what is this favor my mother wishes?"

"No matter what it is, it shall be done," said Carroll, quickly. "I am
your mother's slave if she will but let me serve at your side.  Only,"
he paused, "I wish it was not business--I know nothing of business."

"If it were only business, Captain Carroll," said Maruja, slowly, "I
would have spoken to Raymond or the Senor Buchanan; if it were only
confidence, Pereo, our mayordomo, would have dragged himself from his
sick-bed this morning to do my mother's bidding.  But it is more than
that--it is the functions of a gentleman--and my mother, Captain
Carroll, would like to say of--a friend."

He seized her hand and covered it with kisses.  She withdrew it gently.

"What have I to do?" he asked, eagerly.

She drew a note from her belt.  "It is very simple.  You must ride over
to Aladdin with that note.  You must give it to him ALONE--more than
that, you must not let any one who may be there think you are making
any but a social call.  If he keeps you to dine--you must stay--you
will bring back anything he may give you and deliver it to me secretly
for her."

"Is that all?" asked Carroll, with a slight touch of disappointment in
his tone.

"No," said Maruja, rising impulsively.  "No, Captain Carroll--it is NOT
all!  And you shall know all, if only to prove to you how we confide in
you--and to leave you free, after you have heard it, to do as you
please."  She stood before him, quite white, opening and shutting her
fan quickly, and tapping the tiled floor with her little foot.  "I have
told you Dr. West was my mother's business adviser.  She looked upon
him as more--as a friend.  Do you know what a dangerous thing it is for
a woman who has lost one protector to begin to rely upon another?
Well, my mother is not yet old. Dr. West appreciated her--Dr. West did
not depreciate himself--two things that go far with a woman, Captain
Carroll, and my mother is a woman."  She paused, and then, with a light
toss of her fan, said: "Well, to make an end, but for this excellent
horse and this too ambitious rider, one knows not how far the old story
of my mother's first choice would have been repeated, and the curse of
Koorotora again fallen on the land."

"And you tell me this--you, Maruja--you who warned me against my
hopeless passion for you?"

"Could I foresee this?" she said, passionately; "and are you mad enough
not to see that this very act would have made YOUR suit intolerable to
my relations?"

"Then you did think of my suit, Maruja," he said, grasping her hand.

"Or any one's suit," she continued, hurriedly, turning away with a
slight increase of color in her cheeks.  After a moment's pause, she
added, in a gentler and half-reproachful voice, "Do you think I have
confided my mother's story to you for this purpose only?  Is this the
help you proffer?"

"Forgive me, Maruja," said the young officer, earnestly.  "I am
selfish, I know--for I love you.  But you have not told me yet how I
could help your mother by delivering this letter, which any one could
do."

"Let me finish then," said Maruja.  "It is for you to judge what may be
done.  Letters have passed between my mother and Dr. West. My mother is
imprudent; I know not what she may have written, or what she might not
write, in confidence.  But you understand, they are not letters to be
made public nor to pass into any hands but hers.  They are not to be
left to be bandied about by his American friends; to be commented upon
by strangers; to reach the ears of the Guitierrez.  They belong to that
grave which lies between the Past and my mother; they must not rise
from it to haunt her."

"I understand," said the young officer, quietly.  "This letter, then,
is my authority to recover them?"

"Partly, though it refers to other matters.  This Mr. Prince, whom you
Americans call Aladdin, was a friend of Dr. West; they were associated
in business, and he will probably have access to his papers.  The rest
we must leave to you."

"I think you may," said Carroll, simply.

Maruja stretched out her hand.  The young man bent over it respectfully
and moved towards the door.

She had expected him to make some protestation--perhaps even to claim
some reward.  But the instinct which made him forbear even in thought
to take advantage of the duty laid upon him, which dominated even his
miserable passion for her, and made it subservient to his exaltation of
honor; this epaulet of the officer, and blood of the gentleman, this
simple possession of knighthood not laid on by perfunctory steel, but
springing from within--all this, I grieve to say, was partly
unintelligible to Maruja, and not entirely satisfactory.  Since he had
entered the room they seemed to have changed their situations; he was
no longer the pleading lover that trembled at her feet.  For one base
moment she thought it was the result of his knowledge of her mother's
weakness; but the next instant, meeting his clear glance, she colored
with shame.  Yet she detained him vaguely a moment before the grated
door in the secure shadow of the arch.  He might have kissed her there!
He did not.

In the gloomy stagnation of the great house, it was natural that he
should escape from it for a while, and the saddling of his horse for a
solitary ride attracted no attention.  But it might have been noticed
that his manner had lost much of that nervous susceptibility and
anxiety which indicates a lover; and it was with a return of his
professional coolness and precision that he rode out of the patio as if
on parade.  Erect, observant, and self-possessed, he felt himself "on
duty," and, putting spurs to his horse, cantered along the high-road,
finding an inexpressible relief in motion.  He was doing something in
the interest of helplessness and of HER.  He had no doubt of his right
to interfere.  He did not bother himself with the rights of others.
Like all self-contained men, he had no plan of action, except what the
occasion might suggest.

He was more than two miles from La Mision Perdida, when his quick eye
was attracted by a saddle-blanket lying in the roadside ditch. A
recollection of the calamity of the previous night made him rein in his
horse and examine it.  It was without doubt the saddle-blanket of Dr.
West's horse, lost when the saddle came off, after the Doctor's body
had been dragged by the runaway beast.  But a second fact forced itself
equally upon the young officer.  It was lying nearly a mile from the
spot where the body had been picked up.  This certainly did not agree
with the accepted theory that the accident had taken place further on,
and that the body had been dragged until the saddle came off where it
was found.  His professional knowledge of equitation and the technique
of accoutrements exploded the idea that the saddle could have slipped
here, the saddle-blanket fallen and the horse have run nearly a mile
hampered by the saddle hanging under him.  Consequently, the saddle,
blanket, and unfortunate rider must have been precipitated together,
and at the same moment, on or near this very spot. Captain Carroll was
not a detective; he had no theory to establish, no motive to discover,
only as an officer, he would have simply rejected any excuse offered on
those terms by one of his troopers to account for a similar accident.
He troubled himself with no further deduction.  Without dismounting, he
gave a closer attention to the marks of struggling hoofs near the edge
of the ditch, which had not yet been obliterated by the daily travel.
In doing so, his horse's hoof struck a small object partly hidden in
the thick dust of the highway.  It seemed to be a leather letter or
memorandum case adapted for the breast pocket.  Carroll instantly
dismounted and picked it up.  The name and address of Dr. West were
legibly written on the inside.  It contained a few papers and notes,
but nothing more.  The possibility that it might disclose the letters
he was seeking was a hope quickly past.  It was only a corroborative
fact that the accident had taken place on the spot where he was
standing.  He was losing time; he hurriedly put the book in his pocket,
and once more spurred forward on his road.



CHAPTER VII

The exterior of Aladdin's Palace, familiar as it already was to
Carroll, struck him that afternoon as looking more than usually unreal,
ephemeral, and unsubstantial.  The Moorish arches, of the thinnest
white pine; the arabesque screens and lattices that looked as if made
of pierced cardboard; the golden minarets that seemed to be glued to
the shell-like towers, and the hollow battlements that visibly warped
and cracked in the fierce sunlight,--all appeared more than ever like a
theatrical scene that might sink through the ground, or vanish on
either side to the sound of the prompter's whistle.  Recalling
Raymond's cynical insinuations, he could not help fancying that the
house had been built by a conscientious genie with a view to the
possibility of the lamp and the ring passing, with other effects, into
the hands of the sheriff.

Nevertheless, the servant who took Captain Carroll's horse summoned
another domestic, who preceded him into a small waiting-room off the
gorgeous central hall, which looked not unlike the private bar-room of
a first-class hotel, and presented him with a sherry cobbler.  It was a
peculiarity of Aladdin's Palace that the host seldom did the honors of
his own house, but usually deputed the task to some friend, and
generally the last new-comer.  Carroll was consequently not surprised
when he was presently joined by an utter stranger, who again pressed
upon him the refreshment he had just declined.  "You see," said the
transitory host, "I'm a stranger myself here, and haven't got the ways
of the regular customers; but call for anything you like, and I'll see
it got for you.  Jim" (the actual Christian name of Aladdin) "is
headin' a party through the stables.  Would you like to join 'em--they
ain't more than half through now--or will you come right to the
billiard-room--the latest thing out in stained glass and iron--ez
pretty as fresh paint? or will you meander along to the bridal suite,
and see the bamboo and silver dressing-room, and the white satin and
crystal bed that cost fifteen thousand dollars as it stands.  Or," he
added, confidentially, "would you like to cut the whole cussed thing,
and I'll get out Jim's 2.32 trotter and his spider-legged buggy and
we'll take a spin over to the Springs afore dinner?"  It was, however,
more convenient to Carroll's purpose to conceal his familiarity with
the Aladdin treasures, and to politely offer to follow his guide
through the house.  "I reckon Jim's pretty busy just now," continued
the stranger; "what with old Doc West going under so suddent, just ez
he'd got things boomin' with that railroad and his manufactory company.
The stocks went down to nothing this morning; and, 'twixt you and me,
the boys say," he added, mysteriously sinking his voice, "it was jest
the tightest squeeze there whether there wouldn't be a general burst-up
all round.  But Jim was over at San Antonio afore the Doctor's body was
laid out; just ran that telegraph himself for about two hours; had a
meeting of trustees and directors afore the Coroner came; had the
Doctor's books and papers brought over here in a buggy, and another
meeting before luncheon.  Why, by the time the other fellows began to
drop in to know if the Doctor was really dead, Jim Prince had
discounted the whole affair two years ahead.  Why, bless you, nearly
everybody is in it.  That Spanish woman over there, with the pretty
daughter--that high-toned Greaser with the big house--you know who I
mean." ...

"I don't think I do," said Carroll, coldly.  "I know a lady named
Saltonstall, with several daughters."

"That's her; thought I'd seen you there once.  Well, the Doctor's got
her into it, up to the eyes.  I reckon she's mortgaged everything to
him."

It required all Carroll's trained self-possession to prevent his
garrulous guide from reading his emotion in his face.  This, then, was
the secret of Maruja's melancholy.  Poor child! how bravely she had
borne up under it; and HE, in his utter selfishness, had never
suspected it.  Perhaps that letter was her delicate way of breaking the
news to him, for he should certainly now hear it all from Aladdin's
lips.  And this man, who evidently had succeeded to the control of Dr.
West's property, doubtless had possession of the letters too!  Humph!
He shut his lips firmly together, and strode along by the side of his
innocent guide, erect and defiant.

He did not have long to wait.  The sound of voices, the opening of
doors, and the trampling of feet indicated that the other party were
being "shown over" that part of the building Carroll and his companion
were approaching.  "There's Jim and his gang now," said his cicerone;
"I'll tell him you're here, and step out of this show business myself.
So long!  I reckon I'll see you at dinner."  At this moment Prince and
a number of ladies and gentlemen appeared at the further end of the
hall; his late guide joined them, and apparently indicated Carroll's
presence, as, with a certain lounging, off-duty, officer-like way, the
young man sauntered on.

Aladdin, like others of his class, objected to the military,
theoretically and practically; but he was not above recognizing their
social importance in a country of no society, and of even being
fascinated by Carroll's quiet and secure self-possession and
self-contentment in a community of restless ambition and aggressive
assertion.  He came forward to welcome him cordially; he introduced him
with an air of satisfaction; he would have preferred if he had been in
uniform, but he contented himself with the fact that Carroll, like all
men of disciplined limbs, carried himself equally well in mufti.

"You have shown us everything," said Carroll, smiling, "except the
secret chamber where you keep the magic lamp and ring.  Are we not to
see the spot where the incantation that produces these marvels is held,
even if we are forbidden to witness the ceremony?  The ladies are dying
to see your sanctum--your study--your workshop--where you really live."

"You'll find it a mere den, as plain as my bed-room," said Prince, who
prided himself on the Spartan simplicity of his own habits, and was not
averse to the exhibition.  "Come this way."  He crossed the hall, and
entered a small, plainly furnished room, containing a table piled with
papers, some of which were dusty and worn-looking. Carroll instantly
conceived the idea that these were Dr. West's property.  He took his
letter quietly from his pocket; and, when the attention of the others
was diverted, laid it on the table, with the remark, in an undertone,
audible only to Prince, "From Mrs. Saltonstall."

Aladdin had that sublime audacity which so often fills the place of
tact.  Casting a rapid glance at Carroll, he cried, "Hallo!" and,
wheeling suddenly round on his following guests, with a bewildering
extravagance of playful brusqueness, actually bundled them from the
room.  "The incantation is on!" he cried, waving his arms in the air;
"the genie is at work.  No admittance except on business! Follow Miss
Wilson," he added, clapping both hands on the shoulders of the
prettiest and shyest young lady of the party, with an irresistible
paternal familiarity.  "She's your hostess.  I'll honor her drafts to
any amount;" and before they were aware of his purpose or that Carroll
was no longer among them, Aladdin had closed the door, that shut with a
spring lock, and was alone with the young man.  He walked quickly to
his desk, took up the letter, and opened it.

His face of dominant, self-satisfied good-humor became set and stern.
Without taking the least notice of Carroll, he rose, and, stepping to a
telegraph instrument at a side table, manipulated half a dozen ivory
knobs with a sudden energy.  Then he returned to the table, and began
hurriedly to glance over the memoranda and indorsements of the files of
papers piled upon it.  Carroll's quick eye caught sight of a small
packet of letters in a writing of unmistakable feminine delicacy, and
made certain they were the ones he was in quest of.  Without raising
his eyes, Mr. Prince asked, almost rudely,--

"Who else has she told this to?"

"If you refer to the contents of that letter, it was written and handed
to me about three hours ago.  It has not been out of my possession
since then."

"Humph!  Who's at the casa?  There's Buchanan, and Raymond, and Victor
Guitierrez, eh?"

"I think I can say almost positively that Mrs. Saltonstall has seen no
one but her daughter since the news reached her, if that is what you
wish to know," said Carroll, still following the particular package of
letters with his eyes, as Mr. Prince continued his examination.  Prince
stopped.

"Are you sure?"

"Almost sure."

Prince rose, this time with a greater ease of manner, and, going to the
table, ran his fingers over the knobs, as if mechanically. "One would
like to know at once all there is to know about a transaction that
changes the front of four millions of capital in about four hours, eh,
Captain?" he said, for the first time really regarding his guest.
"Just four hours ago, in this very room, we found out that the widow
Saltonstall owed Dr. West about a million, tied up in investments, and
we calculated to pull her through with perhaps the loss of half.  If
she's got this assignment of the Doctor's property that she speaks of
in her letter, as collateral security, and it's all regular, and
she--so to speak--steps into Dr. West's place, by G-d, sir, we owe HIM
about three millions, and we've got to settle with HER--and that's all
about it.  You've dropped a little bomb-shell in here, Captain, and the
splinters are flying around as far as San Francisco, now.  I confess it
beats me regularly.  I always thought the old man was a little keen
over there at the casa--but she was a woman, and he was a man for all
his sixty years, and THAT combination I never thought of.  I only
wonder she hadn't gobbled him up before."

Captain Carroll's face betrayed no trace of the bewilderment and
satisfaction at this news of which he had been the unconscious bearer,
nor of resentment at the coarseness of its translation.

"There does not seem to be any memorandum of this assignment,"
continued Prince, turning over the papers.

"Have you looked here?" said Carroll, taking up the packet of letters.

"No--they seem to me some private letters she refers to in this letter,
and that she wants back again."

"Let us see," said Carroll, untying the packet.  There were three or
four closely written notes in Spanish and English.

"Love-letters, I reckon," said Prince--"that's why the old girl wants
'em back.  She don't care to have the wheedling that fetched the Doctor
trotted out to the public."

"Let us look more carefully," said Carroll, pleasantly, opening each
letter before Prince, yet so skillfully as to frustrate any attempt of
the latter to read them.  "There does not seem to be any memorandum
here.  They are evidently only private letters."

"Quite so," said Prince.

Captain Carroll retied the packet and put it in his pocket.  "Then I'll
return them to her," he said, quietly.

"Hullo!--here--I say," said Prince, starting to his feet.

"I said I would return them to her," repeated Carroll, calmly.

"But I never gave them to you!  I never consented to their withdrawal
from the papers."

"I'm sorry you did not," said Carroll, coldly; "it would have been more
polite."

"Polite!  D--n it, sir!  I call this stealing."

"Stealing, Mr. Prince, is a word that might be used by the person who
claims these letters to describe the act of any one who would keep them
from HER.  It really can not apply to you or me."

"Once for all, do you refuse to return them to me?" said Prince, pale
with anger.

"Decidedly."

"Very well, sir!  We shall see."  He stepped to the corner and rang a
bell.  "I have summoned my manager, and will charge you with the theft
in his presence."

"I think not."

"And why, sir?"

"Because the presence of a third party would enable me to throw this
glove in your face, which, as a gentleman, I couldn't do without
witnesses."  Steps were heard along the passage; Prince was no coward
in a certain way; neither was he a fool.  He knew that Carroll would
keep his word; he knew that he should have to fight him; that, whatever
the issue of the duel was, the cause of the quarrel would be known, and
scarcely redound to his credit.  At present there were no witnesses to
the offered insult, and none would be wiser.  The letters were not
worth it.  He stepped to the door, opened it, said, "No matter," and
closed it again.

He returned with an affectation of carelessness.  "You are right. I
don't know that I'm called upon to make a scene here which the LAW can
do for me as well elsewhere.  It will settle pretty quick whether
you've got the right to those letters, and whether you've taken the
right way to get them sir."

"I have no desire to evade any responsibility in this matter, legal or
otherwise," said Carroll, coldly, rising to his feet.

"Look here," said Prince, suddenly, with a return of his brusque
frankness; "you might have ASKED me for those letters, you know."

"And you wouldn't have given them to me," said Carroll.

Prince laughed.  "That's so!  I say, Captain.  Did they teach you this
sort of strategy at West Point?"

"They taught me that I could neither receive nor give an insult under a
white flag," said Carroll, pleasantly.  "And they allowed me to make
exchanges under the same rule.  I picked up this pocket-book on the
spot where the accident occurred to Dr. West.  It is evidently his.  I
leave it with you, who are his executor."

The instinct of reticence before a man with whom he could never be
confidential kept him from alluding to his other discovery.

Prince took the pocket-book, and opened it mechanically.  After a
moment's scrutiny of the memoranda it contained, his face assumed
something of the same concentrated attention it wore at the beginning
of the interview.  Raising his eyes suddenly to Carroll, he said,
quickly,--

"You have examined it?"

"Only so far as to see that it contained nothing of importance to the
person I represent," returned Carroll, simply.

The capitalist looked at the young officer's clear eyes.  Something of
embarrassment came into his own as he turned them away.

"Certainly.  Only memoranda of the Doctor's business.  Quite important
to us, you know.  But nothing referring to YOUR principal."  He
laughed.  "Thank you for the exchange.  I say--take a drink!"

"Thank you--no!" returned Carroll, going to the door.

"Well, good-by."

He held out his hand.  Carroll, with his clear eyes still regarding
him, passed quietly by the outstretched hand, opened the door, bowed,
and made his exit.

A slight flush came into Prince's cheek.  Then, as the door closed, he
burst into a half-laugh.  Had he been a dramatic villain, he would have
added to it several lines of soliloquy, in which he would have
rehearsed the fact that the opportunity for revenge had "come at last";
that the "haughty victor who had just left with his ill-gotten spoil
had put into his hands the weapon of his friend's destruction"; that
the "hour had come"; and, possibly he might have said, "Ha! ha!"  But,
being a practical, good-natured, selfish rascal, not much better or
worse than his neighbors, he sat himself down at his desk and began to
carefully consider how HE could best make use of the memoranda jotted
down by Dr. West of the proofs of the existence of his son, and the
consequent discovery of a legal heir to his property.



CHAPTER VIII

When Faquita had made sure that her young mistress was so securely
closeted with Dona Maria that morning as to be inaccessible to curious
eyes and ears, she saw fit to bewail to her fellow-servants this
further evidence of the decay of the old feudal and patriarchal mutual
family confidences.  "Time was, thou rememberest, Pepita, when an
affair of this kind was openly discussed at chocolate with everybody
present, and before us all. When Joaquin Padilla was shot at Monterey,
it was the Dona herself who told us, who read aloud the letters
describing it and the bullet-holes in his clothes, and made it quite a
gala-day--and he was a first-cousin of Guitierrez.  And now, when this
American goat of a doctor is kicked to death by a mule, the family must
shut themselves up, that never a question is asked or answered."  "Ay,"
responded Pepita; "and as regards that, Sanchez there knows as much as
they do, for it was he that almost saw the whole affair."

"How?--sawest it?" inquired Faquita, eagerly.

"Why, was it not he that was bringing home Pereo, who had been lying in
one of his trances or visions--blessed St. Antonio preserve us!" said
Pepita, hastily crossing herself--"on Kooratora's grave, when the
Doctor's mustang charged down upon them like a wild bull, and the
Doctor's foot half out of the stirrups, and he not yet fast in his
seat.  And Pereo laughs a wild laugh and says: 'Watch if the coyote
does not drag yet at his mustang's heels;' and Sanchez ran and watched
the Doctor out of sight, careering and galloping to his death!--ay, as
Pereo prophesied. For it was only half an hour afterward that Sanchez
again heard the tramp of his hoofs--as if it were here--and knowing it
two miles away--thou understandest, he said to himself: 'It is over.'"

The two women shuddered and crossed themselves.

"And what says Pereo of the fulfillment of his prophecy?" asked
Faquita, hugging herself in her shawl with a certain titillating shrug
of fascinating horror.

"It is even possible he understands it not.  Thou knowest how dazed and
dumb he ever is after these visions--that he comes from them as one
from the grave, remembering nothing.  He has lain like a log all the
morning."

"Ay; but this news should awaken him, if aught can.  He loved not this
sneaking Doctor.  Let us seek him; mayhap, Sanchez may be there.  Come!
The mistress lacks us not just now; the guests are provided for.  Come!"

She led the way to the eastern angle of the casa communicating by a low
corridor with the corral and stables.  This was the old "gate-keep" or
quarters of the mayordomo, who, among his functions, was supposed to
exercise a supervision over the exits and entrances of the house.  A
large steward's room or office, beyond it a room of general assembly,
half guard-room, half servants' hall, and Pereo's sleeping-room,
constituted his domain.  A few peons were gathered in the hall near the
open door of the apartment where Pereo lay.

Stretched on a low pallet, his face yellow as wax, a light burning
under a crucifix near his head, and a spray of blessed palm, popularly
supposed to avert the attempts of evil spirits to gain possession of
his suspended faculties, Pereo looked not unlike a corpse.  Two muffled
and shawled domestics, who sat by his side, might have been mourners,
but for their voluble and incessant chattering.

"So thou art here, Faquita," said a stout virago.  "It is a wonder thou
couldst spare time from prayers for the repose of the American Doctor's
soul to look after the health of thy superior, poor Pereo! Is it, then,
true that Dona Maria said she would have naught more to do with the
drunken brute of her mayordomo?"

The awful fascination of Pereo's upturned face did not prevent Faquita
from tossing her head as she replied, pertly, that she was not there to
defend her mistress from lazy gossip.  "Nay, but WHAT said she?" asked
the other attendant.

"She said Pereo was to want for nothing; but at present she could not
see him."

A murmur of indignation and sympathy passed through the company. It was
followed by a long sigh from the insensible man.  "His lips move," said
Faquita, still fascinated by curiosity.  "Hush! he would speak."

"His lips move, but his soul is still asleep," said Sanchez,
oracularly.  "Thus they have moved since early morning, when I came to
speak with him, and found him lying here in a fit upon the floor.  He
was half dressed, thou seest, as if he had risen to go forth, and had
been struck down so--"

"Hush!  I tell thee he speaks," said Faquita.

The sick man was faintly articulating through a few tiny bubbles that
broke upon his rigid lips.  "He--dared--me!  He--said--I was old--too
old."

"Who dared thee?  Who said thou wast too old?" asked the eager Faquita,
bending over him.

"He, Koorotora himself! in the shape of a coyote."

Faquita fell back with a little giggle, half of shame, half of awe.

"It is ever thus," said Sanchez, sententiously; "it is what he said
last night, when I picked him up on the mound.  He will sleep now--thou
shalt see.  He will get no further than Koorotora and the coyote--and
then he will sleep."

And to the awe of the group, and the increased respect for Sanchez's
wisdom, Pereo seemed to fall again into a lethargic slumber.  It was
late in the evening when he appeared to regain perfect consciousness.
"Ah--what is this?" he said, roughly, sitting up in bed, and eying the
watchers around him, some of whom had succumbed to sleep, and others
were engaged in playing cards. "Caramba! are ye mad?  Thou, Sanchez,
here; who shouldst be at thy work in the stables!  Thou, Pepita, is thy
mistress asleep or dead, that thou sittest here?  Blessed San Antonio!
would ye drive me mad?"  He lifted his hand to his head, with a dull
movement of pain, and attempted to rise from the bed.

"Softly, good Pereo; lie still," said Sanchez, approaching him. "Thou
hast been ill--so ill.  These, thy friends, have been waiting only for
this moment to be assured that thou art better.  For this idleness
there is no blame--truly none.  The Dona Maria has said that thou
shouldst lack no care; and, truly, since the terrible news there has
been little to do."

"The terrible news?" repeated Pereo.

Sanchez cast a meaning glance upon the others, as if to indicate this
coaffirmation of his diagnosis.

"Ay, terrible news!  The Doctor West was found this morning dead two
miles from the casa."

"Dr. West dead!" repeated Pereo, slowly, as if endeavoring to master
the real meaning of the words.  Then, seeing the vacuity of his
question reflected on the faces of those around him, he added,
hurriedly, with a feeble smile, "O--ay--dead!  Yes!  I remember. And he
has been ill--very ill, eh?"

"It was an accident.  He was thrown from his horse, and so killed,"
returned Sanchez, gravely.

"Killed--by his horse! sayest thou?" said Pereo, with a sudden fixed
look in his eye.

"Ay, good Pereo.  Dost thou not remember when the mustang bolted with
him down upon us in the lane, and then thou didst say he would come to
evil with the brute?  He did--blessed San Antonio!--within half an
hour!"

"How--thou sawest it?"

"Nay; for the mustang was running away and I did not follow. Bueno! it
happened all the same.  The Alcalde, Coroner, who knows all about it,
has said so an hour ago!  Juan brought the news from the rancho where
the inquest was.  There will be a funeral the day after to-morrow! and
so it is that some of the family will go. Fancy, Pereo, a Guitierrez at
the funeral of the Americano Doctor! Nay, I doubt not that the Dona
Maria will ask thee to say a prayer over his bier."

"Peace, fool! and speak not of thy lady mistress," thundered the old
man, sitting upright.  "Begone to the stables.  Dost thou hear me?  Go!"

"Now, by the Mother of Miracles," said Sanchez, hastening from the room
as the gaunt figure of the old man rose, like a sheeted spectre, from
the bed, "that was his old self again!  Blessed San Antonio!  Pereo has
recovered."

The next day he was at his usual duties, with perhaps a slight increase
of sternness in his manner.  The fulfillment of his prophecy related by
Sanchez added to the superstitious reputation in which he was held,
although Faquita voiced the opinions of a growing skeptical party in
the statement that it was easy to prophesy the Doctor's accident, with
the spectacle of the horse actually running away before the prophet's
eyes.  It was even said that Dona Maria's aversion to Pereo since the
accident arose from a belief that some assistance might have been
rendered by him.  But it was pointed out by Sanchez that Pereo had, a
few moments before, fallen under one of those singular, epileptic-like
strokes to which he was subject, and not only was unfit, but even
required the entire care of Sanchez at the time.  He did not attend the
funeral, nor did Mrs. Saltonstall; but the family was represented by
Maruja and Amita, accompanied by one or two dark-faced cousins, Captain
Carroll, and Raymond.  A number of friends and business associates from
the neighboring towns, Aladdin and a party from his house, the farm
laborers, and a crowd of working men from his mills in the foot-hills,
swelled the assemblage that met in and around the rude agricultural
sheds and outhouses which formed the only pastoral habitation of the
Rancho of San Antonio.  It had been a characteristic injunction of the
deceased that he should be buried in the midst of one of his most
prolific grain fields, as a grim return to that nature he was
impoverishing, with neither mark nor monument to indicate the spot; and
that even the temporary mound above him should, at the fitting season
of the year, be leveled with the rest of the field by the obliterating
plowshares.  A grave was accordingly dug about a quarter of a mile from
his office amidst a "volunteer" crop so dense that the large space mown
around the narrow opening, to admit of the presence of the multitude,
seemed like a golden amphitheatre.

A distinguished clergyman from San Francisco officiated.

A man of tact and politic adaptation, he dwelt upon the blameless life
of the deceased, on his practical benefit for civilization in the
county, and even treated his grim Pantheism in the selection of his
grave as a formal recognition of the text, "dust to dust."  He paid a
not ungrateful compliment to the business associates of the deceased,
and, without actually claiming in the usual terms "a continuance of
past favors" for their successors, managed to interpolate so strong a
recommendation of the late Doctor's commercial projects as to elicit
from Aladdin the expressive commendation that his sermon was "as good
as five per cent. in the stock."

Maruja, who had been standing near the carriage, languidly silent and
abstracted even under the tender attentions of Carroll, suddenly felt
the consciousness of another pair of eyes fixed upon her.  Looking up,
she was surprised to find herself regarded by the man she had twice
met, once as a tramp and once as a wayfarer at the fonda, who had
quietly joined a group not far from her.  At once impressed by the idea
that this was the first time that he had really looked at her, she felt
a singular shyness creeping over her, until, to her own astonishment
and indignation, she was obliged to lower her eyes before his gaze.  In
vain she tried to lift them, with her old supreme power of fascination.
If she had ever blushed, she felt she would have done so now.  She knew
that her face must betray her consciousness; and at last she--Maruja,
the self-poised and all-sufficient goddess--actually turned, in
half-hysterical and girlish bashfulness, to Carroll for relief in an
affected and exaggerated absorption of his attentions.  She scarcely
knew that the clergyman had finished speaking, when Raymond approached
them softly from behind.  "Pray don't believe," he said, appealingly,
"that all the human virtues are about to be buried--I should say
sown--in that wheatfield.  A few will still survive, and creep about
above the Doctor's grave.  Listen to a story just told me, and
disbelieve--if you dare--in human gratitude.  Do you see that
picturesque young ruffian over there?"

Maruja did not lift her eyes.  She felt herself breathlessly hanging on
the speaker's next words.

"Why, that's the young man of the fonda, who picked up your fan," said
Carroll, "isn't it?"

"Perhaps," said Maruja, indifferently.  She would have given worlds to
have been able to turn coldly and stare at him at that moment with the
others, but she dared not.  She contented herself with softly brushing
some dust from Captain Carroll's arm with her fan and a feminine
suggestion of tender care which thrilled that gentleman.

"Well," continued Raymond, "that Robert Macaire over yonder came here
some three or four days ago as a tramp, in want of everything but
honest labor.  Our lamented friend consented to parley with him, which
was something remarkable in the Doctor; still more remarkable, he gave
him a suit of clothes, and, it is said, some money, and sent him on his
way.  Now, more remarkable than all, our friend, on hearing of his
benefactor's death, actually tramps back here to attend his funeral.
The Doctor being dead, his executors not of a kind to emulate the
Doctor's spasmodic generosity, and there being no chance of future
favors, the act must be recorded as purely and simply gratitude.  By
Jove! I don't know but that he is the only one here who can be called a
real mourner.  I'm here because your sister is here; Carroll comes
because YOU do, and you come because your mother can not."

"And who tells you these pretty stories?" asked Maruja, with her face
still turned towards Carroll.

"The foreman, Harrison, who, with an extensive practical experience of
tramps, was struck with this exception to the general rule."

"Poor man; one ought to do something for him," said Amita,
compassionately.

"What!" said Raymond, with affected terror, "and spoil this perfect
story?  Never!  If I should offer him ten dollars, I'd expect him to
kick me; if he took it, I'd expect to kick HIM."

"He is not so bad-looking, is he, Maruja?" asked Amita of her sister.
But Maruja had already moved a few paces off with Carroll, and seemed
to be listening to him only.  Raymond smiled at the pretty perplexity
of Amita's eyebrows over this pronounced indiscretion.

"Don't mind them," he whispered; "you really cannot expect to duena
your elder sister.  Tell me, would you actually like me to see if I
could assist the virtuous tramp?  You have only to speak."  But Amita's
interest appeared to be so completely appeased with Raymond's simple
offer that she only smiled, blushed, and said "No."

Maruja's quick ears had taken in every word of these asides, and for an
instant she hated her sister for her aimless declination of Raymond's
proposal.  But becoming conscious--under her eyelids--that the stranger
was moving away with the dispersing crowd, she rejoined Amita with her
usual manner.  The others had re-entered the carriage, but Maruja took
it into her head to proceed on foot to the rude building whence the
mourners had issued.  The foreman, Harrison, flushed and startled by
this apparition of inaccessible beauty at his threshold, came eagerly
forward.  "I shall not trouble you now, Mr. Har-r-r-rison," she said,
with a polite exaggeration of the consonants; "but some day I shall
ride over here, and ask you to show me your wonderful machines."

She smiled, and turned back to seek her carriage.  But before she had
gone many yards she found that she had completely lost it in the
intervening billows of grain.  She stopped, with an impatient little
Spanish ejaculation.  The next moment the stalks of wheat parted before
her and a figure emerged.  It was the stranger.

She fell back a step in utter helplessness.

He, on his side, retreated again into the wheat, holding it back with
extended arms to let her pass.  As she moved forward mechanically,
without a word he moved backward, making a path for her until she was
able to discern the coachman's whip above the bending heads of the
grain just beyond her.  He stopped here and drew to one side, his arms
still extended, to give her free passage.  She tried to speak, but
could only bow her head, and slipped by him with a strange
feeling--suggested by his attitude--that she was evading his embrace.
But the next moment his arms were lowered, the grain closed around him,
and he was lost to her view.  She reached the carriage almost
unperceived by the inmates, and pounced upon her sister with a laugh.

"Blessed Virgin!" said Amita, "where did you come from?"

"From there!" said Maruja, with a slight nervous shiver, pointing to
the clustering grain.

"We were afraid you were lost."

"So was I," said Maruja, raising her pretty lashes heavenwards, as she
drew a shawl tightly round her shoulders.

"Has anything happened.  You look strange," said Carroll, drawing
closer to her.

Here eyes were sparkling, but she was very pale.

"Nothing, nothing!" she said, hastily, glancing at the grain again.

"If it were not that the haste would have been absolutely indecent, I
should say that the late Doctor had made you a ghostly visit," said
Raymond, looking at her curiously.

"He would have been polite enough not to have commented on my looks,"
said Maruja.  "Am I really such a fright?"

Carroll thought he had never seen her so beautiful.  Her eyelids were
quivering over their fires as if they had been brushed by the passing
wing of a strong passion.

"What are you thinking of?" said Carroll, as they drove on.

She was thinking that the stranger had looked at her admiringly, and
that his eyes were blue.  But she looked quietly into her lover's face,
and said, sweetly, "Nothing, I fear, that would interest you!"



CHAPTER IX

The news of the assignment of Dr. West's property to Mrs. Saltonstall
was followed by the still more astonishing discovery that the Doctor's
will further bequeathed to her his entire property, after payment of
his debts and liabilities.  It was given in recognition of her talents
and business integrity during their late association, and as an
evidence of the confidence and "undying affection" of the testator.
Nevertheless, after the first surprise, the fact was accepted by the
community as both natural and proper under that singular instinct of
humanity which acquiesces without scruple in the union of two large
fortunes, but sharply questions the conjunction of poverty and
affluence, and looks only for interested motives where there is
disparity of wealth.  Had Mrs. Saltonstall been a poor widow instead of
a rich one; had she been the Doctor's housekeeper instead of his
business friend, the bequest would have been strongly criticised--if
not legally tested.  But this combination, which placed the entire
valley of San Antonio in the control of a single individual, appeared
to be perfectly legitimate.  More than that, some vague rumor of the
Doctor's past and his early entanglements only seemed to make this
eminently practical disposition of his property the more respectable,
and condoned for any moral irregularities of his youth.

The effect upon the collateral branches of the Guitierrez family and
the servants and retainers was even more impressive.  For once, it
seemed that the fortunes and traditions of the family were changed; the
female Guitierrez, instead of impoverishing the property, had augmented
it; the foreigner and intruder had been despoiled; the fate of La
Mision Perdida had been changed; the curse of Koorotora had proved a
blessing; his prophet and descendant, Pereo, the mayordomo, moved in an
atmosphere of superstitious adulation and respect among the domestics
and common people.  This recognition of his power he received at times
with a certain exaltation of grandiloquent pride beyond the conception
of any but a Spanish servant, and at times with a certain dull, pained
vacancy of perception and an expression of frightened bewilderment
which also went far to establish his reputation as an unconscious seer
and thaumaturgist.  "Thou seest," said Sanchez to the partly skeptical
Faquita, "he does not know more than an infant what is his power.  That
is the proof of it."  The Dona Maria alone did not participate in this
appreciation of Pereo, and when it was proposed that a feast or
celebration of rejoicing should be given under the old pear-tree by the
Indian's mound, her indignation was long remembered by those that
witnessed it.  "It is not enough that we have been made ridiculous in
the past," she said to Maruja, "by the interference of this solemn
fool, but that the memory of our friend is to be insulted by his
generosity being made into a triumph of Pereo's idiotic ancestor.  One
would have thought those coyotes and Koorotora's bones had been buried
with the cruel gossip of your relations"--(it had been the recent habit
of Dona Maria to allude to "the family" as being particularly related
to Maruja alone)--"over my poor friend.  Let him beware that his
ancestor's mound is not uprooted with the pear-tree, and his heathenish
temple destroyed.  If, as the engineer says, a branch of the new
railroad can be established for La Mision Perdida, I agree with him
that it can better pass at that point with less sacrifice to the
domain. It is the one uncultivated part of the park, and lies at the
proper angle."

"You surely would not consent to this, my mother?" said Maruja, with a
sudden impression of a newly found force in her mother's character.

"Why not, child?" said the relict of Mr. Saltonstall and the mourner of
Dr. West, coldly.  "I admit it was discreet of thee in old times to
have thy sentimental passages there with caballeros who, like the
guests of the hidalgo that kept a skeleton at his feast, were reminded
of the mutability of their hopes by Koorotora's bones and the legend.
But with the explosion of this idea of a primal curse, like Eve's, on
the property," added the Dona Maria, with a slight bitterness, "thou
mayest have thy citas--elsewhere.  Thou canst scarcely keep this
Captain Carroll any longer at a distance by rattling those bones of
Koorotora in his face.  And of a truth, child, since the affair of the
letters, and his discreet and honorable conduct since, I see not why
thou shouldst.  He has thy mother's reputation in his hands."

"He is a gentleman, my mother," said Maruja, quietly.

"And they are scarce, child, and should be rewarded and preserved. That
is what I meant, silly one; this Captain is not rich--but then, thou
hast enough for both."

"But it was Amita that first brought him here," said Maruja, looking
down with an air of embarrassed thoughtfulness, which Dona Maria chose
to instantly accept as exaggerated coyness.

"Do not think to deceive me or thyself, child, with this folly. Thou
art old enough to know a man's mind, if not thine own. Besides, I do
not know that I shall object to her liking for Raymond.  He is very
clever, and would be a relief to some of thy relatives.  He would be
invaluable to us in the emergencies that may grow out of these
mechanical affairs that I do not understand--such as the mill and the
railroad."

"And you propose to take a few husbands as partners in the business?"
said Maruja, who had recovered her spirits.  "I warn you that Captain
Carroll is as stupid as a gentleman could be.  I wonder that he has not
blundered in other things as badly as he has in preferring me to Amita.
He confided to me only last night, that he had picked up a pocket-book
belonging to the Doctor and given it to Aladdin, without a witness or
receipt, and evidently of his own accord."

"A pocket-book of the Doctor's?" repeated Dona Maria.

"Ay; but it contained nothing of thine," said Maruja.  "The poor child
had sense enough to think of that.  But I am in no hurry to ask your
consent and your blessing yet, little mother.  I could even bear that
Amita should precede me to the altar, if the exigencies of thy
'business' require it.  It might also secure Captain Carroll for me.
Nay, look not at me in that cheapening, commercial way--with compound
interest in thine eyes.  I am not so poor an investment, truly, of thy
original capital."

"Thou art thy father's child," said her mother, suddenly kissing her;
"and that is saying enough, the Blessed Virgin knows.  Go now," she
continued, gently pushing her from the room, "and send Amita hither."
She watched the disappearance of Maruja's slightly rebellious
shoulders, and added to herself, "And this is the child that Amita
really believes is pining with lovesickness for Carroll, so that she
can neither sleep nor eat.  This is the girl that Faquita would have me
think hath no longer any heart in her dress or in her finery!  Soul of
Joseph Saltonstall!" ejaculated the widow, lifting her shoulders and
her eyes together, "thou hast much to account for."

Two weeks later she again astonished her daughter.  "Why dost thou not
join the party that drives over to see the wonders of Aladdin's Palace
to-day?  It would seem more proper that thou shouldst accompany thy
guests than Raymond and Amita."

"I have never entered his doors since the day he was disrespectful to
my mother's daughter," said Maruja, in surprise.

"Disrespectful!" repeated Dona Maria, impatiently.  "Thy father's
daughter ought to know that such as he may be ignorant and vulgar, but
can not be disrespectful to her.  And there are offenses, child, it is
much more crushing to forget than to remember.  As long as he has not
the presumption to APOLOGIZE, I see no reason why thou mayst not go.
He has not been here since that affair of the letters.  I shall not
permit him to be uncivil over THAT--dost thou understand?  He is of use
to me in business.  Thou mayst take Carroll with thee; he will
understand that."

"But Carroll will not go," said Maruja.  "He will not say what passed
between them, but I suspect they quarreled."

"All the better, then, that thou goest alone.  He need not be reminded
of it.  Fear not but that he will be only too proud of thy visit to
think of aught else."

Maruja, who seemed relieved at this prospect of being unaccompanied by
Captain Carroll, shrugged her shoulders and assented.

When the party that afternoon drove into the courtyard of Aladdin's
Palace, the announcement that its hospitable proprietor was absent, and
would not return until dinner, did not abate either their pleasure or
their curiosity.  As already intimated to the reader, Mr. Prince's
functions as host were characteristically irregular; and the servant's
suggestion, that Mr. Prince's private secretary would attend to do the
honors, created little interest, and was laughingly waived by Maruja.
"There really is not the slightest necessity to trouble the gentleman,"
she said, politely.  "I know the house thoroughly, and I think I have
shown it once or twice before for your master.  Indeed," she added,
turning to her party, "I have been already complimented on my skill as
a cicerone." After a pause, she continued, with a slight exaggeration
of action and in her deepest contralto, "Ahem, ladies and gentlemen,
the ball and court in which we are now standing is a perfect copy of
the Court of Lions at the Alhambra, and was finished in fourteen days
in white pine, gold, and plaster, at a cost of ten thousand dollars.  A
photograph of the original structure hangs on the wall: you will
observe, ladies and gentlemen, that the reproduction is perfect.  The
Alhambra is in Granada, a province of Spain, which it is said in some
respects to resemble California, where you have probably observed the
Spanish language is still spoken by the old settlers.  We now cross the
stable-yard on a bridge which is a facsimile in appearance and
dimensions of the Bridge of Sighs at Venice, connecting the Doge's
Palace with the State Prison.  Here, on the contrary, instead of being
ushered into a dreary dungeon, as in the great original, a fresh
surprise awaits us.  Allow me, ladies and gentlemen, to precede you for
the surprise.  We open a door thus--and--presto!"--

She stopped, speechless, on the threshold; the fan fell from her
gesticulating hand.

In the centre of a brilliantly-lit conservatory, with golden columns, a
young man was standing.  As her fan dropped on the tessellated
pavement, he came forward, picked it up, and put it in her rigid and
mechanical fingers.  The party, who had applauded her apparently
artistic climax, laughingly pushed by her into the conservatory,
without noticing her agitation.

It was the same face and figure she remembered as last standing before
her, holding back the crowding grain in the San Antonio field.  But
here he was appareled and appointed like a gentleman, and even seemed
to be superior to the garish glitter of his new surroundings.

"I believe I have the pleasure of speaking to Miss Saltonstall," he
said, with the faintest suggestion of his former manner in his
half-resentful sidelong glance.  "I hear that you offered to dispense
with my services, but I knew that Mr. Prince would scarcely be
satisfied if I did not urge it once more upon you in person.  I am his
private secretary."

At the same moment, Amita and Raymond, attracted by the conversation,
turned towards him.  Their recognition of the man they had seen at Dr.
West's was equally distinct.  The silence became embarrassing.  Two
pretty girls of the party pressed to Amita's side, with half-audible
whispers.  "What is it?"  "Who's your handsome and wicked-looking
friend?"  "Is this the surprise?"

At the sound of their voices, Maruja recovered herself coldly.
"Ladies," she said, with a slight wave of her fan, "this is Mr.
Prince's private secretary.  I believe it is hardly fair to take up his
valuable time.  Allow me to thank you, sir, FOR PICKING UP MY FAN."

With a single subtle flash of the eye she swept by him, taking her
companions to the other end of the conservatory.  When she turned, he
was gone.

"This was certainly an unexpected climax," said Raymond, mischievously.
"Did you really arrange it beforehand?  We leave a picturesque tramp at
the edge of a grave; we pass over six weeks and a Bridge of Sighs, and
hey, presto! we find a private secretary in a conservatory!  This is
quite the regular Aladdin business."

"You may laugh," said Maruja, who had recovered her spirits, "but if
you were really clever you'd find out what it all means.  Don't you see
that Amita is dying of curiosity?"

"Let us fly at once and discover the secret, then," said Raymond,
slipping Amita's arm through his.  "We will consult the oracle in the
stables.  Come."

The others followed, leaving Maruja for an instant alone.  She was
about to rejoin them when she heard footsteps in the passage they had
just crossed, and then perceived that the young stranger had merely
withdrawn to allow the party to precede him before he returned to the
other building through the conservatory, which he was just entering.
In turning quickly to escape, the black lace of her over-skirt caught
in the spines of a snaky-looking cactus.  She stopped to disengage
herself with feverish haste in vain.  She was about to sacrifice the
delicate material, in her impatience, when the young man stepped
quietly to her side.

"Allow me.  Perhaps I have more patience, even if I have less time," he
said, stooping down.  Their ungloved hands touched. Maruja stopped in
her efforts and stood up.  He continued until he had freed the luckless
flounce, conscious of the soft fire of her eyes on his head and neck.

"There," he said, rising, and encountering her glance.  As she did not
speak, he continued: "You are thinking, Miss Saltonstall, that you have
seen me before, are you not?  Well--you HAVE; I asked you the road to
San Jose one morning when I was tramping by your hedge."

"And as you probably were looking for something better--which you seem
to have found--you didn't care to listen to MY directions," said
Maruja, quickly.

"I found a man--almost the only one who ever offered me a gratuitous
kindness--at whose grave I afterwards met you.  I found another man who
befriended me here--where I meet you again."

She was beginning to be hysterically nervous lest any one should return
and find them together.  She was conscious of a tingling of vague
shame.  Yet she lingered.  The strange fascination of his half-savage
melancholy, and a reproachfulness that seemed to arraign her, with the
rest of the world, at the bar of his vague resentment, held the
delicate fibres of her sensitive being as cruelly and relentlessly as
the thorns of the cactus had gripped her silken lace.  Without knowing
what she was saying, she stammered that she "was glad he connected her
with his better fortune," and began to move away.  He noticed it with
his sidelong lids, and added, with a slight bitterness:--

"I don't think I should have intruded here again, but I thought you had
gone.  But I--I--am afraid you have not seen the last of me. It was the
intention of my employer, Mr. Prince, to introduce me to you and your
mother.  I suppose he considers it part of my duties here.  I must warn
you that, if you are here when he returns, he will insist upon it, and
upon your meeting me with these ladies at dinner."

"Perhaps so--he is my mother's friend," said Maruja; "but you have the
advantage of us--you can always take to the road, you know."

The smile with which she had intended to accompany this speech did not
come as readily in execution as it had in conception, and she would
have given worlds to have recalled her words.  But he said, "That's
so," quietly, and turned away, as if to give her an opportunity to
escape.  She moved hesitatingly towards the passage and stopped.  The
sound of the returning voices gave her a sudden courage.

"Mr.--"

"Guest," said the young man.

"If we do conclude to stay to dinner as Mr. Prince has said nothing of
introducing you to my sister, you must let ME have that pleasure."

He lifted his eyes to hers with a sudden flush.  But she had fled.

She reached her party, displaying her torn flounce as the cause of her
delay, and there was a slight quickness in her breathing and her speech
which was attributed to the same grave reason.  "But, only listen,"
said Amita, "we've got it all out of the butler and the grooms.  It's
such a romantic story!"

"What is?" said Maruja, suddenly.

"Why, the private tramp's."

"The peripatetic secretary," suggested Raymond.

"Yes," continued Amita, "Mr. Prince was so struck with his gratitude to
the old Doctor that he hunted him up in San Jose, and brought him here.
Since then Prince has been so interested in him--it appears he was
somebody in the States, or has rich relations--that he has been
telegraphing and making all sorts of inquiries about him, and has even
sent out his own lawyer to hunt up everything about him.  Are you
listening?"

"Yes."

"You seem abstracted."

"I am hungry."

"Why not dine here; it's an hour earlier than at home.  Aladdin would
fall at your feet for the honor.  Do!"

Maruja looked at them with innocent vagueness, as if the possibility
were just beginning to dawn upon her.

"And Clara Wilson is just dying to see the mysterious unknown again.
Say yes, little Maruja."

Little Maruja glanced at them with a large maternal compassion. "We
shall see."

Mr. Prince, on his return an hour later, was unexpectedly delighted
with Maruja's gracious acceptance of his invitation to dinner.  He was
thoroughly sensible of the significance which his neighbors had
attached to the avoidance by the Saltonstall heiress of his various
parties and gorgeous festivities ever since a certain act of
indiscretion--now alleged to have been produced by the exaltation of
wine--had placed him under ban.  Whatever his feelings were towards her
mother, he could not fail to appreciate fully this act of the daughter,
which rehabilitated him.  It was with more than his usual
extravagance--shown even in a certain exaggeration of respect towards
Maruja--that he welcomed the party, and made preparations for the
dinner.  The telegraph and mounted messengers were put into rapid
requisition.  The bridal suite was placed at the disposal of the young
ladies for a dressing-room.  The attendant genii surpassed themselves.
The evening dresses of Maruja, Amita, and the Misses Wilson, summoned
by electricity from La Mision Perdida, and dispatched by the fleetest
conveyances, were placed in the arms of their maids, smothered with
bouquets, an hour before dinner.  An operatic concert troupe, passing
through the nearest town, were diverted from their course by the slaves
of the ring to discourse hidden music in the music-room during dinner.
"Bite my finger, Sweetlips," said Miss Clara Wilson, who had a neat
taste for apt quotation, to Maruja, "that I may see if I am awake. It's
the Arabian Nights all over again!"

The dinner was a marvel, even in a land of gastronomic marvels; the
dessert a miracle of fruits, even in a climate that bore the products
of two zones.  Maruja, from her seat beside her satisfied host, looked
across a bank of yellow roses at her sister and Raymond, and was
timidly conscious of the eyes of young Guest, who was seated at the
other end of the table, between the two Misses Wilson.  With a strange
haunting of his appearance on the day she first met him, she stole
glances of half-frightened curiosity at him while he was eating, and
was relieved to find that he used his knife and fork like the others,
and that his appetite was far from voracious.  It was his employer who
was the first to recall the experiences of his past life, with a
certain enthusiasm and the air of a host anxious to contribute to the
entertainment of his guests. "You'd hardly believe, Miss Saltonstall,
that that young gentleman over there walked across the Continent--and
two thousand odd miles, wasn't it?--all alone, and with not much more
in the way of traps than he's got on now.  Tell 'em, Harry, how the
Apaches nearly gobbled you up, and then let you go because they thought
you as good an Injun as any one of them, and how you lived a week in
the desert on two biscuits as big as that."  A chorus of entreaty and
delighted anticipation followed the suggestion.  The old expression of
being at bay returned for an instant to Guest's face, but, lifting his
eyes, he caught a look of almost sympathetic anxiety from Maruja's, who
had not spoken.

"It became necessary for me, some time ago," said Guest, half
explanatorily, to Maruja, "to be rather explicit in the details of my
journey here, and I told Mr. Prince some things which he seems to think
interesting to others.  That is all.  To save my life on one occasion,
I was obliged to show myself as good as an Indian, in his own way, and
I lived among them and traveled with them for two weeks.  I have been
hungry, as I suppose others have on like occasions, but nothing more."

Nevertheless, in spite of his evident reticence, he was obliged to give
way to their entreaties, and, with a certain grim and uncompromising
truthfulness of statement, recounted some episodes of his journey.  It
was none the less thrilling that he did it reluctantly, and in much the
same manner as he had answered his father's questions, and as he had
probably responded to the later cross-examination of Mr. Prince.  He
did not tell it emotionally, but rather with the dogged air of one who
had been subjected to a personal grievance for which he neither asked
nor expected sympathy.  When he did not raise his eyes to Maruja's, he
kept them fixed on his plate.

"Well," said Prince, when a long-drawn sigh of suspended emotion among
the guests testified to his powers as a caterer to their amusement,
"what do you say to some music with our coffee to follow the story?"

"It's more like a play," said Amita to Raymond.  "What a pity Captain
Carroll, who knows all about Indians, isn't here to have enjoyed it.
But I suppose Maruja, who hasn't lost a word, will tell it to him."

"I don't think she will," said Raymond, dryly, glancing at Maruja, who,
lost in some intricate pattern of her Chinese plate, was apparently
unconscious that her host was waiting her signal to withdraw.

At last she raised her head, and said, gently but audibly, to the
waiting Prince,--

"It is positively a newer pattern; the old one had not that delicate
straw line in the arabesque.  You must have had it made for you."

"I did," said the gratified Prince, taking up the plate.  "What eyes
you have, Miss Saltonstall.  They see everything."

"Except that I'm keeping you all waiting," she returned, with a smile,
letting the eyes in question fall with a half-parting salutation on
Guest as she rose.  It was the first exchange of a common instinct
between them, and left them as conscious as if they had pressed hands.

The music gave an opportunity for some desultory conversation, in which
Mr. Prince and his young friend received an invitation from Maruja to
visit La Mision, and the party, by common consent, turned into the
conservatory, where the genial host begged them each to select a flower
from a few especially rare exotics.  When Maruja received hers, she
said, laughingly, to Prince, "Will you think me very importunate if I
ask for another?"  "Take what you like--you have only to name it," he
replied, gallantly.  "But that's just what I can't do," responded the
young girl, "unless," she added, turning to Guest, "unless you can
assist me.  It was the plant I was examining to-day."  "I think I can
show it to you," said Guest, with a slight increase of color, as he
preceded her towards the memorable cactus near the door, "but I doubt
if it has any flower."

Nevertheless, it had.  A bright red blossom, like a spot of blood drawn
by one of its thorns.  He plucked it for her, and she placed it in her
belt.

"You are forgiving," he said, admiringly.

"YOU ought to know that," she returned, looking down.

"I?--why?"

"You were rude to me twice."

"Twice!"

"Yes--once at the Mision of La Perdida; once in the road at San
Antonio."

His eyes became downcast and gloomy.  "At the Mision that morning, I, a
wretched outcast, only saw in you a beautiful girl intent on overriding
me with her merciless beauty.  At San Antonio I handed the fan I picked
up to the man whose eyes told me he loved you."

She started impatiently.  "You might have been more gallant, and found
more difficulty in the selection," she said, pertly.  "But since when
have you gentlemen become so observant and so punctilious?  Would you
expect him to be as considerate of others?"

"I have few claims that any one seems bound to respect," he returned,
brusquely.  Then, in a softer voice, he added, looking at her, gently,--

"You were in mourning when you came here this afternoon, Miss
Saltonstall."

"Was I?  It was for Dr. West--my mother's friend."

"It was very becoming to you."

"You are complimenting me.  But I warn you that Captain Carroll said
something better than that; he said mourning was not necessary for me.
I had only to 'put my eye-lashes at half-mast.'  He is a soldier you
know."

"He seems to be as witty as he is fortunate," said Guest, bitterly.

"Do you think he is fortunate?" said Maruja, raising her eyes to his.
There was so much in this apparently simple question that Guest looked
in her eyes for a suggestion.  What he saw there for an instant made
his heart stop beating.  She apparently did not know it, for she began
to tremble too.

"Is he not?" said Guest, in a low voice.

"Do you think he ought to be?" she found herself whispering.

A sudden silence fell upon them.  The voices of their companions seemed
very far in the distance; the warm breath of the flowers appeared to be
drowning their senses; they tried to speak, but could not; they were so
near to each other that the two long blades of a palm served to hide
them.  In the midst of this profound silence a voice that was like and
yet unlike Maruja's said twice, "Go! go!" but each time seemed hushed
in the stifling silence.  The next moment the palms were pushed aside,
the dark figure of a young man slipped like some lithe animal through
the shrubbery, and Maruja found herself standing, pale and rigid, in
the middle of the walk, in the full glare of the light, and looking
down the corridor toward her approaching companions.  She was furious
and frightened; she was triumphant and trembling; without thought,
sense, or reason, she had been kissed by Henry Guest, and--had returned
it.

The fleetest horses of Aladdin's stud that night could not carry her
far enough or fast enough to take her away from that moment, that
scene, and that sensation.  Wise and experienced, confident in her
beauty, secure in her selfishness, strong over others' weaknesses,
weighing accurately the deeds and words of men and women, recognizing
all there was in position and tradition, seeing with her father's clear
eyes the practical meaning of any divergence from that conventionality
which as a woman of the world she valued, she returned again and again
to the trembling joy of that intoxicating moment.  She though of her
mother and sisters, of Raymond and Garnier, of Aladdin--she even forced
herself to think of Carroll--only to shut her eyes, with a faint smile,
and dream again the brief but thrilling dream of Guest that began and
ended in their joined and parted lips.  Small wonder that, hidden and
silent in her enwrappings, as she lay back in the carriage, with her
pale face against the cold starry sky, two other stars came out and
glistened and trembled on her passion-fringed lashes.



CHAPTER X

The rainy season had set in early.  The last three weeks of summer
drought had drained the great valley of its lifeblood; the dead stalks
of grain rustled like dry bones over Dr. West's grave.  The desiccating
wind and sun had wrought some disenchanting cracks and fissures in
Aladdin's Palace, and otherwise disjoined it, so that it not only
looked as if it were ready to be packed away, but had become finally
untenable in the furious onset of the southwesterly rains.  The
gorgeous furniture of the reception-rooms was wrapped in mackintoshes,
the conservatory was changed into an aquarium, the Bridge of Sighs
crossed an actual canal in the stable-yard.  Only the billiard-room and
Mr. Prince's bed-room and office remained intact, and in the latter,
one stormy afternoon, Mr. Prince himself sat busy over his books and
papers.  His station-wagon, splashed and streaked with mud, stood in
the court-yard, just as it had been driven from the station, and the
smell of the smoke of newly-lit fires showed that the house had been
opened only for this hurried visit of its owner.

The tramping of horse hoofs in the court-yard was soon followed by
steps along the corridor, and the servant ushered Captain Carroll into
the presence of his master.  The Captain did not remove his military
overcoat, but remained standing erect in the centre of the room, with
his forage cap in his hand.

"I could have given you a lift from the station," said Prince, "if you
had come that way.  I've only just got in myself."

"I preferred to ride," said Carroll, dryly.

"Sit down by the fire," said Prince, motioning to a chair, "and dry
yourself."

"I must ask you first the purport of this interview," said Carroll,
curtly, "before I prolong it further.  You have asked me to come here
in reference to certain letters I returned to their rightful owner some
months ago.  If you seek to reclaim them again, or to refer to a
subject which must remain forgotten, I decline to proceed further."

"It DOES refer to the letters, and it rests with you whether they shall
be forgotten or not.  It is not my fault if the subject has been
dropped.  You must remember that until yesterday you have been absent
on a tour of inspection and could not be applied to before."

Carroll cast a cold glance at Prince, and then threw himself into a
chair, with his overcoat still on and his long military boots crossed
before the fire.  Sitting there in profile Prince could not but notice
that he looked older and sterner than at their last interview, and his
cheeks were thinned as if by something more than active service.

"When you were here last summer," began Prince, leaning forward over
his desk, "you brought me a piece of news that astounded me, as it did
many others.  It was the assignment of Dr. West's property to Mrs.
Saltonstall.  That was something there was no gainsaying; it was a
purely business affair, and involved nobody's rights but the assignor.
But this was followed, a day or two after, by the announcement of the
Doctor's will, making the same lady the absolute and sole inheritor of
the same property.  That seemed all right too; for there were,
apparently, no legal heirs. Since then, however, it has been discovered
that there is a legal heir--none other than the Doctor's only son.
Now, as no allusion to the son's existence was made in that will--which
was a great oversight of the Doctor's--it is a fiction of the law that
such an omission is an act of forgetfulness, and therefore leaves the
son the same rights as if there had been no will at all.  In other
words, if the Doctor had seen fit to throw his scapegrace son a hundred
dollar bill, it would have been legal evidence that he remembered him.
As he did not, it's a fair legal presumption that he forgot him, or
that the will is incomplete."

"This seems to be a question for Mrs. Saltonstall's lawyers--not for
her friends," said Carroll, coldly.

"Excuse me; that remains for you to decide--when you hear all.  You
understand at present, then, that Dr. West's property, both by
assignment and will, was made over, in the event of his death, not to
his legal heirs, but to a comparative stranger.  It looked queer to a
good many people, but the only explanation was, that the Doctor had
fallen very much in love with the widow--that he would have probably
married her--had he lived."

With an unpleasant recollection that this was almost exactly Maruja's
explanation of her mother's relations to Dr. West, Carroll returned,
impatiently, "If you mean that their private relations may be made the
subject of legal discussion, in the event of litigation in regard to
the property, that again is a matter for Mrs. Saltonstall to
decide--and not her friends.  It is purely a matter of taste."

"It may be a matter of discretion, Captain Carroll."

"Of discretion!" repeated Carroll, superciliously.

"Well," said Prince, leaving his desk and coming to the fire-place,
with his hands in his pockets, "what would you call it, if it could be
found that Dr. West, on leaving Mrs. Saltonstall's that night, did not
meet with an accident, was not thrown from his horse, but was coolly
and deliberately murdered!"

Captain Carroll's swift recollection of the discovery he himself had
made in the road, and its inconsistency with the accepted theory of the
accident, unmistakably showed itself in his face.  It was a moment
before he recovered himself.

"But even if it can be proved to have been a murder and not an
accident, what has that to do with Mrs. Saltonstall or her claim to the
property?"

"Only that she was the one person directly benefited by his death."

Captain Carroll looked at him steadily, and then rose to his feet. "Do
I understand that you have called me here to listen to this infamous
aspersion of a lady?"

"I have called you here, Captain Carroll, to listen to the arguments
that may be used to set aside Dr. West's will, and return the property
to the legal heir.  You are to listen to them or not, as you choose;
but I warn you that your opportunity to hear them in confidence and
convey them to your friend will end here.  I have no opinion in the
case.  I only tell you that it will be argued that Dr. West was unduly
influenced to make a will in Mrs. Saltonstall's favor; that, after
having done so, it will be shown that, just before his death, he became
aware of the existence of his son and heir, and actually had an
interview with him; that he visited Mrs. Saltonstall that evening, with
the records of his son's identity and a memorandum of his interview in
his pocket-book; and that, an hour after leaving the house, he was
foully murdered.  That is the theory which Mrs. Saltonstall has to
consider.  I told you I have no opinion.  I only know that there are
witnesses to the interview of the Doctor and his son; there is evidence
of murder, and the murderer is suspected; there is the evidence of the
pocket-book, with the memorandum picked up on the spot, which you
handed me yourself."

"Do you mean to say that you will permit this pocketbook, handed you in
confidence, to be used for such an infamous purpose?" said Carroll.

"I think you offered it to me in exchange for Dr. West's letters to
Mrs. Saltonstall," returned Prince, dryly.  "The less said about that,
the less is likely to be said about compromising letters written by the
widow to the Doctor, which she got you to recover--letters which they
may claim had a bearing on the case, and even lured him to his fate."

For an instant Captain Carroll recoiled before the gulf which seemed to
open at the feet of the unhappy family.  For an instant a terrible
doubt possessed him, and in that doubt he found a new reason for a
certain changed and altered tone in Maruja's later correspondence with
him, and the vague hints she had thrown out of the impossibility of
their union.  "I beg you will not press me to greater candor," she had
written, "and try to forget me before you learn to hate me."  For an
instant he believed--and even took a miserable comfort in the
belief--that it was this hideous secret, and not some coquettish
caprice, to which she vaguely alluded.  But it was only for a moment;
the next instant the monstrous doubt passed from the mind of the simple
gentleman, with only a slight flush of shame at his momentary
disloyalty.

Prince, however, had noticed it, not without a faint sense of sympathy.
"Look here!" he said, with a certain brusqueness, which in a man of his
character was less dangerous than his smoothness. "I know your feelings
to that family--at least to one of them--and, if I've been playing it
pretty rough on you, it's only because you played it rather rough on ME
the last time you were here.  Let's understand each other.  I'll go so
far as to say I don't believe that Mrs. Saltonstall had anything to do
with that murder, but, as a business man, I'm bound to say that these
circumstances and her own indiscretion are quite enough to bring the
biggest pressure down on her.  I wouldn't want any better 'bear' on the
market value of her rights than this.  Take it at its best.  Say that
the Coroner's verdict is set aside, and a charge of murder against
unknown parties is made--"

"One moment, Mr. Prince," said Carroll.  "I shall be one of the first
to insist that this is done, and I have confidence enough in Mrs.
Saltonstall's honest friendship for the Doctor to know that she will
lose no time in pursuing his murderers."

Prince looked at Carroll with a feeling of half envy and half pity. "I
think not," he said, dryly; "for all suspicion points to one man as the
perpetrator, and that man was Mrs. Saltonstall's confidential
servant--the mayordomo, Pereo."  He waited for a moment for the effect
of this announcement on Carroll, and then went on: "You now understand
that, even if Mrs. Saltonstall is acquitted of any connivance with or
even knowledge of the deed, she will hardly enjoy the prosecution of
her confidential servant for murder."

"But how can this be prevented?  If, as you say, there are actual
proofs, why have they not been acted upon before?  What can keep them
from being acted upon now?"

"The proofs have been collected by one man, have been in possession of
one man, and will only pass out of his possession when it is for the
benefit of the legal heir--who does not yet even know of their
existence."

"And who is this one man?"

"Myself."

"You?--You?" said Carroll, advancing towards him.  "Then this is YOUR
work!"

"Captain Carroll," said Prince, without moving, but drawing his lips
tightly together and putting his head on one side, "I don't propose to
have another scene like the one we had at our last meeting.  If you try
on anything of that kind, I shall put the whole matter into a lawyer's
hands.  I don't say that you won't regret it; I don't say that I sha'nt
be disappointed, too, for I have been managing this thing purely as a
matter of business, with a view to profiting by it.  It so happens that
we can both work to the same end, even if our motives are not the same.
I don't call myself an officer and a gentleman, but I reckon I've run
this affair about as delicately as the best of them, and with a d----d
sight more horse sense.  I want this thing hushed up and compromised,
to get some control of the property again, and to prevent it
depreciating, as it would, in litigation; you want it hushed up for the
sake of the girl and your future mother-in-law. I don't know anything
about your laws of honor, but I've laid my cards on the table for you
to see, without asking what you've got in your hand.  You can play the
game or leave the board, as you choose."  He turned and walked to the
window--not without leaving on Carroll's mind a certain sense of
firmness, truthfulness, and sincerity which commanded his respect.

"I withdraw any remark that might have seemed to reflect on your
business integrity, Mr. Prince," said Carroll, quietly.  "I am willing
to admit that you have managed this thing better than I could, and, if
I join you in an act to suppress these revelations, I have no right to
judge of your intentions.  What do you propose to have me do?"

"To state the whole case to Mrs. Saltonstall, and to ask her to
acknowledge the young man's legal claim without litigation."

"But how do you know that she would not do this without--excuse
me--without intimidation?"

"I only reckon that a woman clever enough to get hold of a million,
would be clever enough to keep it--against others."

"I hope to show you are mistaken.  But where is this heir?"

"Here."

"Here?"

"Yes.  For the last six months he has been my private secretary.  I
know what you are thinking of, Captain Carroll.  You would consider it
indelicate--eh?  Well, that's just where we differ.  By this means I
have kept everything in my own hands--prevented him from getting into
the hands of outsiders--and I intend to dispose of just as much of the
facts to him as may be necessary for him to prove his title.  What
bargain I make with HIM--is my affair."

"Does he suspect the murder?"

"No.  I did not think it necessary for his good or mine.  He can be an
ugly devil if he likes, and although there wasn't much love lost
between him and the old man, it wouldn't pay to have any revenge mixed
up with business.  He knows nothing of it.  It was only by accident
that, looking after his movements while he was here, I ran across the
tracks of the murderer."

"But what has kept him from making known his claim to the Saltonstalls?
Are you sure he has not?" said Carroll, with a sudden thought that it
might account for Maruja's strangeness.

"Positive.  He's too proud to make a claim unless he could thoroughly
prove it, and only a month ago he made me promise to keep it dark.
He's too lazy to trouble himself about it much anyway--as far as I can
see.  D----d if I don't think his being a tramp has made him lose his
taste for everything!  Don't worry yourself about HIM.  He isn't likely
to make confidences with the Saltonstalls, for he don't like 'em, and
never went there but once. Instinctively or not, the widow didn't
cotton to him; and I fancy Miss Maruja has some old grudge against him
for that fan business on the road.  She isn't a girl to forgive or
forget anything, as I happen to know," he added, with an uneasy laugh.

Carroll was too preoccupied with the danger that seemed to threaten his
friends from this surly pretender to resent Prince's tactless allusion.
He was thinking of Maruja's ominous agitation at his presence at Dr.
West's grave.  "Do they suspect him at all?"--he asked, hurriedly.

"How should they?  He goes by the name of Guest--which was his father's
real name until changed by an act of legislation when he first came
here.  Nobody remembers it.  We only found it out from his papers.  It
was quite legal, as all his property was acquired under the name of
West."

Carroll rose and buttoned his overcoat.  "I presume you are able to
offer conclusive proofs of everything you have asserted?"

"Perfectly."

"I am going to the Mision Perdida now," said Captain Carroll, quietly.
"To-morrow I will bring you the answer--Peace or War." He walked to the
door, lifted his hand to his cap, with a brief military salutation, and
disappeared.



CHAPTER XI

As Captain Carroll urged his horse along the miry road to La Mision
Perdida, he was struck with certain changes in the landscape before him
other than those wrought by the winter rains.  There were the usual
deep gullies and trenches, half-filled with water, in the fields and
along the road, but there were ominous embankments and ridges of
freshly turned soil, and a scattered fringe of timbers following a
cruel, undeviating furrow on the broad grazing lands of the Mision.
But it was not until he had crossed the arroyo that he felt the full
extent of the late improvements.  A quick rumbling in the distance, a
light flash of steam above the willow copse, that drifted across the
field on his right, and he knew that the railroad was already in
operation.  Captain Carroll reined in his frightened charger, and
passed his hand across his brow with a dazed sense of loss.  He had
been gone only four months--yet he already felt strange and forgotten.

It was with a feeling of relief that he at last turned from the
high-road into the lane.  Here everything was unchanged, except that
the ditches were more thickly strewn with the sodden leaves of fringing
oaks and sycamores.  Giving his horse to a servant in the court-yard,
he did not enter the patio, but, crossing the lawn, stepped upon the
long veranda.  The rain was dripping from its eaves and striking a
minute spray from the vines that clung to its columns; his footfall
awoke a hollow echo as he passed, as if the outer shell of the house
were deserted; the formal yews and hemlocks that in summer had relieved
the dazzling glare of six months' sunshine had now taken gloomy
possession of the garden, and the evening shadows, thickened by rain,
seemed to lie in wait at every corner.  The servant, who had, with
old-fashioned courtesy, placed the keys and the "disposition" of that
wing of the house at his service, said that Dona Maria would wait upon
him in the salon before dinner.  Knowing the difficulty of breaking the
usual rigid etiquette, and trusting to the happy intervention of
Maruja--though here, again, custom debarred him from asking for her--he
allowed the servant to remove his wet overcoat, and followed him to the
stately and solemn chamber prepared for him.  The silence and gloom of
the great house, so grateful and impressive in the ardent summer, began
to weigh upon him under this shadow of an overcast sky.  He walked to
the window and gazed out on the cloister-like veranda.  A melancholy
willow at an angle of the stables seemed to be wringing its hands in
the rising wind.  He turned for relief to the dim fire that flickered
like a votive taper in the vault-like hearth, and drew a chair towards
it.  In spite of the impatience and preoccupation of a lover, he found
himself again and again recurring to the story he had just heard, until
the vengeful spirit of the murdered Doctor seemed to darken and possess
the house.  He was striving to shake off the feeling, when his
attention was attracted to stealthy footsteps in the passage.  Could it
be Maruja?  He rose to his feet, with his eye upon the door.  The
footsteps ceased--it remained closed.  But another door, which had
escaped his attention in the darkened corner, slowly swung on its
hinges, and, with a stealthy step, Pereo, the mayordomo, entered the
room.

Courageous and self-possessed as Captain Carroll was by nature and
education, this malevolent vision, and incarnation of the thought
uppermost in his mind, turned him cold.  He had half drawn a derringer
from his breast, when his eye fell on the grizzled locks and wrinkled
face of the old man, and his hand dropped to his side. But Pereo, with
the quick observation of insanity, had noticed the weapon, and rubbed
his hands together, with a malicious laugh.

"Good! good! good!" he whispered, rapidly, in a strange bodiless voice;
"'t will serve! 't will serve!  And you are a soldier too--and know how
to use it!  Good, it is a Providence!"  He lifted his hollow eyes to
heaven, and then added, "Come! come!"

Carroll stepped towards him.  He was alone and in the presence of an
undoubted madman--one strong enough, in spite of his years, to inflict
a deadly injury, and one whom he now began to realize might have done
so once before.  Nevertheless, he laid his hand on the old man's arm,
and, looking him calmly in the eye, said, quietly, "Come?  Where,
Pereo?  I have only just arrived."

"I know it," whispered the old man, nodding his head violently.  "I was
watching them, when you rode up.  That is why I lost the scent; but
together we can track them still--we can track them.  Eh, Captain, eh!
Come!  Come!" and he moved slowly backward, waving his hand towards the
door.

"Track whom, Pereo?" said Carroll, soothingly.  "Whom do you seek?"

"Whom?" said the old man, startled for a moment and passing his hand
over his wrinkled forehead.  "Whom?  Eh!  Why, the Dona Maruja and the
little black cat--her maid--Faquita!"

"Yes, but why seek them?  Why track them?"

"Why?" said the old man, with a sudden burst of impotent passion. "YOU
ask me why!  Because they are going to the rendezvous again. They are
going to seek him.  Do you understand--to seek HIM--the Coyote!"

Carroll smiled a faint smile of relief--"So--the Coyote!"

"Ay," said the old man, in a confidential whisper; "the Coyote! But not
the big one--you understand--the little one.  The big one is
dead--dead--dead!  But the little one lives yet.  You shall do for HIM
what I, Pereo--listen--" he glanced around the room furtively--"what
I--the good old Pereo, did for the big one!  Good, it is a Providence.
Come!"

Of the terrible thoughts that crossed Carroll's mind at this unexpected
climax one alone was uppermost.  The trembling irresponsible wretch
before him meditated some vague crime--and Maruja was in danger.  He
did not allow himself to dwell upon any other suspicion suggested by
that speech; he quickly conceived a plan of action.  To have rung the
bell and given Pereo into the hands of the servants would have only
exposed to them the lunatic's secret--if he had any--and he might
either escape in his fury or relapse into useless imbecility.  To humor
him and follow him, and trust afterwards to his own quickness and
courage to avert any calamity, seemed to be the only plan.  Captain
Carroll turned his clear glance on the restless eyes of Pereo, and
said, without emotion, "Let us go, then, and quickly.  You shall track
them for me; but remember, good Pereo, you must leave the rest to me."

In spite of himself, some accidental significance in this ostentatious
adjuration to lull Pereo's suspicions struck him with pain. But the old
man's eyes glittered with gratified passion as he said, "Ay, good!  I
will keep my word.  Thou shalt work thy will on the little one as I
have said.  Truly it is a Providence!  Come!" Seeing Captain Carroll
glance round for his overcoat, he seized a poncho from the wall,
wrapped it round him, and grasped his hand. Carroll, who would have
evaded this semblance of disguise, had no time to parley, and they
turned together, through the door by which Pereo had entered, into a
long dark passage, which seemed to be made through the outer shell of
the building that flanked the park. Following his guide in the profound
obscurity, perfectly conscious that any change in his madness might be
followed by a struggle in the dark, where no help could reach them,
they presently came to a door that opened upon the fresh smell of rain
and leaves.  They were standing at the bottom of a secluded alley,
between two high hedges that hid it from the end of the garden.  Its
grass-grown walk and untrimmed hedges showed that it was seldom used.
Carroll, still keeping close to Pereo's side, felt him suddenly stop
and tremble.  "Look!" he said, pointing to a shadowy figure some
distance before them; "look, 'tis Maruja, and alone!"

With a dexterous movement, Carroll managed to slip his arm securely
through the old man's, and even to throw himself before him, as if in
his eagerness to discern the figure.

"'Tis Maruja--and alone!" said Pereo, trembling.  "Alone!  Eh!  And the
Coyote is not here!"  He passed his hand over his staring eyes. "So."
Suddenly he turned upon Carroll.  "Ah, do you not see, it is a trick!
The Coyote is escaping with Faquita!  Come!  Nay; thou wilt not?  Then
will I!"  With an unexpected strength born of his madness, he freed his
arm from Carroll and darted down the alley. The figure of Maruja,
evidently alarmed at his approach, glided into the hedge, as Pereo
passed swiftly by, intent only on his one wild fancy.  Without a
further thought of his companion or even the luckless Faquita, Carroll
also plunged through the hedge, to intercept Maruja.  But by that time
she was already crossing the upper end of the lawn, hurrying towards
the entrance to the patio. Carroll did not hesitate to follow.  Keeping
in view the lithe, dark, active little figure, now hidden by an
intervening cluster of bushes, now fading in the gathering evening
shadows, he nevertheless did not succeed in gaining upon her until she
had nearly reached the patio.  Here he lost ground, as turning to the
right, instead of entering the court-yard, she kept her way toward the
stables.  He was near enough, however, to speak.  "One moment, Miss
Saltonstall," he said hurriedly; "there is no danger.  I am alone.  But
I must speak with you."

The young girl seemed only to redouble her exertions.  At last she
stopped before a narrow door hidden in the wall, and fumbled in her
pocket for a key.  That moment Carroll was upon her.

"Forgive me, Miss Saltonstall--Maruja; but you must hear me!  You are
safe, but I fear for your maid, Faquita!"

A little laugh followed his speech; the door yielded and opened to her
vanishing figure.  For an instant the lace shawl muffling her face was
lifted, as the door closed and locked behind her.  Carroll drew back in
consternation.  It was the laughing eyes and saucy face of Faquita!



CHAPTER XII

When Captain Carroll turned from the high-road into the lane, an hour
before, Maruja and Faquita had already left the house by the same
secret passage and garden-door that opened afterwards upon himself and
Pereo.  The young women had evidently changed dresses: Maruja was
wearing the costume of her maid; Faquita was closely veiled and habited
like her mistress; but it was characteristic that, while Faquita
appeared awkward and over-dressed in her borrowed plumes, Maruja's
short saya and trim bodice, with the striped shawl that hid her fair
head, looked infinitely more coquettish and bewitching than on its
legitimate owner.

They passed hurriedly down the long alley, and at its further end
turned at right angles to a small gate half hidden in the shrubbery.
It opened upon a venerable vineyard, that dated back to the occupation
of the padres, but was now given over to the chance cultivation of
peons and domestics.  Its long, broken rows of low vines, knotted and
overgrown with age, reached to the thicketed hillside of buckeye that
marked the beginning of the canada.  Here Maruja parted from her maid,
and, muffling the shawl more closely round her head, hastily passed
between the vine rows to a ruined adobe building near the hillside.  It
was originally part of the refectory of the old Mision, but had been
more recently used as a vinadero's cottage.  As she neared it, her
steps grew slower, until, reaching its door, she hesitated, with her
hand timidly on the latch.  The next moment she opened it gently; it
was closed quickly behind her, and, with a little stifled cry, she
found herself in the arms of Henry Guest.

It was only for an instant; the pleading of her white hands, disengaged
from his neck, where at first they had found themselves, and uplifted
before her face, touched him more than the petitioning eyes or the
sweet voiceless mouth, whose breath even was forgotten. Letting her
sink into the chair from which he had just risen, he drew back a step,
with his hands clasped before him, and his dark half-savage eyes bent
earnestly upon her.  Well might he have gazed.  It was no longer the
conscious beauty, proud and regnant, seated before him; but a timid,
frightened girl, struggling with her first deep passion.

All that was wise and gentle that she had intended to say, all that her
clear intellect and experience had taught her, died upon her lips with
that kiss.  And all that she could do of womanly dignity and high-bred
decorum was to tuck her small feet under her chair, in the desperate
attempt to lengthen her short skirt, and beg him not to look at her.

"I have had to change dresses with Faquita, because we were watched,"
she said, leaning forward in her chair and drawing the striped shawl
around her shoulders.  "I have had to steal out of my mother's house
and through the fields, as if I was a gypsy.  If I only were a gypsy,
Harry, and not--"

"And not the proudest heiress in the land," he interrupted, with
something of his old bitterness.  "True, I had forgot."

"But I never reminded you of it," she said, lifting her eyes to his.
"I did not remind you of it on that day--in--in--in the conservatory,
nor at the time you first spoke of--of--love to me--nor from the time I
first consented to meet you here.  It is YOU, Harry, who have spoken of
the difference of our condition, YOU who have talked of my wealth, my
family, my position--until I would gladly have changed places with
Faquita as I have garments, if I had thought it would make you happier."

"Forgive me, darling!" he said, dropping on one knee before her and
bending over the cold little hand he had taken, until his dark head
almost rested in her lap.  "Forgive me!  You are too proud, Maruja, to
admit, even to yourself, that you have given your heart where your hand
and fortune could not follow.  But others may not think so.  I am
proud, too, and will not have it said that I have won you before I was
worthy of you."

"You have no right to be more proud than I, sir," she said, rising to
her feet, with a touch of her old supreme assertion.  "No--don't,
Harry--please, Harry--there!"  Nevertheless, she succumbed; and, when
she went on, it was with her head resting on his shoulder.  "It's this
deceit and secrecy that is so shameful, Harry.  I think I could bear
everything with you, if it were all known--if you came to woo me
like--like--the others.  Even if they abused you--if they spoke of your
doubtful origin--of your poverty--of your hardships!  When they
aspersed you, I could fight them; when they spoke of your having no
father that you could claim, I could even lie for you, I think, Harry,
and say that you had; if they spoke of your poverty, I would speak of
my wealth; if they talked of your hardships, I should only be proud of
your endurance--if I could only keep the tears from my eyes!"  They
were there now.  He kissed them away.

"But if they threatened you?  If they drove me from the house?"

"I should fly with you," she said, hiding her head in his breast.

"What if I were to ask you to fly with me now?" he said, gloomily.

"Now!" she repeated, lifting her frightened eyes to his.

His face darkened, with its old look of savage resentment.  "Hear me,
Maruja," he said, taking her hands tightly in his own.  "When I forgot
myself--when I was mad that day in the conservatory, the only expiation
I could think of was to swear in my inmost soul that I would never take
advantage of your forgiveness, that I would never tempt you to forget
yourself, your friends, your family, for me, an unknown outcast.  When
I found you pitied me, and listened to my love--I was too weak to
forego the one ray of sunshine in my wretched life--and, thinking that
I had a prospect before me in an idea I promised to reveal to you
later, I swore never to beguile you or myself in that hope by any act
that might bring you to repent it--or myself to dishonor.  But I taxed
myself too much, Maruja.  I have asked too much of you.  You are right,
darling; this secrecy--this deceit--is unworthy of us!  Every hour of
it--blest as it has been to me--every moment--sweet as it is--blackens
the purity of our only defense, makes you false and me a coward! It
must end here--to-day!  Maruja, darling, my precious one!  God knows
what may be the success of my plans.  We have but one chance now.  I
must leave here to-day, never to return, or I must take you with me.
Do not start, Maruja--but hear me out.  Dare you risk all?  Dare you
fly with me now, to-night, to the old Padre at the ruined Mision, and
let him bind us in those bonds that none dare break?  We can take
Faquita with us--it is but a few miles--and we can return and throw
ourselves at your mother's feet.  She can only drive us forth together.
Or we can fly from this cursed wealth, and all the misery it has
entailed--forever."

She raised her head, and, with her two hands on his shoulders, gazed at
him with her father's searching eyes, as if to read his very soul.

"Are you mad, Harry!--think what you propose!  Is this not tempting me?
Think again, dearest," she said, half convulsively, seizing his arm
when her grasp had slipped from his shoulder.

There was a momentary silence as she stood with her eyes fixed almost
wildly on his set face.  But a sudden shock against the bolted door and
an inarticulate outcry startled them.  With an instinctive movement,
Guest threw his arm round her.

"It's Pereo," she said, in a hurried whisper, but once more mistress of
her strength and resolution.  "He is seeking YOU!  Fly at once.  He is
mad, Harry; a raving lunatic.  He watched us the last time.  He has
tracked us here.  He suspects you.  You must not meet him.  You can
escape through the other door, that opens upon the canada.  If you love
me--fly!"

"And leave YOU exposed to his fury--are you mad!  No.  Fly yourself by
the other door, lock it behind you, and alarm the servants.  I will
open this door to him, secure him here, and then be gone.  Do not fear
for me.  There is no danger--and if I mistake not," he added, with a
strange significance, "he will hardly attack me!"

"But he may have already alarmed the household.  Hark!"

There was the noise of a struggle outside the door, and then the voice
of Captain Carroll, calm and collected, rose clearly for an instant.
"You are quite safe, Miss Saltonstall.  I think I have him secure, but
perhaps you had better not open the door until assistance comes."

They gazed at each other, without a word.  A grim challenge played on
Guest's lips.  Maruja lifted her little hands deliberately, and clasped
them round his defiant neck.

"Listen, darling," she said, softly and quietly, as if only the
security of silence and darkness encompassed them.  "You asked me just
now if I would fly with you--if I would marry you, without the consent
of my family--against the protest of my friends--and at once!  I
hesitated, Harry, for I was frightened and foolish.  But I say to you
now that I will marry you when and where you like--for I love you,
Harry, and you alone."

"Then let us go at once," he said, passionately seizing her; "we can
reach the road by the canada before assistance comes--before we are
discovered.  Come!"

"And you will remember in the years to come, Harry," she said, still
composedly, and with her arms still around his neck, "that I never
loved any but you--that I never knew what love was before, and that
since I have loved you--I have never thought of any other. Will you
not?"

"I will--and now--"

"And now," she said, with a superb gesture towards the barrier which
separated them from Carroll, "OPEN THE DOOR!"



CHAPTER XIII

With a swift glance of admiration at Maruja, Guest flung open the door.
The hastily-summoned servants were already bearing away the madman,
exhausted by his efforts.  Captain Carroll alone remained there, erect
and motionless, before the threshold.

At a sign from Maruja, he entered the room.  In the flash of light made
by the opening door, he had been perfectly conscious of her companion,
but not a motion of his eye or the movement of a muscle of his face
betrayed it.  The trained discipline of his youth stood him in good
service, and for the moment left him master of the situation.

"I think no apology is needed for this intrusion," he said, with cool
composure.  "Pereo seemed intent on murdering somebody or something,
and I followed him here.  I suppose I might have got him away more
quietly, but I was afraid you might have thoughtlessly opened the
door."  He stopped, and added, "I see now how unfounded was the
supposition."

It was a fatal addition.  In the next instant, the Maruja who had been
standing beside Guest, conscious-stricken and remorseful in the
presence of the man she had deceived, and calmly awaiting her
punishment, changed at this luckless exhibition of her own peculiar
womanly weapons.  The old Maruja, supreme, ready, undaunted, and
passionless, returned to the fray.

"You were wrong, Captain," she said, sweetly; "fortunately, Mr.
Guest--whom I see you have forgotten in your absence--was with me, and
I think would have felt it his duty to have protected me.  But I thank
you all the same, and I think even Mr. Guest will not allow his envy of
your good fortune in coming so gallantly to my rescue to prevent his
appreciating its full value.  I am only sorry that on your return to La
Mision Perdida you should have fallen into the arms of a madman before
extending your hands to your friends."

Their eyes met.  She saw that he hated her--and felt relieved.

"It may not have been so entirely unfortunate," he said, with a
coldness strongly in contrast with his gradually blazing eyes, "for I
was charged with a message to you, in which this madman is supposed by
some to play an important part."

"Is it a matter of business?" said Maruja, lightly, yet with a sudden
instinctive premonition of coming evil in the relentless tones of his
voice.

"It is business, Miss Saltonstall--purely and simply business," said
Carroll, dryly, "under whatever OTHER name it may have been since
presented to you."

"Perhaps you have no objection to tell it before Mr. Guest," said
Maruja, with an inspiration of audacity; "it sounds so mysterious that
it must be interesting.  Otherwise, Captain Carroll, who abhors
business, would not have undertaken it with more than his usual
enthusiasm."

"As the business DOES interest Mr. Guest, or Mr. West, or whatever name
he may have decided upon since I had the pleasure of meeting him," said
Carroll--for the first time striking fire from the eyes of his
rival--"I see no reason why I should not, even at the risk of telling
you what you already know.  Briefly, then, Mr. Prince charged me to
advise you and your mother to avoid litigation with this gentleman, and
admit his claim, as the son of Dr. West, to his share of the property."

The utter consternation and bewilderment shown in the face of Maruja
convinced Carroll of his fatal error.  She HAD received the addresses
of this man without knowing his real position!  The wild theory that
had seemed to justify his resentment--that she had sold herself to
Guest to possess the property--now recoiled upon him in its utter
baseness.  She had loved Guest for himself alone; by this base
revelation he had helped to throw her into his arms.

But he did not even yet know Maruja.  Turning to Guest, with flashing
eyes, she said, "Is it true--are you the son of Dr. West, and"--she
hesitated--"kept out of your inheritance by US?"

"I AM the son of Dr. West," he said, earnestly, "though I alone had the
right to tell you that at the proper time and occasion. Believe me that
I have given no one the right--least of all any tool of Prince--to
TRADE upon it."

"Then," said Carroll, fiercely, forgetting everything in his anger,
"perhaps you will disclaim before this young lady the charge made by
your employer that Pereo was instigated to Dr. West's murder by her
mother?"

Again he had overshot the mark.  The horror and indignation depicted in
Guest's face was too plainly visible to Maruja, as well as himself, to
permit a doubt that the idea was as new as the accusation.  Forgetting
her bewilderment at these revelations, her wounded pride, a torturing
doubt suggested by Guest's want of confidence in her--indeed everything
but the outraged feelings of her lover, she flew to his side.  "Not a
word," she said, proudly, lifting her little hand before his darkening
face.  "Do not insult me by replying to such an accusation in my
presence.  Captain Carroll," she continued, turning towards him, "I
cannot forget that you were introduced into my mother's house as an
officer and a gentleman.  When you return to it as such, and not as a
MAN OF BUSINESS, you will be welcome.  Until then, farewell!"

She remained standing, erect and passionless, as Carroll, with a cold
salutation, stepped back and disappeared in the darkness; and then she
turned, and, with tottering step and a little cry, fell upon Guest's
breast.  "O Harry--Harry!--why have you deceived me!"

"I thought it for the best, darling," he said, lifting her face to his.
"You know now the prospect I spoke of--the hope that buoyed me up!  I
wanted to win you myself alone, without appealing to your sense of
justice or even your sympathies!  I did win you.  God knows, if I had
not, you would never have learned through me that a son of Dr. West had
ever lived.  But that was not enough.  When I found that I could
establish my right to my father's property, I wanted you to marry me
before YOU knew it; so that it never could be said that you were
influenced by anything but love for me.  That was why I came here
to-day.  That was why I pressed you to fly with me!"

He ceased.  She was fumbling with the buttons of his waistcoat.
"Harry," she said, softly, "did you think of the property
when--when--you kissed me in the conservatory?"

"I thought of nothing but YOU," he answered, tenderly.

Suddenly she started from his embrace.  "But Pereo!--Harry--tell me
quick--no one-nobody can think that this poor demented old man
could--that Dr. West was--that--it's all a trick--isn't it?
Harry--speak!"

He was silent for a moment, and then said, gravely, "There were strange
men at the fonda that night, and--my father was supposed to carry money
with him.  My own life was attempted at the Mision the same evening for
the sake of some paltry gold pieces that I had imprudently shown.  I
was saved solely by the interference of one man.  That man was Pereo,
your mayordomo!"

She seized his hand and raised it joyfully to her lips.  "Thank you for
those words!  And you will come to him with me at once; and he will
recognize you; and we will laugh at those lies; won't we, Harry?"

He did not reply.  Perhaps he was listening to a confused sound of
voices rapidly approaching the cottage.  Together they stepped out into
the gathering night.  A number of figures were coming towards them,
among them Faquita, who ran a little ahead to meet her mistress.

"Oh, Dona Maruja, he has escaped!"

"Who?  Not Pereo!"

"Truly.  And on his horse.  It was saddled and bridled in the stable
all day.  One knew it not.  He was walking like a cat, when suddenly he
parted the peons around him, like grain before a mad bull--and behold!
he was on the pinto's back and away.  And, alas! there is no horse that
can keep up with the pinto.  God grant he may not get in the way of the
r-r-railroad, that, in his very madness, he will even despise."

"My own horse is in the thicket," whispered Guest, hurriedly, in
Maruja's ear.  "I have measured him with the pinto before now. Give me
your blessing, and I will bring him back if he be alive."

She pressed his hand and said, "Go."  Before the astonished servants
could identify the strange escort of their mistress, he was gone.

It was already quite dark.  To any but Guest, who had made the
topography of La Mision Perdida a practical study, and who had known
the habitual circuit of the mayordomo in his efforts to avoid him, the
search would have been hopeless.  But, rightly conjecturing that he
would in his demented condition follow the force of habit, he spurred
his horse along the high-road until he reached the lane leading to the
grassy amphitheatre already described, which was once his favorite
resort.  Since then it had participated in the terrible transformation
already wrought in the valley by the railroad.  A deep cutting through
one of the grassy hills had been made for the line that now crossed the
lower arc of the amphitheatre.

His conjecture was justified on entering it by the appearance of a
shadowy horseman in full career round the circle, and he had no
difficulty in recognizing Pereo.  As there was no other exit than the
one by which he came, the other being inaccessible by reason of the
railroad track, he calmly watched him twice make the circuit of the
arena, ready to ride towards him when he showed symptoms of slackening
his speed.

Suddenly he became aware of some strange exercise on the part of the
mysterious rider; and, as he swept by on the nearer side of the circle,
he saw that he was throwing a lasso!  A horrible thought that he was
witnessing an insane rehearsal of the murder of his father flashed
across his mind.

A far-off whistle from the distant woods recalled him to his calmer
senses at the same moment that it seemed also to check the evolutions
of the furious rider.  Guest felt confident that the wretched man could
not escape him now.  It was the approaching train, whose appearance
would undoubtedly frighten Pereo toward the entrance of the little
valley guarded by him.  The hill-side was already alive with the
clattering echoes of the oncoming monster, when, to his horror, he saw
the madman advancing rapidly towards the cutting.  He put spurs to his
horse, and started in pursuit; but the train was already emerging from
the narrow passage, followed by the furious rider, who had wheeled
abreast of the engine, and was, for a moment or two, madly keeping up
with it. Guest shouted to him, but his voice was lost in the roar of
the rushing caravan.

Something seemed to fly from Pereo's hand.  The next moment the train
had passed; rider and horse, crushed and battered out of all life, were
rolling in the ditch, while the murderer's empty saddle dangled at the
end of a lasso, caught on the smoke-stack of one of the murdered man's
avenging improvements!

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

The marriage of Maruja and the son of the late Dr. West was received in
the valley of San Antonio as one of the most admirably conceived and
skillfully matured plans of that lamented genius. There were many who
were ready to state that the Doctor had confided it to them years
before; and it was generally accepted that the widow Saltonstall had
been simply made a trustee for the benefit of the prospective young
couple.  Only one person perhaps, did not entirely accept these views;
it was Mr. James Price--otherwise known as Aladdin.  In later years, he
is said to have stated authoritatively "that the only combination in
business that was uncertain--was man and woman."

========================================
========================================

IN A HOLLOW OF THE HILLS


by

Bret Bret Harte




CHAPTER I.

It was very dark, and the wind was increasing.  The last gust had been
preceded by an ominous roaring down the whole mountain-side, which
continued for some time after the trees in the little valley had lapsed
into silence.  The air was filled with a faint, cool, sodden odor, as
of stirred forest depths.  In those intervals of silence the darkness
seemed to increase in proportion and grow almost palpable.  Yet out of
this sightless and soundless void now came the tinkle of a spur's
rowels, the dry crackling of saddle leathers, and the muffled plunge of
a hoof in the thick carpet of dust and desiccated leaves.  Then a
voice, which in spite of its matter-of-fact reality the obscurity lent
a certain mystery to, said:--

"I can't make out anything!  Where the devil have we got to, anyway?
It's as black as Tophet, here ahead!"

"Strike a light and make a flare with something," returned a second
voice.  "Look where you're shoving to--now--keep your horse off, will
ye."

There was more muffled plunging, a silence, the rustle of paper, the
quick spurt of a match, and then the uplifting of a flickering flame.
But it revealed only the heads and shoulders of three horsemen, framed
within a nebulous ring of light, that still left their horses and even
their lower figures in impenetrable shadow. Then the flame leaped up
and died out with a few zigzagging sparks that were falling to the
ground, when a third voice, that was low but somewhat pleasant in its
cadence, said:--

"Be careful where you throw that.  You were careless last time. With
this wind and the leaves like tinder, you might send a furnace blast
through the woods."

"Then at least we'd see where we were."

Nevertheless, he moved his horse, whose trampling hoofs beat out the
last fallen spark.  Complete darkness and silence again followed.
Presently the first speaker continued:--

"I reckon we'll have to wait here till the next squall clears away the
scud from the sky?  Hello!  What's that?"

Out of the obscurity before them appeared a faint light,--a dim but
perfectly defined square of radiance,--which, however, did not appear
to illuminate anything around it.  Suddenly it disappeared.

"That's a house--it's a light in a window," said the second voice.

"House be d--d!" retorted the first speaker.  "A house with a window on
Galloper's Ridge, fifteen miles from anywhere?  You're crazy!"

Nevertheless, from the muffled plunging and tinkling that followed,
they seemed to be moving in the direction where the light had appeared.
Then there was a pause.

"There's nothing but a rocky outcrop here, where a house couldn't
stand, and we're off the trail again," said the first speaker
impatiently.

"Stop!--there it is again!"

The same square of light appeared once more, but the horsemen had
evidently diverged in the darkness, for it seemed to be in a different
direction.  But it was more distinct, and as they gazed a shadow
appeared upon its radiant surface--the profile of a human face.  Then
the light suddenly went out, and the face vanished with it.

"It IS a window, and there was some one behind it," said the second
speaker emphatically.

"It was a woman's face," said the pleasant voice.

"Whoever it is, just hail them, so that we can get our bearings. Sing
out!  All together!"

The three voices rose in a prolonged shout, in which, however, the
distinguishing quality of the pleasant voice was sustained.  But there
was no response from the darkness beyond.  The shouting was repeated
after an interval with the same result: the silence and obscurity
remained unchanged.

"Let's get out of this," said the first speaker angrily; "house or no
house, man or woman, we're not wanted, and we'll make nothing waltzing
round here!"

"Hush!" said the second voice.  "Sh-h!  Listen."

The leaves of the nearest trees were trilling audibly.  Then came a
sudden gust that swept the fronds of the taller ferns into their faces,
and laid the thin, lithe whips of alder over their horses' flanks
sharply.  It was followed by the distant sea-like roaring of the
mountain-side.

"That's a little more like it!" said the first speaker joyfully.
"Another blow like that and we're all right.  And look! there's a
lightenin' up over the trail we came by."

There was indeed a faint glow in that direction, like the first
suffusion of dawn, permitting the huge shoulder of the mountain along
whose flanks they had been journeying to be distinctly seen. The sodden
breath of the stirred forest depths was slightly tainted with an acrid
fume.

"That's the match you threw away two hours ago," said the pleasant
voice deliberately.  "It's caught the dry brush in the trail round the
bend."

"Anyhow, it's given us our bearings, boys," said the first speaker,
with satisfied accents.  "We're all right now; and the wind's lifting
the sky ahead there.  Forward now, all together, and let's get out of
this hell-hole while we can!"

It was so much lighter that the bulk of each horseman could be seen as
they moved forward together.  But there was no thinning of the
obscurity on either side of them.  Nevertheless the profile of the
horseman with the pleasant voice seemed to be occasionally turned
backward, and he suddenly checked his horse.

"There's the window again!" he said.  "Look!  There--it's gone again."

"Let it go and be d--d!" returned the leader.  "Come on."

They spurred forward in silence.  It was not long before the wayside
trees began to dimly show spaces between them, and the ferns to give
way to lower, thick-set shrubs, which in turn yielded to a velvety
moss, with long quiet intervals of netted and tangled grasses.  The
regular fall of the horses' feet became a mere rhythmic throbbing.
Then suddenly a single hoof rang out sharply on stone, and the first
speaker reined in slightly.

"Thank the Lord we're on the ridge now! and the rest is easy.  Tell you
what, though, boys, now we're all right, I don't mind saying that I
didn't take no stock in that blamed corpse light down there. If there
ever was a will-o'-the-wisp on a square up mountain, that was one.  It
wasn't no window!  Some of ye thought ye saw a face too--eh?"

"Yes, and a rather pretty one," said the pleasant voice meditatively.

"That's the way they'd build that sort of thing, of course.  It's lucky
ye had to satisfy yourself with looking.  Gosh! I feel creepy yet,
thinking of it!  What are ye looking back for now like Lot's wife?
Blamed if I don't think that face bewitched ye."

"I was only thinking about that fire you started," returned the other
quietly.  "I don't see it now."

"Well--if you did?"

"I was wondering whether it could reach that hollow."

"I reckon that hollow could take care of any casual nat'rel fire that
came boomin' along, and go two better every time!  Why, I don't believe
there was any fire; it was all a piece of that infernal ignis fatuus
phantasmagoriana that was played upon us down there!"

With the laugh that followed they started forward again, relapsing into
the silence of tired men at the end of a long journey.  Even their few
remarks were interjectional, or reminiscent of topics whose freshness
had been exhausted with the day.  The gaining light which seemed to
come from the ground about them rather than from the still, overcast
sky above, defined their individuality more distinctly.  The man who
had first spoken, and who seemed to be their leader, wore the virgin
unshaven beard, mustache, and flowing hair of the Californian pioneer,
and might have been the eldest; the second speaker was close shaven,
thin, and energetic; the third, with the pleasant voice, in height,
litheness, and suppleness of figure appeared to be the youngest of the
party.  The trail had now become a grayish streak along the level
table-land they were following, which also had the singular effect of
appearing lighter than the surrounding landscape, yet of plunging into
utter darkness on either side of its precipitous walls. Nevertheless,
at the end of an hour the leader rose in his stirrups with a sigh of
satisfaction.

"There's the light in Collinson's Mill!  There's nothing gaudy and
spectacular about that, boys, eh?  No, sir! it's a square, honest
beacon that a man can steer by.  We'll be there in twenty minutes." He
was pointing into the darkness below the already descending trail.
Only a pioneer's eye could have detected the few pin-pricks of light in
the impenetrable distance, and it was a signal proof of his leadership
that the others accepted it without seeing it. "It's just ten o'clock,"
he continued, holding a huge silver watch to his eye; "we've wasted an
hour on those blamed spooks yonder!"

"We weren't off the trail more than ten minutes, Uncle Dick," protested
the pleasant voice.

"All right, my son; go down there if you like and fetch out your Witch
of Endor, but as for me, I'm going to throw myself the other side of
Collinson's lights.  They're good enough for me, and a blamed sight
more stationary!"

The grade was very steep, but they took it, California fashion, at a
gallop, being genuinely good riders, and using their brains as well as
their spurs in the understanding of their horses, and of certain
natural laws, which the more artificial riders of civilization are apt
to overlook.  Hence there was no hesitation or indecision communicated
to the nervous creatures they bestrode, who swept over crumbling stones
and slippery ledges with a momentum that took away half their weight,
and made a stumble or false step, or indeed anything but an actual
collision, almost impossible. Closing together they avoided the latter,
and holding each other well up, became one irresistible wedge-shaped
mass.  At times they yelled, not from consciousness nor bravado, but
from the purely animal instinct of warning and to combat the
breathlessness of their descent, until, reaching the level, they
charged across the gravelly bed of a vanished river, and pulled up at
Collinson's Mill.  The mill itself had long since vanished with the
river, but the building that had once stood for it was used as a rude
hostelry for travelers, which, however, bore no legend or invitatory
sign. Those who wanted it, knew it; those who passed it by, gave it no
offense.

Collinson himself stood by the door, smoking a contemplative pipe. As
they rode up, he disengaged himself from the doorpost listlessly,
walked slowly towards them, said reflectively to the leader, "I've been
thinking with you that a vote for Thompson is a vote thrown away," and
prepared to lead the horses towards the water tank.  He had parted with
them over twelve hours before, but his air of simply renewing a
recently interrupted conversation was too common a circumstance to
attract their notice.  They knew, and he knew, that no one else had
passed that way since he had last spoken; that the same sun had swung
silently above him and the unchanged landscape, and there had been no
interruption nor diversion to his monotonous thought.  The wilderness
annihilates time and space with the grim pathos of patience.

Nevertheless he smiled.  "Ye don't seem to have got through coming down
yet," he continued, as a few small boulders, loosened in their rapid
descent, came more deliberately rolling and plunging after the
travelers along the gravelly bottom.  Then he turned away with the
horses, and, after they were watered, he reentered the house. His
guests had evidently not waited for his ministration.  They had already
taken one or two bottles from the shelves behind a wide bar and helped
themselves, and, glasses in hand, were now satisfying the more imminent
cravings of hunger with biscuits from a barrel and slices of smoked
herring from a box.  Their equally singular host, accepting their
conduct as not unusual, joined the circle they had comfortably drawn
round the fireplace, and meditatively kicking a brand back at the fire,
said, without looking at them:--

"Well?"

"Well!" returned the leader, leaning back in his chair after carefully
unloosing the buckle of his belt, but with his eyes also on the
fire,--"well! we've prospected every yard of outcrop along the Divide,
and there ain't the ghost of a silver indication anywhere."

"Not a smell," added the close-shaven guest, without raising his eyes.

They all remained silent, looking at the fire, as if it were the one
thing they had taken into their confidence.  Collinson also addressed
himself to the blaze as he said presently: "It allus seemed to me that
thar was something shiny about that ledge just round the shoulder of
the spur, over the long canyon."

The leader ejaculated a short laugh.  "Shiny, eh? shiny!  Ye think THAT
a sign?  Why, you might as well reckon that because Key's head, over
thar, is gray and silvery that he's got sabe and experience."  As he
spoke he looked towards the man with a pleasant voice.  The fire
shining full upon him revealed the singular fact that while his face
was still young, and his mustache quite dark, his hair was perfectly
gray.  The object of this attention, far from being disconcerted by the
comparison, added with a smile:--

"Or that he had any silver in his pocket."

Another lapse of silence followed.  The wind tore round the house and
rumbled in the short, adobe chimney.

"No, gentlemen," said the leader reflectively, "this sort o' thing is
played out.  I don't take no more stock in that cock-and-bull story
about the lost Mexican mine.  I don't catch on to that Sunday-school
yarn about the pious, scientific sharp who collected leaves and
vegetables all over the Divide, all the while he scientifically knew
that the range was solid silver, only he wouldn't soil his fingers with
God-forsaken lucre.  I ain't saying anything agin that fine-spun theory
that Key believes in about volcanic upheavals that set up on end
argentiferous rock, but I simply say that I don't see it--with the
naked eye.  And I reckon it's about time, boys, as the game's up, that
we handed in our checks, and left the board."

There was another silence around the fire, another whirl and turmoil
without.  There was no attempt to combat the opinions of their leader;
possibly the same sense of disappointed hopes was felt by all, only
they preferred to let the man of greater experience voice it.  He went
on:--

"We've had our little game, boys, ever since we left Rawlin's a week
ago; we've had our ups and downs; we've been starved and parched,
snowed up and half drowned, shot at by road-agents and horse-thieves,
kicked by mules and played with by grizzlies.  We've had a heap o' fun,
boys, for our money, but I reckon the picnic is about over.  So we'll
shake hands to-morrow all round and call it square, and go on our ways
separately."

"And what do you think you'll do, Uncle Dick?" said his close-shaven
companion listlessly.

"I'll make tracks for a square meal, a bed that a man can comfortably
take off his boots and die in, and some violet-scented soap.
Civilization's good enough for me!  I even reckon I wouldn't mind 'the
sound of the church-going bell' ef there was a theatre handy, as there
likely would be.  But the wilderness is played out."

"You'll be back to it again in six months, Uncle Dick," retorted the
other quickly.

Uncle Dick did not reply.  It was a peculiarity of the party that in
their isolated companionship they had already exhausted discussion and
argument.  A silence followed, in which they all looked at the fire as
if it was its turn to make a suggestion.

"Collinson," said the pleasant voice abruptly, "who lives in the hollow
this side of the Divide, about two miles from the first spur above the
big canyon?"

"Nary soul!"

"Are you sure?"

"Sartin!  Thar ain't no one but me betwixt Bald Top and
Skinner's--twenty-five miles."

"Of course, YOU'D know if any one had come there lately?" persisted the
pleasant voice.

"I reckon.  It ain't a week ago that I tramped the whole distance that
you fellers just rode over."

"There ain't," said the leader deliberately, "any enchanted castle or
cabin that goes waltzing round the road with revolving windows and
fairy princesses looking out of 'em?"

But Collinson, recognizing this as purely irrelevant humor, with
possibly a trap or pitfall in it, moved away from the fireplace without
a word, and retired to the adjoining kitchen to prepare supper.
Presently he reappeared.

"The pork bar'l's empty, boys, so I'll hev to fix ye up with jerked
beef, potatoes, and flapjacks.  Ye see, thar ain't anybody ben over
from Skinner's store for a week."

"All right; only hurry up!" said Uncle Dick cheerfully, settling
himself back in his chair, "I reckon to turn in as soon as I've rastled
with your hash, for I've got to turn out agin and be off at sun-up."

They were all very quiet again,--so quiet that they could not help
noticing that the sound of Collinson's preparations for their supper
had ceased too.  Uncle Dick arose softly and walked to the kitchen
door.  Collinson was sitting before a small kitchen stove, with a fork
in his hand, gazing abstractedly before him.  At the sound of his
guest's footsteps he started, and the noise of preparation recommenced.
Uncle Dick returned to his chair by the fire.  Leaning towards the
chair of the close-shaven man, he said in a lower voice:--

"He was off agin!"

"What?"

"Thinkin' of that wife of his."

"What about his wife?" asked Key, lowering his voice also.

The three men's heads were close together.

"When Collinson fixed up this mill he sent for his wife in the States,"
said Uncle Dick, in a half whisper, "waited a year for her, hanging
round and boarding every emigrant wagon that came through the Pass.
She didn't come--only the news that she was dead."  He paused and
nudged his chair still closer--the heads were almost touching.  "They
say, over in the Bar"--his voice had sunk to a complete whisper--"that
it was a lie!  That she ran away with the man that was fetchin' her
out.  Three thousand miles and three weeks with another man upsets some
women.  But HE knows nothing about it, only he sometimes kinder goes
off looney-like, thinking of her."  He stopped, the heads separated;
Collinson had appeared at the doorway, his melancholy patience
apparently unchanged.

"Grub's on, gentlemen; sit by and eat."

The humble meal was dispatched with zest and silence.  A few
interjectional remarks about the uncertainties of prospecting only
accented the other pauses.  In ten minutes they were out again by the
fireplace with their lit pipes.  As there were only three chairs,
Collinson stood beside the chimney.

"Collinson," said Uncle Dick, after the usual pause, taking his pipe
from his lips, "as we've got to get up and get at sun-up, we might as
well tell you now that we're dead broke.  We've been living for the
last few weeks on Preble Key's loose change--and that's gone.  You'll
have to let this little account and damage stand over."

Collinson's brow slightly contracted, without, however, altering his
general expression of resigned patience.

"I'm sorry for you, boys," he said slowly, "and" (diffidently) "kinder
sorry for myself, too.  You see, I reckoned on goin' over to Skinner's
to-morrow, to fill up the pork bar'l and vote for Mesick and the
wagon-road.  But Skinner can't let me have anything more until I've
paid suthin' on account, as he calls it."

"D'ye mean to say thar's any mountain man as low flung and mean as
that?" said Uncle Dick indignantly.

"But it isn't HIS fault," said Collinson gently; "you see, they won't
send him goods from Sacramento if he don't pay up, and he CAN'T if I
DON'T.  Sabe?"

"Ah! that's another thing.  They ARE mean--in Sacramento," said Uncle
Dick, somewhat mollified.

The other guests murmured an assent to this general proposition.
Suddenly Uncle Dick's face brightened.

"Look here!  I know Skinner, and I'll stop there--  No, blank it all! I
can't, for it's off my route!  Well, then, we'll fix it this way.  Key
will go there and tell Skinner that I say that I'LL send the money to
that Sacramento hound.  That'll fix it!"

Collinson's brow cleared; the solution of the difficulty seemed to
satisfy everybody, and the close-shaven man smiled.

"And I'll secure it," he said, "and give Collinson a sight draft on
myself at San Francisco."

"What's that for?" said Collinson, with a sudden suffusion on each
cheek.

"In case of accident."

"Wot accident?" persisted Collinson, with a dark look of suspicion on
his usually placid face.

"In case we should forget it," said the close-shaven man, with a laugh.

"And do you suppose that if you boys went and forgot it that I'd have
anything to do with your d--d paper?" said Collinson, a murky cloud
coming into his eyes.

"Why, that's only business, Colly," interposed Uncle Dick quickly;
"that's all Jim Parker means; he's a business man, don't you see.
Suppose we got killed!  You've that draft to show."

"Show who?" growled Collinson.

"Why,--hang it!--our friends, our heirs, our relations--to get your
money, hesitated Uncle Dick.

"And do you kalkilate," said Collinson, with deeply laboring breath,
"that if you got killed, that I'd be coming on your folks for the worth
of the d--d truck I giv ye?  Go 'way!  Lemme git out o' this.  You're
makin' me tired."  He stalked to the door, lit his pipe, and began to
walk up and down the gravelly river-bed.  Uncle Dick followed him.
From time to time the two other guests heard the sounds of alternate
protest and explanation as they passed and repassed the windows.
Preble Key smiled, Parker shrugged his shoulders.

"He'll be thinkin' you've begrudged him your grub if you don't--that's
the way with these business men," said Uncle Dick's voice in one of
these intervals.  Presently they reentered the house, Uncle Dick saying
casually to Parker, "You can leave that draft on the bar when you're
ready to go to-morrow;" and the incident was presumed to have ended.
But Collinson did not glance in the direction of Parker for the rest of
the evening; and, indeed, standing with his back to the chimney, more
than once fell into that stolid abstraction which was supposed to be
the contemplation of his absent wife.

From this silence, which became infectious, the three guests were
suddenly aroused by a furious clattering down the steep descent of the
mountain, along the trail they had just ridden!  It came near,
increasing in sound, until it even seemed to scatter the fine gravel of
the river-bed against the sides of the house, and then passed in a gust
of wind that shook the roof and roared in the chimney.  With one common
impulse the three travelers rose and went to the door.  They opened it
to a blackness that seemed to stand as another and an iron door before
them, but to nothing else.

"Somebody went by then," said Uncle Dick, turning to Collinson. "Didn't
you hear it?"

"Nary," said Collinson patiently, without moving from the chimney.

"What in God's name was it, then?"

"Only some of them boulders you loosed coming down.  It's touch and go
with them for days after.  When I first came here I used to start up
and rush out into the road--like as you would--yellin' and screechin'
after folks that never was there and never went by. Then it got kinder
monotonous, and I'd lie still and let 'em slide. Why, one night I'd a'
sworn that some one pulled up with a yell and shook the door.  But I
sort of allowed to myself that whatever it was, it wasn't wantin' to
eat, drink, sleep, or it would come in, and I hadn't any call to
interfere.  And in the mornin' I found a rock as big as that box, lying
chock-a-block agin the door.  Then I knowed I was right."

Preble Key remained looking from the door.

"There's a glow in the sky over Big Canyon," he said, with a meaning
glance at Uncle Dick.

"Saw it an hour ago," said Collinson.  "It must be the woods afire just
round the bend above the canyon.  Whoever goes to Skinner's had better
give it a wide berth."

Key turned towards Collinson as if to speak, but apparently changed his
mind, and presently joined his companions, who were already rolling
themselves in their blankets, in a series of wooden bunks or berths,
ranged as in a ship's cabin, around the walls of a resinous, sawdusty
apartment that had been the measuring room of the mill.  Collinson
disappeared,--no one knew or seemed to care where,--and, in less than
ten minutes from the time that they had returned from the door, the
hush of sleep and rest seemed to possess the whole house.  There was no
light but that of the fire in the front room, which threw flickering
and gigantic shadows on the walls of the three empty chairs before it.
An hour later it seemed as if one of the chairs were occupied, and a
grotesque profile of Collinson's slumbering--or meditating--face and
figure was projected grimly on the rafters as though it were the
hovering guardian spirit of the house.  But even that passed presently
and faded out, and the beleaguering darkness that had encompassed the
house all the evening began to slowly creep in through every chink and
cranny of the rambling, ill-jointed structure, until it at last
obliterated even the faint embers on the hearth.  The cool fragrance of
the woodland depths crept in with it until the steep of human warmth,
the reek of human clothing, and the lingering odors of stale human
victual were swept away in that incorruptible and omnipotent breath.
An hour later--and the wilderness had repossessed itself of all.

Key, the lightest sleeper, awoke early,--so early that the dawn
announced itself only in two dim squares of light that seemed to grow
out of the darkness at the end of the room where the windows looked out
upon the valley.  This reminded him of his woodland vision of the night
before, and he lay and watched them until they brightened and began to
outline the figures of his still sleeping companions.  But there were
faint stirrings elsewhere,--the soft brushing of a squirrel across the
shingled roof, the tiny flutter of invisible wings in the rafters, the
"peep" and "squeak" of baby life below the floor.  And then he fell
into a deeper sleep, and awoke only when it was broad day.

The sun was shining upon the empty bunks; his companions were already
up and gone.  They had separated as they had come together,--with the
light-hearted irresponsibility of animals,--without regret, and
scarcely reminiscence; bearing, with cheerful philosophy and the
hopefulness of a future unfettered by their past, the final
disappointment of their quest.  If they ever met again, they would
laugh and remember; if they did not, they would forget without a sigh.
He hurriedly dressed himself, and went outside to dip his face and
hands in the bucket that stood beside the door; but the clear air, the
dazzling sunshine, and the unexpected prospect half intoxicated him.

The abandoned mill stretched beside him in all the pathos of its
premature decay.  The ribs of the water-wheel appeared amid a tangle of
shrubs and driftwood, and were twined with long grasses and straggling
vines; mounds of sawdust and heaps of "brush" had taken upon themselves
a velvety moss where the trickling slime of the vanished river lost
itself in sluggish pools, discolored with the dyes of redwood.  But on
the other side of the rocky ledge dropped the whole length of the
valley, alternately bathed in sunshine or hidden in drifts of white and
clinging smoke.  The upper end of the long canyon, and the crests of
the ridge above him, were lost in this fleecy cloud, which at times
seemed to overflow the summits and fall in slow leaps like lazy
cataracts down the mountain-side.  Only the range before the ledge was
clear; there the green pines seemed to swell onward and upward in long
mounting billows, until at last they broke against the sky.

In the keen stimulus of the hour and the air Key felt the mountaineer's
longing for action, and scarcely noticed that Collinson had
pathetically brought out his pork barrel to scrape together a few
remnants for his last meal.  It was not until he had finished his
coffee, and Collinson had brought up his horse, that a slight sense of
shame at his own and his comrades' selfishness embarrassed his parting
with his patient host.  He himself was going to Skinner's to plead for
him; he knew that Parker had left the draft,--he had seen it lying in
the bar,--but a new sense of delicacy kept him from alluding to it now.
It was better to leave Collinson with his own peculiar ideas of the
responsibilities of hospitality unchanged.  Key shook his hand warmly,
and galloped up the rocky slope.  But when he had finally reached the
higher level, and fancied he could even now see the dust raised by his
departing comrades on their two diverging paths, although he knew that
they had already gone their different ways,--perhaps never to meet
again,--his thoughts and his eyes reverted only to the ruined mill
below him and its lonely occupant.

He could see him quite distinctly in that clear air, still standing
before his door.  And then he appeared to make a parting gesture with
his hand, and something like snow fluttered in the air above his head.
It was only the torn fragments of Parker's draft, which this homely
gentleman of the Sierras, standing beside his empty pork barrel, had
scattered to the four winds.



CHAPTER II.

Key's attention was presently directed to something more important to
his present purpose.  The keen wind which he had faced in mounting the
grade had changed, and was now blowing at his back. His experience of
forest fires had already taught him that this was too often only the
cold air rushing in to fill the vacuum made by the conflagration, and
it needed not his sensation of an acrid smarting in his eyes, and an
unaccountable dryness in the air which he was now facing, to convince
him that the fire was approaching him.  It had evidently traveled
faster than he had expected, or had diverged from its course.  He was
disappointed, not because it would oblige him to take another route to
Skinner's, as Collinson had suggested, but for a very different reason.
Ever since his vision of the preceding night, he had resolved to
revisit the hollow and discover the mystery.  He had kept his purpose a
secret,--partly because he wished to avoid the jesting remarks of his
companions, but particularly because he wished to go alone, from a very
singular impression that although they had witnessed the incident he
had really seen more than they did.  To this was also added the
haunting fear he had felt during the night that this mysterious
habitation and its occupants were in the track of the conflagration.
He had not dared to dwell upon it openly on account of Uncle Dick's
evident responsibility for the origin of the fire; he appeased his
conscience with the reflection that the inmates of the dwelling no
doubt had ample warning in time to escape.  But still, he and his
companions ought to have stopped to help them, and then--but here he
paused, conscious of another reason he could scarcely voice then, or
even now.  Preble Key had not passed the age of romance, but like other
romancists he thought he had evaded it by treating it practically.

Meantime he had reached the fork where the trail diverged to the right,
and he must take that direction if he wished to make a detour of the
burning woods to reach Skinner's.  His momentary indecision
communicated itself to his horse, who halted.  Recalled to himself, he
looked down mechanically, when his attention was attracted by an
unfamiliar object lying in the dust of the trail. It was a small
slipper--so small that at first he thought it must have belonged to
some child.  He dismounted and picked it up.  It was worn and shaped to
the foot.  It could not have lain there long, for it was not filled nor
discolored by the wind-blown dust of the trail, as all other adjacent
objects were.  If it had been dropped by a passing traveler, that
traveler must have passed Collinson's, going or coming, within the last
twelve hours.  It was scarcely possible that the shoe could have
dropped from the foot without the wearer's knowing it, and it must have
been dropped in an urgent flight, or it would have been recovered.
Thus practically Key treated his romance.  And having done so, he
instantly wheeled his horse and plunged into the road in the direction
of the fire.

But he was surprised after twenty minutes' riding to find that the
course of the fire had evidently changed.  It was growing clearer
before him; the dry heat seemed to come more from the right, in the
direction of the detour he should have taken to Skinner's.  This seemed
almost providential, and in keeping with his practical treatment of his
romance, as was also the fact that in all probability the fire had not
yet visited the little hollow which he intended to explore.  He knew he
was nearing it now; the locality had been strongly impressed upon him
even in the darkness of the previous evening.  He had passed the rocky
ledge; his horse's hoofs no longer rang out clearly; slowly and
perceptibly they grew deadened in the springy mosses, and were finally
lost in the netted grasses and tangled vines that indicated the
vicinity of the densely wooded hollow.  Here were already some of the
wider spaced vanguards of that wood; but here, too, a peculiar
circumstance struck him.  He was already descending the slight
declivity; but the distance, instead of deepening in leafy shadow, was
actually growing lighter.  Here were the outskirting sentinels of the
wood--but the wood itself was gone!  He spurred his horse through the
tall arch between the opened columns, and pulled up in amazement.

The wood, indeed, was gone, and the whole hollow filled with the
already black and dead stumps of the utterly consumed forest!  More
than that, from the indications before him, the catastrophe must have
almost immediately followed his retreat from the hollow on the
preceding night.  It was evident that the fire had leaped the
intervening shoulder of the spur in one of the unaccountable, but by no
means rare, phenomena of this kind of disaster.  The circling heights
around were yet untouched; only the hollow, and the ledge of rock
against which they had blundered with their horses when they were
seeking the mysterious window in last evening's darkness, were calcined
and destroyed.  He dismounted and climbed the ledge, still warm from
the spent fire.  A large mass of grayish outcrop had evidently been the
focus of the furnace blast of heat which must have raged for hours in
this spot.  He was skirting its crumbling debris when he started
suddenly at a discovery which made everything else fade into utter
insignificance.  Before him, in a slight depression formed by a fault
or lapse in the upheaved strata, lay the charred and incinerated
remains of a dwelling-house leveled to the earth!  Originally half
hidden by a natural abattis of growing myrtle and ceanothus which
covered this counter-scarp of rock towards the trail, it must have
stood within a hundred feet of them during their halt!

Even in its utter and complete obliteration by the furious furnace
blast that had swept across it, there was still to be seen an
unmistakable ground plan and outline of a four-roomed house.  While
everything that was combustible had succumbed to that intense heat,
there was still enough half-fused and warped metal, fractured iron
plate, and twisted and broken bars to indicate the kitchen and tool
shed.  Very little had, evidently, been taken away; the house and its
contents were consumed where they stood.  With a feeling of horror and
desperation Key at last ventured to disturb two or three of the
blackened heaps that lay before him.  But they were only vestiges of
clothing, bedding, and crockery--there was no human trace that he could
detect.  Nor was there any suggestion of the original condition and
quality of the house, except its size: whether the ordinary unsightly
cabin of frontier "partners," or some sylvan cottage--there was nothing
left but the usual ignoble and unsavory ruins of burnt-out human
habitation.

And yet its very existence was a mystery.  It had been unknown at
Collinson's, its nearest neighbor, and it was presumable that it was
equally unknown at Skinner's.  Neither he nor his companions had
detected it in their first journey by day through the hollow, and only
the tell-tale window at night had been a hint of what was even then so
successfully concealed that they could not discover it when they had
blundered against its rock foundation.  For concealed it certainly was,
and intentionally so.  But for what purpose?

He gave his romance full play for a few minutes with this question.
Some recluse, preferring the absolute simplicity of nature, or perhaps
wearied with the artificialities of society, had secluded himself here
with the company of his only daughter.  Proficient as a pathfinder, he
had easily discovered some other way of provisioning his house from the
settlements than by the ordinary trails past Collinson's or Skinner's,
which would have betrayed his vicinity.  But recluses are not usually
accompanied by young daughters, whose relations with the world, not
being as antagonistic, would make them uncertain companions.  Why not a
wife?  His presumption of the extreme youth of the face he had seen at
the window was after all only based upon the slipper he had found.  And
if a wife, whose absolute acceptance of such confined seclusion might
be equally uncertain, why not somebody else's wife? Here was a reason
for concealment, and the end of an episode, not unknown even in the
wilderness.  And here was the work of the Nemesis who had overtaken
them in their guilty contentment!  The story, even to its moral, was
complete.  And yet it did not entirely satisfy him, so superior is the
absolutely unknown to the most elaborate theory.

His attention had been once or twice drawn towards the crumbling wall
of outcrop, which during the conflagration must have felt the full
force of the fiery blast that had swept through the hollow and spent
its fury upon it.  It bore evidence of the intense heat in cracked
fissures and the crumbling debris that lay at its feet. Key picked up
some of the still warm fragments, and was not surprised that they
easily broke in a gritty, grayish powder in his hands.  In spite of his
preoccupation with the human interest, the instinct of the prospector
was still strong upon him, and he almost mechanically put some of the
pieces in his pockets.  Then after another careful survey of the
locality for any further record of its vanished tenants, he returned to
his horse.  Here he took from his saddle-bags, half listlessly, a
precious phial encased in wood, and, opening it, poured into another
thick glass vessel part of a smoking fluid; he then crumbled some of
the calcined fragments into the glass, and watched the ebullition that
followed with mechanical gravity.  When it had almost ceased he drained
off the contents into another glass, which he set down, and then
proceeded to pour some water from his drinking-flask into the ordinary
tin cup which formed part of his culinary traveling-kit.  Into this he
put three or four pinches of salt from his provision store.  Then
dipping his fingers into the salt and water, he allowed a drop to fall
into the glass.  A white cloud instantly gathered in the colorless
fluid, and then fell in a fine film to the bottom of the glass.  Key's
eyes concentrated suddenly, the listless look left his face.  His
fingers trembled lightly as he again let the salt water fall into the
solution, with exactly the same result!  Again and again he repeated
it, until the bottom of the glass was quite gray with the fallen
precipitate.  And his own face grew as gray.

His hand trembled no longer as he carefully poured off the solution so
as not to disturb the precipitate at the bottom.  Then he drew out his
knife, scooped a little of the gray sediment upon its point, and
emptying his tin cup, turned it upside down upon his knee, placed the
sediment upon it, and began to spread it over the dull surface of its
bottom with his knife.  He had intended to rub it briskly with his
knife blade.  But in the very action of spreading it, the first stroke
of his knife left upon the sediment and the cup the luminous streak of
burnished silver!

He stood up and drew a long breath to still the beatings of his heart.
Then he rapidly re-climbed the rock, and passed over the ruins again,
this time plunging hurriedly through, and kicking aside the charred
heaps without a thought of what they had contained.  Key was not an
unfeeling man, he was not an unrefined one: he was a gentleman by
instinct, and had an intuitive sympathy for others; but in that instant
his whole mind was concentrated upon the calcined outcrop!  And his
first impulse was to see if it bore any evidence of previous
examination, prospecting, or working by its suddenly evicted neighbors
and owners.  There was none: they had evidently not known it.  Nor was
there any reason to suppose that they would ever return to their hidden
home, now devastated and laid bare to the open sunlight and open trail.
They were already far away; their guilty personal secret would keep
them from revisiting it.  An immense feeling of relief came over the
soul of this moral romancer; a momentary recognition of the Most High
in this perfect poetical retribution.  He ran back quickly to his
saddle-bags, drew out one or two carefully written, formal notices of
preemption and claim, which he and his former companions had carried in
their brief partnership, erased their signatures and left only his own
name, with another grateful sense of Divine interference, as he thought
of them speeding far away in the distance, and returned to the ruins.
With unconscious irony, he selected a charred post from the embers,
stuck it in the ground a few feet from the debris of outcrop, and
finally affixed his "Notice."  Then, with a conscientiousness born
possibly of his new religious convictions, he dislodged with his
pickaxe enough of the brittle outcrop to constitute that presumption of
"actual work" upon the claim which was legally required for its
maintenance, and returned to his horse.  In replacing his things in his
saddle-bags he came upon the slipper, and for an instant so complete
was his preoccupation in his later discovery, that he was about to
throw it away as useless impedimenta, until it occurred to him, albeit
vaguely, that it might be of service to him in its connection with that
discovery, in the way of refuting possible false claimants. He was not
aware of any faithlessness to his momentary romance, any more than he
was conscious of any disloyalty to his old companions, in his
gratification that his good fortune had come to him alone. This
singular selection was a common experience of prospecting. And there
was something about the magnitude of his discovery that seemed to point
to an individual achievement.  He had made a rough calculation of the
richness of the lode from the quantity of precipitate in his rude
experiment; he had estimated its length, breadth, and thickness from
his slight knowledge of geology and the theories then ripe; and the
yield would be colossal!  Of course, he would require capital to work
it, he would have to "let in" others to his scheme and his prosperity;
but the control of it would always be HIS OWN.

Then he suddenly started as he had never in his life before started at
the foot of man!  For there was a footfall in the charred brush; and
not twenty yards from him stood Collinson, who had just dismounted from
a mule.  The blood rushed to Key's pale face.

"Prospectin' agin?" said the proprietor of the mill, with his weary
smile.

"No," said Key quickly, "only straightening my pack."  The blood
deepened in his cheek at his instinctive lie.  Had he carefully thought
it out before, he would have welcomed Collinson, and told him all.  But
now a quick, uneasy suspicion flashed upon him. Perhaps his late host
had lied, and knew of the existence of the hidden house.  Perhaps--he
had spoken of some "silvery rock" the night before--he even knew
something of the lode itself.  He turned upon him with an aggressive
face.  But Collinson's next words dissipated the thought.

"I'm glad I found ye, anyhow," he said.  "Ye see, arter you left, I saw
ye turn off the trail and make for the burning woods instead o' goin'
round.  I sez to myself, 'That fellow is making straight for Skinner's.
He's sorter worried about me and that empty pork bar'l,'--I hadn't
oughter spoke that away afore you boys, anyhow,--'and he's takin' risks
to help me.'  So I reckoned I'd throw my leg over Jenny here, and look
arter ye--and go over to Skinner's myself--and vote."

"Certainly," said Key with cheerful alacrity, and the one thought of
getting Collinson away; "we'll go together, and we'll see that that
pork barrel is filled!"  He glowed quite honestly with this sudden idea
of remembering Collinson through his good fortune. "Let's get on
quickly, for we may find the fire between us on the outer trail."  He
hastily mounted his horse.

"Then you didn't take this as a short cut," said Collinson, with dull
perseverance in his idea.  "Why not?  It looks all clear ahead."

"Yes," said Key hurriedly, "but it's been only a leap of the fire, it's
still raging round the bend.  We must go back to the cross-trail."  His
face was still flushing with his very equivocating, and his anxiety to
get his companion away.  Only a few steps further might bring Collinson
before the ruins and the "Notice," and that discovery must not be made
by him until Key's plans were perfected.  A sudden aversion to the man
he had a moment before wished to reward began to take possession of
him.  "Come on," he added almost roughly.

But to his surprise, Collinson yielded with his usual grim patience,
and even a slight look of sympathy with his friend's annoyance.  "I
reckon you're right, and mebbee you're in a hurry to get to Skinner's
all along o' MY business, I oughtn't hev told you boys what I did."  As
they rode rapidly away he took occasion to add, when Key had reined in
slightly, with a feeling of relief at being out of the hollow, "I was
thinkin', too, of what you'd asked about any one livin' here
unbeknownst to me."

"Well," said Key, with a new nervousness.

"Well; I only had an idea o' proposin' that you and me just took a look
around that holler whar you thought you saw suthin'!" said Collinson
tentatively.

"Nonsense," said Key hurriedly.  "We really saw nothing--it was all a
fancy; and Uncle Dick was joking me because I said I thought I saw a
woman's face," he added with a forced laugh.

Collinson glanced at him, half sadly.  "Oh!  You were only funnin',
then.  I oughter guessed that.  I oughter have knowed it from Uncle
Dick's talk!"  They rode for some moments in silence; Key preoccupied
and feverish, and eager only to reach Skinner's. Skinner was not only
postmaster but "registrar" of the district, and the new discoverer did
not feel entirely safe until he had put his formal notification and
claims "on record."  This was no publication of his actual secret, nor
any indication of success, but was only a record that would in all
probability remain unnoticed and unchallenged amidst the many other
hopeful dreams of sanguine prospectors.  But he was suddenly startled
from his preoccupation.

"Ye said ye war straightenin' up yer pack just now," said Collinson
slowly.

"Yes!" said Key almost angrily, "and I was."

"Ye didn't stop to straighten it up down at the forks of the trail, did
ye?"

"I may have," said Key nervously.  "But why?"

"Ye won't mind my axin' ye another question, will ye?  Ye ain't
carryin' round with ye no woman's shoe?"

Key felt the blood drop from his cheeks.  "What do you mean?" he
stammered, scarcely daring to lift his conscious eyelids to his
companion's glance.  But when he did so he was amazed to find that
Collinson's face was almost as much disturbed as his own.

"I know it ain't the square thing to ask ye, but this is how it is,"
said Collinson hesitatingly.  "Ye see just down by the fork of the
trail where you came I picked up a woman's shoe.  It sorter got me!
For I sez to myself, 'Thar ain't no one bin by my shanty, comin' or
goin', for weeks but you boys, and that shoe, from the looks of it,
ain't bin there as many hours.'  I knew there wasn't any wimin
hereabouts.  I reckoned it couldn't hev bin dropped by Uncle Dick or
that other man, for you would have seen it on the road.  So I allowed
it might have bin YOU.  And yer it is."  He slowly drew from his
pocket--what Key was fully prepared to see--the mate of the slipper Key
had in his saddle-bags!  The fair fugitive had evidently lost them both.

But Key was better prepared now (perhaps this kind of dissimulation is
progressive), and quickly alive to the necessity of throwing Collinson
off this unexpected scent.  And his companion's own suggestion was
right to his hand, and, as it seemed, again quite providential!  He
laughed, with a quick color, which, however, appeared to help his lie,
as he replied half hysterically, "You're right, old man, I own up, it's
mine!  It's d--d silly, I know--but then, we're all fools where women
are concerned--and I wouldn't have lost that slipper for a mint of
money."

He held out his hand gayly, but Collinson retained the slipper while he
gravely examined it.

"You wouldn't mind telling me where you mought hev got that?" he said
meditatively.

"Of course I should mind," said Key with a well-affected mingling of
mirth and indignation.  "What are you thinking of, you old rascal?
What do you take me for?"

But Collinson did not laugh.  "You wouldn't mind givin' me the size and
shape and general heft of her as wore that shoe?"

"Most decidedly I should do nothing of the kind!" said Key half
impatiently.  "Enough, that it was given to me by a very pretty girl.
There! that's all you will know."

"GIVEN to you?" said Collinson, lifting his eyes.

"Yes," returned Key sharply.

Collinson handed him the slipper gravely.  "I only asked you," he said
slowly, but with a certain quiet dignity which Key had never before
seen in his face, "because thar was suthin' about the size, and shape,
and fillin' out o' that shoe that kinder reminded me of some 'un; but
that some 'un--her as mought hev stood up in that shoe--ain't o' that
kind as would ever stand in the shoes of her as YOU know at all."  The
rebuke, if such were intended, lay quite as much in the utter ignoring
of Key's airy gallantry and levity as in any conscious slur upon the
fair fame of his invented Dulcinea. Yet Key oddly felt a strong
inclination to resent the aspersion as well as Collinson's gratuitous
morality; and with a mean recollection of Uncle Dick's last evening's
scandalous gossip, he said sarcastically, "And, of course, that some
one YOU were thinking of was your lawful wife."

"It war!" said Collinson gravely.

Perhaps it was something in Collinson's manner, or his own
preoccupation, but he did not pursue the subject, and the conversation
lagged.  They were nearing, too, the outer edge of the present
conflagration, and the smoke, lying low in the unburnt woods, or
creeping like an actual exhalation of the soil, blinded them so that at
times they lost the trail completely.  At other times, from the intense
heat, it seemed as if they were momentarily impinging upon the burning
area, or were being caught in a closing circle.  It was remarkable that
with his sudden accession of fortune Key seemed to lose his usual frank
and careless fearlessness, and impatiently questioned his companion's
woodcraft. There were intervals when he regretted his haste to reach
Skinner's by this shorter cut, and began to bitterly attribute it to
his desire to serve Collinson.  Ah, yes! it would be fine indeed, if
just as he were about to clutch the prize he should be sacrificed
through the ignorance and stupidity of this heavy-handed moralist at
his side!  But it was not until, through that moralist's guidance, they
climbed a steep acclivity to a second ridge, and were comparatively
safe, that he began to feel ashamed of his surly silence or surlier
interruptions.  And Collinson, either through his unconquerable
patience, or possibly in a fit of his usual uxorious abstraction,
appeared to take no notice of it.

A sloping table-land of weather-beaten boulders now effectually
separated them from the fire on the lower ridge.  They presently began
to descend on the further side of the crest, and at last dropped upon a
wagon-road, and the first track of wheels that Key had seen for a
fortnight.  Rude as it was, it seemed to him the highway to fortune,
for he knew that it passed Skinner's and then joined the great
stage-road to Marysville,--now his ultimate destination.  A few rods
further on they came in view of Skinner's, lying like a dingy forgotten
winter snowdrift on the mountain shelf.

It contained a post-office, tavern, blacksmith's shop, "general store,"
and express-office, scarcely a dozen buildings in all, but all
differing from Collinson's Mill in some vague suggestion of vitality,
as if the daily regular pulse of civilization still beat, albeit
languidly, in that remote extremity.  There was anticipation and
accomplishment twice a day; and as Key and Collinson rode up to the
express-office, the express-wagon was standing before the door ready to
start to meet the stagecoach at the cross-roads three miles away.  This
again seemed a special providence to Key.  He had a brief official
communication with Skinner as registrar, and duly recorded his claim;
he had a hasty and confidential aside with Skinner as general
storekeeper, and such was the unconscious magnetism developed by this
embryo millionaire that Skinner extended the necessary credit to
Collinson on Key's word alone. That done, he rejoined Collinson in high
spirits with the news, adding cheerfully, "And I dare say, if you want
any further advances Skinner will give them to you on Parker's draft."

"You mean that bit o' paper that chap left," said Collinson gravely.

"Yes."

"I tore it up."

"You tore it up?" ejaculated Key.

"You hear me?  Yes!" said Collinson.

Key stared at him.  Surely it was again providential that he had not
intrusted his secret to this utterly ignorant and prejudiced man!  The
slight twinges of conscience that his lie about the slippers had caused
him disappeared at once.  He could not have trusted him even in that;
it would have been like this stupid fanatic to have prevented Key's
preemption of that claim, until he, Collinson, had satisfied himself of
the whereabouts of the missing proprietor.  Was he quite sure that
Collinson would not revisit the spot when he had gone?  But he was
ready for the emergency.

He had intended to leave his horse with Skinner as security for
Collinson's provisions, but Skinner's liberality had made this
unnecessary, and he now offered it to Collinson to use and keep for him
until called for.  This would enable his companion to "pack" his goods
on the mule, and oblige him to return to the mill by the wagon-road and
"outside trail," as more commodious for the two animals.

"Ye ain't afeared o' the road agents?" suggested a bystander; "they
just swarm on galloper's Ridge, and they 'held up' the down stage only
last week."

"They're not so lively since the deputy-sheriff's got a new idea about
them, and has been lying low in the brush near Bald Top," returned
Skinner.  "Anyhow, they don't stop teams nor 'packs' unless there's a
chance of their getting some fancy horseflesh by it; and I reckon thar
ain't much to tempt them thar," he added, with a satirical side glance
at his customer's cattle.  But Key was already standing in the
express-wagon, giving a farewell shake to his patient companion's hand,
and this ingenuous pleasantry passed unnoticed.  Nevertheless, as the
express-wagon rolled away, his active fancy began to consider this new
danger that might threaten the hidden wealth of his claim.  But he
reflected that for a time, at least, only the crude ore would be taken
out and shipped to Marysville in a shape that offered no profit to the
highwaymen. Had it been a gold mine!--but here again was the
interposition of Providence!

A week later Preble Key returned to Skinner's with a foreman and ten
men, and an unlimited credit to draw upon at Marysville! Expeditions of
this kind created no surprise at Skinner's.  Parties had before this
entered the wilderness gayly, none knew where or what for; the sedate
and silent woods had kept their secret while there; they had
evaporated, none knew when or where--often, alas! with an unpaid
account at Skinner's.  Consequently, there was nothing in Key's party
to challenge curiosity.  In another week a rambling, one-storied shed
of pine logs occupied the site of the mysterious ruins, and contained
the party; in two weeks excavations had been made, and the whole face
of the outcrop was exposed; in three weeks every vestige of former
tenancy which the fire had not consumed was trampled out by the alien
feet of these toilers of the "Sylvan Silver Hollow Company."  None of
Key's former companions would have recognized the hollow in its
blackened leveling and rocky foundation; even Collinson would not have
remembered this stripped and splintered rock, with its heaps of fresh
debris, as the place where he had overtaken Key.  And Key himself had
forgotten, in his triumph, everything but the chance experiment that
had led to his success.

Perhaps it was well, therefore, that one night, when the darkness had
mercifully fallen upon this scene of sylvan desolation, and its still
more incongruous and unsavory human restoration, and the low murmur of
the pines occasionally swelled up from the unscathed mountain-side, a
loud shout and the trampling of horses' feet awoke the dwellers in the
shanty.  Springing to their feet, they hurriedly seized their weapons
and rushed out, only to be confronted by a dark, motionless ring of
horsemen, two flaming torches of pine knots, and a low but distinct
voice of authority. In their excitement, half-awakened suspicion, and
confusion, they were affected by its note of calm preparation and
conscious power.

"Drop those guns--hold up your hands!  We've got every man of you
covered."

Key was no coward; the men, though flustered, were not cravens: but
they obeyed.  "Trot out your leader!  Let him stand out there, clear,
beside that torch!"

One of the gleaming pine knots disengaged itself from the dark circle
and moved to the centre, as Preble Key, cool and confident, stepped
beside it.

"That will do," said the immutable voice.  "Now, we want Jack Riggs,
Sydney Jack, French Pete, and One-eyed Charley."

A vivid reminiscence of the former night scene in the hollow--of his
own and his companions voices raised in the darkness--flashed across
Key.  With an instinctive premonition that this invasion had something
to do with the former tenant, he said calmly:--

"Who wants them?"

"The State of California," said the voice.

"The State of California must look further," returned Key in his old
pleasant voice; "there are no such names among my party."

"Who are you?"

"The manager of the 'Sylvan Silver Hollow Company,' and these are my
workmen."

There was a hurried movement, and the sound of whispering in the
hitherto dark and silent circle, and then the voice rose again:

"You have the papers to prove that?"

"Yes, in the cabin.  And you?"

"I've a warrant to the sheriff of Sierra."

There was a pause, and the voice went on less confidently:--

"How long have you been here?"

"Three weeks.  I came here the day of the fire and took up this claim."

"There was no other house here?"

"There were ruins,--you can see them still.  It may have been a
burnt-up cabin."

The voice disengaged itself from the vague background and came slowly
forwards:--

"It was a den of thieves.  It was the hiding-place of Jack Riggs and
his gang of road agents.  I've been hunting this spot for three weeks.
And now the whole thing's up!"

There was a laugh from Key's men, but it was checked as the owner of
the voice slowly ranged up beside the burning torch and they saw his
face.  It was dark and set with the defeat of a brave man.

"Won't you come in and take something?" said Key kindly.

"No.  It's enough fool work for me to have routed ye out already. But I
suppose it's all in my d--d day's work!  Good-night!  Forward there!
Get!"

The two torches danced forwards, with the trailing off of vague shadows
in dim procession; there was a clatter over the rocks and they were
gone.  Then, as Preble Key gazed after them, he felt that with them had
passed the only shadow that lay upon his great fortune; and with the
last tenant of the hollow a proscribed outlaw and fugitive, he was
henceforth forever safe in his claim and his discovery.  And yet, oddly
enough, at that moment, as he turned away, for the first time in three
weeks there passed before his fancy with a stirring of reproach a
vision of the face that he had seen at the window.



CHAPTER III.

Of the great discovery in Sylvan Silver Hollow it would seem that
Collinson as yet knew nothing.  In spite of Key's fears that he might
stray there on his return from Skinner's, he did not, nor did he
afterwards revisit the locality.  Neither the news of the registry of
the claim nor the arrival of Key's workmen ever reached him.  The few
travelers who passed his mill came from the valley to cross the Divide
on their way to Skinner's, and returned by the longer but easier detour
of the stage-road over Galloper's Ridge. He had no chance to
participate in the prosperity that flowed from the opening of the mine,
which plentifully besprinkled Skinner's settlement; he was too far away
to profit even by the chance custom of Key's Sabbath wandering workmen.
His isolation from civilization (for those who came to him from the
valley were rude Western emigrants like himself) remained undisturbed.
The return of the prospecting party to his humble hospitality that
night had been an exceptional case; in his characteristic simplicity he
did not dream that it was because they had nowhere else to go in their
penniless condition.  It was an incident to be pleasantly remembered,
but whose nonrecurrence did not disturb his infinite patience.  His
pork barrel and flour sack had been replenished for other travelers;
his own wants were few.

It was a day or two after the midnight visit of the sheriff to Silver
Hollow that Key galloped down the steep grade to Collinson's.  He was
amused, albeit, in his new importance, a little aggrieved also, to find
that Collinson had as usual confounded his descent with that of the
generally detached boulder, and that he was obliged to add his voice to
the general uproar. This brought Collinson to his door.

"I've had your hoss hobbled out among the chickweed and clover in the
green pasture back o' the mill, and he's picked up that much that he's
lookin' fat and sassy," he said quietly, beginning to mechanically
unstrap Key's bridle, even while his guest was in the act of
dismounting.  "His back's quite healed up."

Key could not restrain a shrug of impatience.  It was three weeks since
they had met,--three weeks crammed with excitement, energy,
achievement, and fortune to Key; and yet this place and this man were
as stupidly unchanged as when he had left them.  A momentary fancy that
this was the reality, that he himself was only awakening from some
delusive dream, came over him.  But Collinson's next words were
practical.

"I reckoned that maybe you'd write from Marysville to Skinner to send
for the hoss, and forward him to ye, for I never kalkilated you'd come
back."

It was quite plain from this that Collinson had heard nothing.  But it
was also awkward, as Key would now have to tell the whole story, and
reveal the fact that he had been really experimenting when Collinson
overtook him in the hollow.  He evaded this by post-dating his
discovery of the richness of the ore until he had reached Marysville.
But he found some difficulty in recounting his good fortune: he was
naturally no boaster, he had no desire to impress Collinson with his
penetration, nor the undaunted energy he had displayed in getting up
his company and opening the mine, so that he was actually embarrassed
by his own understatement; and under the grave, patient eyes of his
companion, told his story at best lamely.  Collinson's face betrayed
neither profound interest nor the slightest resentment.  When Key had
ended his awkward recital, Collinson said slowly:--

"Then Uncle Dick and that other Parker feller ain't got no show in this
yer find."

"No," said Key quickly.  "Don't you remember we broke up our
partnership that morning and went off our own ways.  You don't
suppose," he added with a forced half-laugh, "that if Uncle Dick or
Parker had struck a lead after they left me, they'd have put me in it?"

"Wouldn't they?" asked Collinson gravely.

"Of course not."  He laughed a little more naturally, but presently
added, with an uneasy smile, "What makes you think they would?"

"Nuthin'!" said Collinson promptly.

Nevertheless, when they were seated before the fire, with glasses in
their hands, Collinson returned patiently to the subject:

"You wuz saying they went their way, and you went yours.  But your way
was back on the old way that you'd all gone together."

But Key felt himself on firmer ground here, and answered deliberately
and truthfully, "Yes, but I only went back to the hollow to satisfy
myself if there really was any house there, and if there was, to warn
the occupants of the approaching fire."

"And there was a house there," said Collinson thoughtfully.

"Only the ruins."  He stopped and flushed quickly, for he remembered
that he had denied its existence at their former meeting.  "That is,"
he went on hurriedly, "I found out from the sheriff, you know, that
there had been a house there.  But," he added, reverting to his
stronger position, "my going back there was an accident, and my picking
up the outcrop was an accident, and had no more to do with our
partnership prospecting than you had.  In fact," he said, with a
reassuring laugh, "you'd have had a better right to share in my claim,
coming there as you did at that moment, than they.  Why, if I'd have
known what the thing was worth, I might have put you in--only it wanted
capital and some experience." He was glad that he had pitched upon that
excuse (it had only just occurred to him), and glanced affably at
Collinson.  But that gentleman said soberly:--

"No, you wouldn't nuther."

"Why not?" said Key half angrily.

Collinson paused.  After a moment he said, "'Cos I wouldn't hev took
anything outer thet place."

Key felt relieved.  From what he knew of Collinson's vagaries he
believed him.  He was wise in not admitting him to his confidences at
the beginning; he might have thought it his duty to tell others.

"I'm not so particular," he returned laughingly, "but the silver in
that hole was never touched, nor I dare say even imagined by mortal man
before.  However, there is something else about the hollow that I want
to tell you.  You remember the slipper that you picked up?"

"Yes."

"Well, I lied to you about that; I never dropped it.  On the contrary,
I had picked up the mate of it very near where you found yours, and I
wanted to know to whom it belonged.  For I don't mind telling you now,
Collinson, that I believe there WAS a woman in that house, and the same
woman whose face I saw at the window.  You remember how the boys joked
me about it--well, perhaps I didn't care that you should laugh at me
too, but I've had a sore conscience over my lie, for I remembered that
you seemed to have some interest in the matter too, and I thought that
maybe I might have thrown you off the scent.  It seemed to me that if
you had any idea who it was, we might now talk the matter over and
compare notes.  I think you said--at least, I gathered the idea from a
remark of yours," he added hastily, as he remembered that the
suggestion was his own, and a satirical one--"that it reminded you of
your wife's slipper.  Of course, as your wife is dead, that would offer
no clue, and can only be a chance resemblance, unless"-- He stopped.

"Have you got 'em yet?"

"Yes, both."  He took them from the pocket of his riding-jacket.

As Collinson received them, his face took upon itself an even graver
expression.  "It's mighty cur'ous," he said reflectively, "but looking
at the two of 'em the likeness is more fetchin'.  Ye see, my wife had a
STRAIGHT foot, and never wore reg'lar rights and lefts like other
women, but kinder changed about; ye see, these shoes is reg'lar rights
and lefts, but never was worn as sich!"

"There may be other women as peculiar," suggested Key.

"There MUST be," said Collinson quietly.

For an instant Key was touched with the manly security of the reply,
for, remembering Uncle Dick's scandal, it had occurred to him that the
unknown tenant of the robbers' den might be Collinson's wife.  He was
glad to be relieved on that point, and went on more confidently:--

"So, you see, this woman was undoubtedly in that house on the night of
the fire.  She escaped, and in a mighty hurry too, for she had not time
to change her slippers for shoes; she escaped on horseback, for that is
how she lost them.  Now what was she doing there with those rascals,
for the face I saw looked as innocent as a saint's."

"Seemed to ye sort o' contrairy, jist as I reckoned my wife's foot
would have looked in a slipper that you said was GIV to ye," suggested
Collinson pointedly, but with no implication of reproach in his voice.

"Yes," said Key impatiently.

"I've read yarns afore now about them Eyetalian brigands stealin'
women," said Collinson reflectively, "but that ain't California
road-agent style.  Great Scott! if one even so much as spoke to a
woman, they'd have been wiped outer the State long ago.  No! the woman
as WAS there came there to STAY!"

As Key's face did not seem to express either assent or satisfaction at
this last statement, Collinson, after a glance at it, went on with a
somewhat gentler gravity: "I see wot's troublin' YOU, Mr. Key; you've
bin thinkin' that mebbee that poor woman might hev bin the better for a
bit o' that fortin' that you discovered under the very spot where them
slippers of hers had often trod.  You're thinkin' that mebbee it might
hev turned her and those men from their evil ways."

Mr. Key had been thinking nothing of the kind, but for some obscure
reason the skeptical jeer that had risen to his lips remained unsaid.
He rose impatiently.  "Well, there seems to be no chance of discovering
anything now; the house is burnt, the gang dispersed, and she has
probably gone with them."  He paused, and then laid three or four large
gold pieces on the table.  "It's for that old bill of our party,
Collinson," he said.  "I'll settle and collect from each.  Some time
when you come over to the mine, and I hope you'll give us a call, you
can bring the horse.  Meanwhile you can use him; you'll find he's a
little quicker than the mule.  How is business?" he added, with a
perfunctory glance around the vacant room and dusty bar.

"Thar ain't much passin' this way," said Collinson with equal
carelessness, as he gathered up the money, "'cept those boys from the
valley, and they're most always strapped when they come here."

Key smiled as he observed that Collinson offered him no receipt, and,
moreover, as he remembered that he had only Collinson's word for the
destruction of Parker's draft.  But he merely glanced at his
unconscious host, and said nothing.  After a pause he returned in a
lighter tone: "I suppose you are rather out of the world here. Indeed,
I had an idea at first of buying out your mill, Collinson, and putting
in steam power to get out timber for our new buildings, but you see you
are so far away from the wagon-road, that we couldn't haul the timber
away.  That was the trouble, or I'd have made you a fair offer."

"I don't reckon to ever sell the mill," said Collinson simply. Then
observing the look of suspicion in his companion's face, he added
gravely, "You see, I rigged up the whole thing when I expected my wife
out from the States, and I calkilate to keep it in memory of her."

Key slightly lifted his brows.  "But you never told us, by the way, HOW
you ever came to put up a mill here with such an uncertain
water-supply."

"It wasn't onsartin when I came here, Mr. Key; it was a full-fed stream
straight from them snow peaks.  It was the earthquake did it."

"The earthquake!" repeated Key.

"Yes.  Ef the earthquake kin heave up that silver-bearing rock that you
told us about the first day you kem here, and that you found t'other
day, it could play roots with a mere mill-stream, I reckon."

"But the convulsion I spoke of happened ages on ages ago, when this
whole mountain range was being fashioned," said Key with a laugh.

"Well, this yer earthquake was ten years ago, just after I came.  I
reckon I oughter remember it.  It was a queer sort o' day in the fall,
dry and hot as if thar might hev bin a fire in the woods, only thar
wasn't no wind.  Not a breath of air anywhar.  The leaves of them
alders hung straight as a plumb-line.  Except for that thar stream and
that thar wheel, nuthin' moved.  Thar wasn't a bird on the wing over
that canyon; thar wasn't a squirrel skirmishin' in the hull wood; even
the lizards in the rocks stiffened like stone Chinese idols.  It kept
gettin' quieter and quieter, ontil I walked out on that ledge and felt
as if I'd have to give a yell just to hear my own voice.  Thar was a
thin veil over everything, and betwixt and between everything, and the
sun was rooted in the middle of it as if it couldn't move neither.
Everythin' seemed to be waitin', waitin', waitin'.  Then all of a
suddin suthin' seemed to give somewhar!  Suthin' fetched away with a
queer sort of rumblin', as if the peg had slipped outer creation.  I
looked up and kalkilated to see half a dozen of them boulders come,
lickity switch, down the grade.  But, darn my skin, if one of 'em
stirred! and yet while I was looking, the whole face o' that bluff
bowed over softly, as if saying 'Good-by,' and got clean away somewhar
before I knowed it.  Why, you see that pile agin the side o' the
canyon!  Well, a thousand feet under that there's trees, three hundred
feet high, still upright and standin'.  You know how them pines over on
that far mountain-side always seem to be climbin' up, up, up, over each
other's heads to the very top?  Well, Mr. Key, I SAW 'EM climbin'!  And
when I pulled myself together and got back to the mill, everything was
quiet; and, by G--d, so was the mill-wheel, and there wasn't two inches
of water in the river!"

"And what did you think of it?" said Key, interested in spite of his
impatience.

"I thought, Mr. Key--  No! I mustn't say I thought, for I knowed it.  I
knowed that suthin' had happened to my wife!"

Key did not smile, but even felt a faint superstitious thrill as he
gazed at him.  After a pause Collinson resumed: "I heard a month after
that she had died about that time o' yaller fever in Texas with the
party she was comin' with.  Her folks wrote that they died like flies,
and wuz all buried together, unbeknownst and promiscuous, and thar
wasn't no remains.  She slipped away from me like that bluff over that
canyon, and that was the end of it."

"But she might have escaped," said Key quickly, forgetting himself in
his eagerness.

But Collinson only shook his head.  "Then she'd have been here," he
said gravely.

Key moved towards the door still abstractedly, held out his hand, shook
that of his companion warmly, and then, saddling his horse himself,
departed.  A sense of disappointment--in which a vague dissatisfaction
with himself was mingled--was all that had come of his interview.  He
took himself severely to task for following his romantic quest so far.
It was unworthy of the president of the Sylvan Silver Hollow Company,
and he was not quite sure but that his confidences with Collinson might
have imperiled even the interests of the company.  To atone for this
momentary aberration, and correct his dismal fancies, he resolved to
attend to some business at Skinner's before returning, and branched off
on a long detour that would intersect the traveled stage-road.  But
here a singular incident overtook him.  As he wheeled into the
turnpike, he heard the trampling hoof-beats and jingling harness of the
oncoming coach behind him.  He had barely time to draw up against the
bank before the six galloping horses and swinging vehicle swept heavily
by.  He had a quick impression of the heat and steam of sweating
horse-hide, the reek of varnish and leather, and the momentary vision
of a female face silhouetted against the glass window of the coach!
But even in that flash of perception he recognized the profile that he
had seen at the window of the mysterious hut!

He halted for an instant dazed and bewildered in the dust of the
departing wheels.  Then, as the bulk of the vehicle reappeared, already
narrowing in the distance, without a second thought he dashed after it.
His disappointment, his self-criticism, his practical resolutions were
forgotten.  He had but one idea now--the vision was providential!  The
clue to the mystery was before him--he MUST follow it!

Yet he had sense enough to realize that the coach would not stop to
take up a passenger between stations, and that the next station was the
one three miles below Skinner's.  It would not be difficult to reach
this by a cut-off in time, and although the vehicle had appeared to be
crowded, he could no doubt obtain a seat on top.

His eager curiosity, however, led him to put spurs to his horse, and
range up alongside of the coach as if passing it, while he examined the
stranger more closely.  Her face was bent listlessly over a book; there
was unmistakably the same profile that he had seen, but the full face
was different in outline and expression.  A strange sense of
disappointment that was almost a revulsion of feeling came over him; he
lingered, he glanced again; she was certainly a very pretty woman:
there was the beautifully rounded chin, the short straight nose, and
delicately curved upper lip, that he had seen in the profile,--and
yet--yet it was not the same face he had dreamt of.  With an odd,
provoking sense of disillusion, he swept ahead of the coach, and again
slackened his speed to let it pass.  This time the fair unknown raised
her long lashes and gazed suddenly at this persistent horseman at her
side, and an odd expression, it seemed to him almost a glance of
recognition and expectation, came into her dark, languid eyes.  The
pupils concentrated upon him with a singular significance, that was
almost, he even thought, a reply to his glance, and yet it was as
utterly unintelligible.  A moment later, however, it was explained. He
had fallen slightly behind in a new confusion of hesitation, wonder,
and embarrassment, when from a wooded trail to the right, another
horseman suddenly swept into the road before him.  He was a powerfully
built man, mounted on a thoroughbred horse of a quality far superior to
the ordinary roadster.  Without looking at Key he easily ranged up
beside the coach as if to pass it, but Key, with a sudden resolution,
put spurs to his own horse and ranged also abreast of him, in time to
see his fair unknown start at the apparition of this second horseman
and unmistakably convey some signal to him,--a signal that to Key's
fancy now betrayed some warning of himself.  He was the more convinced
as the stranger, after continuing a few paces ahead of the coach,
allowed it to pass him at a curve of the road, and slackened his pace
to permit Key to do the same.  Instinctively conscious that the
stranger's object was to scrutinize or identify him, he determined to
take the initiative, and fixed his eyes upon him as they approached.
But the stranger, who wore a loose brown linen duster over clothes that
appeared to be superior in fashion and material, also had part of his
face and head draped by a white silk handkerchief worn under his hat,
ostensibly to keep the sun and dust from his head and neck,--and had
the advantage of him.  He only caught the flash of a pair of steel-gray
eyes, as the newcomer, apparently having satisfied himself, gave rein
to his spirited steed and easily repassed the coach, disappearing in a
cloud of dust before it.  But Key had by this time reached the
"cut-off," which the stranger, if he intended to follow the coach,
either disdained or was ignorant of, and he urged his horse to its
utmost speed.  Even with the stranger's advantages it would be a close
race to the station.

Nevertheless, as he dashed on, he was by no means insensible to the
somewhat quixotic nature of his undertaking.  If he was right in his
suspicion that a signal had been given by the lady to the stranger, it
was exceedingly probable that he had discovered not only the fair
inmate of the robbers' den, but one of the gang itself, or at least a
confederate and ally.  Yet far from deterring him, in that ingenious
sophistry with which he was apt to treat his romance, he now looked
upon his adventure as a practical pursuit in the interests of law and
justice.  It was true that it was said that the band of road agents had
been dispersed; it was a fact that there had been no spoliation of
coach or teams for three weeks; but none of the depredators had ever
been caught, and their booty, which was considerable, was known to be
still intact.  It was to the interest of the mine, his partners, and
his workmen that this clue to a danger which threatened the locality
should be followed to the end.  As to the lady, in spite of the
disappointment that still rankled in his breast, he could be
magnanimous!  She might be the paramour of the strange horseman, she
might be only escaping from some hateful companionship by his aid.  And
yet one thing puzzled him: she was evidently not acquainted with the
personality of the active gang, for she had, without doubt, at first
mistaken HIM for one of them, and after recognizing her real accomplice
had communicated her mistake to him.

It was a great relief to him when the rough and tangled "cut-off" at
last broadened and lightened into the turnpike road again, and he
beheld, scarcely a quarter of a mile before him, the dust cloud that
overhung the coach as it drew up at the lonely wayside station.  He was
in time, for he knew that the horses were changed there; but a sudden
fear that the fair unknown might alight, or take some other conveyance,
made him still spur his jaded steed forward.  As he neared the station
he glanced eagerly around for the other horseman, but he was nowhere to
be seen.  He had evidently either abandoned the chase or ridden ahead.

It seemed equally a part of what he believed was a providential
intercession, that on arriving at the station he found there was a
vacant seat inside the coach.  It was diagonally opposite that occupied
by the lady, and he was thus enabled to study her face as it was bent
over her book, whose pages, however, she scarcely turned.  After her
first casual glance of curiosity at the new passenger, she seemed to
take no more notice of him, and Key began to wonder if he had not
mistaken her previous interrogating look. Nor was it his only
disturbing query; he was conscious of the same disappointment now that
he could examine her face more attentively, as in his first cursory
glance.  She was certainly handsome; if there was no longer the
freshness of youth, there was still the indefinable charm of the woman
of thirty, and with it the delicate curves of matured muliebrity and
repose.  There were lines, particularly around the mouth and fringed
eyelids, that were deepened as by pain; and the chin, even in its
rounded fullness, had the angle of determination.  From what was
visible, below the brown linen duster that she wore, she appeared to be
tastefully although not richly dressed.

As the coach at last drove away from the station, a grizzled,
farmer-looking man seated beside her uttered a sigh of relief, so
palpable as to attract the general attention.  Turning to his fair
neighbor with a smile of uncouth but good-humored apology, he said in
explanation:--

"You'll excuse me, miss!  I don't know ezactly how YOU'RE feelin',--for
judging from your looks and gin'ral gait, you're a stranger in these
parts,--but ez for ME, I don't mind sayin' that I never feel ezactly
safe from these yer road agents and stage robbers ontil arter we pass
Skinner's station.  All along thet Galloper's Ridge it's jest tech and
go like; the woods is swarmin' with 'em.  But once past Skinner's,
you're all right.  They never dare go below that.  So ef you don't
mind, miss, for it's bein' in your presence, I'll jest pull off my
butes and ease my feet for a spell."

Neither the inconsequence of this singular request, nor the smile it
evoked on the faces of the other passengers, seemed to disturb the
lady's abstraction.  Scarcely lifting her eyes from her book, she bowed
a grave assent.

"You see, miss," he continued, "and you gents," he added, taking the
whole coach into his confidence, "I've got over forty ounces of clean
gold dust in them butes, between the upper and lower sole,--and it's
mighty tight packing for my feet.  Ye kin heft it," he said, as he
removed one boot and held it up before them.  "I put the dust there for
safety--kalkilatin' that while these road gentry allus goes for a man's
pockets and his body belt, they never thinks of his butes, or haven't
time to go through 'em."  He looked around him with a smile of
self-satisfaction.

The murmur of admiring comment was, however, broken by a burly-bearded
miner who sat in the middle seat.  "Thet's pretty fair, as far as it
goes," he said smilingly, "but I reckon it wouldn't go far ef you
started to run.  I've got a simpler game than that, gentlemen, and ez
we're all friends here, and the danger's over, I don't mind tellin' ye.
The first thing these yer road agents do, after they've covered the
driver with their shot guns, is to make the passengers get out and hold
up their hands.  That, ma'am,"--explanatorily to the lady, who betrayed
only a languid interest,--"is to keep 'em from drawing their revolvers.
A revolver is the last thing a road agent wants, either in a man's hand
or in his holster.  So I sez to myself, 'Ef a six-shooter ain't of no
account, wet's the use of carryin' it?'  So I just put my shooting-iron
in my valise when I travel, and fill my holster with my gold dust, so!
It's a deuced sight heavier than a revolver, but they don't feel its
weight, and don't keer to come nigh it.  And I've been 'held up' twice
on t'other side of the Divide this year, and I passed free every time!"

The applause that followed this revelation and the exhibition of the
holster not only threw the farmer's exploits into the shade, but seemed
to excite an emulation among the passengers.  Other methods of securing
their property were freely discussed; but the excitement culminated in
the leaning forward of a passenger who had, up to that moment,
maintained a reserve almost equal to the fair unknown.  His dress and
general appearance were those of a professional man; his voice and
manner corroborated the presumption.

"I don't think, gentlemen," he began with a pleasant smile, "that any
man of us here would like to be called a coward; but in fighting with
an enemy who never attacks, or even appears, except with a deliberately
prepared advantage on his side, it is my opinion that a man is not only
justified in avoiding an unequal encounter with him, but in
circumventing by every means the object of his attack.  You have all
been frank in telling your methods.  I will be equally so in telling
mine, even if I have perhaps to confess to a little more than you have;
for I have not only availed myself of a well-known rule of the robbers
who infest these mountains, to exempt all women and children from their
spoliation,--a rule which, of course, they perfectly understand gives
them a sentimental consideration with all Californians,--but I have, I
confess, also availed myself of the innocent kindness of one of that
charming and justly exempted sex."  He paused and bowed courteously to
the fair unknown.  "When I entered this coach I had with me a bulky
parcel which was manifestly too large for my pockets, yet as evidently
too small and too valuable to be intrusted to the ordinary luggage.
Seeing my difficulty, our charming companion opposite, out of the very
kindness and innocence of her heart, offered to make a place for it in
her satchel, which was not full.  I accepted the offer joyfully.  When
I state to you, gentlemen, that that package contained valuable
government bonds to a considerable amount, I do so, not to claim your
praise for any originality of my own, but to make this public avowal to
our fair fellow passenger for securing to me this most perfect security
and immunity from the road agent that has been yet recorded."

With his eyes riveted on the lady's face, Key saw a faint color rise to
her otherwise impassive face, which might have been called out by the
enthusiastic praise that followed the lawyer's confession.  But he was
painfully conscious of what now seemed to him a monstrous situation!
Here was, he believed, the actual accomplice of the road agents calmly
receiving the complacent and puerile confessions of the men who were
seeking to outwit them. Could he, in ordinary justice to them, to
himself, or the mission he conceived he was pursuing, refrain from
exposing her, or warning them privately?  But was he certain?  Was a
vague remembrance of a profile momentarily seen--and, as he must even
now admit, inconsistent with the full face he was gazing at--sufficient
for such an accusation?  More than that, was the protection she had
apparently afforded the lawyer consistent with the function of an
accomplice!

"Then if the danger's over," said the lady gently, reaching down to
draw her satchel from under the seat, "I suppose I may return it to
you."

"By no means!  Don't trouble yourself!  Pray allow me to still remain
your debtor,--at least as far as the next station," said the lawyer
gallantly.

The lady uttered a languid sigh, sank back in her seat, and calmly
settled herself to the perusal of her book.  Key felt his cheeks
beginning to burn with the embarrassment and shame of his evident
misconception.  And here he was on his way to Marysville, to follow a
woman for whom he felt he no longer cared, and for whose pursuit he had
no longer the excuse of justice.

"Then I understand that you have twice seen these road agents," said
the professional man, turning to the miner.  "Of course, you could be
able to identify them?"

"Nary a man!  You see they're all masked, and only one of 'em ever
speaks."

"The leader or chief?"

"No, the orator."

"The orator?" repeated the professional man in amazement.

"Well, you see, I call him the orator, for he's mighty glib with his
tongue, and reels off all he has to say like as if he had it by heart.
He's mighty rough on you, too, sometimes, for all his high-toned style.
Ef he thinks a man is hidin' anything he jest scalps him with his
tongue, and blamed if I don't think he likes the chance of doin' it.
He's got a regular set speech, and he's bound to go through it all,
even if he makes everything wait, and runs the risk of capture.  Yet he
ain't the chief,--and even I've heard folks say ain't got any
responsibility if he is took, for he don't tech anybody or anybody's
money, and couldn't be prosecuted.  I reckon he's some sort of a
broken-down lawyer--d'ye see?"

"Not much of a lawyer, I imagine," said the professional man, smiling,
"for he'll find himself quite mistaken as to his share of
responsibility.  But it's a rather clever way of concealing the
identity of the real leader."

"It's the smartest gang that was ever started in the Sierras.  They
fooled the sheriff of Sierra the other day.  They gave him a sort of
idea that they had a kind of hidin'-place in the woods whar they met
and kept their booty, and, by jinks! he goes down thar with his hull
posse,--just spilin' for a fight,--and only lights upon a gang of
innocent greenhorns, who were boring for silver on the very spot where
he allowed the robbers had their den!  He ain't held up his head since."

Key cast a quick glance at the lady to see the effect of this
revelation.  But her face--if the same profile he had seen at the
window--betrayed neither concern nor curiosity.  He let his eyes drop
to the smart boot that peeped from below her gown, and the thought of
his trying to identify it with the slipper he had picked up seemed to
him as ridiculous as his other misconceptions.  He sank back gloomily
in his seat; by degrees the fatigue and excitement of the day began to
mercifully benumb his senses; twilight had fallen and the talk had
ceased.  The lady had allowed her book to drop in her lap as the
darkness gathered, and had closed her eyes; he closed his own, and
slipped away presently into a dream, in which he saw the profile again
as he had seen it in the darkness of the hollow, only that this time it
changed to a full face, unlike the lady's or any one he had ever seen.
Then the window seemed to open with a rattle, and he again felt the
cool odors of the forest; but he awoke to find that the lady had only
opened her window for a breath of fresh air.  It was nearly eight o'
clock; it would be an hour yet before the coach stopped at the next
station for supper; the passengers were drowsily nodding; he closed his
eyes and fell into a deeper sleep, from which he awoke with a start.

The coach had stopped!



CHAPTER IV.

"It can't be Three Pines yet," said a passenger's voice, in which the
laziness of sleep still lingered, "or else we've snoozed over five
mile.  I don't see no lights; wot are we stoppin' for?"  The other
passengers struggled to an upright position.  One nearest the window
opened it; its place was instantly occupied by the double muzzle of a
shot-gun!  No one moved.  In the awestricken silence the voice of the
driver rose in drawling protestation.

"It ain't no business o' mine, but it sorter strikes me that you chaps
are a-playin' it just a little too fine this time!  It ain't three
miles from Three Pine Station and forty men.  Of course, that's your
lookout,--not mine!"

The audacity of the thing had evidently struck even the usually
taciturn and phlegmatic driver into his first expostulation on record.

"Your thoughtful consideration does you great credit," said a voice
from the darkness, "and shall be properly presented to our manager; but
at the same time we wish it understood that we do not hesitate to take
any risks in strict attention to our business and our clients.  In the
mean time you will expedite matters, and give your passengers a chance
to get an early tea at Three Pines, by handing down that treasure-box
and mail-pouch.  Be careful in handling that blunderbuss you keep
beside it; the last time it unfortunately went off, and I regret to say
slightly wounded one of your passengers. Accidents of this kind,
interfering, as they do, with the harmony and pleasure of our chance
meetings, cannot be too highly deplored."

"By gosh!" ejaculated an outside passenger in an audible whisper.

"Thank you, sir," said the voice quietly; "but as I overlooked you, I
will trouble you now to descend with the others."

The voice moved nearer; and, by the light of a flaming bull's-eye cast
upon the coach, it could be seen to come from a stout, medium-sized man
with a black mask, which, however, showed half of a smooth, beardless
face, and an affable yet satirical mouth.  The speaker cleared his
throat with the slight preparatory cough of the practiced orator, and,
approaching the window, to Key's intense surprise, actually began in
the identical professional and rhetorical style previously indicated by
the miner.

"Circumstances over which we have no control, gentlemen, compel us to
oblige you to alight, stand in a row on one side, and hold up your
hands.  You will find the attitude not unpleasant after your cramped
position in the coach, while the change from its confined air to the
wholesome night-breeze of the Sierras cannot but prove salutary and
refreshing.  It will also enable us to relieve you of such so-called
valuables and treasures in the way of gold dust and coin, which I
regret to say too often are misapplied in careless hands, and which the
teachings of the highest morality distinctly denominate as the root of
all evil!  I need not inform you, gentlemen, as business men, that
promptitude and celerity of compliance will insure dispatch, and
shorten an interview which has been sometimes needlessly, and, I regret
to say, painfully protracted."

He drew back deliberately with the same monotonous precision of habit,
and disclosed the muzzles of his confederates' weapons still leveled at
the passengers.  In spite of their astonishment, indignation, and
discomfiture, his practiced effrontery and deliberate display appeared
in some way to touch their humorous sense, and one or two smiled
hysterically, as they rose and hesitatingly filed out of the vehicle.
It is possible, however, that the leveled shot-guns contributed more or
less directly to this result.

Two masks began to search the passengers under the combined focus of
the bull's-eyes, the shining gun-barrels, and a running but still
carefully prepared commentary from the spokesman.  "It is to be
regretted that business men, instead of intrusting their property to
the custody of the regularly constituted express agent, still continue
to secrete it on their persons; a custom that, without enhancing its
security, is not only an injustice to the express company, but a great
detriment to dispatch.  We also wish to point out that while we do not
as a rule interfere with the possession of articles of ordinary
personal use or adornment, such as simple jewelry or watches, we
reserve our right to restrict by confiscation the vulgarity and
unmanliness of diamonds and enormous fob chains."

The act of spoliation was apparently complete, yet it was evident that
the orator was restraining himself for a more effective climax.
Clearing his throat again and stepping before the impatient but still
mystified file of passengers, he reviewed them gravely.  Then in a
perfectly pitched tone of mingled pain and apology, he said slowly:--

"It would seem that, from no wish of our own, we are obliged on this
present occasion to suspend one or two of our usual rules.  We are not
in the habit of interfering with the wearing apparel of our esteemed
clients; but in the interests of ordinary humanity we are obliged to
remove the boots of the gentleman on the extreme left, which evidently
give him great pain and impede his locomotion.  We also seldom deviate
from our rule of obliging our clients to hold up their hands during
this examination; but we gladly make an exception in favor of the
gentleman next to him, and permit him to hand us the altogether too
heavily weighted holster which presses upon his hip.  Gentlemen," said
the orator, slightly raising his voice, with a deprecating gesture,
"you need not be alarmed!  The indignant movement of our friend, just
now, was not to draw his revolver,--for it isn't there!"  He paused
while his companions speedily removed the farmer's boots and the
miner's holster, and with a still more apologetic air approached the
coach, where only the lady remained erect and rigid in her corner.
"And now," he said with simulated hesitation, "we come to the last and
to us the most painful suspension of our rules.  On these very rare
occasions, when we have been honored with the presence of the fair sex,
it has been our invariable custom not only to leave them in the
undisturbed possession of their property, but even of their privacy as
well.  It is with deep regret that on this occasion we are obliged to
make an exception.  For in the present instance, the lady, out of the
gentleness of her heart and the politeness of her sex, has burdened
herself not only with the weight but the responsibility of a package
forced upon her by one of the passengers.  We feel, and we believe,
gentlemen, that most of you will agree with us, that so scandalous and
unmanly an attempt to evade our rules and violate the sanctity of the
lady's immunity will never be permitted.  For your own sake, madam, we
are compelled to ask you for the satchel under your seat.  It will be
returned to you when the package is removed."

"One moment," said the professional man indignantly, "there is a man
here whom you have spared,--a man who lately joined us.  Is that man,"
pointing to the astonished Key, "one of your confederates?"

"That man," returned the spokesman with a laugh, "is the owner of the
Sylvan Hollow Mine.  We have spared him because we owe him some
consideration for having been turned out of his house at the dead of
night while the sheriff of Sierra was seeking us."  He stopped, and
then in an entirely different voice, and in a totally changed manner,
said roughly, "Tumble in there, all of you, quick!  And you, sir" (to
Key),--"I'd advise you to ride outside.  Now, driver, raise so much as
a rein or a whiplash until you hear the signal--and by God! you'll know
what next."  He stepped back, and seemed to be instantly swallowed up
in the darkness; but the light of a solitary bull's-eye--the holder
himself invisible--still showed the muzzles of the guns covering the
driver.  There was a momentary stir of voices within the closed coach,
but an angry roar of "Silence!" from the darkness hushed it.

The moments crept slowly by; all now were breathless.  Then a clear
whistle rang from the distance, the light suddenly was extinguished,
the leveled muzzles vanished with it, the driver's lash fell
simultaneously on the backs of his horses, and the coach leaped forward.

The jolt nearly threw Key from the top, but a moment later it was still
more difficult to keep his seat in the headlong fury of their progress.
Again and again the lash descended upon the maddened horses, until the
whole coach seemed to leap, bound, and swerve with every stroke.  Cries
of protest and even distress began to come from the interior, but the
driver heeded it not.  A window was suddenly let down; the voice of the
professional man saying, "What's the matter?  We're not followed.  You
are imperiling our lives by this speed," was answered only by, "Will
some of ye throttle that d--d fool?" from the driver, and the renewed
fall of the lash.  The wayside trees appeared a solid plateau before
them, opened, danced at their side, closed up again behind them,--but
still they sped along.  Rushing down grades with the speed of an
avalanche, they ascended again without drawing rein, and as if by sheer
momentum; for the heavy vehicle now seemed to have a diabolical energy
of its own.  It ground scattered rocks to powder with its crushing
wheels, it swayed heavily on ticklish corners, recovering itself with
the resistless forward propulsion of the straining teams, until the
lights of Three Pine Station began to glitter through the trees.  Then
a succession of yells broke from the driver, so strong and dominant
that they seemed to outstrip even the speed of the unabated cattle.
Lesser lights were presently seen running to and fro, and on the
outermost fringe of the settlement the stage pulled up before a crowd
of wondering faces, and the driver spoke.

"We've been held up on the open road, by G--d, not THREE MILES from
whar ye men are sittin' here yawpin'!  If thar's a man among ye that
hasn't got the soul of a skunk, he'll foller and close in upon 'em
before they have a chance to get into the brush."  Having thus relieved
himself of his duty as an enforced noncombatant, and allowed all
further responsibility to devolve upon his recreant fellow employees,
he relapsed into his usual taciturnity, and drove a trifle less
recklessly to the station, where he grimly set down his bruised and
discomfited passengers.  As Key mingled with them, he could not help
perceiving that neither the late "orator's" explanation of his
exemption from their fate, nor the driver's surly corroboration of his
respectability, had pacified them.  For a time this amused him,
particularly as he could not help remembering that he first appeared to
them beside the mysterious horseman who some one thought had been
identified as one of the masks.  But he was not a little piqued to find
that the fair unknown appeared to participate in their feelings, and
his first civility to her met with a chilling response.  Even then, in
the general disillusion of his romance regarding her, this would have
been only a momentary annoyance; but it strangely revived all his
previous suspicions, and set him to thinking.  Was the singular
sagacity displayed by the orator in his search purely intuitive? Could
any one have disclosed to him the secret of the passengers' hoards?
Was it possible for HER while sitting alone in the coach to have
communicated with the band?  Suddenly the remembrance flashed across
him of her opening the window for fresh air!  She could have easily
then dropped some signal.  If this were so, and she really was the
culprit, it was quite natural for her own safety that she should
encourage the passengers in the absurd suspicion of himself!  His dying
interest revived; a few moments ago he had half resolved to abandon his
quest and turn back at Three Pines.  Now he determined to follow her to
the end.  But he did not indulge in any further sophistry regarding his
duty; yet, in a new sense of honor, he did not dream of retaliating
upon her by communicating his suspicions to his fellow passengers.
When the coach started again, he took his seat on the top, and remained
there until they reached Jamestown in the early evening.  Here a number
of his despoiled companions were obliged to wait, to communicate with
their friends. Happily, the exemption that had made them indignant
enabled him to continue his journey with a full purse.  But he was
content with a modest surveillance of the lady from the top of the
coach.

On arriving at Stockton this surveillance became less easy.  It was the
terminus of the stage-route, and the divergence of others by boat and
rail.  If he were lucky enough to discover which one the lady took, his
presence now would be more marked, and might excite her suspicion.  But
here a circumstance, which he also believed to be providential,
determined him.  As the luggage was being removed from the top of the
coach, he overheard the agent tell the expressman to check the "lady's"
trunk to San Luis.  Key was seized with an idea which seemed to solve
the difficulty, although it involved a risk of losing the clue
entirely.  There were two routes to San Luis, one was by stage, and
direct, though slower; the other by steamboat and rail, via San
Francisco.  If he took the boat, there was less danger of her
discovering him, even if she chose the same conveyance; if she took the
direct stage,--and he trusted to a woman's avoidance of the hurry of
change and transshipment for that choice,--he would still arrive at San
Luis, via San Francisco, an hour before her.  He resolved to take the
boat; a careful scrutiny from a stateroom window of the arriving
passengers on the gangplank satisfied him that she had preferred the
stage.  There was still the chance that in losing sight of her she
might escape him, but the risk seemed small.  And a trifling
circumstance had almost unconsciously influenced him--after his
romantic and superstitious fashion--as to this final step.

He had been singularly moved when he heard that San Luis was the lady's
probable destination.  It did not seem to bear any relation to the
mountain wilderness and the wild life she had just quitted; it was
apparently the most antipathic, incongruous, and inconsistent refuge
she could have taken.  It offered no opportunity for the disposal of
booty, or for communication with the gang.  It was less secure than a
crowded town.  An old Spanish mission and monastery college in a sleepy
pastoral plain,--it had even retained its old-world flavor amidst
American improvements and social revolution.  He knew it well.  From
the quaint college cloisters, where the only reposeful years of his
adventurous youth had been spent, to the long Alameda, or double
avenues of ancient trees, which connected it with the convent of Santa
Luisa, and some of his youthful "devotions,"--it had been the nursery
of his romance.  He was amused at what seemed to be the irony of fate,
in now linking it with this folly of his maturer manhood; and yet he
was uneasily conscious of being more seriously affected by it.  And it
was with a greater anxiety than this adventure had ever yet cost him
that he at last arrived at the San Jose hotel, and from a balcony
corner awaited the coming of the coach.  His heart beat rapidly as it
approached.  She was there!  But at her side, as she descended from the
coach, was the mysterious horseman of the Sierra road.  Key could not
mistake the well-built figure, whatever doubt there had been about the
features, which had been so carefully concealed.  With the astonishment
of this rediscovery, there flashed across him again the fatefulness of
the inspiration which had decided him not to go in the coach.  His
presence there would have no doubt warned the stranger, and so estopped
this convincing denouement.  It was quite possible that her companion,
by relays of horses and the advantage of bridle cut-offs, could have
easily followed the Three Pine coach and joined her at Stockton.  But
for what purpose?  The lady's trunk, which had not been disturbed
during the first part of the journey, and had been forwarded at
Stockton untouched before Key's eyes, could not have contained booty to
be disposed of in this forgotten old town.

The register of the hotel bore simply the name of "Mrs. Barker," of
Stockton, but no record of her companion, who seemed to have
disappeared as mysteriously as he came.  That she occupied a
sitting-room on the same floor as his own--in which she was apparently
secluded during the rest of the day--was all he knew. Nobody else
seemed to know her.  Key felt an odd hesitation, that might have been
the result of some vague fear of implicating her prematurely, in making
any marked inquiry, or imperiling his secret by the bribed espionage of
servants.  Once when he was passing her door he heard the sounds of
laughter,--albeit innocent and heart-free,--which seemed so
inconsistent with the gravity of the situation and his own thoughts
that he was strangely shocked.  But he was still more disturbed by a
later occurrence.  In his watchfulness of the movements of his neighbor
he had been equally careful of his own, and had not only refrained from
registering his name, but had enjoined secrecy upon the landlord, whom
he knew. Yet the next morning after his arrival, the porter not
answering his bell promptly enough, he so far forgot himself as to walk
to the staircase, which was near the lady's room, and call to the
employee over the balustrade.  As he was still leaning over the
railing, the faint creak of a door, and a singular magnetic
consciousness of being overlooked, caused him to turn slowly, but only
in time to hear the rustle of a withdrawing skirt as the door was
quickly closed.  In an instant he felt the full force of his foolish
heedlessness, but it was too late.  Had the mysterious fugitive
recognized him?  Perhaps not; their eyes had not met, and his face had
been turned away.

He varied his espionage by subterfuges, which his knowledge of the old
town made easy.  He watched the door of the hotel, himself unseen, from
the windows of a billiard saloon opposite, which he had frequented in
former days.  Yet he was surprised the same afternoon to see her, from
his coigne of vantage, reentering the hotel, where he was sure he had
left her a few moments ago.  Had she gone out by some other exit,--or
had she been disguised?  But on entering his room that evening he was
confounded by an incident that seemed to him as convincing of her
identity as it was audacious.  Lying on his pillow were a few dead
leaves of an odorous mountain fern, known only to the Sierras.  They
were tied together by a narrow blue ribbon, and had evidently been
intended to attract his attention.  As he took them in his hand, the
distinguishing subtle aroma of the little sylvan hollow in the hills
came to him like a memory and a revelation!  He summoned the
chambermaid; she knew nothing of them, or indeed of any one who had
entered his room.  He walked cautiously into the hall; the lady's
sitting-room door was open, the room was empty.  "The occupant," said
the chambermaid, "had left that afternoon."  He held the proof of her
identity in his hand, but she herself had vanished!  That she had
recognized him there was now no doubt: had she divined the real object
of his quest, or had she accepted it as a mere sentimental gallantry at
the moment when she knew it was hopeless, and she herself was perfectly
safe from pursuit?  In either event he had been duped.  He did not know
whether to be piqued, angry,--or relieved of his irresolute quest.

Nevertheless, he spent the rest of the twilight and the early evening
in fruitlessly wandering through the one long thoroughfare of the town,
until it merged into the bosky Alameda, or spacious grove, that
connected it with Santa Luisa.  By degrees his chagrin and
disappointment were forgotten in the memories of the past, evoked by
the familiar pathway.  The moon was slowly riding overhead, and
silvering the carriage-way between the straight ebony lines of trees,
while the footpaths were diapered with black and white checkers.  The
faint tinkling of a tram-car bell in the distance apprised him of one
of the few innovations of the past. The car was approaching him,
overtook him, and was passing, with its faintly illuminated windows,
when, glancing carelessly up, he beheld at one of them the profile of
the face which he had just thought he had lost forever!

He stopped for an instant, not in indecision this time, but in a grim
resolution to let no chance escape him now.  The car was going slowly;
it was easy to board it now, but again the tinkle of the bell indicated
that it was stopping at the corner of a road beyond. He checked his
pace,--a lady alighted,--it was she!  She turned into the cross-street,
darkened with the shadows of some low suburban tenement houses, and he
boldly followed.  He was fully determined to find out her secret, and
even, if necessary, to accost her for that purpose.  He was perfectly
aware what he was doing, and all its risks and penalties; he knew the
audacity of such an introduction, but he felt in his left-hand pocket
for the sprig of fern which was an excuse for it; he knew the danger of
following a possible confidante of desperadoes, but he felt in his
right-hand pocket for the derringer that was equal to it.  They were
both there; he was ready.

He was nearing the convent and the oldest and most ruinous part of the
town.  He did not disguise from himself the gloomy significance of
this; even in the old days the crumbling adobe buildings that abutted
on the old garden wall of the convent were the haunts of lawless
Mexicans and vagabond peons.  As the roadway began to be rough and
uneven, and the gaunt outlines of the sagging roofs of tiles stood out
against the sky above the lurking shadows of ruined doorways, he was
prepared for the worst.  As the crumbling but still massive walls of
the convent garden loomed ahead, the tall, graceful, black-gowned
figure he was following presently turned into the shadow of the wall
itself.  He quickened his pace, lest it should again escape him.
Suddenly it stopped, and remained motionless.  He stopped, too.  At the
same moment it vanished!

He ran quickly forward to where it had stood, and found himself before
a large iron gate, with a smaller one in the centre, that had just
clanged to on its rusty hinges.  He rubbed his eyes!--the place, the
gate, the wall, were all strangely familiar!  Then he stepped back into
the roadway, and looked at it again.  He was not mistaken.

He was standing before the porter's lodge of the Convent of the Sacred
Heart.



CHAPTER V.

The day following the great stagecoach robbery found the patient
proprietor of Collinson's Mill calm and untroubled in his usual
seclusion.  The news that had thrilled the length and breadth of
Galloper's Ridge had not touched the leafy banks of the dried-up river;
the hue and cry had followed the stage-road, and no courier had deemed
it worth his while to diverge as far as the rocky ridge which formed
the only pathway to the mill.  That day Collinson's solitude had been
unbroken even by the haggard emigrant from the valley, with his old
monotonous story of hardship and privation. The birds had flown nearer
to the old mill, as if emboldened by the unwonted quiet.  That morning
there had been the half human imprint of a bear's foot in the ooze
beside the mill-wheel; and coming home with his scant stock from the
woodland pasture, he had found a golden squirrel--a beautiful, airy
embodiment of the brown woods itself--calmly seated on his bar-counter,
with a biscuit between its baby hands.  He was full of his
characteristic reveries and abstractions that afternoon; falling into
them even at his wood-pile, leaning on his axe--so still that an
emerald-throated lizard, who had slid upon the log, went to sleep under
the forgotten stroke.

But at nightfall the wind arose,--at first as a distant murmur along
the hillside, that died away before it reached the rocky ledge; then it
rocked the tops of the tall redwoods behind the mill, but left the mill
and the dried leaves that lay in the river-bed undisturbed.  Then the
murmur was prolonged, until it became the continuous trouble of some
far-off sea, and at last the wind possessed the ledge itself; driving
the smoke down the stumpy chimney of the mill, rattling the sun-warped
shingles on the roof, stirring the inside rafters with cool breaths,
and singing over the rough projections of the outside eaves.  At nine
o'clock he rolled himself up in his blankets before the fire, as was
his wont, and fell asleep.

It was past midnight when he was awakened by the familiar clatter of
boulders down the grade, the usual simulation of a wild rush from
without that encompassed the whole mill, even to that heavy impact
against the door, which he had heard once before.  In this he
recognized merely the ordinary phenomena of his experience, and only
turned over to sleep again.  But this time the door rudely fell in upon
him, and a figure strode over his prostrate body, with a gun leveled at
his head.

He sprang sideways for his own weapon, which stood by the hearth. In
another second that action would have been his last, and the solitude
of Seth Collinson might have remained henceforward unbroken by any
mortal.  But the gun of the first figure was knocked sharply upward by
a second man, and the one and only shot fired that night sped
harmlessly to the roof.  With the report he felt his arms gripped
tightly behind him; through the smoke he saw dimly that the room was
filled with masked and armed men, and in another moment he was pinioned
and thrust into his empty armchair. At a signal three of the men left
the room, and he could hear them exploring the other rooms and
outhouses.  Then the two men who had been standing beside him fell back
with a certain disciplined precision, as a smooth-chinned man advanced
from the open door. Going to the bar, he poured out a glass of whiskey,
tossed it off deliberately, and, standing in front of Collinson, with
his shoulder against the chimney and his hand resting lightly on his
hip, cleared his throat.  Had Collinson been an observant man, he would
have noticed that the two men dropped their eyes and moved their feet
with a half impatient, perfunctory air of waiting.  Had he witnessed
the stage-robbery, he would have recognized in the smooth-faced man the
presence of "the orator."  But he only gazed at him with his dull,
imperturbable patience.

"We regret exceedingly to have to use force to a gentleman in his own
house," began the orator blandly; "but we feel it our duty to prevent a
repetition of the unhappy incident which occurred as we entered.  We
desire that you should answer a few questions, and are deeply grateful
that you are still able to do so,--which seemed extremely improbable a
moment or two ago."  He paused, coughed, and leaned back against the
chimney.  "How many men have you here besides yourself?"

"Nary one," said Collinson.

The interrogator glanced at the other men, who had reentered.  They
nodded significantly.

"Good!" he resumed.  "You have told the truth--an excellent habit, and
one that expedites business.  Now, is there a room in this house with a
door that locks?  Your front door DOESN'T."

"No."

"No cellar nor outhouse?"

"No."

"We regret that; for it will compel us, much against our wishes, to
keep you bound as you are for the present.  The matter is simply this:
circumstances of a very pressing nature oblige us to occupy this house
for a few days,--possibly for an indefinite period.  We respect the
sacred rites of hospitality too much to turn you out of it; indeed,
nothing could be more distasteful to our feelings than to have you, in
your own person, spread such a disgraceful report through the
chivalrous Sierras.  We must therefore keep you a close
prisoner,--open, however, to an offer.  It is this: we propose to give
you five hundred dollars for this property as it stands, provided that
you leave it, and accompany a pack-train which will start to-morrow
morning for the lower valley as far as Thompson's Pass, binding
yourself to quit the State for three months and keep this matter a
secret.  Three of these gentlemen will go with you. They will point out
to you your duty; their shotguns will apprise you of any dereliction
from it.  What do you say?"

"Who yer talking to?" said Collinson in a dull voice.

"You remind us," said the orator suavely, "that we have not yet the
pleasure of knowing."

"My name's Seth Collinson."

There was a dead silence in the room, and every eye was fixed upon the
two men.  The orator's smile slightly stiffened.

"Where from?" he continued blandly.

"Mizzouri."

"A very good place to go back to,--through Thompson's Pass.  But you
haven't answered our proposal."

"I reckon I don't intend to sell this house, or leave it," said
Collinson simply.

"I trust you will not make us regret the fortunate termination of your
little accident, Mr. Collinson," said the orator with a singular smile.
"May I ask why you object to selling out?  Is it the figure?"

"The house isn't mine," said Collinson deliberately.  "I built this yer
house for my wife wot I left in Mizzouri.  It's hers.  I kalkilate to
keep it, and live in it ontil she comes fur it!  And when I tell ye
that she is dead, ye kin reckon just what chance ye have of ever
gettin' it."

There was an unmistakable start of sensation in the room, followed by a
silence so profound that the moaning of the wind on the mountain-side
was distinctly heard.  A well-built man, with a mask that scarcely
concealed his heavy mustachios, who had been standing with his back to
the orator in half contemptuous patience, faced around suddenly and
made a step forward as if to come between the questioner and
questioned.  A voice from the corner ejaculated, "By G--d!"

"Silence," said the orator sharply.  Then still more harshly he turned
to the others "Pick him up, and stand him outside with a guard; and
then clear out, all of you!"

The prisoner was lifted up and carried out; the room was instantly
cleared; only the orator and the man who had stepped forward remained.
Simultaneously they drew the masks from their faces, and stood looking
at each other.  The orator's face was smooth and corrupt; the full,
sensual lips wrinkled at the corners with a sardonic humor; the man who
confronted him appeared to be physically and even morally his superior,
albeit gloomy and discontented in expression.  He cast a rapid glance
around the room, to assure himself that they were alone; and then,
straightening his eyebrows as he backed against the chimney, said:--

"D--d if I like this, Chivers!  It's your affair; but it's mighty
low-down work for a man!"

"You might have made it easier if you hadn't knocked up Bryce's gun.
That would have settled it, though no one guessed that the cur was her
husband," said Chivers hotly.

"If you want it settled THAT WAY, there's still time," returned the
other with a slight sneer.  "You've only to tell him that you're the
man that ran away with his wife, and you'll have it out together, right
on the ledge at twelve paces.  The boys will see you through.  In
fact," he added, his sneer deepening, "I rather think it's what they're
expecting."

"Thank you, Mr. Jack Riggs," said Chivers sardonically.  "I dare say it
would be more convenient to some people, just before our booty is
divided, if I were drilled through by a blundering shot from that
hayseed; or it would seem right to your high-toned chivalry if a
dead-shot as I am knocked over a man who may have never fired a
revolver before; but I don't exactly see it in that light, either as a
man or as your equal partner.  I don't think you quite understand me,
my dear Jack.  If you don't value the only man who is identified in all
California as the leader of this gang (the man whose style and address
has made it popular--yes, POPULAR, by G--d!--to every man, woman, and
child who has heard of him; whose sayings and doings are quoted by the
newspapers; whom people run risks to see; who has got the sympathy of
the crowd, so that judges hesitate to issue warrants and constables to
serve them),--if YOU don't see the use of such a man, I do.  Why,
there's a column and a half in the 'Sacramento Union' about our last
job, calling me the 'Claude Duval' of the Sierras, and speaking of my
courtesy to a lady!  A LADY!--HIS wife, by G--d! our confederate!  My
dear Jack, you not only don't know business values, but, 'pon my soul,
you don't seem to understand humor!  Ha, ha!"

For all his cynical levity, for all his affected exaggeration, there
was the ring of an unmistakable and even pitiable vanity in his voice,
and a self-consciousness that suffused his broad cheeks and writhed his
full mouth, but seemed to deepen the frown on Riggs's face.

"You know the woman hates it, and would bolt if she could,--even from
you," said Riggs gloomily.  "Think what she might do if she knew her
husband were here.  I tell you she holds our lives in the hollow of her
hand."

"That's your fault, Mr. Jack Riggs; you would bring your sister with
her infernal convent innocence and simplicity into our hut in the
hollow.  She was meek enough before that.  But this is sheer nonsense.
I have no fear of her.  The woman don't live who would go back on
Godfrey Chivers--for a husband!  Besides, she went off to see your
sister at the convent at Santa Clara as soon as she passed those bonds
off on Charley to get rid of!  Think of her traveling with that d--d
fool lawyer all the way to Stockton, and his bonds (which we had put
back in her bag) alongside of them all the time, and he telling her he
was going to stop their payment, and giving her the letter to mail for
him!--eh?  Well, we'll have time to get rid of her husband before she
gets back.  If he don't go easy--well"--

"None of that, Chivers, you understand, once for all!" interrupted
Riggs peremptorily.  "If you cannot see that your making away with that
woman's husband would damn that boasted reputation you make so much of
and set every man's hand against us, I do, and I won't permit it.  It's
a rotten business enough,--our coming on him as we have; and if this
wasn't the only God-forsaken place where we could divide our stuff
without danger and get it away off the highroads, I'd pull up stakes at
once."

"Let her stay at the convent, then, and be d--d to her," said Chivers
roughly.  "She'll be glad enough to be with your sister again; and
there's no fear of her being touched there."

"But I want to put an end to that, too," returned Riggs sharply. "I do
not choose to have my sister any longer implicated with OUR confederate
or YOUR mistress.  No more of that--you understand me?"

The two men had been standing side by side, leaning against the
chimney.  Chivers now faced his companion, his full lips wreathed into
an evil smile.

"I think I understand you, Mr. Jack Riggs, or--I beg your
pardon--Rivers, or whatever your real name may be," he began slowly.
"Sadie Collinson, the mistress of Judge Godfrey Chivers, formerly of
Kentucky, was good enough company for you the day you dropped down upon
us in our little house in the hollow of Galloper's Ridge. We were
living quite an idyllic, pastoral life there, weren't we?--she and me;
hidden from the censorious eye of society and--Collinson, obeying only
the voice of Nature and the little birds. It was a happy time," he went
on with a grimly affected sigh, disregarding his companion's impatient
gesture.  "You were young then, waging YOUR fight against society, and
fresh--uncommonly fresh, I may say--from your first exploit.  And a
very stupid, clumsy, awkward exploit, too, Mr. Riggs, if you will
pardon my freedom.  You wanted money, and you had an ugly temper, and
you had lost both to a gambler; so you stopped the coach to rob him,
and had to kill two men to get back your paltry thousand dollars, after
frightening a whole coach-load of passengers, and letting Wells, Fargo,
and Co.'s treasure-box with fifty thousand dollars in it slide.  It was
a stupid, a blundering, a CRUEL act, Mr. Riggs, and I think I told you
so at the time.  It was a waste of energy and material, and made you,
not a hero, but a stupid outcast!  I think I proved this to you, and
showed you how it might have been done."

"Dry up on that," interrupted Riggs impatiently.  "You offered to
become my partner, and you did."

"Pardon me.  Observe, my impetuous friend, that my contention is that
you--YOU--poisoned our blameless Eden in the hollow; that YOU were our
serpent, and that this Sadie Collinson, over whom you have become so
fastidious, whom you knew as my mistress, was obliged to become our
confederate.  You did not object to her when we formed our gang, and
her house became our hiding-place and refuge.  You took advantage of
her woman's wit and fine address in disposing of our booty; you availed
yourself, with the rest, of the secrets she gathered as MY mistress,
just as you were willing to profit by the superior address of her
paramour--your humble servant--when your own face was known to the
sheriff, and your old methods pronounced brutal and vulgar.  Excuse me,
but I must insist upon THIS, and that you dropped down upon me and
Sadie Collinson exactly as you have dropped down here upon her husband."

"Enough of this!" said Riggs angrily.  "I admit the woman is part and
parcel of the gang, and gets her share,--or you get it for her," he
added sneeringly; "but that doesn't permit her to mix herself with my
family affairs."

"Pardon me again," interrupted Chivers softly.  "Your memory, my dear
Riggs, is absurdly defective.  We knew that you had a young sister in
the mountains, from whom you discreetly wished to conceal your real
position.  We respected, and I trust shall always respect, your noble
reticence.  But do you remember the night you were taking her to school
at Santa Clara,--two nights before the fire,--when you were recognized
on the road near Skinner's, and had to fly with her for your life, and
brought her to us,--your two dear old friends, 'Mr. and Mrs. Barker of
Chicago,' who had a pastoral home in the forest?  You remember how we
took her in,--yes, doubly took her in,--and kept your secret from her?
And do you remember how this woman (this mistress of MINE and OUR
confederate), while we were away, saved her from the fire on our only
horse, caught the stage-coach, and brought her to the convent?"

Riggs walked towards the window, turned, and coming back, held out his
hand.  "Yes, she did it; and I thanked her, as I thank you." He stopped
and hesitated, as the other took his hand.  "But, blank it all,
Chivers, don't you see that Alice is a young girl, and this woman
is--you know what I mean.  Somebody might recognize HER, and that would
be worse for Alice than even if it were known what Alice's BROTHER was.
G--d! if these two things were put together, the girl would be ruined
forever."

"Jack," said Chivers suddenly, "you want this woman out of the way.
Well--dash it all!--she nearly separated us, and I'll be frank with you
as between man and man.  I'll give her up!  There are women enough in
the world, and hang it, we're partners, after all!"

"Then you abandon her?" said Riggs slowly, his eyes fixed on his
companion.

"Yes.  She's getting a little too maundering lately.  It will be a
ticklish job to manage, for she knows too much; but it will be done.
There's my hand on it."

Riggs not only took no notice of the proffered hand, but his former
look of discontent came back with an ill-concealed addition of loathing
and contempt.

"We'll drop that now," he said shortly; "we've talked here alone long
enough already.  The men are waiting for us."  He turned on his heel
into the inner room.  Chivers remained standing by the chimney until
his stiffened smile gave way under the working of his writhing lips;
then he turned to the bar, poured out and swallowed another glass of
whiskey at a single gulp, and followed his partner with half-closed
lids that scarcely veiled his ominous eyes.

The men, with the exception of the sentinels stationed on the rocky
ledge and the one who was guarding the unfortunate Collinson, were
drinking and gambling away their perspective gains around a small pile
of portmanteaus and saddle-bags, heaped in the centre of the room.
They contained the results of their last successes, but one pair of
saddle-bags bore the mildewed appearance of having been cached, or
buried, some time before.  Most of their treasure was in packages of
gold dust; and from the conversation that ensued, it appeared that,
owing to the difficulties of disposing of it in the mountain towns, the
plan was to convey it by ordinary pack mule to the unfrequented valley,
and thence by an emigrant wagon, on the old emigrant trail, to the
southern counties, where it could be no longer traced.  Since the
recent robberies, the local express companies and bankers had refused
to receive it, except the owners were known and identified.  There had
been but one box of coin, which had already been speedily divided up
among the band.  Drafts, bills, bonds, and valuable papers had been
usually intrusted to one "Charley," who acted as a flying messenger to
a corrupt broker in Sacramento, who played the role of the band's
"fence."  It had been the duty of Chivers to control this delicate
business, even as it had been his peculiar function to open all the
letters and documents.  This he had always lightened by characteristic
levity and sarcastic comments on the private revelations of the
contents. The rough, ill-spelt letter of the miner to his wife,
inclosing a draft, or the more sentimental effusion of an emigrant
swain to his sweetheart, with the gift of a "specimen," had always
received due attention at the hands of this elegant humorist.  But the
operation was conducted to-night with business severity and silence.
The two leaders sat opposite to each other, in what might have appeared
to the rest of the band a scarcely veiled surveillance of each other's
actions.  When the examination was concluded, and, the more valuable
inclosures put aside, the despoiled letters were carried to the fire
and heaped upon the coals.  Presently the chimney added its roar to the
moaning of the distant hillside, a few sparks leaped up and died out in
the midnight air, as if the pathos and sentiment of the unconscious
correspondents had exhaled with them.

"That's a d--d foolish thing to do," growled French Pete over his cards.

"Why?" demanded Chivers sharply.

"Why?--why, it makes a flare in the sky that any scout can see, and a
scent for him to follow."

"We're four miles from any traveled road," returned Chivers
contemptuously, "and the man who could see that glare and smell that
smoke would be on his way here already."

"That reminds me that that chap you've tied up--that Collinson--allows
he wants to see you," continued French Pete.

"To see ME!" repeated Chivers.  "You mean the Captain?"

"I reckon he means YOU," returned French Pete; "he said the man who
talked so purty."

The men looked at each other with a smile of anticipation, and put down
their cards.  Chivers walked towards the door; one or two rose to their
feet as if to follow, but Riggs stopped them peremptorily. "Sit down,"
he said roughly; then, as Chivers passed him, he added to him in a
lower tone, "Remember."

Slightly squaring his shoulders and opening his coat, to permit a
rhetorical freedom, which did not, however, prevent him from keeping
touch with the butt of his revolver, Chivers stepped into the open air.
Collinson had been moved to the shelter of an overhang of the roof,
probably more for the comfort of the guard, who sat cross-legged on the
ground near him, than for his own. Dismissing the man with a gesture,
Chivers straightened himself before his captive.

"We deeply regret that your unfortunate determination, my dear sir, has
been the means of depriving US of the pleasure of your company, and YOU
of your absolute freedom; but may we cherish the hope that your desire
to see me may indicate some change in your opinion?"

By the light of the sentry's lantern left upon the ground, Chivers
could see that Collinson's face wore a slightly troubled and even
apologetic expression.

"I've bin thinkin'," said Collinson, raising his eyes to his captor
with a singularly new and shy admiration in them, "mebbee not so much
of WOT you said, ez HOW you said it, and it's kinder bothered me,
sittin' here, that I ain't bin actin' to you boys quite on the square.
I've said to myself, 'Collinson, thar ain't another house betwixt Bald
Top and Skinner's whar them fellows kin get a bite or a drink to help
themselves, and you ain't offered 'em neither.  It ain't no matter who
they are or how they came: whether they came crawling along the road
from the valley, or dropped down upon you like them rocks from the
grade; yere they are, and it's your duty, ez long ez you keep this yer
house for your wife in trust, so to speak, for wanderers.'  And I ain't
forgettin' yer ginerel soft style and easy gait with me when you kem
here.  It ain't every man as could walk into another man's house arter
the owner of it had grabbed a gun, ez soft-speakin', ez overlookin',
and ez perlite ez you.  I've acted mighty rough and low-down, and I
know it.  And I sent for you to say that you and your folks kin use
this house and all that's in it ez long ez you're in trouble.  I've
told you why I couldn't sell the house to ye, and why I couldn't leave
it.  But ye kin use it, and while ye're here, and when you go,
Collinson don't tell nobody.  I don't know what ye mean by 'binding
myself' to keep your secret; when Collinson says a thing he sticks to
it, and when he passes his word with a man, or a man passes his word
with him, it don't need no bit of paper."

There was no doubt of its truth.  In the grave, upraised eyes of his
prisoner, Chivers saw the certainty that he could trust him, even far
more than he could trust any one within the house he had just quitted.
But this very certainty, for all its assurance of safety to himself,
filled him, not with remorse, which might have been an evanescent
emotion, but with a sudden alarming and terrible consciousness of being
in the presence of a hitherto unknown and immeasurable power!  He had
no pity for man who trusted him; he had no sense of shame in taking
advantage of it; he even felt an intellectual superiority in this want
of sagacity in his dupe; but he still felt in some way defeated,
insulted, shocked, and frightened.  At first, like all scoundrels, he
had measured the man by himself; was suspicious and prepared for
rivalry; but the grave truthfulness of Collinson's eyes left him
helpless.  He was terrified by this unknown factor.  The right that
contends and fights often stimulates its adversary; the right that
yields leaves the victor vanquished.  Chivers could even have killed
Collinson in his vague discomfiture, but he had a terrible
consciousness that there was something behind him that he could not
make way with. That was why this accomplished rascal felt his flaccid
cheeks grow purple and his glib tongue trip before his captive.

But Collinson, more occupied with his own shortcomings, took no note of
this, and Chivers quickly recovered his wits, if not his former
artificiality.  "All right," he said quickly, with a hurried glance at
the door behind him.  "Now that you think better of it, I'll be frank
with you, and tell you I'm your friend.  You understand,--your friend.
Don't talk much to those men--don't give yourself away to them;" he
laughed this time in absolute natural embarrassment.  "Don't talk about
your wife, and this house, but just say you've made the thing up with
me,--with ME, you know, and I'll see you through."  An idea, as yet
vague, that he could turn Collinson's unexpected docility to his own
purposes, possessed him even in his embarrassment, and he was still
more strangely conscious of his inordinate vanity gathering a fearful
joy from Collinson's evident admiration.  It was heightened by his
captive's next words.

"Ef I wasn't tied I'd shake hands with ye on that.  You're the kind o'
man, Mr. Chivers, that I cottoned to from the first.  Ef this house
wasn't HERS, I'd a' bin tempted to cotton to yer offer, too, and mebbee
made yer one myself, for it seems to me your style and mine would
sorter jibe together.  But I see you sabe what's in my mind, and make
allowance.  WE don't want no bit o' paper to shake hands on that.  Your
secret and your folk's secret is mine, and I don't blab that any more
than I'd blab to them wot you've just told me."

Under a sudden impulse, Chivers leaned forward, and, albeit with
somewhat unsteady hands and an embarrassed will, untied the cords that
held Collinson in his chair.  As the freed man stretched himself to his
full height, he looked gravely down into the bleared eyes of his
captor, and held out his strong right hand.  Chivers took it.  Whether
there was some occult power in Collinson's honest grasp, I know not;
but there sprang up in Chivers's agile mind the idea that a good way to
get rid of Mrs. Collinson was to put her in the way of her husband's
finding her, and for an instant, in the contemplation of that idea,
this supreme rascal absolutely felt an embarrassing glow of virtue.



CHAPTER VI.

The astonishment of Preble Key on recognizing the gateway into which
the mysterious lady had vanished was so great that he was at first
inclined to believe her entry THERE a mere trick of his fancy.  That
the confederate of a gang of robbers should be admitted to the austere
recesses of the convent, with a celerity that bespoke familiarity, was
incredible.  He again glanced up and down the length of the shadowed
but still visible wall.  There was no one there.  The wall itself
contained no break or recess in which one could hide, and this was the
only gateway.  The opposite side of the street in the full moonlight
stared emptily.  No! Unless she were an illusion herself and his whole
chase a dream, she MUST have entered here.

But the chase was not hopeless.  He had at least tracked her to a place
where she could be identified.  It was not a hotel, which she could
leave at any moment unobserved.  Though he could not follow her and
penetrate its seclusion now, he could later--thanks to his old
associations with the padres of the contiguous college--gain an
introduction to the Lady Superior on some pretext.  She was safe there
that night.  He turned away with a feeling of relief.  The incongruity
of her retreat assumed a more favorable aspect to his hopes.  He looked
at the hallowed walls and the slumbering peacefulness of the gnarled
old trees that hid the convent, and a gentle reminiscence of his youth
stole over him.  It was not the first time that he had gazed wistfully
upon that chaste refuge where, perhaps, the bright eyes that he had
followed in the quaint school procession under the leafy Alameda in the
afternoon, were at last closed in gentle slumber.  There was the very
grille through which the wicked Conchita--or, was it Dolores?--had shot
her Parthian glance at the lingering student.  And the man of
thirty-five, prematurely gray and settled in fortune, smiled as he
turned away, and forgot the adventuress of thirty who had brought him
there.

The next morning he was up betimes and at the college of San Jose.
Father Cipriano, a trifle more snuffy and aged, remembered with delight
his old pupil.  Ah! it was true, then, that he had become a mining
president, and that was why his hair was gray; but he trusted that Don
Preble had not forgot that this was not all of life, and that fortune
brought great responsibilities and cares. But what was this, then?  He
HAD thought of bringing out some of his relations from the States, and
placing a niece in the convent. That was good and wise.  Ah, yes.  For
education in this new country, one must turn to the church.  And he
would see the Lady Superior?  Ah! that was but the twist of one's
finger and the lifting of a latch to a grave superintendent and a gray
head like that.  Of course, he had not forgotten the convent and the
young senoritas, nor the discipline and the suspended holidays.  Ah! it
was a special grace of our Lady that he, Father Cipriano, had not been
worried into his grave by those foolish muchachos.  Yet, when he had
extinguished a snuffy chuckle in his red bandana handkerchief, Key knew
that he would accompany him to the convent that noon.

It was with a slight stirring of shame over his elaborate pretext that
he passed the gate of the Sacred Heart with the good father. But it is
to be feared that he speedily forgot that in the unexpected information
that it elicited.  The Lady Superior was gracious, and even
enthusiastic.  Ah, yes, it was a growing custom of the American
caballeros--who had no homes, nor yet time to create any--to bring
their sisters, wards, and nieces here, and--with a dove-like
side-glance towards Key--even the young senoritas they wished to fit
for their Christian brides!  Unlike the caballero, there were many
business men so immersed in their affairs that they could not find time
for a personal examination of the convent,--which was to be
regretted,--but who, trusting to the reputation of the Sacred Heart and
its good friends, simply sent the young lady there by some trusted
female companion.  Notably this was the case of the Senor Rivers,--did
Don Preble ever know him?--a great capitalist in the Sierras, whose
sweet young sister, a naive, ingenuous creature, was the pride of the
convent.  Of course, it was better that it was so.  Discipline and
seclusion had to be maintained.  The young girl should look upon this
as her home.  The rules for visitors were necessarily severe.  It was
rare indeed--except in a case of urgency, such as happened last
night--that even a lady, unless the parent of a scholar, was admitted
to the hospitality of the convent.  And this lady was only the friend
of that same sister of the American capitalist, although she was the
one who had brought her there.  No, she was not a relation. Perhaps Don
Preble had heard of a Mrs. Barker,--the friend of Rivers of the
Sierras.  It was a queer combination of names.  But what will you?  The
names of Americanos mean nothing.  And Don Preble knows them not.  Ah!
possibly?--good!  The lady would be remembered, being tall, dark, and
of fine presence, though sad.  A few hours earlier and Don Preble could
have judged for himself, for, as it were, she might have passed through
this visitors' room. But she was gone--departed by the coach.  It was
from a telegram--those heathen contrivances that blurt out things to
you, with never an excuse, nor a smile, nor a kiss of the hand!  For
her part, she never let her scholars receive them, but opened them
herself, and translated them in a Christian spirit, after due
preparation, at her leisure.  And it was this telegram that made the
Senora Barker go, or, without doubt, she would have of herself told to
the Don Preble, her compatriot of the Sierras, how good the convent was
for his niece.

Stung by the thought that this woman had again evaded him, and
disconcerted and confused by the scarcely intelligible information he
had acquired, Key could with difficulty maintain his composure. "The
caballero is tired of his long pasear," said the Lady Superior gently.
"We will have a glass of wine in the lodge waiting-room." She led the
way from the reception room to the outer door, but stopped at the sound
of approaching footsteps and rustling muslin along the gravel walk.
"The second class are going out," she said, as a gentle procession of
white frocks, led by two nuns, filed before the gateway.  "We will wait
until they have passed.  But the senor can see that my children do not
look unhappy."

They certainly looked very cheerful, although they had halted before
the gateway with a little of the demureness of young people who know
they are overlooked by authority, and had bumped against each other
with affected gravity.  Somewhat ashamed of his useless deception, and
the guileless simplicity of the good Lady Superior, Key hesitated and
began: "I am afraid that I am really giving you too much trouble," and
suddenly stopped.

For as his voice broke the demure silence, one of the nearest--a young
girl of apparently seventeen--turned towards him with a quick and an
apparently irresistible impulse, and as quickly turned away again.  But
in that instant Key caught a glimpse of a face that might not only have
thrilled him in its beauty, its freshness, but in some vague
suggestiveness.  Yet it was not that which set his pulses beating; it
was the look of joyous recognition set in the parted lips and sparkling
eyes, the glow of childlike innocent pleasure that mantled the sweet
young face, the frank confusion of suddenly realized expectancy and
longing.  A great truth gripped his throbbing heart, and held it still.
It was the face that he had seen in the hollow!

The movement of the young girl was too marked to escape the eye of the
Lady Superior, though she had translated it differently.  "You must not
believe our young ladies are all so rude, Don Preble," she said dryly;
"though our dear child has still some of the mountain freedom.  And
this is the Senor Rivers's sister.  But possibly--who knows?" she said
gently, yet with a sudden sharpness in her clear eyes,--"perhaps she
recognized in your voice a companion of her brother."

Luckily for Key, the shock had been so sudden and overpowering that he
showed none of the lesser symptoms of agitation or embarrassment.  In
this revelation of a secret, that he now instinctively felt was bound
up with his own future happiness, he exhibited none of the signs of a
discovered intriguer or unmasked Lothario.  He said quietly and coldly:
"I am afraid I have not the pleasure of knowing the young lady, and
certainly have never before addressed her."  Yet he scarcely heard his
companion's voice, and answered mechanically, seeing only before him
the vision of the girl's bewitching face, in its still more bewitching
consciousness of his presence.  With all that he now knew, or thought
he knew, came a strange delicacy of asking further questions, a vague
fear of compromising HER, a quick impatience of his present deception;
even his whole quest of her seemed now to be a profanation, for which
he must ask her forgiveness.  He longed to be alone to recover himself.
Even the temptation to linger on some pretext, and wait for her return
and another glance from her joyous eyes, was not as strong as his
conviction of the necessity of cooler thought and action.  He had met
his fate that morning, for good or ill; that was all he knew.  As soon
as he could decently retire, he thanked the Lady Superior, promised to
communicate with her later, and taking leave of Father Cipriano, found
himself again in the street.

Who was she, what was she, and what meant her joyous recognition of
him?  It is to be feared that it was the last question that affected
him most, now that he felt that he must have really loved her from the
first.  Had she really seen him before, and had been as mysteriously
impressed as he was?  It was not the reflection of a conceited man, for
Key had not that kind of vanity, and he had already touched the
humility that is at the base of any genuine passion.  But he would not
think of that now.  He had established the identity of the other woman,
as being her companion in the house in the hollow on that eventful
night; but it was HER profile that he had seen at the window.  The
mysterious brother Rivers might have been one of the robbers,--perhaps
the one who accompanied Mrs. Barker to San Jose.  But it was plain that
the young girl had no complicity with the actions of the gang, whatever
might have been her companion's confederation.  In the prescience of a
true lover, he knew that she must have been deceived and kept in utter
ignorance of it.  There was no look of it in her lovely, guileless
eyes; her very impulsiveness and ingenuousness would have long since
betrayed the secret.  Was it left for him, at this very outset of his
passion, to be the one to tell her?  Could he bear to see those frank,
beautiful eyes dimmed with shame and sorrow?  His own grew moist.
Another idea began to haunt him.  Would it not be wiser, even more
manly, for him--a man over twice her years--to leave her alone with her
secret, and so pass out of her innocent young life as chancefully as he
had entered it?  But was it altogether chanceful?  Was there not in her
innocent happiness in him a recognition of something in him better than
he had dared to think himself?  It was the last conceit of the humility
of love.

He reached his hotel at last, unresolved, perplexed, yet singularly
happy.  The clerk handed him, in passing, a business-looking letter,
formally addressed.  Without opening it, he took it to his room, and
throwing himself listlessly on a chair by the window again tried to
think.  But the atmosphere of his room only recalled to him the
mysterious gift he had found the day before on his pillow.  He felt now
with a thrill that it must have been from HER. How did she convey it
there?  She would not have intrusted it to Mrs. Barker.  The idea
struck him now as distastefully as it seemed improbable.  Perhaps she
had been here herself with her companion--the convent sometimes made
that concession to a relative or well-known friend.  He recalled the
fact that he had seen Mrs. Barker enter the hotel alone, after the
incident of the opening door, while he was leaning over the balustrade.
It was SHE who was alone THEN, and had recognized his voice; and he had
not known it.  She was out again to-day with the procession.  A sudden
idea struck him.  He glanced quickly at the letter in his hand, and
hurriedly opened it.  It contained only three lines, in a large formal
hand, but they sent the swift blood to his cheeks.

"I heard your voice to-day for the third time.  I want to hear it
again.  I will come at dusk.  Do not go out until then."

He sat stupefied.  Was it madness, audacity, or a trick?  He summoned
the waiter.  The letter had been left by a boy from the confectioner's
shop in the next block.  He remembered it of old,--a resort for the
young ladies of the convent.  Nothing was easier than conveying a
letter in that way.  He remembered with a shock of disillusion and
disgust that it was a common device of silly but innocent assignation.
Was he to be the ridiculous accomplice of a schoolgirl's extravagant
escapade, or the deluded victim of some infamous plot of her infamous
companion?  He could not believe either; yet he could not check a
certain revulsion of feeling towards her, which only a moment ago he
would have believed impossible.

Yet whatever was her purpose, he must prevent her coming there at any
hazard.  Her visit would be the culmination of her folly, or the
success of any plot.  Even while he was fully conscious of the material
effect of any scandal and exposure to her, even while he was incensed
and disillusionized at her unexpected audacity, he was unusually
stirred with the conviction that she was wronging herself, and that
more than ever she demanded his help and his consideration.  Still she
must not come.  But how was he to prevent her?  It wanted but an hour
of dusk.  Even if he could again penetrate the convent on some pretext
at that inaccessible hour for visitors,--twilight,--how could he
communicate with her?  He might intercept her on the way, and persuade
her to return; but she must be kept from entering the hotel.

He seized his hat and rushed downstairs.  But here another difficulty
beset him.  It was easy enough to take the ordinary road to the
convent, but would SHE follow that public one in what must be a
surreptitious escape?  And might she not have eluded the procession
that morning, and even now be concealed somewhere, waiting for the
darkness to make her visit.  He concluded to patrol the block next to
the hotel, yet near enough to intercept her before she reached it,
until the hour came.  The time passed slowly.  He loitered before shop
windows, or entered and made purchases, with his eye on the street.
The figure of a pretty girl,--and there were many,--the fluttering
ribbons on a distant hat, or the flashing of a cambric skirt around the
corner sent a nervous thrill through him.  The reflection of his grave,
abstracted face against a shop window, or the announcement of the
workings of his own mine on a bulletin board, in its incongruity with
his present occupation, gave him an hysterical impulse to laugh.  The
shadows were already gathering, when he saw a slender, graceful figure
disappear in the confectioner's shop on the block below.  In his
elaborate precautions, he had overlooked that common trysting spot.  He
hurried thither, and entered.  The object of his search was not there,
and he was compelled to make a shamefaced, awkward survey of the tables
in an inner refreshment saloon to satisfy himself.  Any one of the
pretty girls seated there might have been the one who had just entered,
but none was the one he sought.  He hurried into the street again,--he
had wasted a precious moment,--and resumed his watch.  The sun had
sunk, the Angelus had rung out of a chapel belfry, and shadows were
darkening the vista of the Alameda.  She had not come.  Perhaps she had
thought better of it; perhaps she had been prevented; perhaps the whole
appointment had been only a trick of some day-scholars, who were
laughing at him behind some window.  In proportion as he became
convinced that she was not coming, he was conscious of a keen despair
growing in his heart, and a sickening remorse that he had ever thought
of preventing her.  And when he at last reluctantly reentered the
hotel, he was as miserable over the conviction that she was not coming
as he had been at her expected arrival.  The porter met him hurriedly
in the hall.

"Sister Seraphina of the Sacred Heart has been here, in a hurry to see
you on a matter of importance," he said, eyeing Key somewhat curiously.
"She would not wait in the public parlor, as she said her business was
confidential, so I have put her in a private sitting-room on your
floor."

Key felt the blood leave his cheeks.  The secret was out for all his
precaution.  The Lady Superior had discovered the girl's flight,--or
her attempt.  One of the governing sisterhood was here to arraign him
for it, or at least prevent an open scandal.  Yet he was resolved; and
seizing this last straw, he hurriedly mounted the stairs, determined to
do battle at any risk for the girl's safety, and to perjure himself to
any extent.

She was standing in the room by the window.  The light fell upon the
coarse serge dress with its white facings, on the single girdle that
scarcely defined the formless waist, on the huge crucifix that dangled
ungracefully almost to her knees, on the hideous, white-winged coif
that, with the coarse but dense white veil, was itself a renunciation
of all human vanity.  It was a figure he remembered well as a boy, and
even in his excitement and half resentment touched him now, as when a
boy, with a sense of its pathetic isolation.  His head bowed with
boyish deference as she approached gently, passed him a slight
salutation, and closed the door that he had forgotten to shut behind
him.

Then, with a rapid movement, so quick that he could scarcely follow it,
the coif, veil, rosary, and crucifix were swept off, and the young
pupil of the convent stood before him.

For all the sombre suggestiveness of her disguise and its ungraceful
contour, there was no mistaking the adorable little head, tumbled all
over with silky tendrils of hair from the hasty withdrawal of her coif,
or the blue eyes that sparkled with frank delight beneath them.  Key
thought her more beautiful than ever. Yet the very effect of her
frankness and beauty was to recall him to all the danger and
incongruity of her position.

"This is madness," he said quickly.  "You may be followed here and
discovered in this costume at any moment!"  Nevertheless, he caught the
two little hands that had been extended to him, and held them tightly,
and with a frank familiarity that he would have wondered at an instant
before.

"But I won't," she said simply.  "You see I'm doing a 'half-retreat';
and I stay with Sister Seraphina in her room; and she always sleeps two
hours after the Angelus; and I got out without anybody knowing me, in
her clothes.  I see what it is," she said, suddenly bending a
reproachful glance upon him, "you don't like me in them.  I know
they're just horrid; but it was the only way I could get out."

"You don't understand me," he said eagerly.  "I don't like you to run
these dreadful risks and dangers for"--He would have said "for me," but
added with sudden humility--"for nothing.  Had I dreamed that you cared
to see me, I would have arranged it easily without this indiscretion,
which might make others misjudge you. Every instant that you remain
here--worse, every moment that you are away from the convent in that
disguise, is fraught with danger. I know you never thought of it."

"But I did," she said quietly; "I thought of it, and thought that if
Sister Seraphina woke up, and they sent for me, you would take me away
with you to that dear little hollow in the hills, where I first heard
your voice.  You remember it, don't you?  You were lost, I think, in
the darkness, and I used to say to myself afterwards that I found you.
That was the first time.  Then the second time I heard you, was here in
the hall.  I was alone in the other room, for Mrs. Barker had gone out.
I did not know you were here, but I knew your voice.  And the third
time was before the convent gate, and then I knew you knew me.  And
after that I didn't think of anything but coming to you; for I knew
that if I was found out, you would take me back with you, and perhaps
send word to my brother where we were, and then"--  She stopped
suddenly, with her eyes fixed on Key's blank face.  Her own grew blank,
the joy faded out of her clear eyes, she gently withdrew her hand from
his, and without a word began to resume her disguise.

"Listen to me," said Key passionately.  "I am thinking only of YOU. I
want to, and WILL, save you from any blame,--blame you do not
understand even now.  There is still time.  I will go back to the
convent with you at once.  You shall tell me everything; I will tell
you everything on the way."

She had already completely resumed her austere garb, and drew the veil
across her face.  With the putting on her coif she seemed to have
extinguished all the joyous youthfulness of her spirit, and moved with
the deliberateness of renunciation towards the door. They descended the
staircase without a word.  Those who saw them pass made way for them
with formal respect.

When they were in the street, she said quietly, "Don't give me your
arm--Sisters don't take it."  When they had reached the street corner,
she turned it, saying, "This is the shortest way."

It was Key who was now restrained, awkward, and embarrassed.  The fire
of his spirit, the passion he had felt a moment before, had gone out of
him, as if she were really the character she had assumed.  He said at
last desperately:--

"How long did you live in the hollow?"

"Only two days.  My brother was bringing me here to school, but in the
stage coach there was some one with whom he had quarreled, and he
didn't want to meet him with me.  So we got out at Skinner's, and came
to the hollow, where his old friends, Mr. and Mrs. Barker, lived."

There was no hesitation nor affectation in her voice.  Again he felt
that he would as soon have doubted the words of the Sister she
represented as her own.

"And your brother--did you live with him?"

"No.  I was at school at Marysville until he took me away.  I saw
little of him for the past two years, for he had business in the
mountains--very rough business, where he couldn't take me, for it kept
him away from the settlements for weeks.  I think it had something to
do with cattle, for he was always having a new horse. I was all alone
before that, too; I had no other relations; I had no friends.  We had
always been moving about so much, my brother and I.  I never saw any
one that I liked, except you, and until yesterday I had only HEARD you."

Her perfect naivete alternately thrilled him with pain and doubt. In
his awkwardness and uneasiness he was brutal.

"Yes, but you must have met somebody--other men--here even, when you
were out with your schoolfellows, or perhaps on an adventure like this."

Her white coif turned towards him quickly.  "I never wanted to know
anybody else.  I never cared to see anybody else.  I never would have
gone out in this way but for you," she said hurriedly.  After a pause
she added in a frightened tone: "That didn't sound like your voice
then.  It didn't sound like it a moment ago either."

"But you are sure that you know my voice," he said, with affected
gayety.  "There were two others in the hollow with me that night."

"I know that, too.  But I know even what you said.  You reproved them
for throwing a lighted match in the dry grass.  You were thinking of us
then.  I know it."

"Of US?" said Key quickly.

"Of Mrs. Barker and myself.  We were alone in the house, for my brother
and her husband were both away.  What you said seemed to forewarn me,
and I told her.  So we were prepared when the fire came nearer, and we
both escaped on the same horse."

"And you dropped your shoes in your flight," said Key laughingly, "and
I picked them up the next day, when I came to search for you. I have
kept them still."

"They were HER shoes," said the girl quickly, "I couldn't find mine in
our hurry, and hers were too large for me, and dropped off." She
stopped, and with a faint return of her old gladness said, "Then you
DID come back?  I KNEW you would."

"I should have stayed THEN, but we got no reply when we shouted. Why
was that?" he demanded suddenly.

"Oh, we were warned against speaking to any stranger, or even being
seen by any one while we were alone," returned the girl simply.

"But why?" persisted Key.

"Oh, because there were so many highwaymen and horse-stealers in the
woods.  Why, they had stopped the coach only a few weeks before, and
only a day or two ago, when Mrs. Barker came down.  SHE saw them!"

Key with difficulty suppressed a groan.  They walked on in silence for
some moments, he scarcely daring to lift his eyes to the decorous
little figure hastening by his side.  Alternately touched by mistrust
and pain, at last an infinite pity, not unmingled with a desperate
resolution, took possession of him.

"I must make a confession to you, Miss Rivers," he began with the
bashful haste of a very boy, "that is"--he stammered with a half
hysteric laugh,--"that is--a confession as if you were really a sister
or a priest, you know--a sort of confidence to you--to your dress.  I
HAVE seen you, or THOUGHT I saw you before.  It was that which brought
me here, that which made me follow Mrs. Barker--my only clue to you--to
the door of that convent.  That night, in the hollow, I saw a profile
at the lighted window, which I thought was yours."

"I never was near the window," said the young girl quickly.  "It must
have been Mrs. Barker."

"I know that now," returned Key.  "But remember, it was my only clue to
you.  I mean," he added awkwardly, "it was the means of my finding you."

"I don't see how it made you think of me, whom you never saw, to see
another woman's profile," she retorted, with the faintest touch of
asperity in her childlike voice.  "But," she added, more gently and
with a relapse into her adorable naivete, "most people's profiles look
alike."

"It was not that," protested Key, still awkwardly, "it was only that I
realized something--only a dream, perhaps."

She did not reply, and they continued on in silence.  The gray wall of
the convent was already in sight.  Key felt he had achieved nothing.
Except for information that was hopeless, he had come to no nearer
understanding of the beautiful girl beside him, and his future appeared
as vague as before; and, above all, he was conscious of an inferiority
of character and purpose to this simple creature, who had obeyed him so
submissively.  Had he acted wisely? Would it not have been better if he
had followed her own frankness, and--

"Then it was Mrs. Barker's profile that brought you here?" resumed the
voice beneath the coif.  "You know she has gone back.  I suppose you
will follow?"

"You will not understand me," said Key desperately.  "But," he added in
a lower voice, "I shall remain here until you do."

He drew a little closer to her side.

"Then you must not begin by walking so close to me," she said, moving
slightly away; "they may see you from the gate.  And you must not go
with me beyond that corner.  If I have been missed already they will
suspect you."

"But how shall I know?" he said, attempting to take her hand.  "Let me
walk past the gate.  I cannot leave you in this uncertainty."

"You will know soon enough," she said gravely, evading his hand. "You
must not go further now.  Good-night."

She had stopped at the corner of the wall.  He again held out his hand.
Her little fingers slid coldly between his.

"Good-night, Miss Rivers."

"Stop!" she said suddenly, withdrawing her veil and lifting her clear
eyes to his in the moonlight.  "You must not say THAT--it isn't the
truth.  I can't bear to hear it from YOUR lips, in YOUR voice.  My name
is NOT Rivers!"

"Not Rivers--why?" said Key, astounded.

"Oh, I don't know why," she said half despairingly; "only my brother
didn't want me to use my name and his here, and I promised. My name is
'Riggs'--there!  It's a secret--you mustn't tell it; but I could not
bear to hear YOU say a lie."

"Good-night, Miss Riggs," said Key sadly.

"No, nor that either," she said softly.  "Say Alice."

"Good-night, Alice."

She moved on before him.  She reached the gate.  For a moment her
figure, in its austere, formless garments, seemed to him to even stoop
and bend forward in the humility of age and self-renunciation, and she
vanished within as into a living tomb.

Forgetting all precaution, he pressed eagerly forward, and stopped
before the gate.  There was no sound from within; there had evidently
been no challenge nor interruption.  She was safe.



CHAPTER VII.

The reappearance of Chivers in the mill with Collinson, and the brief
announcement that the prisoner had consented to a satisfactory
compromise, were received at first with a half contemptuous smile by
the party; but for the commands of their leaders, and possibly a
conviction that Collinson's fatuous cooperation with Chivers would be
safer than his wrath, which might not expend itself only on Chivers,
but imperil the safety of all, it is probable that they would have
informed the unfortunate prisoner of his real relations to his captor.
In these circumstances, Chivers's half satirical suggestion that
Collinson should be added to the sentries outside, and guard his own
property, was surlily assented to by Riggs, and complacently accepted
by the others.  Chivers offered to post him himself,--not without an
interchange of meaning glances with Riggs,--Collinson's own gun was
returned to him, and the strangely assorted pair left the mill amicably
together.

But however humanly confident Chivers was in his companion's
faithfulness, he was not without a rascal's precaution, and determined
to select a position for Collinson where he could do the least damage
in any aberration of trust.  At the top of the grade, above the mill,
was the only trail by which a party in force could approach it.  This
was to Chivers obviously too strategic a position to intrust to his
prisoner, and the sentry who guarded its approach, five hundred yards
away, was left unchanged.  But there was another "blind" trail, or
cut-off, to the left, through the thickest undergrowth of the woods,
known only to his party.  To place Collinson there was to insure him
perfect immunity from the approach of an enemy, as well as from any
confidential advances of his fellow sentry.  This done, he drew a cigar
from his pocket, and handing it to Collinson, lighted another for
himself, and leaning back comfortably against a large boulder, glanced
complacently at his companion.

"You may smoke until I go, Mr. Collinson, and even afterwards, if you
keep the bowl of your pipe behind a rock, so as to be out of sight of
your fellow sentry, whose advances, by the way, if I were you, I should
not encourage.  Your position here, you see, is a rather peculiar one.
You were saying, I think, that a lingering affection for your wife
impelled you to keep this place for her, although you were convinced of
her death?"

Collinson's unaffected delight in Chivers's kindliness had made his
eyes shine in the moonlight with a doglike wistfulness.  "I reckon I
did say that, Mr. Chivers," he said apologetically, "though it ain't
goin' to interfere with you usin' the shanty jest now."

"I wasn't alluding to that, Collinson," returned Chivers, with a large
rhetorical wave of the hand, and an equal enjoyment in his companion's
evident admiration of him, "but it struck me that your remark,
nevertheless, implied some doubt of your wife's death, and I don't know
but that your doubts are right."

"Wot's that?" said Collinson, with a dull glow in his face.

Chivers blew the smoke of his cigar lazily in the still air. "Listen,"
he said.  "Since your miraculous conversion a few moments ago, I have
made some friendly inquiries about you, and I find that you lost all
trace of your wife in Texas in '52, where a number of her fellow
emigrants died of yellow fever.  Is that so?"

"Yes," said Collinson quickly.

"Well, it so happens that a friend of mine," continued Chivers slowly,
"was in a train which followed that one, and picked up and brought on
some of the survivors."

"That was the train wot brought the news," said Collinson, relapsing
into his old patience.  "That's how I knowed she hadn't come."

"Did you ever hear the names of any of its passengers?" said Chivers,
with a keen glance at his companion.

"Nary one!  I only got to know it was a small train of only two wagons,
and it sorter melted into Californy through a southern pass, and kinder
petered out, and no one ever heard of it agin, and that was all."

"That was NOT all, Collinson," said Chivers lazily.  "I saw the train
arrive at South Pass.  I was awaiting a friend and his wife. There was
a lady with them, one of the survivors.  I didn't hear her name, but I
think my friend's wife called her 'Sadie.'  I remember her as a rather
pretty woman--tall, fair, with a straight nose and a full chin, and
small slim feet.  I saw her only a moment, for she was on her way to
Los Angeles, and was, I believe, going to join her husband somewhere in
the Sierras."

The rascal had been enjoying with intense satisfaction the return of
the dull glow in Collinson's face, that even seemed to animate the
whole length of his angular frame as it turned eagerly towards him.  So
he went on, experiencing a devilish zest in this description of his
mistress to her husband, apart from the pleasure of noting the slow
awakening of this apathetic giant, with a sensation akin to having
warmed him into life.  Yet his triumph was of short duration.  The fire
dropped suddenly out of Collinson's eyes, the glow from his face, and
the dull look of unwearied patience returned.

"That's all very kind and purty of yer, Mr. Chivers," he said gravely;
"you've got all my wife's pints thar to a dot, and it seems to fit her
jest like a shoe I picked up t'other day.  But it wasn't my Sadie, for
ef she's living or had lived, she'd bin just yere!"

The same fear and recognition of some unknown reserve in this trustful
man came over Chivers as before.  In his angry resentment of it he
would have liked to blurt out the infidelity of the wife before her
husband, but he knew Collinson would not believe him, and he had
another purpose now.  His full lips twisted into a suave smile.

"While I would not give you false hopes, Mr. Collinson," he said, with
a bland smile, "my interest in you compels me to say that you may be
over confident and wrong.  There are a thousand things that may have
prevented your wife from coming to you,--illness, possibly the result
of her exposure, poverty, misapprehension of your place of meeting,
and, above all, perhaps some false report of your own death.  Has it
ever occurred to you that it is as possible for her to have been
deceived in that way as for you?"

"Wot yer say?" said Collinson, with a vague suspicion.

"What I mean.  You think yourself justified in believing your wife
dead, because she did not seek you here; may she not feel herself
equally justified in believing the same of you, because you had not
sought her elsewhere?"

"But it was writ that she was comin' yere, and--I boarded every train
that come in that fall," said Collinson, with a new irritation, unlike
his usual calm.

"Except one, my dear Collinson,--except one," returned Chivers, holding
up a fat forefinger smilingly.  "And that may be the clue. Now, listen!
There is still a chance of following it, if you will. The name of my
friends were Mr. and Mrs. Barker.  I regret," he added, with a
perfunctory cough, "that poor Barker is dead.  He was not such an
exemplary husband as you are, my dear Collinson, and I fear was not all
that Mrs. Barker could have wished; enough that he succumbed from
various excesses, and did not leave me Mrs. Barker's present address.
But she has a young friend, a ward, living at the convent of Santa
Luisa, whose name is Miss Rivers, who can put you in communication with
her.  Now, one thing more: I can understand your feelings, and that you
would wish at once to satisfy your mind.  It is not, perhaps, to my
interest nor the interest of my party to advise you, but," he
continued, glancing around him, "you have an admirably secluded
position here, on the edge of the trail, and if you are missing from
your post to-morrow morning, I shall respect your feelings, trust to
your honor to keep this secret, and--consider it useless to pursue you!"

There was neither shame nor pity in his heart, as the deceived man
turned towards him with tremulous eagerness, and grasped his hand in
silent gratitude.  But the old rage and fear returned, as Collinson
said gravely:--

"You kinder put a new life inter me, Mr. Chivers, and I wish I had yer
gift o' speech to tell ye so.  But I've passed my word to the Capting
thar and to the rest o' you folks that I'd stand guard out yere, and I
don't go back o' my word.  I mout, and I moutn't find my Sadie; but she
wouldn't think the less o' me, arter these years o' waitin', ef I
stayed here another night, to guard the house I keep in trust for her,
and the strangers I've took in on her account."

"As you like, then," said Chivers, contracting his lips, "but keep your
own counsel to-night.  There may be those who would like to deter you
from your search.  And now I will leave you alone in this delightful
moonlight.  I quite envy you your unrestricted communion with Nature.
Adios, amigo, adios!"

He leaped lightly on a large rock that overhung the edge of the grade,
and waved his hand.

"I wouldn't do that, Mr. Chivers," said Collinson, with a concerned
face; "them rocks are mighty ticklish, and that one in partiklar. A
tech sometimes sends 'em scooting."

Mr. Chivers leaped quickly to the ground, turned, waved his hand again,
and disappeared down the grade.

But Collinson was no longer alone.  Hitherto his characteristic
reveries had been of the past,--reminiscences in which there was only
recollection, no imagination, and very little hope.  Under the spell of
Chivers's words his fancy seemed to expand; he began to think of his
wife as she might be now,--perhaps ill, despairing, wandering
hopelessly, even ragged and footsore, or--believing HIM dead--relapsing
into the resigned patience that had been his own; but always a new
Sadie, whom he had never seen or known before.  A faint dread, the
lightest of misgivings (perhaps coming from his very ignorance), for
the first time touched his steadfast heart, and sent a chill through
it.  He shouldered his weapon, and walked briskly towards the edge of
the thick-set woods.  There were the fragrant essences of the laurel
and spruce--baked in the long-day sunshine that had encompassed their
recesses--still coming warm to his face; there were the strange
shiftings of temperature throughout the openings, that alternately
warmed and chilled him as he walked.  It seemed so odd that he should
now have to seek her instead of her coming to him; it would never be
the same meeting to him, away from the house that he had built for her!
He strolled back, and looked down upon it, nestling on the ledge.  The
white moonlight that lay upon it dulled the glitter of lights in its
windows, but the sounds of laughter and singing came to even his
unfastidious ears with a sense of vague discord.  He walked back again,
and began to pace before the thick-set wood.  Suddenly he stopped and
listened.

To any other ears but those accustomed to mountain solitude it would
have seemed nothing.  But, familiar as he was with all the infinite
disturbances of the woodland, and even the simulation of intrusion
caused by a falling branch or lapsing pine-cone, he was arrested now by
a recurring sound, unlike any other.  It was an occasional muffled
beat--interrupted at uncertain intervals, but always returning in
regular rhythm, whenever it was audible.  He knew it was made by a
cantering horse; that the intervals were due to the patches of dead
leaves in its course, and that the varying movement was the effect of
its progress through obstacles and underbrush.  It was therefore coming
through some "blind" cutoff in the thick-set wood.  The shifting of the
sound also showed that the rider was unfamiliar with the locality, and
sometimes wandered from the direct course; but the unfailing and
accelerating persistency of the sound, in spite of these difficulties,
indicated haste and determination.

He swung his gun from his shoulder, and examined its caps.  As the
sound came nearer, he drew up beside a young spruce at the entrance of
the thicket.  There was no necessity to alarm the house, or call the
other sentry.  It was a single horse and rider, and he was equal to
that.  He waited quietly, and with his usual fateful patience.  Even
then his thoughts still reverted to his wife; and it was with a
singular feeling that he, at last, saw the thick underbrush give way
before a woman, mounted on a sweating but still spirited horse, who
swept out into the open.  Nevertheless, he stopped in front of her, and
called:--

"Hold up thar!"

The horse recoiled, nearly unseating her.  Collinson caught the reins.
She lifted her whip mechanically, yet remained holding it in the air,
trembling, until she slipped, half struggling, half helplessly, from
the saddle to the ground.  Here she would have again fallen, but
Collinson caught her sharply by the waist.  At his touch she started
and uttered a frightened "No!"  At her voice Collinson started.

"Sadie!" he gasped.

"Seth!" she half whispered.

They stood looking at each other.  But Collinson was already himself
again.  The man of simple directness and no imagination saw only his
wife before him--a little breathless, a little flurried, a little
disheveled from rapid riding, as he had sometimes seen her before, but
otherwise unchanged.  Nor had HE changed; he took her up where he had
left her years ago.  His grave face only broadened into a smile, as he
held both her hands in his.

"Yes, it's me--Lordy!  Why, I was comin' only to-morrow to find ye,
Sade!"

She glanced hurriedly around her, "To--to find me," she said
incredulously.

"Sartain!  That ez, I was goin' to ask about ye,--goin' to ask about ye
at the convent."

"At the convent?" she echoed with a frightened amazement.

"Yes, why, Lordy Sade--don't you see?  You thought I was dead, and I
thought you was dead,--that's what's the matter.  But I never reckoned
that you'd think me dead until Chivers allowed that it must be so."

Her face whitened in the moonlight "Chivers?" she said blankly.

"In course; but nat'rally you don't know him, honey.  He only saw you
onc't.  But it was along o' that, Sade, that he told me he reckoned you
wasn't dead, and told me how to find you.  He was mighty kind and
consarned about it, and he even allowed I'd better slip off to you this
very night."

"Chivers," she repeated, gazing at her husband with bloodless lips.

"Yes, an awful purty-spoken man.  Ye'll have to get to know him Sade.
He's here with some of his folks az hez got inter trouble--I'm
forgettin' to tell ye.  You see"--

"Yes, yes, yes!" she interrupted hysterically; "and this is the Mill?"

"Yes, lovey, the Mill--my mill--YOUR mill--the house I built for you,
dear.  I'd show it to you now, but you see, Sade, I'm out here standin'
guard."

"Are YOU one of them?" she said, clutching his hand desperately.

"No, dear," he said soothingly,--"no; only, you see, I giv' my word to
'em as I giv' my house to-night, and I'm bound to protect them and see
'em through.  Why, Lordy! Sade, you'd have done the same--for Chivers."

"Yes, yes," she said, beating her hands together strangely, "of course.
He was so kind to bring me back to you.  And you might have never found
me but for him."

She burst into an hysterical laugh, which the simple-minded man might
have overlooked but for the tears that coursed down her bloodless face.

"What's gone o' ye, Sadie," he said in a sudden fear, grasping her
hands; "that laugh ain't your'n--that voice ain't your'n.  You're the
old Sadie, ain't ye?"  He stopped.  For a moment his face blanched as
he glanced towards the mill, from which the faint sound of bacchanalian
voices came to his quick ear.  "Sadie, dear, ye ain't thinkin' anything
agin' me?  Ye ain't allowin' I'm keeping anythin' back from ye?"

Her face stiffened into rigidity; she dashed the tears from her eyes.
"No," she said quickly.  Then after a moment she added, with a faint
laugh, "You see we haven't seen each other for so long--it's all so
sudden--so unexpected."

"But you kem here, just now, calkilatin' to find me?" said Collinson
gravely.

"Yes, yes," she said quickly, still grasping both his hands, but with
her head slightly turned in the direction of the mill.

"But who told ye where to find the mill?" he said, with gentle patience.

"A friend," she said hurriedly.  "Perhaps," she added, with a singular
smile, "a friend of the friend who told you."

"I see," said Collinson, with a relieved face and a broadening smile,
"it's a sort of fairy story.  I'll bet, now, it was that old Barker
woman that Chivers knows."

Her teeth gleamed rigidly together in the moonlight, like a
death's-head.  "Yes," she said dryly, "it was that old Barker woman.
Say, Seth," she continued, moistening her lips slowly, "you're guarding
this place alone?"

"Thar's another feller up the trail,--a sentry,--but don't you be
afeard, he can't hear us, Sade."

"On this side of the mill?"

"Yes!  Why, Lord love ye, Sadie! t'other side o' the mill it drops down
straight to the valley; nobody comes yer that way but poor low-down
emigrants.  And it's miles round to come by the valley from the summit."

"You didn't hear your friend Chivers say that the sheriff was out with
his posse to-night hunting them?"

"No.  Did you?"

"I think I heard something of that kind at Skinner's, but it may have
been only a warning to me, traveling alone."

"Thet's so," said Collinson, with a tender solicitude, "but none o'
these yer road-agents would have teched a woman.  And this yer Chivers
ain't the man to insult one, either."

"No," she said, with a return of her hysteric laugh.  But it was
overlooked by Collinson, who was taking his gun from beside the tree
where he had placed it, "Where are you going?" she said suddenly.

"I reckon them fellers ought to be warned o' what you heard.  I'll be
back in a minit."

"And you're going to leave me now--when--when we've only just met after
these years," she said, with a faint attempt at a smile, which,
however, did not reach the cold glitter of her eyes.

"Just for a little, honey.  Besides, don't you see, I've got to get
excused; for we'll have to go off to Skinner's or somewhere, Sadie, for
we can't stay in thar along o' them."

"So you and your wife are turned out of your home to please Chivers,"
she said, still smiling.

"That's whar you slip up, Sadie," said Collinson, with a troubled face;
"for he's that kind of a man thet if I jest as much as hinted you was
here, he'd turn 'em all out o' the house for a lady. Thet's why I don't
propose to let on anything about you till to-morrow."

"To-morrow will do," she said, still smiling, but with a singular
abstraction in her face.  "Pray don't disturb them now.  You say there
is another sentinel beyond.  He is enough to warn them of any approach
from the trail.  I'm tired and ill--very ill!  Sit by me here, Seth,
and wait!  We can wait here together--we have waited so long,
Seth,--and the end has come now."

She suddenly lapsed against the tree, and slipped in a sitting posture
to the ground.  Collinson cast himself at her side, and put his arm
round her.

"Wot's gone o' ye, Sade?  You're cold and sick.  Listen.  Your hoss is
just over thar feedin'.  I'll put you back on him, run in and tell 'em
I'm off, and be with ye in a jiffy, and take ye back to Skinner's."

"Wait," she said softly.  "Wait."

"Or to the Silver Hollow--it's not so far."

She had caught his hands again, her rigid face close to his, "What
hollow?--speak!" she said breathlessly.

"The hollow whar a friend o' mine struck silver.  He'll take yur in."

Her head sank against his shoulder.  "Let me stay here," she answered,
"and wait."

He supported her tenderly, feeling the gentle brushing of her hair
against his cheek as in the old days.  He was content to wait, holding
her thus.  They were very silent; her eyes half closed, as if in
exhaustion, yet with the strange suggestion of listening in the vacant
pupils.

"Ye ain't hearin' anythin', deary?" he said, with a troubled face.

"No; but everything is so deathly still," she said in a frightened
whisper.

It certainly was very still.  A singular hush seemed to have slid over
the landscape; there was no longer any sound from the mill; there was
an ominous rest in the woodland, so perfect that the tiny rustle of an
uneasy wing in the tree above them had made them start; even the
moonlight seemed to hang suspended in the air.

"It's like the lull before the storm," she said with her strange laugh.

But the non-imaginative Collinson was more practical.  "It's mighty
like that earthquake weather before the big shake thet dried up the
river and stopped the mill.  That was just the time I got the news o'
your bein' dead with yellow fever.  Lord! honey, I allus allowed to
myself thet suthin' was happenin' to ye then."

She did not reply; but he, holding her figure closer to him, felt it
trembling with a nervous expectation.  Suddenly she threw him off, and
rose to her feet with a cry.  "There!" she screamed frantically,
"they've come! they've come!"

A rabbit had run out into the moonlight before them, a gray fox had
dashed from the thicket into the wood, but nothing else.

"Who's come?" said Collinson, staring at her.

"The sheriff and his posse!  They're surrounding them now.  Don't you
hear?" she gasped.

There was a strange rattling in the direction of the mill, a dull
rumble, with wild shouts and outcries, and the trampling of feet on its
wooden platform.  Collinson staggered to his feet; but at the same
moment he was thrown violently against his wife, and they both clung
helplessly to the tree, with their eyes turned toward the ledge.  There
was a dense cloud of dust and haze hanging over it.

She uttered another cry, and ran swiftly towards the rocky grade.
Collinson ran quickly after her, but as she reached the grade he
suddenly shouted, with an awful revelation in his voice, "Come back!
Stop, Sadie, for God's sake!"  But it was too late.  She had already
disappeared; and as he reached the rock on which Chivers had leaped, he
felt it give way beneath him.

But there was no sound, only a rush of wind from the valley below.
Everything lapsed again into its awful stillness.  As the cloud lifted
from where the mill had stood, the moon shone only upon empty space.
There was a singular murmuring and whispering from the woods beyond
that increased in sound, and an hour later the dry bed of the old
mill-stream was filled with a rushing river.



CHAPTER VIII.

Preble Key returned to his hotel from the convent, it is to be feared,
with very little of that righteous satisfaction which is supposed to
follow the performance of a good deed.  He was by no means certain that
what he had done was best for the young girl. He had only shown himself
to her as a worldly monitor of dangers, of which her innocence was
providentially unconscious.  In his feverish haste to avert a scandal,
he had no chance to explain his real feelings; he had, perhaps, even
exposed her thwarted impulses to equally naive but more dangerous
expression, which he might not have the opportunity to check.  He
tossed wakefully that night upon his pillow, tormented with alternate
visions of her adorable presence at the hotel, and her bowed,
renunciating figure as she reentered the convent gate.  He waited
expectantly the next day for the message she had promised, and which he
believed she would find some way to send.  But no message was
forthcoming.  The day passed, and he became alarmed.  The fear that her
escapade had been discovered again seized him.  If she were in close
restraint, she could neither send to him, nor could he convey to her
the solicitude and sympathy that filled his heart.  In her childish
frankness she might have confessed the whole truth, and this would not
only shut the doors of the convent against him, under his former
pretext, but compromise her still more if he boldly called. He waylaid
the afternoon procession; she was not among them. Utterly despairing,
the wildest plans for seeing her passed through his brain,--plans that
recalled his hot-headed youth, and a few moments later made him smile
at his extravagance, even while it half frightened him at the reality
of his passion.  He reached the hotel heart-sick and desperate.  The
porter met him on the steps. It was with a thrill that sent the blood
leaping to his cheeks that he heard the man say:--

"Sister Seraphina is waiting for you in the sitting-room."

There was no thought of discovery or scandal in Preble Key's mind now;
no doubt or hesitation as to what he would do, as he sprang up the
staircase.  He only knew that he had found her again, and was happy!
He burst into the room, but this time remembered to shut the door
behind him.  He looked eagerly towards the window where she had stood
the day before, but now she rose quickly from the sofa in the corner,
where she had been seated, and the missal she had been reading rolled
from her lap to the floor.  He ran towards her to pick it up.  Her
name--the name she had told him to call her--was passionately trembling
on his lips, when she slowly put her veil aside, and displayed a pale,
kindly, middle-aged face, slightly marked by old scars of smallpox.  It
was not Alice; it was the real Sister Seraphina who stood before him.

His first revulsion of bitter disappointment was so quickly followed by
a realization that all had been discovered, and his sacrifice of
yesterday had gone for naught, that he stood before her, stammering,
but without the power to say a word.  Luckily for him, his utter
embarrassment seemed to reassure her, and to calm that timidity which
his brusque man-like irruption might well produce in the inexperienced,
contemplative mind of the recluse. Her voice was very sweet, albeit
sad, as she said gently:--

"I am afraid I have taken you by surprise; but there was no time to
arrange for a meeting, and the Lady Superior thought that I, who knew
all the facts, had better see you confidentially.  Father Cipriano gave
us your address."

Amazed and wondering, Key bowed her to a seat.

"You will remember," she went on softly, "that the Lady Superior failed
to get any information from you regarding the brother of one of our
dear children, whom he committed to our charge through a--a companion
or acquaintance--a Mrs. Barker.  As she was armed with his authority by
letter, we accepted the dear child through her, permitted her as his
representative to have free access to his sister, and even allowed her,
as an unattended woman, to pass the night at the convent.  We were
therefore surprised this morning to receive a letter from him,
absolutely forbidding any further intercourse, correspondence, or
association of his sister with this companion, Mrs. Barker.  It was
necessary to inform the dear child of this at once, as she was on the
point of writing to this woman; but we were pained and shocked at her
reception of her brother's wishes.  I ought to say, in justice to the
dear child, that while she is usually docile, intelligent, and
tractable to discipline, and a devote in her religious feelings, she is
singularly impulsive.  But we were not prepared for the rash and sudden
step she has taken.  At noon to-day she escaped from the convent!"

Key, who had been following her with relief, sprang to his feet at this
unexpected culmination.

"Escaped!" he said.  "Impossible!  I mean," he added, hurriedly
recalling himself, "your rules, your discipline, your attendants are so
perfect."

"The poor impulsive creature has added sacrilege to her madness--a
sacrilege we are willing to believe she did not understand, for she
escaped in a religious habit--my own."

"But this would sufficiently identify her," he said, controlling
himself with an effort.

"Alas, not so!  There are many of us who go abroad on our missions in
these garments, and they are made all alike, so as to divert rather
than attract attention to any individuality.  We have sent private
messengers in all directions, and sought her everywhere, but without
success.  You will understand that we wish to avoid scandal, which a
more public inquiry would create."

"And you come to me," said Key, with a return of his first suspicion,
in spite of his eagerness to cut short the interview and be free to
act,--"to me, almost a stranger?"

"Not a stranger, Mr. Key," returned the religieuse gently, "but to a
well-known man--a man of affairs in the country where this unhappy
child's brother lives--a friend who seems to be sent by Heaven to find
out this brother for us, and speed this news to him. We come to the old
pupil of Father Cipriano, a friend of the Holy Church; to the kindly
gentleman who knows what it is to have dear relations of his own, and
who only yesterday was seeking the convent to"--

"Enough!" interrupted Key hurriedly, with a slight color.  "I will go
at once.  I do not know this man, but I will do my best to find him.
And this--this--young girl?  You say you have no trace of her?  May she
not still be here?  I should have some clue by which to seek her--I
mean that I could give to her brother."

"Alas! we fear she is already far away from here.  If she went at once
to San Luis, she could have easily taken a train to San Francisco
before we discovered her flight.  We believe that it was the poor
child's intent to join her brother, so as to intercede for her
friend--or, perhaps, alas! to seek her."

"And this friend left yesterday morning?" he said quickly, yet
concealing a feeling of relief.  "Well, you may depend on me!  And now,
as there is no time to be lost, I will make my arrangements to take the
next train."  He held out his hand, paused, and said in almost boyish
embarrassment: "Bid me God speed, Sister Seraphina!"

"May the Holy Virgin aid you," she said gently.  Yet, as she passed out
of the door, with a grateful smile, a characteristic reaction came over
Key.  His romantic belief in the interposition of Providence was not
without a tendency to apply the ordinary rules of human evidence to
such phenomena.  Sister Seraphina's application to him seemed little
short of miraculous interference; but what if it were only a trick to
get rid of him, while the girl, whose escapade had been discovered, was
either under restraint in the convent, or hiding in Santa Luisa?  Yet
this did not prevent him from mechanically continuing his arrangements
for departure. When they were completed, and he had barely time to get
to the station at San Luis, he again lingered in vague expectation of
some determining event.

The appearance of a servant with a telegraphic message at this moment
seemed to be an answer to this instinctive feeling.  He tore it open
hastily.  But it was only a single line from his foreman at the mine,
which had been repeated to him from the company's office in San
Francisco.  It read, "Come at once--important."

Disappointed as it left him, it determined his action; and as the train
steamed out of San Luis, it for a while diverted his attention from the
object of his pursuit.  In any event, his destination would have been
Skinner's or the Hollow, as the point from which to begin his search.
He believed with Sister Seraphina that the young girl would make her
direct appeal to her brother; but even if she sought Mrs. Barker, it
would still be at some of the haunts of the gang.  The letter to the
Lady Superior had been postmarked from "Bald Top," which Key knew to be
an obscure settlement less frequented than Skinner's.  Even then it was
hardly possible that the chief of the road agents would present himself
at the post-office, and it had probably been left by some less known of
the gang.  A vague idea, that was hardly a suspicion, that the girl
might have a secret address of her brother's, without understanding the
reasons for its secrecy, came into his mind.  A still more vague hope,
that he might meet her before she found her brother, upheld him.  It
would be an accidental meeting on her part, for he no longer dared to
hope that she would seek or trust him again.  And it was with very
little of his old sanguine quality that, travel-worn and weary, he at
last alighted at Skinner's.  But his half careless inquiry if any lady
passengers had lately arrived there, to his embarrassment produced a
broad smile on the face of Skinner.

"You're the second man that asked that question, Mr. Key," he said.

"The second man?" ejaculated Key nervously.

"Yes the first was the sheriff of Sierra.  He wanted to find a tall,
good-looking woman, about thirty, with black eyes.  I hope that ain't
the kind o' girl you're looking arter--is it? for I reckon she's gin
you both the slip."

Key protested with a forced laugh that it was not, yet suddenly
hesitated to describe Alice; for he instantly recognized the portrait
of her friend, the assumed Mrs. Barker.  Skinner continued in lazy
confidence:--

"Ye see they say that the sheriff had sorter got the dead wood on that
gang o' road agents, and had hemmed 'em in somewhar betwixt Bald Top
and Collinson's.  But that woman was one o' their spies, and spotted
his little game, and managed to give 'em the tip, so they got clean
away.  Anyhow, they ain't bin heard from since.  But the big shake has
made scoutin' along the ledges rather stiff work for the sheriff.  They
say the valley near Long Canyon's chock full o' rock and slumgullion
that's slipped down."

"What do you mean by the big shake?" asked Key in surprise.

"Great Scott! you didn't hear of it?  Didn't hear of the 'arthquake
that shook us up all along Galloper's the other night?  Well," he added
disgustedly, "that's jist the conceit of them folks in the bay, that
can't allow that ANYTHIN' happens in the mountains!"

The urgent telegrams of his foreman now flashed across Key's
preoccupied mind.  Possibly Skinner saw his concern, "I reckon your
mine is all right, Mr. Key.  One of your men was over yere last night,
and didn't say nothin'."

But this did not satisfy Key; and in a few minutes he had mounted his
horse and was speeding towards the Hollow, with a remorseful
consciousness of having neglected his colleagues' interests.  For
himself, in the utter prepossession of his passion for Alice, he cared
nothing.  As he dashed down the slope to the Hollow, he thought only of
the two momentous days that she had passed there, and the fate that had
brought them so nearly together.  There was nothing to recall its
sylvan beauty in the hideous works that now possessed it, or the
substantial dwelling-house that had taken the place of the old cabin.
A few hurried questions to the foreman satisfied him of the integrity
of the property.  There had been some alarm in the shaft, but there was
no subsidence of the "seam," nor any difficulty in the working.  "What
I telegraphed you for, Mr. Key, was about something that has cropped up
way back o' the earthquake.  We were served here the other day with a
legal notice of a claim to the mine, on account of previous work done
on the ledge by the last occupant."

"But the cabin was built by a gang of thieves, who used it as a hoard
for their booty," returned Key hotly, "and every one of them are
outlaws, and have no standing before the law."  He stopped with a pang
as he thought of Alice.  And the blood rushed to his cheeks as the
foreman quietly continued:--

"But the claim ain't in any o' their names.  It's allowed to be the
gift of their leader to his young sister, afore the outlawry, and it's
in HER name--Alice Riggs or something."

Of the half-dozen tumultuous thoughts that passed through Key's mind,
only one remained.  It was purely an act of the brother's to secure
some possible future benefit for his sister.  And of this she was
perfectly ignorant!  He recovered himself quickly, and said with a
smile:--

"But I discovered the ledge and its auriferous character myself. There
was no trace or sign of previous discovery or mining occupation."

"So I jedged, and so I said, and thet puts ye all right.  But I thought
I'd tell ye; for mining laws is mining laws, and it's the one thing ye
can't get over," he added, with the peculiar superstitious reverence of
the Californian miner for that vested authority.

But Key scarcely listened.  All that he had heard seemed only to link
him more fatefully and indissolubly with the young girl.  He was
already impatient of even this slight delay in his quest.  In his
perplexity his thoughts had reverted to Collinson's: the mill was a
good point to begin his search from; its good-natured, stupid
proprietor might be his guide, his ally, and even his confidant.

When his horse was baited, he was again in the saddle.  "If yer going
Collinson's way, yer might ask him if he's lost a horse," said the
foreman.  "The morning after the shake, some of the boys picked up a
mustang, with a make-up lady's saddle on."  Key started!  While it was
impossible that it could have been ridden by Alice, it might have been
by the woman who had preceded her.

"Did you make any search?" he inquired eagerly; "there may have been an
accident."

"I reckon it wasn't no accident," returned the foreman coolly, "for the
riata was loose and trailing, as if it had been staked out, and broken
away."

Without another word, Key put spurs to his horse and galloped away,
leaving his companion staring after him.  Here was a clue: the horse
could not have strayed far; the broken tether indicated a camp; the
gang had been gathered somewhere in the vicinity where Mrs. Barker had
warned them,--perhaps in the wood beyond Collinson's.  He would
penetrate it alone.  He knew his danger; but as a SINGLE unarmed man he
might be admitted to the presence of the leader, and the alleged claim
was a sufficient excuse.  What he would say or do afterwards depended
upon chance.  It was a wild scheme--but he was reckless.  Yet he would
go to Collinson's first.

At the end of two hours he reached the thick-set wood that gave upon
the shelf at the top of the grade which descended to the mill. As he
emerged from the wood into the bursting sunlight of the valley below,
he sharply reined in his horse and stopped.  Another bound would have
been his last.  For the shelf, the rocky grade itself, the ledge below,
and the mill upon it, were all gone!  The crumbling outer wall of the
rocky grade had slipped away into immeasurable depths below, leaving
only the sharp edge of a cliff, which incurved towards the woods that
had once stood behind the mill, but which now bristled on the very edge
of a precipice.  A mist was hanging over its brink and rising from the
valley; it was a full-fed stream that was coursing through the former
dry bed of the river and falling down the face of the bluff.  He rubbed
his eyes, dismounted, crept along the edge of the precipice, and looked
below: whatever had subsided and melted down into its thousand feet of
depth, there was no trace left upon its smooth face.  Scarcely an angle
of drift or debris marred the perpendicular; the burial of all ruin was
deep and compact; the erasure had been swift and sure--the obliteration
complete.  It might have been the precipitation of ages, and not of a
single night.  At that remote distance it even seemed as if grass were
already growing ever this enormous sepulchre, but it was only the tops
of the buried pines.  The absolute silence, the utter absence of any
mark of convulsive struggle, even the lulling whimper of falling
waters, gave the scene a pastoral repose.

So profound was the impression upon Key and his human passion that it
at first seemed an ironical and eternal ending of his quest.  It was
with difficulty that he reasoned that the catastrophe occurred before
Alice's flight, and that even Collinson might have had time to escape.
He slowly skirted the edge of the chasm, and made his way back through
the empty woods behind the old mill-site towards the place where he had
dismounted.  His horse seemed to have strayed into the shadows of this
covert; but as he approached him, he was amazed to see that it was not
his own, and that a woman's scarf was lying over its side saddle.  A
wild idea seized him, and found expression in an impulsive cry:--

"Alice!"

The woods echoed it; there was an interval of silence, and then a faint
response.  But it was HER voice.  He ran eagerly forward in that
direction, and called again; the response was nearer this time, and
then the tall ferns parted, and her lithe, graceful figure came
running, stumbling, and limping towards him like a wounded fawn.  Her
face was pale and agitated, the tendrils of her light hair were
straying over her shoulder, and one of the sleeves of her school-gown
was stained with blood and dust.  He caught the white and trembling
hands that were thrust out to him eagerly.

"It is YOU!" she gasped.  "I prayed for some one to come, but I did not
dream it would be YOU.  And then I heard YOUR voice--and I thought it
could be only a dream until you called a second time."

"But you are hurt," he exclaimed passionately.  "You have met with some
accident!"

"No, no!" she said eagerly.  "Not I--but a poor, poor man I found lying
on the edge of the cliff.  I could not help him much, I did not care to
leave him.  No one WOULD come!  I have been with him alone, all the
morning!  Come quick, he may be dying."

He passed his arm around her waist unconsciously; she permitted it as
unconsciously, as he half supported her figure while they hurried
forward.

"He had been crushed by something, and was just hanging over the ledge,
and could not move nor speak," she went on quickly.  "I dragged him
away to a tree, it took me hours to move him, he was so heavy,--and I
got him some water from the stream and bathed his face, and blooded all
my sleeve."

"But what were you doing here?" he asked quickly.

A faint blush crossed the pallor of her delicate cheek.  She looked
away quickly.  "I--was going to find my brother at Bald Top," she
replied at last hurriedly.  "But don't ask me now--only come quick, do."

"Is the wounded man conscious?  Did you speak with him?  Does he know
who you are?" asked Key uneasily.

"No! he only moaned a little and opened his eyes when I dragged him.  I
don't think he even knew what had happened."

They hurried on again.  The wood lightened suddenly.  "Here!" she said
in a half whisper, and stepped timidly into the open light. Only a few
feet from the fatal ledge, against the roots of a buckeye, with HER
shawl thrown over him, lay the wounded man.

Key started back.  It was Collinson!

His head and shoulders seemed uninjured; but as Key lifted the shawl,
he saw that the long, lank figure appeared to melt away below the waist
into a mass of shapeless and dirty rags.  Key hurriedly replaced the
shawl, and, bending over him, listened to his hurried respiration and
the beating of his heart.  Then he pressed a drinking-flask to his
lips.  The spirit seemed to revive him; he slowly opened his eyes.
They fell upon Key with quick recognition.  But the look changed; one
could see that he was trying to rise, but that no movement of the limbs
accompanied that effort of will, and his old patient, resigned look
returned.  Key shuddered.  There was some injury to the spine.  The man
was paralyzed.

"I can't get up, Mr. Key," he said in a faint but untroubled voice,
"nor seem to move my arms, but you'll just allow that I've shook hands
with ye--all the same."

"How did this happen?" said Key anxiously.

"Thet's wot gets me!  Sometimes I reckon I know, and sometimes I don't.
Lyin' thar on thet ledge all last night, and only jest able to look
down into the old valley, sometimes it seemed to me ez if I fell over
and got caught in the rocks trying to save my wife; but then when I kem
to think sensible, and know my wife wasn't there at all, I get
mystified.  Sometimes I think I got ter thinkin' of my wife only when
this yer young gal thet's bin like an angel to me kem here and dragged
me off the ledge, for you see she don't belong here, and hez dropped on
to me like a sperrit."

"Then you were not in the house when the shock came?" said Key.

"No.  You see the mill was filled with them fellers as the sheriff was
arter, and it went over with 'em--and I"--

"Alice," said Key, with a white face, "would you mind going to my
horse, which you will find somewhere near yours, and bringing me a
medicine case from my saddle-bags?"

The innocent girl glanced quickly at her companion, saw the change in
his face, and, attributing it to the imminent danger of the injured
man, at once glided away.  When she was out of hearing, Key leaned
gravely over him:--

"Collinson, I must trust you with a secret.  I am afraid that this poor
girl who helped you is the sister of the leader of that gang the
sheriff was in pursuit of.  She has been kept in perfect ignorance of
her brother's crimes.  She must NEVER know them--nor even know his
fate!  If he perished utterly in this catastrophe, as it would seem--it
was God's will to spare her that knowledge.  I tell you this, to warn
you in anything you say before her.  She MUST believe, as I shall try
to make her believe, that he has gone back to the States--where she
will perhaps, hereafter, believe that he died.  Better that she should
know nothing--and keep her thought of him unchanged."

"I see--I see--I see, Mr. Key," murmured the injured man.  "Thet's wot
I've been sayin' to myself lyin' here all night.  Thet's wot I bin
sayin' o' my wife Sadie,--her that I actooally got to think kem back to
me last night.  You see I'd heerd from one o' those fellars that a
woman like unto her had been picked up in Texas and brought on yere,
and that mebbe she was somewhar in Californy.  I was that foolish--and
that ontrue to her, all the while knowin', as I once told you, Mr. Key,
that ef she'd been alive she'd bin yere--that I believed it true for a
minit!  And that was why, afore this happened, I had a dream, right out
yer, and dreamed she kem to me, all white and troubled, through the
woods.  At first I thought it war my Sadie; but when I see she warn't
like her old self, and her voice was strange and her laugh was
strange--then I knowed it wasn't her, and I was dreamin'.  You're
right, Mr. Key, in wot you got off just now--wot was it?  Better to
know nothin'--and keep the old thoughts unchanged."

"Have you any pain?" asked Key after a pause.

"No; I kinder feel easier now."

Key looked at his changing face.  "Tell me," he said gently, "if it
does not tax your strength, all that has happened here, all you know.
It is for HER sake."

Thus adjured, with his eyes fixed on Key, Collinson narrated his story
from the irruption of the outlaws to the final catastrophe. Even then
he palliated their outrage with his characteristic patience, keeping
still his strange fascination for Chivers, and his blind belief in his
miserable wife.  The story was at times broken by lapses of faintness,
by a singular return of his old abstraction and forgetfulness in the
midst of a sentence, and at last by a fit of coughing that left a few
crimson bubbles on the corners of his month.  Key lifted his eyes
anxiously; there was some grave internal injury, which the dying man's
resolute patience had suppressed.  Yet, at the sound of Alice's
returning step, Collinson's eyes brightened, apparently as much at her
coming as from the effect of the powerful stimulant Key had taken from
his medicine case.

"I thank ye, Mr. Key," he said faintly; "for I've got an idea I ain't
got no great time before me, and I've got suthin' to say to you, afore
witnesses"--his eyes sought Alice's in half apology--"afore witnesses,
you understand.  Would you mind standin' out thar, afore me, in the
light, so I kin see you both, and you, miss, rememberin', ez a witness,
suthin' I got to tell to him?  You might take his hand, miss, to make
it more regular and lawlike."

The two did as he bade them, standing side by side, painfully humoring
what seemed to them to be wanderings of a dying man.

"Thar was a young fellow," said Collinson in a steady voice, "ez kem to
my shanty a night ago on his way to the--the--valley.  He was a
sprightly young fellow, gay and chipper-like, and he sez to me,
confidential-like, 'Collinson,' sez he, 'I'm off to the States this
very night on business of importance; mebbe I'll be away a long
time--for years!  You know,' sez he, 'Mr. Key, in the Hollow! Go to
him,' sez he, 'and tell him ez how I hadn't time to get to see him;
tell him,' sez he, 'that RIVERS'--you've got the name, Mr. Key?--you've
got the name, miss?--'that RIVERS wants him to say this to his little
sister from her lovin' brother.  And tell him,' sez he, this yer
RIVERS, 'to look arter her, being alone.'  You remember that, Mr. Key?
you remember it, miss?  You see, I remembered it, too, being, so to
speak, alone myself"--he paused, and added in a faint whisper--"till
now."

Then he was silent.  That innocent lie was the first and last upon his
honest lips; for as they stood there, hand in hand, they saw his plain,
hard face take upon itself, at first, the gray, ashen hues of the rocks
around him, and then and thereafter something of the infinite
tranquillity and peace of that wilderness in which he had lived and
died, and of which he was a part.

Contemporaneous history was less kindly.  The "Bald Top Sentinel"
congratulated its readers that the late seismic disturbance was
accompanied with very little loss of life, if any.  "It is reported
that the proprietor of a low shebeen for emigrants in an obscure hollow
had succumbed from injuries; but," added the editor, with a fine touch
of Western humor, "whether this was the result of his being forcibly
mixed up with his own tanglefoot whiskey or not, we are unable to
determine from the evidence before us."  For all that, a small stone
shaft was added later to the rocks near the site of the old mill,
inscribed to the memory of this obscure proprietor, with the singular
legend: "Have ye faith like to him?" And those who knew only of the
material catastrophe looking around upon the scene of desolation it
commemorated, thought grimly that it must be faith indeed, and--were
wiser than they knew.

"You smiled, Don Preble," said the Lady Superior to Key a few weeks
later, "when I told to you that many caballeros thought it most
discreet to intrust their future brides to the maternal guardianship
and training of the Holy Church; yet, of a truth, I meant not YOU.  And
yet--eh! well, we shall see."

========================================
========================================

DRIFT FROM TWO SHORES


by

BRET HARTE




CONTENTS

  THE MAN ON THE BEACH
  TWO SAINTS OF THE FOOT-HILLS
  "JINNY"
  ROGER CATRON'S FRIEND
  "WHO WAS MY QUIET FRIEND?"
  A GHOST OF THE SIERRAS
  THE HOODLUM BAND
  THE MAN WHOSE YOKE WAS NOT EASY
  MY FRIEND, THE TRAMP
  THE MAN FROM SOLANO
  THE OFFICE SEEKER
  A SLEEPING-CAR EXPERIENCE
  MORNING ON THE AVENUE
  WITH THE ENTREES




DRIFT FROM TWO SHORES



THE MAN ON THE BEACH

I

He lived beside a river that emptied into a great ocean.  The narrow
strip of land that lay between him and the estuary was covered at high
tide by a shining film of water, at low tide with the cast-up offerings
of sea and shore.  Logs yet green, and saplings washed away from inland
banks, battered fragments of wrecks and orange crates of bamboo, broken
into tiny rafts yet odorous with their lost freight, lay in long
successive curves,--the fringes and overlappings of the sea.  At high
noon the shadow of a seagull's wing, or a sudden flurry and gray squall
of sandpipers, themselves but shadows, was all that broke the
monotonous glare of the level sands.

He had lived there alone for a twelvemonth.  Although but a few miles
from a thriving settlement, during that time his retirement had never
been intruded upon, his seclusion remained unbroken.  In any other
community he might have been the subject of rumor or criticism, but the
miners at Camp Rogue and the traders at Trinidad Head, themselves
individual and eccentric, were profoundly indifferent to all other
forms of eccentricity or heterodoxy that did not come in contact with
their own.  And certainly there was no form of eccentricity less
aggressive than that of a hermit, had they chosen to give him that
appellation.  But they did not even do that, probably from lack of
interest or perception.  To the various traders who supplied his small
wants he was known as "Kernel," "Judge," and "Boss."  To the general
public "The Man on the Beach" was considered a sufficiently
distinguishing title.  His name, his occupation, rank, or antecedents,
nobody cared to inquire.  Whether this arose from a fear of reciprocal
inquiry and interest, or from the profound indifference before referred
to, I cannot say.

He did not look like a hermit.  A man yet young, erect, well-dressed,
clean-shaven, with a low voice, and a smile half melancholy, half
cynical, was scarcely the conventional idea of a solitary.  His
dwelling, a rude improvement on a fisherman's cabin, had all the severe
exterior simplicity of frontier architecture, but within it was
comfortable and wholesome.  Three rooms--a kitchen, a living room, and
a bedroom--were all it contained.

He had lived there long enough to see the dull monotony of one season
lapse into the dull monotony of the other.  The bleak northwest
trade-winds had brought him mornings of staring sunlight and nights of
fog and silence.  The warmer southwest trades had brought him clouds,
rain, and the transient glories of quick grasses and odorous beach
blossoms.  But summer or winter, wet or dry season, on one side rose
always the sharply defined hills with their changeless background of
evergreens; on the other side stretched always the illimitable ocean as
sharply defined against the horizon, and as unchanging in its hue.  The
onset of spring and autumn tides, some changes among his feathered
neighbors, the footprints of certain wild animals along the river's
bank, and the hanging out of party-colored signals from the wooded
hillside far inland, helped him to record the slow months.  On summer
afternoons, when the sun sank behind a bank of fog that, moving
solemnly shoreward, at last encompassed him and blotted out sea and
sky, his isolation was complete.  The damp gray sea that flowed above
and around and about him always seemed to shut out an intangible world
beyond, and to be the only real presence.  The booming of breakers
scarce a dozen rods from his dwelling was but a vague and
unintelligible sound, or the echo of something past forever.  Every
morning when the sun tore away the misty curtain he awoke, dazed and
bewildered, as upon a new world.  The first sense of oppression over,
he came to love at last this subtle spirit of oblivion; and at night,
when its cloudy wings were folded over his cabin, he would sit alone
with a sense of security he had never felt before.  On such occasions
he was apt to leave his door open, and listen as for footsteps; for
what might not come to him out of this vague, nebulous world beyond?
Perhaps even SHE,--for this strange solitary was not insane nor
visionary.  He was never in spirit alone.  For night and day, sleeping
or waking, pacing the beach or crouching over his driftwood fire, a
woman's face was always before him,--the face for whose sake and for
cause of whom he sat there alone.  He saw it in the morning sunlight;
it was her white hands that were lifted from the crested breakers; it
was the rustling of her skirt when the sea wind swept through the beach
grasses; it was the loving whisper of her low voice when the long waves
sank and died among the sedge and rushes.  She was as omnipresent as
sea and sky and level sand.  Hence when the fog wiped them away, she
seemed to draw closer to him in the darkness. On one or two more
gracious nights in midsummer, when the influence of the fervid noonday
sun was still felt on the heated sands, the warm breath of the fog
touched his cheek as if it had been hers, and the tears started to his
eyes.

Before the fogs came--for he arrived there in winter--he had found
surcease and rest in the steady glow of a lighthouse upon the little
promontory a league below his habitation.  Even on the darkest nights,
and in the tumults of storm, it spoke to him of a patience that was
enduring and a steadfastness that was immutable. Later on he found a
certain dumb companionship in an uprooted tree, which, floating down
the river, had stranded hopelessly upon his beach, but in the evening
had again drifted away.  Rowing across the estuary a day or two
afterward, he recognized the tree again from a "blaze" of the settler's
axe still upon its trunk.  He was not surprised a week later to find
the same tree in the sands before his dwelling, or that the next
morning it should be again launched on its purposeless wanderings.  And
so, impelled by wind or tide, but always haunting his seclusion, he
would meet it voyaging up the river at the flood, or see it tossing
among the breakers on the bar, but always with the confidence of its
returning sooner or later to an anchorage beside him.  After the third
month of his self-imposed exile, he was forced into a more human
companionship, that was brief but regular.  He was obliged to have
menial assistance.  While he might have eaten his bread "in sorrow"
carelessly and mechanically, if it had been prepared for him, the
occupation of cooking his own food brought the vulgarity and
materialness of existence so near to his morbid sensitiveness that he
could not eat the meal he had himself prepared.  He did not yet wish to
die, and when starvation or society seemed to be the only alternative,
he chose the latter.  An Indian woman, so hideous as to scarcely
suggest humanity, at stated times performed for him these offices.
When she did not come, which was not infrequent, he did not eat.

Such was the mental and physical condition of the Man on the Beach on
the 1st of January, 1869.


It was a still, bright day, following a week of rain and wind.  Low
down the horizon still lingered a few white flecks--the flying
squadrons of the storm--as vague as distant sails.  Southward the
harbor bar whitened occasionally but lazily; even the turbulent Pacific
swell stretched its length wearily upon the shore.  And toiling from
the settlement over the low sand dunes, a carriage at last halted half
a mile from the solitary's dwelling.

"I reckon ye'll hev to git out here," said the driver, pulling up to
breathe his panting horses.  "Ye can't git any nigher."

There was a groan of execration from the interior of the vehicle, a
hysterical little shriek, and one or two shrill expressions of feminine
disapprobation, but the driver moved not.  At last a masculine head
expostulated from the window: "Look here; you agreed to take us to the
house.  Why, it's a mile away at least!"

"Thar, or tharabouts, I reckon," said the driver, coolly crossing his
legs on the box.

"It's no use talking; I can never walk through this sand and horrid
glare," said a female voice quickly and imperatively.  Then,
apprehensively, "Well, of all the places!"

"Well, I never!"

"This DOES exceed everything."

"It's really TOO idiotic for anything."

It was noticeable that while the voices betrayed the difference of age
and sex, they bore a singular resemblance to each other, and a certain
querulousness of pitch that was dominant.

"I reckon I've gone about as fur as I allow to go with them hosses,"
continued the driver suggestively, "and as time's vallyble, ye'd better
unload."

"The wretch does not mean to leave us here alone?" said a female voice
in shrill indignation.  "You'll wait for us, driver?" said a masculine
voice, confidently.

"How long?" asked the driver.

There was a hurried consultation within.  The words "Might send us
packing!" "May take all night to get him to listen to reason," "Bother!
whole thing over in ten minutes," came from the window. The driver
meanwhile had settled himself back in his seat, and whistled in patient
contempt of a fashionable fare that didn't know its own mind nor
destination.  Finally, the masculine head was thrust out, and, with a
certain potential air of judicially ending a difficulty, said:--

"You're to follow us slowly, and put up your horses in the stable or
barn until we want you."

An ironical laugh burst from the driver.  "Oh, yes--in the stable or
barn--in course.  But, my eyes sorter failin' me, mebbee, now, some ev
you younger folks will kindly pint out the stable or barn of the
Kernel's.  Woa!--will ye?--woa!  Give me a chance to pick out that
there barn or stable to put ye in!"  This in arch confidence to the
horses, who had not moved.

Here the previous speaker, rotund, dignified, and elderly, alighted
indignantly, closely followed by the rest of the party, two ladies and
a gentleman.  One of the ladies was past the age, but not the fashion,
of youth, and her Parisian dress clung over her wasted figure and
well-bred bones artistically if not gracefully; the younger lady,
evidently her daughter, was crisp and pretty, and carried off the
aquiline nose and aristocratic emaciation of her mother with a certain
piquancy and a dash that was charming.  The gentleman was young, thin,
with the family characteristics, but otherwise indistinctive.

With one accord they all faced directly toward the spot indicated by
the driver's whip.  Nothing but the bare, bleak, rectangular outlines
of the cabin of the Man on the Beach met their eyes.  All else was a
desolate expanse, unrelieved by any structure higher than the tussocks
of scant beach grass that clothed it.  They were so utterly helpless
that the driver's derisive laughter gave way at last to good humor and
suggestion.  "Look yer," he said finally, "I don't know ez it's your
fault you don't know this kentry ez well ez you do Yurup; so I'll drag
this yer team over to Robinson's on the river, give the horses a bite,
and then meander down this yer ridge, and wait for ye.  Ye'll see me
from the Kernel's."  And without waiting for a reply, he swung his
horses' heads toward the river, and rolled away.

The same querulous protest that had come from the windows arose from
the group, but vainly.  Then followed accusations and recrimination.
"It's YOUR fault; you might have written, and had him meet us at the
settlement."  "You wanted to take him by surprise!"  "I didn't.  You
know if I'd written that we were coming, he'd have taken good care to
run away from us."  "Yes, to some more inaccessible place."  "There can
be none worse than this," etc., etc.  But it was so clearly evident
that nothing was to be done but to go forward, that even in the midst
of their wrangling they straggled on in Indian file toward the distant
cabin, sinking ankle-deep in the yielding sand, punctuating their
verbal altercation with sighs, and only abating it at a scream from the
elder lady.

"Where's Maria?"

"Gone on ahead!" grunted the younger gentleman, in a bass voice, so
incongruously large for him that it seemed to have been a
ventriloquistic contribution by somebody else.

It was too true.  Maria, after adding her pungency to the general
conversation, had darted on ahead.  But alas! that swift Camilla, after
scouring the plain some two hundred feet with her demitrain, came to
grief on an unbending tussock and sat down, panting but savage.  As
they plodded wearily toward her, she bit her red lips, smacked them on
her cruel little white teeth like a festive and sprightly ghoul, and
lisped:--

"You DO look so like guys!  For all the world like those English
shopkeepers we met on the Righi, doing the three-guinea excursion in
their Sunday clothes!"

Certainly the spectacle of these exotically plumed bipeds, whose fine
feathers were already bedrabbled by sand and growing limp in the sea
breeze, was somewhat dissonant with the rudeness of sea and sky and
shore.  A few gulls screamed at them; a loon, startled from the lagoon,
arose shrieking and protesting, with painfully extended legs, in
obvious burlesque of the younger gentleman.  The elder lady felt the
justice of her gentle daughter's criticism, and retaliated with simple
directness:--

"Your skirt is ruined, your hair is coming down, your hat is half off
your head, and your shoes--in Heaven's name, Maria! what HAVE you done
with your shoes?"

Maria had exhibited a slim stockinged foot from under her skirt. It was
scarcely three fingers broad, with an arch as patrician as her nose.
"Somewhere between here and the carriage," she answered; "Dick can run
back and find it, while he is looking for your brooch, mamma.  Dick's
so obliging."

The robust voice of Dick thundered, but the wasted figure of Dick
feebly ploughed its way back, and returned with the missing buskin.

"I may as well carry them in my hand like the market girls at Saumur,
for we have got to wade soon," said Miss Maria, sinking her own terrors
in the delightful contemplation of the horror in her parent's face, as
she pointed to a shining film of water slowly deepening in a narrow
swale in the sands between them and the cabin.

"It's the tide," said the elder gentleman.  "If we intend to go on we
must hasten; permit me, my dear madam," and before she could reply he
had lifted the astounded matron in his arms, and made gallantly for the
ford.  The gentle Maria cast an ominous eye on her brother, who, with
manifest reluctance, performed for her the same office.  But that acute
young lady kept her eyes upon the preceding figure of the elder
gentleman, and seeing him suddenly and mysteriously disappear to his
armpits, unhesitatingly threw herself from her brother's protecting
arms,--an action which instantly precipitated him into the water,--and
paddled hastily to the opposite bank, where she eventually assisted in
pulling the elderly gentleman out of the hollow into which he had
fallen, and in rescuing her mother, who floated helplessly on the
surface, upheld by her skirts, like a gigantic and variegated
water-lily. Dick followed with a single gaiter.  In another minute they
were safe on the opposite bank.

The elder lady gave way to tears; Maria laughed hysterically; Dick
mingled a bass oath with the now audible surf; the elder gentleman,
whose florid face the salt water had bleached, and whose dignity seemed
to have been washed away, accounted for both by saying he thought it
was a quicksand.

"It might have been," said a quiet voice behind them; "you should have
followed the sand dunes half a mile further to the estuary."

They turned instantly at the voice.  It was that of the Man on the
Beach.  They all rose to their feet and uttered together, save one, the
single exclamation, "James!"  The elder gentleman said "Mr. North,"
and, with a slight resumption of his former dignity, buttoned his coat
over his damp shirt front.

There was a silence, in which the Man on the Beach looked gravely down
upon them.  If they had intended to impress him by any suggestion of a
gay, brilliant, and sensuous world beyond in their own persons, they
had failed, and they knew it.  Keenly alive as they had always been to
external prepossession, they felt that they looked forlorn and
ludicrous, and that the situation lay in his hands.  The elderly lady
again burst into tears of genuine distress, Maria colored over her
cheek-bones, and Dick stared at the ground in sullen disquiet.

"You had better get up," said the Man on the Beach, after a moment's
thought, "and come up to the cabin.  I cannot offer you a change of
garments, but you can dry them by the fire."

They all rose together, and again said in chorus, "James!" but this
time with an evident effort to recall some speech or action previously
resolved upon and committed to memory.  The elder lady got so far as to
clasp her hands and add, "You have not forgotten us--James, oh,
James!"; the younger gentleman to attempt a brusque "Why, Jim, old
boy," that ended in querulous incoherence; the young lady to cast a
half-searching, half-coquettish look at him; and the old gentleman to
begin, "Our desire, Mr. North"--but the effort was futile.  Mr. James
North, standing before them with folded arms, looked from the one to
the other.

"I have not thought much of you for a twelvemonth," he said, quietly,
"but I have not forgotten you.  Come!"

He led the way a few steps in advance, they following silently.  In
this brief interview they felt he had resumed the old dominance and
independence, against which they had rebelled; more than that, in this
half failure of their first concerted action they had changed their
querulous bickerings to a sullen distrust of each other, and walked
moodily apart as they followed James North into his house. A fire
blazed brightly on the hearth; a few extra seats were quickly
extemporized from boxes and chests, and the elder lady, with the skirt
of her dress folded over her knees,--looking not unlike an exceedingly
overdressed jointed doll,--dried her flounces and her tears together.
Miss Maria took in the scant appointments of the house in one single
glance, and then fixed her eyes upon James North, who, the least
concerned of the party, stood before them, grave and patiently
expectant.

"Well," began the elder lady in a high key, "after all this worry and
trouble you have given us, James, haven't you anything to say? Do you
know--have you the least idea what you are doing? what egregious folly
you are committing? what everybody is saying?  Eh? Heavens and
earth!--do you know who I am?"

"You are my father's brother's widow, Aunt Mary," returned James,
quietly.  "If I am committing any folly it only concerns myself; if I
cared for what people said I should not be here; if I loved society
enough to appreciate its good report I should stay with it."

"But they say you have run away from society to pine alone for a
worthless creature--a woman who has used you, as she has used and
thrown away others--a--"

"A woman," chimed in Dick, who had thrown himself on James's bed while
his patent leathers were drying, "a woman that all the fellers know
never intended"--here, however, he met James North's eye, and muttering
something about "whole thing being too idiotic to talk about," relapsed
into silence.

"You know," continued Mrs. North, "that while we and all our set shut
our eyes to your very obvious relations with that woman, and while I
myself often spoke of it to others as a simple flirtation, and averted
a scandal for your sake, and when the climax was reached, and she
herself gave you an opportunity to sever your relations, and nobody
need have been wiser--and she'd have had all the blame--and it's only
what she's accustomed to--you--you! you, James North!--you must
nonsensically go, and, by this extravagant piece of idiocy and
sentimental tomfoolery, let everybody see how serious the whole affair
was, and how deep it hurt you! and here in this awful place,
alone--where you're half drowned to get to it and are willing to be
wholly drowned to get away!  Oh, don't talk to me!  I won't hear
it--it's just too idiotic for anything!"

The subject of this outburst neither spoke nor moved a single muscle.

"Your aunt, Mr. North, speaks excitedly," said the elder gentleman;
"yet I think she does not overestimate the unfortunate position in
which your odd fancy places you.  I know nothing of the reasons that
have impelled you to this step; I only know that the popular opinion is
that the cause is utterly inadequate.  You are still young, with a
future before you.  I need not say how your present conduct may imperil
that.  If you expected to achieve any good--even to your own
satisfaction--but this conduct--"

"Yes--if there was anything to be gained by it!" broke in Mrs. North.

"If you ever thought she'd come back!--but that kind of woman don't.
They must have change.  Why"--began Dick suddenly, and as suddenly
lying down again.

"Is this all you have come to say?" asked James North, after a moment's
patient silence, looking from one to the other.

"All?" screamed Mrs. North; "is it not enough?"

"Not to change my mind nor my residence at present," replied North,
coolly.

"Do you mean to continue this folly all your life?"

"And have a coroner's inquest, and advertisements and all the facts in
the papers?"

"And have HER read the melancholy details, and know that you were
faithful and she was not?"

This last shot was from the gentle Maria, who bit her lips as it
glanced from the immovable man.

"I believe there is nothing more to say," continued North, quietly. "I
am willing to believe your intentions are as worthy as your zeal.  Let
us say no more," he added, with grave weariness; "the tide is rising,
and your coachman is signaling you from the bank."

There was no mistaking the unshaken positiveness of the man, which was
all the more noticeable from its gentle but utter indifference to the
wishes of the party.  He turned his back upon them as they gathered
hurriedly around the elder gentleman, while the words, "He cannot be in
his right mind," "It's your duty to do it," "It's sheer insanity,"
"Look at his eye!" all fell unconsciously upon his ear.

"One word more, Mr. North," said the elder gentleman, a little
portentously, to conceal an evident embarrassment.  "It may be that
your conduct might suggest to minds more practical than your own the
existence of some aberration of the intellect--some temporary
mania--that might force your best friends into a quasi-legal attitude
of--"

"Declaring me insane," interrupted James North, with the slight
impatience of a man more anxious to end a prolix interview than to
combat an argument.  "I think differently.  As my aunt's lawyer, you
know that within the last year I have deeded most of my property to her
and her family.  I cannot believe that so shrewd an adviser as Mr.
Edmund Carter would ever permit proceedings that would invalidate that
conveyance."

Maria burst into a laugh of such wicked gratification that James North,
for the first time, raised his eyes with something of interest to her
face.  She colored under them, but returned his glance with another
like a bayonet flash.  The party slowly moved toward the door, James
North following.

"Then this is your final answer?" asked Mrs. North, stopping
imperiously on the threshold.

"I beg your pardon?" queried North, half abstractedly.

"Your final answer?"

"Oh, certainly."

Mrs. North flounced away a dozen rods in rage.  This was unfortunate
for North.  It gave them the final attack in detail. Dick began: "Come
along!  You know you can advertise for her with a personal down there
and the old woman wouldn't object as long as you were careful and put
in an appearance now and then!"

As Dick limped away, Mr. Carter thought, in confidence, that the whole
matter--even to suit Mr. North's sensitive nature--might be settled
there.  "SHE evidently expects you to return.  My opinion is that she
never left San Francisco.  You can't tell anything about these women."

With this last sentence on his indifferent ear, James North seemed to
be left free.  Maria had rejoined her mother; but as they crossed the
ford, and an intervening sand-hill hid the others from sight, that
piquant young lady suddenly appeared on the hill and stood before him.

"And you're not coming back?" she said directly.

"No."

"Never?"

"I cannot say."

"Tell me! what is there about some women to make men love them so?"

"Love," replied North, quietly.

"No, it cannot be--it is not THAT!"

North looked over the hill and round the hill, and looked bored.

"Oh, I'm going now.  But one moment, Jem!  I didn't want to come. They
dragged me here.  Good-by."

She raised a burning face and eyes to his.  He leaned forward and
imprinted the perfunctory cousinly kiss of the period upon her cheek.

"Not that way," she said angrily, clutching his wrists with her long,
thin fingers; "you shan't kiss me in that way, James North."

With the faintest, ghost-like passing of a twinkle in the corners of
his sad eyes, he touched his lips to hers.  With the contact, she
caught him round the neck, pressed her burning lips and face to his
forehead, his cheeks, the very curves of his chin and throat, and--with
a laugh was gone.


II

Had the kinsfolk of James North any hope that their visit might revive
some lingering desire he still combated to enter once more the world
they represented, that hope would have soon died. Whatever effect this
episode had upon the solitary,--and he had become so self-indulgent of
his sorrow, and so careless of all that came between him and it, as to
meet opposition with profound indifference,--the only appreciable
result was a greater attraction for the solitude that protected him,
and he grew even to love the bleak shore and barren sands that had
proved so inhospitable to others.  There was a new meaning to the roar
of the surges, an honest, loyal sturdiness in the unchanging
persistency of the uncouth and blustering trade-winds, and a mute
fidelity in the shining sands, treacherous to all but him.  With such
bandogs to lie in wait for trespassers, should he not be grateful?

If no bitterness was awakened by the repeated avowal of the
unfaithfulness of the woman he loved, it was because he had always made
the observation and experience of others give way to the dominance of
his own insight.  No array of contradictory facts ever shook his belief
or unbelief; like all egotists, he accepted them as truths controlled
by a larger truth of which he alone was cognizant.  His simplicity,
which was but another form of his egotism, was so complete as to baffle
ordinary malicious cunning, and so he was spared the experience and
knowledge that come to a lower nature, and help debase it.

Exercise and the stimulus of the few wants that sent him hunting or
fishing kept up his physical health.  Never a lover of rude freedom or
outdoor life his sedentary predilections and nice tastes kept him from
lapsing into barbarian excess; never a sportsman he followed the chase
with no feverish exaltation.  Even dumb creatures found out his secret,
and at times, stalking moodily over the upland, the brown deer and elk
would cross his path without fear or molestation, or, idly lounging in
his canoe within the river bar, flocks of wild fowl would settle within
stroke of his listless oar.  And so the second winter of his hermitage
drew near its close, and with it came a storm that passed into local
history, and is still remembered.  It uprooted giant trees along the
river, and with them the tiny rootlets of the life he was idly
fostering.

The morning had been fitfully turbulent, the wind veering several
points south and west, with suspicions lulls, unlike the steady onset
of the regular southwest trades.  High overhead the long manes of
racing cirro stratus streamed with flying gulls and hurrying
water-fowl; plover piped incessantly, and a flock of timorous
sand-pipers sought the low ridge of his cabin, while a wrecking crew of
curlew hastily manned the uprooted tree that tossed wearily beyond the
bar.  By noon the flying clouds huddled together in masses, and then
were suddenly exploded in one vast opaque sheet over the heavens.  The
sea became gray, and suddenly wrinkled and old.  There was a dumb,
half-articulate cry in the air,--rather a confusion of many sounds, as
of the booming of distant guns, the clangor of a bell, the trampling of
many waves, the creaking of timbers and soughing of leaves, that sank
and fell ere you could yet distinguish them.  And then it came on to
blow. For two hours it blew strongly.  At the time the sun should have
set the wind had increased; in fifteen minutes darkness shut down, even
the white sands lost their outlines, and sea and shore and sky lay in
the grip of a relentless and aggressive power.

Within his cabin, by the leaping light of his gusty fire, North sat
alone.  His first curiosity passed, the turmoil without no longer
carried his thought beyond its one converging centre.  SHE had come to
him on the wings of the storm, even as she had been borne to him on the
summer fog-cloud.  Now and then the wind shook the cabin, but he heeded
it not.  He had no fears for its safety; it presented its low gable to
the full fury of the wind that year by year had piled, and even now was
piling, protecting buttresses of sand against it.  With each succeeding
gust it seemed to nestle more closely to its foundations, in the whirl
of flying sand that rattled against its roof and windows.  It was
nearly midnight when a sudden thought brought him to his feet.  What if
SHE were exposed to the fury of such a night as this?  What could he do
to help her? Perhaps even now, as he sat there idle, she--Hark! was not
that a gun--No?  Yes, surely!

He hurriedly unbolted the door, but the strength of the wind and the
impact of drifted sand resisted his efforts.  With a new and feverish
strength possessing him he forced it open wide enough to permit his
egress when the wind caught him as a feather, rolled him over and over,
and then, grappling him again, held him down hard and fast against the
drift.  Unharmed, but unable to move, he lay there, hearing the
multitudinous roar of the storm, but unable to distinguish one familiar
sound in the savage medley.  At last he managed to crawl flat on his
face to the cabin, and refastening the door, threw himself upon his bed.

He was awakened from a fitful dream of his Cousin Maria.  She with a
supernatural strength seemed to be holding the door against some
unseen, unknown power that moaned and strove without, and threw itself
in despairing force against the cabin.  He could see the lithe
undulations of her form as she alternately yielded to its power, and
again drew the door against it, coiling herself around the log-hewn
doorpost with a hideous, snake-like suggestion.  And then a struggle
and a heavy blow, which shook the very foundations of the structure,
awoke him.  He leaped to his feet, and into an inch of water!  By the
flickering firelight he could see it oozing and dripping from the
crevices of the logs and broadening into a pool by the chimney.  A
scrap of paper torn from an envelope was floating idly on its current.
Was it the overflow of the backed-up waters of the river?  He was not
left long in doubt.  Another blow upon the gable of the house, and a
torrent of spray leaped down the chimney, scattered the embers far and
wide, and left him in utter darkness.  Some of the spray clung to his
lips.  It was salt.  The great ocean had beaten down the river bar and
was upon him!

Was there aught to fly to?  No!  The cabin stood upon the highest point
of the sand spit, and the low swale on one side crossed by his late
visitors was a seething mass of breakers, while the estuary behind him
was now the ocean itself.  There was nothing to do but to wait.

The very helplessness of his situation was, to a man of his peculiar
temperament, an element of patient strength.  The instinct of
self-preservation was still strong in him, but he had no fear of death,
nor, indeed, any presentiment of it; yet if it came, it was an easy
solution of the problem that had been troubling him, and it wiped off
the slate!  He thought of the sarcastic prediction of his cousin, and
death in the form that threatened him was the obliteration of his home
and even the ground upon which it stood. There would be nothing to
record, no stain could come upon the living.  The instinct that kept
him true to HER would tell her how he died; if it did not, it was
equally well.  And with this simple fatalism his only belief, this
strange man groped his way to his bed, lay down, and in a few moments
was asleep.  The storm still roared without.  Once again the surges
leaped against the cabin, but it was evident that the wind was abating
with the tide.

When he awoke it was high noon, and the sun was shining brightly. For
some time he lay in a delicious languor, doubting if he was alive or
dead, but feeling through every nerve and fibre an exquisite sense of
peace--a rest he had not known since his boyhood--a relief he scarcely
knew from what.  He felt that he was smiling, and yet his pillow was
wet with the tears that glittered still on his lashes.  The sand
blocking up his doorway, he leaped lightly from his window.  A few
clouds were still sailing slowly in the heavens, the trailing plumes of
a great benediction that lay on sea and shore.  He scarcely recognized
the familiar landscape; a new bar had been formed in the river, and a
narrow causeway of sand that crossed the lagoon and marshes to the
river bank and the upland trail seemed to bring him nearer to humanity
again.  He was conscious of a fresh, childlike delight in all this, and
when, a moment later, he saw the old uprooted tree, now apparently
forever moored and imbedded in the sand beside his cabin, he ran to it
with a sense of joy.

Its trailing roots were festooned with clinging sea-weed and the long,
snaky, undulating stems of the sea-turnip; and fixed between two
crossing roots was a bamboo orange crate, almost intact.  As he walked
toward it he heard a strange cry, unlike anything the barren sands had
borne before.  Thinking it might be some strange sea bird caught in the
meshes of the sea-weed, he ran to the crate and looked within.  It was
half filled with sea-moss and feathery algae.  The cry was repeated.
He brushed aside the weeds with his hands.  It was not a wounded sea
bird, but a living human child!

As he lifted it from its damp enwrappings he saw that it was an infant
eight or nine months old.  How and when it had been brought there, or
what force had guided that elfish cradle to his very door, he could not
determine; but it must have been left early, for it was quite warm, and
its clothing almost dried by the blazing morning sun.  To wrap his coat
about it, to run to his cabin with it, to start out again with the
appalling conviction that nothing could be done for it there, occupied
some moments.  His nearest neighbor was Trinidad Joe, a "logger," three
miles up the river. He remembered to have heard vaguely that he was a
man of family. To half strangle the child with a few drops from his
whisky flask, to extricate his canoe from the marsh, and strike out
into the river with his waif, was at least to do something.  In half an
hour he had reached the straggling cabin and sheds of Trinidad Joe, and
from the few scanty flowers that mingled with the brushwood fence, and
a surplus of linen fluttering on the line, he knew that his surmise as
to Trinidad Joe's domestic establishment was correct.

The door at which he knocked opened upon a neat, plainly-furnished
room, and the figure of a buxom woman of twenty-five.  With an
awkwardness new to him, North stammered out the circumstances of his
finding the infant, and the object of his visit.  Before he had
finished, the woman, by some feminine trick, had taken the child from
his hands ere he knew it; and when he paused, out of breath, burst into
a fit of laughter.  North tried to laugh too, but failed.

When the woman had wiped the tears from a pair of very frank blue eyes,
and hidden two rows of very strong white teeth again, she said:--

"Look yar!  You're that looney sort a' chap that lives alone over on
the spit yonder, ain't ye?"

North hastened to admit all that the statement might imply.

"And so ye've had a baby left ye to keep you company?  Lordy!" Here she
looked as if dangerously near a relapse, and then added, as if in
explanation of her conduct,--

"When I saw ye paddlin' down here,--you thet ez shy as elk in
summer,--I sez, 'He's sick.'  But a baby,--Oh, Lordy!"

For a moment North almost hated her.  A woman who, in this pathetic,
perhaps almost tragic, picture saw only a ludicrous image, and that
image himself, was of another race than that he had ever mingled with.
Profoundly indifferent as he had always been to the criticism of his
equals in station, the mischievous laughter of this illiterate woman
jarred upon him worse than his cousin's sarcasm.  It was with a little
dignity that he pointed out the fact that at present the child needed
nourishment.  "It's very young," he added.  "I'm afraid it wants its
natural nourishment."

"Whar is it to get it?" asked the woman.

James North hesitated, and looked around.  There should be a baby
somewhere! there MUST be a baby somewhere!  "I thought that you," he
stammered, conscious of an awkward coloring,--"I--that is--I--" He
stopped short, for she was already cramming her apron into her mouth,
too late, however, to stop the laugh that overflowed it. When she found
her breath again, she said,--

"Look yar!  I don't wonder they said you was looney!  I'm Trinidad
Joe's onmarried darter, and the only woman in this house.  Any fool
could have told you that.  Now, ef you can rig us up a baby out o' them
facts, I'd like to see it done."

Inwardly furious but outwardly polite, James North begged her pardon,
deplored his ignorance, and, with a courtly bow, made a movement to
take the child.  But the woman as quickly drew it away.

"Not much," she said, hastily.  "What! trust that poor critter to you?
No, sir!  Thar's more ways of feeding a baby, young man, than you knows
on, with all your 'nat'ral nourishment.'  But it looks kinder logy and
stupid."

North freezingly admitted that he had given the infant whisky as a
stimulant.

"You did?  Come, now, that ain't so looney after all.  Well, I'll take
the baby, and when Dad comes home we'll see what can be done."

North hesitated.  His dislike of the woman was intense, and yet he knew
no one else and the baby needed instant care.  Besides, he began to see
the ludicrousness of his making a first call on his neighbors with a
foundling to dispose of.  She saw his hesitation, and said,--

"Ye don't know me, in course.  Well, I'm Bessy Robinson, Trinidad Joe
Robinson's daughter.  I reckon Dad will give me a character if you want
references, or any of the boys on the river."

"I'm only thinking of the trouble I'm giving you, Miss Robinson, I
assure you.  Any expense you may incur--"

"Young man," said Bessy Robinson, turning sharply on her heel, and
facing him with her black brows a little contracted, "if it comes to
expenses, I reckon I'll pay you for that baby, or not take it at all.
But I don't know you well enough to quarrel with you on sight.  So
leave the child to me, and, if you choose, paddle down here to-morrow,
after sun up--the ride will do you good--and see it, and Dad thrown in.
Good by!" and with one powerful but well-shaped arm thrown around the
child, and the other crooked at the dimpled elbow a little
aggressively, she swept by James North and entered a bedroom, closing
the door behind her.

When Mr. James North reached his cabin it was dark.  As he rebuilt his
fire, and tried to rearrange the scattered and disordered furniture,
and remove the debris of last night's storm, he was conscious for the
first time of feeling lonely.  He did not miss the child.  Beyond the
instincts of humanity and duty he had really no interest in its welfare
or future.  He was rather glad to get rid of it, he would have
preferred to some one else, and yet SHE looked as if she were
competent.  And then came the reflection that since the morning he had
not once thought of the woman he loved. The like had never occurred in
his twelvemonth solitude.  So he set to work, thinking of her and of
his sorrows, until the word "Looney," in connection with his suffering,
flashed across his memory.  "Looney!"  It was not a nice word.  It
suggested something less than insanity; something that might happen to
a common, unintellectual sort of person.  He remembered the loon, an
ungainly feathered neighbor, that was popularly supposed to have lent
its name to the adjective.  Could it be possible that people looked
upon him as one too hopelessly and uninterestingly afflicted for
sympathy or companionship, too unimportant and common for even
ridicule; or was this but the coarse interpretation of that vulgar girl?

Nevertheless, the next morning "after sun up" James North was at
Trinidad Joe's cabin.  That worthy proprietor himself--a long, lank
man, with even more than the ordinary rural Western characteristics of
ill health, ill feeding, and melancholy--met him on the bank, clothed
in a manner and costume that was a singular combination of the
frontiersman and the sailor.  When North had again related the story of
his finding the child, Trinidad Joe pondered.

"It mout hev been stowed away in one of them crates for safe-keeping,"
he said, musingly, "and washed off the deck o' one o' them Tahiti brigs
goin' down fer oranges.  Least-ways, it never got thar from these
parts."

"But it's a miracle its life was saved at all.  It must have been some
hours in the water."

"Them brigs lays their course well inshore, and it was just mebbe a
toss up if the vessel clawed off the reef at all!  And ez to the child
keepin' up, why, dog my skin! that's just the contrariness o' things,"
continued Joe, in sententious cynicism.  "Ef an able seaman had fallen
from the yard-arm that night he'd been sunk in sight o' the ship, and
thet baby ez can't swim a stroke sails ashore, sound asleep, with the
waves for a baby-jumper."

North, who was half relieved, yet half awkwardly disappointed at not
seeing Bessy, ventured to ask how the child was doing.

"She'll do all right now," said a frank voice above, and, looking up,
North discerned the round arms, blue eyes, and white teeth of the
daughter at the window.  "She's all hunky, and has an appetite--ef she
hezn't got her 'nat'ral nourishment.'  Come, Dad! heave ahead, and tell
the stranger what you and me allow we'll do, and don't stand there
swappin' lies with him."

"Weel," said Trinidad Joe, dejectedly, "Bess allows she can rar that
baby and do justice to it.  And I don't say--though I'm her
father--that she can't.  But when Bess wants anything she wants it all,
clean down; no half-ways nor leavin's for her."

"That's me! go on, Dad--you're chippin' in the same notch every time,"
said Miss Robinson, with cheerful directness.

"Well, we agree to put the job up this way.  We'll take the child and
you'll give us a paper or writin' makin' over all your right and title.
How's that?"

Without knowing exactly why he did, Mr. North objected decidedly.

"Do you think we won't take good care of it?" asked Miss Bessy, sharply.

"That is not the question," said North, a little hotly.  "In the first
place, the child is not mine to give.  It has fallen into my hands as a
trust,--the first hands that received it from its parents.  I do not
think it right to allow any other hands to come between theirs and
mine."

Miss Bessy left the window.  In another moment she appeared from the
house, and, walking directly towards North, held out a somewhat
substantial hand.  "Good!" she said, as she gave his fingers an honest
squeeze.  "You ain't so looney after all.  Dad, he's right! He shan't
gin it up, but we'll go halves in it, he and me.  He'll be father and
I'll be mother 'til death do us part, or the reg'lar family turns up.
Well--what do you say?"

More pleased than he dared confess to himself with the praise of this
common girl, Mr. James North assented.  Then would he see the baby?  He
would, and Trinidad Joe having already seen the baby, and talked of the
baby, and felt the baby, and indeed had the baby offered to him in
every way during the past night, concluded to give some of his valuable
time to logging, and left them together.

Mr. North was obliged to admit that the baby was thriving.  He moreover
listened with polite interest to the statement that the baby's eyes
were hazel, like his own; that it had five teeth; that she was, for a
girl of that probable age, a robust child; and yet Mr. North lingered.
Finally, with his hand on the door-lock, he turned to Bessy and said,--

"May I ask you an odd question, Miss Robinson?"

"Go on."

"Why did you think I was--'looney'?"

The frank Miss Robinson bent her head over the baby.

"Why?"

"Yes, why?"

"Because you WERE looney."

"Oh!"

"But--"

"Yes--"

"You'll get over it."

And under the shallow pretext of getting the baby's food, she retired
to the kitchen, where Mr. North had the supreme satisfaction of seeing
her, as he passed the window, sitting on a chair with her apron over
her head, shaking with laughter.

For the next two or three days he did not visit the Robinsons, but gave
himself up to past memories.  On the third day he had--it must be
confessed not without some effort--brought himself into that condition
of patient sorrow which had been his habit.  The episode of the storm
and the finding of the baby began to fade, as had faded the visit of
his relatives.  It had been a dull, wet day and he was sitting by his
fire, when there came a tap at his door. "Flora;" by which juvenescent
name his aged Indian handmaid was known, usually announced her presence
with an imitation of a curlew's cry: it could not be her.  He fancied
he heard the trailing of a woman's dress against the boards, and
started to his feet, deathly pale, with a name upon his lips.  But the
door was impatiently thrown open, and showed Bessy Robinson!  And the
baby!

With a feeling of relief he could not understand he offered her a seat.
She turned her frank eyes on him curiously.

"You look skeert!"

"I was startled.  You know I see nobody here!"

"Thet's so.  But look yar, do you ever use a doctor?"

Not clearly understanding her, he in turn asked, "Why?"

"Cause you must rise up and get one now--thet's why.  This yer baby of
ours is sick.  We don't use a doctor at our house, we don't beleeve in
'em, hain't no call for 'em--but this yer baby's parents mebbee did.
So rise up out o' that cheer and get one."

James North looked at Miss Robinson and rose, albeit a little in doubt,
and hesitating.

Miss Robinson saw it.  "I shouldn't hev troubled ye, nor ridden three
mile to do it, if ther hed been any one else to send.  But Dad's over
at Eureka, buying logs, and I'm alone.  Hello--wher yer goin'?"

North had seized his hat and opened the door.  "For a doctor," he
replied amazedly.

"Did ye kalkilate to walk six miles and back?"

"Certainly--I have no horse."

"But I have, and you'll find her tethered outside.  She ain't much to
look at, but when you strike the trail she'll go."

"But YOU--how will YOU return?"

"Well," said Miss Robinson, drawing her chair to the fire, taking off
her hat and shawl, and warming her knees by the blaze, "I didn't reckon
to return.  You'll find me here when you come back with the doctor.
Go!  Skedaddle quick!"

She did not have to repeat the command.  In another instant James North
was in Miss Bessy's seat--a man's dragoon saddle,--and pounding away
through the sand.  Two facts were in his mind: one was that he, the
"looney," was about to open communication with the wisdom and
contemporary criticism of the settlement, by going for a doctor to
administer to a sick and anonymous infant in his possession; the other
was that his solitary house was in the hands of a self-invited,
large-limbed, illiterate, but rather comely young woman.  These facts
he could not gallop away from, but to his credit be it recorded that he
fulfilled his mission zealously, if not coherently, to the doctor, who
during the rapid ride gathered the idea that North had rescued a young
married woman from drowning, who had since given birth to a child.

The few words that set the doctor right when he arrived at the cabin
might in any other community have required further explanation, but Dr.
Duchesne, an old army surgeon, was prepared for everything and
indifferent to all.  "The infant," he said, "was threatened with
inflammation of the lungs; at present there was no danger, but the
greatest care and caution must be exercised. Particularly exposure
should be avoided."  "That settles the whole matter, then," said Bessy
potentially.  Both gentlemen looked their surprise.  "It means," she
condescended to further explain, "that YOU must ride that filly home,
wait for the old man to come to-morrow, and then ride back here with
some of my duds, for thar's no 'day-days' nor picknicking for that baby
ontil she's better.  And I reckon to stay with her ontil she is."

"She certainly is unable to bear any exposure at present," said the
doctor, with an amused side glance at North's perplexed face. "Miss
Robinson is right.  I'll ride with you over the sands as far as the
trail."

"I'm afraid," said North, feeling it incumbent upon him to say
something, "that you'll hardly find it as comfortable here as--"

"I reckon not," she said simply, "but I didn't expect much."

North turned a little wearily away.  "Good night," she said suddenly,
extending her hand, with a gentler smile of lip and eye than he had
ever before noticed, "good night--take good care of Dad."

The doctor and North rode together some moments in silence.  North had
another fact presented to him, i. e. that he was going a-visiting, and
that he had virtually abandoned his former life; also that it would be
profanation to think of his sacred woe in the house of a stranger.

"I dare say," said the doctor, suddenly, "you are not familiar with the
type of woman Miss Bessy presents so perfectly.  Your life has been
spent among the conventional class."

North froze instantly at what seemed to be a probing of his secret.
Disregarding the last suggestion, he made answer simply and truthfully
that he had never met any Western girl like Bessy.

"That's your bad luck," said the doctor.  "You think her coarse and
illiterate?"

Mr. North had been so much struck with her kindness that really he had
not thought of it.

"That's not so," said the doctor, curtly; "although even if you told
her so she would not think any the less of you--nor of herself.  If she
spoke rustic Greek instead of bad English, and wore a cestus in place
of an ill-fitting corset, you'd swear she was a goddess.  There's your
trail.  Good night."


III

James North did not sleep well that night.  He had taken Miss Bessy's
bedroom, at her suggestion, there being but two, and "Dad never using
sheets and not bein' keerful in his habits."  It was neat, but that was
all.  The scant ornamentation was atrocious; two or three highly
colored prints, a shell work-box, a ghastly winter bouquet of skeleton
leaves and mosses, a star-fish, and two china vases hideous enough to
have been worshiped as Buddhist idols, exhibited the gentle recreation
of the fair occupant, and the possible future education of the child.
In the morning he was met by Joe, who received the message of his
daughter with his usual dejection, and suggested that North stay with
him until the child was better.  That event was still remote; North
found, on his return to his cabin, that the child had been worse; but
he did not know, until Miss Bessy dropped a casual remark, that she had
not closed her own eyes that night.  It was a week before he regained
his own quarters, but an active week--indeed, on the whole, a rather
pleasant week.  For there was a delicate flattery in being domineered
by a wholesome and handsome woman, and Mr. James North had by this time
made up his mind that she was both.  Once or twice he found himself
contemplating her splendid figure with a recollection of the doctor's
compliment, and later, emulating her own frankness, told her of it.

"And what did YOU say?" she asked.

"Oh, I laughed and said--nothing."

And so did she.

A month after this interchange of frankness, she asked him if he could
spend the next evening at her house.  "You see," she said, "there's to
be a dance down at the hall at Eureka, and I haven't kicked a fut since
last spring.  Hank Fisher's comin' up to take me over, and I'm goin' to
let the shanty slide for the night."

"But what's to become of the baby?" asked North, a little testily.

"Well," said Miss Robinson, facing him somewhat aggressively, "I reckon
it won't hurt ye to take care of it for a night.  Dad can't--and if he
could, he don't know how.  Liked to have pizened me after mar died.
No, young man, I don't propose to ask Hank Fisher to tote thet child
over to Eureka and back, and spile his fun."

"Then I suppose I must make way for Mr. Hank--Hank--Fisher?" said
North, with the least tinge of sarcasm in his speech.

"Of course.  You've got nothing else to do, you know."

North would have given worlds to have pleaded a previous engagement on
business of importance, but he knew that Bessy spoke truly.  He had
nothing to do.  "And Fisher has, I suppose?" he asked.

"Of course--to look after ME!"

A more unpleasant evening James North had not spent since the first day
of his solitude.  He almost began to hate the unconscious cause of his
absurd position, as he paced up and down the floor with it. "Was there
ever such egregious folly?" he began, but remembering he was quoting
Maria North's favorite resume of his own conduct, he stopped.  The
child cried, missing, no doubt, the full rounded curves and plump arm
of its nurse.  North danced it violently, with an inward accompaniment
that was not musical, and thought of the other dancers.  "Doubtless,"
he mused, "she has told this beau of hers that she has left the baby
with the 'looney' Man on the Beach. Perhaps I may be offered a
permanent engagement as a harmless simpleton accustomed to the care of
children.  Mothers may cry for me.  The doctor is at Eureka.  Of
course, he will be there to see his untranslated goddess, and condole
with her over the imbecility of the Man on the Beach."  Once he
carelessly asked Joe who the company were.

"Well," said Joe, mournfully, "thar's Widder Higsby and darter; the
four Stubbs gals; in course Polly Doble will be on hand with that
feller that's clerking over at the Head for Jones, and Jones's wife.
Then thar's French Pete, and Whisky Ben, and that chap that shot
Archer,--I disremember his name,--and the barber--what's that little
mulatto's name--that 'ar Kanaka?  I swow!" continued Joe, drearily,
"I'll be forgettin' my own next--and--"

"That will do," interrupted North, only half concealing his disgust as
he rose and carried the baby to the other room, beyond the reach of
names that might shock its ladylike ears.  The next morning he met the
from-dance-returning Bessy abstractedly, and soon took his leave, full
of a disloyal plan, conceived in the sleeplessness of her own
bedchamber.  He was satisfied that he owed a duty to its unknown
parents to remove the child from the degrading influences of the barber
Kanaka, and Hank Fisher especially, and he resolved to write to his
relatives, stating the case, asking a home for the waif and assistance
to find its parents.  He addressed this letter to his cousin Maria,
partly in consideration of the dramatic farewell of that young lady,
and its possible influence in turning her susceptible heart towards his
protege.  He then quietly settled back to his old solitary habits, and
for a week left the Robinsons unvisited.  The result was a morning call
by Trinidad Joe on the hermit.  "It's a whim of my gal's, Mr. North,"
he said, dejectedly, "and ez I told you before and warned ye, when that
gal hez an idee, fower yoke of oxen and seving men can't drag it outer
her.  She's got a idee o' larnin'--never hevin' hed much schoolin', and
we ony takin' the papers, permiskiss like--and she says YOU can teach
her--not hevin' anythin' else to do.  Do ye folly me?"

"Yes," said North, "certainly."

"Well, she allows ez mebbee you're proud, and didn't like her takin'
care of the baby for nowt; and she reckons that ef you'll gin her some
book larnin', and get her to sling some fancy talk in fash'n'ble
style--why, she'll call it squar."

"You can tell her," said North, very honestly, "that I shall be only
too glad to help her in any way, without ever hoping to cancel my debt
of obligation to her."

"Then it's a go?" said the mystified Joe, with a desperate attempt to
convey the foregoing statement to his own intellect in three Saxon
words.

"It's a go," replied North, cheerfully.

And he felt relieved.  For he was not quite satisfied with his own want
of frankness to her.  But here was a way to pay off the debt he owed
her, and yet retain his own dignity.  And now he could tell her what he
had done, and he trusted to the ambitious instinct that prompted her to
seek a better education to explain his reasons for it.

He saw her that evening and confessed all to her frankly.  She kept her
head averted, but when she turned her blue eyes to him they were wet
with honest tears.  North had a man's horror of a ready feminine
lachrymal gland; but it was not like Bessy to cry, and it meant
something; and then she did it in a large, goddess-like way, without
sniffling, or chocking, or getting her nose red, but rather with a
gentle deliquescence, a harmonious melting, so that he was fain to
comfort her with nearer contact, gentleness in his own sad eyes, and a
pressure of her large hand.

"It's all right, I s'pose," she said, sadly; "but I didn't reckon on
yer havin' any relations, but thought you was alone, like me."

James North, thinking of Hank Fisher and the "mullater," could not help
intimating that his relations were very wealthy and fashionable people,
and had visited him last summer.  A recollection of the manner in which
they had so visited him and his own reception of them prevented his
saying more.  But Miss Bessy could not forego a certain feminine
curiosity, and asked,--

"Did they come with Sam Baker's team?"

"Yes."

"Last July?"

"Yes."

"And Sam drove the horses here for a bite?"

"I believe so."

"And them's your relations?"

"They are."

Miss Robinson reached over the cradle and enfolded the sleeping infant
in her powerful arms.  Then she lifted her eyes, wrathful through her
still glittering tears, and said, slowly, "They
don't--have--this--child--then!"

"But why?"

"Oh, why?  I saw them!  That's why, and enough!  You can't play any
such gay and festive skeletons on this poor baby for flesh and blood
parents.  No, sir!"

"I think you judge them hastily, Miss Bessy," said North, secretly
amused; "my aunt may not, at first, favorably impress strangers, yet
she has many friends.  But surely you do not object to my cousin Maria,
the young lady?"

"What! that dried cuttle-fish, with nothing livin' about her but her
eyes?  James North, ye may be a fool like the old woman,--perhaps it's
in the family,--but ye ain't a devil, like that gal! That ends it."

And it did.  North dispatched a second letter to Maria saying that he
had already made other arrangements for the baby.  Pleased with her
easy victory, Miss Bessy became more than usually gracious, and the
next day bowed her shapely neck meekly to the yoke of her teacher, and
became a docile pupil.  James North could not have helped noticing her
ready intelligence, even had he been less prejudiced in her favor than
he was fast becoming now.  If he had found it pleasant before to be
admonished by her there was still more delicious flattery in her
perfect trust in his omniscient skill as a pilot over this unknown sea.
There was a certain enjoyment in guiding her hand over the
writing-book, that I fear he could not have obtained from an intellect
less graciously sustained by its physical nature.  The weeks flew
quickly by on gossamer wings, and when she placed a bunch of larkspurs
and poppies in his hand one morning, he remembered for the first that
it was spring.

I cannot say that there was more to record of Miss Bessy's education
than this.  Once North, half jestingly, remarked that he had never yet
seen her admirer, Mr. Hank Fisher.  Miss Bessy (coloring but
cool)--"You never will!"  North (white but hot)--"Why?"  Miss Bessy
(faintly)--"I'd rather not."  North (resolutely)--"I insist."  Bessy
(yielding)--"As my teacher?" North (hesitatingly, at the limitation of
the epithet)--"Y-e-e-s!" Bessy--"And you'll promise never to speak of
it again?"  North--"Never." Bessy (slowly)--"Well, he said I did an
awful thing to go over to your cabin and stay."  North (in the genuine
simplicity of a refined nature)--"But how?"  Miss Bessy (half piqued,
but absolutely admiring that nature)--"Quit! and keep your promise!"

They were so happy in these new relations that it occurred to Miss
Bessy one day to take James North to task for obliging her to ask to be
his pupil.  "You knew how ignorant I was," she added; and Mr. North
retorted by relating to her the doctor's criticism on her independence.
"To tell you the truth," he added, "I was afraid you would not take it
as kindly as he thought."

"That is, you thought me as vain as yourself.  It seems to me you and
the doctor had a great deal to say to each other."

"On the contrary," laughed North, "that was all we said."

"And you didn't make fun of me?"

Perhaps it was not necessary for North to take her hand to emphasize
his denial, but he did.

Miss Bessy, being still reminiscent, perhaps, did not notice it. "If it
hadn't been for that ar--I mean that thar--no, that baby--I wouldn't
have known you!" she said dreamily.

"No," returned North, mischievously, "but you still would have known
Hank Fisher."

No woman is perfect.  Miss Bessy looked at him with a sudden--her first
and last--flash of coquetry.  Then stooped and kissed--the baby.

James North was a simple gentleman, but not altogether a fool.  He
returned the kiss, but not vicariously.

There was a footstep on the porch.  These two turned the hues of a
dying dolphin, and then laughed.  It was Joe.  He held a newspaper in
his hand.  "I reckon ye woz right, Mr. North, about my takin' these yar
papers reg'lar.  For I allow here's suthin' that may clar up the
mystery o' that baby's parents."  With the hesitation of a slowly
grappling intellect, Joe sat down on the table and read from the San
Francisco "Herald" as follows: "'It is now ascertained beyond doubt
that the wreck reported by the Aeolus was the American brig Pomare
bound hence to Tahiti.  The worst surmises are found correct.  The body
of the woman has been since identified as that of the beau-ti-ful
daughter of--of--of--Terp--Terp--Terpish'--Well! I swow that name just
tackles me."

"Gin it to me, Dad," said Bessy pertly.  "You never had any education,
any way.  Hear your accomplished daughter."  With a mock bow to the new
schoolmaster, and a capital burlesque of a confident school girl, she
strode to the middle of the room the paper held and folded book-wise in
her hands.  "Ahem!  Where did you leave off?  Oh, 'the beautiful
daughter of Terpsichore--whose name was prom-i-nently connected with a
mysterious social scandal of last year--the gifted but unfortunate
Grace Chatterton'--No--don't stop me--there's some more!  'The body of
her child, a lovely infant of six months, has not been recovered, and
it is supposed was washed overboard.'  There! may be that's the child,
Mr. North.  Why, Dad! Look, O my God!  He's falling.  Catch him, Dad!
Quick!"

But her strong arm had anticipated her father's.  She caught him,
lifted him to the bed, on which he lay henceforth for many days
unconscious.  Then fever supervened, and delirium, and Dr. Duchesne
telegraphed for his friends; but at the end of a week and the opening
of a summer day the storm passed, as the other storm had passed, and he
awoke, enfeebled, but at peace.  Bessy was at his side--he was glad to
see--alone.

"Bessy, dear," he said hesitatingly, "when I am stronger I have
something to tell you."

"I know it all, Jem," she said with a trembling lip; "I heard it
all--no, not from THEM, but from your own lips in your delirium. I'm
glad it came from YOU--even then."

"Do you forgive me, Bessy?"

She pressed her lips to his forehead and said hastily, and then
falteringly, as if afraid of her impulse:--

"Yes.  Yes."

"And you will still be mother to the child?"

"HER child?"

"No dear, not hers, but MINE!"

She started, cried a little, and then putting her arms around him,
said: "Yes."

And as there was but one way of fulfilling that sacred promise, they
were married in the autumn.



TWO SAINTS OF THE FOOT-HILLS

It never was clearly ascertained how long they had been there.  The
first settler of Rough-and-Ready--one Low, playfully known to his
familiars as "The Poor Indian"--declared that the Saints were afore his
time, and occupied a cabin in the brush when he "blazed" his way to the
North Fork.  It is certain that the two were present when the water was
first turned on the Union Ditch and then and there received the
designation of Daddy Downey and Mammy Downey, which they kept to the
last.  As they tottered toward the refreshment tent, they were welcomed
with the greatest enthusiasm by the boys; or, to borrow the more
refined language of the "Union Recorder,"--"Their gray hairs and bent
figures, recalling as they did the happy paternal eastern homes of the
spectators, and the blessings that fell from venerable lips when they
left those homes to journey in quest of the Golden Fleece on Occidental
Slopes, caused many to burst into tears."  The nearer facts, that many
of these spectators were orphans, that a few were unable to establish
any legal parentage whatever, that others had enjoyed a State's
guardianship and discipline, and that a majority had left their
paternal roofs without any embarrassing preliminary formula, were mere
passing clouds that did not dim the golden imagery of the writer.  From
that day the Saints were adopted as historical lay figures, and entered
at once into possession of uninterrupted gratuities and endowment.

It was not strange that, in a country largely made up of ambitious and
reckless youth, these two--types of conservative and settled
forms--should be thus celebrated.  Apart from any sentiment or
veneration, they were admirable foils to the community's youthful
progress and energy.  They were put forward at every social gathering,
occupied prominent seats on the platform at every public meeting,
walked first in every procession, were conspicuous at the frequent
funeral and rarer wedding, and were godfather and godmother to the
first baby born in Rough-and-Ready.  At the first poll opened in that
precinct, Daddy Downey cast the first vote, and, as was his custom on
all momentous occasions, became volubly reminiscent.  "The first vote I
ever cast," said Daddy, "was for Andrew Jackson; the father o' some on
your peart young chaps wasn't born then; he! he! that was 'way long in
'33, wasn't it?  I disremember now, but if Mammy was here, she bein' a
school-gal at the time, she could say.  But my memory's failin' me.
I'm an old man, boys; yet I likes to see the young ones go ahead.  I
recklect that thar vote from a suckumstance.  Squire Adams was present,
and seein' it was my first vote, he put a goold piece into my hand,
and, sez he, sez Squire Adams, 'Let that always be a reminder of the
exercise of a glorious freeman's privilege!'  He did; he! he! Lord,
boys!  I feel so proud of ye, that I wish I had a hundred votes to cast
for ye all."

It was hardly necessary to say that the memorial tribute of Squire
Adams was increased tenfold by the judges, inspectors, and clerks, and
that the old man tottered back to Mammy, considerably heavier than he
came.  As both of the rival candidates were equally sure of his vote,
and each had called upon him and offered a conveyance, it is but fair
to presume they were equally beneficent.  But Daddy insisted upon
walking to the polls,--a distance of two miles,--as a moral example,
and a text for the California paragraphers, who hastened to record that
such was the influence of the foot-hill climate, that "a citizen of
Rough-and-Ready, aged eighty-four, rose at six o'clock, and, after
milking two cows, walked a distance of twelve miles to the polls, and
returned in time to chop a cord of wood before dinner."

Slightly exaggerated as this statement may have been, the fact that
Daddy was always found by the visitor to be engaged at his wood-pile,
which seemed neither to increase nor diminish under his axe, a fact,
doubtless, owing to the activity of Mammy, who was always at the same
time making pies, seemed to give some credence to the story.  Indeed,
the wood-pile of Daddy Downey was a standing reproof to the indolent
and sluggish miner.

"Ole Daddy must use up a pow'ful sight of wood; every time I've passed
by his shanty he's been makin' the chips fly.  But what gets me is,
that the pile don't seem to come down," said Whisky Dick to his
neighbor.

"Well, you derned fool!" growled his neighbor, "spose some chap happens
to pass by thar, and sees the old man doin' a man's work at eighty, and
slouches like you and me lying round drunk, and that chap, feelin'
kinder humped, goes up some dark night and heaves a load of cut pine
over his fence, who's got anything to say about it?  Say?"  Certainly
not the speaker, who had done the act suggested, nor the penitent and
remorseful hearer, who repeated it next day.

The pies and cakes made by the old woman were, I think, remarkable
rather for their inducing the same loyal and generous spirit than for
their intrinsic excellence, and it may be said appealed more strongly
to the nobler aspirations of humanity than its vulgar appetite.
Howbeit, everybody ate Mammy Downey's pies, and thought of his
childhood.  "Take 'em, dear boys," the old lady would say; "it does me
good to see you eat 'em; reminds me kinder of my poor Sammy, that, ef
he'd lived, would hev been ez strong and beg ez you be, but was taken
down with lung fever, at Sweetwater.  I kin see him yet; that's forty
year ago, dear! comin' out o' the lot to the bake-house, and smilin'
such a beautiful smile, like yours, dear boy, as I handed him a mince
or a lemming turnover.  Dear, dear, how I do run on! and those days is
past! but I seems to live in you again!"  The wife of the hotel-keeper,
actuated by a low jealousy, had suggested that she "seemed to live OFF
them;" but as that person tried to demonstrate the truth of her
statement by reference to the cost of the raw material used by the old
lady, it was considered by the camp as too practical and economical for
consideration.  "Besides," added Cy Perkins, "ef old Mammy wants to
turn an honest penny in her old age, let her do it.  How would you like
your old mother to make pies on grub wages? eh?"  A suggestion that so
affected his hearer (who had no mother) that he bought three on the
spot.  The quality of these pies had never been discussed but once.  It
is related that a young lawyer from San Francisco, dining at the
Palmetto restaurant, pushed away one of Mammy Downey's pies with every
expression of disgust and dissatisfaction.  At this juncture, Whisky
Dick, considerably affected by his favorite stimulant, approached the
stranger's table, and, drawing up a chair, sat uninvited before him.

"Mebbee, young man," he began gravely, "ye don't like Mammy Downey's
pies?"

The stranger replied curtly, and in some astonishment, that he did not,
as a rule, "eat pie."

"Young man," continued Dick, with drunken gravity, "mebbee you're
accustomed to Charlotte rusks and blue mange; mebbee ye can't eat
unless your grub is got up by one o' them French cooks'?  Yet WE--us
boys yar in this camp--calls that pie--a good--a com-pe-tent pie!"

The stranger again disclaimed anything but a general dislike of that
form of pastry.

"Young man," continued Dick, utterly unheeding the explanation,--"young
man, mebbee you onst had an ole--a very ole mother, who, tottering down
the vale o' years, made pies.  Mebbee, and it's like your blank
epicurean soul, ye turned up your nose on the ole woman, and went back
on the pies, and on her!  She that dandled ye when ye woz a baby,--a
little baby!  Mebbee ye went back on her, and shook her, and played off
on her, and gave her away--dead away!  And now, mebbee, young man--I
wouldn't hurt ye for the world, but mebbee, afore ye leave this yar
table, YE'LL EAT THAT PIE!"

The stranger rose to his feet, but the muzzle of a dragoon revolver in
the unsteady hands of Whisky Dick, caused him to sit down again. He ate
the pie, and lost his case likewise, before a Rough-and-Ready jury.

Indeed, far from exhibiting the cynical doubts and distrusts of age,
Daddy Downey received always with childlike delight the progress of
modern improvement and energy.  "In my day, long back in the twenties,
it took us nigh a week--a week, boys--to get up a barn, and all the
young ones--I was one then--for miles 'round at the raisin'; and yer's
you boys--rascals ye are, too--runs up this yer shanty for Mammy and me
'twixt sun-up and dark!  Eh, eh, you're teachin' the old folks new
tricks, are ye?  Ah, get along, you!" and in playful simulation of
anger he would shake his white hair and his hickory staff at the
"rascals."  The only indication of the conservative tendencies of age
was visible in his continual protest against the extravagance of the
boys.  "Why," he would say, "a family, a hull family,--leavin' alone me
and the old woman,--might be supported on what you young rascals throw
away in a single spree.  Ah, you young dogs, didn't I hear about your
scattering half-dollars on the stage the other night when that
Eyetalian Papist was singin'?  And that money goes out of Ameriky--ivry
cent!"

There was little doubt that the old couple were saving, if not
avaricious.  But when it was known, through the indiscreet volubility
of Mammy Downey, that Daddy Downey sent the bulk of their savings,
gratuities, and gifts to a dissipated and prodigal son in the
East,--whose photograph the old man always carried with him,--it rather
elevated him in their regard.  "When ye write to that gay and festive
son o' yourn, Daddy," said Joe Robinson, "send him this yer specimen.
Give him my compliments, and tell him, ef he kin spend money faster
than I can, I call him!  Tell him, ef he wants a first-class jamboree,
to kem out here, and me and the boys will show him what a square drunk
is!"  In vain would the old man continue to protest against the spirit
of the gift; the miner generally returned with his pockets that much
the lighter, and it is not improbable a little less intoxicated than he
otherwise might have been.  It may be premised that Daddy Downey was
strictly temperate.  The only way he managed to avoid hurting the
feelings of the camp was by accepting the frequent donations of whisky
to be used for the purposes of liniment.

"Next to snake-oil, my son," he would say, "and dilberry-juice,--and ye
don't seem to pro-duce 'em hereabouts,--whisky is good for rubbin' onto
old bones to make 'em limber.  But pure cold water, 'sparklin' and
bright in its liquid light,' and, so to speak, reflectin' of God's own
linyments on its surfiss, is the best, onless, like poor ol' Mammy and
me, ye gets the dumb-agur from over-use."

The fame of the Downey couple was not confined to the foot-hills. The
Rev. Henry Gushington, D.D., of Boston, making a bronchial tour of
California, wrote to the "Christian Pathfinder" an affecting account of
his visit to them, placed Daddy Downey's age at 102, and attributed the
recent conversions in Rough-and-Ready to their influence.  That gifted
literary Hessian, Bill Smith, traveling in the interests of various
capitalists, and the trustworthy correspondent of four "only
independent American journals," quoted him as an evidence of the
longevity superinduced by the climate, offered him as an example of the
security of helpless life and property in the mountains, used him as an
advertisement of the Union Ditch, and it is said in some vague way
cited him as proving the collateral facts of a timber and ore-producing
region existing in the foot-hills worthy the attention of Eastern
capitalists.

Praised thus by the lips of distinguished report, fostered by the care
and sustained by the pecuniary offerings of their fellow-citizens, the
Saints led for two years a peaceful life of gentle absorption.  To
relieve them from the embarrassing appearance of eleemosynary
receipts,--an embarrassment felt more by the givers than the
recipients,--the postmastership of Rough-and-Ready was procured for
Daddy, and the duty of receiving and delivering the United States mails
performed by him, with the advice and assistance of the boys.  If a few
letters went astray at this time, it was easily attributed to this
undisciplined aid, and the boys themselves were always ready to make up
the value of a missing money-letter and "keep the old man's accounts
square."  To these functions presently were added the treasurerships of
the Masons' and Odd Fellows' charitable funds,--the old man being far
advanced in their respective degrees,--and even the position of almoner
of their bounties was super-added.  Here, unfortunately, Daddy's habits
of economy and avaricious propensity came near making him unpopular,
and very often needy brothers were forced to object to the quantity and
quality of the help extended.  They always met with more generous
relief from the private hands of the brothers themselves, and the
remark, "that the ol' man was trying to set an example,--that he meant
well,"--and that they would yet be thankful for his zealous care and
economy.  A few, I think, suffered in noble silence, rather than bring
the old man's infirmity to the public notice.

And so with this honor of Daddy and Mammy, the days of the miners were
long and profitable in the land of the foot-hills.  The mines yielded
their abundance, the winters were singularly open and yet there was no
drouth nor lack of water, and peace and plenty smiled on the Sierrean
foothills, from their highest sunny upland to the trailing falda of
wild oats and poppies.  If a certain superstition got abroad among the
other camps, connecting the fortunes of Rough-and-Ready with Daddy and
Mammy, it was a gentle, harmless fancy, and was not, I think,
altogether rejected by the old people.  A certain large, patriarchal,
bountiful manner, of late visible in Daddy, and the increase of much
white hair and beard, kept up the poetic illusion, while Mammy, day by
day, grew more and more like somebody's fairy godmother.  An attempt
was made by a rival camp to emulate these paying virtues of reverence,
and an aged mariner was procured from the Sailor's Snug Harbor in San
Francisco, on trial. But the unfortunate seaman was more or less
diseased, was not always presentable, through a weakness for ardent
spirits, and finally, to use the powerful idiom of one of his
disappointed foster-children, "up and died in a week, without slinging
ary blessin'."

But vicissitude reaches young and old alike.  Youthful Rough-and-Ready
and the Saints had climbed to their meridian together, and it seemed
fit that they should together decline.  The first shadow fell with the
immigration to Rough-and-Ready of a second aged pair. The landlady of
the Independence Hotel had not abated her malevolence towards the
Saints, and had imported at considerable expense her grand-aunt and
grand-uncle, who had been enjoying for some years a sequestered
retirement in the poorhouse at East Machias.  They were indeed very
old.  By what miracle, even as anatomical specimens, they had been
preserved during their long journey was a mystery to the camp.  In some
respects they had superior memories and reminiscences.  The old
man--Abner Trix--had shouldered a musket in the war of 1812; his wife,
Abigail, had seen Lady Washington.  She could sing hymns; he knew every
text between "the leds" of a Bible.  There is little doubt but that in
many respects, to the superficial and giddy crowd of youthful
spectators, they were the more interesting spectacle.

Whether it was jealousy, distrust, or timidity that overcame the
Saints, was never known, but they studiously declined to meet the
strangers.  When directly approached upon the subject, Daddy Downey
pleaded illness, kept himself in close seclusion, and the Sunday that
the Trixes attended church in the school-house on the hill, the triumph
of the Trix party was mitigated by the fact that the Downeys were not
in their accustomed pew.  "You bet that Daddy and Mammy is lying low
jest to ketch them old mummies yet," explained a Downeyite.  For by
this time schism and division had crept into the camp; the younger and
later members of the settlement adhering to the Trixes, while the older
pioneers stood not only loyal to their own favorites, but even, in the
true spirit of partisanship, began to seek for a principle underlying
their personal feelings.  "I tell ye what, boys," observed Sweetwater
Joe, "if this yer camp is goin' to be run by greenhorns, and old
pioneers, like Daddy and the rest of us, must take back seats, it's
time we emigrated and shoved out, and tuk Daddy with us.  Why, they're
talkin' of rotation in offiss, and of putting that skeleton that Ma'am
Decker sets up at the table, to take her boarders' appetites away, into
the post-office in place o' Daddy."  And, indeed, there were some fears
of such a conclusion; the newer men of Rough-and-Ready were in the
majority, and wielded a more than equal influence of wealth and outside
enterprise.  "Frisco," as a Downeyite bitterly remarked, "already owned
half the town."  The old friends that rallied around Daddy and Mammy
were, like most loyal friends in adversity, in bad case themselves, and
were beginning to look and act, it was observed, not unlike their old
favorites.

At this juncture Mammy died.

The sudden blow for a few days seemed to reunite dissevered
Rough-and-Ready.  Both factions hastened to the bereaved Daddy with
condolements, and offers of aid and assistance.  But the old man
received them sternly.  A change had come over the weak and yielding
octogenarian.  Those who expected to find him maudlin, helpless,
disconsolate, shrank from the cold, hard eyes and truculent voice that
bade them "begone," and "leave him with his dead."  Even his own
friends failed to make him respond to their sympathy, and were fain to
content themselves with his cold intimation that both the wishes of his
dead wife and his own instincts were against any display, or the
reception of any favor from the camp that might tend to keep up the
divisions they had innocently created.  The refusal of Daddy to accept
any service offered was so unlike him as to have but one dreadful
meaning!  The sudden shock had turned his brain!  Yet so impressed were
they with his resolution that they permitted him to perform the last
sad offices himself, and only a select few of his nearer neighbors
assisted him in carrying the plain deal coffin from his lonely cabin in
the woods to the still lonelier cemetery on the hill-top.

When the shallow grave was filled, he dismissed even these curtly, shut
himself up in his cabin, and for days remained unseen.  It was evident
that he was no longer in his right mind.

His harmless aberration was accepted and treated with a degree of
intelligent delicacy hardly to be believed of so rough a community.
During his wife's sudden and severe illness, the safe containing the
funds intrusted to his care by the various benevolent associations was
broken into and robbed, and although the act was clearly attributable
to his carelessness and preoccupation, all allusion to the fact was
withheld from him in his severe affliction.  When he appeared again
before the camp, and the circumstances were considerately explained to
him, with the remark that "the boys had made it all right," the vacant,
hopeless, unintelligent eye that he turned upon the speaker showed too
plainly that he had forgotten all about it.  "Don't trouble the old
man," said Whisky Dick, with a burst of honest poetry.  "Don't ye see
his memory's dead, and lying there in the coffin with Mammy?" Perhaps
the speaker was nearer right than he imagined.

Failing in religious consolation, they took various means of diverting
his mind with worldly amusements, and one was a visit to a traveling
variety troupe, then performing in the town.  The result of the visit
was briefly told by Whisky Dick.  "Well, sir, we went in, and I sot the
old man down in a front seat, and kinder propped him up with some other
of the fellers round him, and there he sot as silent and awful ez the
grave.  And then that fancy dancer, Miss Grace Somerset, comes in, and
dern my skin, ef the old man didn't get to trembling and fidgeting all
over, as she cut them pidgin wings.  I tell ye what, boys, men is men,
way down to their boots,--whether they're crazy or not!  Well, he took
on so, that I'm blamed if at last that gal HERSELF didn't notice him!
and she ups, suddenly, and blows him a kiss--so! with her fingers!"

Whether this narration were exaggerated or not, it is certain that the
old man Downey every succeeding night of the performance was a
spectator.  That he may have aspired to more than that was suggested a
day or two later in the following incident:  A number of the boys were
sitting around the stove in the Magnolia saloon, listening to the onset
of a winter storm against the windows, when Whisky Dick, tremulous,
excited, and bristling with rain-drops and information, broke in upon
them.

"Well, boys, I've got just the biggest thing out.  Ef I hadn't seed it
myself, I wouldn't hev believed it!"

"It ain't thet ghost ag'in?" growled Robinson, from the depths of his
arm-chair; "thet ghost's about played."

"Wot ghost?" asked a new-comer.

"Why, ole Mammy's ghost, that every feller about yer sees when he's
half full and out late o' nights."

"Where?"

"Where?  Why, where should a ghost be?  Meanderin' round her grave on
the hill, yander, in course."

"It's suthin bigger nor thet, pard," said Dick confidently; "no ghost
kin rake down the pot ag'in the keerds I've got here.  This ain't no
bluff!"

"Well, go on!" said a dozen excited voices.

Dick paused a moment, diffidently, with the hesitation of an artistic
raconteur.

"Well," he said, with affected deliberation, "let's see!  It's nigh
onto an hour ago ez I was down thar at the variety show.  When the
curtain was down betwixt the ax, I looks round fer Daddy.  No Daddy
thar!  I goes out and asks some o' the boys.  'Daddy WAS there a minnit
ago,' they say; 'must hev gone home.'  Bein' kinder responsible for the
old man, I hangs around, and goes out in the hall and sees a passage
leadin' behind the scenes.  Now the queer thing about this, boys, ez
that suthin in my bones tells me the old man is THAR.  I pushes in,
and, sure as a gun, I hears his voice. Kinder pathetic, kinder
pleadin', kinder--"

"Love-makin'!" broke in the impatient Robinson.

"You've hit it, pard,--you've rung the bell every time!  But she says,
'wants thet money down, or I'll--' and here I couldn't get to hear the
rest.  And then he kinder coaxes, and she says, sorter sassy, but
listenin' all the time,--woman like, ye know, Eve and the sarpint!--and
she says, 'I'll see to-morrow.'  And he says, 'You won't blow on me?'
and I gets excited and peeps in, and may I be teetotally durned ef I
didn't see--"

"What?" yelled the crowd.

"Why, DADDY ON HIS KNEES TO THAT THERE FANCY DANCER, Grace Somerset!
Now, if Mammy's ghost is meanderin' round, why, et's about time she
left the cemetery and put in an appearance in Jackson's Hall.  Thet's
all!"

"Look yar, boys," said Robinson, rising, "I don't know ez it's the
square thing to spile Daddy's fun.  I don't object to it, provided she
ain't takin' in the old man, and givin' him dead away.  But ez we're
his guardeens, I propose that we go down thar and see the lady, and
find out ef her intentions is honorable.  If she means marry, and the
old man persists, why, I reckon we kin give the young couple a send-off
thet won't disgrace this yer camp!  Hey, boys?"

It is unnecessary to say that the proposition was received with
acclamation, and that the crowd at once departed on their discreet
mission.  But the result was never known, for the next morning brought
a shock to Rough-and-Ready before which all other interest paled to
nothingness.

The grave of Mammy Downey was found violated and despoiled; the coffin
opened, and half filled with the papers and accounts of the robbed
benevolent associations; but the body of Mammy was gone! Nor, on
examination, did it appear that the sacred and ancient form of that
female had ever reposed in its recesses!

Daddy Downey was not to be found, nor is it necessary to say that the
ingenuous Grace Somerset was also missing.

For three days the reason of Rough-and-Ready trembled in the balance.
No work was done in the ditches, in the flume, nor in the mills.
Groups of men stood by the grave of the lamented relict of Daddy
Downey, as open-mouthed and vacant as that sepulchre.  Never since the
great earthquake of '52 had Rough-and-Ready been so stirred to its
deepest foundations.

On the third day the sheriff of Calaveras--a quiet, gentle, thoughtful
man--arrived in town, and passed from one to the other of excited
groups, dropping here and there detached but concise and practical
information.

"Yes, gentlemen, you are right, Mrs. Downey is not dead, because there
wasn't any Mrs. Downey!  Her part was played by George F. Fenwick, of
Sydney,--a 'ticket-of-leave-man,' who was, they say, a good actor.
Downey?  Oh, yes Downey was Jem Flanigan, who, in '52, used to run the
variety troupe in Australia, where Miss Somerset made her debut.  Stand
back a little, boys.  Steady!  'The money?' Oh, yes, they've got away
with that, sure!  How are ye, Joe?  Why, you're looking well and
hearty!  I rather expected ye court week. How's things your way?"

"Then they were only play-actors, Joe Hall?" broke in a dozen voices.

"I reckon!" returned the sheriff, coolly.

"And for a matter o' five blank years," said Whisky Dick, sadly, "they
played this camp!"



"JINNY"

I think that the few who were permitted to know and love the object of
this sketch spent the rest of their days not only in an attitude of
apology for having at first failed to recognize her higher nature, but
of remorse that they should have ever lent a credulous ear to a priori
tradition concerning her family characteristics. She had not escaped
that calumny which she shared with the rest of her sex for those
youthful follies, levities, and indiscretions which belong to
immaturity.  It is very probable that the firmness that distinguished
her maturer will in youth might have been taken for obstinacy, that her
nice discrimination might at the same period have been taken for
adolescent caprice, and that the positive expression of her quick
intellect might have been thought youthful impertinence before her
years had won respect for her judgment.

She was foaled at Indian Creek, and one month later, when she was
brought over to Sawyer's Bar, was considered the smallest donkey ever
seen in the foot-hills.  The legend that she was brought over in one of
"Dan the Quartz Crusher's" boots required corroboration from that
gentleman; but his denial being evidently based upon a masculine vanity
regarding the size of his foot rather than a desire to be historically
accurate, it went for nothing.  It is certain that for the next two
months she occupied the cabin of Dan, until, perhaps incensed at this
and other scandals, she one night made her way out.  "I hadn't the
least idee wot woz comin'," said Dan, "but about midnight I seemed to
hear hail onto the roof, and a shower of rocks and stones like to a
blast started in the canyon. When I got up and struck a light, thar was
suthin' like onto a cord o' kindlin' wood and splinters whar she'd
stood asleep, and a hole in the side o' the shanty, and--no Jinny!
Lookin' at them hoofs o' hern--and mighty porty they is to look at,
too--you would allow she could do it!"  I fear that this performance
laid the foundation of her later infelicitous reputation, and perhaps
awakened in her youthful breast a misplaced ambition, and an emulation
which might at that time have been diverted into a nobler channel.  For
the fame of this juvenile performance--and its possible promise in the
future--brought at once upon her the dangerous flattery and attention
of the whole camp.  Under intelligently directed provocation she would
repeat her misguided exercise, until most of the scanty furniture of
the cabin was reduced to a hopeless wreck, and sprains and callosities
were developed upon the limbs of her admirers.  Yet even at this early
stage of her history, that penetrating intellect which was in after
years her dominant quality was evident to all.  She could not be made
to kick at quartz tailings, at a barrel of Boston crackers, or at the
head or shin of "Nigger Pete."  An artistic discrimination economized
her surplus energy.  "Ef you'll notiss," said Dan, with a large
parental softness, "she never lets herself out to onst like them mules
or any jackass ez I've heerd of, but kinder holds herself in, and, so
to speak, takes her bearings--sorter feels round gently with that off
foot, takes her distance and her rest, and then with that ar' foot
hoverin' round in the air softly, like an angel's wing, and a gentle,
dreamy kind o' look in them eyes, she lites out!  Don't ye, Jinny?
Thar! jist ez I told ye," continued Dan, with an artist's noble
forgetfulness of self, as he slowly crawled from the splintered ruin of
the barrel on which he had been sitting.  "Thur! did ye ever see the
like!  Did ye dream that all the while I was talkin' she was a
meditatin' that?"

The same artistic perception and noble reticence distinguished her
bray.  It was one of which a less sagacious animal would have been
foolishly vain or ostentatiously prodigal.  It was a contralto of great
compass and profundity--reaching from low G to high C--perhaps a trifle
stronger in the lower register, and not altogether free from a nasal
falsetto in the upper.  Daring and brilliant as it was in the middle
notes, it was perhaps more musically remarkable for its great
sustaining power.  The element of surprise always entered into the
hearer's enjoyment; long after any ordinary strain of human origin
would have ceased, faint echoes of Jinny's last note were perpetually
recurring.  But it was as an intellectual and moral expression that her
bray was perfect.  As far beyond her size as were her aspirations, it
was a free and running commentary of scorn at all created things
extant, with ironical and sardonic additions that were terrible.  It
reviled all human endeavor, it quenched all sentiment, it suspended
frivolity, it scattered reverie, it paralyzed action.  It was
omnipotent. More wonderful and characteristic than all, the very
existence of this tremendous organ was unknown to the camp for six
months after the arrival of its modest owner, and only revealed to them
under circumstances that seemed to point more conclusively than ever to
her rare discretion.

It was the beginning of a warm night and the middle of a heated
political discussion.  Sawyer's Bar had gathered in force at the
Crossing, and by the light of flaring pine torches, cheered and
applauded the rival speakers who from a rude platform addressed the
excited multitude.  Partisan spirit at that time ran high in the
foot-hills; crimination and recrimination, challenge, reply,
accusation, and retort had already inflamed the meeting, and Colonel
Bungstarter, after a withering review of his opponent's policy,
culminated with a personal attack upon the career and private character
of the eloquent and chivalrous Colonel Culpepper Starbottle of
Siskiyou.  That eloquent and chivalrous gentleman was known to be
present; it was rumored that the attack was expected to provoke a
challenge from Colonel Starbottle which would give Bungstarter the
choice of weapons, and deprive Starbottle of his advantage as a dead
shot.  It was whispered also that the sagacious Starbottle, aware of
this fact, would retaliate in kind so outrageously as to leave
Bungstarter no recourse but to demand satisfaction on the spot.  As
Colonel Starbottle rose, the eager crowd drew together, elbowing each
other in rapt and ecstatic expectancy.  "He can't get even on
Bungstarter, onless he allows his sister ran off with a nigger, or that
he put up his grandmother at draw poker and lost her," whispered the
Quartz Crusher; "kin he?"  All ears were alert, particularly the very
long and hairy ones just rising above the railing of the speaker's
platform; for Jinny, having a feminine distrust of solitude and a
fondness for show, had followed her master to the meeting and had
insinuated herself upon the platform, where way was made for her with
that frontier courtesy always extended to her age and sex.

Colonel Starbottle, stertorous and purple, advanced to the railing.
There he unbuttoned his collar and laid his neckcloth aside, then with
his eye fixed on his antagonist he drew off his blue frock coat, and
thrusting one hand into his ruffled shirt front, and raising the other
to the dark canopy above him, he opened his vindictive lips.  The
action, the attitude, were Starbottle's.  But the voice was not.  For
at that supreme moment, a bray--so profound, so appalling, so utterly
soul-subduing, so paralyzing that everything else sank to mere
insignificance beside it--filled woods, and sky, and air.  For a moment
only the multitude gasped in speechless astonishment--it was a moment
only--and then the welkin roared with their shouts.  In vain silence
was commanded, in vain Colonel Starbottle, with a ghastly smile,
remarked that he recognized in the interruption the voice and the
intellect of the opposition; the laugh continued, the more as it was
discovered that Jinny had not yet finished, and was still recurring to
her original theme.  "Gentlemen," gasped Starbottle, "any attempt by
[Hee-haw! from Jinny] brutal buffoonery to restrict the right of free
speech to all [a prolonged assent from Jinny] is worthy only the
dastardly"--but here a diminuendo so long drawn as to appear a striking
imitation of the Colonel's own apoplectic sentences drowned his voice
with shrieks of laughter.

It must not be supposed that during this performance a vigorous attempt
was not made to oust Jinny from the platform.  But all in vain.
Equally demoralizing in either extremity, Jinny speedily cleared a
circle with her flying hoofs, smashed the speaker's table and water
pitcher, sent the railing flying in fragments over the cheering crowd,
and only succumbed to two blankets, in which, with her head concealed,
she was finally dragged, half captive, half victor, from the field.
Even then a muffled and supplemental bray that came from the woods at
intervals drew half the crowd away and reduced the other half to mere
perfunctory hearers.  The demoralized meeting was adjourned; Colonel
Starbottle's withering reply remained unuttered, and the Bungstarter
party were triumphant.

For the rest of the evening Jinny was the heroine of the hour, but no
cajolery nor flattery could induce her to again exhibit her powers.  In
vain did Dean of Angel's extemporize a short harangue in the hope that
Jinny would be tempted to reply; in vain was every provocation offered
that might sting her sensitive nature to eloquent revolt.  She replied
only with her heels.  Whether or not this was simple caprice, or
whether she was satisfied with her maiden effort, or indignant at her
subsequent treatment, she remained silent.  "She made her little game,"
said Dan, who was a political adherent of Starbottle's, and who yet
from that day enjoyed the great speaker's undying hatred, "and even if
me and her don't agree on politics--YOU let her alone."  Alas, it would
have been well for Dan if he could have been true to his instincts, but
the offer of one hundred dollars from the Bungstarter party proved too
tempting.  She passed irrevocably from his hands into those of the
enemy.  But any reader of these lines will, I trust, rejoice to hear
that this attempt to restrain free political expression in the
foot-hills failed signally.  For, although she was again covertly
introduced on the platform by the Bungstarters, and placed face to face
with Colonel Starbottle at Murphy's Camp, she was dumb.  Even a brass
band failed to excite her emulation.  Either she had become disgusted
with politics or the higher prices paid by the party to other and less
effective speakers aroused her jealousy and shocked her self-esteem,
but she remained a passive spectator.  When the Hon. Sylvester
Rourback, who received, for the use of his political faculties for a
single night, double the sum for which she was purchased outright,
appeared on the same platform with herself, she forsook it hurriedly
and took to the woods.  Here she might have starved but for the
intervention of one McCarty, a poor market gardener, who found her, and
gave her food and shelter under the implied contract that she should
forsake politics and go to work. The latter she for a long time
resisted, but as she was considered large enough by this time to draw a
cart, McCarty broke her to single harness, with a severe fracture of
his leg and the loss of four teeth and a small spring wagon.  At
length, when she could be trusted to carry his wares to Murphy's Camp,
and could be checked from entering a shop with the cart attached to
her,--a fact of which she always affected perfect disbelief,--her
education was considered as complete as that of the average California
donkey. It was still unsafe to leave her alone, as she disliked
solitude, and always made it a point to join any group of loungers with
her unnecessary cart, and even to follow some good-looking miner to his
cabin.  The first time this peculiarity was discovered by her owner was
on his return to the street after driving a bargain within the walls of
the Temperance Hotel.  Jinny was nowhere to be seen.  Her devious
course, however, was pleasingly indicated by vegetables that strewed
the road until she was at last tracked to the veranda of the Arcade
saloon, where she was found looking through the window at a game of
euchre, and only deterred by the impeding cart from entering the
building.  A visit one Sunday to the little Catholic chapel at French
Camp, where she attempted to introduce an antiphonal service and the
cart, brought shame and disgrace upon her unlucky master.  For the cart
contained freshly-gathered vegetables, and the fact that McCarty had
been Sabbath-breaking was painfully evident.  Father Sullivan was quick
to turn an incident that provoked only the risibilities of his audience
into a moral lesson.  "It's the poor dumb beast that has a more
Christian sowl than Michael," he commented; but here Jinny assented so
positively that they were fain to drag her away by main force.

To her eccentric and thoughtless youth succeeded a calm maturity in
which her conservative sagacity was steadily developed.  She now worked
for her living, subject, however, to a nice discrimination by which she
limited herself to a certain amount of work, beyond which neither
threats, beatings, nor cajoleries would force her. At certain hours she
would start for the stable with or without the incumbrances of the cart
or Michael, turning two long and deaf ears on all expostulation or
entreaty.  "Now, God be good to me," said Michael, one day picking
himself out from a ditch as he gazed sorrowfully after the flying heels
of Jinny, "but it's only the second load of cabbages I'm bringin' the
day, and if she's shtruck NOW, it's ruined I am entoirely."  But he was
mistaken; after two hours of rumination Jinny returned of her own free
will, having evidently mistaken the time, and it is said even consented
to draw an extra load to make up the deficiency.  It may be imagined
from this and other circumstances that Michael stood a little in awe of
Jinny's superior intellect, and that Jinny occasionally, with the
instinct of her sex, presumed upon it.  After the Sunday episode,
already referred to, she was given her liberty on that day, a privilege
she gracefully recognized by somewhat unbending her usual austerity in
the indulgence of a saturnine humor.  She would visit the mining camps,
and, grazing lazily and thoughtfully before the cabins, would, by
various artifices and coquetries known to the female heart, induce some
credulous stranger to approach her with the intention of taking a ride.
She would submit hesitatingly to a halter, allow him to mount her back,
and, with every expression of timid and fearful reluctance, at last
permit him to guide her in a laborious trot out of sight of human
habitation.  What happened then was never clearly known.  In a few
moments the camp would be aroused by shouts and execrations, and the
spectacle of Jinny tearing by at a frightful pace, with the stranger
clinging with his arms around her neck, afraid to slip off, from terror
of her circumvolving heels, and vainly imploring assistance.  Again and
again she would dash by the applauding groups, adding the aggravation
of her voice to the danger of her heels, until suddenly wheeling, she
would gallop to Carter's Pond, and deposit her luckless freight in the
muddy ditch.  This practical joke was repeated until one Sunday she was
approached by Juan Ramirez, a Mexican vaquero, booted and spurred, and
carrying a riata.  A crowd was assembled to see her discomfiture.  But,
to the intense disappointment of the camp, Jinny, after quietly
surveying the stranger, uttered a sardonic bray, and ambled away to the
little cemetery on the hill, whose tangled chapparal effectually
prevented all pursuit by her skilled antagonist.  From that day she
forsook the camp, and spent her Sabbaths in mortuary reflections among
the pine head-boards and cold "hic jacets" of the dead.

Happy would it have been if this circumstance, which resulted in the
one poetic episode of her life, had occurred earlier; for the cemetery
was the favorite resort of Miss Jessie Lawton, a gentle invalid from
San Francisco, who had sought the foot-hills for the balsam of pine and
fir, and in the faint hope that the freshness of the wild roses might
call back her own.  The extended views from the cemetery satisfied Miss
Lawton's artistic taste, and here frequently, with her sketch-book in
hand, she indulged that taste and a certain shy reserve which kept her
from contact with strangers.  On one of the leaves of that sketch-book
appears a study of a donkey's head, being none other than the grave
features of Jinny, as once projected timidly over the artist's
shoulder. The preliminaries of this intimacy have never transpired, nor
is it a settled fact if Jinny made the first advances.  The result was
only known to the men of Sawyer's Bar by a vision which remained fresh
in their memories long after the gentle lady and her four-footed friend
had passed beyond their voices.  As two of the tunnel-men were
returning from work one evening, they chanced to look up the little
trail, kept sacred from secular intrusion, that led from the cemetery
to the settlement.  In the dim twilight, against a sunset sky, they
beheld a pale-faced girl riding slowly toward them.  With a delicate
instinct, new to those rough men, they drew closer in the shadow of the
bushes until she passed. There was no mistaking the familiar
grotesqueness of Jinny; there was no mistaking the languid grace of
Miss Lawton.  But a wreath of wild roses was around Jinny's neck, from
her long ears floated Miss Jessie's hat ribbons, and a mischievous,
girlish smile was upon Miss Jessie's face, as fresh as the azaleas in
her hair.  By the next day the story of this gentle apparition was
known to a dozen miners in camp, and all were sworn to secrecy.  But
the next evening, and the next, from the safe shadows of the woods they
watched and drank in the beauty of that fanciful and all unconscious
procession.  They kept their secret, and never a whisper or footfall
from these rough men broke its charm or betrayed their presence.  The
man who could have shocked the sensitive reserve of the young girl
would have paid for it with his life.

And then one day the character of the procession changed, and this
little incident having been told, it was permitted that Jinny should
follow her friend, caparisoned even as before, but this time by the
rougher but no less loving hands of men.  When the cortege reached the
ferry where the gentle girl was to begin her silent journey to the sea,
Jinny broke from those who held her, and after a frantic effort to
mount the barge fell into the swiftly rushing Stanislaus.  A dozen
stout arms were stretched to save her, and a rope skilfully thrown was
caught around her feet.  For an instant she was passive, and, as it
seemed, saved.  But the next moment her dominant instinct returned, and
with one stroke of her powerful heel she snapped the rope in twain and
so drifted with her mistress to the sea.



ROGER CATRON'S FRIEND

I think that, from the beginning, we all knew how it would end.  He had
always been so quiet and conventional, although by nature an impulsive
man; always so temperate and abstemious, although a man with a quick
appreciation of pleasure; always so cautious and practical, although an
imaginative man, that when, at last, one by one he loosed these bands,
and gave himself up to a life, perhaps not worse than other lives which
the world has accepted as the natural expression of their various
owners, we at once decided that the case was a hopeless one.  And when
one night we picked him up out of the Union Ditch, a begrimed and
weather-worn drunkard, a hopeless debtor, a self-confessed spendthrift,
and a half-conscious, maudlin imbecile, we knew that the end had come.
The wife he had abandoned had in turn deserted him; the woman he had
misled had already realized her folly, and left him with her
reproaches; the associates of his reckless life, who had used and
abused him, had found him no longer of service, or even amusement, and
clearly there was nothing left to do but to hand him over to the state,
and we took him to the nearest penitential asylum. Conscious of the
Samaritan deed, we went back to our respective wives, and told his
story.  It is only just to say that these sympathetic creatures were
more interested in the philanthropy of their respective husbands than
in its miserable object.  "It was good and kind in you, dear," said
loving Mrs. Maston to her spouse, as returning home that night he flung
his coat on a chair with an air of fatigued righteousness; "it was like
your kind heart to care for that beast; but after he left that good
wife of his--that perfect saint--to take up with that awful woman, I
think I'd have left him to die in the ditch.  Only to think of it,
dear, a woman that you wouldn't speak to!"  Here Mr. Maston coughed
slightly, colored a little, mumbled something about "women not
understanding some things," "that men were men," etc., and then went
comfortably to sleep, leaving the outcast, happily oblivious of all
things, and especially this criticism, locked up in Hangtown Jail.

For the next twelve hours he lay there, apathetic and half-conscious.
Recovering from this after a while, he became furious, vengeful, and
unmanageable, filling the cell and corridor with maledictions of friend
and enemy; and again sullen, morose, and watchful.  Then he refused
food, and did not sleep, pacing his limits with the incessant, feverish
tread of a caged tiger.  Two physicians, diagnosing his case from the
scant facts, pronounced him insane, and he was accordingly transported
to Sacramento.  But on the way thither he managed to elude the
vigilance of his guards, and escaped.  The alarm was given, a hue and
cry followed him, the best detectives of San Francisco were on his
track, and finally recovered his dead body--emaciated and wasted by
exhaustion and fever--in the Stanislaus Marshes, identified it, and,
receiving the reward of $1,000 offered by his surviving relatives and
family, assisted in legally establishing the end we had predicted.

Unfortunately for the moral, the facts were somewhat inconsistent with
the theory.  A day or two after the remains were discovered and
identified, the real body of "Roger Catron, aged 52 years, slight,
iron-gray hair, and shabby in apparel," as the advertisement read,
dragged itself, travel-worn, trembling, and disheveled, up the steep
slope of Deadwood Hill.  How he should do it, he had long since
determined,--ever since he had hidden his Derringer, a mere baby
pistol, from the vigilance of his keepers. Where he should do it, he
had settled within his mind only within the last few moments.  Deadwood
Hill was seldom frequented; his body might lie there for months before
it was discovered.  He had once thought of the river, but he remembered
it had an ugly way of exposing its secrets on sandbar and shallow, and
that the body of Whisky Jim, bloated and disfigured almost beyond
recognition, had been once delivered to the eyes of Sandy Bar, before
breakfast, on the left bank of the Stanislaus.  He toiled up through
the chimisal that clothed the southern slope of the hill until he
reached the bald, storm-scarred cap of the mountain, ironically decked
with the picked, featherless plumes of a few dying pines.  One,
stripped of all but two lateral branches, brought a boyish recollection
to his fevered brain.  Against a background of dull sunset fire, it
extended two gaunt arms--black, rigid, and pathetic.  Calvary!

With the very word upon his lips, he threw himself, face downwards, on
the ground beneath it, and, with his fingers clutched in the soil, lay
there for some moments, silent and still.  In this attitude, albeit a
skeptic and unorthodox man, he prayed.  I cannot say--indeed I DARE not
say--that his prayer was heard, or that God visited him thus.  Let us
rather hope that all there was of God in him, in this crucial moment of
agony and shame, strove outward and upward.  Howbeit, when the moon
rose he rose too, perhaps a trifle less steady than the planet, and
began to descend the hill with feverish haste, yet with this marked
difference between his present haste and his former recklessness, that
it seemed to have a well-defined purpose.  When he reached the road
again, he struck into a well-worn trail, where, in the distance, a
light faintly twinkled. Following this beacon, he kept on, and at last
flung himself heavily against the door of the little cabin from whose
window the light had shone.  As he did so, it opened upon the figure of
a square, thickset man, who, in the impetuosity of Catron's onset,
received him, literally, in his arms.

"Captain Dick," said Roger Catron, hoarsely, "Captain Dick, save me!
For God's sake, save me!"

Captain Dick, without a word, placed a large, protecting hand upon
Catron's shoulder, allowed it to slip to his waist, and then drew his
visitor quietly, but firmly, within the cabin.  Yet, in the very
movement, he had managed to gently and unobtrusively possess himself of
Catron's pistol.

"Save ye!  From which?" asked Captain Dick, as quietly and
unobtrusively dropping the Derringer in a flour sack.

"From everything," gasped Catron, "from the men that are hounding me,
from my family, from my friends, but most of all--from, from--myself!"

He had, in turn, grasped Captain Dick, and forced him frenziedly
against the wall.  The captain released himself, and, taking the hands
of his excited visitor, said slowly,--

"Ye wan some blue mass--suthin' to unload your liver.  I'll get it up
for ye."

"But, Captain Dick, I'm an outcast, shamed, disgraced--"

"Two on them pills taken now, and two in the morning," continued the
captain, gravely, rolling a bolus in his fingers, "will bring yer head
to the wind again.  Yer fallin' to leeward all the time, and ye want to
brace up."

"But, Captain," continued the agonized man, again clutching the sinewy
arms of his host, and forcing his livid face and fixed eyes within a
few inches of Captain Dick's, "hear me!  You must and shall hear me.
I've been in jail--do you hear?--in jail, like a common felon.  I've
been sent to the asylum, like a demented pauper.  I've--"

"Two now, and two in the morning," continued the captain, quietly
releasing one hand only to place two enormous pills in the mouth of the
excited Catron, "thar now--a drink o' whisky--thar, that'll do--just
enough to take the taste out of yer mouth, wash it down, and belay it,
so to speak.  And how are the mills running, gin'rally, over at the
Bar?"

"Captain Dick, hear me--if you ARE my friend, for God's sake hear me!
An hour ago I should have been a dead man--"

"They say that Sam Bolin hez sold out of the Excelsior--"

"Captain Dick!  Listen, for God's sake; I have suffered--"

But Captain Dick was engaged in critically examining his man.  "I guess
I'll ladle ye out some o' that soothin' mixture I bought down at
Simpson's t' other day," he said, reflectively.  "And I onderstand the
boys up on the Bar think the rains will set in airly."

But here Nature was omnipotent.  Worn by exhaustion, excitement, and
fever, and possibly a little affected by Captain Dick's later potion,
Roger Catron turned white, and lapsed against the wall.  In an instant
Captain Dick had caught him, as a child, lifted him in his stalwart
arms, wrapped a blanket around him, and deposited him in his bunk.
Yet, even in his prostration, Catron made one more despairing appeal
for mental sympathy from his host.

"I know I'm sick--dying, perhaps," he gasped, from under the blankets;
"but promise me, whatever comes, tell my wife--say to--"

"It has been lookin' consid'ble like rain, lately, hereabouts,"
continued the captain, coolly, in a kind of amphibious slang,
characteristic of the man, "but in these yer latitudes no man kin set
up to be a weather sharp."

"Captain! will you hear me?"

"Yer goin' to sleep, now," said the captain, potentially.

"But, Captain, they are pursuing me!  If they should track me here?"

"Thar is a rifle over thar, and yer's my navy revolver.  When I've
emptied them, and want you to bear a hand, I'll call ye.  Just now your
lay is to turn in.  It's my watch."

There was something so positive, strong, assuring, and a little awesome
in the captain's manner, that the trembling, nervously-prostrated man
beneath the blankets forbore to question further. In a few moments his
breathing, albeit hurried and irregular, announced that he slept.  The
captain then arose, for a moment critically examined the sleeping man,
holding his head a little on one side, whistling softly, and stepping
backwards to get a good perspective, but always with contemplative good
humor, as if Catron were a work of art, which he (the captain) had
created, yet one that he was not yet entirely satisfied with.  Then he
put a large pea-jacket over his flannel blouse, dragged a Mexican
serape from the corner, and putting it over his shoulders, opened the
cabin door, sat down on the doorstep, and leaning back against the
door-post, composed himself to meditation.  The moon lifted herself
slowly over the crest of Deadwood Hill, and looked down, not unkindly,
on his broad, white, shaven face, round and smooth as her own disc,
encircled with a thin fringe of white hair and whiskers. Indeed, he
looked so like the prevailing caricatures in a comic almanac of
planets, with dimly outlined features, that the moon would have been
quite justified in flirting with him, as she clearly did, insinuating a
twinkle into his keen, gray eyes, making the shadow of a dimple on his
broad, fat chin, and otherwise idealizing him after the fashion of her
hero-worshiping sex. Touched by these benign influences, Captain Dick
presently broke forth in melody.  His song was various, but chiefly, I
think, confined to the recital of the exploits of one "Lorenzo," who,
as related by himself,--

    "Shipped on board of a Liner,
                'Renzo, boys, Renzo,"--

a fact that seemed to have deprived him at once of all metre, grammar,
or even the power of coherent narration.  At times a groan or a
half-articulate cry would come from the "bunk" whereon Roger Catron
lay, a circumstance that always seemed to excite Captain Dick to
greater effort and more rapid vocalization.  Toward morning, in the
midst of a prolonged howl from the captain, who was finishing the
"Starboard Watch, ahoy!" in three different keys, Roger Catron's voice
broke suddenly and sharply from his enwrappings:--

"Dry up, you d--d old fool, will you?"

Captain Dick stopped instantly.  Rising to his feet, and looking over
the landscape, he took all nature into his confidence in one
inconceivably arch and crafty wink.  "He's coming up to the wind," he
said softly, rubbing his hands.  "The pills is fetchin' him. Steady
now, boys, steady.  Steady as she goes on her course," and with another
wink of ineffable wisdom, he entered the cabin and locked the door.


Meanwhile, the best society of Sandy Bar was kind to the newly-made
widow.  Without being definitely expressed, it was generally felt that
sympathy with her was now safe, and carried no moral responsibility
with it.  Even practical and pecuniary aid, which before had been
withheld, lest it should be diverted from its proper intent, and,
perhaps through the weakness of the wife, made to minister to the
wickedness of the husband,--even that was now openly suggested.
Everybody felt that somebody should do something for the widow.  A few
did it.  Her own sex rallied to her side, generally with large
sympathy, but, unfortunately, small pecuniary or practical result.  At
last, when the feasibility of her taking a boarding-house in San
Francisco, and identifying herself with that large class of American
gentlewomen who have seen better days, but clearly are on the road
never to see them again, was suggested, a few of her own and her
husband's rich relatives came to the front to rehabilitate her.  It was
easier to take her into their homes as an equal than to refuse to call
upon her as the mistress of a lodging-house in the adjoining street.
And upon inspection it was found that she was still quite an eligible
partie, prepossessing, and withal, in her widow's weeds, a kind of
poetical and sentimental presence, as necessary in a wealthy and
fashionable American family as a work of art.  "Yes, poor Caroline has
had a sad, sad history," the languid Mrs. Walker Catron would say, "and
we all sympathize with her deeply; Walker always regards her as a
sister."  What was this dark history never came out, but its very
mystery always thrilled the visitor, and seemed to indicate plainly the
respectability of the hostess.  An American family without a genteel
skeleton in its closet could scarcely add to that gossip which keeps
society from forgetting its members.  Nor was it altogether unnatural
that presently Mrs. Roger Catron lent herself to this sentimental
deception, and began to think that she really was a more exquisitely
aggrieved woman than she had imagined.  At times, when this vague load
of iniquity put upon her dead husband assumed, through the mystery of
her friends, the rumor of murder and highway robbery, and even an
attempt upon her own life, she went to her room, a little frightened,
and had "a good cry," reappearing more mournful and pathetic than ever,
and corroborating the suspicions of her friends.  Indeed, one or two
impulsive gentlemen, fired by her pathetic eyelids, openly regretted
that the deceased had not been hanged, to which Mrs. Walker Catron
responded that, "Thank Heaven, they were spared at least that
disgrace!" and so sent conviction into the minds of her hearers.

It was scarcely two months after this painful close of her matrimonial
life that one rainy February morning the servant brought a card to Mrs.
Roger Catron, bearing the following inscription:--

          "Richard Graeme Macleod."


Women are more readily affected by names than we are, and there was a
certain Highland respectability about this that, albeit, not knowing
its possessor, impelled Mrs. Catron to send word that she "would be
down in a few moments."  At the end of this femininely indefinite
period,--a quarter of an hour by the French clock on the
mantel-piece,--Mrs. Roger Catron made her appearance in the
reception-room.  It was a dull, wet day, as I have said before, but on
the Contra Costa hills the greens and a few flowers were already
showing a promise of rejuvenescence and an early spring.  There was
something of this, I think, in Mrs. Catron's presence, shown perhaps in
the coquettish bow of a ribbon, in a larger and more delicate ruche, in
a tighter belting of her black cashmere gown; but still there was a
suggestion of recent rain in the eyes, and threatening weather.  As she
entered the room, the sun came out, too, and revealed the prettiness
and delicacy of her figure, and I regret to state, also, the somewhat
obtrusive plainness of her visitor.

"I knew ye'd be sorter disapp'inted at first, not gettin' the regular
bearings o' my name, but I'm 'Captain Dick.'  Mebbe ye've heard your
husband--that is, your husband ez waz, Roger Catron--speak o' me?"

Mrs. Catron, feeling herself outraged and deceived in belt, ruche, and
ribbon, freezingly admitted that she had heard of him before.

"In course," said the captain; "why, Lord love ye, Mrs. Catron,--ez
waz,--he used to be all the time talkin' of ye.  And allers in a free,
easy, confidential way.  Why, one night--don't ye remember?--when he
came home, carryin', mebbee, more canvas than was seamanlike, and you
shet him out the house, and laid for him with a broomstick, or one o'
them crokay mallets, I disremember which, and he kem over to me, ole
Captain Dick, and I sez to him, sez I, 'Why, Roger, them's only love
pats, and yer condishun is such ez to make any woman mad-like.'  Why,
Lord bless ye! there ain't enny of them mootool differences you and him
hed ez I doesn't knows on, and didn't always stand by, and lend ye a
hand, and heave in a word or two of advice when called on."

Mrs. Catron, ice everywhere but in her pink cheeks, was glad that Mr.
Catron seemed to have always a friend to whom he confided EVERYTHING,
even the base falsehoods he had invented.

"Mebbe now they WAZ falsehoods," said the captain, thoughtfully. "But
don't ye go to think," he added conscientiously, "that he kept on that
tack all the time.  Why, that day he made a raise, gambling, I think,
over at Dutch Flat, and give ye them bracelets,--regular solid
gold,--why, it would have done your heart good to have heard him talk
about you--said you had the prettiest arm in Californy.  Well," said
the captain, looking around for a suitable climax, "well, you'd have
thought that he was sorter proud of ye! Why, I woz with him in 'Frisco
when he bought that A1 prize bonnet for ye for $75, and not hevin' over
$50 in his pocket, borryed the other $25 outer me.  Mebbe it was a
little fancy for a bonnet; but I allers thought he took it a little too
much to heart when you swopped it off for that Dollar Varden dress,
just because that Lawyer Maxwell said the Dollar Vardens was becomin'
to ye.  Ye know, I reckon, he was always sorter jealous of that thar
shark--"

"May I venture to ask what your business is with me?" interrupted Mrs.
Catron, sharply.

"In course," said the captain, rising.  "Ye see," he said,
apologetically, "we got to talking o' Roger and ole times, and I got a
little out o' my course.  It's a matter of--" he began to fumble in his
pockets, and finally produced a small memorandum-book, which he glanced
over--"it's a matter of $250."

"I don't understand you," said Mrs. Catron, in indignant astonishment.

"On the 15th of July," said the captain, consulting his
memorandum-book, "Roger sold his claim at Nye's Ford for $1,500.  Now,
le's see.  Thar was nigh on $350 ez he admitted to me he lost at poker,
and we'll add $50 to that for treating, suppers, and drinks
gin'rally--put Roger down for $400.  Then there was YOU.  Now you spent
$250 on your trip to 'Frisco thet summer; then $200 went for them
presents you sent your Aunt Jane, and thar was $400 for house expenses.
Well, thet foots up $1,250.  Now, what's become of thet other $250?"

Mrs. Catron's woman's impulse to retaliate sharply overcame her first
natural indignation at her visitor's impudence.

Therein she lost, woman-like, her ground of vantage.

"Perhaps the woman he fled with can tell you," she said savagely.

"Thet," said the captain, slowly, "is a good, a reasonable idee. But it
ain't true; from all I can gather SHE lent HIM money.  It didn't go
THAR."

"Roger Catron left me penniless," said Mrs. Catron, hotly.

"Thet's jist what gets me.  You oughter have $250 somewhar lying round."

Mrs. Catron saw her error.  "May I ask what right you have to question
me?  If you have any, I must refer you to my lawyer or my
brother-in-law; if you have none, I hope you will not oblige me to call
the servants to put you from the house."

"Thet sounds reasonable and square, too," said the captain,
thoughtfully; "I've a power of attorney from Roger Catron to settle up
his affairs and pay his debts, given a week afore them detectives
handed ye over his dead body.  But I thought that you and me might save
lawyer's fees and all fuss and feathers, ef, in a sociable, sad-like
way,--lookin' back sorter on Roger ez you and me once knew him,--we had
a quiet talk together."

"Good morning, sir," said Mrs. Catron, rising stiffly.  The captain
hesitated a moment, a slight flush of color came in his face as he at
last rose as the lady backed out of the room.  "Good morning, ma'am,"
said the captain, and departed.

Very little was known of this interview except the general impression
in the family that Mrs. Catron had successfully resisted a vague
attempt at blackmail from one of her husband's former dissolute
companions.  Yet it is only fair to say that Mrs. Catron snapped up,
quite savagely, two male sympathizers on this subject, and cried a good
deal for two days afterward, and once, in the hearing of her
sister-in-law, to that lady's great horror, "wished she was dead."

A week after this interview, as Lawyer Phillips sat in his office, he
was visited by Macleod.  Recognizing, possibly, some practical
difference between the widow and the lawyer, Captain Dick this time
first produced his credentials,--a "power of attorney."  "I need not
tell you," said Phillips, "that the death of your principal renders
this instrument invalid, and I suppose you know that, leaving no will,
and no property, his estate has not been administered upon."

"Mebbe it is, and mebbe it isn't.  But I hain't askin' for anythin' but
information.  There was a bit o' prop'ty and a mill onto it, over at
Heavytree, ez sold for $10,000.  I don't see," said the captain,
consulting his memorandum-book, "ez HE got anything out of it."

"It was mortgaged for $7,000," said the lawyer, quickly, "and the
interest and fees amount to about $3,000 more."

"The mortgage was given as security for a note?"

"Yes, a gambling debt," said the lawyer, sharply.

"Thet's so, and my belief ez that it wasn't a square game.  He
shouldn't hev given no note.  Why, don't ye mind, 'way back in '60,
when you and me waz in Marysville, that night that you bucked agin
faro, and lost seving hundred dollars, and then refoosed to take up
your checks, saying it was fraud and a gambling debt?  And don't ye
mind when that chap kicked ye, and I helped to drag him off ye--and--"

"I'm busy now, Mr. Macleod," said Phillips, hastily; "my clerk will
give you all the information you require.  Good morning."

"It's mighty queer," said the captain, thoughtfully, as he descended
the stairs, "but the moment the conversation gets limber and
sociable-like, and I gets to runnin' free under easy sail, it's always
'Good morning, Captain,' and we're becalmed."

By some occult influence, all the foregoing conversation, slightly
exaggerated, and the whole interview of the captain with the widow with
sundry additions, became the common property of Sandy Bar, to the great
delight of the boys.  There was scarcely a person who had ever had
business or social relations with Roger Catron, whom "The Frozen
Truth," as Sandy Bar delighted to designate the captain, had not
"interviewed," as simply and directly.  It is said that he closed a
conversation with one of the San Francisco detectives, who had found
Roger Catron's body, in these words: "And now hevin' got throo'
bizness, I was goin' to ask ye what's gone of Matt. Jones, who was with
ye in the bush in Austraily.  Lord, how he got me quite interested in
ye, telling me how you and him got out on a ticket-of-leave, and was
chased by them milishy guards, and at last swam out to a San Francisco
bark and escaped;" but here the inevitable pressure of previous
business always stopped the captain's conversational flow.  The natural
result of this was a singular reaction in favor of the late Roger
Catron in the public sentiment of Sandy Bar, so strong, indeed, as to
induce the Rev. Mr. Joshua McSnagly, the next Sunday, to combat it with
the moral of Catron's life.  After the service, he was approached in
the vestibule, and in the hearing of some of his audience, by Captain
Dick, with the following compliment: "In many pints ye hed jess got
Roger Catron down to a hair.  I knew ye'd do it: why, Lord love ye, you
and him had pints in common; and when he giv' ye that hundred dollars
arter the fire in Sacramento, to help ye rebuild the parsonage, he said
to me,--me not likin' ye on account o' my being on the committee that
invited ye to resign from Marysville all along o' that affair with
Deacon Pursell's darter; and a piece she was, parson! eh?--well, Roger,
he ups and sez to me, 'Every man hez his faults,' sez he; and sez he,
'there's no reason why a parson ain't a human being like us, and that
gal o' Pursell's is pizen, ez I know.'  So ye see, I seed that ye was
hittin' yourself over Catron's shoulder, like them early martyrs."  But
here, as Captain Dick was clearly blocking up all egress from the
church, the sexton obliged him to move on, and again he was stopped in
his conversational career.

But only for a time.  Before long, it was whispered that Captain Dick
had ordered a meeting of the creditors, debtors, and friends of Roger
Catron at Robinson's Hall.  It was suggested, with some show of reason,
that this had been done at the instigation of various practical jokers
of Sandy Bar, who had imposed on the simple directness of the captain,
and the attendance that night certainly indicated something more than a
mere business meeting. All of Sandy Bar crowded into Robinson's Hall,
and long before Captain Dick made his appearance on the platform, with
his inevitable memorandum-book, every inch of floor was crowded.

The captain began to read the expenditures of Roger Catron with
relentless fidelity of detail.  The several losses by poker, the whisky
bills, and the record of a "jamboree" at Tooley's, the vague expenses
whereof footed up $275, were received with enthusiastic cheers by the
audience.  A single milliner's bill for $125 was hailed with delight;
$100 expended in treating the Vestal Virgin Combination Troupe almost
canonized his memory; $50 for a simple buggy ride with Deacon Fisk
brought down the house; $500 advanced, without security, and unpaid,
for the electioneering expenses of Assemblyman Jones, who had recently
introduced a bill to prevent gambling and the sale of lager beer on
Sundays, was received with an ominous groan.  One or two other items of
money loaned occasioned the withdrawal of several gentlemen from the
audience amidst the hisses or ironical cheers of the others.

At last Captain Dick stopped and advanced to the footlights.

"Gentlemen and friends," he said, slowly.  "I foots up $25,000 as Roger
Catron hez MADE, fair and square, in this yer county.  I foots up
$27,000 ez he has SPENT in this yer county.  I puts it to you ez
men,--far-minded men,--ef this man was a pauper and debtor? I put it to
you ez far-minded men,--ez free and easy men,--ez political
economists,--ez this the kind of men to impoverish a county?"

An overwhelming and instantaneous "No!" almost drowned the last
utterance of the speaker.

"Thar is only one item," said Captain Dick, slowly, "only one item,
that ez men,--ez far-minded men,--ez political economists,--it seems to
me we hez the right to question.  It's this:  Thar is an item, read to
you by me, of $2,000 paid to certing San Francisco detectives, paid out
o' the assets o' Roger Catron, for the finding of Roger Catron's body.
Gentlemen of Sandy Bar and friends, I found that body, and yer it is!"

And Roger Catron, a little pale and nervous, but palpably in the flesh,
stepped upon the platform.

Of course the newspapers were full of it the next day.  Of course, in
due time, it appeared as a garbled and romantic item in the San
Francisco press.  Of course Mrs. Catron, on reading it, fainted, and
for two days said that this last cruel blow ended all relations between
her husband and herself.  On the third day she expressed her belief
that, if he had had the slightest feeling for her, he would, long
since, for the sake of mere decency, have communicated with her.  On
the fourth day she thought she had been, perhaps, badly advised, had an
open quarrel with her relatives, and intimated that a wife had certain
obligations, etc.  On the sixth day, still not hearing from him, she
quoted Scripture, spoke of a seventy-times-seven forgiveness, and went
generally into mild hysterics.  On the seventh, she left in the morning
train for Sandy Bar.

And really I don't know as I have anything more to tell.  I dined with
them recently, and, upon my word, a more decorous, correct,
conventional, and dull dinner I never ate in my life.



"WHO WAS MY QUIET FRIEND?"

"Stranger!"

The voice was not loud, but clear and penetrating.  I looked vainly up
and down the narrow, darkening trail.  No one in the fringe of alder
ahead; no one on the gullied slope behind.

"O! stranger!"

This time a little impatiently.  The California classical vocative,
"O," always meant business.

I looked up, and perceived for the first time on the ledge, thirty feet
above me, another trail parallel with my own, and looking down upon me
through the buckeye bushes a small man on a black horse.

Five things to be here noted by the circumspect mountaineer. FIRST, the
locality,--lonely and inaccessible, and away from the regular faring of
teamsters and miners.  SECONDLY, the stranger's superior knowledge of
the road, from the fact that the other trail was unknown to the
ordinary traveler.  THIRDLY, that he was well armed and equipped.
FOURTHLY, that he was better mounted. FIFTHLY, that any distrust or
timidity arising from the contemplation of these facts had better be
kept to one's self.

All this passed rapidly through my mind as I returned his salutation.

"Got any tobacco?" he asked.

I had, and signified the fact, holding up the pouch inquiringly.

"All right, I'll come down.  Ride on, and I'll jine ye on the slide."

"The slide!"  Here was a new geographical discovery as odd as the
second trail.  I had ridden over the trail a dozen times, and seen no
communication between the ledge and trail.  Nevertheless, I went on a
hundred yards or so, when there was a sharp crackling in the
underbrush, a shower of stones on the trail, and my friend plunged
through the bushes to my side, down a grade that I should scarcely have
dared to lead my horse.  There was no doubt he was an accomplished
rider,--another fact to be noted.

As he ranged beside me, I found I was not mistaken as to his size; he
was quite under the medium height, and but for a pair of cold, gray
eyes, was rather commonplace in feature.

"You've got a good horse there," I suggested.

He was filling his pipe from my pouch, but looked up a little
surprised, and said, "Of course."  He then puffed away with the nervous
eagerness of a man long deprived of that sedative. Finally, between the
puffs, he asked me whence I came.

I replied, "From Lagrange."

He looked at me a few moments curiously, but on my adding that I had
only halted there for a few hours, he said: "I thought I knew every man
between Lagrange and Indian Spring, but somehow I sorter disremember
your face and your name."

Not particularly caring that he should remember either, I replied half
laughingly, that, as I lived the other side of Indian Spring, it was
quite natural.  He took the rebuff, if such it was, so quietly that as
an act of mere perfunctory politeness I asked him where he came from.

"Lagrange."

"And you are going to--"

"Well! that depends pretty much on how things pan out, and whether I
can make the riffle."  He let his hand rest quite unconsciously on the
leathern holster of his dragoon revolver, yet with a strong suggestion
to me of his ability "to make the riffle" if he wanted to, and added:
"But just now I was reck'nin' on taking a little pasear with you."

There was nothing offensive in his speech save its familiarity, and the
reflection, perhaps, that whether I objected or not, he was quite able
to do as he said.  I only replied that if our pasear was prolonged
beyond Heavytree Hill, I should have to borrow his beast. To my
surprise he replied quietly, "That's so," adding that the horse was at
my disposal when he wasn't using it, and HALF of it when he was.  "Dick
has carried double many a time before this," he continued, "and kin do
it again; when your mustang gives out I'll give you a lift and room to
spare."

I could not help smiling at the idea of appearing before the boys at
Red Gulch en croupe with the stranger; but neither could I help being
oddly affected by the suggestion that his horse had done double duty
before.  "On what occasion, and why?" was a question I kept to myself.
We were ascending the long, rocky flank of the divide; the narrowness
of the trail obliged us to proceed slowly, and in file, so that there
was little chance for conversation, had he been disposed to satisfy my
curiosity.

We toiled on in silence, the buckeye giving way to chimisal, the
westering sun, reflected again from the blank walls beside us, blinding
our eyes with its glare.  The pines in the canyon below were olive
gulfs of heat, over which a hawk here and there drifted lazily, or,
rising to our level, cast a weird and gigantic shadow of slowly moving
wings on the mountain side.  The superiority of the stranger's horse
led him often far in advance, and made me hope that he might forget me
entirely, or push on, growing weary of waiting.  But regularly he would
halt by a bowlder, or reappear from some chimisal, where he had
patiently halted.  I was beginning to hate him mildly, when at one of
those reappearances he drew up to my side, and asked me how I liked
Dickens!

Had he asked my opinion of Huxley or Darwin, I could not have been more
astonished.  Thinking it were possible that he referred to some local
celebrity of Lagrange, I said, hesitatingly:--

"You mean--"

"Charles Dickens.  Of course you've read him?  Which of his books do
you like best?"

I replied with considerable embarrassment that I liked them all,--as I
certainly did.

He grasped my hand for a moment with a fervor quite unlike his usual
phlegm, and said, "That's me, old man.  Dickens ain't no slouch.  You
can count on him pretty much all the time."

With this rough preface, he launched into a criticism of the novelist,
which for intelligent sympathy and hearty appreciation I had rarely
heard equaled.  Not only did he dwell upon the exuberance of his humor,
but upon the power of his pathos and the all-pervading element of his
poetry.  I looked at the man in astonishment.  I had considered myself
a rather diligent student of the great master of fiction, but the
stranger's felicity of quotation and illustration staggered me.  It is
true, that his thought was not always clothed in the best language, and
often appeared in the slouching, slangy undress of the place and
period, yet it never was rustic nor homespun, and sometimes struck me
with its precision and fitness.  Considerably softened toward him, I
tried him with other literature.  But vainly.  Beyond a few of the
lyrical and emotional poets, he knew nothing.  Under the influence and
enthusiasm of his own speech, he himself had softened considerably;
offered to change horses with me, readjusted my saddle with
professional skill, transferred my pack to his own horse, insisted upon
my sharing the contents of his whisky flask, and, noticing that I was
unarmed, pressed upon me a silver-mounted Derringer, which he assured
me he could "warrant."  These various offices of good will and the
diversion of his talk beguiled me from noticing the fact that the trail
was beginning to become obscure and unrecognizable.  We were evidently
pursuing a route unknown before to me.  I pointed out the fact to my
companion, a little impatiently.  He instantly resumed his old manner
and dialect.

"Well, I reckon one trail's as good as another, and what hev ye got to
say about it?"

I pointed out, with some dignity, that I preferred the old trail.

"Mebbe you did.  But you're jiss now takin' a pasear with ME.  This yer
trail will bring you right into Indian Spring, and ONNOTICED, and no
questions asked.  Don't you mind now, I'll see you through."

It was necessary here to make some stand against my strange companion.
I said firmly, yet as politely as I could, that I had proposed stopping
over night with a friend.

"Whar?"

I hesitated.  The friend was an eccentric Eastern man, well known in
the locality for his fastidiousness and his habits as a recluse. A
misanthrope, of ample family and ample means, he had chosen a secluded
but picturesque valley in the Sierras where he could rail against the
world without opposition.  "Lone Valley," or "Boston Ranch," as it was
familiarly called, was the one spot that the average miner both
respected and feared.  Mr. Sylvester, its proprietor, had never
affiliated with "the boys," nor had he ever lost their respect by any
active opposition to their ideas.  If seclusion had been his object, he
certainly was gratified. Nevertheless, in the darkening shadows of the
night, and on a lonely and unknown trail, I hesitated a little at
repeating his name to a stranger of whom I knew so little.  But my
mysterious companion took the matter out of my hands.

"Look yar," he said, suddenly, "thar ain't but one place twixt yer and
Indian Spring whar ye can stop, and that is Sylvester's."

I assented, a little sullenly.

"Well," said the stranger, quietly, and with a slight suggestion of
conferring a favor on me, "ef yer pointed for Sylvester's--why--I DON'T
MIND STOPPING THAR WITH YE.  It's a little off the road--I'll lose some
time--but taking it by and large, I don't much mind."

I stated, as rapidly and as strongly as I could, that my acquaintance
with Mr. Sylvester did not justify the introduction of a stranger to
his hospitality; that he was unlike most of the people here,--in short,
that he was a queer man, etc., etc.

To my surprise my companion answered quietly: "Oh, that's all right.
I've heerd of him.  Ef you don't feel like checking me through, or if
you'd rather put 'C. O. D.' on my back, why it's all the same to me.
I'll play it alone.  Only you just count me in. Say 'Sylvester' all the
time.  That's me!"

What could I oppose to this man's quiet assurance?  I felt myself
growing red with anger and nervous with embarrassment.  What would the
correct Sylvester say to me?  What would the girls,--I was a young man
then, and had won an entree to their domestic circle by my
reserve,--known by a less complimentary adjective among "the
boys,"--what would they say to my new acquaintance?  Yet I certainly
could not object to his assuming all risks on his own personal
recognizances, nor could I resist a certain feeling of shame at my
embarrassment.

We were beginning to descend.  In the distance below us already
twinkled the lights in the solitary rancho of Lone Valley.  I turned to
my companion.  "But you have forgotten that I don't even know your
name.  What am I to call you?"

"That's so," he said, musingly.  "Now, let's see.  'Kearney' would be a
good name.  It's short and easy like.  Thar's a street in 'Frisco the
same title; Kearney it is."

"But--" I began impatiently.

"Now you leave all that to me," he interrupted, with a superb
self-confidence that I could not but admire.  "The name ain't no
account.  It's the man that's responsible.  Ef I was to lay for a man
that I reckoned was named Jones, and after I fetched him I found out on
the inquest that his real name was Smith, that wouldn't make no matter,
as long as I got the man."

The illustration, forcible as it was, did not strike me as offering a
prepossessing introduction, but we were already at the rancho. The
barking of dogs brought Sylvester to the door of the pretty little
cottage which his taste had adorned.

I briefly introduced Mr. Kearney.  "Kearney will do--Kearney's good
enough for me," commented the soi-disant Kearney half-aloud, to my own
horror and Sylvester's evident mystification, and then he blandly
excused himself for a moment that he might personally supervise the
care of his own beast.  When he was out of ear-shot I drew the puzzled
Sylvester aside.

"I have picked up--I mean I have been picked up on the road by a gentle
maniac, whose name is not Kearney.  He is well armed and quotes
Dickens.  With care, acquiescence in his views on all subjects, and
general submission to his commands, he may be placated.  Doubtless the
spectacle of your helpless family, the contemplation of your daughter's
beauty and innocence, may touch his fine sense of humor and pathos.
Meanwhile, Heaven help you, and forgive me."

I ran upstairs to the little den that my hospitable host had kept
always reserved for me in my wanderings.  I lingered some time over my
ablutions, hearing the languid, gentlemanly drawl of Sylvester below,
mingled with the equally cool, easy slang of my mysterious
acquaintance.  When I came down to the sitting-room I was surprised,
however, to find the self-styled Kearney quietly seated on the sofa,
the gentle May Sylvester, the "Lily of Lone Valley," sitting with
maidenly awe and unaffected interest on one side of him, while on the
other that arrant flirt, her cousin Kate, was practicing the pitiless
archery of her eyes, with an excitement that seemed almost real.

"Who is your deliciously cool friend?" she managed to whisper to me at
supper, as I sat utterly dazed and bewildered between the enrapt May
Sylvester, who seemed to hang upon his words, and this giddy girl of
the period, who was emptying the battery of her charms in active
rivalry upon him.  "Of course we know his name isn't Kearney.  But how
romantic!  And isn't he perfectly lovely?  And who is he?"

I replied with severe irony that I was not aware what foreign potentate
was then traveling incognito in the Sierras of California, but that
when his royal highness was pleased to inform me, I should be glad to
introduce him properly.  "Until then," I added, "I fear the
acquaintance must be Morganatic."

"You're only jealous of him," she said pertly.  "Look at May--she is
completely fascinated.  And her father, too."  And actually, the
languid, world-sick, cynical Sylvester was regarding him with a boyish
interest and enthusiasm almost incompatible with his nature. Yet I
submit honestly to the clear-headed reason of my own sex, that I could
see nothing more in the man than I have already delivered to the reader.

In the middle of an exciting story of adventure, of which he, to the
already prejudiced mind of his fair auditors, was evidently the hero,
he stopped suddenly.

"It's only some pack train passing the bridge on the lower trail,"
explained Sylvester; "go on."

"It may be my horse is a trifle oneasy in the stable," said the alleged
Kearney; "he ain't used to boards and covering."  Heaven only knows
what wild and delicious revelation lay in the statement of this fact,
but the girls looked at each other with cheeks pink with excitement as
Kearney arose, and, with quiet absence of ceremony, quitted the table.

"Ain't he just lovely?" said Kate, gasping for breath, "and so witty."

"Witty!" said the gentle May, with just the slightest trace of defiance
in her sweet voice; "witty, my dear? why, don't you see that his heart
is just breaking with pathos?  Witty, indeed; why, when he was speaking
of that poor Mexican woman that was hung, I saw the tears gather in his
eyes.  Witty, indeed!"

"Tears," laughed the cynical Sylvester, "tears, idle tears.  Why, you
silly children, the man is a man of the world, a philosopher, quiet,
observant, unassuming."

"Unassuming!"  Was Sylvester intoxicated, or had the mysterious
stranger mixed the "insane verb" with the family pottage?  He returned
before I could answer this self-asked inquiry, and resumed coolly his
broken narrative.  Finding myself forgotten in the man I had so long
hesitated to introduce to my friends, I retired to rest early, only to
hear, through the thin partitions, two hours later, enthusiastic
praises of the new guest from the voluble lips of the girls, as they
chatted in the next room before retiring.

At midnight I was startled by the sound of horses' hoofs and the
jingling of spurs below.  A conversation between my host and some
mysterious personage in the darkness was carried on in such a low tone
that I could not learn its import.  As the cavalcade rode away I raised
the window.

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing," said Sylvester, coolly, "only another one of those playful
homicidal freaks peculiar to the country.  A man was shot by Cherokee
Jack over at Lagrange this morning, and that was the sheriff of
Calaveras and his posse hunting him.  I told him I'd seen nobody but
you and your friend.  By the way, I hope the cursed noise hasn't
disturbed him.  The poor fellow looked as if he wanted rest."

I thought so, too.  Nevertheless, I went softly to his room.  It was
empty.  My impression was that he had distanced the sheriff of
Calaveras about two hours.



A GHOST OF THE SIERRAS

It was a vast silence of pines, redolent with balsamic breath, and
muffled with the dry dust of dead bark and matted mosses.  Lying on our
backs, we looked upward through a hundred feet of clear, unbroken
interval to the first lateral branches that formed the flat canopy
above us.  Here and there the fierce sun, from whose active persecution
we had just escaped, searched for us through the woods, but its keen
blade was dulled and turned aside by intercostal boughs, and its
brightness dissipated in nebulous mists throughout the roofing of the
dim, brown aisles around us.  We were in another atmosphere, under
another sky; indeed, in another world than the dazzling one we had just
quitted.  The grave silence seemed so much a part of the grateful
coolness, that we hesitated to speak, and for some moments lay quietly
outstretched on the pine tassels where we had first thrown ourselves.
Finally, a voice broke the silence:--

"Ask the old Major; he knows all about it!"

The person here alluded to under that military title was myself.  I
hardly need explain to any Californian that it by no means followed
that I was a "Major," or that I was "old," or that I knew anything
about "it," or indeed what "it" referred to.  The whole remark was
merely one of the usual conventional feelers to conversation,--a kind
of social preamble, quite common to our slangy camp intercourse.
Nevertheless, as I was always known as the Major, perhaps for no better
reason than that the speaker, an old journalist, was always called
Doctor, I recognized the fact so far as to kick aside an intervening
saddle, so that I could see the speaker's face on a level with my own,
and said nothing.

"About ghosts!" said the Doctor, after a pause, which nobody broke or
was expected to break.  "Ghosts, sir!  That's what we want to know.
What are we doing here in this blanked old mausoleum of Calaveras
County, if it isn't to find out something about 'em, eh?"

Nobody replied.

"Thar's that haunted house at Cave City.  Can't be more than a mile or
two away, anyhow.  Used to be just off the trail."

A dead silence.

The Doctor (addressing space generally) "Yes, sir; it WAS a mighty
queer story."

Still the same reposeful indifference.  We all knew the Doctor's skill
as a raconteur; we all knew that a story was coming, and we all knew
that any interruption would be fatal.  Time and time again, in our
prospecting experience, had a word of polite encouragement, a rash
expression of interest, even a too eager attitude of silent expectancy,
brought the Doctor to a sudden change of subject.  Time and time again
have we seen the unwary stranger stand amazed and bewildered between
our own indifference and the sudden termination of a promising
anecdote, through his own unlucky interference.  So we said nothing.
"The Judge"--another instance of arbitrary nomenclature--pretended to
sleep.  Jack began to twist a cigarrito.  Thornton bit off the ends of
pine needles reflectively.

"Yes, sir," continued the Doctor, coolly resting the back of his head
on the palms of his hands, "it WAS rather curious.  All except the
murder.  THAT'S what gets me, for the murder had no new points, no
fancy touches, no sentiment, no mystery.  Was just one of the old
style, 'sub-head' paragraphs.  Old-fashioned miner scrubs along on
hardtack and beans, and saves up a little money to go home and see
relations.  Old-fashioned assassin sharpens up knife, old style; loads
old flint-lock, brass-mounted pistol; walks in on old-fashioned miner
one dark night, sends him home to his relations away back to several
generations, and walks off with the swag.  No mystery THERE; nothing to
clear up; subsequent revelations only impertinence.  Nothing for any
ghost to do--who meant business. More than that, over forty murders,
same old kind, committed every year in Calaveras, and no spiritual post
obits coming due every anniversary; no assessments made on the peace
and quiet of the surviving community.  I tell you what, boys, I've
always been inclined to throw off on the Cave City ghost for that
alone.  It's a bad precedent, sir.  If that kind o' thing is going to
obtain in the foot-hills, we'll have the trails full of chaps formerly
knocked over by Mexicans and road agents; every little camp and grocery
will have stock enough on hand to go into business, and where's there
any security for surviving life and property, eh? What's your opinion,
Judge, as a fair-minded legislator?"

Of course there was no response.  Yet it was part of the Doctor's
system of aggravation to become discursive at these moments, in the
hope of interruption, and he continued for some moments to dwell on the
terrible possibility of a state of affairs in which a gentleman could
no longer settle a dispute with an enemy without being subjected to
succeeding spiritual embarrassment.  But all this digression fell upon
apparently inattentive ears.

"Well, sir, after the murder, the cabin stood for a long time deserted
and tenantless.  Popular opinion was against it.  One day a ragged
prospector, savage with hard labor and harder luck, came to the camp,
looking for a place to live and a chance to prospect. After the boys
had taken his measure, they concluded that he'd already tackled so much
in the way of difficulties that a ghost more or less wouldn't be of
much account.  So they sent him to the haunted cabin.  He had a big
yellow dog with him, about as ugly and as savage as himself; and the
boys sort o' congratulated themselves, from a practical view-point,
that while they were giving the old ruffian a shelter, they were
helping in the cause of Christianity against ghosts and goblins.  They
had little faith in the old man, but went their whole pile on that dog.
That's where they were mistaken.

"The house stood almost three hundred feet from the nearest cave, and
on dark nights, being in a hollow, was as lonely as if it had been on
the top of Shasta.  If you ever saw the spot when there was just moon
enough to bring out the little surrounding clumps of chapparal until
they looked like crouching figures, and make the bits of broken quartz
glisten like skulls, you'd begin to understand how big a contract that
man and that yellow dog undertook.

"They went into possession that afternoon, and old Hard Times set out
to cook his supper.  When it was over he sat down by the embers and lit
his pipe, the yellow dog lying at his feet.  Suddenly 'Rap! rap!' comes
from the door.  'Come in,' says the man, gruffly. 'Rap!' again.  'Come
in and be d--d to you,' says the man, who has no idea of getting up to
open the door.  But no one responded, and the next moment smash goes
the only sound pane in the only window. Seeing this, old Hard Times
gets up, with the devil in his eye, and a revolver in his hand,
followed by the yellow dog, with every tooth showing, and swings open
the door.  No one there!  But as the man opened the door, that yellow
dog, that had been so chipper before, suddenly begins to crouch and
step backward, step by step, trembling and shivering, and at last
crouches down in the chimney, without even so much as looking at his
master.  The man slams the door shut again, but there comes another
smash.

"This time it seems to come from inside the cabin, and it isn't until
the man looks around and sees everything quiet that he gets up, without
speaking, and makes a dash for the door, and tears round outside the
cabin like mad, but finds nothing but silence and darkness.  Then he
comes back swearing and calls the dog.  But that great yellow dog that
the boys would have staked all their money on is crouching under the
bunk, and has to be dragged out like a coon from a hollow tree, and
lies there, his eyes starting from their sockets; every limb and muscle
quivering with fear, and his very hair drawn up in bristling ridges.
The man calls him to the door. He drags himself a few steps, stops,
sniffs, and refuses to go further.  The man calls him again, with an
oath and a threat. Then, what does that yellow dog do?  He crawls
edgewise towards the door, crouching himself against the bunk till he's
flatter than a knife blade; then, half way, he stops.  Then that d--d
yellow dog begins to walk gingerly--lifting each foot up in the air,
one after the other, still trembling in every limb.  Then he stops
again. Then he crouches.  Then he gives one little shuddering leap--not
straight forward, but up,--clearing the floor about six inches, as if--"

"Over something," interrupted the Judge, hastily, lifting himself on
his elbow.

The Doctor stopped instantly.  "Juan," he said coolly, to one of the
Mexican packers, "quit foolin' with that riata.  You'll have that stake
out and that mule loose in another minute.  Come over this way!"

The Mexican turned a scared, white face to the Doctor, muttering
something, and let go the deer-skin hide.  We all up-raised our voices
with one accord, the Judge most penitently and apologetically, and
implored the Doctor to go on.  "I'll shoot the first man who interrupts
you again," added Thornton; persuasively.

But the Doctor, with his hands languidly under his head, had lost his
interest.  "Well, the dog ran off to the hills, and neither the threats
nor cajoleries of his master could ever make him enter the cabin again.
The next day the man left the camp.  What time is it? Getting on to
sundown, ain't it?  Keep off my leg, will you, you d--d Greaser, and
stop stumbling round there!  Lie down."

But we knew that the Doctor had not completely finished his story, and
we waited patiently for the conclusion.  Meanwhile the old, gray
silence of the woods again asserted itself, but shadows were now
beginning to gather in the heavy beams of the roof above, and the dim
aisles seemed to be narrowing and closing in around us. Presently the
Doctor recommenced lazily, as if no interruption had occurred.

"As I said before, I never put much faith in that story, and shouldn't
have told it, but for a rather curious experience of my own.  It was in
the spring of '62, and I was one of a party of four, coming up from
O'Neill's, when we had been snowed up.  It was awful weather; the snow
had changed to sleet and rain after we crossed the divide, and the
water was out everywhere; every ditch was a creek, every creek a river.
We had lost two horses on the North Fork, we were dead beat, off the
trail, and sloshing round, with night coming on, and the level hail
like shot in our faces. Things were looking bleak and scary when,
riding a little ahead of the party, I saw a light twinkling in a hollow
beyond.  My horse was still fresh, and calling out to the boys to
follow me and bear for the light, I struck out for it.  In another
moment I was before a little cabin that half burrowed in the black
chapparal; I dismounted and rapped at the door.  There was no response.
I then tried to force the door, but it was fastened securely from
within. I was all the more surprised when one of the boys, who had
overtaken me, told me that he had just seen through a window a man
reading by the fire.  Indignant at this inhospitality, we both made a
resolute onset against the door, at the same time raising our angry
voices to a yell.  Suddenly there was a quick response, the hurried
withdrawing of a bolt, and the door opened.

"The occupant was a short, thick-set man, with a pale, careworn face,
whose prevailing expression was one of gentle good humor and patient
suffering.  When we entered, he asked us hastily why we had not 'sung
out' before.

"'But we KNOCKED!' I said, impatiently, 'and almost drove your door in.'

"'That's nothing,' he said, patiently.  'I'm used to THAT.'

"I looked again at the man's patient, fateful face, and then around the
cabin.  In an instant the whole situation flashed before me. 'Are we
not near Cave City?' I asked.

"'Yes,' he replied, 'it's just below.  You must have passed it in the
storm.'

"'I see.'  I again looked around the cabin.  'Isn't this what they call
the haunted house?'

"He looked at me curiously.  'It is,' he said, simply.

"You can imagine my delight!  Here was an opportunity to test the whole
story, to work down to the bed rock, and see how it would pan out!  We
were too many and too well armed to fear tricks or dangers from
outsiders.  If--as one theory had been held--the disturbance was kept
up by a band of concealed marauders or road agents, whose purpose was
to preserve their haunts from intrusion, we were quite able to pay them
back in kind for any assault.  I need not say that the boys were
delighted with this prospect when the fact was revealed to them.  The
only one doubtful or apathetic spirit there was our host, who quietly
resumed his seat and his book, with his old expression of patient
martyrdom.  It would have been easy for me to have drawn him out, but I
felt that I did not want to corroborate anybody else's experience; only
to record my own.  And I thought it better to keep the boys from any
predisposing terrors.

"We ate our supper, and then sat, patiently and expectant, around the
fire.  An hour slipped away, but no disturbance; another hour passed as
monotonously.  Our host read his book; only the dash of hail against
the roof broke the silence.  But--"

The Doctor stopped.  Since the last interruption, I noticed he had
changed the easy slangy style of his story to a more perfect, artistic,
and even studied manner.  He dropped now suddenly into his old
colloquial speech, and quietly said: "If you don't quit stumbling over
those riatas, Juan, I'll hobble YOU.  Come here, there; lie down, will
you?"

We all turned fiercely on the cause of this second dangerous
interruption, but a sight of the poor fellow's pale and frightened face
withheld our vindictive tongues.  And the Doctor, happily, of his own
accord, went on:--

"But I had forgotten that it was no easy matter to keep these
high-spirited boys, bent on a row, in decent subjection; and after the
third hour passed without a supernatural exhibition, I observed, from
certain winks and whispers, that they were determined to get up
indications of their own.  In a few moments violent rappings were heard
from all parts of the cabin; large stones (adroitly thrown up the
chimney) fell with a heavy thud on the roof.  Strange groans and
ominous yells seemed to come from the outside (where the interstices
between the logs were wide enough).  Yet, through all this uproar, our
host sat still and patient, with no sign of indignation or reproach
upon his good-humored but haggard features. Before long it became
evident that this exhibition was exclusively for HIS benefit.  Under
the thin disguise of asking him to assist them in discovering the
disturbers OUTSIDE the cabin, those inside took advantage of his
absence to turn the cabin topsy-turvy.

"'You see what the spirits have done, old man,' said the arch leader of
this mischief.  'They've upset that there flour barrel while we wasn't
looking, and then kicked over the water jug and spilled all the water!'

"The patient man lifted his head and looked at the flour-strewn walls.
Then he glanced down at the floor, but drew back with a slight tremor.

"'It ain't water!' he said, quietly.

"'What is it, then?'

"'It's BLOOD!  Look!'

"The nearest man gave a sudden start and sank back white as a sheet.

"For there, gentlemen, on the floor, just before the door, where the
old man had seen the dog hesitate and lift his feet, there!
there!--gentlemen--upon my honor, slowly widened and broadened a dark
red pool of human blood!  Stop him!  Quick!  Stop him, I say!"

There was a blinding flash that lit up the dark woods, and a sharp
report!  When we reached the Doctor's side he was holding the smoking
pistol, just discharged, in one hand, while with the other he was
pointing to the rapidly disappearing figure of Juan, our Mexican
vaquero!

"Missed him! by G-d!" said the Doctor.  "But did you hear him?  Did you
see his livid face as he rose up at the name of blood?  Did you see his
guilty conscience in his face.  Eh?  Why don't you speak? What are you
staring at?"

"Was it the murdered man's ghost, Doctor?" we all panted in one quick
breath.

"Ghost be d--d!  No!  But in that Mexican vaquero--that cursed Juan
Ramirez!--I saw and shot at his murderer!"



THE HOODLUM BAND

OR

THE BOY CHIEF, THE INFANT POLITICIAN, AND THE PIRATE PRODIGY

BY JACK WHACKAWAY

Author of "The Boy Slaver," "The Immature Incendiary," "The Precocious
Pugilist," etc., etc.


CHAPTER I

It was a quiet New England village.  Nowhere in the valley of the
Connecticut the autumn sun shone upon a more peaceful, pastoral,
manufacturing community.  The wooden nutmegs were slowly ripening on
the trees, and the white pine hams for Western consumption were
gradually rounding into form under the deft manipulation of the hardy
American artisan.  The honest Connecticut farmer was quietly gathering
from his threshing floor the shoe-pegs, which, when intermixed with a
fair proportion of oats, offered a pleasing substitute for fodder to
the effete civilizations of Europe.  An almost Sabbath-like stillness
prevailed.  Doemville was only seven miles from Hartford, and the
surrounding landscape smiled with the conviction of being fully insured.

Few would have thought that this peaceful village was the home of the
three young heroes whose exploits would hereafter--but we anticipate.

Doemville Academy was the principal seat of learning in the county.
Under the grave and gentle administration of the venerable Doctor
Context, it had attained just popularity.  Yet the increasing
infirmities of age obliged the doctor to relinquish much of his trust
to his assistants, who, it is needless to say, abused his confidence.
Before long their brutal tyranny and deep-laid malevolence became
apparent.  Boys were absolutely forced to study their lessons.  The
sickening fact will hardly be believed, but during school hours they
were obliged to remain in their seats with the appearance at least of
discipline.  It is stated by good authority that the rolling of croquet
balls across the floor during recitation was objected to, under the
fiendish excuse of its interfering with their studies.  The breaking of
windows by base balls, and the beating of small scholars with bats,
were declared against.  At last, bloated and arrogant with success, the
under-teachers threw aside all disguise and revealed themselves in
their true colors.  A cigar was actually taken out of a day scholar's
mouth during prayers!  A flask of whisky was dragged from another's
desk, and then thrown out of the window.  And finally, Profanity,
Hazing, Theft, and Lying were almost discouraged!

Could the youth of America, conscious of their power and a literature
of their own, tamely submit to this tyranny?  Never!  We repeat it
firmly.  Never!  We repeat it to parents and guardians. Never!  But the
fiendish tutors, chuckling in their glee, little knew what was passing
through the cold, haughty intellect of Charles Fanuel Hall Golightly,
aged ten; what curled the lip of Benjamin Franklin Jenkins, aged seven;
or what shone in the bold blue eyes of Bromley Chitterlings, aged six
and a half, as they sat in the corner of the playground at recess.
Their only other companion and confidant was the negro porter and
janitor of the school, known as "Pirate Jim."

Fitly, indeed, was he named, as the secrets of his early wild
career--confessed freely to his noble young friends--plainly showed.  A
slaver at the age of seventeen, the ringleader of a mutiny on the
African Coast at the age of twenty, a privateersman during the last war
with England, the commander of a fire-ship and its sole survivor at
twenty-five, with a wild intermediate career of unmixed piracy, until
the Rebellion called him to civil service again as a blockade-runner,
and peace and a desire for rural repose led him to seek the janitorship
of the Doemville Academy, where no questions were asked and references
not exchanged: he was, indeed, a fit mentor for our daring youth.
Although a man whose days had exceeded the usual space allotted to
humanity, the various episodes of his career footing his age up to
nearly one hundred and fifty-nine years, he scarcely looked it, and was
still hale and vigorous.

"Yes," continued Pirate Jim, critically, "I don't think he was any
bigger nor you, Master Chitterlings, if as big, when he stood on the
fork'stle of my ship, and shot the captain o' that East Injymen dead.
We used to call him little Weevils, he was so young-like. But, bless
your hearts, boys! he wa'n't anything to little Sammy Barlow, ez once
crep' up inter the captain's stateroom on a Rooshin frigate, stabbed
him to the heart with a jack-knife, then put on the captain's uniform
and his cocked hat, took command of the ship and fout her hisself."

"Wasn't the captain's clothes big for him?" asked B. Franklin Jenkins,
anxiously.

The janitor eyed young Jenkins with pained dignity.

"Didn't I say the Rooshin captain was a small, a very small man?
Rooshins is small, likewise Greeks."

A noble enthusiasm beamed in the faces of the youthful heroes.

"Was Barlow as large as me?" asked C. F. Hall Golightly, lifting his
curls from his Jove-like brow.

"Yes; but then he hed hed, so to speak, experiences.  It was allowed
that he had pizened his schoolmaster afore he went to sea. But it's dry
talking, boys."

Golightly drew a flask from his jacket and handed it to the janitor.
It was his father's best brandy.  The heart of the honest old seaman
was touched.

"Bless ye, my own pirate boy!" he said, in a voice suffocating with
emotion.

"I've got some tobacco," said the youthful Jenkins, "but it's fine-cut;
I use only that now."

"I kin buy some plug at the corner grocery," said Pirate Jim, "only I
left my port-money at home."

"Take this watch," said young Golightly; "it is my father's.  Since he
became a tyrant and usurper, and forced me to join a corsair's band,
I've began by dividing the property."

"This is idle trifling," said young Chitterlings, mildly.  "Every
moment is precious.  Is this an hour to give to wine and wassail? Ha,
we want action--action!  We must strike the blow for freedom
to-night--aye, this very night.  The scow is already anchored in the
mill-dam, freighted with provisions for a three months' voyage. I have
a black flag in my pocket.  Why, then, this cowardly delay?"

The two elder youths turned with a slight feeling of awe and shame to
gaze on the glowing cheeks, and high, haughty crest of their youngest
comrade--the bright, the beautiful Bromley Chitterlings. Alas! that
very moment of forgetfulness and mutual admiration was fraught with
danger.  A thin, dyspeptic, half-starved tutor approached.

"It is time to resume your studies, young gentlemen," he said, with
fiendish politeness.

They were his last words on earth.

"Down, tyrant!" screamed Chitterlings.

"Sic him--I mean, Sic semper tyrannis!" said the classical Golightly.

A heavy blow on the head from a base-ball bat, and the rapid projection
of a base ball against his empty stomach, brought the tutor a limp and
lifeless mass to the ground.  Golightly shuddered. Let not my young
readers blame him too rashly.  It was his first homicide.

"Search his pockets," said the practical Jenkins.

They did so, and found nothing but a Harvard Triennial Catalogue.

"Let us fly," said Jenkins.

"Forward to the boats!" cried the enthusiastic Chitterlings.

But C. F. Hall Golightly stood gazing thoughtfully at the prostrate
tutor.

"This," he said calmly, "is the result of a too free government and the
common school system.  What the country needs is reform.  I cannot go
with you, boys."

"Traitor!" screamed the others.

C. F. H. Golightly smiled sadly.

"You know me not.  I shall not become a pirate--but a Congressman!"

Jenkins and Chitterlings turned pale.

"I have already organized two caucuses in a base ball club, and bribed
the delegates of another.  Nay, turn not away.  Let us be friends,
pursuing through various ways one common end.  Farewell!" They shook
hands.

"But where is Pirate Jim?" asked Jenkins.

"He left us but for a moment to raise money on the watch to purchase
armament for the scow.  Farewell!"

And so the gallant, youthful spirits parted, bright with the sunrise of
hope.

That night a conflagration raged in Doemville.  The Doemville Academy,
mysteriously fired, first fell a victim to the devouring element.  The
candy shop and cigar store, both holding heavy liabilities against the
academy, quickly followed.  By the lurid gleams of the flames, a long,
low, sloop-rigged scow, with every mast gone except one, slowly worked
her way out of the mill-dam towards the Sound.  The next day three boys
were missing--C. F. Hall Golightly, B. F. Jenkins, and Bromley
Chitterlings.  Had they perished in the flames who shall say?  Enough
that never more under these names did they again appear in the homes of
their ancestors.

Happy, indeed, would it have been for Doemville had the mystery ended
here.  But a darker interest and scandal rested upon the peaceful
village.  During that awful night the boarding-school of Madam
Brimborion was visited stealthily, and two of the fairest heiresses of
Connecticut--daughters of the president of a savings bank, and
insurance director--were the next morning found to have eloped.  With
them also disappeared the entire contents of the Savings Bank, and on
the following day the Flamingo Fire Insurance Company failed.


CHAPTER II

Let my young readers now sail with me to warmer and more hospitable
climes.  Off the coast of Patagonia a long, low, black schooner proudly
rides the seas, that breaks softly upon the vine-clad shores of that
luxuriant land.  Who is this that, wrapped in Persian rugs, and dressed
in the most expensive manner, calmly reclines on the quarter-deck of
the schooner, toying lightly ever and anon with the luscious fruits of
the vicinity, held in baskets of solid gold by Nubian slaves? or at
intervals, with daring grace, guides an ebony velocipede over the
polished black walnut decks, and in and out the intricacies of the
rigging.  Who is it? well may be asked.  What name is it that blanches
with terror the cheeks of the Patagonian navy?  Who but the Pirate
Prodigy--the relentless Boy Scourer of Patagonian seas?  Voyagers
slowly drifting by the Silurian beach, coasters along the Devonian
shore, still shudder at the name of Bromley Chitterlings--the Boy
Avenger, late of Hartford, Connecticut.

It has been often asked by the idly curious, Why Avenger, and of what?
Let us not seek to disclose the awful secret hidden under that youthful
jacket.  Enough that there may have been that of bitterness in his past
life that he

    "Whose soul would sicken o'er the heaving wave,"

or "whose soul would heave above the sickening wave," did not
understand.  Only one knew him, perhaps too well--a queen of the
Amazons, taken prisoner off Terra del Fuego a week previous.  She loved
the Boy Avenger.  But in vain; his youthful heart seemed obdurate.

"Hear me," at last he said, when she had for the seventh time wildly
proffered her hand and her kingdom in marriage, "and know once and
forever why I must decline your flattering proposal: I love another."

With a wild, despairing cry, she leaped into the sea, but was instantly
rescued by the Pirate Prodigy.  Yet, even in that supreme moment, such
was his coolness that on his way to the surface he captured a mermaid,
and, placing her in charge of his steward, with directions to give her
a stateroom, with hot and cold water, calmly resumed his place by the
Amazon's side.  When the cabin door closed on his faithful servant,
bringing champagne and ices to the interesting stranger, Chitterlings
resumed his narrative with a choking voice:--

"When I first fled from the roof of a tyrannical parent, I loved the
beautiful and accomplished Eliza J. Sniffen.  Her father was president
of the Workingmen's Savings Bank, and it was perfectly understood that
in the course of time the entire deposits would be his.  But, like a
vain fool, I wished to anticipate the future, and in a wild moment
persuaded Miss Sniffen to elope with me; and, with the entire cash
assets of the bank, we fled together."  He paused, overcome with
emotion.  "But fate decreed it otherwise.  In my feverish haste, I had
forgotten to place among the stores of my pirate craft that peculiar
kind of chocolate caramel to which Eliza Jane was most partial.  We
were obliged to put into New Rochelle on the second day out, to enable
Miss Sniffen to procure that delicacy at the nearest confectioner's,
and match some zephyr worsteds at the first fancy shop.  Fatal mistake.
She went--she never returned!"  In a moment he resumed in a choking
voice, "After a week's weary waiting, I was obliged to put to sea
again, bearing a broken heart and the broken bank of her father.  I
have never seen her since."

"And you still love her?" asked the Amazon queen, excitedly.

"Aye, forever!"

"Noble youth.  Here take the reward of thy fidelity, for know, Bromley
Chitterlings, that I am Eliza Jane.  Wearied with waiting, I embarked
on a Peruvian guano ship--but it's a long story, dear."

"And altogether too thin," said the Boy Avenger, fiercely, releasing
himself from her encircling arms.  "Eliza Jane's age, a year ago, was
only thirteen, and you are forty, if a day."

"True," she returned, sadly, "but I have suffered much, and time passes
rapidly, and I've grown.  You would scarcely believe that this is my
own hair."

"I know not," he replied, in gloomy abstraction.

"Forgive my deceit," she returned.  "If you are affianced to another,
let me at least be--a mother to you."

The Pirate Prodigy started, and tears came to his eyes.  The scene was
affecting in the extreme.  Several of the oldest seamen--men who had
gone through scenes of suffering with tearless eyes and unblanched
cheeks--now retired to the spirit-room to conceal their emotion.  A few
went into caucus in the forecastle, and returned with the request that
the Amazonian queen should hereafter be known as the "Queen of the
Pirates' Isle."

"Mother!" gasped the Pirate Prodigy.

"My son!" screamed the Amazonian queen.

They embraced.  At the same moment a loud flop was heard on the
quarter-deck.  It was the forgotten mermaid, who, emerging from her
state-room and ascending the companion-way at that moment, had fainted
at the spectacle.  The Pirate Prodigy rushed to her side with a bottle
of smelling-salts.

She recovered slowly.  "Permit me," she said, rising with dignity, "to
leave the ship.  I am unaccustomed to such conduct."

"Hear me--she is my mother!"

"She certainly is old enough to be," replied the mermaid; "and to speak
of that being her own hair!" she added with a scornful laugh, as she
rearranged her own luxuriant tresses with characteristic grace, a comb,
and a small hand-mirror.

"If I couldn't afford any other clothes, I might wear a switch, too!"
hissed the Amazonian queen.  "I suppose you don't dye it on account of
the salt water.  But perhaps you prefer green, dear?"

"A little salt water might improve your own complexion, love."

"Fishwoman!" screamed the Amazonian queen.

"Bloomerite!" shrieked the mermaid.

In another instant they had seized each other.

"Mutiny!  Overboard with them!" cried the Pirate Prodigy, rising to the
occasion, and casting aside all human affection in the peril of the
moment.

A plank was brought and two women placed upon it.

"After you, dear," said the mermaid, significantly, to the Amazonian
queen; "you're the oldest."

"Thank you!" said the Amazonian queen, stepping back.  "Fish is always
served first."

Stung by the insult, with a wild scream of rage, the mermaid grappled
her in her arms and leaped into the sea.

As the waters closed over them forever, the Pirate Prodigy sprang to
his feet.  "Up with the black flag, and bear away for New London," he
shouted in trumpet-like tones.  "Ha, ha!  Once more the Rover is free!"

Indeed it was too true.  In that fatal moment he had again loosed
himself from the trammels of human feeling, and was once more the Boy
Avenger.


CHAPTER III

Again I must ask my young friends to mount my hippogriff and hie with
me to the almost inaccessible heights of the Rocky Mountains. There,
for years, a band of wild and untamable savages, known as the "Pigeon
Feet," had resisted the blankets and Bibles of civilization.  For years
the trails leading to their camp were marked by the bones of teamsters
and broken wagons, and the trees were decked with the drying scalp
locks of women and children.  The boldest of military leaders hesitated
to attack them in their fortresses, and prudently left the scalping
knives, rifles, powder, and shot, provided by a paternal government for
their welfare, lying on the ground a few miles from their encampment,
with the request that they were not to be used until the military had
safely retired.  Hitherto, save an occasional incursion into the
territory of the "Knock-knees," a rival tribe, they had limited their
depredations to the vicinity.

But lately a baleful change had come over them.  Acting under some evil
influence, they now pushed their warfare into the white settlements,
carrying fire and destruction with them.  Again and again had the
government offered them a free pass to Washington and the privilege of
being photographed, but under the same evil guidance they refused.
There was a singular mystery in their mode of aggression.
School-houses were always burned, the schoolmasters taken into
captivity, and never again heard from.  A palace car on the Union
Pacific Railway, containing an excursion party of teachers en route to
San Francisco, was surrounded, its inmates captured, and--their
vacancies in the school catalogue never again filled.  Even a Board of
Educational Examiners, proceeding to Cheyenne, were taken prisoners,
and obliged to answer questions they themselves had proposed, amidst
horrible tortures.  By degrees these atrocities were traced to the
malign influence of a new chief of the tribe.  As yet little was known
of him but through his baleful appellations, "Young Man who Goes for
his Teacher," and "He Lifts the Hair of the School Marm."  He was said
to be small and exceedingly youthful in appearance.  Indeed, his
earlier appellative, "He Wipes his Nose on his Sleeve," was said to
have been given to him to indicate his still boy-like habits.

It was night in the encampment and among the lodges of the "Pigeon
Toes."  Dusky maidens flitted in and out among the camp-fires like
brown moths, cooking the toothsome buffalo hump, frying the fragrant
bear's meat, and stewing the esculent bean for the braves. For a few
favored ones spitted grasshoppers were reserved as a rare delicacy,
although the proud Spartan soul of their chief scorned all such
luxuries.

He was seated alone in his wigwam, attended only by the gentle
Mushymush, fairest of the "Pigeon Feet" maidens.  Nowhere were the
characteristics of her great tribe more plainly shown than in the
little feet that lapped over each other in walking.  A single glance at
the chief was sufficient to show the truth of the wild rumors
respecting his youth.  He was scarcely twelve, of proud and lofty
bearing, and clad completely in wrappings of various-colored scalloped
cloths, which gave him the appearance of a somewhat extra-sized
pen-wiper.  An enormous eagle's feather, torn from the wing of a bald
eagle who once attempted to carry him away, completed his attire.  It
was also the memento of one of his most superhuman feats of courage.
He would undoubtedly have scalped the eagle but that nature had
anticipated him.

"Why is the Great Chief sad?" asked Mushymush, softly.  "Does his soul
still yearn for the blood of the pale-faced teachers?  Did not the
scalping of two professors of geology in the Yale exploring party
satisfy his warrior's heart yesterday?  Has he forgotten that Hayden
and Clarence King are still to follow?  Shall his own Mushymush bring
him a botanist to-morrow?  Speak, for the silence of my brother lies on
my heart like the snow on the mountain, and checks the flow of my
speech."

Still the proud Boy Chief sat silent.  Suddenly he said: "Hist!" and
rose to his feet.  Taking a long rifle from the ground he adjusted its
sight.  Exactly seven miles away on the slope of the mountain the
figure of a man was seen walking.  The Boy Chief raised the rifle to
his unerring eye and fired.  The man fell.

A scout was dispatched to scalp and search the body.  He presently
returned.

"Who was the pale face?" eagerly asked the chief.

"A life insurance agent."

A dark scowl settled on the face of the chief.

"I thought it was a book-peddler."

"Why is my brother's heart sore against the book-peddler?" asked
Mushymush.

"Because," said the Boy Chief, fiercely, "I am again without my regular
dime novel, and I thought he might have one in his pack. Hear me,
Mushymush; the United States mails no longer bring me my 'Young
America,' or my 'Boys' and Girls' Weekly.'  I find it impossible, even
with my fastest scouts, to keep up with the rear of General Howard, and
replenish my literature from the sutler's wagon.  Without a dime novel
or a 'Young America,' how am I to keep up this Injin business?"

Mushymush remained in meditation a single moment.  Then she looked up
proudly.

"My brother has spoken.  It is well.  He shall have his dime novel. He
shall know what kind of a hair-pin his sister Mushymush is."

And she arose and gamboled lightly as the fawn out of his presence.

In two hours she returned.  In one hand she held three small flaxen
scalps, in the other "The Boy Marauder," complete in one volume, price
ten cents.

"Three pale-faced children," she gasped, "were reading it in the tail
end of an emigrant wagon.  I crept up to them softly.  Their parents
are still unaware of the accident," and she sank helpless at his feet.

"Noble girl!" said the Boy Chief, gazing proudly on her prostrate form;
"and these are the people that a military despotism expects to subdue!"


CHAPTER IV

But the capture of several wagon-loads of commissary whisky, and the
destruction of two tons of stationery intended for the general
commanding, which interfered with his regular correspondence with the
War Department, at last awakened the United States military authorities
to active exertion.  A quantity of troops were massed before the
"Pigeon Feet" encampment, and an attack was hourly imminent.

"Shine your boots, sir?"

It was the voice of a youth in humble attire, standing before the flap
of the commanding general's tent.

The General raised his head from his correspondence.

"Ah," he said, looking down on the humble boy, "I see; I shall write
that the appliances of civilization move steadily forward with the
army.  Yes," he added, "you may shine my military boots. You
understand, however, that to get your pay you must first--"

"Make a requisition on the commissary-general, have it certified to by
the quartermaster, countersigned by the post-adjutant, and submitted by
you to the War Department--"

"And charged as stationery," added the General, gently.  "You are, I
see, an intelligent and thoughtful boy.  I trust you neither use
whisky, tobacco, nor are ever profane?"

"I promised my sainted mother--"

"Enough!  Go on with your blacking; I have to lead the attack on the
'Pigeon Feet' at eight precisely.  It is now half-past seven," said the
General, consulting a large kitchen clock that stood in the corner of
his tent.

The little boot-black looked up; the General was absorbed in his
correspondence.  The boot-black drew a tin putty blower from his
pocket, took unerring aim, and nailed in a single shot the minute hand
to the dial.  Going on with his blacking, yet stopping ever and anon to
glance over the General's plan of campaign, spread on the table before
him, he was at last interrupted by the entrance of an officer.

"Everything is ready for the attack, General.  It is now eight o'clock."

"Impossible!  It is only half-past seven."

"But my watch and the watches of your staff--"

"Are regulated by my kitchen clock, that has been in my family for
years.  Enough!  It is only half-past seven."

The officer retired; the boot-black had finished one boot.  Another
officer appeared.

"Instead of attacking the enemy, General, we are attacked ourselves.
Our pickets are already driven in."

"Military pickets should not differ from other pickets," interrupted
the boot-black, modestly.  "To stand firmly they should be well driven
in."

"Ha! there is something in that," said the General, thoughtfully. "But
who are you, who speak thus?"

Rising to his full height, the boot-black threw off his outer rags, and
revealed the figure of the Boy Chief of the "Pigeon Feet."

"Treason!" shrieked the General; "order an advance along the whole
line."

But in vain.  The next moment he fell beneath the tomahawk of the Boy
Chief, and within the next quarter of an hour the United States Army
was dispersed.  Thus ended the battle of Boot-black Creek.


CHAPTER V

And yet the Boy Chief was not entirely happy.  Indeed, at times he
seriously thought of accepting the invitation extended by the Great
Chief at Washington, immediately after the massacre of the soldiers,
and once more revisiting the haunts of civilization.  His soul sickened
in feverish inactivity; schoolmasters palled on his taste; he had
introduced base ball, blind hooky, marbles, and peg-top among his
Indian subjects, but only with indifferent success. The squaws insisted
in boring holes through the china alleys and wearing them as necklaces;
his warriors stuck spikes in their base ball bats and made war clubs of
them.  He could not but feel, too, that the gentle Mushymush, although
devoted to her pale-faced brother, was deficient in culinary education.
Her mince pies were abominable; her jam far inferior to that made by
his Aunt Sally of Doemville.  Only an unexpected incident kept him
equally from the extreme of listless Sybaritic indulgence, or of morbid
cynicism. Indeed, at the age of twelve, he already had become disgusted
with existence.

He had returned to his wigwam after an exhausting buffalo hunt in which
he had slain two hundred and seventy-five buffalos with his own hand,
not counting the individual buffalo on which he had leaped so as to
join the herd, and which he afterward led into the camp a captive and a
present to the lovely Mushymush.  He had scalped two express riders and
a correspondent of the "New York Herald"; had despoiled the Overland
Mail Stage of a quantity of vouchers which enabled him to draw double
rations from the government, and was reclining on a bear skin, smoking
and thinking of the vanity of human endeavor, when a scout entered,
saying that a pale-face youth had demanded access to his person.

"Is he a commissioner?  If so, say that the red man is rapidly passing
to the happy hunting-grounds of his fathers, and now desires only
peace, blankets, and ammunition; obtain the latter and then scalp the
commissioner."

"But it is only a youth who asks an interview."

"Does he look like an insurance agent?  If so, say that I have already
policies in three Hartford companies.  Meanwhile prepare the stake, and
see that the squaws are ready with their implements of torture."

The youth was admitted; he was evidently only half the age of the Boy
Chief.  As he entered the wigwam and stood revealed to his host they
both started.  In another moment they were locked in each other's arms.

"Jenky, old boy!"

"Bromley, old fel!"

B. F. Jenkins, for such was the name of the Boy Chief, was the first to
recover his calmness.  Turning to his warriors he said, proudly--

"Let my children retire while I speak to the agent of our Great Father
in Washington.  Hereafter no latch keys will be provided for the
wigwams of the warriors.  The practice of late hours must be
discouraged."

"How!" said the warriors, and instantly retired.

"Whisper," said Jenkins, drawing his friend aside; "I am known here
only as the Boy Chief of the 'Pigeon toes.'"

"And I," said Bromley Chitterlings, proudly, "am known everywhere as
the Pirate Prodigy--the Boy Avenger of the Patagonian Coast."

"But how came you here?"

"Listen!  My pirate brig, the 'Lively Mermaid,' now lies at Meiggs's
Wharf in San Francisco, disguised as a Mendocino lumber vessel.  My
pirate crew accompanied me here in a palace car from San Francisco."

"It must have been expensive," said the prudent Jenkins.

"It was, but they defrayed it by a collection from the other
passengers--you understand, an enforced collection.  The papers will be
full of it to-morrow.  Do you take the 'New York Sun'?"

"No; I dislike their Indian policy.  But why are you here?"

"Hear me, Jenk!  'Tis a long and a sad story.  The lovely Eliza J.
Sniffen, who fled with me from Doemville, was seized by her parents and
torn from my arms at New Rochelle.  Reduced to poverty by the breaking
of the savings bank of which he was president,--a failure to which I
largely contributed, and the profits of which I enjoyed,--I have since
ascertained that Eliza Jane Sniffen was forced to become a
schoolmistress, departed to take charge of a seminary in Colorado, and
since then has never been heard from."

Why did the Boy Chief turn pale, and clutch at the tent-pole for
support?  Why, indeed!

"Eliza J. Sniffen," gasped Jenkins, "aged fourteen, red-haired, with a
slight tendency to strabismus?"

"The same."

"Heaven help me!  She died by my mandate!"

"Traitor!" shrieked Chitterlings, rushing at Jenkins with a drawn
poniard.

But a figure interposed.  The slight girlish form of Mushymush with
outstretched hands stood between the exasperated Pirate Prodigy and the
Boy Chief.

"Forbear," she said sternly to Chitterlings; "you know not what you do."

The two youths paused.

"Hear me," she said rapidly.  "When captured in a confectioner's shop
at New Rochelle, E. J. Sniffen was taken back to poverty.  She resolved
to become a schoolmistress.  Hearing of an opening in the West, she
proceeded to Colorado to take exclusive charge of the pensionnat of
Mad. Choflie, late of Paris.  On the way thither she was captured by
the emissaries of the Boy Chief--"

"In consummation of a fatal vow I made never to spare educational
instructors," interrupted Jenkins.

"But in her captivity," continued Mushymush, "she managed to stain her
face with poke-berry juice, and mingling with the Indian maidens was
enabled to pass for one of the tribe.  Once undetected, she boldly
ingratiated herself with the Boy Chief,--how honestly and devotedly he
best can tell,--for I, Mushymush, the little sister of the Boy Chief,
am Eliza Jane Sniffen."

The Pirate Prodigy clasped her in his arms.  The Boy Chief, raising his
hand, ejaculated:--

"Bless you, my children!"

"There is but one thing wanting to complete this reunion," said
Chitterlings, after a pause, but the hurried entrance of a scout
stopped his utterance.

"A commissioner from the Great Father in Washington."

"Scalp him!" shrieked the Boy Chief; "this is no time for diplomatic
trifling."

"We have, but he still insists upon seeing you, and has sent in his
card."

The Boy Chief took it, and read aloud, in agonized accents:--

"Charles F. Hall Golightly, late Page in United States Senate, and
Acting Commissioner of United States."

In another moment, Golightly, pale, bleeding, and, as it were,
prematurely bald, but still cold and intellectual, entered the wigwam.
They fell upon his neck and begged his forgiveness.

"Don't mention it," he said, quietly; "these things must and will
happen under our present system of government.  My story is brief.
Obtaining political influence through caucuses, I became at last Page
in the Senate.  Through the exertions of political friends I was
appointed clerk to the commissioner whose functions I now represent.
Knowing through political spies in your own camp who you were, I acted
upon the physical fears of the commissioner, who was an ex-clergyman,
and easily induced him to deputize me to consult with you.  In doing
so, I have lost my scalp, but as the hirsute signs of juvenility have
worked against my political progress I do not regret it.  As a
partially bald young man I shall have more power.  The terms that I
have to offer are simply this: you can do everything you want, go
anywhere you choose, if you will only leave this place.  I have a
hundred thousand-dollar draft on the United States Treasury in my
pocket at your immediate disposal."

"But what's to become of me?" asked Chitterlings.

"Your case has already been under advisement.  The Secretary of State,
who is an intelligent man, is determined to recognize you as de jure
and de facto the only loyal representative of the Patagonian
government.  You may safely proceed to Washington as its envoy
extraordinary.  I dine with the secretary next week."

"And yourself, old fellow?"

"I only wish that twenty years from now you will recognize by your
influence and votes the rights of C. F. H. Golightly to the presidency."

And here ends our story.  Trusting that my dear young friends may take
whatever example or moral their respective parents and guardians may
deem fittest from these pages, I hope in future years to portray
further the career of those three young heroes I have already
introduced in the spring-time of life to their charitable consideration.



THE MAN WHOSE YOKE WAS NOT EASY

He was a spare man, and, physically, an ill-conditioned man, but at
first glance scarcely a seedy man.  The indications of reduced
circumstances in the male of the better class are, I fancy, first
visible in the boots and shirt; the boots offensively exhibiting a
degree of polish inconsistent with their dilapidated condition, and the
shirt showing an extent of ostentatious surface that is invariably
fatal to the threadbare waist-coat that it partially covers.  He was a
pale man, and, I fancied, still paler from his black clothes.

He handed me a note.

It was from a certain physician; a man of broad culture and broader
experience; a man who had devoted the greater part of his active life
to the alleviation of sorrow and suffering; a man who had lived up to
the noble vows of a noble profession; a man who locked in his honorable
breast the secrets of a hundred families, whose face was as kindly,
whose touch was as gentle, in the wards of the great public hospitals
as it was beside the laced curtains of the dying Narcissa; a man who,
through long contact with suffering, had acquired a universal
tenderness and breadth of kindly philosophy; a man who, day and night,
was at the beck and call of anguish; a man who never asked the creed,
belief, moral or worldly standing of the sufferer, or even his ability
to pay the few coins that enabled him (the physician) to exist and
practice his calling; in brief, a man who so nearly lived up to the
example of the Great Master that it seems strange I am writing of him
as a doctor of medicine and not of divinity.

The note was in pencil, characteristically brief, and ran thus:--

"Here is the man I spoke of.  He ought to be good material for you."

For a moment I sat looking from the note to the man, and sounding the
"dim perilous depths" of my memory for the meaning of this mysterious
communication.  The good "material," however, soon relieved my
embarrassment by putting his hand on his waistcoat, coming toward me,
and saying, "It is just here, you can feel it."

It was not necessary for me to do so.  In a flash I remembered that my
medical friend had told me of a certain poor patient, once a soldier,
who, among his other trials and uncertainties, was afflicted with an
aneurism caused by the buckle of his knapsack pressing upon the arch of
the aorta.  It was liable to burst at any shock or any moment.  The
poor fellow's yoke had indeed been too heavy.

In the presence of such a tremendous possibility I think for an instant
I felt anxious only about myself.  What I should do; how dispose of the
body; how explain the circumstance of his taking off; how evade the
ubiquitous reporter and the coroner's inquest; how a suspicion might
arise that I had in some way, through negligence or for some dark
purpose, unknown to the jury, precipitated the catastrophe, all flashed
before me.  Even the note, with its darkly suggestive offer of "good
material" for me, looked diabolically significant.  What might not an
intelligent lawyer make of it?

I tore it up instantly, and with feverish courtesy begged him to be
seated.

"You don't care to feel it?" he asked, a little anxiously.

"No."

"Nor see it?"

"No."

He sighed, a trifle sadly, as if I had rejected the only favor he could
bestow.  I saw at once that he had been under frequent exhibition to
the doctors, and that he was, perhaps, a trifle vain of this attention.
This perception was corroborated a moment later by his producing a copy
of a medical magazine, with a remark that on the sixth page I would
find a full statement of his case.

"Could I serve him in any way?" I asked.

It appeared that I could.  If I could help him to any light employment,
something that did not require any great physical exertion or mental
excitement, he would be thankful.  But he wanted me to understand that
he was not, strictly speaking, a poor man; that some years before the
discovery of his fatal complaint he had taken out a life insurance
policy for five thousand dollars, and that he had raked and scraped
enough together to pay it up, and that he would not leave his wife and
four children destitute.  "You see," he added, "if I could find some
sort of light work to do, and kinder sled along, you know--until--"

He stopped, awkwardly.

I have heard several noted actors thrill their audiences with a single
phrase.  I think I never was as honestly moved by any spoken word as
that "until," or the pause that followed it.  He was evidently quite
unconscious of its effect, for as I took a seat beside him on the sofa,
and looked more closely in his waxen face, I could see that he was
evidently embarrassed, and would have explained himself further, if I
had not stopped him.

Possibly it was the dramatic idea, or possibly chance; but a few days
afterward, meeting a certain kind-hearted theatrical manager, I asked
him if he had any light employment for a man who was an invalid?  "Can
he walk?"  "Yes."  "Stand up for fifteen minutes?" "Yes."  "Then I'll
take him.  He'll do for the last scene in the 'Destruction of
Sennacherib'--it's a tremendous thing, you know. We'll have two
thousand people on the stage."  I was a trifle alarmed at the title,
and ventured to suggest (without betraying my poor friend's secret)
that he could not actively engage in the "Destruction of Sennacherib,"
and that even the spectacle of it might be too much for him.  "Needn't
see it at all," said my managerial friend; "put him in front, nothing
to do but march in and march out, and dodge curtain."

He was engaged.  I admit I was at times haunted by grave doubts as to
whether I should not have informed the manager of his physical
condition, and the possibility that he might some evening perpetrate a
real tragedy on the mimic stage, but on the first performance of "The
Destruction of Sennacherib," which I conscientiously attended, I was
somewhat relieved.  I had often been amused with the placid way in
which the chorus in the opera invariably received the most astounding
information, and witnessed the most appalling tragedies by poison or
the block, without anything more than a vocal protest or command,
always delivered to the audience and never to the actors, but I think
my poor friend's utter impassiveness to the wild carnage and the
terrible exhibitions of incendiarism that were going on around him
transcended even that.  Dressed in a costume that seemed to be the very
soul of anachronism, he stood a little outside the proscenium, holding
a spear, the other hand pressed apparently upon the secret within his
breast, calmly surveying, with his waxen face, the gay auditorium.  I
could not help thinking that there was a certain pride visible even in
his placid features, as of one who was conscious that at any moment he
might change this simulated catastrophe into real terror.  I could not
help saying this to the Doctor, who was with me.  "Yes," he said with
professional exactitude; "when it happens he'll throw his arms up above
his head, utter an ejaculation, and fall forward on his face,--it's a
singular thing, they always fall forward on their face,--and they'll
pick up the man as dead as Julius Caesar."

After that, I used to go night after night, with a certain hideous
fascination; but, while it will be remembered the "Destruction of
Sennacherib" had a tremendous run, it will also be remembered that not
a single life was really lost during its representation.

It was only a few weeks after this modest first appearance on the
boards of "The Man with an Aneurism," that, happening to be at dinner
party of practical business men, I sought to interest them with the
details of the above story, delivered with such skill and pathos as I
could command.  I regret to say that, as a pathetic story, it for a
moment seemed to be a dead failure.  At last a prominent banker sitting
next to me turned to me with the awful question: "Why don't your friend
try to realize on his life insurance?"  I begged his pardon, I didn't
quite understand.  "Oh, discount, sell out.  Look here--(after a
pause).  Let him assign his policy to me, it's not much of a risk, on
your statement. Well--I'll give him his five thousand dollars, clear."

And he did.  Under the advice of this cool-headed--I think I may add
warm-hearted--banker, "The Man with an Aneurism" invested his money in
the name of and for the benefit of his wife in certain securities that
paid him a small but regular stipend.  But he still continued upon the
boards of the theatre.

By reason of some business engagements that called me away from the
city, I did not see my friend the physician for three months afterward.
When I did I asked tidings of The Man with the Aneurism.  The Doctor's
kind face grew sad.  "I'm afraid--that is, I don't exactly know whether
I've good news or bad.  Did you ever see his wife?"

I never had.

"Well, she was younger than he, and rather attractive.  One of those
doll-faced women.  You remember, he settled that life insurance policy
on her and the children: she might have waited; she didn't.  The other
day she eloped with some fellow, I don't remember his name, with the
children and the five thousand dollars."

"And the shock killed him," I said with poetic promptitude.

"No--that is--not yet; I saw him yesterday," said the Doctor, with
conscientious professional precision, looking over his list of calls.

"Well, where is the poor fellow now?"

"He's still at the theatre.  James, if these powders are called for,
you'll find them, here in this envelope.  Tell Mrs. Blank I'll be there
at seven--and she can give the baby this until I come. Say there's no
danger.  These women are an awful bother!  Yes, he's at the theatre
yet.  Which way are you going?  Down town?  Why can't you step into my
carriage, and I'll give you a lift, and we'll talk on the way down?
Well--he's at the theatre yet. And--and--do you remember the
'Destruction of Sennacherib?'  No?  Yes you do.  You remember that
woman in pink, who pirouetted in the famous ballet scene!  You don't?
Why, yes you do!  Well, I imagine, of course I don't know, it's only a
summary diagnosis, but I imagine that our friend with the aneurism has
attached himself to her."

"Doctor, you horrify me."

"There are more things, Mr. Poet, in heaven and earth than are yet
dreamt of in your philosophy.  Listen.  My diagnosis may be wrong, but
that woman called the other day at my office to ask about him, his
health, and general condition.  I told her the truth--and she FAINTED.
It was about as dead a faint as I ever saw; I was nearly an hour in
bringing her out of it.  Of course it was the heat of the room, her
exertions the preceding week, and I prescribed for her.  Queer, wasn't
it?  Now, if I were a writer, and had your faculty, I'd make something
out of that."

"But how is his general health?"

"Oh, about the same.  He can't evade what will come, you know, at any
moment.  He was up here the other day.  Why, the pulsation was as
plain--why, the entire arch of the aorta--  What! you get out here?
Good-by."

Of course no moralist, no man writing for a sensitive and strictly
virtuous public, could further interest himself in this man.  So I
dismissed him at once from my mind, and returned to the literary
contemplation of virtue that was clearly and positively defined, and of
Sin, that invariably commenced with a capital letter.  That this man,
in his awful condition, hovering on the verge of eternity, should allow
himself to be attracted by--but it was horrible to contemplate.

Nevertheless, a month afterwards, I was returning from a festivity with
my intimate friend Smith, my distinguished friend Jobling, my most
respectable friend Robinson, and my wittiest friend Jones.  It was a
clear, star-lit morning, and we seemed to hold the broad, beautiful
avenue to ourselves; and I fear we acted as if it were so.  As we
hilariously passed the corner of Eighteenth Street, a coupe rolled by,
and I suddenly heard my name called from its gloomy depths.

"I beg your pardon," said the Doctor, as his driver drew up by the
sidewalk, "but I've some news for you.  I've just been to see our poor
friend ----.  Of course I was too late.  He was gone in a flash."

"What! dead?"

"As Pharaoh!  In an instant, just as I said.  You see, the rupture took
place in the descending arch of--"

"But, Doctor!"

"It's a queer story.  Am I keeping you from your friends?  No? Well,
you see she--that woman I spoke of--had written a note to him based on
what I had told her.  He got it, and dropped in his dressing-room, dead
as a herring."

"How could she have been so cruel, knowing his condition?  She might,
with woman's tact, have rejected him less abruptly."

"Yes; but you're all wrong.  By Jove! she ACCEPTED him! was willing to
marry him!"

"What?"

"Yes.  Don't you see?  It was joy that killed him.  Gad, we never
thought of THAT!  Queer, ain't it?  See here, don't you think you might
make a story out of it?"

"But, Doctor, it hasn't got any moral."

"Humph!  That's so.  Good morning.  Drive on, John."



MY FRIEND, THE TRAMP

I had been sauntering over the clover downs of a certain noted New
England seaport.  It was a Sabbath morning, so singularly reposeful and
gracious, so replete with the significance of the seventh day of rest,
that even the Sabbath bells ringing a mile away over the salt marshes
had little that was monitory, mandatory, or even supplicatory in their
drowsy voices.  Rather they seemed to call from their cloudy towers,
like some renegade muezzin: "Sleep is better than prayer; sleep on, O
sons of the Puritans!  Slumber still, O deacons and vestrymen!  Let, oh
let those feet that are swift to wickedness curl up beneath thee! those
palms that are itching for the shekels of the ungodly lie clasped
beneath thy pillow!  Sleep is better than prayer."

And, indeed, though it was high morning, sleep was still in the air.
Wrought upon at last by the combined influences of sea and sky and
atmosphere, I succumbed, and lay down on one of the boulders of a
little stony slope that gave upon the sea.  The great Atlantic lay
before me, not yet quite awake, but slowly heaving the rhythmical
expiration of slumber.  There was no sail visible in the misty horizon.
There was nothing to do but to lie and stare at the unwinking ether.

Suddenly I became aware of the strong fumes of tobacco.  Turning my
head, I saw a pale blue smoke curling up from behind an adjacent
boulder.  Rising, and climbing over the intermediate granite, I came
upon a little hollow, in which, comfortably extended on the mosses and
lichens, lay a powerfully-built man.  He was very ragged; he was very
dirty; there was a strong suggestion about him of his having too much
hair, too much nail, too much perspiration; too much of those
superfluous excrescences and exudations that society and civilization
strive to keep under.  But it was noticeable that he had not much of
anything else.  It was The Tramp.

With that swift severity with which we always visit rebuke upon the
person who happens to present any one of our vices offensively before
us, in his own person, I was deeply indignant at his laziness.  Perhaps
I showed it in my manner, for he rose to a half-sitting attitude,
returned my stare apologetically, and made a movement toward knocking
the fire from his pipe against the granite.

"Shure, sur, and if I'd belaved that I was trispassin on yer honor's
grounds, it's meself that would hev laid down on the say shore and
takin' the salt waves for me blankits.  But it's sivinteen miles I've
walked this blessed noight, with nothin' to sustain me, and hevin' a
mortal wakeness to fight wid in me bowels, by reason of starvation, and
only a bit o' baccy that the Widdy Maloney gi' me at the cross roads,
to kape me up entoirley.  But it was the dark day I left me home in
Milwaukee to walk to Boston; and if ye'll oblige a lone man who has
left a wife and six children in Milwaukee, wid the loan of twenty-five
cints, furninst the time he gits worruk, God'll be good to ye."

It instantly flashed through my mind that the man before me had the
previous night partaken of the kitchen hospitality of my little
cottage, two miles away.  That he presented himself in the guise of a
distressed fisherman, mulcted of his wages by an inhuman captain; that
he had a wife lying sick of consumption in the next village, and two
children, one of whom was a cripple, wandering in the streets of
Boston.  I remembered that this tremendous indictment against Fortune
touched the family, and that the distressed fisherman was provided with
clothes, food, and some small change. The food and small change had
disappeared, but the garments for the consumptive wife, where were
they?  He had been using them for a pillow.

I instantly pointed out this fact, and charged him with the deception.
To my surprise, he took it quietly, and even a little complacently.

"Bedad, yer roight; ye see, sur" (confidentially), "ye see, sur, until
I get worruk--and it's worruk I'm lukin' for--I have to desave now and
thin to shute the locality.  Ah, God save us! but on the say-coast
thay'r that har-rud upon thim that don't belong to the say."

I ventured to suggest that a strong, healthy man like him might have
found work somewhere between Milwaukee and Boston.

"Ah, but ye see I got free passage on a freight train, and didn't
sthop.  It was in the Aist that I expected to find worruk."

"Have you any trade?"

"Trade, is it?  I'm a brickmaker, God knows, and many's the lift I've
had at makin' bricks in Milwaukee.  Shure, I've as aisy a hand at it as
any man.  Maybe yer honor might know of a kill hereabout?"

Now to my certain knowledge, there was not a brick kiln within fifty
miles of that spot, and of all unlikely places to find one would have
been this sandy peninsula, given up to the summer residences of a few
wealthy people.  Yet I could not help admiring the assumption of the
scamp, who knew this fact as well as myself. But I said, "I can give
you work for a day or two;" and, bidding him gather up his sick wife's
apparel, led the way across the downs to my cottage.  At first I think
the offer took him by surprise, and gave him some consternation, but he
presently recovered his spirits, and almost instantly his speech.  "Ah,
worruk, is it?  God be praised! it's meself that's ready and willin'.
'Though maybe me hand is spoilt wid brickmakin'."

I assured him that the work I would give him would require no delicate
manipulation, and so we fared on over the sleepy downs. But I could not
help noticing that, although an invalid, I was a much better pedestrian
than my companion, frequently leaving him behind, and that even as a
"tramp," he was etymologically an impostor.  He had a way of lingering
beside the fences we had to climb over, as if to continue more
confidentially the history of his misfortunes and troubles, which he
was delivering to me during our homeward walk, and I noticed that he
could seldom resist the invitation of a mossy boulder or a tussock of
salt grass.  "Ye see, sur," he would say, suddenly sitting down, "it's
along uv me misfortunes beginnin' in Milwaukee that--" and it was not
until I was out of hearing that he would languidly gather his traps
again and saunter after me.  When I reached my own garden gate he
leaned for a moment over it, with both of his powerful arms extended
downward, and said, "Ah, but it's a blessin' that Sunday comes to give
rest fur the wake and the weary, and them as walks sivinteen miles to
get it."  Of course I took the hint.  There was evidently no work to be
had from my friend, the Tramp, that day.  Yet his countenance
brightened as he saw the limited extent of my domain, and observed that
the garden, so called, was only a flower-bed about twenty-five by ten.
As he had doubtless before this been utilized, to the extent of his
capacity, in digging, he had probably expected that kind of work; and I
daresay I discomfitted him by pointing him to an almost leveled stone
wall, about twenty feet long, with the remark that his work would be
the rebuilding of that stone wall, with stone brought from the
neighboring slopes. In a few moments he was comfortably provided for in
the kitchen, where the cook, a woman of his own nativity, apparently,
"chaffed" him with a raillery that was to me quite unintelligible.  Yet
I noticed that when, at sunset, he accompanied Bridget to the spring
for water, ostentatiously flourishing the empty bucket in his hand,
when they returned in the gloaming Bridget was carrying the water, and
my friend, the Tramp, was some paces behind her, cheerfully
"colloguing," and picking blackberries.

At seven the next morning he started in cheerfully to work.  At nine,
A. M., he had placed three large stones on the first course in
position, an hour having been spent in looking for a pick and hammer,
and in the incidental "chaffing" with Bridget.  At ten o'clock I went
to overlook his work; it was a rash action, as it caused him to
respectfully doff his hat, discontinue his labors, and lean back
against the fence in cheerful and easy conservation. "Are you fond uv
blackberries, Captain?"  I told him that the children were in the habit
of getting them from the meadow beyond, hoping to estop the suggestion
I knew was coming.  "Ah, but, Captain, it's meself that with wanderin'
and havin' nothin' to pass me lips but the berries I'd pick from the
hedges,--it's meself knows where to find thim.  Sure, it's yer childer,
and foine boys they are, Captain, that's besaching me to go wid 'em to
the place, known'st only to meself."  It is unnecessary to say that he
triumphed.  After the manner of vagabonds of all degrees, he had
enlisted the women and children on his side--and my friend, the Tramp,
had his own way.  He departed at eleven and returned at four, P. M.,
with a tin dinner-pail half filled.  On interrogating the boys it
appeared that they had had a "bully time," but on cross-examination it
came out that THEY had picked the berries. From four to six, three more
stones were laid, and the arduous labors of the day were over.  As I
stood looking at the first course of six stones, my friend, the Tramp,
stretched his strong arms out to their fullest extent and said: "Ay,
but it's worruk that's good for me; give me worruk, and it's all I'll
be askin' fur."

I ventured to suggest that he had not yet accomplished much.

"Wait till to-morror.  Ah, but ye'll see thin.  It's me hand that's yet
onaisy wid brick-makin' and sthrange to the shtones.  An ye'll wait
till to-morror?"

Unfortunately I did not wait.  An engagement took me away at an early
hour, and when I rode up to my cottage at noon my eyes were greeted
with the astonishing spectacle of my two boys hard at work laying the
courses of the stone wall, assisted by Bridget and Norah, who were
dragging stones from the hillsides, while comfortably stretched on the
top of the wall lay my friend, the Tramp, quietly overseeing the
operation with lazy and humorous comment.  For an instant I was
foolishly indignant, but he soon brought me to my senses.  "Shure, sur,
it's only larnin' the boys the habits uv industhry I was--and may they
niver know, be the same token, what it is to worruk fur the bread
betune their lips.  Shure it's but makin' 'em think it play I was.  As
fur the colleens beyint in the kitchen, sure isn't it betther they was
helping your honor here than colloguing with themselves inside?"

Nevertheless, I thought it expedient to forbid henceforth any
interruption of servants or children with my friend's "worruk." Perhaps
it was the result of this embargo that the next morning early the Tramp
wanted to see me.

"And it's sorry I am to say it to ye, sur," he began, "but it's the
handlin' of this stun that's desthroyin' me touch at the brick-makin',
and it's better I should lave ye and find worruk at me own thrade.  For
it's worruk I am nadin'.  It isn't meself, Captain, to ate the bread of
oidleness here.  And so good-by to ye, and if it's fifty cints ye can
be givin' me ontil I'll find a kill--it's God that'll repay ye."

He got the money.  But he got also conditionally a note from me to my
next neighbor, a wealthy retired physician, possessed of a large
domain, a man eminently practical and businesslike in his management of
it.  He employed many laborers on the sterile waste he called his
"farm," and it occurred to me that if there really was any work in my
friend, the Tramp, which my own indolence and preoccupation had failed
to bring out, he was the man to do it.

I met him a week after.  It was with some embarrassment that I inquired
after my friend, the Tramp.  "Oh, yes," he said, reflectively, "let's
see: he came Monday and left me Thursday.  He was, I think, a stout,
strong man, a well-meaning, good-humored fellow, but afflicted with a
most singular variety of diseases. The first day I put him at work in
the stables he developed chills and fever caught in the swamps of
Louisiana--"

"Excuse me," I said hurriedly, "you mean in Milwaukee!"

"I know what I'm talking about," returned the Doctor, testily; "he told
me his whole wretched story--his escape from the Confederate service,
the attack upon him by armed negroes, his concealment in the bayous and
swamps--"

"Go on, Doctor," I said, feebly; "you were speaking of his work."

"Yes.  Well, his system was full of malaria; the first day I had him
wrapped up in blankets, and dosed with quinine.  The next day he was
taken with all the symptoms of cholera morbus, and I had to keep him up
on brandy and capsicum.  Rheumatism set in on the following day, and
incapacitated him for work, and I concluded I had better give him a
note to the director of the City Hospital than keep him here.  As a
pathological study he was good; but as I was looking for a man to help
about the stable, I couldn't afford to keep him in both capacities."

As I never could really tell when the Doctor was in joke or in earnest,
I dropped the subject.  And so my friend, the Tramp, gradually faded
from my memory, not however without leaving behind him in the barn
where he had slept a lingering flavor of whisky, onions, and
fluffiness.  But in two weeks this had gone, and the "Shebang" (as my
friends irreverently termed my habitation) knew him no more.  Yet it
was pleasant to think of him as having at last found a job at
brick-making, or having returned to his family at Milwaukee, or making
his Louisiana home once more happy with his presence, or again tempting
the fish-producing main--this time with a noble and equitable captain.

It was a lovely August morning when I rode across the sandy peninsula
to visit a certain noted family, whereof all the sons were valiant and
the daughters beautiful.  The front of the house was deserted, but on
the rear veranda I heard the rustle of gowns, and above it arose what
seemed to be the voice of Ulysses, reciting his wanderings.  There was
no mistaking that voice, it was my friend, the Tramp!

From what I could hastily gather from his speech, he had walked from
St. John, N. B., to rejoin a distressed wife in New York, who was,
however, living with opulent but objectionable relatives. "An' shure,
miss, I wouldn't be askin' ye the loan of a cint if I could get worruk
at me trade of carpet-wavin'--and maybe ye know of some mannfacthory
where they wave carpets beyant here.  Ah, miss, and if ye don't give me
a cint, it's enough for the loikes of me to know that me troubles has
brought the tears in the most beautiful oiyes in the wurruld, and God
bless ye for it, miss!"

Now I knew that the Most Beautiful Eyes in the World belonged to one of
the most sympathetic and tenderest hearts in the world, and I felt that
common justice demanded my interference between it and one of the
biggest scamps in the world.  So, without waiting to be announced by
the servant, I opened the door, and joined the group on the veranda.

If I expected to touch the conscience of my friend, the Tramp, by a
dramatic entrance, I failed utterly; for no sooner did he see me, than
he instantly gave vent to a howl of delight, and, falling on his knees
before me, grasped my hand, and turned oratorically to the ladies.

"Oh, but it's himself--himself that has come as a witness to me
carrakther!  Oh, but it's himself that lifted me four wakes ago, when I
was lyin' with a mortal wakeness on the say-coast, and tuk me to his
house.  Oh, but it's himself that shupported me over the faldes, and
whin the chills and faver came on me and I shivered wid the cold, it
was himself, God bless him, as sthripped the coat off his back, and giv
it me, sayin', 'Take it, Dinnis, it's shtarved with the cowld say air
ye'll be entoirely.'  Ah, but look at him--will ye, miss!  Look at his
swate, modist face--a blushin' like your own, miss.  Ah! look at him,
will ye?  He'll be denyin' of it in a minit--may the blessin' uv God
folly him.  Look at him, miss! Ah, but it's a swate pair ye'd make!
(the rascal knew I was a married man).  Ah, miss, if you could see him
wroightin' day and night with such an illigant hand of his own--(he had
evidently believed from the gossip of my servants that I was a
professor of chirography)--if ye could see him, miss, as I have, ye'd
be proud of him."

He stopped out of breath.  I was so completely astounded I could say
nothing: the tremendous indictment I had framed to utter as I opened
the door vanished completely.  And as the Most Beautiful Eyes in the
Wurruld turned gratefully to mine--well--

I still retained enough principle to ask the ladies to withdraw, while
I would take upon myself the duty of examining into the case of my
friend, the Tramp, and giving him such relief as was required.  (I did
not know until afterward, however, that the rascal had already
despoiled their scant purses of three dollars and fifty cents.)  When
the door was closed upon them I turned upon him.

"You infernal rascal!"

"Ah, Captain, and would ye be refusin' ME a carrakther and me givin' YE
such a one as Oi did!  God save us! but if ye'd hav' seen the luk that
the purty one give ye.  Well, before the chills and faver bruk me
spirits entirely, when I was a young man, and makin' me tin dollars a
week brick-makin', it's meself that wud hav' given--"

"I consider," I broke in, "that a dollar is a fair price for your
story, and as I shall have to take it all back and expose you before
the next twenty-four hours pass, I think you had better hasten to
Milwaukee, New York, or Louisiana."

I handed him the dollar.  "Mind, I don't want to see your face again."

"Ye wun't, captain."

And I did not.

But it so chanced that later in the season, when the migratory
inhabitants had flown to their hot-air registers in Boston and
Providence, I breakfasted with one who had lingered.  It was a certain
Boston lawyer,--replete with principle, honesty, self-discipline,
statistics, aesthetics, and a perfect consciousness of possessing all
these virtues, and a full recognition of their market values.  I think
he tolerated me as a kind of foreigner, gently but firmly waiving all
argument on any topic, frequently distrusting my facts, generally my
deductions, and always my ideas. In conversation he always appeared to
descend only half way down a long moral and intellectual staircase, and
always delivered his conclusions over the balusters.

I had been speaking of my friend, the Tramp.  "There is but one way of
treating that class of impostors; it is simply to recognize the fact
that the law calls him a 'vagrant,' and makes his trade a misdemeanor.
Any sentiment on the other side renders you particeps criminis.  I
don't know but an action would lie against you for encouraging tramps.
Now, I have an efficacious way of dealing with these gentry."  He rose
and took a double-barreled fowling-piece from the chimney.  "When a
tramp appears on my property, I warn him off.  If he persists, I fire
on him--as I would on any criminal trespasser."

"Fire on him?" I echoed in alarm.

"Yes--BUT WITH POWDER ONLY!  Of course HE doesn't know that.  But he
doesn't come back."

It struck me for the first time that possibly many other of my friend's
arguments might be only blank cartridges, and used to frighten off
other trespassing intellects.

"Of course, if the tramp still persisted, I would be justified in using
shot.  Last evening I had a visit from one.  He was coming over the
wall.  My shot gun was efficacious; you should have seen him run!"

It was useless to argue with so positive a mind, and I dropped the
subject.  After breakfast I strolled over the downs, my friend
promising to join me as soon as he arranged some household business.

It was a lovely, peaceful morning, not unlike the day when I first met
my friend, the Tramp.  The hush of a great benediction lay on land and
sea.  A few white sails twinkled afar, but sleepily; one or two large
ships were creeping in lazily, like my friend, the Tramp.  A voice
behind me startled me.

My host had rejoined me.  His face, however, looked a little troubled.

"I just now learned something of importance," he began.  "It appears
that with all my precautions that Tramp has visited my kitchen, and the
servants have entertained him.  Yesterday morning, it appears, while I
was absent, he had the audacity to borrow my gun to go duck-shooting.
At the end of two or three hours he returned with two ducks and--the
gun."

"That was, at least, honest."

"Yes--but!  That fool of a girl says that, as he handed back the gun,
he told her it was all right, and that he had loaded it up again to
save the master trouble."

I think I showed my concern in my face, for he added, hastily: "It was
only duck-shot; a few wouldn't hurt him!"

Nevertheless, we both walked on in silence for a moment.  "I thought
the gun kicked a little," he said at last, musingly; "but the idea of--
Hallo! what's this?"

He stopped before the hollow where I had first seen my Tramp.  It was
deserted, but on the mosses there were spots of blood and fragments of
an old gown, blood-stained, as if used for bandages. I looked at it
closely: it was the gown intended for the consumptive wife of my
friend, the Tramp.

But my host was already nervously tracking the bloodstains that on
rock, moss, and boulder were steadily leading toward the sea.  When I
overtook him at last on the shore, he was standing before a flat rock,
on which lay a bundle I recognized, tied up in a handkerchief, and a
crooked grape-vine stick.

"He may have come here to wash his wounds--salt is a styptic," said my
host, who had recovered his correct precision of statement.

I said nothing, but looked toward the sea.  Whatever secret lay hid in
its breast, it kept it fast.  Whatever its calm eyes had seen that
summer night, it gave no reflection now.  It lay there passive,
imperturbable, and reticent.  But my friend, the Tramp, was gone!



THE MAN FROM SOLANO

He came toward me out of an opera lobby, between the acts,--a figure as
remarkable as anything in the performance.  His clothes, no two
articles of which were of the same color, had the appearance of having
been purchased and put on only an hour or two before,--a fact more
directly established by the clothes-dealer's ticket which still adhered
to his coat-collar, giving the number, size, and general dimensions of
that garment somewhat obtrusively to an uninterested public.  His
trousers had a straight line down each leg, as if he had been born flat
but had since developed; and there was another crease down his back,
like those figures children cut out of folded paper.  I may add that
there was no consciousness of this in his face, which was good-natured,
and, but for a certain squareness in the angle of his lower jaw,
utterly uninteresting and commonplace.

"You disremember me," he said, briefly, as he extended his hand, "but
I'm from Solano, in Californy.  I met you there in the spring of '57.
I was tendin' sheep, and you was burnin' charcoal."

There was not the slightest trace of any intentional rudeness in the
reminder.  It was simply a statement of fact, and as such to be
accepted.

"What I hailed ye for was only this," he said, after I had shaken hands
with him.  "I saw you a minnit ago standin' over in yon box--chirpin'
with a lady--a young lady, peart and pretty.  Might you be telling me
her name?"

I gave him the name of a certain noted belle of a neighboring city, who
had lately stirred the hearts of the metropolis, and who was especially
admired by the brilliant and fascinating young Dashboard, who stood
beside me.

The Man from Solano mused for a moment, and then said, "Thet's so!
thet's the name!  It's the same gal!"

"You have met her, then?" I asked, in surprise.

"Ye-es," he responded, slowly: "I met her about fower months ago. She'd
bin makin' a tour of Californy with some friends, and I first saw her
aboard the cars this side of Reno.  She lost her baggage-checks, and I
found them on the floor and gave 'em back to her, and she thanked me.
I reckon now it would be about the square thing to go over thar and
sorter recognize her."  He stopped a moment, and looked at us
inquiringly.

"My dear sir," struck in the brilliant and fascinating Dashboard, "if
your hesitation proceeds from any doubt as to the propriety of your
attire, I beg you to dismiss it from your mind at once.  The tyranny of
custom, it is true, compels your friend and myself to dress peculiarly,
but I assure you nothing could be finer than the way that the olive
green of your coat melts in the delicate yellow of your cravat, or the
pearl gray of your trousers blends with the bright blue of your
waistcoat, and lends additional brilliancy to that massive oroide
watch-chain which you wear."

To my surprise, the Man from Solano did not strike him.  He looked at
the ironical Dashboard with grave earnestness, and then said quietly:--

"Then I reckon you wouldn't mind showin' me in thar?"

Dashboard was, I admit, a little staggered at this.  But he recovered
himself, and, bowing ironically, led the way to the box. I followed him
and the Man from Solano.

Now, the belle in question happened to be a gentlewoman--descended from
gentlewomen--and after Dashboard's ironical introduction, in which the
Man from Solano was not spared, she comprehended the situation
instantly.  To Dashboard's surprise she drew a chair to her side, made
the Man from Solano sit down, quietly turned her back on Dashboard, and
in full view of the brilliant audience and the focus of a hundred
lorgnettes, entered into conversation with him.

Here, for the sake of romance, I should like to say he became animated,
and exhibited some trait of excellence,--some rare wit or solid sense.
But the fact is he was dull and stupid to the last degree.  He
persisted in keeping the conversation upon the subject of the lost
baggage-checks, and every bright attempt of the lady to divert him
failed signally.  At last, to everybody's relief, he rose, and leaning
over her chair, said:--

"I calklate to stop over here some time, miss, and you and me bein'
sorter strangers here, maybe when there's any show like this goin' on
you'll let me--"

Miss X. said somewhat hastily that the multiplicity of her engagements
and the brief limit of her stay in New York she feared would, etc.,
etc.  The two other ladies had their handkerchiefs over their mouths,
and were staring intently on the stage, when the Man from Solano
continued:--

"Then, maybe, miss, whenever there is a show goin' on that you'll
attend, you'll just drop me word to Earle's Hotel, to this yer
address," and he pulled from his pocket a dozen well-worn letters, and
taking the buff envelope from one, handed it to her with something like
a bow.

"Certainly," broke in the facetious Dashboard, "Miss X. goes to the
Charity Ball to-morrow night.  The tickets are but a trifle to an
opulent Californian, and a man of your evident means, and the object a
worthy one.  You will, no doubt, easily secure an invitation."

Miss X. raised her handsome eyes for a moment to Dashboard.  "By all
means," she said, turning to the Man from Solano; "and as Mr. Dashboard
is one of the managers and you are a stranger, he will, of course, send
you a complimentary ticket.  I have known Mr. Dashboard long enough to
know that he is invariably courteous to strangers and a gentleman."
She settled herself in her chair again and fixed her eyes upon the
stage.

The Man from Solano thanked the Man of New York, and then, after
shaking hands with every body in the box, turned to go.  When he had
reached the door he looked back to Miss X., and said,--

"It WAS one of the queerest things in the world, miss, that my findin'
them checks--"

But the curtain had just then risen on the garden scene in "Faust," and
Miss X. was absorbed.  The Man from Solano carefully shut the box door
and retired.  I followed him.

He was silent until he reached the lobby, and then he said, as if
renewing a previous conversation, "She IS a mighty peart gal--that's
so.  She's just my kind, and will make a stavin' good wife."

I thought I saw danger ahead for the Man from Solano, so I hastened to
tell him that she was beset by attentions, that she could have her pick
and choice of the best of society, and finally, that she was, most
probably, engaged to Dashboard.

"That's so," he said quietly, without the slightest trace of feeling.
"It would be mighty queer if she wasn't.  But I reckon I'll steer down
to the ho-tel.  I don't care much for this yellin'."  (He was alluding
to a cadenza of that famous cantatrice, Signora Batti Batti.)  "What's
the time?"

He pulled out his watch.  It was such a glaring chain, so obviously
bogus, that my eyes were fascinated by it.  "You're looking at that
watch," he said; "it's purty to look at, but she don't go worth a cent.
And yet her price was $125, gold.  I gobbled her up in Chatham Street
day before yesterday, where they were selling 'em very cheap at
auction."

"You have been outrageously swindled," I said, indignantly.  "Watch and
chain are not worth twenty dollars."

"Are they worth fifteen?" he asked, gravely.

"Possibly."

"Then I reckon it's a fair trade.  Ye see, I told 'em I was a
Californian from Solano, and hadn't anything about me of greenbacks.  I
had three slugs with me.  Ye remember them slugs?" (I did; the "slug"
was a "token" issued in the early days--a hexagonal piece of gold a
little over twice the size of a twenty-dollar gold piece--worth and
accepted for fifty dollars.)

"Well, I handed them that, and they handed me the watch.  You see them
slugs I had made myself outer brass filings and iron pyrites, and used
to slap 'em down on the boys for a bluff in a game of draw poker.  You
see, not being reg'lar gov-ment money, it wasn't counterfeiting.  I
reckon they cost me, counting time and anxiety, about fifteen dollars.
So, if this yer watch is worth that, it's about a square game, ain't
it?"

I began to understand the Man from Solano, and said it was.  He
returned his watch to his pocket, toyed playfully with the chain, and
remarked, "Kinder makes a man look fash'nable and wealthy, don't it?"

I agreed with him.  "But what do you intend to do here?" I asked.

"Well, I've got a cash capital of nigh on seven hundred dollars.  I
guess until I get into reg'lar business I'll skirmish round Wall
Street, and sorter lay low."  I was about to give him a few words of
warning, but I remembered his watch, and desisted.  We shook hands and
parted.

A few days after I met him on Broadway.  He was attired in another new
suit, but I think I saw a slight improvement in his general appearance.
Only five distinct colors were visible in his attire. But this, I had
reason to believe afterwards, was accidental.

I asked him if he had been to the ball.  He said he had.  "That gal,
and a mighty peart gal she was too, was there, but she sorter fought
shy of me.  I got this new suit to go in, but those waiters sorter run
me into a private box, and I didn't get much chance to continner our
talk about them checks.  But that young feller, Dashboard, was mighty
perlite.  He brought lots of fellers and young women round to the box
to see me, and he made up a party that night to take me round Wall
Street and in them Stock Boards.  And the next day he called for me and
took me, and I invested about five hundred dollars in them stocks--may
be more.  You see, we sorter swopped stocks.  You know I had ten shares
in the Peacock Copper Mine, that you was once secretary of."

"But those shares are not worth a cent.  The whole thing exploded ten
years ago."

"That's so, may be; YOU say so.  But then I didn't know anything more
about Communipaw Central, or the Naphtha Gaslight Company, and so I
thought it was a square game.  Only I realized on the stocks I bought,
and I kem up outer Wall Street about four hundred dollars better.  You
see it was a sorter risk, after all, for them Peacock stocks MIGHT come
up!"

I looked into his face: it was immeasurably serene and commonplace. I
began to be a little afraid of the man, or, rather, of my want of
judgment of the man; and after a few words we shook hands and parted.

It was some months before I again saw the Man from Solano.  When I did,
I found that he had actually become a member of the Stock Board, and
had a little office on Broad Street, where he transacted a fair
business.  My remembrance going back to the first night I met him, I
inquired if he had renewed his acquaintance with Miss X. "I heerd that
she was in Newport this summer, and I ran down there fur a week."

"And you talked with her about the baggage-checks?"

"No," he said, seriously; "she gave me a commission to buy some stocks
for her.  You see, I guess them fash'nable fellers sorter got to
runnin' her about me, and so she put our acquaintance on a square
business footing.  I tell you, she's a right peart gal.  Did ye hear of
the accident that happened to her?"

I had not.

"Well, you see, she was out yachting, and I managed through one of
those fellers to get an invite, too.  The whole thing was got up by a
man that they say is going to marry her.  Well, one afternoon the boom
swings round in a little squall and knocks her overboard. There was an
awful excitement,--you've heard about it, may be?"

"No!"  But I saw it all with a romancer's instinct in a flash of
poetry!  This poor fellow, debarred through uncouthness from expressing
his affection for her, had at last found his fitting opportunity.  He
had--

"Thar was an awful row," he went on.  "I ran out on the taffrail, and
there a dozen yards away was that purty creature, that peart gal,
and--I--"

"You jumped for her," I said, hastily.

"No!" he said gravely.  "I let the other man do the jumping.  I sorter
looked on."

I stared at him in astonishment.

"No," he went on, seriously.  "He was the man who jumped--that was just
then his 'put'--his line of business.  You see, if I had waltzed over
the side of that ship, and cavoorted in, and flummuxed round and
finally flopped to the bottom, that other man would have jumped
nateral-like and saved her; and ez he was going to marry her anyway, I
don't exactly see where I'D hev been represented in the transaction.
But don't you see, ef, after he'd jumped and hadn't got her, he'd gone
down himself, I'd hev had the next best chance, and the advantage of
heving him outer the way.  You see, you don't understand me--I don't
think you did in Californy."

"Then he did save her?"

"Of course.  Don't you see she was all right.  If he'd missed her, I'd
have chipped in.  Thar warn't no sense in my doing his duty onless he
failed."

Somehow the story got out.  The Man from Solano as a butt became more
popular than ever, and of course received invitations to burlesque
receptions, and naturally met a great many people whom otherwise he
would not have seen.  It was observed also that his seven hundred
dollars were steadily growing, and that he seemed to be getting on in
his business.  Certain California stocks which I had seen quietly
interred in the old days in the tombs of their fathers were magically
revived; and I remember, as one who has seen a ghost, to have been
shocked as I looked over the quotations one morning to have seen the
ghostly face of the "Dead Beat Beach Mining Co.," rouged and plastered,
looking out from the columns of the morning paper.  At last a few
people began to respect, or suspect, the Man from Solano.  At last,
suspicion culminated with this incident:--

He had long expressed a wish to belong to a certain "fash'n'ble" club,
and with a view of burlesque he was invited to visit the club, where a
series of ridiculous entertainments were given him, winding up with a
card party.  As I passed the steps of the club-house early next
morning, I overheard two or three members talking excitedly,--

"He cleaned everybody out."  "Why, he must have raked in nigh on
$40,000."

"Who?" I asked.

"The Man from Solano."

As I turned away, one of the gentlemen, a victim, noted for his
sporting propensities, followed me, and laying his hand on my
shoulders, asked:--

"Tell me fairly now.  What business did your friend follow in
California?"

"He was a shepherd."

"A what?"

"A shepherd.  Tended his flocks on the honey-scented hills of Solano."

"Well, all I can say is, d--n your California pastorals!"



THE OFFICE SEEKER

He asked me if I had ever seen the "Remus Sentinel."

I replied that I had not, and would have added that I did not even know
where Remus was, when he continued by saying it was strange the hotel
proprietor did not keep the "Sentinel" on his files, and that he,
himself, should write to the editor about it.  He would not have spoken
about it, but he, himself, had been an humble member of the profession
to which I belonged, and had often written for its columns.  Some
friends of his--partial, no doubt--had said that his style somewhat
resembled Junius's; but of course, you know--well, what he could say
was that in the last campaign his articles were widely sought for.  He
did not know but he had a copy of one.  Here his hand dived into the
breast-pocket of his coat, with a certain deftness that indicated long
habit, and, after depositing on his lap a bundle of well-worn
documents, every one of which was glaringly suggestive of certificates
and signatures, he concluded he had left it in his trunk.

I breathed more freely.  We were sitting in the rotunda of a famous
Washington hotel, and only a few moments before had the speaker, an
utter stranger to me, moved his chair beside mine and opened a
conversation.  I noticed that he had that timid, lonely, helpless air
which invests the bucolic traveler who, for the first time, finds
himself among strangers, and his identity lost, in a world so much
larger, so much colder, so much more indifferent to him than he ever
imagined.  Indeed, I think that what we often attribute to the
impertinent familiarity of country-men and rustic travelers on railways
or in cities is largely due to their awful loneliness and nostalgia.  I
remember to have once met in a smoking-car on a Kansas railway one of
these lonely ones, who, after plying me with a thousand useless
questions, finally elicited the fact that I knew slightly a man who had
once dwelt in his native town in Illinois. During the rest of our
journey the conversation turned chiefly upon his fellow-townsman, whom
it afterwards appeared that my Illinois friend knew no better than I
did.  But he had established a link between himself and his far-off
home through me, and was happy.

While this was passing through my mind I took a fair look at him. He
was a spare young fellow, not more than thirty, with sandy hair and
eyebrows, and eyelashes so white as to be almost imperceptible. He was
dressed in black, somewhat to the "rearward o' the fashion," and I had
an odd idea that it had been his wedding suit, and it afterwards
appeared I was right.  His manner had the precision and much of the
dogmatism of the country schoolmaster, accustomed to wrestle with the
feeblest intellects.  From his history, which he presently gave me, it
appeared I was right here also.

He was born and bred in a Western State, and, as schoolmaster of Remus
and Clerk of Supervisors, had married one of his scholars, the daughter
of a clergyman, and a man of some little property.  He had attracted
some attention by his powers of declamation, and was one of the
principal members of the Remus Debating Society.  The various questions
then agitating Remus,--"Is the doctrine of immortality consistent with
an agricultural life?" and, "Are round dances morally wrong?"--afforded
him an opportunity of bringing himself prominently before the country
people.  Perhaps I might have seen an extract copied from the "Remus
Sentinel" in the "Christian Recorder" of May 7, 1875?  No?  He would
get it for me. He had taken an active part in the last campaign.  He
did not like to say it, but it had been universally acknowledged that
he had elected Gashwiler.

Who?

Gen. Pratt C. Gashwiler, member of Congress from our deestrict.

Oh!

A powerful man, sir--a very powerful man; a man whose influence will
presently be felt here, sir--HERE!  Well, he had come on with
Gashwiler, and--well, he did not know why--Gashwiler did not know why
he should not, you know (a feeble, half-apologetic laugh here), receive
that reward, you know, for these services which, etc., etc.

I asked him if he had any particular or definite office in view.

Well, no.  He had left that to Gashwiler.  Gashwiler had said--he
remembered his very words: "Leave it all to me; I'll look through the
different departments, and see what can be done for a man of your
talents."

And--

He's looking.  I'm expecting him back here every minute.  He's gone
over to the Department of Tape, to see what can be done there.  Ah!
here he comes.

A large man approached us.  He was very heavy, very unwieldy, very
unctuous and oppressive.  He affected the "honest farmer," but so badly
that the poorest husbandman would have resented it.  There was a
suggestion of a cheap lawyer about him that would have justified any
self-respecting judge in throwing him over the bar at once.  There was
a military suspicion about him that would have entitled him to a
court-martial on the spot.  There was an introduction, from which I
learned that my office-seeking friend's name was Expectant Dobbs.  And
then Gashwiler addressed me:--

"Our young friend here is waiting, waiting.  Waiting, I may say, on the
affairs of State.  Youth," continued the Hon. Mr. Gashwiler, addressing
an imaginary constituency, "is nothing but a season of waiting--of
preparation--ha, ha!"

As he laid his hand in a fatherly manner--a fatherly manner that was as
much of a sham as anything else about him--I don't know whether I was
more incensed at him or his victim, who received it with evident pride
and satisfaction.  Nevertheless he ventured to falter out:--

"Has anything been done yet?"

"Well, no; I can't say that anything--that is, that anything has been
COMPLETED; but I may say we are in excellent position for an
advance--ha, ha!  But we must wait, my young friend, wait.  What is it
the Latin philosopher says?  'Let us by all means hasten slowly'--ha,
ha!" and he turned to me as if saying confidentially, "Observe the
impatience of these boys!"  "I met, a moment ago, my old friend and
boyhood's companion, Jim McGlasher, chief of the Bureau for the
Dissemination of Useless Information, and," lowering his voice to a
mysterious but audible whisper, "I shall see him again to-morrow."

The "All aboard!" of the railway omnibus at this moment tore me from
the presence of this gifted legislator and his protege; but as we drove
away I saw through the open window the powerful mind of Gashwiler
operating, so to speak, upon the susceptibilities of Mr. Dobbs.

I did not meet him again for a week.  The morning of my return I saw
the two conversing together in the hall, but with the palpable
distinction between this and their former interviews, that the gifted
Gashwiler seemed to be anxious to get away from his friend. I heard him
say something about "committees" and "to-morrow," and when Dobbs turned
his freckled face toward me I saw that he had got at last some
expression into it--disappointment.

I asked him pleasantly how he was getting on.

He had not lost his pride yet.  He was doing well, although such was
the value set upon his friend Gashwiler's abilities by his brother
members that he was almost always occupied with committee business.  I
noticed that his clothes were not in as good case as before, and he
told me that he had left the hotel, and taken lodgings in a by-street,
where it was less expensive.  Temporarily of course.

A few days after this I had business in one of the great departments.
From the various signs over the doors of its various offices and
bureaus it always oddly reminded me of Stewart's or Arnold and
Constable's.  You could get pensions, patents, and plants.  You could
get land and the seeds to put in it, and the Indians to prowl round it,
and what not.  There was a perpetual clanging of office desk bells, and
a running hither and thither of messengers strongly suggestive of "Cash
47."

As my business was with the manager of this Great National Fancy Shop,
I managed to push by the sad-eyed, eager-faced crowd of men and women
in the anteroom, and entered the secretary's room, conscious of having
left behind me a great deal of envy and uncharitableness of spirit.  As
I opened the door I heard a monotonous flow of Western speech which I
thought I recognized. There was no mistaking it.  It was the voice of
the Gashwiler.

"The appointment of this man, Mr. Secretary, would be most acceptable
to the people in my deestrict.  His family are wealthy and influential,
and it's just as well in the fall elections to have the supervisors and
county judge pledged to support the administration.  Our delegates to
the State Central Committee are to a man"--but here, perceiving from
the wandering eye of Mr. Secretary that there was another man in the
room, he whispered the rest with a familiarity that must have required
all the politician in the official's breast to keep from resenting.

"You have some papers, I suppose?" asked the secretary, wearily.

Gashwiler was provided with a pocketful, and produced them.  The
secretary threw them on the table among the other papers, where they
seemed instantly to lose their identity, and looked as if they were
ready to recommend anybody but the person they belonged to. Indeed, in
one corner the entire Massachusetts delegation, with the Supreme Bench
at their head, appeared to be earnestly advocating the manuring of Iowa
waste lands; and to the inexperienced eye, a noted female reformer had
apparently appended her signature to a request for a pension for wounds
received in battle.

"By the way," said the secretary, "I think I have a letter here from
somebody in your district asking an appointment, and referring to you?
Do you withdraw it?"

"If anybody has been presuming to speculate upon my patronage," said
the Hon. Mr. Gashwiler, with rising rage.

"I've got the letter somewhere here," said the secretary, looking
dazedly at his table.  He made a feeble movement among the papers, and
then sank back hopelessly in his chair, and gazed out of the window as
if he thought and rather hoped it might have flown away. "It was from a
Mr. Globbs, or Gobbs, or Dobbs, of Remus," he said finally, after a
superhuman effort of memory.

"Oh, that's nothing--a foolish fellow who has been boring me for the
last month."

"Then I am to understand that this application is withdrawn?"

"As far as my patronage is concerned, certainly.  In fact, such an
appointment would not express the sentiments--indeed, I may say, would
be calculated to raise active opposition in the deestrict."

The secretary uttered a sigh of relief, and the gifted Gashwiler passed
out.  I tried to get a good look at the honorable scamp's eye, but he
evidently did not recognize me.

It was a question in my mind whether I ought not to expose the
treachery of Dobbs's friend, but the next time I met Dobbs he was in
such good spirits that I forebore.  It appeared that his wife had
written to him that she had discovered a second cousin in the person of
the Assistant Superintendent of the Envelope Flap Moistening Bureau of
the Department of Tape, and had asked his assistance; and Dobbs had
seen him, and he had promised it.  "You see," said Dobbs, "in the
performance of his duties he is often very near the person of the
secretary, frequently in the next room, and he is a powerful man,
sir--a powerful man to know, sir--a VERY powerful man."

How long this continued I do not remember.  Long enough, however, for
Dobbs to become quite seedy, for the giving up of wrist cuffs, for the
neglect of shoes and beard, and for great hollows to form round his
eyes, and a slight flush on his cheek-bones.  I remember meeting him in
all the departments, writing letters or waiting patiently in anterooms
from morning till night.  He had lost all his old dogmatism, but not
his pride.  "I might as well be here as anywhere, while I'm waiting,"
he said, "and then I'm getting some knowledge of the details of
official life."

In the face of this mystery I was surprised at finding a note from him
one day, inviting me to dine with him at a certain famous restaurant.
I had scarce got over my amazement, when the writer himself overtook me
at my hotel.  For a moment I scarcely recognized him.  A new suit of
fashionably-cut clothes had changed him, without, however, entirely
concealing his rustic angularity of figure and outline.  He even
affected a fashionable dilettante air, but so mildly and so innocently
that it was not offensive.

"You see," he began, explanatory-wise, "I've just found out the way to
do it.  None of these big fellows, these cabinet officers, know me
except as an applicant.  Now, the way to do this thing is to meet 'em
fust sociably; wine 'em and dine 'em.  Why, sir,"--he dropped into the
schoolmaster again here,--"I had two cabinet ministers, two judges, and
a general at my table last night."

"On YOUR invitation?"

"Dear, no! all I did was to pay for it.  Tom Soufflet gave the dinner
and invited the people.  Everybody knows Tom.  You see, a friend of
mine put me up to it, and said that Soufflet had fixed up no end of
appointments and jobs in that way.  You see, when these gentlemen get
sociable over their wine, he says carelessly, 'By the way, there's
So-and-so--a good fellow--wants something; give it to him.'  And the
first thing you know, or they know, he gets a promise from them.  They
get a dinner--and a good one--and he gets an appointment."

"But where did you get the money?"

"Oh,"--he hesitated,--"I wrote home, and Fanny's father raised fifteen
hundred dollars some way, and sent it to me.  I put it down to
political expenses."  He laughed a weak, foolish laugh here, and added,
"As the old man don't drink nor smoke, he'd lift his eyebrows to know
how the money goes.  But I'll make it all right when the office
comes--and she's coming, sure pop."

His slang fitted as poorly on him as his clothes, and his familiarity
was worse than his former awkward shyness.  But I could not help asking
him what had been the result of this expenditure.

"Nothing just yet.  But the Secretary of Tape and the man at the head
of the Inferior Department, both spoke to me, and one of them said he
thought he'd heard my name before.  He might," he added, with a forced
laugh, "for I've written him fifteen letters."

Three months passed.  A heavy snow-storm stayed my chariot wheels on a
Western railroad, ten miles from a nervous lecture committee and a
waiting audience; there was nothing to do but to make the attempt to
reach them in a sleigh.  But the way was long and the drifts deep, and
when at last four miles out we reached a little village, the driver
declared his cattle could hold out no longer, and we must stop there.
Bribes and threats were equally of no avail.  I had to accept the fact.

"What place is this?"

"Remus."

"Remus, Remus," where had I heard that name before?  But while I was
reflecting he drove up before the door of the tavern.  It was a dismal,
sleep-forbidding place, and only nine o'clock, and here was the long
winter's night before me.  Failing to get the landlord to give me a
team to go further, I resigned myself to my fate and a cigar, behind
the red-hot stove.  In a few moments one of the loungers approached me,
calling me by name, and in a rough but hearty fashion condoled with me
for my mishap, advised me to stay at Remus all night, and added: "The
quarters ain't the best in the world yer at this hotel.  But thar's an
old man yer--the preacher that was--that for twenty years hez taken in
such fellers as you and lodged 'em free gratis for nothing, and hez
been proud to do it.  The old man used to be rich; he ain't so now;
sold his big house on the cross roads, and lives in a little cottage
with his darter right over yan.  But ye couldn't do him a better turn
than to go over thar and stay, and if he thought I'd let ye go out o'
Remus without axing ye, he'd give me h-ll.  Stop, I'll go with ye."

I might at least call on the old man, and I accompanied my guide
through the still falling snow until we reached a little cottage. The
door opened to my guide's knock, and with the brief and discomposing
introduction, "Yer, ole man, I've brought you one o' them snow-bound
lecturers," he left me on the threshold, as my host, a kindly-faced,
white-haired man of seventy, came forward to greet me.

His frankness and simple courtesy overcame the embarrassment left by my
guide's introduction, and I followed him passively as he entered the
neat, but plainly-furnished sitting-room.  At the same moment a pretty,
but faded young woman arose from the sofa and was introduced to me as
his daughter.  "Fanny and I live here quite alone, and if you knew how
good it was to see somebody from the great outside world now and then,
you would not apologize for what you call your intrusion."

During this speech I was vaguely trying to recall where and when and
under what circumstances I had ever before seen the village, the house,
the old man or his daughter.  Was it in a dream, or in one of those dim
reveries of some previous existence to which the spirit of mankind is
subject?  I looked at them again.  In the careworn lines around the
once pretty girlish mouth of the young woman, in the furrowed seams
over the forehead of the old man, in the ticking of the old-fashioned
clock on the shelf, in the faint whisper of the falling snow outside, I
read the legend, "Patience, patience; Wait and Hope."

The old man filled a pipe, and offering me one, continued, "Although I
seldom drink myself, it was my custom to always keep some nourishing
liquor in my house for passing guests, but to-night I find myself
without any."  I hastened to offer him my flask, which, after a
moment's coyness, he accepted, and presently under its benign influence
at least ten years dropped from his shoulders, and he sat up in his
chair erect and loquacious.

"And how are affairs at the National Capital, sir?" he began.

Now, if there was any subject of which I was profoundly ignorant, it
was this.  But the old man was evidently bent on having a good
political talk.  So I said vaguely, yet with a certain sense of
security, that I guessed there wasn't much being done.

"I see," said the old man, "in the matters of resumption; of the
sovereign rights of States and federal interference, you would imply
that a certain conservative tentative policy is to be promulgated until
after the electoral committee have given their verdict."  I looked for
help towards the lady, and observed feebly that he had very clearly
expressed my views.

The old man, observing my look, said: "Although my daughter's husband
holds a federal position in Washington, the pressure of his business is
so great that he has little time to give us mere gossip--I beg your
pardon, did you speak?"

I had unconsciously uttered an exclamation.  This, then, was Remus--the
home of Expectant Dobbs--and these his wife and father; and the
Washington banquet-table, ah me! had sparkled with the yearning heart's
blood of this poor wife, and had been upheld by this tottering Caryatid
of a father.

"Do you know what position he has?"

The old man did not know positively, but thought it was some general
supervising position.  He had been assured by Mr. Gashwiler that it was
a first-class clerkship; yes, a FIRST class.

I did not tell him that in this, as in many other official regulations
in Washington, they reckoned backward, but said:--

"I suppose that your M. C., Mr.--Mr. Gashwiler--"

"Don't mention his name," said the little woman, rising to her feet
hastily; "he never brought Expectant anything but disappointment and
sorrow.  I hate, I despise the man."

"Dear Fanny," expostulated the old man, gently, "this is unchristian
and unjust.  Mr. Gashwiler is a powerful, a very powerful man!  His
work is a great one; his time is preoccupied with weightier matters."

"His time was not so preoccupied but he could make use of poor
Expectant," said this wounded dove, a little spitefully.

Nevertheless it was some satisfaction to know that Dobbs had at last
got a place, no matter how unimportant, or who had given it to him; and
when I went to bed that night in the room that had been evidently
prepared for their conjugal chamber, I felt that Dobbs's worst trials
were over.  The walls were hung with souvenirs of their ante-nuptial
days.  There was a portrait of Dobbs, aetat. 25; there was a faded
bouquet in a glass case, presented by Dobbs to Fanny on
examination-day; there was a framed resolution of thanks to Dobbs from
the Remus Debating Society; there was a certificate of Dobbs's election
as President of the Remus Philomathean Society; there was his
commission as Captain in the Remus Independent Contingent of Home
Guards; there was a Freemason's chart, in which Dobbs was addressed in
epithets more fulsome and extravagant than any living monarch.  And yet
all these cheap glories of a narrow life and narrower brain were upheld
and made sacred by the love of the devoted priestess who worshiped at
this lonely shrine, and kept the light burning through gloom and doubt
and despair.  The storm tore round the house, and shook its white fists
in the windows.  A dried wreath of laurel that Fanny had placed on
Dobbs's head after his celebrated centennial address at the
school-house, July 4, 1876, swayed in the gusts, and sent a few of its
dead leaves down on the floor, and I lay in Dobbs's bed and wondered
what a first-class clerkship was.

I found out early the next summer.  I was strolling through the long
corridors of a certain great department, when I came upon a man
accurately yoked across the shoulders, and supporting two huge pails of
ice on either side, from which he was replenishing the pitchers in the
various offices.  As I passed I turned to look at him again.  It was
Dobbs!

He did not set down his burden; it was against the rules, he said. But
he gossiped cheerily, said he was beginning at the foot of the ladder,
but expected soon to climb up.  That it was Civil Service Reform, and
of course he would be promoted soon.

"Had Gashwiler procured the appointment?"

No.  He believed it was ME.  I had told his story to
Assistant-secretary Blank, who had, in turn related it to
Bureau-director Dash--both good fellows--but this was all they could
do.  Yes, it was a foothold.  But he must go now.

Nevertheless, I followed him up and down, and, cheered up with a
rose-colored picture of his wife and family, and my visit there, and
promising to come and see him the next time I came to Washington, I
left him with his self-imposed yoke.

With a new administration, Civil Service Reform came in, crude and
ill-digested, as all sudden and sweeping reforms must be; cruel to the
individual, as all crude reforms will ever be; and among the list of
helpless men and women, incapacitated for other work by long service in
the dull routine of federal office, who were decapitated, the weak,
foolish, emaciated head of Expectant Dobbs went to the block.  It
afterward appeared that the gifted Gashwiler was responsible for the
appointment of twenty clerks, and that the letter of poor Dobbs, in
which he dared to refer to the now powerless Gashwiler, had sealed his
fate.  The country made an example of Gashwiler and--Dobbs.

From that moment he disappeared.  I looked for him in vain in
anterooms, lobbies, and hotel corridors, and finally came to the
conclusion that he had gone home.

How beautiful was that July Sabbath, when the morning train from
Baltimore rolled into the Washington depot.  How tenderly and chastely
the morning sunlight lay on the east front of the Capitol until the
whole building was hushed in a grand and awful repose. How difficult it
was to think of a Gashwiler creeping in and out of those enfiling
columns, or crawling beneath that portico, without wondering that yon
majestic figure came not down with flat of sword to smite the fat
rotundity of the intruder.  How difficult to think that parricidal
hands have ever been lifted against the Great Mother, typified here in
the graceful white chastity of her garments, in the noble tranquillity
of her face, in the gathering up her white-robed children within her
shadow.

This led me to think of Dobbs, when, suddenly a face flashed by my
carriage window.  I called to the driver to stop, and, looking again,
saw that it was a woman standing bewildered and irresolute on the
street corner.  As she turned her anxious face toward me I saw that it
was Mrs. Dobbs.

What was she doing here, and where was Expectant?

She began an incoherent apology, and then burst into explanatory tears.
When I had got her in the carriage she said, between her sobs, that
Expectant had not returned; that she had received a letter from a
friend here saying he was sick,--oh very, very sick,--and father could
not come with her, so she came alone.  She was so frightened, so
lonely, so miserable.

Had she his address?

Yes, just here!  It was on the outskirts of Washington, near
Georgetown.  Then I would take her there, if I could, for she knew
nobody.

On our way I tried to cheer her up by pointing out some of the children
of the Great Mother before alluded to, but she only shut her eyes as we
rolled down the long avenues, and murmured, "Oh, these cruel, cruel
distances!"

At last we reached the locality, a negro quarter, yet clean and neat in
appearance.  I saw the poor girl shudder slightly as we stopped at the
door of a low, two-story frame house, from which the unwonted spectacle
of a carriage brought a crowd of half-naked children and a comely,
cleanly, kind-faced mulatto woman.

Yes, this was the house.  He was upstairs, rather poorly, but asleep,
she thought.

We went upstairs.  In the first chamber, clean, though poorly
furnished, lay Dobbs.  On a pine table near his bed were letters and
memorials to the various departments, and on the bed-quilt, unfinished,
but just as the weary fingers had relaxed their grasp upon it, lay a
letter to the Tape Department.

As we entered the room he lifted himself on his elbow.  "Fanny!" he
said, quickly, and a shade of disappointment crossed his face.  "I
thought it was a message from the secretary," he added, apologetically.

The poor woman had suffered too much already to shrink from this last
crushing blow.  But she walked quietly to his side without a word or
cry, knelt, placed her loving arms around him, and I left them so
together.

When I called again in the evening he was better; so much better that,
against the doctor's orders, he had talked to her quite cheerfully and
hopefully for an hour, until suddenly raising her bowed head in his two
hands, he said, "Do you know, dear, that in looking for help and
influence there was one, dear, I had forgotten; one who is very potent
with kings and councilors, and I think, love, I shall ask Him to
interest Himself in my behalf.  It is not too late yet, darling, and I
shall seek Him to-morrow."

And before the morrow came he had sought and found Him, and I doubt not
got a good place.



A SLEEPING-CAR EXPERIENCE

It was in a Pullman sleeping-car on a Western road.  After that first
plunge into unconsciousness which the weary traveler takes on getting
into his berth, I awakened to the dreadful revelation that I had been
asleep only two hours.  The greater part of a long winter night was
before me to face with staring eyes.

Finding it impossible to sleep, I lay there wondering a number of
things: why, for instance, the Pullman sleeping-car blankets were
unlike other blankets; why they were like squares cut out of cold
buckwheat cakes, and why they clung to you when you turned over, and
lay heavy on you without warmth; why the curtains before you could not
have been made opaque, without being so thick and suffocating; why it
would not be as well to sit up all night half asleep in an ordinary
passenger-car as to lie awake all night in a Pullman.  But the snoring
of my fellow-passengers answered this question in the negative.

With the recollection of last night's dinner weighing on me as heavily
and coldly as the blankets, I began wondering why, over the whole
extent of the continent, there was no local dish; why the bill of fare
at restaurant and hotel was invariably only a weak reflex of the
metropolitan hostelries; why the entrees were always the same, only
more or less badly cooked; why the traveling American always was
supposed to demand turkey and cold cranberry sauce; why the pretty
waiter-girl apparently shuffled your plates behind your back, and then
dealt them over your shoulder in a semicircle, as if they were a hand
at cards, and not always a good one?  Why, having done this, she
instantly retired to the nearest wall, and gazed at you scornfully, as
one who would say, "Fair sir, though lowly, I am proud; if thou dost
imagine that I would permit undue familiarity of speech, beware!"  And
then I began to think of and dread the coming breakfast; to wonder why
the ham was always cut half an inch thick, and why the fried egg always
resembled a glass eye that visibly winked at you with diabolical
dyspeptic suggestions; to wonder if the buckwheat cakes, the eating of
which requires a certain degree of artistic preparation and
deliberation, would be brought in as usual one minute before the train
started. And then I had a vivid recollection of a fellow-passenger who,
at a certain breakfast station in Illinois, frantically enwrapped his
portion of this national pastry in his red bandana handkerchief, took
it into the smoking-car, and quietly devoured it en route.

Lying broad awake, I could not help making some observations which I
think are not noticed by the day traveler.  First, that the speed of a
train is not equal or continuous.  That at certain times the engine
apparently starts up, and says to the baggage train behind it, "Come,
come, this won't do!  Why, it's nearly half-past two; how in h-ll shall
we get through?  Don't you talk to ME.  Pooh, pooh!" delivered in that
rhythmical fashion which all meditation assumes on a railway train.
Exempli gratia:  One night, having raised my window-curtain to look
over a moonlit snowy landscape, as I pulled it down the lines of a
popular comic song flashed across me.  Fatal error!  The train
instantly took it up, and during the rest of the night I was haunted by
this awful refrain: "Pull down the bel-lind, pull down the bel-lind;
simebody's klink klink, O don't be shoo-shoo!"  Naturally this differs
on the different railways.  On the New York Central, where the road-bed
is quite perfect and the steel rails continuous, I have heard this
irreverent train give the words of a certain popular revival hymn after
this fashion: "Hold the fort, for I am Sankey; Moody slingers still.
Wave the swish swash back from klinky, klinky klanky kill." On the New
York and New Haven, where there are many switches, and the engine
whistles at every cross road, I have often heard, "Tommy make room for
your whooopy! that's a little clang; bumpity, bumpity, boopy, clikitty,
clikitty, clang."  Poetry, I fear, fared little better.  One starlit
night, coming from Quebec, as we slipped by a virgin forest, the
opening lines of Evangeline flashed upon me.  But all I could make of
them was this: "This is the forest primeval-eval; the groves of the
pines and the hemlocks-locks-locks-locks-loooock!"  The train was only
"slowing" or "braking" up at a station.  Hence the jar in the metre.

I had noticed a peculiar Aeolian harp-like cry that ran through the
whole train as we settled to rest at last after a long run--an almost
sigh of infinite relief, a musical sigh that began in C and ran
gradually up to F natural, which I think most observant travelers have
noticed day and night.  No railway official has ever given me a
satisfactory explanation of it.  As the car, in a rapid run, is always
slightly projected forward of its trucks, a practical friend once
suggested to me that it was the gradual settling back of the car body
to a state of inertia, which, of course, every poetical traveler would
reject.  Four o'clock the sound of boot-blacking by the porter faintly
apparent from the toilet-room.  Why not talk to him?  But, fortunately,
I remembered that any attempt at extended conversation with conductor
or porter was always resented by them as implied disloyalty to the
company they represented.  I recalled that once I had endeavored to
impress upon a conductor the absolute folly of a midnight inspection of
tickets, and had been treated by him as an escaped lunatic.  No, there
was no relief from this suffocating and insupportable loneliness to be
gained then.  I raised the window-blind and looked out.  We were
passing a farm-house.  A light, evidently the lantern of a farm-hand,
was swung beside a barn.  Yes, the faintest tinge of rose in the far
horizon.  Morning, surely, at last.

We had stopped at a station.  Two men had got into the car, and had
taken seats in the one vacant section, yawning occasionally and
conversing in a languid, perfunctory sort of way.  They sat opposite
each other, occasionally looking out of the window, but always giving
the strong impression that they were tired of each other's company.  As
I looked out of my curtains at them, the One Man said, with a feebly
concealed yawn:--

"Yes, well, I reckon he was at one time as poplar an ondertaker ez I
knew."

The Other Man (inventing a question rather than giving an answer, out
of some languid, social impulse): "But was he--this yer ondertaker--a
Christian--hed he jined the church?"

The One Man (reflectively): "Well, I don't know ez you might call him a
purfessin' Christian; but he hed--yes, he hed conviction.  I think Dr.
Wylie hed him under conviction.  Et least that was the way I got it
from HIM."

A long, dreary pause.  The Other Man (feeling it was incumbent upon him
to say something): "But why was he poplar ez an ondertaker?"

The One Man (lazily): "Well, he was kinder poplar with widders and
widderers--sorter soothen 'em a kinder, keerless way; slung 'em suthin'
here and there, sometimes outer the Book, sometimes outer hisself, ez a
man of experience as hed hed sorror.  Hed, they say (VERY CAUTIOUSLY),
lost three wives hisself, and five children by this yer new
disease--dipthery--out in Wisconsin.  I don't know the facts, but
that's what's got round."

The Other Man: "But how did he lose his poplarity?"

The One Man: "Well, that's the question.  You see he interduced some
things into ondertaking that waz new.  He hed, for instance, a way, as
he called it, of manniperlating the features of the deceased."

The Other Man (quietly): "How manniperlating?"

The One Man (struck with a bright and aggressive thought): "Look yer,
did ye ever notiss how, generally speakin', onhandsome a corpse is?"

The Other Man had noticed this fact.

The One Man (returning to his fact): "Why there was Mary Peebles, ez
was daughter of my wife's bosom friend--a mighty pooty girl and a
professing Christian--died of scarlet fever.  Well, that gal--I was one
of the mourners, being my wife's friend--well, that gal, though I
hedn't, perhaps, oughter say--lying in that casket, fetched all the way
from some A1 establishment in Chicago, filled with flowers and
furbelows--didn't really seem to be of much account.  Well, although my
wife's friend, and me a mourner--well, now, I was--disappointed and
discouraged."

The Other Man (in palpably affected sympathy): "Sho! now!"

"Yes, SIR!  Well, you see, this yer ondertaker, this Wilkins, hed a way
of correctin' all thet.  And just by manniperlation.  He worked over
the face of the deceased ontil he perduced what the survivin' relatives
called a look of resignation,--you know, a sort of smile, like.  When
he wanted to put in any extrys, he perduced what he called--hevin'
reglar charges for this kind of work--a Christian's hope."

The Other Man: "I want to know."

"Yes.  Well, I admit, at times it was a little startlin'.  And I've
allers said (a little confidentially) that I had my doubts of its being
Scriptoorl, or sacred, we being, ez you know, worms of the yearth; and
I relieved my mind to our pastor, but he didn't feel like interferin',
ez long ez it was confined to church membership. But the other day,
when Cy Dunham died--you disremember Cy Dunham?"

A long interval of silence.  The Other Man was looking out of the
window, and had apparently forgotten his companion completely.  But as
I stretched my head out of the curtain I saw four other heads as
eagerly reached out from other berths to hear the conclusion of the
story.  One head, a female one, instantly disappeared on my looking
around, but a certain tremulousness of her window-curtain showed an
unabated interest.  The only two utterly disinterested men were the One
Man and the Other Man.

The Other Man (detaching himself languidly from the window): "Cy
Dunham?"

"Yes; Cy never hed hed either convictions or purfessions.  Uster get
drunk and go round with permiscous women.  Sorter like the prodigal
son, only a little more so, ez fur ez I kin judge from the facks ez
stated to me.  Well, Cy one day petered out down at Little Rock, and
was sent up yer for interment.  The fammerly, being proud-like, of
course didn't spare no money on that funeral, and it waz--now between
you and me--about ez shapely and first-class and prime-mess affair ez I
ever saw.  Wilkins hed put in his extrys. He hed put onto that
prodigal's face the A1 touch,--hed him fixed up with a 'Christian's
hope.'  Well, it was about the turning-point, for thar waz some of the
members and the pastor hisself thought that the line oughter to be
drawn somewhere, and thar was some talk at Deacon Tibbet's about a
reg'lar conference meetin' regardin' it.  But it wasn't thet which made
him onpoplar."

Another silence; no expression nor reflection from the face of the
Other Man of the least desire to know what ultimately settled the
unpopularity of the undertaker.  But from the curtains of the various
berths several eager and one or two even wrathful faces, anxious for
the result.

The Other Man (lazily recurring to the fading topic): "Well, what made
him onpoplar?"

The One Man (quietly): "Extrys, I think--that is, I suppose, not
knowin'" (cautiously) "all the facts.  When Mrs. Widdecombe lost her
husband, 'bout two months ago, though she'd been through the valley of
the shadder of death twice--this bein' her third marriage, hevin' been
John Barker's widder--"

The Other Man (with an intense expression of interest): "No, you're
foolin' me!"

The One Man (solemnly): "Ef I was to appear before my Maker to-morrow,
yes! she was the widder of Barker."

The Other Man: "Well, I swow."

The One Man: "Well, this Widder Widdecombe, she put up a big funeral
for the deceased.  She hed Wilkins, and thet ondertaker just laid
hisself out.  Just spread hisself.  Onfort'natly,--perhaps fort'natly
in the ways of Providence,--one of Widdecombe's old friends, a doctor
up thar in Chicago, comes down to the funeral.  He goes up with the
friends to look at the deceased, smilin' a peaceful sort o' heavinly
smile, and everybody sayin' he's gone to meet his reward, and this yer
friend turns round, short and sudden on the widder settin' in her pew,
and kinder enjoyin, as wimen will, all the compliments paid the corpse,
and he says, says he:--

"'What did you say your husband died of, marm?'

"'Consumption,' she says, wiping her eyes, poor critter.
'Consumption--gallopin' consumption.'

"'Consumption be d--d,' sez he, bein' a profane kind of Chicago doctor,
and not bein' ever under conviction.  'Thet man died of strychnine.
Look at thet face.  Look at thet contortion of them fashal muscles.
Thet's strychnine.  Thet's risers Sardonikus' (thet's what he said; he
was always sorter profane).

"'Why, doctor,' says the widder, 'thet--thet is his last smile. It's a
Christian's resignation.'

"'Thet be blowed; don't tell me,' sez he.  'Hell is full of thet kind
of resignation.  It's pizon.  And I'll--'  Why, dern my skin, yes we
are; yes, it's Joliet.  Wall, now, who'd hey thought we'd been nigh
onto an hour."

Two or three anxious passengers from their berths: "Say; look yer,
stranger!  Old man!  What became of--"

But the One Man and the Other Man had vanished.



MORNING ON THE AVENUE

NOTES BY AN EARLY RISER.

I have always been an early riser.  The popular legend that "Early to
bed and early to rise," invariably and rhythmically resulted in
healthfulness, opulence, and wisdom, I beg here to solemnly protest
against.  As an "unhealthy" man, as an "unwealthy" man, and doubtless
by virtue of this protest an "unwise" man, I am, I think, a glaring
example of the untruth of the proposition.

For instance, it is my misfortune, as an early riser, to live upon a
certain fashionable avenue, where the practice of early rising is
confined exclusively to domestics.  Consequently, when I issue forth on
this broad, beautiful thoroughfare at six A. M., I cannot help thinking
that I am, to a certain extent, desecrating its traditional customs.

I have more than once detected the milkman winking at the maid with a
diabolical suggestion that I was returning from a carouse, and
Roundsman 9999 has once or twice followed me a block or two with the
evident impression that I was a burglar returning from a successful
evening out.  Nevertheless, these various indiscretions have brought me
into contact with a kind of character and phenomena whose existence I
might otherwise have doubted.

First, let me speak of a large class of working-people whose presence
is, I think, unknown to many of those gentlemen who are in the habit of
legislating or writing about them.  A majority of these early risers in
the neighborhood of which I may call my "beat" carry with them
unmistakable evidences of the American type. I have seen so little of
that foreign element that is popularly supposed to be the real working
class of the great metropolis, that I have often been inclined to doubt
statistics.  The ground that my morning rambles cover extends from
Twenty-third Street to Washington Park, and laterally from Sixth Avenue
to Broadway.  The early rising artisans that I meet here, crossing
three avenues,--the milkmen, the truck-drivers, the workman, even the
occasional tramp,--wherever they may come from or go to, or what their
real habitat may be,--are invariably Americans.  I give it as an honest
record, whatever its significance or insignificance may be, that during
the last year, between the hours of six and eight A. M., in and about
the locality I have mentioned, I have met with but two unmistakable
foreigners, an Irishman and a German.  Perhaps it may be necessary to
add to this statement that the people I have met at those early hours I
have never seen at any other time in the same locality.

As to their quality, the artisans were always cleanly dressed,
intelligent, and respectful.  I remember, however, one morning, when
the ice storm of the preceding night had made the sidewalks glistening,
smiling and impassable, to have journeyed down the middle of Twelfth
Street with a mechanic so sooty as to absolutely leave a legible track
in the snowy pathway.  He was the fireman attending the engine in a
noted manufactory, and in our brief conversation he told me many facts
regarding his profession which I fear interested me more than the
after-dinner speeches of some distinguished gentlemen I had heard the
preceding night.  I remember that he spoke of his engine as "she," and
related certain circumstances regarding her inconsistency, her
aberrations, her pettishnesses, that seemed to justify the feminine
gender.  I have a grateful recollection of him as being one who
introduced me to a restaurant where chicory, thinly disguised as
coffee, was served with bread at five cents a cup, and that he
honorably insisted on being the host, and paid his ten cents for our
mutual entertainment with the grace of a Barmecide.  I remember, in a
more genial season,--I think early summer,--to have found upon the
benches of Washington Park a gentleman who informed me that his
profession was that of a "pigeon catcher"; that he contracted with
certain parties in this city to furnish these birds for what he called
their "pigeon-shoots"; and that in fulfilling this contract he often
was obliged to go as far west as Minnesota.  The details he gave--his
methods of entrapping the birds, his study of their habits, his evident
belief that the city pigeon, however well provided for by parties who
fondly believed the bird to be their own, was really ferae naturae, and
consequently "game" for the pigeon-catcher--were all so interesting
that I listened to him with undisguised delight. When he had finished,
however, he said, "And now, sir, being a poor man, with a large family,
and work bein' rather slack this year, if ye could oblige me with the
loan of a dollar and your address, until remittances what I'm expecting
come in from Chicago, you'll be doin' me a great service," etc., etc.
He got the dollar, of course (his information was worth twice the
money), but I imagine he lost my address.  Yet it is only fair to say
that some days after, relating his experience to a prominent sporting
man, he corroborated all its details, and satisfied me that my
pigeon-catching friend, although unfortunate, was not an impostor.

And this leads me to speak of the birds.  Of all early risers, my most
importunate, aggressive, and obtrusive companions are the English
sparrows.  Between six and seven A. M. they seem to possess the avenue,
and resent my intrusion.  I remember, one chilly morning, when I came
upon a flurry of them, chattering, quarreling, skimming, and alighting
just before me.  I stopped at last, fearful of stepping on the nearest.
To my great surprise, instead of flying away, he contested the ground
inch by inch before my advancing foot, with his wings outspread and
open bill outstretched, very much like that ridiculous burlesque of the
American eagle which the common canary-bird assumes when teased. "Did
you ever see 'em wash in the fountain in the square?" said Roundsman
9999, early one summer morning.  I had not.  "I guess they're there
yet.  Come and see 'em," he said, and complacently accompanied me two
blocks.  I don't know which was the finer sight,--the thirty or forty
winged sprites, dashing in and out of the basin, each the very
impersonation of a light-hearted, mischievous puck, or this grave
policeman, with badge and club and shield, looking on with delight.
Perhaps my visible amusement, or the spectacle of a brother policeman
just then going past with a couple of "drunk and disorderlies,"
recalled his official responsibilities and duties.  "They say them
foreign sparrows drive all the other birds away," he added, severely;
and then walked off with a certain reserved manner, as if it were not
impossible for him to be called upon some morning to take the entire
feathered assembly into custody, and if so called upon he should do it.

Next, I think, in procession among the early risers, and surely next in
fresh and innocent exterior, were the work-women or shop-girls.  I have
seen this fine avenue on gala afternoons bright with the beauty and
elegance of an opulent city, but I have see no more beautiful faces
than I have seen among these humbler sisters.  As the mere habits of
dress in America, except to a very acute critic, give no suggestion of
the rank of the wearer, I can imagine an inexperienced foreigner
utterly mystified and confounded by these girls, who perhaps work a
sewing-machine or walk the long floors of a fashionable dry-goods shop.
I remember one face and figure, faultless and complete,--modestly yet
most becomingly dressed,--indeed, a figure that Compte-Calix might have
taken for one of his exquisite studies, which, between seven and eight
A. M. passed through Eleventh Street, between Sixth Avenue and
Broadway.  So exceptionally fine was her carriage, so chaste and
virginal her presence, and so refined and even spiritual her features,
that, as a literary man, I would have been justified in taking her for
the heroine of a society novel.  Indeed, I had already woven a little
romance about her, when one morning she overtook me, accompanied by
another girl--pretty, but of a different type--with whom she was
earnestly conversing.  As the two passed me, there fell from her
faultless lips the following astounding sentence: "And I told him, if
he didn't like it he might lump it, and he traveled off on his left
ear, you bet!"  Heaven knows what indiscretion this speech saved me
from; but the reader will understand what a sting the pain of rejection
might have added to it by the above formula.

The "morning-cocktail" men come next in my experience of early rising.
I used to take my early cup of coffee in the cafe of a certain
fashionable restaurant that had a bar attached.  I could not help
noticing that, unlike the usual social libations of my countrymen, the
act of taking a morning cocktail was a solitary one.  In the course of
my experience I cannot recall the fact of two men taking an
ante-breakfast cocktail together.  On the contrary, I have observed the
male animal rush savagely at the bar, demand his drink of the
bar-keeper, swallow it, and hasten from the scene of his early
debauchery, or else take it in a languid, perfunctory manner, which, I
think, must have been insulting to the bar-keeper.  I have observed two
men, whom I had seen drinking amicably together the preceding night,
standing gloomily at the opposite corners of the bar, evidently trying
not to see each other and making the matter a confidential one with the
bar-keeper.  I have seen even a thin disguise of simplicity assumed.  I
remember an elderly gentleman, of most respectable exterior, who used
to enter the cafe as if he had strayed there accidentally.  After
looking around carefully, and yet unostentatiously, he would walk to
the bar, and, with an air of affected carelessness, state that "not
feeling well this morning, he guessed he would take--well, he would
leave it to the bar-keeper."  The bar-keeper invariably gave him a
stiff brandy cocktail.  When the old gentleman had done this half a
dozen times, I think I lost faith in him.  I tried afterwards to glean
from the bar-keeper some facts regarding those experiences, but I am
proud to say that he was honorably reticent. Indeed, I think it may be
said truthfully that there is no record of a bar-keeper who has been
"interviewed."  Clergymen and doctors have, but it is well for the
weakness of humanity that the line should be drawn somewhere.

And this reminds me that one distressing phase of early rising is the
incongruous and unpleasant contact of the preceding night.  The social
yesterday is not fairly over before nine A. M. to-day, and there is
always a humorous, sometimes a pathetic, lapping over the edges.  I
remember one morning at six o'clock to have been overtaken by a
carriage that drew up beside me.  I recognized the coachman, who
touched his hat apologetically, as if he wished me to understand that
he was not at all responsible for the condition of his master, and I
went to the door of the carriage.  I was astonished to find two young
friends of mine, in correct evening dress, reclining on each other's
shoulders and sleeping the sleep of the justly inebriated.  I stated
this fact to the coachman.  Not a muscle of his well-trained face
answered to my smile.  But he said: "You see, sir, we've been out all
night, and more than four blocks below they saw you, and wanted me to
hail you, but you know you stopped to speak to a gentleman, and so I
sorter lingered, and I drove round the block once or twice, and I guess
I've got 'em quiet again."  I looked in the carriage door once more on
these sons of Belial.  They were sleeping quite unconsciously.  A
bouttonniere in the lappel of the younger one's coat had shed its
leaves, which were scattered over him with a ridiculous suggestion of
the "Babes in the Wood," and I closed the carriage door softly. "I
suppose I'd better take 'em home, sir?" queried the coachman, gravely.
"Well, yes, John, perhaps you had."

There is another picture in my early rising experience that I wish was
as simply and honestly ludicrous.  It was at a time when the moral
sentiment of the metropolis, expressed through ordinance and special
legislation, had declared itself against a certain form of "variety"
entertainment, and had, as usual, proceeded against the performers, and
not the people who encouraged them.  I remember, one frosty morning, to
have encountered in Washington Park my honest friend Sergeant X. and
Roundsman 9999 conveying a party of these derelicts to the station.
One of the women, evidently, had not had time to change her apparel,
and had thinly disguised the flowing robe and loose cestus of Venus
under a ragged "waterproof"; while the other, who had doubtless posed
for Mercury, hid her shapely tights in a plaid shawl, and changed her
winged sandals for a pair of "arctics."  Their rouged faces were
streaked and stained with tears.  The man who was with them, the male
of their species, had but hastily washed himself of his Ethiopian
presentment, and was still black behind the ears; while an exaggerated
shirt collar and frilled shirt made his occasional indignant profanity
irresistibly ludicrous.  So they fared on over the glittering snow,
against the rosy sunlight of the square, the gray front of the
University building, with a few twittering sparrows in the foreground,
beside the two policemen, quiet and impassive as fate. I could not help
thinking of the distinguished A., the most fashionable B., the wealthy
and respectable C., the sentimental D., and the man of the world E.,
who were present at the performance, whose distinguished patronage had
called it into life, and who were then resting quietly in their beds,
while these haggard servants of their pleasaunce were haled over the
snow to punishment and ignominy.

Let me finish by recalling one brighter picture of that same season.
It was early; so early that the cross of Grace Church had, when I
looked up, just caught the morning sun, and for a moment flamed like a
crusader's symbol.  And then the grace and glory of that exquisite
spire became slowly visible.  Fret by fret the sunlight stole slowly
down, quivering and dropping from each, until at last the whole church
beamed in rosy radiance.  Up and down the long avenue the street lay in
shadow; by some strange trick of the atmosphere the sun seemed to have
sought out only that graceful structure for its blessing.  And then
there was a dull rumble.  It was the first omnibus,--the first throb in
the great artery of the reviving city.  I looked up.  The church was
again in shadow.



WITH THE ENTREES

"Once, when I was a pirate--!"

The speaker was an elderly gentleman in correct evening dress, the room
a tasteful one, the company of infinite respectability, the locality at
once fashionable and exclusive, the occasion an unexceptionable dinner.
To this should be added that the speaker was also the host.

With these conditions self-evident, all that good breeding could do was
to receive the statement with a vague smile that might pass for
good-humored incredulity or courteous acceptation of a simple fact.
Indeed, I think we all rather tried to convey the impression that our
host, when he WAS a pirate,--if he ever really was one,--was all that a
self-respecting pirate should be, and never violated the canons of good
society.  This idea was, to some extent, crystallized by the youngest
Miss Jones in the exclamation, "Oh, how nice!"

"It was, of course, many years ago, when I was quite a lad."

We all murmured "Certainly," as if piracy were a natural expression of
the exuberance of youth.

"I ought, perhaps, explain the circumstances that led me into this way
of life."

Here Legrande, a courteous attache of the Patagonian legation,
interposed in French and an excess of politeness, "that it was not of a
necessity," a statement to which his English neighbor hurriedly
responded, "Oui, oui."

"There ess a boke," he continued, in a well-bred, rapid whisper, "from
Captain Canot,--a Frenchman,--most eenteresting--he was--oh, a fine man
of education--and what you call a 'slavair,'" but here he was quietly
nudged into respectful silence.

"I ran away from home," continued our host.  He paused, and then added,
appealingly, to the two distinguished foreigners present: "I do not
know if I can make you understand that this is a peculiarly American
predilection.  The exodus of the younger males of an American family
against the parents' wishes does not, with us, necessarily carry any
obloquy with it.  To the average American the prospect of fortune and a
better condition lies OUTSIDE of his home; with you the home means the
estate, the succession of honors or titles, the surety that the
conditions of life shall all be kept intact.  With us the children who
do not expect, and generally succeed in improving the fortunes of the
house, are marked exceptions.  Do I make myself clear?"

The French-Patagonian attache thought it was "charming and progressif."
The Baron Von Pretzel thought he had noticed a movement of that kind in
Germany, which was expressed in a single word of seventeen syllables.
Viscount Piccadilly said to his neighbor: "That, you know now, the
younger sons, don't you see, go to Australia, you know in some beastly
trade--stock-raising or sheep--you know; but, by Jove! them fellahs--"

"My father always treated me well," continued our host.  "I shared
equally with my brothers the privileges and limitations of our New
England home.  Nevertheless, I ran away and went to sea--"

"To see--what?" asked Legrande.

"Aller sur mer," said his neighbor, hastily.

"Go on with your piracy!" said Miss Jones.

The distinguished foreigners looked at each other and then at Miss
Jones.  Each made a mental note of the average cold-blooded ferocity of
the young American female.

"I shipped on board of a Liverpool 'liner,'" continued our host.

"What ess a 'liner'?" interrupted Legrande, sotto voce, to his next
neighbor, who pretended not to hear him.

"I need not say that these were the days when we had not lost our
carrying trade, when American bottoms--"

"Que est ce, 'bot toom'?" said Legrande, imploringly, to his other
friend.

"When American bottoms still carried the bulk of freight, and the
supremacy of our flag--"

Here Legrande recognized a patriotic sentiment and responded to it with
wild republican enthusiasm, nodding his head violently. Piccadilly
noticed it, too, and, seeing an opening for some general discussion on
free trade, began half audibly to HIS neighbor: "Most extraordinary
thing, you know, your American statesmen--"

"I deserted the ship at Liverpool--"

But here two perfunctory listeners suddenly turned toward the other end
of the table, where another guest, our Nevada Bonanza lion, was
evidently in the full flood of pioneer anecdote and narration. Calmly
disregarding the defection, he went on:--

"I deserted the ship at Liverpool in consequence of my ill-treatment by
the second mate,--a man selected for his position by reason of his
superior physical strength and recognized brutality. I have been since
told that he graduated from the state prison.  On the second day out I
saw him strike a man senseless with a belaying pin for some trifling
breach of discipline.  I saw him repeatedly beat and kick sick men--"

"Did you ever read Dana's 'Two Years before the Mast'?" asked
Lightbody, our heavy literary man, turning to HIS neighbor, in a
distinctly audible whisper.  "Ah! there's a book!  Got all this sort of
thing in it.  Dev'lishly well written, too."

The Patagonian (alive for information): "What ess this Dana, eh?"

His left hand neighbor (shortly): "Oh, that man!"

His right hand neighbor (curtly): "The fellah who wrote the
Encyclopaedia and edits 'The Sun'? that was put up in Boston for the
English mission and didn't get it."

The Patagonian (making a mental diplomatic note of the fact that the
severe discipline of the editor of "The Sun," one of America's
profoundest scholars, while acting from patriotic motives, as the
second mate of an American "bottom," had unfitted him for diplomatic
service abroad): "Ah, ciel!"

"I wandered on the quays for a day or two, until I was picked up by a
Portuguese sailor, who, interesting himself in my story, offered to
procure me a passage to Fayal and Lisbon, where, he assured me, I could
find more comfortable and profitable means of returning to my own land.
Let me say here that this man, although I knew him afterward as one of
the most unscrupulous and heartless of pirates,--in fact the typical
buccaneer of the books,--was to me always kind, considerate, and, at
times, even tender.  He was a capital seaman.  I give this evidence in
favor of a much ridiculed race, who have been able seamen for
centuries."

"Did you ever read that Portuguese Guide-book?" asked Lightbody of his
neighbor; "it's the most exquisitely ridiculous thing--"

"Will the great American pirate kindly go on, or resume his original
functions," said Miss Jones, over the table, with a significant look in
the direction of Lightbody.  But her anxiety was instantly
misinterpreted by the polite and fair-play loving Englishman: "I say,
now, don't you know that the fact is these Portuguese fellahs are
always ahead of us in the discovery business?  Why, you know--"

"I shipped with him on a brig, ostensibly bound to St. Kitts and a
market.  We had scarcely left port before I discovered the true
character of the vessel.  I will not terrify you with useless details.
Enough that all that tradition and romance has given you of the
pirate's life was ours.  Happily, through the kindness of my Portuguese
friend, I was kept from being an active participant in scenes of which
I was an unwilling witness.  But I must always bear my testimony to one
fact.  Our discipline, our esprit de corps, if I may so term it, was
perfect.  No benevolent society, no moral organization, was ever so
personally self-sacrificing, so honestly loyal to one virtuous purpose,
as we were to our one vice.  The individual was always merged in the
purpose.  When our captain blew out the brains of our quartermaster,
one day--"

"That reminds me--DID you read of that Georgia murder?" began
Lightbody; "it was in all the papers I think.  Oh, I beg pardon--"

"For simply interrupting him in a conversation with our second
officer," continued our host, quietly.  "The act, although harsh and
perhaps unnecessarily final, was, I think, indorsed by the crew.
James, pass the champagne to Mr. Lightbody."

He paused a moment for the usual casual interruption, but even the
active Legrande was silent.

Alas! from the other end of the table came the voice of the Bonanza
man:--

"The rope was around her neck.  Well, gentlemen, that Mexican woman
standing there, with that crowd around her, eager for her blood, dern
my skin! if she didn't call out to the sheriff to hold on a minit.  And
what fer?  Ye can't guess!  Why, one of them long braids she wore was
under the noose, and kinder in the way.  I remember her raising her
hand to her neck and givin' a spiteful sort of jerk to the braid that
fetched it outside the slip-knot, and then saying to the sheriff:
'There, d--n ye, go on.'  There was a sort o' thoughtfulness in the
act, a kind o' keerless, easy way, that jist fetched the boys--even
them thet hed the rope in their hands, and they--" (suddenly
recognizing the silence): "Oh, beg pardon, old man; didn't know I'd
chipped into your yarn--heave ahead; don't mind me."

"What I am trying to tell you is this:  One night, in the Caribbean
Sea, we ran into one of the Leeward Islands, that had been in olden
time a rendezvous for our ship.  We were piloted to our anchorage
outside by my Portuguese friend, who knew the locality thoroughly, and
on whose dexterity and skill we placed the greatest reliance. If
anything more had been necessary to fix this circumstance in my mind,
it would have been the fact that two or three days before he had
assured me that I should presently have the means of honorable
discharge from the pirate's crew, and a return to my native land. A
launch was sent from the ship to communicate with our friends on the
island, who supplied us with stores, provisions, and general
information.  The launch was manned by eight men, and officered by the
first mate,--a grim, Puritanical, practical New Englander, if I may use
such a term to describe a pirate, of great courage, experience, and
physical strength.  My Portuguese friend, acting as pilot, prevailed
upon them to allow me to accompany the party as coxswain.  I was
naturally anxious, you can readily comprehend, to see--"

"Certainly," "Of course," "Why shouldn't you?" went round the table.

"Two trustworthy men were sent ashore with instructions.  We,
meanwhile, lay off the low, palm-fringed beach, our crew lying on their
oars, or giving way just enough to keep the boat's head to the
breakers.  The mate and myself sat in the stern sheets, looking
shoreward for the signal.  The night was intensely black.  Perhaps for
this reason never before had I seen the phosphorescence of a tropical
sea so strongly marked.  From the great open beyond, luminous crests
and plumes of pale fire lifted themselves, ghost-like, at our bows,
sank, swept by us with long, shimmering, undulating trails, broke on
the beach in silvery crescents, or shattered their brightness on the
black rocks of the promontory. The whole vast sea shone and twinkled
like another firmament, against which the figures of our men, sitting
with their faces toward us, were outlined darkly.  The grim, set
features of our first mate, sitting beside me, were faintly
illuminated.  There was no sound but the whisper of passing waves
against our lap-streak, and the low, murmuring conversation of the men.
I had my face toward the shore.  As I looked over the glimmering
expanse, I suddenly heard the whispered name of our first mate.  As
suddenly, by the phosphorescent light that surrounded it, I saw the
long trailing hair and gleaming shoulders of a woman floating beside
us. Legrande, you are positively drinking nothing.  Lightbody, you are
shirking the Burgundy--you used to like it!"

He paused, but no one spoke.

"I--let me see! where was I?  Oh, yes!  Well, I saw the woman, and when
I turned to call the attention of the first mate to this fact, I knew
instantly, by some strange instinct, that he had seen and heard her,
too.  So, from that moment to the conclusion of our little drama, we
were silent, but enforced spectators.

"She swam gracefully--silently!  I remember noticing through that odd,
half-weird, phosphorescent light which broke over her shoulders as she
rose and fell with each quiet stroke of her splendidly rounded arms,
that she was a mature, perfectly-formed woman.  I remember, also, that
when she reached the boat, and, supporting herself with one small hand
on the gunwale, she softly called the mate in a whisper by his
Christian name, I had a boyish idea that she was--the--er--er--female
of his species--his--er--natural wife!  I'm boring you--am I not?"

Two or three heads shook violently and negatively.  The youngest, and,
I regret to say, the OLDEST, Miss Jones uttered together
sympathetically, "Go on--please; do!"

"The--woman told him in a few rapid words that he had been betrayed;
that the two men sent ashore were now in the hands of the authorities;
that a force was being organized to capture the vessel; that instant
flight was necessary, and that the betrayer and traitor was--my friend,
the Portuguese, Fernandez!

"The mate raised the dripping, little brown hand to his lips, and
whispered some undistinguishable words in her ear.  I remember seeing
her turn a look of ineffable love and happiness upon his grim, set
face, and then she was gone.  She dove as a duck dives, and I saw her
shapely head, after a moment's suspense, reappear a cable's length away
toward the shore.

"I ventured to raise my eyes to the mate's face; it was cold and
impassive.  I turned my face toward the crew; they were conversing in
whispers with each other, with their faces toward us, yet apparently
utterly oblivious of the scene that had just taken place in the stern.
There was a moment of silence, and then the mate's voice came out quite
impassively, but distinctly:--

"'Fernandez!'

"'Aye, aye, sir!'

"'Come aft and--bring your oar with you.'

"He did so, stumbling over the men, who, engaged in their whispered
yarns, didn't seem to notice him.

"'See if you can find soundings here.'

"Fernandez leaned over the stern and dropped his oar to its shaft in
the phosphorescent water.  But he touched no bottom; the current
brought the oar at right angles presently to the surface.

"'Send it down, man,' said the mate, imperatively; 'down, down. Reach
over there.  What are you afraid of?  So; steady there; I'll hold you.'

"Fernandez leaned over the stern and sent the oar and half of his bared
brown arm into the water.  In an instant the mate caught him with one
tremendous potential grip at his elbows, and forced him and his oar
head downward in the waters.  The act was so sudden, yet so carefully
premeditated, that no outcry escaped the doomed man.  Even the launch
scarcely dipped her stern to the act.  In that awful moment I heard a
light laugh from one of the men in response to a wanton yarn from his
comrade,--James, bring the vichy to Mr. Lightbody!  You'll find that a
dash of cognac will improve it wonderfully.

"Well--to go on--a few bubbles arose to the surface.  Fernandez seemed
unreasonably passive, until I saw that when the mate had gripped his
elbows with his hands he had also firmly locked the traitor's knees
within his own.  In a few moments--it seemed to me, then, a
century--the mate's grasp relaxed; the body of Fernandez, a mere limp,
leaden mass, slipped noiselessly and heavily into the sea.  There was
no splash.  The ocean took it calmly and quietly to its depths.  The
mate turned to the men, without deigning to cast a glance on me.

"'Oars!'  The men raised their oars apeak.

"'Let fall!'  There was a splash in the water, encircling the boat in
concentric lines of molten silver.

"'Give way!'

"Well, of course, that's all.  WE got away in time.  I knew I bored you
awfully!  Eh?  Oh, you want to know what became of the woman--really, I
don't know!  And myself--oh, I got away at Havana!  Eh? Certainly;
James, you'll find some smelling salts in my bureau. Gentlemen, I fear
we have kept the ladies too long."

But they had already risen, and were slowly filing out of the room.
Only one lingered--the youngest Miss Jones.

"That was a capital story," she said, pausing beside our host, with a
special significance in her usual audacity.  "Do you know you
absolutely sent cold chills down my spine a moment ago.  Really, now,
you ought to write for the magazines!"

Our host looked up at the pretty, audacious face.  Then he said, sotto
voce,--

"I do!"

========================================
========================================

BY SHORE AND SEDGE


by

BRET HARTE




CONTENTS

  AN APOSTLE OF THE TULES
  SARAH WALKER
  A SHIP OF '49




BY SHORE AND SEDGE



AN APOSTLE OF THE TULES

I

On October 10, 1856, about four hundred people were camped in Tasajara
Valley, California.  It could not have been for the prospect, since a
more barren, dreary, monotonous, and uninviting landscape never
stretched before human eye; it could not have been for convenience or
contiguity, as the nearest settlement was thirty miles away; it could
not have been for health or salubrity, as the breath of the
ague-haunted tules in the outlying Stockton marshes swept through the
valley; it could not have been for space or comfort, for, encamped on
an unlimited plain, men and women were huddled together as closely as
in an urban tenement-house, without the freedom or decency of rural
isolation; it could not have been for pleasant companionship, as
dejection, mental anxiety, tears, and lamentation were the dominant
expression; it was not a hurried flight from present or impending
calamity, for the camp had been deliberately planned, and for a week
pioneer wagons had been slowly arriving; it was not an irrevocable
exodus, for some had already returned to their homes that others might
take their places.  It was simply a religious revival of one or two
denominational sects, known as a "camp-meeting."

A large central tent served for the assembling of the principal
congregation; smaller tents served for prayer-meetings and class-rooms,
known to the few unbelievers as "side-shows"; while the actual
dwellings of the worshipers were rudely extemporized shanties of boards
and canvas, sometimes mere corrals or inclosures open to the cloudless
sky, or more often the unhitched covered wagon which had brought them
there.  The singular resemblance to a circus, already profanely
suggested, was carried out by a straggling fringe of boys and
half-grown men on the outskirts of the encampment, acrimonious with
disappointed curiosity, lazy without the careless ease of vagrancy, and
vicious without the excitement of dissipation.  For the coarse poverty
and brutal economy of the larger arrangements, the dreary panorama of
unlovely and unwholesome domestic details always before the eyes, were
hardly exciting to the senses.  The circus might have been more
dangerous, but scarcely more brutalizing.  The actors themselves, hard
and aggressive through practical struggles, often warped and twisted
with chronic forms of smaller diseases, or malformed and crippled
through carelessness and neglect, and restless and uneasy through some
vague mental distress and inquietude that they had added to their
burdens, were scarcely amusing performers.  The rheumatic Parkinsons,
from Green Springs; the ophthalmic Filgees, from Alder Creek; the
ague-stricken Harneys, from Martinez Bend; and the feeble-limbed
Steptons, from Sugar Mill, might, in their combined families, have
suggested a hospital, rather than any other social assemblage.  Even
their companionship, which had little of cheerful fellowship in it,
would have been grotesque but for the pathetic instinct of some mutual
vague appeal from the hardness of their lives and the helplessness of
their conditions that had brought them together.  Nor was this appeal
to a Higher Power any the less pathetic that it bore no reference
whatever to their respective needs or deficiencies, but was always an
invocation for a light which, when they believed they had found it, to
unregenerate eyes scarcely seemed to illumine the rugged path in which
their feet were continually stumbling.  One might have smiled at the
idea of the vendetta-following Ferguses praying for "justification by
Faith," but the actual spectacle of old Simon Fergus, whose shot-gun
was still in his wagon, offering up that appeal with streaming eyes and
agonized features was painful beyond a doubt.  To seek and obtain an
exaltation of feeling vaguely known as "It," or less vaguely veiling a
sacred name, was the burden of the general appeal.

The large tent had been filled, and between the exhortations a certain
gloomy enthusiasm had been kept up by singing, which had the effect of
continuing in an easy, rhythmical, impersonal, and irresponsible way
the sympathies of the meeting.  This was interrupted by a young man who
rose suddenly, with that spontaneity of impulse which characterized the
speakers, but unlike his predecessors, he remained for a moment mute,
trembling and irresolute.  The fatal hesitation seemed to check the
unreasoning, monotonous flow of emotion, and to recall to some extent
the reason and even the criticism of the worshipers.  He stammered a
prayer whose earnestness was undoubted, whose humility was but too
apparent, but his words fell on faculties already benumbed by
repetition and rhythm.  A slight movement of curiosity in the rear
benches, and a whisper that it was the maiden effort of a new preacher,
helped to prolong the interruption.  A heavy man of strong physical
expression sprang to the rescue with a hysterical cry of "Glory!" and a
tumultuous fluency of epithet and sacred adjuration.  Still the meeting
wavered.  With one final paroxysmal cry, the powerful man threw his
arms around his nearest neighbor and burst into silent tears.  An
anxious hush followed; the speaker still continued to sob on his
neighbor's shoulder.  Almost before the fact could be commented upon,
it was noticed that the entire rank of worshipers on the bench beside
him were crying also; the second and third rows were speedily dissolved
in tears, until even the very youthful scoffers in the last benches
suddenly found their half-hysterical laughter turned to sobs.  The
danger was averted, the reaction was complete; the singing commenced,
and in a few moments the hapless cause of the interruption and the man
who had retrieved the disaster stood together outside the tent.  A
horse was picketed near them.

The victor was still panting from his late exertions, and was more or
less diluvial in eye and nostril, but neither eye nor nostril bore the
slightest tremor of other expression.  His face was stolid and
perfectly in keeping with his physique,--heavy, animal, and
unintelligent.

"Ye oughter trusted in the Lord," he said to the young preacher.

"But I did," responded the young man, earnestly.

"That's it.  Justifyin' yourself by works instead o' leanin' onto Him!
Find Him, sez you!  Git Him, sez you!  Works is vain.  Glory! glory!"
he continued, with fluent vacuity and wandering, dull, observant eyes.

"But if I had a little more practice in class, Brother Silas, more
education?"

"The letter killeth," interrupted Brother Silas.  Here his wandering
eyes took dull cognizance of two female faces peering through the
opening of the tent.  "No, yer mishun, Brother Gideon, is to seek Him
in the by-ways, in the wilderness,--where the foxes hev holes and the
ravens hev their young,--but not in the Temples of the people.  Wot sez
Sister Parsons?"

One of the female faces detached itself from the tent flaps, which it
nearly resembled in color, and brought forward an angular figure
clothed in faded fustian that had taken the various shades and odors of
household service.

"Brother Silas speaks well," said Sister Parsons, with stridulous
fluency.  "It's fore-ordained.  Fore-ordinashun is better nor
ordinashun, saith the Lord.  He shall go forth, turnin' neither to the
right hand nor the left hand, and seek Him among the lost tribes and
the ungodly.  He shall put aside the temptashun of Mammon and the
flesh."  Her eyes and those of Brother Silas here both sought the other
female face, which was that of a young girl of seventeen.

"Wot sez little Sister Meely,--wot sez Meely Parsons?" continued
Brother Silas, as if repeating an unctuous formula.

The young girl came hesitatingly forward, and with a nervous cry of
"Oh, Gideon!" threw herself on the breast of the young man.

For a moment they remained locked in each other's arms.  In the
promiscuous and fraternal embracings which were a part of the
devotional exercises of the hour, the act passed without significance.
The young man gently raised her face.  She was young and comely, albeit
marked with a half-frightened, half-vacant sorrow.  "Amen," said
Brother Gideon, gravely.

He mounted his horse and turned to go.  Brother Silas had clasped his
powerful arms around both women and was holding them in a ponderous
embrace.

"Go forth, young man, into the wilderness."

The young man bowed his head, and urged his horse forward in the bleak
and barren plain.  In half an hour every vestige of the camp and its
unwholesome surroundings was lost in the distance.  It was as if the
strong desiccating wind, which seemed to spring up at his horse's feet,
had cleanly erased the flimsy structures from the face of the plain,
swept away the lighter breath of praise and plaint, and dried up the
easy-flowing tears.  The air was harsh but pure; the grim economy of
form and shade and color in the level plain was coarse but not vulgar;
the sky above him was cold and distant but not repellent; the moisture
that had been denied his eyes at the prayer-meeting overflowed them
here; the words that had choked his utterance an hour ago now rose to
his lips.  He threw himself from his horse, and kneeling in the
withered grass--a mere atom in the boundless plain--lifted his pale
face against the irresponsive blue and prayed.

He prayed that the unselfish dream of his bitter boyhood, his
disappointed youth, might come to pass.  He prayed that he might in
higher hands become the humble instrument of good to his fellow-man. He
prayed that the deficiencies of his scant education, his self-taught
learning, his helpless isolation, and his inexperience might be
overlooked or reinforced by grace.  He prayed that the Infinite
Compassion might enlighten his ignorance and solitude with a
manifestation of the Spirit; in his very weakness he prayed for some
special revelation, some sign or token, some visitation or gracious
unbending from that coldly lifting sky.  The low sun burned the black
edge of the distant tules with dull eating fires as he prayed, lit the
dwarfed hills with a brief but ineffectual radiance, and then died out.
The lingering trade winds fired a few volleys over its grave and then
lapsed into a chilly silence.  The young man staggered to his feet; it
was quite dark now, but the coming night had advanced a few starry
vedettes so near the plain they looked like human watch-fires.  For an
instant he could not remember where he was.  Then a light trembled far
down at the entrance of the valley.  Brother Gideon recognized it.  It
was in the lonely farmhouse of the widow of the last Circuit preacher.



II

The abode of the late Reverend Marvin Hiler remained in the
disorganized condition he had left it when removed from his sphere of
earthly uselessness and continuous accident.  The straggling fence that
only half inclosed the house and barn had stopped at that point where
the two deacons who had each volunteered to do a day's work on it had
completed their allotted time.  The building of the barn had been
arrested when the half load of timber contributed by Sugar Mill
brethren was exhausted, and three windows given by "Christian Seekers"
at Martinez painfully accented the boarded spaces for the other three
that "Unknown Friends" in Tasajara had promised but not yet supplied.
In the clearing some trees that had been felled but not taken away
added to the general incompleteness.

Something of this unfinished character clung to the Widow Hiler and
asserted itself in her three children, one of whom was consistently
posthumous.  Prematurely old and prematurely disappointed, she had all
the inexperience of girlhood with the cares of maternity, and kept in
her family circle the freshness of an old maid's misogynistic
antipathies with a certain guilty and remorseful consciousness of
widowhood.  She supported the meagre household to which her husband had
contributed only the extra mouths to feed with reproachful astonishment
and weary incapacity.  She had long since grown tired of trying to make
both ends meet, of which she declared "the Lord had taken one."  During
her two years' widowhood she had waited on Providence, who by a
pleasing local fiction had been made responsible for the disused and
cast-off furniture and clothing which, accompanied with scriptural
texts, found their way mysteriously into her few habitable rooms.  The
providential manna was not always fresh; the ravens who fed her and her
little ones with flour from the Sugar Mills did not always select the
best quality.  Small wonder that, sitting by her lonely hearthstone,--a
borrowed stove that supplemented the unfinished fireplace,--surrounded
by her mismatched furniture and clad in misfitting garments, she had
contracted a habit of sniffling during her dreary watches.  In her
weaker moments she attributed it to grief; in her stronger intervals
she knew that it sprang from damp and draught.

In her apathy the sound of horses' hoofs at her unprotected door even
at that hour neither surprised nor alarmed her.  She lifted her head as
the door opened and the pale face of Gideon Deane looked into the room.
She moved aside the cradle she was rocking, and, taking a saucepan and
tea-cup from a chair beside her, absently dusted it with her apron, and
pointing to the vacant seat said, "Take a chair," as quietly as if he
had stepped from the next room instead of the outer darkness.

"I'll put up my horse first," said Gideon gently.

"So do," responded the widow briefly.

Gideon led his horse across the inclosure, stumbling over the heaps of
rubbish, dried chips, and weather-beaten shavings with which it was
strewn, until he reached the unfinished barn, where he temporarily
bestowed his beast.  Then taking a rusty axe, by the faint light of the
stars, he attacked one of the fallen trees with such energy that at the
end of ten minutes he reappeared at the door with an armful of cut
boughs and chips, which he quietly deposited behind the stove.
Observing that he was still standing as if looking for something, the
widow lifted her eyes and said, "Ef it's the bucket, I reckon ye'll
find it at the spring, where one of them foolish Filgee boys left it.
I've been that tuckered out sens sundown, I ain't had the ambition to
go and tote it back." Without a word Gideon repaired to the spring,
filled the missing bucket, replaced the hoop on the loosened staves of
another he found lying useless beside it, and again returned to the
house. The widow once more pointed to the chair, and Gideon sat down.
"It's quite a spell sens you wos here," said the Widow Hiler, returning
her foot to the cradle-rocker; "not sens yer was ordained.  Be'n
practicin', I reckon, at the meetin'."

A slight color came into his cheek.  "My place is not there, Sister
Hiler," he said gently; "it's for those with the gift o' tongues. I go
forth only a common laborer in the vineyard."  He stopped and
hesitated; he might have said more, but the widow, who was familiar
with that kind of humility as the ordinary perfunctory expression of
her class, suggested no sympathetic interest in his mission.

"Thar's a deal o' talk over there," she said dryly, "and thar's folks
ez thinks thar's a deal o' money spent in picnicking the Gospel that
might be given to them ez wish to spread it, or to their widows and
children.  But that don't consarn you, Brother Gideon.  Sister Parsons
hez money enough to settle her darter Meely comfortably on her own
land; and I've heard tell that you and Meely was only waitin' till you
was ordained to be jined together. You'll hev an easier time of it,
Brother Gideon, than poor Marvin Hiler had," she continued, suppressing
her tears with a certain astringency that took the place of her lost
pride; "but the Lord wills that some should be tried and some not."

"But I am not going to marry Meely Parsons," said Gideon quietly.

The widow took her foot from the rocker.  "Not marry Meely!" she
repeated vaguely.  But relapsing into her despondent mood she
continued: "Then I reckon it's true what other folks sez of Brother
Silas Braggley makin' up to her and his powerful exhortin' influence
over her ma.  Folks sez ez Sister Parsons hez just resigned her soul
inter his keepin'."

"Brother Silas hez a heavenly gift," said the young man, with gentle
enthusiasm; "and perhaps it may be so.  If it is, it is the Lord's
will.  But I do not marry Meely because my life and my ways henceforth
must lie far beyond her sphere of strength.  I oughtn't to drag a young
inexperienced soul with me to battle and struggle in the thorny paths
that I must tread."

"I reckon you know your own mind," said Sister Hiler grimly.  "But
thar's folks ez might allow that Meely Parsons ain't any better than
others, that she shouldn't have her share o' trials and keers and
crosses.  Riches and bringin' up don't exempt folks from the shadder.
I married Marvin Hiler outer a house ez good ez Sister Parsons', and at
a time when old Cyrus Parsons hadn't a roof to his head but the cover
of the emigrant wagon he kem across the plains in.  I might say ez
Marvin knowed pretty well wot it was to have a helpmeet in his
ministration, if it wasn't vanity of sperit to say it now.  But the
flesh is weak, Brother Gideon."  Her influenza here resolved itself
into unmistakable tears, which she wiped away with the first article
that was accessible in the work-bag before her.  As it chanced to be a
black silk neckerchief of the deceased Hiler, the result was funereal,
suggestive, but practically ineffective.

"You were a good wife to Brother Hiler," said the young man gently.
"Everybody knows that."

"It's suthin' to think of since he's gone," continued the widow,
bringing her work nearer to her eyes to adjust it to their tear-dimmed
focus.  "It's suthin' to lay to heart in the lonely days and nights
when thar's no man round to fetch water and wood and lend a hand to
doin' chores; it's suthin' to remember, with his three children to
feed, and little Selby, the eldest, that vain and useless that he can't
even tote the baby round while I do the work of a hired man."

"It's a hard trial, Sister Hiler," said Gideon, "but the Lord has His
appointed time."

Familiar as consolation by vague quotation was to Sister Hiler, there
was an occult sympathy in the tone in which this was offered that
lifted her for an instant out of her narrower self.  She raised her
eyes to his.  The personal abstraction of the devotee had no place in
the deep dark eyes that were lifted from the cradle to hers with a sad,
discriminating, and almost womanly sympathy. Surprised out of her
selfish preoccupation, she was reminded of her apparent callousness to
what might be his present disappointment. Perhaps it seemed strange to
her, too, that those tender eyes should go a-begging.

"Yer takin' a Christian view of yer own disappointment, Brother
Gideon," she said, with less astringency of manner; "but every heart
knoweth its own sorrer.  I'll be gettin' supper now that the baby's
sleepin' sound, and ye'll sit by and eat."

"If you let me help you, Sister Hiler," said the young man with a
cheerfulness that belied any overwhelming heart affection, and awakened
in the widow a feminine curiosity as to his real feelings to Meely.
But her further questioning was met with a frank, amiable, and simple
brevity that was as puzzling as the most artful periphrase of tact.
Accustomed as she was to the loquacity of grief and the confiding
prolixity of disappointed lovers, she could not understand her guest's
quiescent attitude.  Her curiosity, however, soon gave way to the
habitual contemplation of her own sorrows, and she could not forego the
opportune presence of a sympathizing auditor to whom she could relieve
her feelings.  The preparations for the evening meal were therefore
accompanied by a dreary monotone of lamentation.  She bewailed her lost
youth, her brief courtship, the struggles of her early married life,
her premature widowhood, her penurious and helpless existence, the
disruption of all her present ties, the hopelessness of the future. She
rehearsed the unending plaint of those long evenings, set to the music
of the restless wind around her bleak dwelling, with something of its
stridulous reiteration.  The young man listened, and replied with
softly assenting eyes, but without pausing in the material aid that he
was quietly giving her.  He had removed the cradle of the sleeping
child to the bedroom, quieted the sudden wakefulness of "Pinkey,"
rearranged the straggling furniture of the sitting-room with much order
and tidiness, repaired the hinges of a rebellious shutter and the lock
of an unyielding door, and yet had apparently retained an unabated
interest in her spoken woes. Surprised once more into recognizing this
devotion, Sister Hiler abruptly arrested her monologue.

"Well, if you ain't the handiest man I ever seed about a house!"

"Am I?" said Gideon, with suddenly sparkling eyes.  "Do you really
think so?"

"I do."

"Then you don't know how glad I am."  His frank face so unmistakably
showed his simple gratification that the widow, after gazing at him for
a moment, was suddenly seized with a bewildering fancy.  The first
effect of it was the abrupt withdrawal of her eyes, then a sudden
effusion of blood to her forehead that finally extended to her
cheekbones, and then an interval of forgetfulness where she remained
with a plate held vaguely in her hand.  When she succeeded at last in
putting it on the table instead of the young man's lap, she said in a
voice quite unlike her own,--

"Sho!"

"I mean it," said Gideon, cheerfully.  After a pause, in which he
unostentatiously rearranged the table which the widow was abstractedly
disorganizing, he said gently, "After tea, when you're not so much
flustered with work and worry, and more composed in spirit, we'll have
a little talk, Sister Hiler.  I'm in no hurry to-night, and if you
don't mind I'll make myself comfortable in the barn with my blanket
until sun-up to-morrow.  I can get up early enough to do some odd
chores round the lot before I go."

"You know best, Brother Gideon," said the widow, faintly, "and if you
think it's the Lord's will, and no speshal trouble to you, so do.  But
sakes alive! it's time I tidied myself a little," she continued,
lifting one hand to her hair, while with the other she endeavored to
fasten a buttonless collar; "leavin' alone the vanities o' dress, it's
ez much as one can do to keep a clean rag on with the children climbin'
over ye.  Sit by, and I'll be back in a minit."  She retired to the
back room, and in a few moments returned with smoothed hair and a
palm-leaf broche shawl thrown over her shoulders, which not only
concealed the ravages made by time and maternity on the gown beneath,
but to some extent gave her the suggestion of being a casual visitor in
her own household.  It must be confessed that for the rest of the
evening Sister Hiler rather lent herself to this idea, possibly from
the fact that it temporarily obliterated the children, and quite
removed her from any responsibility in the unpicturesque household.
This effect was only marred by the absence of any impression upon
Gideon, who scarcely appeared to notice the change, and whose soft eyes
seemed rather to identify the miserable woman under her forced
disguise. He prefaced the meal with a fervent grace, to which the widow
listened with something of the conscious attitude she had adopted at
church during her late husband's ministration, and during the meal she
ate with a like consciousness of "company manners."

Later that evening Selby Hiler woke up in his little truckle bed,
listening to the rising midnight wind, which in his childish fancy he
confounded with the sound of voices that came through the open door of
the living-room.  He recognized the deep voice of the young minister,
Gideon, and the occasional tearful responses of his mother, and he was
fancying himself again at church when he heard a step, and the young
preacher seemed to enter the room, and going to the bed leaned over it
and kissed him on the forehead, and then bent over his little brother
and sister and kissed them too.  Then he slowly re-entered the
living-room.  Lifting himself softly on his elbow, Selby saw him go up
towards his mother, who was crying, with her head on the table, and
kiss her also on the forehead. Then he said "Good-night," and the front
door closed, and Selby heard his footsteps crossing the lot towards the
barn.  His mother was still sitting with her face buried in her hands
when he fell asleep.

She sat by the dying embers of the fire until the house was still
again; then she rose and wiped her eyes.  "Et's a good thing," she
said, going to the bedroom door, and looking in upon her sleeping
children; "et's a mercy and a blessing for them and--for--me.
But--but--he might--hev--said--he--loved me!"



III

Although Gideon Deane contrived to find a nest for his blanket in the
mouldy straw of the unfinished barn loft, he could not sleep. He
restlessly watched the stars through the cracks of the boarded roof,
and listened to the wind that made the half-open structure as vocal as
a sea-shell, until past midnight.  Once or twice he had fancied he
heard the tramp of horse-hoofs on the far-off trail, and now it seemed
to approach nearer, mingled with the sound of voices. Gideon raised his
head and looked through the doorway of the loft. He was not mistaken:
two men had halted in the road before the house, and were examining it
as if uncertain if it were the dwelling they were seeking, and were
hesitating if they should rouse the inmates.  Thinking he might spare
the widow this disturbance to her slumbers, and possibly some alarm, he
rose quickly, and descending to the inclosure walked towards the house.
As he approached the men advanced to meet him, and by accident or
design ranged themselves on either side.  A glance showed him they were
strangers to the locality.

"We're lookin' fer the preacher that lives here," said one, who seemed
to be the elder.  "A man by the name o' Hiler, I reckon!"

"Brother Hiler has been dead two years," responded Gideon.  "His widow
and children live here."

The two men looked at each other.  The younger one laughed; the elder
mumbled something about its being "three years ago," and then turning
suddenly on Gideon, said:

"P'r'aps YOU'RE a preacher?"

"I am."

"Can you come to a dying man?"

"I will."

The two men again looked at each other.  "But," continued Gideon,
softly, "you'll please keep quiet so as not to disturb the widow and
her children, while I get my horse."  He turned away; the younger man
made a movement as if to stop him, but the elder quickly restrained his
hand.  "He isn't goin' to run away," he whispered.  "Look," he added,
as Gideon a moment later reappeared mounted and equipped.

"Do you think we'll be in time?" asked the young preacher as they rode
quickly away in the direction of the tules.

The younger repressed a laugh; the other answered grimly, "I reckon."

"And is he conscious of his danger?"

"I reckon."

Gideon did not speak again.  But as the onus of that silence seemed to
rest upon the other two, the last speaker, after a few moments' silent
and rapid riding, continued abruptly, "You don't seem curious?"

"Of what?" said Gideon, lifting his soft eyes to the speaker.  "You
tell me of a brother at the point of death, who seeks the Lord through
an humble vessel like myself.  HE will tell me the rest."

A silence still more constrained on the part of the two strangers
followed, which they endeavored to escape from by furious riding; so
that in half an hour the party had reached a point where the tules
began to sap the arid plain, while beyond them broadened the lagoons of
the distant river.  In the foreground, near a clump of dwarfed willows,
a camp-fire was burning, around which fifteen or twenty armed men were
collected, their horses picketed in an outer circle guarded by two
mounted sentries.  A blasted cotton-wood with a single black arm
extended over the tules stood ominously against the dark sky.

The circle opened to receive them and closed again.  The elder man
dismounted and leading Gideon to the blasted cotton-wood, pointed to a
pinioned man seated at its foot with an armed guard over him. He looked
up at Gideon with an amused smile.

"You said it was a dying man," said Gideon, recoiling.

"He will be a dead man in half an hour," returned the stranger.

"And you?"

"We are the Vigilantes from Alamo.  This man," pointing to the
prisoner, "is a gambler who killed a man yesterday.  We hunted him
here, tried him an hour ago, and found him guilty.  The last man we
hung here, three years ago, asked for a parson.  We brought him the man
who used to live where we found you.  So we thought we'd give this man
the same show, and brought you."

"And if I refuse?" said Gideon.

The leader shrugged his shoulders.

"That's HIS lookout, not ours.  We've given him the chance.  Drive
ahead, boys," he added, turning to the others; "the parson allows he
won't take a hand."

"One moment," said Gideon, in desperation, "one moment, for the sake of
that God you have brought me here to invoke in behalf of this wretched
man.  One moment, for the sake of Him in whose presence you must stand
one day as he does now."  With passionate earnestness he pointed out
the vindictive impulse they were mistaking for Divine justice; with
pathetic fervency he fell upon his knees and implored their mercy for
the culprit.  But in vain. As at the camp-meeting of the day before, he
was chilled to find his words seemed to fall on unheeding and
unsympathetic ears.  He looked around on their abstracted faces; in
their gloomy savage enthusiasm for expiatory sacrifice, he was
horrified to find the same unreasoning exaltation that had checked his
exhortations then. Only one face looked upon his, half mischievously,
half compassionately.  It was the prisoner's.

"Yer wastin' time on us," said the leader, dryly; "wastin' HIS time.
Hadn't you better talk to him?"

Gideon rose to his feet, pale and cold.  "He may have something to
confess.  May I speak with him alone?" he said gently.

The leader motioned to the sentry to fall back.  Gideon placed himself
before the prisoner so that in the faint light of the camp-fire the
man's figure was partly hidden by his own.  "You meant well with your
little bluff, pardner," said the prisoner, not unkindly, "but they've
got the cards to win."

"Kneel down with your back to me," said Gideon, in a low voice. The
prisoner fell on his knees.  At the same time he felt Gideon's hand and
the gliding of steel behind his back, and the severed cords hung
loosely on his arms and legs.

"When I lift my voice to God, brother," said Gideon, softly, "drop on
your face and crawl as far as you can in a straight line in my shadow,
then break for the tules.  I will stand between you and their first
fire."

"Are you mad?" said the prisoner.  "Do you think they won't fire lest
they should hurt you?  Man! they'll kill YOU, the first thing."

"So be it--if your chance is better."

Still on his knees, the man grasped Gideon's two hands in his own and
devoured him with his eyes.

"You mean it?"

"I do."

"Then," said the prisoner, quietly, "I reckon I'll stop and hear what
you've got to say about God until they're ready."

"You refuse to fly?"

"I reckon I was never better fitted to die than now," said the
prisoner, still grasping his hand.  After a pause he added in a lower
tone, "I can't pray--but--I think," he hesitated, "I think I could
manage to ring in a hymn."

"Will you try, brother?"

"Yes."

With their hands tightly clasped together, Gideon lifted his gentle
voice.  The air was a common one, familiar in the local religious
gatherings, and after the first verse one or two of the sullen
lookers-on joined unkindly in the refrain.  But, as he went on, the air
and words seemed to offer a vague expression to the dull lowering
animal emotion of the savage concourse, and at the end of the second
verse the refrain, augmented in volume and swelled by every voice in
the camp, swept out over the hollow plain.

It was met in the distance by a far-off cry.  With an oath taking the
place of his supplication, the leader sprang to his feet.  But too
late!  The cry was repeated as a nearer slogan of defiance--the plain
shook--there was the tempestuous onset of furious hoofs--a dozen
shots--the scattering of the embers of the camp-fire into a thousand
vanishing sparks even as the lurid gathering of savage humanity was
dispersed and dissipated over the plain, and Gideon and the prisoner
stood alone.  But as the sheriff of Contra Costa with his rescuing
posse swept by, the man they had come to save fell forward in Gideon's
arms with a bullet in his breast--the Parthian shot of the flying
Vigilante leader.

The eager crowd that surged around him with outstretched helping hands
would have hustled Gideon aside.  But the wounded man roused himself,
and throwing an arm around the young preacher's neck, warned them back
with the other.  "Stand back!" he gasped.  "He risked his life for
mine!  Look at him, boys!  Wanted ter stand up 'twixt them hounds and
me and draw their fire on himself!  Ain't he just hell?" he stopped; an
apologetic smile crossed his lips.  "I clean forgot, pardner; but it's
all right.  I said I was ready to go; and I am."  His arm slipped from
Gideon's neck; he slid to the ground; he had fainted.

A dark, military-looking man pushed his way through the crowd--the
surgeon, one of the posse, accompanied by a younger man fastidiously
dressed.  The former bent over the unconscious prisoner, and tore open
his shirt; the latter followed his movements with a flush of anxious
inquiry in his handsome, careless face.  After a moment's pause the
surgeon, without looking up, answered the young man's mute questioning.
"Better send the sheriff here at once, Jack."

"He is here," responded the official, joining the group.

The surgeon looked up at him.  "I am afraid they've put the case out of
your jurisdiction, Sheriff," he said grimly.  "It's only a matter of a
day or two at best--perhaps only a few hours.  But he won't live to be
taken back to jail."

"Will he live to go as far as Martinez?" asked the young man addressed
as Jack.

"With care, perhaps."

"Will you be responsible for him, Jack Hamlin?" said the sheriff,
suddenly.

"I will."

"Then take him.  Stay, he's coming to."

The wounded man slowly opened his eyes.  They fell upon Jack Hamlin
with a pleased look of recognition, but almost instantly and anxiously
glanced around as if seeking another.  Leaning over him, Jack said
gayly, "They've passed you over to me, old man; are you willing?"

The wounded man's eyes assented, but still moved restlessly from side
to side.

"Is there any one you want to go with you?"

"Yes," said the eyes.

"The doctor, of course?"

The eyes did not answer.  Gideon dropped on his knees beside him. A ray
of light flashed in the helpless man's eyes and transfigured his whole
face.

"You want HIM?" said Jack incredulously.

"Yes," said the eyes.

"What--the preacher?"

The lips struggled to speak.  Everybody bent down to hear his reply.

"You bet," he said faintly.



IV

It was early morning when the wagon containing the wounded man, Gideon,
Jack Hamlin, and the surgeon crept slowly through the streets of
Martinez and stopped before the door of the "Palmetto Shades."  The
upper floor of this saloon and hostelry was occupied by Mr. Hamlin as
his private lodgings, and was fitted up with the usual luxury and more
than the usual fastidiousness of his extravagant class.  As the dusty
and travel-worn party trod the soft carpets and brushed aside their
silken hangings in their slow progress with their helpless burden to
the lace-canopied and snowy couch of the young gambler, it seemed
almost a profanation of some feminine seclusion.  Gideon, to whom such
luxury was unknown, was profoundly troubled.  The voluptuous ease and
sensuousness, the refinements of a life of irresponsible indulgence,
affected him with a physical terror to which in his late moment of real
peril he had been a stranger; the gilding and mirrors blinded his eyes;
even the faint perfume seemed to him an unhallowed incense, and turned
him sick and giddy.  Accustomed as he had been to disease and misery in
its humblest places and meanest surroundings, the wounded desperado
lying in laces and fine linen seemed to him monstrous and unnatural.
It required all his self-abnegation, all his sense of duty, all his
deep pity, and all the instinctive tact which was born of his gentle
thoughtfulness for others, to repress a shrinking.  But when the
miserable cause of all again opened his eyes and sought Gideon's hand,
he forgot it all.  Happily, Hamlin, who had been watching him with
wondering but critical eyes, mistook his concern.  "Don't you worry
about that gin-mill and hash-gymnasium downstairs," he said.  "I've
given the proprietor a thousand dollars to shut up shop as long as this
thing lasts." That this was done from some delicate sense of respect to
the preacher's domiciliary presence, and not entirely to secure
complete quiet and seclusion for the invalid, was evident from the fact
that Mr. Hamlin's drawing and dining rooms, and even the hall, were
filled with eager friends and inquirers.  It was discomposing to Gideon
to find himself almost an equal subject of interest and curiosity to
the visitors.  The story of his simple devotion had lost nothing by
report; hats were doffed in his presence that might have grown to their
wearers' heads; the boldest eyes dropped as he passed by; he had only
to put his pale face out of the bedroom door and the loudest
discussion, heated by drink or affection, fell to a whisper.  The
surgeon, who had recognized the one dominant wish of the hopelessly
sinking man, gravely retired, leaving Gideon a few simple instructions
and directions for their use.  "He'll last as long as he has need of
you," he said respectfully.  "My art is only second here.  God help you
both!  When he wakes, make the most of your time."

In a few moments he did waken, and as before turned his fading look
almost instinctively on the faithful, gentle eyes that were watching
him.  How Gideon made the most of his time did not transpire, but at
the end of an hour, when the dying man had again lapsed into
unconsciousness, he softly opened the door of the sitting-room.

Hamlin started hastily to his feet.  He had cleared the room of his
visitors, and was alone.  He turned a moment towards the window before
he faced Gideon with inquiring but curiously-shining eyes.

"Well?" he said, hesitatingly.

"Do you know Kate Somers?" asked Gideon.

Hamlin opened his brown eyes.  "Yes."

"Can you send for her?"

"What, HERE?"

"Yes, here."

"What for?"

"To marry him," said Gideon, gently.  "There's no time to lose."

"To MARRY him?"

"He wishes it."

"But say--oh, come, now," said Hamlin confidentially, leaning back with
his hands on the top of a chair.  "Ain't this playing it a little--just
a LITTLE--too low down?  Of course you mean well, and all that; but
come, now, say--couldn't you just let up on him there?  Why,
she"--Hamlin softly closed the door--"she's got no character."

"The more reason he should give her one."

A cynical knowledge of matrimony imparted to him by the wives of others
evidently colored Mr. Hamlin's views.  "Well, perhaps it's all the same
if he's going to die.  But isn't it rather rough on HER?  I don't
know," he added, reflectively; "she was sniveling round here a little
while ago, until I sent her away."

"You sent her away!" echoed Gideon.

"I did."

"Why?"

"Because YOU were here."

Nevertheless Mr. Hamlin departed, and in half an hour reappeared with
two brilliantly dressed women.  One, hysterical, tearful, frightened,
and pallid, was the destined bride; the other, highly colored, excited,
and pleasedly observant, was her friend.  Two men hastily summoned from
the anteroom as witnesses completed the group that moved into the
bedroom and gathered round the bed.

The ceremony was simple and brief.  It was well, for of all who took
part in it none was more shaken by emotion than the officiating priest.
The brilliant dresses of the women, the contrast of their painted faces
with the waxen pallor of the dying man; the terrible incongruity of
their voices, inflections, expressions, and familiarity; the mingled
perfume of cosmetics and the faint odor of wine; the eyes of the
younger woman following his movements with strange absorption, so
affected him that he was glad when he could fall on his knees at last
and bury his face in the pillow of the sufferer.  The hand that had
been placed in the bride's cold fingers slipped from them and
mechanically sought Gideon's again.  The significance of the
unconscious act brought the first spontaneous tears into the woman's
eyes.  It was his last act, for when Gideon's voice was again lifted in
prayer, the spirit for whom it was offered had risen with it, as it
were, still lovingly hand in hand, from the earth forever.

The funeral was arranged for two days later, and Gideon found that his
services had been so seriously yet so humbly counted upon by the
friends of the dead man that he could scarce find it in his heart to
tell them that it was the function of the local preacher--an older and
more experienced man than himself.  "If it is," said Jack Hamlin,
coolly, "I'm afraid he won't get a yaller dog to come to his church;
but if you say you'll preach at the grave, there ain't a man, woman, or
child that will be kept away.  Don't you go back on your luck, now;
it's something awful and nigger-like. You've got this crowd where the
hair is short; excuse me, but it's so.  Talk of revivals!  You could
give that one-horse show in Tasajara a hundred points, and skunk them
easily."  Indeed, had Gideon been accessible to vanity, the spontaneous
homage he met with everywhere would have touched him more
sympathetically and kindly than it did; but in the utter
unconsciousness of his own power and the quality they worshiped in him,
he felt alarmed and impatient of what he believed to be their weak
sympathy with his own human weakness.  In the depth of his unselfish
heart, lit, it must be confessed, only by the scant, inefficient lamp
of his youthful experience, he really believed he had failed in his
apostolic mission because he had been unable to touch the hearts of the
Vigilantes by oral appeal and argument.  Feeling thus the reverence of
these irreligious people that surrounded him, the facile yielding of
their habits and prejudices to his half-uttered wish, appeared to him
only a temptation of the flesh.  No one had sought him after the manner
of the camp-meeting; he had converted the wounded man through a common
weakness of their humanity.  More than that, he was conscious of a
growing fascination for the truthfulness and sincerity of that class;
particularly of Mr. Jack Hamlin, whose conversion he felt he could
never attempt, yet whose strange friendship alternately thrilled and
frightened him.

It was the evening before the funeral.  The coffin, half smothered in
wreaths and flowers, stood upon trestles in the anteroom; a large
silver plate bearing an inscription on which for the second time Gideon
read the name of the man he had converted.  It was a name associated on
the frontier so often with reckless hardihood, dissipation, and blood,
that even now Gideon trembled at his presumption, and was chilled by a
momentary doubt of the efficiency of his labor.  Drawing unconsciously
nearer to the mute subject of his thoughts, he threw his arms across
the coffin and buried his face between them.

A stream of soft music, the echo of some forgotten song, seemed to
Gideon to suddenly fill and possess the darkened room, and then to
slowly die away, like the opening and shutting of a door upon a flood
of golden radiance.  He listened with hushed breath and a beating
heart.  He had never heard anything like it before.  Again the strain
arose, the chords swelled round him, until from their midst a tenor
voice broke high and steadfast, like a star in troubled skies.  Gideon
scarcely breathed.  It was a hymn--but such a hymn.  He had never
conceived there could be such beautiful words, joined to such exquisite
melody, and sung with a grace so tender and true.  What were all other
hymns to this ineffable yearning for light, for love, and for infinite
rest?  Thrilled and exalted, Gideon felt his doubts pierced and
scattered by that illuminating cry.  Suddenly he rose, and with a
troubled thought pushed open the door to the sitting-room.  It was Mr.
Jack Hamlin sitting before a parlor organ.  The music ceased.

"It was YOU," stammered Gideon.

Jack nodded, struck a few chords by way of finish, and then wheeled
round on the music-stool towards Gideon.  His face was slightly
flushed.  "Yes.  I used to be the organist and tenor in our church in
the States.  I used to snatch the sinners bald-headed with that. Do you
know I reckon I'll sing that to-morrow, if you like, and maybe
afterwards we'll--but"--he stopped--"we'll talk of that after the
funeral.  It's business."  Seeing Gideon still glancing with a troubled
air from the organ to himself, he said: "Would you like to try that
hymn with me?  Come on!"

He again struck the chords.  As the whole room seemed to throb with the
music, Gideon felt himself again carried away.  Glancing over Jack's
shoulders, he could read the words but not the notes; yet, having a
quick ear for rhythm, he presently joined in with a deep but
uncultivated baritone.  Together they forgot everything else, and at
the end of an hour were only recalled by the presence of a silently
admiring concourse of votive-offering friends who had gathered round
them.

The funeral took place the next day at the grave dug in the public
cemetery--a green area fenced in by the palisading tules.  The words of
Gideon were brief but humble; the strongest partisan of the dead man
could find no fault in a confession of human frailty in which the
speaker humbly confessed his share; and when the hymn was started by
Hamlin and taken up by Gideon, the vast multitude, drawn by interest
and curiosity, joined as in a solemn Amen.

Later, when those two strangely-assorted friends had returned to Mr.
Hamlin's rooms previous to Gideon's departure, the former, in a manner
more serious than his habitual cynical good-humor, began: "I said I had
to talk business with you.  The boys about here want to build a church
for you, and are ready to plank the money down if you'll say it's a go.
You understand they aren't asking you to run in opposition to that
Gospel sharp--excuse me--that's here now, nor do they want you to run a
side show in connection with it.  They want you to be independent.
They don't pin you down to any kind of religion, you know; whatever you
care to give them--Methodist, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian---is mighty
good enough for them, if you'll expound it.  You might give a little of
each, or one on one day and one another--they'll never know the
difference if you only mix the drinks yourself.  They'll give you a
house and guarantee you fifteen hundred dollars the first year."

He stopped and walked towards the window.  The sunlight that fell upon
his handsome face seemed to call back the careless smile to his lips
and the reckless fire to his brown eyes.  "I don't suppose there's a
man among them that wouldn't tell you all this in a great deal better
way than I do.  But the darned fools--excuse me--would have ME break it
to you.  Why, I don't know.  I needn't tell you I like you--not only
for what you did for George--but I like you for your style--for
yourself.  And I want you to accept.  You could keep these rooms till
they got a house ready for you.  Together--you and me--we'd make that
organ howl.  But because I like it--because it's everything to us--and
nothing to you, it don't seem square for me to ask it.  Does it?"

Gideon replied by taking Hamlin's hand.  His face was perfectly pale,
but his look collected.  He had not expected this offer, and yet when
it was made he felt as if he had known it before--as if he had been
warned of it--as if it was the great temptation of his life.  Watching
him with an earnestness only slightly overlaid by his usual manner,
Hamlin went on.

"I know it would be lonely here, and a man like you ought to have a
wife for--" he slightly lifted his eyebrows--"for example's sake. I
heard there was a young lady in the case over there in Tasajara--but
the old people didn't see it on account of your position. They'd jump
at it now.  Eh?  No?  Well," continued Jack, with a decent attempt to
conceal his cynical relief, "perhaps those boys have been so eager to
find out all they could do for you that they've been sold.  Perhaps
we're making equal fools of ourselves now in asking you to stay.  But
don't say no just yet--take a day or a week to think of it."

Gideon still pale but calm, cast his eyes around the elegant room, at
the magic organ, then upon the slight handsome figure before him.  "I
WILL think of it," he said, in a low voice, as he pressed Jack's hand.
"And if I accept you will find me here to-morrow afternoon at this
time; if I do not you will know that I keep with me wherever I go the
kindness, the brotherly love, and the grace of God that prompts your
offer, even though He withholds from me His blessed light, which alone
can make me know His wish."  He stopped and hesitated.  "If you love
me, Jack, don't ask me to stay, but pray for that light which alone can
guide my feet back to you, or take me hence for ever."

He once more tightly pressed the hand of the embarrassed man before him
and was gone.

Passers-by on the Martinez road that night remembered a mute and
ghostly rider who, heedless of hail or greeting, moved by them as in a
trance or vision.  But the Widow Hiler the next morning, coming from
the spring, found no abstraction or preoccupation in the soft eyes of
Gideon Deane as he suddenly appeared before her, and gently relieved
her of the bucket she was carrying.  A quick flash of color over her
brow and cheek-bone, as if a hot iron had passed there, and a certain
astringent coyness, would have embarrassed any other man than him.

"Sho, it's YOU.  I reck'ned I'd seen the last of you."

"You don't mean that, Sister Hiler?" said Gideon, with a gentle smile.

"Well, what with the report of your goin's on at Martinez and improvin'
the occasion of that sinner's death, and leadin' a revival, I reckoned
you'ld hev forgotten low folks at Tasajara. And if your goin' to be
settled there in a new church, with new hearers, I reckon you'll want
new surroundings too.  Things change and young folks change with 'em."

They had reached the house.  Her breath was quick and short as if she
and not Gideon had borne the burden.  He placed the bucket in its
accustomed place, and then gently took her hand in his.  The act
precipitated the last drop of feeble coquetry she had retained, and the
old tears took its place.  Let us hope for the last time. For as Gideon
stooped and lifted her ailing babe in his strong arms, he said softly,
"Whatever God has wrought for me since we parted, I know now He has
called me to but one work."

"And that work?" she asked, tremulously.

"To watch over the widow and fatherless.  And with God's blessing,
sister, and His holy ordinance, I am here to stay."




SARAH WALKER

It was very hot.  Not a breath of air was stirring throughout the
western wing of the Greyport Hotel, and the usual feverish life of its
four hundred inmates had succumbed to the weather.  The great veranda
was deserted; the corridors were desolated; no footfall echoed in the
passages; the lazy rustle of a wandering skirt, or a passing sigh that
was half a pant, seemed to intensify the heated silence.  An
intoxicated bee, disgracefully unsteady in wing and leg, who had been
holding an inebriated conversation with himself in the corner of my
window pane, had gone to sleep at last and was snoring.  The errant
prince might have entered the slumberous halls unchallenged, and walked
into any of the darkened rooms whose open doors gaped for more air,
without awakening the veriest Greyport flirt with his salutation.  At
times a drowsy voice, a lazily interjected sentence, an incoherent
protest, a long-drawn phrase of saccharine tenuity suddenly broke off
with a gasp, came vaguely to the ear, as if indicating a
half-suspended, half-articulated existence somewhere, but not definite
enough to indicate conversation.  In the midst of this, there was the
sudden crying of a child.

I looked up from my work.  Through the camera of my jealously guarded
window I could catch a glimpse of the vivid, quivering blue of the sky,
the glittering intensity of the ocean, the long motionless leaves of
the horse-chestnut in the road,--all utterly inconsistent with anything
as active as this lamentation.  I stepped to the open door and into the
silent hall.

Apparently the noise had attracted the equal attention of my neighbors.
A vague chorus of "Sarah Walker," in querulous recognition, of "O Lord!
that child again!" in hopeless protest, rose faintly from the different
rooms.  As the lamentations seemed to approach nearer, the visitors'
doors were successively shut, swift footsteps hurried along the hall;
past my open door came a momentary vision of a heated nursemaid
carrying a tumultuous chaos of frilled skirts, flying sash, rebellious
slippers, and tossing curls; there was a moment's rallying struggle
before the room nearly opposite mine, and then a door opened and shut
upon the vision.  It was Sarah Walker!

Everybody knew her; few had ever seen more of her than this passing
vision.  In the great hall, in the dining-room, in the vast parlors, in
the garden, in the avenue, on the beach, a sound of lamentation had
always been followed by this same brief apparition. Was there a sudden
pause among the dancers and a subjugation of the loudest bassoons in
the early evening "hop," the explanation was given in the words "Sarah
Walker."  Was there a wild confusion among the morning bathers on the
sands, people whispered "Sarah Walker."  A panic among the waiters at
dinner, an interruption in the Sunday sacred concert, a disorganization
of the after-dinner promenade on the veranda, was instantly referred to
Sarah Walker. Nor were her efforts confined entirely to public life.
In cozy corners and darkened recesses, bearded lips withheld the
amorous declaration to mutter "Sarah Walker" between their clenched
teeth; coy and bashful tongues found speech at last in the rapid
formulation of "Sarah Walker."  Nobody ever thought of abbreviating her
full name.  The two people in the hotel, otherwise individualized, but
known only as "Sarah Walker's father" and "Sarah Walker's mother," and
never as Mr. and Mrs. Walker, addressed her only as "Sarah Walker"; two
animals that were occasionally a part of this passing pageant were
known as "Sarah Walker's dog" and "Sarah Walker's cat," and later it
was my proud privilege to sink my own individuality under the title of
"that friend of Sarah Walker's."

It must not be supposed that she had attained this baleful eminence
without some active criticism.  Every parent in the Greyport Hotel had
held his or her theory of the particular defects of Sarah Walker's
education; every virgin and bachelor had openly expressed views of the
peculiar discipline that was necessary to her subjugation.  It may be
roughly estimated that she would have spent the entire nine years of
her active life in a dark cupboard on an exclusive diet of bread and
water, had this discipline obtained; while, on the other hand, had the
educational theories of the parental assembly prevailed, she would have
ere this shone an etherealized essence in the angelic host.  In either
event she would have "ceased from troubling," which was the general
Greyport idea of higher education.  A paper read before our Literary
Society on "Sarah Walker and other infantile diseases," was referred to
in the catalogue as "Walker, Sarah, Prevention and Cure," while the
usual burlesque legislation of our summer season culminated in the Act
entitled "An Act to amend an Act entitled an Act for the abatement of
Sarah Walker."  As she was hereafter exclusively to be fed "on the
PROVISIONS of this Act," some idea of its general tone may be gathered.
It was a singular fact in this point of her history that her natural
progenitors not only offered no resistance to the doubtful celebrity of
their offspring, but, by hopelessly accepting the situation, to some
extent POSED as Sarah Walker's victims.  Mr. and Mrs. Walker were known
to be rich, respectable, and indulgent to their only child.  They
themselves had been evolved from a previous generation of promiscuously
acquired wealth into the repose of inherited property, but it was
currently accepted that Sarah had "cast back" and reincarnated some
waif on the deck of an emigrant ship at the beginning of the century.

Such was the child separated from me by this portentous history, a
narrow passage, and a closed nursery door.  Presently, however, the
door was partly opened again as if to admit the air.  The crying had
ceased, but in its place the monotonous Voice of Conscience, for the
moment personated by Sarah Walker's nursemaid, kept alive a drowsy
recollection of Sarah Walker's transgressions.

"You see," said the Voice, "what a dreadful thing it is for a little
girl to go on as you do.  I am astonished at you, Sarah Walker.  So is
everybody; so is the good ladies next door; so is the kind gentleman
opposite; so is all!  Where you expect to go to, 'Evin only knows!  How
you expect to be forgiven, saints alone can tell!  But so it is always,
and yet you keep it up.  And wouldn't you like it different, Sarah
Walker?  Wouldn't you like to have everybody love you?  Wouldn't you
like them good ladies next door, and that nice gentleman opposite, all
to kinder rise up and say, 'Oh, what a dear good little girl Sarah
Walker is?'"  The interpolation of a smacking sound of lips, as if in
unctuous anticipation of Sarah Walker's virtue, here ensued--"Oh, what
a dear, good, sw-e-et, lovely little girl Sarah Walker is!"

There was a dead silence.  It may have been fancy, but I thought that
some of the doors in the passage creaked softly as if in listening
expectation.  Then the silence was broken by a sigh.  Had Sarah Walker
ingloriously succumbed?  Rash and impotent conclusion!

"I don't," said Sarah Walker's voice, slowly rising until it broke on
the crest of a mountainous sob, "I--don't--want--'em--to--love me.
I--don't want--'em--to say--what a--dear--good--little girl--Sarah
Walker is!"  She caught her breath.  "I--want--'em--to say--what a
naughty--bad--dirty--horrid--filthy--little girl Sarah Walker is--so I
do.  There!"

The doors slammed all along the passages.  The dreadful issue was
joined.  I softly crossed the hall and looked into Sarah Walker's room.

The light from a half-opened shutter fell full upon her rebellious
little figure.  She had stiffened herself in a large easy-chair into
the attitude in which she had been evidently deposited there by the
nurse whose torn-off apron she still held rigidly in one hand.  Her
shapely legs stood out before her, jointless and inflexible to the
point of her tiny shoes--a POSE copied with pathetic fidelity by the
French doll at her feet.  The attitude must have been dreadfully
uncomfortable, and maintained only as being replete with some vague
insults to the person who had put her down, as exhibiting a wild
indecorum of silken stocking.  A mystified kitten--Sarah Walker's
inseparable--was held as rigidly under one arm with equal dumb
aggressiveness.  Following the stiff line of her half-recumbent figure,
her head suddenly appeared perpendicularly erect--yet the only mobile
part of her body.  A dazzling sunburst of silky hair, the color of
burnished copper, partly hid her neck and shoulders and the back of the
chair.  Her eyes were a darker shade of the same color--the orbits
appearing deeper and larger from the rubbing in of habitual tears from
long wet lashes.  Nothing so far seemed inconsistent with her infelix
reputation, but, strange to say, her other features were marked by
delicacy and refinement, and her mouth--that sorely exercised and
justly dreaded member--was small and pretty, albeit slightly dropped at
the corners.

The immediate effect of my intrusion was limited solely to the
nursemaid.  Swooping suddenly upon Sarah Walker's too evident
deshabille, she made two or three attempts to pluck her into propriety;
but the child, recognizing the cause as well as the effect, looked
askance at me and only stiffened herself the more. "Sarah Walker, I'm
shocked."

"It ain't HIS room anyway," said Sarah, eying me malevolently. "What's
he doing here?"

There was so much truth in this that I involuntarily drew back abashed.
The nurse-maid ejaculated "Sarah!" and lifted her eyes in hopeless
protest.

"And he needn't come seeing YOU," continued Sarah, lazily rubbing the
back of her head against the chair; "my papa don't allow it. He warned
you 'bout the other gentleman, you know."

"Sarah Walker!"

I felt it was necessary to say something.  "Don't you want to come with
me and look at the sea?" I said with utter feebleness of invention.  To
my surprise, instead of actively assaulting me Sarah Walker got up,
shook her hair over her shoulders, and took my hand.

"With your hair in that state?" almost screamed the domestic.  But
Sarah Walker had already pulled me into the hall.  What particularly
offensive form of opposition to authority was implied in this prompt
assent to my proposal I could only darkly guess. For myself I knew I
must appear to her a weak impostor.  What would there possibly be in
the sea to interest Sarah Walker?  For the moment I prayed for a
water-spout, a shipwreck, a whale, or any marine miracle to astound her
and redeem my character.  I walked guiltily down the hall, holding her
hand bashfully in mine.  I noticed that her breast began to heave
convulsively; if she cried I knew I should mingle my tears with hers.
We reached the veranda in gloomy silence.  As I expected, the sea lay
before us glittering in the sun--vacant, staring, flat, and hopelessly
and unquestionably uninteresting.

"I knew it all along," said Sarah Walker, turning down the corners of
her mouth; "there never was anything to see.  I know why you got me to
come here.  You want to tell me if I'm a good girl you'll take me to
sail some day.  You want to say if I'm bad the sea will swallow me up.
That's all you want, you horrid thing, you!"

"Hush!" I said, pointing to the corner of the veranda.

A desperate idea of escape had just seized me.  Bolt upright in the
recess of a window sat a nursemaid who had succumbed to sleep equally
with her helpless charge in the perambulator beside her.  I instantly
recognized the infant--a popular organism known as "Baby Buckly"--the
prodigy of the Greyport Hotel, the pet of its enthusiastic womanhood.
Fat and featureless, pink and pincushiony, it was borrowed by gushing
maidenhood, exchanged by idiotic maternity, and had grown unctuous and
tumefacient under the kisses and embraces of half the hotel.  Even in
its present repose it looked moist and shiny from indiscriminate and
promiscuous osculation.

"Let's borrow Baby Buckly," I said recklessly.

Sarah Walker at once stopped crying.  I don't know how she did it, but
the cessation was instantaneous, as if she had turned off a tap
somewhere.

"And put it in Mr. Peters' bed!" I continued.

Peters being notoriously a grim bachelor, the bare suggestion bristled
with outrage.  Sarah Walker's eyes sparkled.

"You don't mean it!--go 'way!"--she said with affected coyness.

"But I do!  Come."

We extracted it noiselessly together--that is, Sarah Walker did, with
deft womanliness--carried it darkly along the hall to No. 27, and
deposited it in Peters' bed, where it lay like a freshly opened oyster.
We then returned hand in hand to my room, where we looked out of the
window on the sea.  It was observable that there was no lack of
interest in Sarah Walker now.

Before five minutes had elapsed some one breathlessly passed the open
door while we were still engaged in marine observation.  This was
followed by return footsteps and a succession of swiftly rustling
garments, until the majority of the women in our wing had apparently
passed our room, and we saw an irregular stream of nursemaids and
mothers converging towards the hotel out of the grateful shadow of
arbors, trees, and marquees.  In fact we were still engaged in
observation when Sarah Walker's nurse came to fetch her away, and to
inform her that "by rights" Baby Buckly's nurse and Mr. Peters should
both be made to leave the hotel that very night.  Sarah Walker
permitted herself to be led off with dry but expressive eyes.  That
evening she did not cry, but, on being taken into the usual custody for
disturbance, was found to be purple with suppressed laughter.

This was the beginning of my intimacy with Sarah Walker.  But while it
was evident that whatever influence I obtained over her was due to my
being particeps criminis, I think it was accepted that a regular
abduction of infants might become in time monotonous if not dangerous.
So she was satisfied with the knowledge that I could not now, without
the most glaring hypocrisy, obtrude a moral superiority upon her.  I do
not think she would have turned state evidence and accused me, but I
was by no means assured of her disinterested regard.  She contented
herself, for a few days afterwards, with meeting me privately and
mysteriously communicating unctuous reminiscences of our joint crime,
without suggesting a repetition.  Her intimacy with me did not seem to
interfere with her general relations to her own species in the other
children in the hotel.  Perhaps I should have said before that her
popularity with them was by no means prejudiced by her infelix
reputation.  But while she was secretly admired by all, she had few
professed followers and no regular associates.  Whether the few whom
she selected for that baleful preeminence were either torn from her by
horrified guardians, or came to grief through her dangerous counsels,
or whether she really did not care for them, I could not say.  Their
elevation was brief, their retirement unregretted.  It was however
permitted me, through felicitous circumstances, to become acquainted
with the probable explanation of her unsociability.

The very hot weather culminated one afternoon in a dead faint of earth
and sea and sky.  An Alpine cloudland of snow that had mocked the
upturned eyes of Greyport for hours, began to darken under the folding
shadow of a black and velvety wing.  The atmosphere seemed to thicken
as the gloom increased; the lazy dust, thrown up by hurrying feet that
sought a refuge, hung almost motionless in the air.  Suddenly it was
blown to the four quarters in one fierce gust that as quickly dispersed
the loungers drooping in shade and cover. For a few seconds the long
avenue was lost in flying clouds of dust, and then was left bare of
life or motion.  Raindrops in huge stars and rosettes appeared
noiselessly and magically upon the sidewalks--gouts of moisture
apparently dropped from mid-air.  And then the ominous hush returned.

A mile away along the rocks, I turned for shelter into a cavernous
passage of the overhanging cliff, where I could still watch the coming
storm upon the sea.  A murmur of voices presently attracted my
attention.  I then observed that the passage ended in a kind of open
grotto, where I could dimly discern the little figures of several
children, who, separated from their nurses in the sudden onset of the
storm, had taken refuge there.  As the gloom deepened they became
silent again, until the stillness was broken by a familiar voice.
There was no mistaking it.--It was Sarah Walker's. But it was not
lifted in lamentation, it was raised only as if resuming a suspended
narrative.

"Her name," said Sarah Walker gloomily, "was Kribbles.  She was the
only child--of--of orphaned parentage, and fair to see, but she was
bad, and God did not love her.  And one day she was separated from her
nurse on a desert island like to this.  And then came a hidgeous
thunderstorm.  And a great big thunderbolt came galumping after her.
And it ketched her and rolled all over her--so! and then it came back
and ketched her and rolled her over--so!  And when they came to pick
her up there was not so much as THAT left of her.  All burnt up!"

"Wasn't there just a little bit of her shoe?" suggested a cautious
auditor.

"Not a bit," said Sarah Walker firmly.  All the other children echoed
"Not a bit," indignantly, in evident gratification at the completeness
of Kribbles' catastrophe.  At this moment the surrounding darkness was
suddenly filled with a burst of blue celestial fire; the heavy inky sea
beyond, the black-edged mourning horizon, the gleaming sands, each nook
and corner of the dripping cave, with the frightened faces of the
huddled group of children, started into vivid life for an instant, and
then fell back with a deafening crash into the darkness.

There was a slight sound of whimpering.  Sarah Walker apparently
pounced upon the culprit, for it ceased.

"Sniffling 'tracts 'lectricity," she said sententiously.

"But you thaid it wath Dod!" lisped a casuist of seven.

"It's all the same," said Sarah sharply, "and so's asking questions."

This obscure statement was however apparently understood, for the
casuist lapsed into silent security.  "Lots of things 'tracts it,"
continued Sarah Walker.  "Gold and silver, and metals and knives and
rings."

"And pennies?"

"And pennies most of all!  Kribbles was that vain, she used to wear
jewelry and fly in the face of Providence."

"But you thaid--"

"Will you?--There! you hear that?"  There was another blinding flash
and bounding roll of thunder along the shore.  "I wonder you didn't
ketch it.  You would--only I'm here."

All was quiet again, but from certain indications it was evident that a
collection of those dangerous articles that had proved fatal to the
unhappy Kribbles was being taken up.  I could hear the clink of coins
and jingle of ornaments.  That Sarah herself was the custodian was
presently shown.  "But won't the lightning come to you now?" asked a
timid voice.

"No," said Sarah, promptly, "'cause I ain't afraid!  Look!"

A frightened protest from the children here ensued, but the next
instant she appeared at the entrance of the grotto and ran down the
rocks towards the sea.  Skipping from bowlder to bowlder she reached
the furthest projection of the ledge, now partly submerged by the
rising surf, and then turned half triumphantly, half defiantly, towards
the grotto.  The weird phosphorescence of the storm lit up the resolute
little figure standing there, gorgeously bedecked with the chains,
rings, and shiny trinkets of her companions.  With a tiny hand raised
in mock defiance of the elements, she seemed to lean confidingly
against the panting breast of the gale, with fluttering skirt and
flying tresses.  Then the vault behind her cracked with three jagged
burning fissures, a weird flame leaped upon the sand, there was a cry
of terror from the grotto, echoed by a scream of nurses on the cliff, a
deluge of rain, a terrific onset from the gale--and--Sarah Walker was
gone? Nothing of the kind!  When I reached the ledge, after a severe
struggle with the storm, I found Sarah on the leeward side, drenched
but delighted.  I held her tightly, while we waited for a lull to
regain the cliff, and took advantage of the sympathetic situation.

"But you know you WERE frightened, Sarah," I whispered; "you thought of
what happened to poor Kribbles."

"Do you know who Kribbles was?" she asked confidentially.

"No."

"Well," she whispered, "I made Kribbles up.  And the hidgeous storm and
thunderbolt--and the burning!  All out of my own head."

The only immediate effect of this escapade was apparently to
precipitate and bring into notoriety the growing affection of an
obscure lover of Sarah Walker's, hitherto unsuspected.  He was a mild
inoffensive boy of twelve, known as "Warts," solely from an inordinate
exhibition of these youthful excrescences.  On the day of Sarah
Walker's adventure his passion culminated in a sudden and illogical
attack upon Sarah's nurse and parents while they were bewailing her
conduct, and in assaulting them with his feet and hands.  Whether he
associated them in some vague way with the cause of her momentary
peril, or whether he only wished to impress her with the touching
flattery of a general imitation of her style, I cannot say.  For his
lovemaking was peculiar.  A day or two afterwards he came to my open
door and remained for some moments bashfully looking at me.  The next
day I found him standing by my chair in the piazza with an embarrassed
air and in utter inability to explain his conduct.  At the end of a
rapid walk on the sand one morning, I was startled by the sound of
hurried breath, and looking around, discovered the staggering Warts
quite exhausted by endeavoring to keep up with me on his short legs.
At last the daily recurrence of his haunting presence forced a dreadful
suspicion upon me.  Warts was courting ME for Sarah Walker!  Yet it was
impossible to actually connect her with these mute attentions. "You
want me to give them to Sarah Walker," I said cheerfully one afternoon,
as he laid upon my desk some peculiarly uninviting crustacea which
looked not unlike a few detached excrescences from his own hands.  He
shook his head decidedly.  "I understand," I continued, confidently;
"you want me to keep them for her."  "No," said Warts, doggedly.  "Then
you only want me to tell her how nice they are?"  The idea was
apparently so shamelessly true that he blushed himself hastily into the
passage, and ceased any future contribution.  Naturally still more
ineffective was the slightest attempt to bring his devotion into the
physical presence of Sarah Walker.  The most ingenious schemes to lure
him into my room while she was there failed utterly.  Yet he must have
at one time basked in her baleful presence.  "Do you like Warts?" I
asked her one day bluntly.  "Yes," said Sarah Walker with cheerful
directness; "ain't HE got a lot of 'em?--though he used to have more.
But," she added reflectively, "do you know the little Ilsey boy?"  I
was compelled to admit my ignorance.  "Well!" she said with a
reminiscent sigh of satisfaction, "HE'S got only two toes on his left
foot--showed 'em to me.  And he was born so."  Need it be said that in
these few words I read the dismal sequel of Warts' unfortunate
attachment? His accidental eccentricity was no longer attractive.  What
were his evanescent accretions, subject to improvement or removal,
beside the hereditary and settled malformations of his rival?

Once only, in this brief summer episode, did Sarah Walker attract the
impulsive and general sympathy of Greyport.  It is only just to her
consistency to say it was through no fault of hers, unless a
characteristic exposure which brought on a chill and diphtheria could
be called her own act.  Howbeit, towards the close of the season, when
a sudden suggestion of the coming autumn had crept, one knew not how,
into the heart of a perfect day; when even a return of the summer
warmth had a suspicion of hectic,--on one of these days Sarah Walker
was missed with the bees and the butterflies.  For two days her voice
had not been heard in hall or corridor, nor had the sunshine of her
French marigold head lit up her familiar places.  The two days were
days of relief, yet mitigated with a certain uneasy apprehension of the
return of Sarah Walker, or--more alarming thought!--the Sarah Walker
element in a more appalling form.  So strong was this impression that
an unhappy infant who unwittingly broke this interval with his maiden
outcry was nearly lynched.  "We're not going to stand that from YOU,
you know," was the crystallized sentiment of a brutal bachelor.  In
fact, it began to be admitted that Greyport had been accustomed to
Sarah Walker's ways.  In the midst of this, it was suddenly whispered
that Sarah Walker was lying dangerously ill, and was not expected to
live.

Then occurred one of those strange revulsions of human sentiment which
at first seem to point the dawning of a millennium of poetic justice,
but which, in this case, ended in merely stirring the languid pulses of
society into a hectic fever, and in making sympathy for Sarah Walker an
insincere and exaggerated fashion. Morning and afternoon visits to her
apartment, with extravagant offerings, were de rigueur; bulletins were
issued three times a day; an allusion to her condition was the
recognized preliminary to all conversation; advice, suggestions, and
petitions to restore the baleful existence, flowed readily from the
same facile invention that had once proposed its banishment; until one
afternoon the shadow had drawn so close that even Folly withheld its
careless feet before it, and laid down its feeble tinkling bells and
gaudy cap tremblingly on the threshold.  But the sequel must be told in
more vivid words than mine.

"Whin I saw that angel lyin' there," said Sarah Walker's nurse, "as
white, if ye plaze, as if the whole blessed blood of her body had gone
to make up the beautiful glory of her hair; speechless as she was, I
thought I saw a sort of longin' in her eyes.

"'Is it anythin' you'll be wantin', Sarah darlint', sez her mother with
a thremblin' voice, 'afore it's lavin' us ye are?  Is it the ministher
yer askin' for, love?' sez she.

"And Sarah looked at me, and if it was the last words I spake, her lips
moved and she whispered 'Scotty.'

"'Wirra! wirra!' sez the mother, 'it's wanderin' she is, the darlin';'
for Scotty, don't ye see, was the grand barkeeper of the hotel.

"'Savin' yer presence, ma'am,' sez I, 'and the child's here, ez is half
a saint already, it's thruth she's spakin'--it's Scotty she wants.'
And with that my angel blinks wid her black eyes 'yes.'

"'Bring him,' says the docthor, 'at once.'

"And they bring him in wid all the mustachios and moighty fine curls of
him, and his diamonds, rings, and pins all a-glistening just like his
eyes when he set 'em on that suffering saint.

"'Is it anythin' you're wantin,' Sarah dear?' sez he, thryin' to spake
firm.  And Sarah looks at him, and then looks at a tumbler on the table.

"'Is it a bit of a cocktail, the likes of the one I made for ye last
Sunday unbeknownst?' sez he, looking round mortal afraid of the
parents.  And Sarah Walker's eyes said, 'It is.'  Then the ministher
groaned, but the docthor jumps to his feet.

"'Bring it,' sez he, 'and howld your jaw, an ye's a Christian sowl.'
And he brought it.  An' afther the first sip, the child lifts herself
up on one arm, and sez, with a swate smile and a toss of the glass:

"'I looks towards you, Scotty,' sez she.

"'I observes you and bows, miss,' sez he, makin' as if he was dhrinkin'
wid her.

"'Here's another nail in yer coffin, old man,' sez she winkin'.

"'And here's the hair all off your head, miss,' sez he quite aisily,
tossin' back the joke betwixt 'em.

"And with that she dhrinks it off, and lies down and goes to sleep like
a lamb, and wakes up wid de rosy dawn in her cheeks, and the morthal
seekness gone forever."

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Thus Sarah Walker recovered.  Whether the fact were essential to the
moral conveyed in these pages, I leave the reader to judge.

I was leaning on the terrace of the Kronprinzen-Hof at Rolandseck one
hot summer afternoon, lazily watching the groups of tourists strolling
along the road that ran between the Hof and the Rhine. There was
certainly little in the place or its atmosphere to recall the Greyport
episode of twenty years before, when I was suddenly startled by hearing
the name of "Sarah Walker."

In the road below me were three figures,--a lady, a gentleman, and a
little girl.  As the latter turned towards the lady who addressed her,
I recognized the unmistakable copper-colored tresses, trim figure,
delicate complexion, and refined features of the friend of my youth!  I
seized my hat, but by the time I had reached the road, they had
disappeared.

The utter impossibility of its being Sarah Walker herself, and the
glaring fact that the very coincidence of name would be inconsistent
with any conventional descent from the original Sarah, I admit confused
me.  But I examined the book of the Kronprinzen-Hof and the other
hotels, and questioned my portier.  There was no "Mees" nor "Madame
Walkiere" extant in Rolandseck.  Yet might not Monsieur have heard
incorrectly?  The Czara Walka was evidently Russian, and Rolandseck was
a resort for Russian princes.  But pardon!  Did Monsieur really mean
the young demoiselle now approaching?  Ah! that was a different affair.
She was the daughter of the Italian Prince and Princess Monte Castello
staying here.  The lady with her was not the Princess, but a foreign
friend.  The gentleman was the Prince.  Would he present Monsieur's
card?

They were entering the hotel.  The Prince was a little,
inoffensive-looking man, the lady an evident countrywoman of my own,
and the child--was, yet was NOT, Sarah!  There was the face, the
outline, the figure--but the life, the verve, the audacity, was
wanting!  I could contain myself no longer.

"Pardon an inquisitive compatriot, madam," I said; "but I heard you a
few moments ago address this young lady by the name of a very dear
young friend, whom I knew twenty years ago--Sarah Walker.  Am I right?"

The Prince stopped and gazed at us both with evident affright; then
suddenly recognizing in my freedom some wild American indecorum,
doubtless provoked by the presence of another of my species, which he
really was not expected to countenance, retreated behind the portier.
The circumstance by no means increased the good-will of the lady, as
she replied somewhat haughtily:--

"The Principessina is named Sarah Walker, after her mother's maiden
name."

"Then this IS Sarah Walker's daughter!" I said joyfully.

"She is the daughter of the Prince and Princess of Monte Castello,"
corrected the lady frigidly.

"I had the pleasure of knowing her mother very well."  I stopped and
blushed.  Did I really know Sarah Walker very well?  And would Sarah
Walker know me now?  Or would it not be very like her to go back on me?
There was certainly anything but promise in the feeble-minded, vacuous
copy of Sarah before me.  I was yet hesitating, when the Prince, who
had possibly received some quieting assurance from the portier, himself
stepped forward, stammered that the Princess would, without doubt, be
charmed to receive me later, and skipped upstairs, leaving the
impression on my mind that he contemplated ordering his bill at once.
There was no excuse for further prolonging the interview.  "Say good-by
to the strange gentleman, Sarah," suggested Sarah's companion stiffly.
I looked at the child in the wild hope of recognizing some prompt
resistance to the suggestion that would have identified her with the
lost Sarah of my youth--but in vain.  "Good-by, sir," said the affected
little creature, dropping a mechanical curtsey.  "Thank you very much
for remembering my mother."  "Good-by, Sarah!"  It was indeed good-by
forever.

For on my way to my room I came suddenly upon the Prince, in a recess
of the upper hall, addressing somebody through an open door with a
querulous protest, whose wild extravagance of statement was grotesquely
balanced by its utter feeble timidity of manner.  "It is," said the
Prince, "indeed a grave affair.  We have here hundreds of socialists,
emissaries from lawless countries and impossible places, who travel
thousands of miles to fall upon our hearts and embrace us.  They
establish an espionage over us; they haunt our walks in incredible
numbers; they hang in droves upon our footsteps; Heaven alone saves us
from a public osculation at any moment!  They openly allege that they
have dandled us on their knees at recent periods; washed and dressed
us, and would do so still.  Our happiness, our security--"

"Don't be a fool, Prince.  Do shut up!"

The Prince collapsed and shrank away, and I hurried past the open door.
A tall, magnificent-looking woman was standing before a glass,
arranging her heavy red hair.  The face, which had been impatiently
turned towards the door, had changed again to profile, with a frown
still visible on the bent brow.  Our eyes met as I passed.  The next
moment the door slammed, and I had seen the last of Sarah Walker.




A SHIP OF '49

I

It had rained so persistently in San Francisco during the first week of
January, 1854, that a certain quagmire in the roadway of Long Wharf had
become impassable, and a plank was thrown over its dangerous depth.
Indeed, so treacherous was the spot that it was alleged, on good
authority, that a hastily embarking traveler had once hopelessly lost
his portmanteau, and was fain to dispose of his entire interest in it
for the sum of two dollars and fifty cents to a speculative stranger on
the wharf.  As the stranger's search was rewarded afterwards only by
the discovery of the body of a casual Chinaman, who had evidently
endeavored wickedly to anticipate him, a feeling of commercial
insecurity was added to the other eccentricities of the locality.

The plank led to the door of a building that was a marvel even in the
chaotic frontier architecture of the street.  The houses on either
side--irregular frames of wood or corrugated iron--bore evidence of
having been quickly thrown together, to meet the requirements of the
goods and passengers who were once disembarked on what was the muddy
beach of the infant city.  But the building in question exhibited a
certain elaboration of form and design utterly inconsistent with this
idea.  The structure obtruded a bowed front to the street, with a
curving line of small windows, surmounted by elaborate carvings and
scroll work of vines and leaves, while below, in faded gilt letters,
appeared the legend "Pontiac--Marseilles."  The effect of this
incongruity was startling.  It is related that an inebriated miner,
impeded by mud and drink before its door, was found gazing at its
remarkable facade with an expression of the deepest despondency.  "I
hev lived a free life, pardner," he explained thickly to the Samaritan
who succored him, "and every time since I've been on this six weeks'
jamboree might have kalkilated it would come to this.  Snakes I've seen
afore now, and rats I'm not unfamiliar with, but when it comes to the
starn of a ship risin' up out of the street, I reckon it's time to pass
in my checks."  "It IS a ship, you blasted old soaker," said the
Samaritan curtly.

It was indeed a ship.  A ship run ashore and abandoned on the beach
years before by her gold-seeking crew, with the debris of her scattered
stores and cargo, overtaken by the wild growth of the strange city and
the reclamation of the muddy flat, wherein she lay hopelessly imbedded;
her retreat cut off by wharves and quays and breakwater, jostled at
first by sheds, and then impacted in a block of solid warehouses and
dwellings, her rudder, port, and counter boarded in, and now gazing
hopelessly through her cabin windows upon the busy street before her.
But still a ship despite her transformation.  The faintest line of
contour yet left visible spoke of the buoyancy of another element; the
balustrade of her roof was unmistakably a taffrail.  The rain slipped
from her swelling sides with a certain lingering touch of the sea; the
soil around her was still treacherous with its suggestions, and even
the wind whistled nautically over her chimney.  If, in the fury of some
southwesterly gale, she had one night slipped her strange moorings and
left a shining track through the lower town to the distant sea, no one
would have been surprised.

Least of all, perhaps, her present owner and possessor, Mr. Abner Nott.
For by the irony of circumstances, Mr. Nott was a Far Western farmer
who had never seen a ship before, nor a larger stream of water than a
tributary of the Missouri River.  In a spirit, half of fascination,
half of speculation, he had bought her at the time of her abandonment,
and had since mortgaged his ranch at Petaluma with his live stock, to
defray the expenses of filling in the land where she stood, and the
improvements of the vicinity. He had transferred his household goods
and his only daughter to her cabin, and had divided the space "between
decks" and her hold into lodging-rooms, and lofts for the storage of
goods.  It could hardly be said that the investment had been
profitable.  His tenants vaguely recognized that his occupancy was a
sentimental rather than a commercial speculation, and often generously
lent themselves to the illusion by not paying their rent.  Others
treated their own tenancy as a joke,--a quaint recreation born of the
childlike familiarity of frontier intercourse.  A few had left
carelessly abandoning their unsalable goods to their landlord, with
great cheerfulness and a sense of favor.  Occasionally Mr. Abner Nott,
in a practical relapse, raged against the derelicts, and talked of
dispossessing them, or even dismantling his tenement, but he was easily
placated by a compliment to the "dear old ship," or an effort made by
some tenant to idealize his apartment.  A photographer who had
ingeniously utilized the forecastle for a gallery (accessible from the
bows in the next street), paid no further tribute than a portrait of
the pretty face of Rosey Nott. The superstitious reverence in which
Abner Nott held his monstrous fancy was naturally enhanced by his
purely bucolic exaggeration of its real functions and its native
element.  "This yer keel has sailed, and sailed, and sailed," he would
explain with some incongruity of illustration, "in a bee line, makin'
tracks for days runnin'.  I reckon more storms and blizzards hez
tackled her then you ken shake a stick at.  She's stampeded whales
afore now, and sloshed round with pirates and freebooters in and outer
the Spanish Main, and across lots from Marcelleys where she was rared.
And yer she sits peaceful-like just ez if she'd never been outer a
pertater patch, and hadn't ploughed the sea with fo'sails and studdin'
sails and them things cavortin' round her masts."

Abner Nott's enthusiasm was shared by his daughter, but with more
imagination, and an intelligence stimulated by the scant literature of
her father's emigrant wagon and the few books found on the cabin
shelves.  But to her the strange shell she inhabited suggested more of
the great world than the rude, chaotic civilization she saw from the
cabin windows or met in the persons of her father's lodgers. Shut up
for days in this quaint tenement, she had seen it change from the
enchanted playground of her childish fancy to the theatre of her active
maidenhood, but without losing her ideal romance in it.  She had
translated its history in her own way, read its quaint nautical
hieroglyphics after her own fashion, and possessed herself of its
secrets.  She had in fancy made voyages in it to foreign lands; had
heard the accents of a softer tongue on its decks, and on summer
nights, from the roof of the quarter-deck, had seen mellower
constellations take the place of the hard metallic glitter of the
Californian skies.  Sometimes, in her isolation, the long, cylindrical
vault she inhabited seemed, like some vast sea-shell, to become musical
with the murmurings of the distant sea.  So completely had it taken the
place of the usual instincts of feminine youth that she had forgotten
she was pretty, or that her dresses were old in fashion and scant in
quantity.  After the first surprise of admiration her father's lodgers
ceased to follow the abstracted nymph except with their eyes,--partly
respecting her spiritual shyness, partly respecting the jealous
supervision of the paternal Nott.  She seldom penetrated the crowded
centre of the growing city; her rare excursions were confined to the
old ranch at Petaluma, whence she brought flowers and plants, and even
extemporized a hanging-garden on the quarter-deck.

It was still raining, and the wind, which had increased to a gale, was
dashing the drops against the slanting cabin windows with a sound like
spray when Mr. Abner Nott sat before a table seriously engaged with his
accounts.  For it was "steamer night,"--as that momentous day of
reckoning before the sailing of the regular mail steamer was briefly
known to commercial San Francisco,--and Mr. Nott was subject at such
times to severely practical relapses.  A swinging light seemed to bring
into greater relief that peculiar encased casket-like security of the
low-timbered, tightly-fitting apartment, with its toy-like utilities of
space, and made the pretty oval face of Rosey Nott appear a
characteristic ornament. The sliding door of the cabin communicated
with the main deck, now roofed in and partitioned off so as to form a
small passage that led to the open starboard gangway, where a narrow,
inclosed staircase built on the ship's side took the place of the
ship's ladder under her counter, and opened in the street.

A dash of rain against the window caused Rosey to lift her eyes from
her book.

"It's much nicer here than at the ranch, father," she said coaxingly,
"even leaving alone its being a beautiful ship instead of a shanty; the
wind don't whistle through the cracks and blow out the candle when
you're reading, nor the rain spoil your things hung up against the
wall.  And you look more like a gentleman sitting in his own--ship--you
know, looking over his bills and getting ready to give his orders."

Vague and general as Miss Rosey's compliment was, it had its full
effect upon her father, who was at times dimly conscious of his
hopeless rusticity and its incongruity with his surroundings. "Yes," he
said awkwardly, with a slight relaxation of his aggressive attitude;
"yes, in course it's more bang-up style, but it don't pay--Rosey--it
don't pay.  Yer's the Pontiac that oughter be bringin' in, ez rents go,
at least three hundred a month, don't make her taxes.  I bin thinkin'
seriously of sellin' her."

As Rosey knew her father had experienced this serious contemplation on
the first of every month for the last two years, and cheerfully ignored
it the next day, she only said, "I'm sure the vacant rooms and lofts
are all rented, father."

"That's it," returned Mr. Nott thoughtfully, plucking at his bushy
whiskers with his fingers and thumb as if he were removing dead and
sapless incumbranees in their growth, "that's just what it is--them's
ez in it themselves don't pay, and them ez haz left their goods--the
goods don't pay.  The feller ez stored them iron sugar kettles in the
forehold, after trying to get me to make another advance on 'em, sez he
believes he'll have to sacrifice 'em to me after all, and only begs I'd
give him a chance of buying back the half of 'em ten years from now, at
double what I advanced him.  The chap that left them five hundred cases
of hair dye 'tween decks and then skipped out to Sacramento, met me the
other day in the street and advised me to use a bottle ez an
advertisement, or try it on the starn of the Pontiac for fire-proof
paint.  That foolishness ez all he's good for.  And yet thar might be
suthin' in the paint, if a feller had nigger luck.  Ther's that New
York chap ez bought up them damaged boxes of plug terbaker for fifty
dollars a thousand, and sold 'em for foundations for that new building
in Sansome Street at a thousand clear profit.  It's all luck, Rosey."

The girl's eyes had wandered again to the pages of her book. Perhaps
she was already familiar with the text of her father's monologue.  But
recognizing an additional querulousness in his voice, she laid the book
aside and patiently folded her hands in her lap.

"That's right--for I've suthin' to tell ye.  The fact is Sleight wants
to buy the Pontiac out and out just ez she stands with the two fifty
vara lots she stands on."

"Sleight wants to buy her?  Sleight?" echoed Rosey incredulously.

"You bet!  Sleight--the big financier, the smartest man in 'Frisco."

"What does he want to buy her for?" asked Rosey, knitting her pretty
brows.

The apparently simple question suddenly puzzled Mr. Nott.  He glanced
feebly at his daughter's face, and frowned in vacant irritation.
"That's so," he said, drawing a long breath; "there's suthin' in that."

"What did he SAY?" continued the young girl, impatiently.

"Not much.  'You've got the Pontiac, Nott,' sez he.  'You bet!' sez I.
'What'll you take for her and the lot she stands on?' sez he, short and
sharp.  Some fellers, Rosey," said Nott, with a cunning smile, "would
hev blurted out a big figger and been cotched.  That ain't my style.  I
just looked at him.  'I'll wait fur your figgers until next steamer
day,' sez he, and off he goes like a shot.  He's awfully sharp, Rosey."

"But if he is sharp, father, and he really wants to buy the ship,"
returned Rosey, thoughtfully, "it's only because he knows it's valuable
property, and not because he likes it as we do.  He can't take that
value away even if we don't sell it to him, and all the while we have
the comfort of the dear old Pontiac, don't you see?"

This exhaustive commercial reasoning was so sympathetic to Mr. Nott's
instincts that he accepted it as conclusive.  He, however, deemed it
wise to still preserve his practical attitude.  "But that don't make it
pay by the month, Rosey.  Suthin' must be done.  I'm thinking I'll
clean out that photographer."

"Not just after he's taken such a pretty view of the cabin front of the
Pontiac from the street, father!  No! he's going to give us a copy, and
put the other in a shop window in Montgomery Street."

"That's so," said Mr. Nott, musingly; "it's no slouch of an
advertisement.  'The Pontiac,' the property of A. Nott, Esq., of St.
Jo, Missouri.  Send it on to your Aunt Phoebe; sorter make the old
folks open their eyes--oh?  Well, seein' he's been to some expense
fittin' up an entrance from the other street, we'll let him slide.  But
as to that d----d old Frenchman Ferrers, in the next loft, with his
stuck-up airs and high-falutin style, we must get quit of him; he's
regularly gouged me in that ere horsehair spekilation."

"How can you say that, father!" said Rosey, with a slight increase of
color.  "It was your own offer.  You know those bales of curled
horsehair were left behind by the late tenant to pay his rent. When Mr.
de Ferrieres rented the room afterwards, you told him you'd throw them
in in the place of repairs and furniture.  It was your own offer."

"Yes, but I didn't reckon ther'd ever be a big price per pound paid for
the darned stuff for sofys and cushions and sich."

"How do you know HE knew it, father?" responded Rosey.

"Then why did he look so silly at first, and then put on airs when I
joked him about it, eh?"

"Perhaps he didn't understand your joking, father.  He's a foreigner,
and shy and proud, and--not like the others.  I don't think he knew
what you meant then, any more than he believed he was making a bargain
before.  He may be poor, but I think he's been--a--a--gentleman."

The young girl's animation penetrated even Mr. Nott's slow
comprehension.  Her novel opposition, and even the prettiness it
enhanced, gave him a dull premonition of pain.  His small round eyes
became abstracted, his mouth remained partly open, even his fresh color
slightly paled.

"You seem to have been takin' stock of this yer man, Rosey," he said,
with a faint attempt at archness; "if he warn't ez old ez a crow, for
all his young feathers, I'd think he was makin' up to you."

But the passing glow had faded from her young cheeks, and her eyes
wandered again to her book.  "He pays his rent regularly every steamer
night," she said, quietly, as if dismissing an exhausted subject, "and
he'll be here in a moment, I dare say."  She took up her book, and
leaning her head on her hand, once more became absorbed in its pages.

An uneasy silence followed.  The rain beat against the windows, the
ticking of a clock became audible, but still Mr. Nott sat with vacant
eyes fixed on his daughter's face, and the constrained smile on his
lips.  He was conscious that he had never seen her look so pretty
before, yet he could not tell why this was no longer an unalloyed
satisfaction.  Not but that he had always accepted the admiration of
others for her as a matter of course, but for the first time he became
conscious that she not only had an interest in others, but apparently a
superior knowledge of them.  How did she know these things about this
man, and why had she only now accidentally spoken of them?  HE would
have done so.  All this passed so vaguely through his unreflective
mind, that he was unable to retain any decided impression, but the
far-reaching one that his lodger had obtained some occult influence
over her through the exhibition of his baleful skill in the horsehair
speculation. "Them tricks is likely to take a young girl's fancy.  I
must look arter her," he said to himself softly.

A slow regular step in the gangway interrupted his paternal
reflections.  Hastily buttoning across his chest the pea-jacket which
he usually wore at home as a single concession to his nautical
surroundings, he drew himself up with something of the assumption of a
ship-master, despite certain bucolic suggestions of his boots and legs.
The footsteps approached nearer, and a tall figure suddenly stood in
the doorway.

It was a figure so extraordinary that even in the strange masquerade of
that early civilization it was remarkable; a figure with whom father
and daughter were already familiar without abatement of wonder--the
figure of a rejuvenated old man, padded, powdered, dyed, and painted to
the verge of caricature, but without a single suggestion of
ludicrousness or humor.  A face so artificial that it seemed almost a
mask, but, like a mask, more pathetic than amusing.  He was dressed in
the extreme of fashion of a dozen years before; his pearl gray trousers
strapped tightly over his varnished boots, his voluminous satin cravat
and high collar embraced his rouged cheeks and dyed whiskers, his
closely-buttoned frock coat clinging to a waist that seemed accented by
stays.

He advanced two steps into the cabin with an upright precision of
motion that might have hid the infirmities of age, and said
deliberately with a foreign accent:--

"You-r-r ac-coumpt?"

In the actual presence of the apparition Mr. Nott's dignified
resistance wavered.  But glancing uneasily at his daughter and seeing
her calm eyes fixed on the speaker without embarrassment, he folded his
arms stiffly, and with a lofty simulation of examining the ceiling,
said,--

"Ahem!  Rosa!  The gentleman's account."

It was an infelicitous action.  For the stranger, who evidently had not
noticed the presence of the young girl before, started, took a step
quickly forward, bent stiffly but profoundly over the little hand that
held the account, raised it to his lips, and with "a thousand pardons,
mademoiselle," laid a small canvas bag containing the rent before the
disorganized Mr. Nott and stiffly vanished.

That night was a troubled one to the simple-minded proprietor of the
good ship Pontiac.  Unable to voice his uneasiness by further
discussion, but feeling that his late discomposing interview with his
lodger demanded some marked protest, he absented himself on the plea of
business during the rest of the evening, happily to his daughter's
utter obliviousness of the reason.  Lights were burning brilliantly in
counting-rooms and offices, the feverish life of the mercantile city
was at its height.  With a vague idea of entering into immediate
negotiations with Mr. Sleight for the sale of the ship--as a direct way
out of his present perplexity, he bent his steps towards the
financier's office, but paused and turned back before reaching the
door.  He made his way to the wharf and gazed abstractedly at the
lights reflected in the dark, tremulous, jelly-like water.  But
wherever he went he was accompanied by the absurd figure of his
lodger--a figure he had hitherto laughed at or half pitied, but which
now, to his bewildered comprehension, seemed to have a fateful
significance.  Here a new idea seized him, and he hurried back to the
ship, slackening his pace only when he arrived at his own doorway.
Here he paused a moment and slowly ascended the staircase.  When he
reached the passage he coughed slightly and paused again.  Then he
pushed open the door of the darkened cabin and called softly:--

"Rosey!"

"What is it, father?" said Rosey's voice from the little state-room on
the right--Rosey's own bower.

"Nothing!" said Mr. Nott, with an affectation of languid calmness; "I
only wanted to know if you was comfortable.  It's an awful busy night
in town."

"Yes, father."

"I reckon thar's tons o' gold goin' to the States tomorrow."

"Yes, father."

"Pretty comfortable, eh?"

"Yes, father."

"Well, I'll browse round a spell, and turn in myself, soon."

"Yes father."

Mr. Nott took down a hanging lantern, lit it, and passed out into the
gangway.  Another lamp hung from the companion hatch to light the
tenants to the lower deck, whence he descended.  This deck was divided
fore and aft by a partitioned passage,--the lofts or apartments being
lighted from the ports, and one or two by a door cut through the ship's
side communicating with an alley on either side.  This was the case
with the loft occupied by Mr. Nott's strange lodger, which, besides a
door in the passage, had this independent communication with the alley.
Nott had never known him to make use of the latter door; on the
contrary, it was his regular habit to issue from his apartment at three
o'clock every afternoon, dressed as he has been described, stride
deliberately through the passage to the upper deck and thence into the
street, where his strange figure was a feature of the principal
promenade for two or three hours, returning as regularly at eight
o'clock to the ship and the seclusion of his loft.  Mr. Nott paused
before the door, under the pretence of throwing the light before him
into the shadows of the forecastle; all was silent within.  He was
turning back when he was impressed by the regular recurrence of a
peculiar rustling sound which he had at first referred to the rubbing
of the wires of the swinging lantern against his clothing.  He set down
the light and listened; the sound was evidently on the other side of
the partition; the sound of some prolonged, rustling, scraping
movement, with regular intervals.  Was it due to another of Mr. Nott's
unprofitable tenants--the rats?  No.  A bright idea flashed upon Mr.
Nott's troubled mind.  It was de Ferrieres snoring!  He smiled grimly.
"Wonder if Rosey'd call him a gentleman if she heard that," he chuckled
to himself as he slowly made his way back to the cabin and the small
state-room opposite to his daughter's. During the rest of the night he
dreamed of being compelled to give Rosey in marriage to his strange
lodger, who added insult to the outrage by snoring audibly through the
marriage service.

Meantime, in her cradle-like nest in her nautical bower, Miss Rosey
slumbered as lightly.  Waking from a vivid dream of Venice--a child's
Venice--seen from the swelling deck of the proudly-riding Pontiac, she
was so impressed as to rise and cross on tiptoe to the little slanting
porthole.  Morning was already dawning over the flat, straggling city,
but from every counting-house and magazine the votive tapers of the
feverish worshipers of trade and mammon were still flaring fiercely.



II

The day following "steamer night" was usually stale and flat at San
Francisco.  The reaction from the feverish exaltation of the previous
twenty-four hours was seen in the listless faces and lounging feet of
promenaders, and was notable in the deserted offices and warehouses
still redolent of last night's gas, and strewn with the dead ashes of
last night's fires.

There was a brief pause before the busy life which ran its course from
"steamer day" to steamer day was once more taken up.  In that interval
a few anxious speculators and investors breathed freely, some critical
situation was relieved, or some impending catastrophe momentarily
averted.  In particular, a singular stroke of good fortune that morning
befell Mr. Nott.  He not only secured a new tenant, but, as he
sagaciously believed, introduced into the Pontiac a counteracting
influence to the subtle fascinations of de Ferrieres.

The new tenant apparently possessed a combination of business
shrewdness and brusque frankness that strongly impressed his landlord.
"You see, Rosey," said Nott, complacently describing the interview to
his daughter, "when I sorter intimated in a keerless kind o' way that
sugar kettles and hair dye was about played out ez securities, he just
planked down the money for two months in advance.  'There,' sez he,
'that's YOUR SECURITY--now where's MINE?'  'I reckon I don't hitch on,
pardner,' sez I; 'security what for?'  ''Spose you sell the ship?' sez
he, 'afore the two months is up.  I've heard that old Sleight wants to
buy her.'  'Then you gets back your money,' sez I.  'And lose my room,'
sez he; 'not much, old man.  You sign a paper that whoever buys the
ship inside o' two months hez to buy ME ez a tenant with it; that's on
the square.' So I sign the paper.  It was mighty cute in the young
feller, wasn't it?" he said, scanning his daughter's pretty puzzled
face a little anxiously; "and don't you see ez I ain't goin' to sell
the Pontiac, it's just about ez cute in me, eh?  He's a contractor
somewhere around yer, and wants to be near his work.  So he takes the
room next to the Frenchman, that that ship captain quit for the mines,
and succeeds naterally to his chest and things.  He's might
peart-lookin, that young feller, Rosey--long black moustaches, all his
own color, Rosey--and he's a regular high-stepper, you bet.  I reckon
he's not only been a gentleman, but ez NOW.  Some o' them contractors
are very high-toned!"

"I don't think we have any right to give him the captain's chest,
father," said Rosey; "there may be some private things in it. There
were some letters and photographs in the hair-dye man's trunk that you
gave the photographer."

"That's just it, Rosey," returned Abner Nott with sublime
unconsciousness, "photographs and love letters you can't sell for cash,
and I don't mind givin' 'em away, if they kin make a feller creature
happy."

"But, father, have we the RIGHT to give 'em away?"

"They're collateral security, Rosey," said her father grimly.
"Co-la-te-ral," he continued, emphasizing each syllable by tapping the
fist of one hand in the open palm of the other.  "Co-la-te-ral is the
word the big business sharps yer about call 'em.  You can't get round
that."  He paused a moment, and then, as a new idea seemed to be
painfully borne in his round eyes, continued cautiously: "Was that the
reason why you wouldn't touch any of them dresses from the trunks of
that opery gal ez skedaddled for Sacramento?  And yet them trunks I
regularly bought at auction--Rosey--at auction, on spec--and they
didn't realize the cost of drayage."

A slight color mounted to Rosey's face.  "No," she said, hastily, "not
that."  Hesitating a moment she then drew softly to his side, and,
placing her arms around his neck, turned his broad, foolish face
towards her own.  "Father," she began, "when mother died, would YOU
have liked anybody to take her trunks and paw around her things and
wear them?"

"When your mother died, just this side o' Sweetwater, Rosey," said Mr.
Nott, with beaming unconsciousness, "she hadn't any trunks.  I reckon
she hadn't even an extra gown hanging up in the wagin, 'cept the
petticoat ez she had wrapped around yer.  It was about ez much ez we
could do to skirmish round with Injins, alkali, and cold, and we sorter
forgot to dress for dinner.  She never thought, Rosey, that you and me
would live to be inhabitin' a paliss of a real ship.  Ef she had she
would have died a proud woman."

He turned his small, loving, boar-like eyes upon her as a
preternaturally innocent and trusting companion of Ulysses might have
regarded the transforming Circe.  Rosey turned away with the faintest
sigh.  The habitual look of abstraction returned to her eyes as if she
had once more taken refuge in her own ideal world. Unfortunately the
change did not escape either the sensitive observation or the fatuous
misconception of the sagacious parent. "Ye'll be mountin' a few
furbelows and fixins, Rosey, I reckon, ez only natural.  Mabbee ye'll
have to prink up a little now that we've got a gentleman contractor in
the ship.  I'll see what I kin pick up in Montgomery Street."  And
indeed he succeeded a few hours later in accomplishing with equal
infelicity his generous design. When she returned from her household
tasks she found on her berth a purple velvet bonnet of extraordinary
make, and a pair of white satin slippers.  "They'll do for a start off,
Rosey," he explained, "and I got 'em at my figgers."

"But I go out so seldom, father, and a bonnet--"

"That's so," interrupted Mr. Nott, complacently, "it might be jest ez
well for a young gal like yer to appear ez if she DID go out, or would
go out if she wanted to.  So you kin be wearin' that ar headstall
kinder like this evening when the contractor's here, ez if you'd jest
come in from a pasear."

Miss Rosey did not however immediately avail herself of her father's
purchase, but contented herself with the usual scarlet ribbon that like
a snood confined her brown hair, when she returned to her tasks.  The
space between the galley and the bulwarks had been her favorite resort
in summer when not actually engaged in household work.  It was now
lightly roofed over with boards and tarpaulin against the winter rain,
but still afforded her a veranda-like space before the gallery door,
where she could read or sew, looking over the bow of the Pontiac to the
tossing bay or the further range of the Contra Costa hills.

Hither Miss Rosey brought the purple prodigy, partly to please her
father, partly with a view of subjecting it to violent radical changes.
But after trying it on before the tiny mirror in the galley once or
twice, her thoughts wandered away, and she fell into one of her
habitual reveries seated on a little stool before the galley door.

She was roused from it by the slight shaking and rattling of the doors
of a small hatch on the deck, not a dozen yards from where she sat.  It
had been evidently fastened from below during the wet weather, but as
she gazed, the fastenings were removed, the doors were suddenly lifted,
and the head and shoulders of a young man emerged from the deck.
Partly from her father's description, and partly from the impossibility
of its being anybody else, she at once conceived it to be the new
lodger.  She had time to note that he was young and good-looking,
graver perhaps than became his sudden pantomimic appearance, but before
she could observe him closely, he had turned, closed the hatch with a
certain familiar dexterity, and walked slowly towards the bows.  Even
in her slight bewilderment, she observed that his step upon the deck
seemed different to her father's or the photographer's, and that he
laid his hand on various objects with a half-caressing ease and habit.
Presently he paused and turned back, and glancing at the galley door
for the first time encountered her wondering eyes.

It seemed so evident that she had been a curious spectator of his
abrupt entrance on deck that he was at first disconcerted and confused.
But after a second glance at her he appeared to resume his composure,
and advanced a little defiantly towards the galley.

"I suppose I frightened you, popping up the fore hatch just now?"

"The what?" asked Rosey.

"The fore hatch," he repeated impatiently, indicating it with a gesture.

"And that's the fore hatch?" she said abstractedly.  "You seem to know
ships."

"Yes--a little," he said quietly.  "I was below, and unfastened the
hatch to come up the quickest way and take a look round.  I've just
hired a room here," he added explanatorily.

"I thought so," said Rosey simply; "you're the contractor?"

"The contractor!--oh, yes!  You seem to know it all."

"Father's told me."

"Oh, he's your father--Nott?  Certainly.  I see now," he continued,
looking at her with a half repressed smile.  "Certainly, Miss Nott,
good morning," he half added and walked towards the companion way.
Something in the direction of his eyes as he turned away made Rosey
lift her hands to her head.  She had forgotten to remove her father's
baleful gift.

She snatched it off and ran quickly to the companion way.

"Sir!" she called.

The young man turned half way down the steps and looked up.  There was
a faint color in her cheeks, and her pretty brown hair was slightly
disheveled from the hasty removal of the bonnet.

"Father's very particular about strangers being on this deck," she said
a little sharply.

"Oh--ah--I'm sorry I intruded."

"I--I--thought I'd tell you," said Rosey, frightened by her boldness
into a feeble anti-climax.

"Thank you."

She came back slowly to the galley and picked up the unfortunate bonnet
with a slight sense of remorse.  Why should she feel angry with her
poor father's unhappy offering?  And what business had this strange
young man to use the ship so familiarly?  Yet she was vaguely conscious
that she and her father, with all their love and their domestic
experience of it, lacked a certain instinctive ease in its possession
that the half indifferent stranger had shown on first treading its
deck.  She walked to the hatchway and examined it with a new interest.
Succeeding in lifting the hatch, she gazed at the lower deck.  As she
already knew the ladder had long since been removed to make room for
one of the partitions, the only way the stranger could have reached it
was by leaping to one of the rings.  To make sure of this she let
herself down holding on to the rings, and dropped a couple of feet to
the deck below.  She was in the narrow passage her father had
penetrated the previous night. Before her was the door leading to de
Ferrieres's loft, always locked.  It was silent within; it was the hour
when the old Frenchman made his habitual promenade in the city.  But
the light from the newly-opened hatch allowed her to see more of the
mysterious recesses of the forward bulkhead than she had known before,
and she was startled by observing another yawning hatch-way at her feet
from which the closely-fitting door had been lifted, and which the new
lodger had evidently forgotten to close again. The young girl stooped
down and peered cautiously into the black abyss.  Nothing was to be
seen, nothing heard but the distant gurgle and click of water in some
remoter depth.  She replaced the hatch and returned by way of the
passage to the cabin.

When her father came home that night she briefly recounted the
interview with the new lodger, and her discovery of his curiosity. She
did this with a possible increase of her usual shyness and abstraction,
and apparently more as a duty than a colloquial recreation.  But it
pleased Mr. Nott also to give it more than his usual misconception.
"Looking round the ship, was he--eh, Rosey?" he said with infinite
archness.  "In course, kinder sweepin' round the galley, and offerin'
to fetch you wood and water, eh?"  Even when the young girl had picked
up her book with the usual faint smile of affectionate tolerance, and
then drifted away in its pages, Mr. Nott chuckled audibly.  "I reckon
old Frenchy didn't come by when the young one was bedevlin' you there."

"What, father?" said Rosey, lifting her abstracted eyes to his face.

At the moment it seemed impossible that any human intelligence could
have suspected deceit or duplicity in Rosey's clear gaze. But Mr.
Nott's intelligence was superhuman.  "I was sayin' that Mr. Ferrieres
didn't happen in while the young feller was there--eh?"

"No, father," answered Rosey, with an effort to follow him out of the
pages of her book.  "Why?"

But Mr. Nott did not reply.  Later in the evening he awkwardly waylaid
the new lodger before the cabin door as that gentleman would have
passed on to his room.

"I'm afraid," said the young man, glancing at Rosey, "that I intruded
upon your daughter to-day.  I was a little curious to see the old ship,
and I didn't know what part of it was private."

"There ain't no private part to this yer ship--that ez, 'cepting the
rooms and lofts," said Mr. Nott, authoritatively.  Then, subjecting the
anxious look of his daughter to his usual faculty for misconception, he
added, "Thar ain't no place whar you haven't as much right to go ez any
other man; thar ain't any man, furriner or Amerykan, young or old, dyed
or undyed, ez hev got any better rights.  You hear me, young fellow.
Mr. Renshaw--my darter.  My darter--Mr. Renshaw.  Rosey, give the
gentleman a chair.  She's only jest come in from a promeynade, and hez
jest taken off her bonnet," he added, with an arch look at Rosey, and a
hurried look around the cabin, as if he hoped to see the missing gift
visible to the general eye.  "So take a seat a minit, won't ye?"

But Mr. Renshaw, after an observant glance at the young girl's
abstracted face, brusquely excused himself, "I've got a letter to
write," he said, with a half bow to Rosey.  "Good night."

He crossed the passage to the room that had been assigned to him, and
closing the door gave way to some irritability of temper in his efforts
to light the lamp and adjust his writing materials.  For his excuse to
Mr. Nott was more truthful than most polite pretexts. He had, indeed, a
letter to write, and one that, being yet young in duplicity, the near
presence of his host rendered difficult.  For it ran as follows:--


"DEAR SLEIGHT,

"As I found I couldn't get a chance to make any examination of the ship
except as occasion offered, I just went in to rent lodgings in her from
the God-forsaken old ass who owns her, and here I am a tenant for two
months.  I contracted for that time in case the old fool should sell
out to some one else before.  Except that she's cut up a little between
decks by the partitions for lofts that that Pike County idiot has put
into her, she looks but little changed, and her FORE-HOLD, as far as I
can judge, is intact.  It seems that Nott bought her just as she
stands, with her cargo half out, but he wasn't here when she broke
cargo.  If anybody else had bought her but this cursed Missourian, who
hasn't got the hayseed out of his hair, I might have found out
something from him, and saved myself this kind of fooling, which isn't
in my line.  If I could get possession of a loft on the main deck, well
forward, just over the fore-hold, I could satisfy myself in a few
hours, but the loft is rented by that crazy Frenchman who parades
Montgomery Street every afternoon, and though old Pike County wants to
turn him out, I'm afraid I can't get it for a week to come.

"If anything should happen to me, just you waltz down here and corral
my things at once, for this old frontier pirate has a way of
confiscating his lodgers' trunks.

"Yours,
  DICK."



III

If Mr. Renshaw indulged in any further curiosity regarding the interior
of the Pontiac, he did not make his active researches manifest to
Rosey.  Nor, in spite of her father's invitation, did he again approach
the galley--a fact which gave her her first vague impression in his
favor.  He seemed also to avoid the various advances which Mr. Nott
appeared impelled to make, whenever they met in the passage, but did so
without seemingly avoiding HER, and marked his half contemptuous
indifference to the elder Nott by an increase of respect to the young
girl.  She would have liked to ask him something about ships, and was
sure his conversation would have been more interesting than that of old
Captain Bower, to whose cabin he had succeeded, who had once told her a
ship was the "devil's hen-coop."  She would have liked also to explain
to him that she was not in the habit of wearing a purple bonnet.  But
her thoughts were presently engrossed by an experience which
interrupted the even tenor of her young life.

She had been, as she afterwards remembered, impressed with a nervous
restlessness one afternoon, which made it impossible for her to perform
her ordinary household duties, or even to indulge her favorite
recreation of reading or castle building.  She wandered over the ship,
and, impelled by the same vague feeling of unrest, descended to the
lower deck and the forward bulkhead where she had discovered the open
hatch.  It had not been again disturbed, nor was there any trace of
further exploration.  A little ashamed, she knew not why, of revisiting
the scene of Mr. Renshaw's researches, she was turning back when she
noticed that the door which communicated with de Ferrieres's loft was
partly open.  The circumstance was so unusual that she stopped before
it in surprise.  There was no sound from within; it was the hour when
its queer occupant was always absent; he must have forgotten to lock
the door or it had been unfastened by other hands.  After a moment of
hesitation she pushed it further open and stepped into the room.

By the dim light of two port-holes she could see that the floor was
strewn and piled with the contents of a broken bale of curled horse
hair, of which a few untouched bales still remained against the wall.
A heap of morocco skins, some already cut in the form of chair cushion
covers, and a few cushions unfinished and unstuffed lay in the light of
the ports, and gave the apartment the appearance of a cheap workshop.
A rude instrument for combing the horse hair, awls, buttons, and thread
heaped on a small bench showed that active work had been but recently
interrupted.  A cheap earthenware ewer and basin on the floor, and a
pallet made of an open bale of horse hair, on which a ragged quilt and
blanket were flung, indicated that the solitary worker dwelt and slept
beside his work.

The truth flashed upon the young girl's active brain, quickened by
seclusion and fed by solitary books.  She read with keen eyes the
miserable secret of her father's strange guest in the poverty-stricken
walls, in the mute evidences of menial handicraft performed in
loneliness and privation, in this piteous adaptation of an accident to
save the conscious shame of premeditated toil. She knew now why he had
stammeringly refused to receive her father's offer to buy back the
goods he had given him; she knew now how hardly gained was the pittance
that paid his rent and supported his childish vanity and grotesque
pride.  From a peg in the corner hung the familiar masquerade that hid
his poverty--the pearl-gray trousers, the black frock coat, the tall
shining hat--in hideous contrast to the penury of his surroundings.
But if THEY were here, where was HE, and in what new disguise had he
escaped from his poverty?  A vague uneasiness caused her to hesitate
and return to the open door.  She had nearly reached it when her eye
fell on the pallet which it partly illuminated.  A singular resemblance
in the ragged heap made her draw closer.  The faded quilt was a
dressing-gown, and clutching its folds lay a white, wasted hand.

The emigrant childhood of Rose Nott had been more than once shadowed by
scalping knives, and she was acquainted with Death. She went fearlessly
to the couch, and found that the dressing-gown was only an enwrapping
of the emaciated and lifeless body of de Ferrieres.  She did not
retreat or call for help, but examined him closely.  He was
unconscious, but not pulseless; he had evidently been strong enough to
open the door for air or succor, but had afterward fallen in a fit on
the couch.  She flew to her father's locker and the galley fire,
returned, and shut the door behind her, and by the skillful use of hot
water and whisky soon had the satisfaction of seeing a faint color take
the place of the faded rouge in the ghastly cheeks.  She was still
chafing his hands when he slowly opened his eyes.  With a start, he
made a quick attempt to push aside her hands and rise.  But she gently
restrained him.

"Eh--what!" he stammered, throwing his face back from hers with an
effort and trying to turn it to the wall.

"You have been ill," she said quietly.  "Drink this."

With his face still turned away he lifted the cup to his chattering
teeth.  When he had drained it he threw a trembling glance around the
room and at the door.

"There's no one been here but myself," she said quickly.  "I happened
to see the door open as I passed.  I didn't think it worth while to
call any one."

The searching look he gave her turned into an expression of relief,
which, to her infinite uneasiness, again feebly lightened into one of
antiquated gallantry.  He drew the dressing-gown around him with an air.

"Ah! it is a goddess, Mademoiselle, that has deigned to enter the cell
where--where--I--amuse myself.  It is droll--is it not?  I came here to
make--what you call--the experiment of your father's fabric.  I make
myself--ha! ha!--like a workman.  Ah, bah! the heat, the darkness, the
plebeian motion make my head to go round. I stagger, I faint, I cry
out, I fall.  But what of that?  The great God hears my cry and sends
me an angel.  Voila!"

He attempted an easy gesture of gallantry, but overbalanced himself and
fell sideways on the pallet with a gasp.  Yet there was so much genuine
feeling mixed with his grotesque affectation, so much piteous
consciousness of the ineffectiveness of his falsehood, that the young
girl, who had turned away, came back and laid her hand upon his arm.

"You must lie still and try to sleep," she said gently.  "I will return
again.  Perhaps," she added, "there is some one I can send for?"

He shook his head violently.  Then in his old manner added, "After
Mademoiselle--no one."

"I mean--" she hesitated--"have you no friends?"

"Friends,--ah! without doubt."  He shrugged his shoulders.  "But
Mademoiselle will comprehend--"

"You are better now," said Rosey quickly, "and no one need know
anything if you don't wish it.  Try to sleep.  You need not lock the
door when I go; I will see that no one comes in."

He flushed faintly and averted his eyes.  "It is too droll,
Mademoiselle, is it not?"

"Of course it is," said Rosey, glancing round the miserable room.

"And Mademoiselle is an angel."

He carried her hand to his lips humbly--his first purely unaffected
action.  She slipped through the door, and softly closed it behind her.

Reaching the upper deck she was relieved to find her father had not
returned, and her absence had been unnoticed.  For she had resolved to
keep de Ferrieres's secret to herself from the moment that she had
unwittingly discovered it, and to do this and still be able to watch
over him without her father's knowledge required some caution.  She was
conscious of his strange aversion to the unfortunate man without
understanding the reason, but as she was in the habit of entertaining
his caprices more from affectionate tolerance of his weakness than
reverence of his judgment, she saw no disloyalty to him in withholding
a confidence that might be disloyal to another.  "It won't do father
any good to know it," she said to herself, "and if it DID it oughtn't
to," she added with triumphant feminine logic.  But the impression made
upon her by the spectacle she had just witnessed was stronger than any
other consideration.  The revelation of de Ferrieres's secret poverty
seemed a chapter from a romance of her own weaving; for a moment it
lifted the miserable hero out of the depths of his folly and
selfishness.  She forgot the weakness of the man in the strength of his
dramatic surroundings.  It partly satisfied a craving she had felt; it
was not exactly the story of the ship, as she had dreamed it, but it
was an episode in her experience of it that broke its monotony.  That
she should soon learn, perhaps from de Ferrieres's own lips, the true
reason of his strange seclusion, and that it involved more than
appeared to her now, she never for a moment doubted.

At the end of an hour she again knocked softly at the door, carrying
some light nourishment she had prepared for him.  He was asleep, but
she was astounded to find that in the interval he had managed to dress
himself completely in his antiquated finery.  It was a momentary shock
to the illusion she had been fostering, but she forgot it in the
pitiable contrast between his haggard face and his pomatumed hair and
beard, the jauntiness of his attire, and the collapse of his invalid
figure.  When she had satisfied herself that his sleep was natural, she
busied herself softly in arranging the miserable apartment.  With a few
feminine touches she removed the slovenliness of misery, and placed the
loose material and ostentatious evidences of his work on one side.
Finding that he still slept, and knowing the importance of this natural
medication, she placed the refreshment she had brought by his side and
noiselessly quitted the apartment.  Hurrying through the gathering
darkness between decks, she once or twice thought she had heard
footsteps, and paused, but encountering no one, attributed the
impression to her over-consciousness.  Yet she thought it prudent to go
to the galley first, where she lingered a few moments before returning
to the cabin.  On entering she was a little startled at observing a
figure seated at her father's desk, but was relieved at finding it was
Mr. Renshaw.

He rose and put aside the book he had idly picked up.  "I am afraid I
am an intentional intruder this time, Miss Nott.  But I found no one
here, and I was tempted to look into this ship-shape little snuggery.
You see the temptation got the better of me."

His voice and smile were so frank and pleasant, so free from his
previous restraint, yet still respectful, so youthful yet manly, that
Rosey was affected by them even in her preoccupation.  Her eyes
brightened and then dropped before his admiring glance.  Had she known
that the excitement of the last few hours had brought a wonderful charm
into her pretty face, had aroused the slumbering life of her
half-awakened beauty, she would have been more confused.  As it was,
she was only glad that the young man should turn out to be "nice."
Perhaps he might tell her something about ships; perhaps if she had
only known him longer she might, with de Ferrieres's permission, have
shared her confidence with him, and enlisted his sympathy and
assistance.  She contented herself with showing this anticipatory
gratitude in her face as she begged him, with the timidity of a maiden
hostess, to resume his seat.

But Mr. Renshaw seemed to talk only to make her talk, and I am forced
to admit that Rosey found this almost as pleasant.  It was not long
before he was in possession of her simple history from the day of her
baby emigration to California to the transfer of her childish life to
the old ship, and even of much of the romantic fancies she had woven
into her existence there.  Whatever ulterior purpose he had in view, he
listened as attentively as if her artless chronicle was filled with
practical information.  Once, when she had paused for breath, he said
gravely, "I must ask you to show me over this wonderful ship some day
that I may see it with your eyes."

"But I think you know it already better than I do," said Rosey with a
smile.

Mr. Renshaw's brow clouded slightly.  "Ah," he said, with a touch of
his former restraint; "and why?"

"Well," said Rosey timidly, "I thought you went round and touched
things in a familiar way as if you had handled them before."

The young man raised his eyes to Rosey's and kept them there long
enough to bring back his gentler expression.  "Then, because I found
you trying on a very queer bonnet the first day I saw you," he said,
mischievously, "I ought to believe you were in the habit of wearing
one."

In the first flush of mutual admiration young people are apt to find a
laugh quite as significant as a sigh for an expression of sympathetic
communion, and this master-stroke of wit convulsed them both.  In the
midst of it Mr. Nott entered the cabin.  But the complacency with which
he viewed the evident perfect understanding of the pair was destined to
suffer some abatement.  Rosey, suddenly conscious that she was in some
way participating in ridicule of her father through his unhappy gift,
became embarrassed.  Mr. Renshaw's restraint returned with the presence
of the old man.  In vain, at first, Abner Nott strove with profound
levity to indicate his arch comprehension of the situation, and in
vain, later, becoming alarmed, he endeavored, with cheerful gravity, to
indicate his utter obliviousness of any but a business significance in
their tete-a-tete.

"I oughtn't to hev intruded, Rosey," he said, "when you and the
gentleman were talkin' of contracts, mebbee; but don't mind me. I'm on
the fly, anyhow, Rosey dear, hevin' to see a man round the corner."

But even the attitude of withdrawing did not prevent the exit of
Renshaw to his apartment and of Rosey to the galley.  Left alone in the
cabin, Abner Nott felt in the knots and tangles of his beard for a
reason.  Glancing down at his prodigious boots which, covered with mud
and gravel, strongly emphasized his agricultural origin, and gave him a
general appearance of standing on his own broad acres, he was struck
with an idea.  "It's them boots," he whispered to himself, softly;
"they somehow don't seem 'xactly to trump or follow suit in this yer
cabin; they don't hitch into anythin', but jist slosh round loose, and,
so to speak, play it alone.  And them young critters nat'rally feels it
and gets out o' the way."  Acting upon this instinct with his usual
precipitate caution, he at once proceeded to the nearest second-hand
shop, and, purchasing a pair of enormous carpet slippers, originally
the property of a gouty sea-captain, reappeared with a strong
suggestion of newly upholstering the cabin.  The improvement, however,
was fraught with a portentous circumstance.  Mr. Nott's footsteps,
which usually announced his approach all over the ship, became stealthy
and inaudible.

Meantime Miss Rosey had taken advantage of the absence of her father to
visit her patient.  To avoid attracting attention she did not take a
light, but groped her way to the lower deck and rapped softly at the
door.  It was instantly opened by de Ferrieres.  He had apparently
appreciated the few changes she had already made in the room, and had
himself cleared away the pallet from which he had risen to make two low
seats against the wall.  Two bits of candle placed on the floor
illuminated the beams above, the dressing-gown was artistically draped
over the solitary chair, and a pile of cushions formed another seat.
With elaborate courtesy he handed Miss Rosey to the chair.  He looked
pale and weak, though the gravity of the attack had evidently passed.
Yet he persisted in remaining standing.  "If I sit," he explained with
a gesture, "I shall again disgrace myself by sleeping in Mademoiselle's
presence. Yes!  I shall sleep--I shall dream--and wake to find her
gone?"

More embarrassed by his recovery than when he was lying helplessly
before her, she said hesitatingly that she was glad he was better, and
that she hoped he liked the broth.

"It was manna from heaven, Mademoiselle.  See, I have taken it
all--every precious drop.  What else could I have done for
Mademoiselle's kindness?"

He showed her the empty bowl.  A swift conviction came upon her that
the man had been suffering from want of food.  The thought restored her
self-possession even while it brought the tears to her eyes.  "I wish
you would let me speak to father--or some one," she said impulsively,
and stopped.

A quick and half insane gleam of terror and suspicion lit up his deep
eyes.  "For what, Mademoiselle!  For an accident--that is
nothing--absolutely nothing, for I am strong and well now--see!" he
said tremblingly.  "Or for a whim--for a folly you may say, that they
will misunderstand.  No, Mademoiselle is good, is wise.  She will say
to herself, 'I understand, my friend Monsieur de Ferrieres for the
moment has a secret.  He would seem poor, he would take the role of
artisan, he would shut himself up in these walls--perhaps I may guess
why, but it is his secret.  I think of it no more.'"  He caught her
hand in his with a gesture that he would have made one of gallantry,
but that in its tremulous intensity became a piteous supplication.

"I have said nothing, and will say nothing, if you wish it," said Rosey
hastily; "but others may find out how you live here.  This is not fit
work for you.  You seem to be a--a gentleman.  You ought to be a
lawyer, or a doctor, or in a bank," she continued timidly, with a vague
enumeration of the prevailing degrees of local gentility.

He dropped her hand.  "Ah! does not Mademoiselle comprehend that it is
BECAUSE I am a gentleman that there is nothing between it and this?
Look!" he continued almost fiercely.  "What if I told you it is the
lawyer, it is the doctor, it is the banker that brings me, a gentleman,
to this, eh?  Ah, bah!  What do I say?  This is honest, what I do!  But
the lawyer, the banker, the doctor, what are they?" He shrugged his
shoulders, and pacing the apartment with a furtive glance at the half
anxious, half frightened girl, suddenly stopped, dragged a small
portmanteau from behind the heap of bales and opened it.  "Look,
Mademoiselle," he said, tremulously lifting a handful of worn and
soiled letters and papers.  "Look--these are the tools of your banker,
your lawyer, your doctor.  With this the banker will make you poor, the
lawyer will prove you a thief, the doctor will swear you are crazy, eh?
What shall you call the work of a gentleman--this"--he dragged the pile
of cushions forward--"or this?"

To the young girl's observant eyes some of the papers appeared to be of
a legal or official character, and others like bills of lading, with
which she was familiar.  Their half-theatrical exhibition reminded her
of some play she had seen; they might be the clue to some story, or the
mere worthless hoardings of a diseased fancy.  Whatever they were, de
Ferrieres did not apparently care to explain further; indeed, the next
moment his manner changed to his old absurd extravagance.  "But this is
stupid for Mademoiselle to hear.  What shall we speak of?  Ah, what
SHOULD we speak of in Mademoiselle's presence?"

"But are not these papers valuable?" asked Rosey, partly to draw her
host's thoughts back to their former channel.

"Perhaps."  He paused and regarded the young girl fixedly.  "Does
Mademoiselle think so?"

"I don't know," said Rosey.  "How should I?"

"Ah! if Mademoiselle thought so--if Mademoiselle would deign--"  He
stopped again and placed his hand upon his forehead.  "It might be so!"
he muttered.

"I must go now," said Rosey, hurriedly, rising with an awkward sense of
constraint.  "Father will wonder where I am."

"I shall explain.  I will accompany you, Mademoiselle."

"No, no," said Rosey, quickly; "he must not know I have been here!" She
stopped.  The honest blush flew to her cheek, and then returned again,
because she had blushed.

De Ferrieres gazed at her with an exalted look.  Then drawing himself
to his full height, he said, with an exaggerated and indescribable
gesture, "Go, my child, go.  Tell your father that you have been alone
and unprotected in the abode of poverty and suffering, but--that it was
in the presence of Armand de Ferrieres."

He threw open the door with a bow that nearly swept the ground, but did
not again offer to take her hand.  At once impressed and embarrassed at
this crowning incongruity, her pretty lip trembled between a smile and
a cry as she said, "Good-night," and slipped away into the darkness.

Erect and grotesque de Ferrieres retained the same attitude until the
sound of her footsteps was lost, when he slowly began to close the
door.  But a strong arm arrested it from without, and a large carpeted
foot appeared at the bottom of the narrowing opening.  The door
yielded, and Mr. Abner Nott entered the room.



IV

With an exclamation and a hurried glance around him, de Ferrieres threw
himself before the intruder.  But slowly lifting his large hand, and
placing it on his lodger's breast, he quietly overbore the sick man's
feeble resistance with an impact of power that seemed almost as moral
as it was physical.  He did not appear to take any notice of the room
or its miserable surroundings; indeed, scarcely of the occupant.  Still
pushing him, with abstracted eyes and immobile face, to the chair that
Rosey had just quitted, he made him sit down, and then took up his own
position on the pile of cushions opposite.  His usually underdone
complexion was of watery blueness; but his dull, abstracted glance
appeared to exercise a certain dumb, narcotic fascination on his lodger.

"I mout," said Nott, slowly, "hev laid ye out here on sight, without
enny warnin', or dropped ye in yer tracks in Montgomery Street,
wherever ther was room to work a six-shooter in comf'ably? Johnson, of
Petaluny--him, ye know, ez had a game eye--fetched Flynn comin' outer
meetin' one Sunday, and it was only on account of his wife, and she a
second-hand one, so to speak.  There was Walker, of Contra Costa,
plugged that young Sacramento chap, whose name I disremember, full o'
holes just ez HE was sayin' 'Good by' to his darter.  I mout hev done
all this if it had settled things to please me.  For while you and
Flynn and that Sacramento chap ez all about the same sort o' men,
Rosey's a different kind from their sort o' women."

"Mademoiselle is an angel!" said de Ferrieres, suddenly rising, with an
excess of extravagance.  "A saint!  Look!  I cram the lie, ha! down his
throat who challenges it."

"Ef by mam'selle ye mean my Rosey," said Nott, quietly laying his
powerful hands on de Ferrieres's shoulders, and slowly pinning him down
again upon his chair, "ye're about right, though she ain't mam'selle
yet.  Ez I was sayin', I might hev killed you off-hand if I hed thought
it would hev been a good thing for Rosey."

"For her?  Ah, well!  Look, I am ready," interrupted de Ferrieres,
again springing to his feet, and throwing open his coat with both
hands.  "See! here at my heart--fire!"

"Ez I was sayin'," continued Nott, once more pressing the excited man
down in his chair, "I might hev wiped ye out--and mebbee ye wouldn't
hev keered--or YOU might hev wiped ME out, and I mout hev said,
'Thank'ee,' but I reckon this ain't a case for what's comf'able for you
and me.  It's what's good for ROSEY.  And the thing to kalkilate is,
what's to be done."

His small round eyes for the first time rested on de Ferrieres's face,
and were quickly withdrawn.  It was evident that this abstracted look,
which had fascinated his lodger, was merely a resolute avoidance of de
Ferrieres's glance, and it became apparent later that this avoidance
was due to a ludicrous appreciation of de Ferrieres's attractions.

"And after we've done THAT we must kalkilate what Rosey is, and what
Rosey wants.  P'raps, ye allow, YOU know what Rosey is? P'raps you've
seen her prance round in velvet bonnets and white satin slippers, and
sich.  P'raps you've seen her readin' tracks and v'yages, without
waitin' to spell a word, or catch her breath. But that ain't the Rosey
ez I know.  It's a little child ez uster crawl in and out the
tail-board of a Mizzouri wagon on the alcali pizoned plains, where
there wasn't another bit of God's mercy on yearth to be seen for miles
and miles.  It's a little gal as uster hunger and thirst ez quiet and
mannerly ez she now eats and drinks in plenty; whose voice was ez
steady with Injins yelling round her nest in the leaves on Sweetwater
ez in her purty cabin up yonder. THAT'S the gal ez I know!  That's the
Rosey ez my ole woman puts into my arms one night arter we left Laramie
when the fever was high, and sez, 'Abner,' sez she, 'the chariot is
swingin' low for me to-night, but thar ain't room in it for her or you
to git in or hitch on.  Take her and rare her, so we kin all jine on
the other shore,' sez she.  And I'd knowed the other shore wasn't no
Kaliforny.  And that night, p'raps, the chariot swung lower than ever
before, and my ole woman stepped into it, and left me and Rosey to
creep on in the old wagon alone.  It's them kind o' things," added Mr.
Nott thoughtfully, "that seem to pint to my killin' you on sight ez the
best thing to be done.  And yet Rosey mightn't like it."

He had slipped one of his feet out of his huge carpet slippers, and, as
he reached down to put it on again, he added calmly: "And ez to yer
marrying HER it ain't to be done."

The utterly bewildered expression which transfigured de Ferrieres's
face at this announcement was unobserved by Nott's averted eyes, nor
did he perceive that his listener the next moment straightened his
erect figure and adjusted his cravat.

"Ef Rosey," he continued, "hez read in vy'ges and tracks in Eyetalian
and French countries of such chaps ez you and kalkilates you're the
right kind to tie to, mebbee it mout hev done if you'd been livin' over
thar in a pallis, but somehow it don't jibe in over here and agree with
a ship--and that ship lying comf'able ashore in San Francisco.  You
don't seem to suit the climate, you see, and your general gait is
likely to stampede the other cattle. Agin," said Nott, with an
ostentation of looking at his companion but really gazing on vacancy,
"this fixed up, antique style of yours goes better with them ivy
kivered ruins in Rome and Palmyry that Rosey's mixed you up with, than
it would yere.  I ain't saying," he added as de Ferrieres was about to
speak, "I ain't sayin' ez that child ain't smitten with ye.  It ain't
no use to lie and say she don't prefer you to her old father, or young
chaps of her own age and kind.  I've seed it afor now.  I suspicioned
it afor I seed her slip out o' this place to-night.  Thar! keep your
hair on, such ez it is!" he added as de Ferrieres attempted a quick
deprecatory gesture.  "I ain't askin yer how often she comes here, nor
what she sez to you nor you to her.  I ain't asked her and I don't ask
you.  I'll allow ez you've settled all the preliminaries and bought her
the ring and sich; I'm only askin' you now, kalkilatin you've got all
the keerds in your own hand, what you'll take to step out and leave the
board?"

The dazed look of de Ferrieres might have forced itself even upon
Nott's one-idead fatuity, had it not been a part of that gentleman's
system delicately to look another way at that moment so as not to
embarrass his adversary's calculation.  "Pardon," stammered de
Ferrieres, "but I do not comprehend!"  He raised his hand to his head.
"I am not well--I am stupid.  Ah, mon Dieu!"

"I ain't sayin'," added Nott more gently, "ez you don't feel bad. It's
nat'ral.  But it ain't business.  I'm asking you," he continued, taking
from his breast-pocket a large wallet, "how much you'll take in cash
now, and the rest next steamer day, to give up Rosey and leave the
ship."

De Ferrieres staggered to his feet despite Nott's restraining hand. "To
leave Mademoiselle and leave the ship?" he said huskily, "is it not?"

"In course.  Yer can leave things yer just ez you found 'em when you
came, you know," continued Nott, for the first time looking around the
miserable apartment.  "It's a business job.  I'll take the bales back
ag'in, and you kin reckon up what you're out, countin' Rosey and loss
o' time."

"He wishes me to go--he has said," repeated de Ferrieres to himself
thickly.

"Ef you mean ME when you say HIM, and ez thar ain't any other man
around, I reckon you do--'yes!'"

"And he asks me--he--this man of the feet and the daughter--asks me--de
Ferrieres--what I will take," continued de Ferrieres, buttoning his
coat.  "No! it is a dream!"  He walked stiffly to the corner where his
portmanteau lay, lifted it, and going to the outer door, a cut through
the ship's side that communicated with the alley, unlocked it and flung
it open to the night.  A thick mist like the breath of the ocean flowed
into the room.

"You ask me what I shall take to go," he said as he stood on the
threshold.  "I shall take what YOU cannot give, Monsieur, but what I
would not keep if I stood here another moment.  I take my Honor,
Monsieur, and--I take my leave!"

For a moment his grotesque figure was outlined in the opening, and then
disappeared as if he had dropped into an invisible ocean below.
Stupefied and disconcerted at this complete success of his overtures,
Abner Nott remained speechless, gazing at the vacant space until a cold
influx of the mist recalled him.  Then he rose and shuffled quickly to
the door.

"Hi!  Ferrers!  Look yer--Say!  Wot's your hurry, pardner?"

But there was no response.  The thick mist, which hid the surrounding
objects, seemed to deaden all sound also.  After a moment's pause he
closed the door, but did not lock it, and retreating to the centre of
the room remained blinking at the two candles and plucking some
perplexing problem from his beard. Suddenly an idea seized him.  Rosey!
Where was she?  Perhaps it had been a preconcerted plan, and she had
fled with him.  Putting out the lights, he stumbled hurriedly through
the passage to the gangway above.  The cabin-door was open; there was
the sound of voices--Renshaw's and Rosey's.  Mr. Nott felt relieved but
not unembarrassed.  He would have avoided his daughter's presence that
evening.  But even while making this resolution with characteristic
infelicity he blundered into the room.  Rosey looked up with a slight
start; Renshaw's animated face was changed to its former expression of
inward discontent.

"You came in so like a ghost, father," said Rosey with a slight
peevishness that was new to her.  "And I thought you were in town.
Don't go, Mr. Renshaw."

But Mr. Renshaw intimated that he had already trespassed upon Miss
Nott's time, and that no doubt her father wanted to talk with her. To
his surprise and annoyance, however, Mr. Nott insisted on accompanying
him to his room, and without heeding Renshaw's cold "Good-night,"
entered and closed the door behind him.

"P'rap's," said Mr. Nott with a troubled air, "you disremember that
when you first kem here you asked me if you could hev that 'er loft
that the Frenchman had down stairs."

"No, I don't remember it," said Renshaw almost rudely.  "But," he
added, after a pause, with an air of a man obliged to revive a stale
and unpleasant memory, "if I did--what about it?"

"Nuthin', only that you kin hev it to-morrow, ez that 'ere Frenchman is
movin' out," responded Nott.  "I thought you was sorter keen about it
when you first kem."

"Umph! we'll talk about it to-morrow."  Something in the look of
wearied perplexity with which Mr. Nott was beginning to regard his own
mal a propos presence, arrested the young man's attention. "What's the
reason you didn't sell this old ship long ago, take a decent house in
the town, and bring up your daughter like a lady?" he asked with a
sudden blunt good humor.  But even this implied blasphemy against the
habitation he worshiped did not prevent Mr. Nott from his usual
misconstruction of the question.

"I reckon, now, Rosey's got high-flown ideas of livin' in a castle with
ruins, eh?" he said cunningly.

"Haven't heard her say," returned Renshaw abruptly.  "Good-night."

Firmly convinced that Rosey had been unable to conceal from Mr. Renshaw
the influence of her dreams of a castellated future with de Ferrieres,
he regained the cabin.  Satisfying himself that his daughter had
retired, he sought his own couch.  But not to sleep. The figure of de
Ferrieres, standing in the ship side and melting into the outer
darkness, haunted him, and compelled him in dreams to rise and follow
him through the alleys and by-ways of the crowded city.  Again, it was
a part of his morbid suspicion that he now invested the absent man with
a potential significance and an unknown power.  What deep-laid plans
might he not form to possess himself of Rosey, of which he, Abner Nott,
would be ignorant? Unchecked by the restraint of a father's roof he
would now give full license to his power.  "Said he'd take his Honor
with him," muttered Abner to himself in the dim watches of the night;
"lookin' at that sayin' in its right light, it looks bad."



V

The elaborately untruthful account which Mr. Nott gave his daughter of
de Ferrieres's sudden departure was more fortunate than his usual
equivocations.  While it disappointed and slightly mortified her, it
did not seem to her inconsistent with what she already knew of him.
"Said his doctor had ordered him to quit town under an hour, owing to a
comin' attack of hay fever, and he had a friend from furrin parts
waitin' him at the Springs, Rosey," explained Nott, hesitating between
his desire to avoid his daughter's eyes and his wish to observe her
countenance.

"Was he worse?--I mean did he look badly, father?" inquired Rosey
thoughtfully.

"I reckon not exackly bad.  Kinder looked ez if he mout be worse soon
ef he didn't hump hisself."

"Did you see him?--in his room?" asked Rosey anxiously.  Upon the
answer to this simple question depended the future confidential
relations of father and daughter.  If her father had himself detected
the means by which his lodger existed, she felt that her own
obligations to secrecy had been removed.  But Mr. Nott's answer
disposed of this vain hope.  It was a response after his usual fashion
to the question he IMAGINED she artfully wished to ask, i. e. if he had
discovered their rendezvous of the previous night. This it was part of
his peculiar delicacy to ignore.  Yet his reply showed that he had been
unconscious of the one miserable secret that he might have read easily.

"I was there an hour or so--him and me alone--discussin' trade.  I
reckon he's got a good thing outer that curled horse hair, for I see
he's got in an invoice o' cushions.  I've stored 'em all in the forrard
bulkhead until he sends for 'em, ez Mr. Renshaw hez taken the loft."

But although Mr. Renshaw had taken the loft, he did not seem in haste
to occupy it.  He spent part of the morning in uneasily pacing his
room, in occasional sallies into the street from which he purposelessly
returned, and once or twice in distant and furtive contemplation of
Rosey at work in the galley.  This last observation was not unnoticed
by the astute Nott, who at once conceiving that he was nourishing a
secret and hopeless passion for Rosey, began to consider whether it was
not his duty to warn the young man of her preoccupied affections.  But
Mr. Renshaw's final disappearance obliged him to withhold his
confidence till morning.

This time Mr. Renshaw left the ship with the evident determination of
some settled purpose.  He walked rapidly until he reached the
counting-house of Mr. Sleight, when he was at once shown into a private
office.  In a few moments Mr. Sleight, a brusque but passionless man,
joined him.

"Well," said Sleight, closing the door carefully.  "What news?"

"None," said Renshaw bluntly.  "Look here, Sleight," he added, turning
to him suddenly.  "Let me out of this game.  I don't like it."

"Does that mean you've found nothing?" asked Sleight, sarcastically.

"It means that I haven't looked for anything, and that I don't intend
to without the full knowledge of that d----d fool who owns the ship."

"You've changed your mind since you wrote that letter," said Sleight
coolly, producing from a drawer the note already known to the reader.
Renshaw mechanically extended his hand to take it. Mr. Sleight dropped
the letter back into the drawer, which he quietly locked.  The
apparently simple act dyed Mr. Renshaw's cheek with color, but it
vanished quickly, and with it any token of his previous embarrassment.
He looked at Sleight with the convinced air of a resolute man who had
at last taken a disagreeable step but was willing to stand by the
consequences.

"I HAVE changed my mind," he said coolly.  "I found out that it was one
thing to go down there as a skilled prospector might go to examine a
mine that was to be valued according to his report of the indications,
but that it was entirely another thing to go and play the spy in a poor
devil's house in order to buy something he didn't know he was selling
and wouldn't sell if he did."

"And something that the man HE bought of didn't think of selling;
something HE himself never paid for, and never expected to buy,"
sneered Sleight.

"But something that WE expect to buy from our knowledge of all this,
and it is that which makes all the difference."

"But you knew all this before."

"I never saw it in this light before!  I never thought of it until I
was living there face to face with the old fool I was intending to
overreach.  I never was SURE of it until this morning, when he actually
turned out one of his lodgers that I might have the very room I
required to play off our little game in comfortably.  When he did that,
I made up my mind to drop the whole thing, and I'm here to do it."

"And let somebody else take the responsibility--with the
percentage--unless you've also felt it your duty to warn Nott too,"
said Sleight with a sneer.

"You only dare say that to me, Sleight," said Renshaw quietly, "because
you have in that drawer an equal evidence of my folly and my
confidence; but if you are wise you will not presume too far on either.
Let us see how we stand.  Through the yarn of a drunken captain and a
mutinous sailor you became aware of an unclaimed shipment of treasure,
concealed in an unknown ship that entered this harbor.  You are
enabled, through me, to corroborate some facts and identify the ship.
You proposed to me, as a speculation, to identify the treasure if
possible before you purchased the ship. I accepted the offer without
consideration; on consideration I now decline it, but without prejudice
or loss to any one but myself. As to your insinuation I need not remind
you that my presence here to-day refutes it.  I would not require your
permission to make a much better bargain with a good natured fool like
Nott than I could with you.  Or if I did not care for the business I
could have warned the girl--"

"The girl--what girl?"

Renshaw bit his lip but answered boldly, "The old man's daughter--a
poor girl--whom this act would rob as well as her father."

Sleight looked at his companion attentively.  "You might have said so
at first, and let up on this camp-meetin' exhortation.  Well
then--admitting you've got the old man and the young girl on the same
string, and that you've played it pretty low down in the short time
you've been there--I suppose, Dick Renshaw, I've got to see your bluff.
Well, how much is it!  What's the figure you and she have settled on?"

For an instant Mr. Sleight was in physical danger.  But before he had
finished speaking Renshaw's quick sense of the ludicrous had so far
overcome his first indignation as to enable him even to admire the
perfect moral insensibility of his companion.  As he rose and walked
towards the door, he half wondered that he had ever treated the affair
seriously.  With a smile he replied:

"Far from bluffing, Sleight, I am throwing my cards on the table.
Consider that I've passed out.  Let some other man take my hand. Rake
down the pot if you like, old man, I leave for Sacramento to-night.
Adios."

When the door had closed behind him Mr. Sleight summoned his clerk.

"Is that petition for grading Pontiac Street ready?"

"I've seen the largest property holders, sir; they're only waiting for
you to sign first."  Mr. Sleight paused and then affixed his signature
to the paper his clerk laid before him.  "Get the other names and send
it up at once."

"If Mr. Nott doesn't sign, sir?"

"No matter.  He will be assessed all the same."  Mr. Sleight took up
his hat.

"The Lascar seaman that was here the other day has been wanting to see
you, sir.  I said you were busy."

Mr. Sleight put down his hat.  "Send him up."

Nevertheless Mr. Sleight sat down and at once abstracted himself so
completely as to be apparently in utter oblivion of the man who
entered.  He was lithe and Indian-looking; bearing in dress and manner
the careless slouch without the easy frankness of a sailor.

"Well!" said Sleight without looking up.

"I was only wantin' to know ef you had any news for me, boss?"

"News?" echoed Sleight as if absently; "news of what?"

"That little matter of the Pontiac we talked about, boss," returned the
Lascar with an uneasy servility in the whites of his teeth and eyes.

"Oh," said Sleight, "that's played out.  It's a regular fraud. It's an
old forecastle yarn, my man, that you can't reel off in the cabin."

The sailor's face darkened.

"The man who was looking into it has thrown the whole thing up.  I tell
you it's played out!" repeated Sleight, without raising his head.

"It's true, boss--every word," said the Lascar, with an appealing
insinuation that seemed to struggle hard with savage earnestness. "You
can swear me, boss; I wouldn't lie to a gentleman like you. Your man
hasn't half looked, or else--it must be there, or--"

"That's just it," said Sleight slowly; "who's to know that your friends
haven't been there already?--that seems to have been your style."

"But no one knew it but me, until I told you, I swear to God.  I ain't
lying, boss, and I ain't drunk.  Say--don't give it up, boss. That man
of yours likely don't believe it, because he don't know anything about
it.  I DO--I could find it."

A silence followed.  Mr. Sleight remained completely absorbed in his
papers for some moments.  Then glancing at the Lascar, he took his pen,
wrote a hurried note, folded it, addressed it, and, holding it between
his fingers, leaned back in his chair.

"If you choose to take this note to my man, he may give it another
show.  Mind, I don't say that he WILL.  He's going to Sacramento
to-night, but you could go down there and find him before he starts.
He's got a room there, I believe.  While you're waiting for him, you
might keep your eyes open to satisfy yourself."

"Ay, ay, sir," said the sailor, eagerly endeavoring to catch the eye of
his employer.  But Mr. Sleight looked straight before him, and he
turned to go.

"The Sacramento boat goes at nine," said Mr. Sleight quietly.

This time their glances met, and the Lascar's eye glistened with subtle
intelligence.  The next moment he was gone, and Mr. Sleight again
became absorbed in his papers.

Meanwhile Renshaw was making his way back to the Pontiac with that
light-hearted optimism that had characterized his parting with Sleight.
It was this quality of his nature, fostered perhaps by the easy
civilization in which he moved, that had originally drawn him into
relations with the man he had just quitted; a quality that had been
troubled and darkened by those relations, yet, when they were broken,
at once returned.  It consequently did not occur to him that he had
only selfishly compromised with the difficulty; it seemed to him enough
that he had withdrawn from a compact he thought dishonorable; he was
not called upon to betray his partner in that compact merely to benefit
others.  He had been willing to incur suspicion and loss to reinstate
himself in his self-respect, more he could not do without justifying
that suspicion.  The view taken by Sleight was, after all, that which
most business men would take--which even the unbusiness-like Nott would
take--which the girl herself might be tempted to listen to.  Clearly he
could do nothing but abandon the Pontiac and her owner to the fate he
could not in honor avert.  And even that fate was problematical.  It
did not follow that the treasure was still concealed in the Pontiac,
nor that Nott would be willing to sell her.  He would make some excuse
to Nott--he smiled to think he would probably be classed in the long
line of absconding tenants--he would say good-by to Rosey, and leave
for Sacramento that night.  He ascended the stairs to the gangway with
a freer breast than when he first entered the ship.

Mr. Nott was evidently absent, and after a quick glance at the
half-open cabin door, Renshaw turned towards the galley.  But Miss
Rosey was not in her accustomed haunt, and with a feeling of
disappointment, which seemed inconsistent with so slight a cause, he
crossed the deck impatiently and entered his room.  He was about to
close the door when the prolonged rustle of a trailing skirt in the
passage attracted his attention.  The sound was so unlike that made by
any garment worn by Rosey that he remained motionless, with his hand on
the door.  The sound approached nearer, and the next moment a white
veiled figure with a trailing skirt slowly swept past the room.
Renshaw's pulses halted for an instant in half superstitious awe.  As
the apparition glided on and vanished in the cabin door he could only
see that it was the form of a beautiful and graceful woman--but nothing
more.  Bewildered and curious, he forgot himself so far as to follow
it, and impulsively entered the cabin.  The figure turned, uttered a
little cry, threw the veil aside, and showed the half troubled, half
blushing face of Rosey.

"I--beg--your pardon," stammered Renshaw; "I didn't know it was you."

"I was trying on some things," said Rosey, recovering her composure and
pointing to an open trunk that seemed to contain a theatrical
wardrobe--"some things father gave me long ago.  I wanted to see if
there was anything I could use.  I thought I was all alone in the ship,
but fancying I heard a noise forward I came out to see what it was.  I
suppose it must have been you."

She raised her clear eyes to his, with a slight touch of womanly
reserve that was so incompatible with any vulgar vanity or girlish
coquetry that he became the more embarrassed.  Her dress, too, of a
slightly antique shape, rich but simple, seemed to reveal and accent a
certain repose of gentlewomanliness, that he was now wishing to believe
he had always noticed.  Conscious of a superiority in her that now
seemed to change their relations completely, he alone remained silent,
awkward, and embarrassed before the girl who had taken care of his
room, and who cooked in the galley!  What he had thoughtlessly
considered a merely vulgar business intrigue against her stupid father,
now to his extravagant fancy assumed the proportions of a sacrilege to
herself.

"You've had your revenge, Miss Nott, for the fright I once gave you,"
he said a little uneasily, "for you quite startled me just now as you
passed.  I began to think the Pontiac was haunted.  I thought you were
a ghost.  I don't know why such a ghost should FRIGHTEN anybody," he
went on with a desperate attempt to recover his position by gallantry.
"Let me see--that's Donna Elvira's dress--is it not?"

"I don't think that was the poor woman's name," said Rosey simply; "she
died of yellow fever at New Orleans as Signora somebody."

Her ignorance seemed to Mr. Renshaw so plainly to partake more of the
nun than the provincial that he hesitated to explain to her that he
meant the heroine of an opera.

"It seems dreadful to put on the poor thing's clothes, doesn't it?" she
added.

Mr. Renshaw's eyes showed so plainly that he thought otherwise, that
she drew a little austerely towards the door of her state-room.

"I must change these things before any one comes," she said dryly.

"That means I must go, I suppose.  But couldn't you let me wait here or
in the gangway until then, Miss Nott?  I am going away to-night, and I
mayn't see you again."  He had not intended to say this, but it slipped
from his embarrassed tongue.  She stopped with her hand on the door.

"You are going away?"

"I--think--I must leave to-night.  I have some important business in
Sacramento."

She raised her frank eyes to his.  The unmistakable look of
disappointment that he saw in them gave his heart a sudden throb and
sent the quick blood to his cheeks.

"It's too bad," she said, abstractedly.  "Nobody ever seems to stay
here long.  Captain Bower promised to tell me all about the ship and he
went away the second week.  The photographer left before he finished
the picture of the Pontiac; Monsieur de Ferrieres has only just gone,
and now YOU are going."

"Perhaps, unlike them, I have finished my season of usefulness here,"
he replied, with a bitterness he would have recalled the next moment.
But Rosey, with a faint sigh, saying, "I won't be long," entered the
state-room and closed the door behind her.

Renshaw bit his lip and pulled at the long silken threads of his
moustache until they smarted.  Why had he not gone at once?  Why was it
necessary to say he might not see her again--and if he had said it, why
should he add anything more?  What was he waiting for now?  To endeavor
to prove to her that he really bore no resemblance to Captain Bower,
the photographer, the crazy Frenchman de Ferrieres?  Or would he be
forced to tell her that he was running away from a conspiracy to
defraud her father--merely for something to say?  Was there ever such
folly?  Rosey was "not long," as she had said, but he was beginning to
pace the narrow cabin impatiently when the door opened and she returned.

She had resumed her ordinary calico gown, but such was the impression
left upon Renshaw's fancy that she seemed to wear it with a new grace.
At any other time he might have recognized the change as due to a new
corset, which strict veracity compels me to record Rosey had adopted
for the first time that morning.  Howbeit, her slight coquetry seemed
to have passed, for she closed the open trunk with a return of her old
listless air, and sitting on it rested her elbows on her knees and her
oval chin in her hands.

"I wish you would do me a favor," she said after a reflective pause.

"Let me know what it is and it shall be done," replied Renshaw quickly.

"If you should come across Monsieur de Ferrieres, or hear of him, I
wish you would let me know.  He was very poorly when he left here, and
I should like to know if he was better.  He didn't say where he was
going.  At least, he didn't tell father; but I fancy he and father
don't agree."

"I shall be very glad of having even THAT opportunity of making you
remember me, Miss Nott," returned Renshaw with a faint smile; "I don't
suppose either that it would be very difficult to get news of your
friend--everybody seems to know him."

"But not as I did," said Rosey with an abstracted little sigh.

Mr. Renshaw opened his brown eyes upon her.  Was he mistaken? was this
romantic girl only a little coquette playing her provincial airs on
him?  "You say he and your father didn't agree?  That means, I suppose,
that YOU and he agreed?--and that was the result."

"I don't think father knew anything about it," said Rosey simply.

Mr. Renshaw rose.  And this was what he had been waiting to hear!
"Perhaps," he said grimly, "you would also like news of the
photographer and Captain Bower, or did your father agree with them
better?"

"No," said Rosey quietly.  She remained silent for a moment, and
lifting her lashes said, "Father always seemed to agree with YOU, and
that--" she hesitated.

"That's why YOU don't."

"I didn't say that," said Rosey with an incongruous increase of
coldness and color.  "I only meant to say it was that which makes it
seem so hard you should go now."

Notwithstanding his previous determination Renshaw found himself
sitting down again.  Confused and pleased, wishing he had said more--or
less--he said nothing, and Rosey was forced to continue.

"It's strange, isn't it--but father was urging me this morning to make
a visit to some friends at the old Ranch.  I didn't want to go.  I like
it much better here."

"But you cannot bury yourself here forever, Miss Nott," said Renshaw
with a sudden burst of honest enthusiasm.  "Sooner or later you will be
forced to go where you will be properly appreciated, where you will be
admired and courted, where your slightest wish will be law.  Believe
me, without flattery, you don't know your own power."

"It doesn't seem strong enough to keep even the little I like here,"
said Rosey with a slight glistening of the eyes.  "But," she added
hastily, "you don't know how much the dear old ship is to me. It's the
only home I think I ever had."

"But the Ranch?" said Renshaw.

"The Ranch seemed to be only the old wagon halted in the road.  It was
a very little improvement on outdoors," said Rosey with a little
shiver.  "But this is so cozy and snug and yet so strange and foreign.
Do you know I think I began to understand why I like it so since you
taught me so much about ships and voyages.  Before that I only learned
from books.  Books deceive you, I think, more than people do.  Don't
you think so?"

She evidently did not notice the quick flush that covered his cheeks
and apparently dazzled his troubled eyelid for she went on
confidentially.

"I was thinking of you yesterday.  I was sitting by the galley door,
looking forward.  You remember the first day I saw you when you
startled me by coming up out of the hatch?"

"I wish you wouldn't think of that," said Renshaw, with more
earnestness than he would have made apparent.

"I don't want to either," said Rosey, gravely, "for I've had a strange
fancy about it.  I saw once when I was younger, a picture in a print
shop in Montgomery Street that haunted me.  I think it was called 'The
Pirate.'  There was a number of wicked-looking sailors lying around the
deck, and coming out of a hatch was one figure with his hands on the
deck and a cutlass in his mouth."

"Thank you," said Renshaw.

"You don't understand.  He was horrid-looking, not at all like you. I
never thought of HIM when I first saw you; but the other day I thought
how dreadful it would have been if some one like him and not like you
had come up then.  That made me nervous sometimes of being alone.  I
think father is too.  He often goes about stealthily at night, as if he
was watching for something."

Renshaw's face grew suddenly dark.  Could it be possible that Sleight
had always suspected him, and set spies to watch--or was he guilty of
some double intrigue?

"He thinks," continued Rosey with a faint smile, "that some one is
looking around the ship, and talks of setting bear-traps.  I hope
you're not mad, Mr. Renshaw," she added, suddenly catching sight of his
changed expression, "at my foolishness in saying you reminded me of the
pirate.  I meant nothing."

"I know you're incapable of meaning anything but good to anybody, Miss
Nott, perhaps to me more than I deserve," said Renshaw with a sudden
burst of feeling.  "I wish--I wish--you would do ME a favor. YOU asked
me one just now."  He had taken her hand.  It seemed so like a mere
illustration of his earnestness, that she did not withdraw it.  "Your
father tells you everything.  If he has any offer to dispose of the
ship, will you write to me at once before anything is concluded?"  He
winced a little--the sentence of Sleight, "What's the figure you and
she have settled upon?" flashed across his mind.  He scarcely noticed
that Rosey had withdrawn her hand coldly.

"Perhaps you had better speak to father, as it is HIS business.
Besides, I shall not be here.  I shall be at the Ranch."

"But you said you didn't want to go?"

"I've changed my mind," said Rosey listlessly.  "I shall go to-night."

She rose as if to indicate that the interview was ended.  With an
overpowering instinct that his whole future happiness depended upon his
next act, he made a step towards her, with eager outstretched hands.
But she slightly lifted her own with a warning gesture, "I hear father
coming--you will have a chance to talk BUSINESS with him," she said,
and vanished into her state-room.



VI

The heavy tread of Abner Nott echoed in the passage.  Confused and
embarrassed, Renshaw remained standing at the door that had closed upon
Rosey as her father entered the cabin.  Providence, which always
fostered Mr. Nott's characteristic misconceptions, left that
perspicacious parent but one interpretation of the situation. Rosey had
evidently just informed Mr. Renshaw that she loved another!

"I was just saying 'good-by' to Miss Nott," said Renshaw, hastily
regaining his composure with an effort.  "I am going to Sacramento
to-night, and will not return.  I--"

"In course, in course," interrupted Nott, soothingly; "that's wot you
say now, and that's what you allow to do.  That's wot they allus do."

"I mean," said Renshaw, reddening at what he conceived to be an
allusion to the absconding propensities of Nott's previous tenants,--"I
mean that you shall keep the advance to cover any loss you might suffer
through my giving up the rooms."

"Certingly," said Nott, laying his hand with a large sympathy on
Renshaw's shoulder; "but we'll drop that just now.  We won't swap
hosses in the middle of the river.  We'll square up accounts in your
room," he added, raising his voice that Rosey might overhear him, after
a preliminary wink at the young man.  "Yes, sir, we'll just square up
and settle in there.  Come along, Mr. Renshaw." Pushing him with
paternal gentleness from the cabin, with his hand still upon his
shoulder, he followed him into the passage.  Half annoyed at his
familiarity, yet not altogether displeased by this illustration of
Rosey's belief of his preference, Renshaw wonderingly accompanied him.
Nott closed the door, and pushing the young man into a chair,
deliberately seated himself at the table opposite.  "It's just as well
that Rosey reckons that you and me is settlin' our accounts," he began,
cunningly, "and mebbee it's just ez well ez she should reckon you're
goin' away."

"But I AM going," interrupted Renshaw, impatiently.  "I leave to-night."

"Surely, surely," said Nott, gently, "that's wot you kalkilate to do;
that's just nat'ral in a young feller.  That's about what I reckon I'D
hev done to her mother if anythin' like this hed ever cropped up, which
it didn't.  Not but what Almiry Jane had young fellers enough round
her, but, 'cept ole Judge Peter, ez was lamed in the War of 1812, there
ain't no similarity ez I kin see," he added, musingly.

"I am afraid I can't see any similarity either, Mr. Nott," said
Renshaw, struggling between a dawning sense of some impending absurdity
and his growing passion for Rosey.  "For Heaven's sake speak out if
you've got anything to say."

Mr. Nott leaned forward, and placed his large hand on the young man's
shoulder.  "That's it.  That's what I sed to myself when I seed how
things were pintin'.  'Speak out,' sez I, 'Abner!  Speak out if you've
got anything to say.  You kin trust this yer Mr. Renshaw.  He ain't the
kind of man to creep into the bosom of a man's ship for pupposes of his
own.  He ain't a man that would hunt round until he discovered a poor
man's treasure, and then try to rob--'"

"Stop!" said Renshaw, with a set face and darkening eyes.  "WHAT
treasure? WHAT man are you speaking of?"

"Why Rosey and Mr. Ferrers," returned Nott, simply.

Renshaw sank into his seat again.  But the expression of relief which
here passed swiftly over his face gave way to one of uneasy interest as
Nott went on.

"P'r'aps it's a little highfalutin talkin' of Rosey ez a treasure. But,
considerin', Mr. Renshaw, ez she's the only prop'ty I've kept by me for
seventeen years ez hez paid interest and increased in valooe, it ain't
sayin' too much to call her so.  And ez Ferrers knows this, he oughter
been content with gougin' me in that horse-hair spec, without goin' for
Rosey.  P'r'aps yer surprised at hearing me speak o' my own flesh and
blood ez if I was talkin' hoss-trade, but you and me is bus'ness men,
Mr. Renshaw, and we discusses ez such.  We ain't goin' to slosh round
and slop over in po'try and sentiment," continued Nott, with a
tremulous voice, and a hand that slightly shook on Renshaw's shoulder.
"We ain't goin' to git up and sing, 'Thou'st larned to love another
thou'st broken every vow we've parted from each other and my bozom's
lonely now oh is it well to sever such hearts as ourn for ever kin I
forget thee never farewell farewell farewell.'  Ye never happen'd to
hear Jim Baker sing that at the moosic hall on Dupont Street, Mr.
Renshaw," continued Mr. Nott, enthusiastically, when he had recovered
from that complete absence of punctuation which alone suggested verse
to his intellect.  "He sorter struck water down here," indicating his
heart, "every time."

"But what has Miss Nott to do with M. de Ferrieres?" asked Renshaw,
with a faint smile.

Mr. Nott regarded him with dumb, round, astonished eyes.  "Hezn't she
told yer?"

"Certainly not."

"And she didn't let on anythin' about him?" he continued, feebly.

"She said she'd liked to know where--"  He stopped, with the reflection
that he was betraying her confidences.

A dim foreboding of some new form of deceit, to which even the man
before him was a consenting party, almost paralyzed Nott's faculties.
"Then she didn't tell yer that she and Ferrers was sparkin' and keepin'
kimpany together; that she and him was engaged, and was kalkilatin' to
run away to furrin parts; that she cottoned to him more than to the
ship or her father?"

"She certainly did not, and I shouldn't believe it," said Renshaw,
quickly.

Nott smiled.  He was amused; he astutely recognized the usual
trustfulness of love and youth.  There was clearly no deceit here!
Renshaw's attentive eyes saw the smile, and his brow darkened.

"I like to hear yer say that, Mr. Renshaw," said Nott, "and it's no
more than Rosey deserves, ez it's suthing onnat'ral and spell-like
that's come over her through Ferrers.  It ain't my Rosey.  But it's
Gospel truth, whether she's bewitched or not; whether it's them damn
fool stories she reads--and it's like ez not he's just the kind o'
snipe to write 'em hisself, and sorter advertise hisself, don't yer
see--she's allus stuck up for him.  They've had clandesent interviews,
and when I taxed him with it he ez much ez allowed it was so, and
reckoned he must leave, so ez he could run her off, you know--kinder
stampede her with 'honor.'  Them's his very words."

"But that is all past; he is gone, and Miss Nott does not even know
where he is!" said Renshaw, with a laugh, which, however, concealed a
vague uneasiness.

Mr. Nott rose and opened the door carefully.  When he had satisfied
himself that no one was listening, he came back and said in a whisper,
"That's a lie.  Not ez Rosey means to lie, but it's a trick he's put
upon that poor child.  That man, Mr. Renshaw, hez been hangin' round
the Pontiac ever since.  I've seed him twice with my own eyes pass the
cabin windys.  More than that, I've heard strange noises at night, and
seen strange faces in the alley over yer.  And only jist now ez I kem
in I ketched sight of a furrin lookin' Chinee nigger slinking round the
back door of what useter be Ferrers's loft."

"Did he look like a sailor?" asked Renshaw quickly, with a return of
his former suspicion.

"Not more than I do," said Nott, glancing complacently at his
pea-jacket.  "He had rings on his yeers like a wench."

Mr. Renshaw started.  But seeing Nott's eyes fixed on him, he said
lightly, "But what have these strange faces and this strange
man--probably only a Lascar sailor out of a job--to do with Ferrieres?"

"Friends o' his--feller furrin citizens--spies on Rosey, don't you see?
But they can't play the old man, Mr. Renshaw.  I've told Rosey she must
make a visit to the old Ranch.  Once I've got her ther safe, I reckon I
kin manage Mr. Ferrers and any number of Chinee niggers he kin bring
along."

Renshaw remained for a few moments lost in thought.  Then rising
suddenly he grasped Mr. Nott's hand with a frank smile but determined
eyes.  "I haven't got the hang of this, Mr. Nott--the whole thing gets
me!  I only know that I've changed my mind.  I'm NOT going to
Sacramento.  I shall stay HERE, old man, until I see you safe through
the business, or my name's not Dick Renshaw. There's my hand on it!
Don't say a word.  Maybe it is no more than I ought to do--perhaps not
half enough.  Only remember, not a word of this to your daughter.  She
must believe that I leave to-night. And the sooner you get her out of
this cursed ship the better."

"Deacon Flint's girls are goin' up in to-night's boat.  I'll send Rosey
with them," said Nott with a cunning twinkle.  Renshaw nodded.  Nott
seized his hand with a wink of unutterable significance.

Left to himself Renshaw tried to review more calmly the circumstances
in these strange revelations that had impelled him to change his
resolution so suddenly.  That the ship was under the surveillance of
unknown parties, and that the description of them tallied with his own
knowledge of a certain Lascar sailor, who was one of Sleight's
informants--seemed to be more than probable.  That this seemed to point
to Sleight's disloyalty to himself while he was acting as his agent, or
a double treachery on the part of Sleight's informants was in either
case a reason and an excuse for his own interference.  But the
connection of the absurd Frenchman with the case, which at first seemed
a characteristic imbecility of his landlord, bewildered him the more he
thought of it.  Rejecting any hypothesis of the girl's affection for
the antiquated figure whose sanity was a question of public criticism,
he was forced to the equally alarming theory that Ferrieres was
cognizant of the treasure, and that his attentions to Rosey were to
gain possession of it by marrying her.  Might she not be dazzled by a
picture of this wealth?  Was it not possible that she was already in
part possession of the secret, and her strange attraction to the ship,
and what he had deemed her innocent craving for information concerning
it, a consequence?  Why had he not thought of this before?  Perhaps she
had detected his purpose from the first, and had deliberately
checkmated him.  The thought did not increase his complacency as Nott
softly returned.

"It's all right," he began with a certain satisfaction in this rare
opportunity for Machiavellian diplomacy, "it's all fixed now. Rosey
tumbled to it at once, partiklerly when I said you was bound to go.
'But wot makes Mr. Renshaw go, father,' sez she; 'wot makes everybody
run away from the ship?' sez she, rather peart like and sassy for her.
'Mr. Renshaw hez contractin' business,' sez I; 'got a big thing up in
Sacramento that'll make his fortun',' sez I--for I wasn't goin' to give
yer away, don't ye see.  'He had some business to talk to you about the
ship,' sez she, lookin' at me under the corner of her pocket
handkerchief.  'Lots o' business,' sez I.  'Then I reckon he don't care
to hev me write to him,' sez she.  'Not a bit,' sez I, 'he wouldn't
answer ye if ye did.  Ye'll never hear from that chap agin.'"

"But what the devil--" interrupted the young man impetuously.

"Keep yer hair on!" remonstrated the old man with dark intelligence.
"Ef you'd seen the way she flounced into her stateroom!--she, Rosey, ez
allus moves ez softly ez a spirit--you'd hev wished I'd hev unloaded a
little more.  No sir, gals is gals in some things all the time."

Renshaw rose and paced the room rapidly.  "Perhaps I'd better speak to
her again before she goes," he said, impulsively.

"P'r'aps you'd better not," replied the imperturbable Nott.

Irritated as he was, Renshaw could not avoid the reflection that the
old man was right.  What, indeed, could he say to her with his present
imperfect knowledge?  How could she write to him if that knowledge was
correct?

"Ef," said Nott, kindly, with a laying on of large benedictory and
paternal hands, "ef yer are willin' to see Rosey agin, without SPEAKIN'
to her, I reckon I ken fix it for yer.  I'm goin' to take her down to
the boat in half an hour.  Ef yer should happen--mind, ef yer should
HAPPEN to be down there, seein' some friends off and sorter promenadin'
up and down the wharf like them high-toned chaps on Montgomery
Street--ye might ketch her eye unconscious like.  Or, ye might do
this!"  He rose after a moment's cogitation and with a face of profound
mystery opened the door and beckoned Renshaw to follow him.  Leading
the way cautiously, he brought the young man into an open unpartitioned
recess beside her stateroom.  It seemed to be used as a storeroom, and
Renshaw's eye was caught by a trunk the size and shape of the one that
had provided Rosey with the materials of her masquerade.  Pointing to
it Mr. Nott said in a grave whisper: "This yer trunk is the companion
trunk to Rosey's. SHE'S got the things them opery women wears; this yer
contains the HE things, the duds and fixin's o' the men o' the same
stripe." Throwing it open he continued: "Now, Mr. Renshaw, gals is
gals; it's nat'ral they should be took by fancy dress and store clothes
on young chaps as on theirselves.  That man Ferrers hez got the dead
wood on all of ye in this sort of thing, and hez been playing, so to
speak, a lone hand all along.  And ef thar's anythin' in thar," he
added, lifting part of a theatrical wardrobe, "that you think you'd
fancy--anythin' you'd like to put on when ye promenade the wharf down
yonder--it's yours.  Don't ye be bashful, but help yourself."

It was fully a minute before Renshaw fairly grasped the old man's
meaning.  But when he did--when the suggested spectacle of himself
arrayed a la Ferrieres, gravely promenading the wharf as a last
gorgeous appeal to the affections of Rosey, rose before his fancy, he
gave way to a fit of genuine laughter.  The nervous tension of the past
few hours relaxed; he laughed until the tears came into his eyes; he
was still laughing when the door of the cabin was suddenly opened and
Rosey appeared cold and distant on the threshold.

"I--beg your pardon," stammered Renshaw hastily.  "I didn't mean--to
disturb you--I--"

Without looking at him Rosey turned to her father.  "I am ready," she
said coldly, and closed the door again.

A glance of artful intelligence came into Nott's eyes, which had
remained blankly staring at Renshaw's apparently causeless hilarity.
Turning to him he winked solemnly.  "That keerless kind o' hoss-laff
jist fetched her," he whispered, and vanished before his chagrined
companion could reply.

When Mr. Nott and his daughter departed Renshaw was not in the ship,
neither did he make a spectacular appearance on the wharf as Mr. Nott
had fondly expected, nor did he turn up again until after nine o'clock,
when he found the old man in the cabin awaiting his return with some
agitation.

"A minit ago," he said, mysteriously closing the door behind Renshaw,
"I heard a voice in the passage, and goin' out who should I see agin
but that darned furrin nigger ez I told yer 'bout, kinder hidin' in the
dark, his eyes shinin like a catamount, I was jist reachin' for my
weppins when he riz up with a grin and handed me this yer letter.  I
told him I reckoned you'd gone to Sacramento, but he said he wez sure
you was in your room, and to prove it I went thar.  But when I kem back
the d----d skunk had vamoosed--got frightened I reckon--and wasn't
nowhar to be seen."

Reashaw took the letter hastily.  It contained only a line in Sleight's
hand.  "If you change your mind, the bearer may be of service to you."

He turned abruptly to Nott.  "You say it was the same Lascar you saw
before."

"It was."

"Then all I can say is he is no agent of de Ferrieres's," said Renshaw,
turning away with a disappointed air.  Mr. Nott would have asked
another question, but with an abrupt "Good-night" the young man entered
his room, locked the door, and threw himself on his bed to reflect
without interruption.

But if he was in no mood to stand Nott's fatuous conjectures, he was
less inclined to be satisfied with his own.  Had he been again carried
away through his impulses evoked by the caprices of a pretty coquette
and the absurd theories of her half imbecile father?  Had he broken
faith with Sleight and remained in the ship for nothing, and would not
his change of resolution appear to be the result of Sleight's note?
But why had the Lascar been haunting the ship before?  In the midst of
these conjectures he fell asleep.



VII

Between three and four in the morning the clouds broke over the
Pontiac, and the moon, riding high, picked out in black and silver the
long hulk that lay cradled between the iron shells of warehouses and
the wooden frames of tenements on either side.  The galley and covered
gangway presented a mass of undefined shadow, against which the white
deck shone brightly, stretching to the forecastle and bows, where the
tiny glass roof of the photographer glistened like a gem in the
Pontiac's crest.  So peaceful and motionless she lay that she might
have been some petrifaction of a past age now first exhumed and laid
bare to the cold light of the stars.

Nevertheless this calm security was presently invaded by a sense of
stealthy life and motion.  What had seemed a fixed shadow suddenly
detached itself from the deck, and began to slip stanchion by stanchion
along the bulwarks toward the companion way.  At the cabin door it
halted and crouched motionless.  Then rising, it glided forward with
the same staccato movement until opposite the slight elevation of the
forehatch.  Suddenly it darted to the hatch, unfastened and lifted it
with a swift, familiar dexterity, and disappeared in the opening.  But
as the moon shone upon its vanishing face, it revealed the whitening
eyes and teeth of the Lascar seaman.

Dropping to the lower deck lightly, he felt his way through the dark
passage between the partitions, evidently less familiar to him, halting
before each door to listen.  Returning forward he reached the second
hatchway that had attracted Rosey's attention, and noiselessly unclosed
its fastenings.  A penetrating smell of bilge arose from the opening.
Drawing a small bull's-eye lantern from his breast he lit it, and
unhesitatingly let himself down to the further depth.  The moving flash
of his light revealed the recesses of the upper hold, the abyss of the
well amidships, and glanced from the shining backs of moving zig-zags
of rats that seemed to outline the shadowy beams and transoms.
Disregarding those curious spectators of his movements, he turned his
attention eagerly to the inner casings of the hold, that seemed in one
spot to have been strengthened by fresh timbers.  Attacking this
stealthily with the aid of some tools hidden in his oil-skin clothing,
in the light of the lantern he bore a fanciful resemblance to the
predatory animals around him.  The low continuous sound of rasping and
gnawing of timber which followed heightened the resemblance.  At the
end of a few minutes he had succeeded in removing enough of the outer
planking to show that the entire filling of the casing between the
stanchions was composed of small boxes.  Dragging out one of them with
feverish eagerness to the light, the Lascar forced it open.  In the
rays of the bull's-eye, a wedged mass of discolored coins showed with a
lurid glow. The story of the Pontiac was true--the treasure was there!

But Mr. Sleight had overlooked the logical effect of this discovery on
the natural villainy of his tool.  In the very moment of his triumphant
execution of his patron's suggestions the idea of keeping the treasure
to himself flashed upon his mind.  HE had discovered it--why should he
give it up to anybody?  HE had run all the risks; if he were detected
at that moment, who would believe that his purpose there at midnight
was only to satisfy some one else that the treasure was still intact?
No.  The circumstances were propitious; he would get the treasure out
of the ship at once, drop it over her side, hastily conceal it in the
nearest lot adjacent, and take it away at his convenience.--Who would
be the wiser for it?

But it was necessary to reconnoitre first.  He knew that the loft
overhead was empty.  He knew that it communicated with the alley, for
he had tried the door that morning.  He would convey the treasure
there, and drop it into the alley.  The boxes were heavy. Each one
would require a separate journey to the ship's side, but he would at
least secure something if he were interrupted.  He stripped the casing,
and gathered the boxes together in a pile.

Ah, yes, it was funny too that he--the Lascar hound--the d----d
nigger--should get what bigger and bullier men than he had died for!
The mate's blood was on those boxes, if the salt water had not washed
it out.  It was a hell of a fight when they dragged the captain--Oh,
what was that?  Was it the splash of a rat in the bilge, or what?

A superstitious terror had begun to seize him at the thought of blood.
The stifling hold seemed again filled with struggling figures he had
known; the air thick with cries and blasphemies that he had forgotten.
He rose to his feet, and running quickly to the hatchway, leaped to the
deck above.  All was quiet.  The door leading to the empty loft yielded
to his touch.  He entered, and, gliding through, unbarred and opened
the door that gave upon the alley.  The cold air and moonlight flowed
in silently; the way of escape was clear.  Bah!  He would go back for
the treasure.

He had reached the passage when the door he had just opened was
suddenly darkened.  Turning rapidly, he was conscious of a gaunt
figure, grotesque, silent, and erect, looming on the threshold between
him and the sky.  Hidden in the shadow, he made a stealthy step towards
it, with an iron wrench in his uplifted hand.  But the next moment his
eyes dilated with superstitious horror; the iron fell from this hand,
and with a scream, like a frightened animal, he turned and fled into
the passage.  In the first access of his blind terror he tried to reach
the deck above through the forehatch, but was stopped by the sound of a
heavy tread overhead. The immediate fear of detection now overcame his
superstition; he would have even faced the apparition again to escape
through the loft; but, before he could return there, other footsteps
approached rapidly from the end of the passage he would have to
traverse. There was but one chance of escape left now--the forehold he
had just quitted.  He might hide there until the alarm was over.  He
glided back to the hatch, lifted it, and it closed softly over his head
as the upper hatch was simultaneously raised, and the small round eyes
of Abner Nott peered down upon it.  The other footsteps proved to be
Renshaw's but, attracted by the open door of the loft, he turned aside
and entered.  As soon as he disappeared Mr. Nott cautiously dropped
through the opening to the deck below, and, going to the other hatch
through which the Lascar had vanished, deliberately refastened it.  In
a few moments Renshaw returned with a light, and found the old man
sitting on the hatch.

"The loft door was open," said Renshaw.  "There's little doubt whoever
was here escaped that way."

"Surely," said Nott.  There was a peculiar look of Machiavellian
sagacity in his face which irritated Renshaw.

"Then you're sure it was Ferrieres you saw pass by your window before
you called me?" he asked.

Nott nodded his head with an expression of infinite profundity.

"But you say he was going FROM the ship.  Then it could not have been
he who made the noise we heard down here."

"Mebbee no, and mebbee yes," returned Nott, cautiously.  "But if he was
already concealed inside the ship, as that open door, which you say you
barred from the inside, would indicate, what the devil did he want with
this?" said Renshaw, producing the monkey-wrench he had picked up.

Mr. Nott examined the tool carefully, and shook his head with momentous
significance.  Nevertheless, his eyes wandered to the hatch on which he
was seated.

"Did you find anything disturbed THERE?" said Renshaw, following the
direction of his eye.  "Was that hatch fastened as it is now?"

"It was," said Nott, calmly.  "But ye wouldn't mind fetchin' me a
hammer and some o' them big nails from the locker, would yer, while I
hang round here just so ez to make sure against another attack."

Renshaw complied with his request; but as Nott proceeded to gravely
nail down the fastenings of the hatch, he turned impatiently away to
complete his examination of the ship.  The doors of the other lofts and
their fastenings appeared secure and undisturbed.  Yet it was
undeniable that a felonious entrance had been made, but by whom or for
what purpose still remained uncertain.  Even now, Renshaw found it
difficult to accept Nott's theory that de Ferrieres was the aggressor
and Rosey the object, nor could he justify his own suspicion that the
Lascar had obtained a surreptitious entrance under Sleight's
directions.  With a feeling that if Rosey had been present he would
have confessed all, and demanded from her an equal confidence, he began
to hate his feeble, purposeless, and inefficient alliance with her
father, who believed but dare not tax his daughter with complicity in
this outrage.  What could be done with a man whose only idea of action
at such a moment was to nail up an undisturbed entrance in his invaded
house!  He was so preoccupied with these thoughts that when Nott
rejoined him in the cabin he scarcely heeded his presence, and was
entirely oblivious of the furtive looks which the old man from time to
time cast upon his face.

"I reckon ye wouldn't mind," broke in Nott, suddenly, "ef I asked a
favor of ye, Mr. Renshaw.  Mebbee ye'll allow it's askin' too much in
the matter of expense; mebbee ye'll allow it's askin' too much in the
matter o' time.  But I kalkilate to pay all the expense, and if you'd
let me know what yer vally yer time at, I reckon I could stand that.
What I'd be askin' is this.  Would ye mind takin' a letter from me to
Rosey, and bringin' back an answer?"

Renshaw stared speechlessly at this absurd realization of his wish of a
moment before.  "I don't think I understand you," he stammered.

"P'r'aps not," returned Nott, with great gravity.  "But that's not so
much matter to you ez your time and expenses."

"I meant I should be glad to go if I can be of any service to you,"
said Renshaw, hastily.

"You kin ketch the seven o'clock boat this morning, and you'll reach
San Rafael at ten--"

"But I thought Miss Rosey went to Petaluma," interrupted Renshaw
quickly.

Nott regarded him with an expression of patronizing superiority.
"That's what we ladled out to the public gin'rally, and to Ferrers and
his gang in partickler.  We SAID Petalumey, but if you go to Madrono
Cottage, San Rafael, you'll find Rosey thar."

If Mr. Renshaw required anything more to convince him of the necessity
of coming to some understanding with Rosey at once it would have been
this last evidence of her father's utterly dark and supremely
inscrutable designs.  He assented quickly, and Nott handed him a note.

"Ye'll be partickler to give this inter her own hands, and wait for an
answer," said Nott gravely.

Resisting the proposition to enter then and there into an elaborate
calculation of the value of his time and the expenses of the trip,
Renshaw found himself at seven o'clock on the San Rafael boat. Brief as
was the journey it gave him time to reflect upon his coming interview
with Rosey.  He had resolved to begin by confessing all; the attempt of
last night had released him from any sense of duty to Sleight.
Besides, he did not doubt that Nott's letter contained some reference
to this affair only known to Nott's dark and tortuous intelligence.



VIII

Madrono Cottage lay at the entrance of a little canada already green
with the early winter rains, and nestled in a thicket of the harlequin
painted trees that gave it a name.  The young man was a little relieved
to find that Rosey had gone to the post-office a mile away, and that he
would probably overtake her or meet her returning--alone.  The
road--little more than a trail--wound along the crest of the hill
looking across the canada to the long, dark, heavily-wooded flank of
Mount Tamalpais that rose from the valley a dozen miles away.  A
cessation of the warm rain, a rift in the sky, and the rare spectacle
of cloud scenery, combined with a certain sense of freedom, restored
that lighthearted gayety that became him most.  At a sudden turn of the
road he caught sight of Rosey's figure coming towards him, and
quickened his step with the impulsiveness of a boy.  But she suddenly
disappeared, and when he again saw her she was on the other side of the
trail apparently picking the leaves of a manzanita.  She had already
seen him.

Somehow the frankness of his greeting was checked.  She looked up at
him with cheeks that retained enough of their color to suggest why she
had hesitated, and said, "YOU here, Mr. Renshaw?  I thought you were in
Sacramento."

"And I thought YOU were in Petaluma," he retorted gayly.  "I have a
letter from your father.  The fact is, one of those gentlemen who has
been haunting the ship actually made an entry last night.  Who he was,
and what he came for, nobody knows.  Perhaps your father gives you his
suspicions."  He could not help looking at her narrowly as he handed
her the note.  Except that her pretty eyebrows were slightly raised in
curiosity she seemed undisturbed as she opened the letter.  Presently
she raised her eyes to his.

"Is this all father gave you?"

"All."

"You're sure you haven't dropped anything?"

"Nothing.  I have given you all he gave me."

"And that is all it is."  She exhibited the missive, a perfectly blank
sheet of paper folded like a note!

Renshaw felt the angry blood glow in his cheeks.  "This is
unpardonable!  I assure you, Miss Nott, there must be some mistake. He
himself has probably forgotten the inclosure," he continued, yet with
an inward conviction that the act was perfectly premeditated on the
part of the old man.

The young girl held out her hand frankly.  "Don't think any more of it,
Mr. Renshaw.  Father is forgetful at times.  But tell me about last
night."

In a few words Mr. Renshaw briefly but plainly related the details of
the attempt upon the Pontiac, from the moment that he had been awakened
by Nott, to his discovery of the unknown trespasser's flight by the
open door to the loft.  When he had finished, he hesitated, and then
taking Rosey's hand, said impulsively, "You will not be angry with me
if I tell you all?  Your father firmly believes that the attempt was
made by the old Frenchman, de Ferrieres, with a view of carrying you
off."

A dozen reasons other than the one her father would have attributed it
to might have called the blood to her face.  But only innocence could
have brought the look of astonished indignation to her eyes as she
answered quickly:

"So THAT was what you were laughing at?"

"Not that, Miss Nott," said the young man eagerly: "though I wish to
God I could accuse myself of nothing more disloyal.  Do not speak, I
beg," he added impatiently, as Rosey was about to reply. "I have no
right to hear you; I have no right to even stand in your presence until
I have confessed everything.  I came to the Pontiac; I made your
acquaintance, Miss Nott, through a fraud as wicked as anything your
father charges to de Ferrieres.  I am not a contractor.  I never was an
honest lodger in the Pontiac.  I was simply a spy."

"But you didn't mean to be--it was some mistake, wasn't it?" said
Rosey, quite white, but more from sympathy with the offender's emotion
than horror at the offense.

"I am afraid I did mean it.  But bear with me for a few moments longer
and you shall know all.  It's a long story.  Will you walk on,
and--take my arm?  You do not shrink from me, Miss Nott.  Thank you.  I
scarcely deserve the kindness."

Indeed so little did Rosey shrink that he was conscious of a slight
reassuring pressure on his arm as they moved forward, and for the
moment I fear the young man felt like exaggerating his offense for the
sake of proportionate sympathy.  "Do you remember," he continued, "one
evening when I told you some sea tales, you said you always thought
there must be some story about the Pontiac? There was a story of the
Pontiac, Miss Nott--a wicked story--a terrible story--which I might
have told you, which I OUGHT to have told you--which was the story that
brought me there.  You were right, too, in saying that you thought I
had known the Pontiac before I stepped first on her deck that day.  I
had."

He laid his disengaged hand across lightly on Rosey's, as if to assure
himself that she was listening.

"I was at that time a sailor.  I had been fool enough to run away from
college, thinking it a fine romantic thing to ship before the mast for
a voyage round the world.  I was a little disappointed, perhaps, but I
made the best of it, and in two years I was second mate of a whaler
lying in a little harbor of one of the uncivilized islands of the
Pacific.  While we were at anchor there a French trading vessel put in,
apparently for water.  She had the dregs of a mixed crew of Lascars and
Portuguese, who said they had lost the rest of their men by desertion,
and that the captain and mate had been carried off by fever.  There was
something so queer in their story that our skipper took the law in his
own hands, and put me on board of her with a salvage crew.  But that
night the French crew mutinied, cut the cables, and would have got to
sea if we had not been armed and prepared, and managed to drive them
below.  When we had got them under hatches for a few hours they
parleyed, and offered to go quietly ashore.  As we were short of hands
and unable to take them with us, and as we had no evidence against
them, we let them go, took the ship to Callao, turned her over to the
authorities, lodged a claim for salvage, and continued our voyage. When
we returned we found the truth of the story was known.  She had been a
French trader from Marseilles, owned by her captain; her crew had
mutinied in the Pacific, killed their officers and the only
passenger--the owner of the cargo.  They had made away with the cargo
and a treasure of nearly half a million of Spanish gold for trading
purposes which belonged to the passenger.  In course of time the ship
was sold for salvage and put into the South American trade until the
breaking out of the Californian gold excitement, when she was sent with
a cargo to San Francisco.  That ship was the Pontiac which your father
bought."

A slight shudder ran through the girl's frame.  "I wish--I wish you
hadn't told me," she said.  "I shall never close my eyes again
comfortably on board of her, I know."

"I would say that you had purified her of ALL stains of her past--but
there may be one that remains.  And THAT in most people's eyes would be
no detraction.  You look puzzled, Miss Nott--but I am coming to the
explanation and the end of my story.  A ship of war was sent to the
island to punish the mutineers and pirates, for such they were, but
they could not be found.  A private expedition was sent to discover the
treasure which they were supposed to have buried, but in vain.  About
two months ago Mr. Sleight told me one of his shipmates had sent him a
Lascar sailor who had to dispose of a valuable secret regarding the
Pontiac for a percentage.  That secret was that the treasure was never
taken by the mutineers out of the Pontiac!  They were about to land and
bury it when we boarded them.  They took advantage of their
imprisonment under hatches to BURY IT IN THE SHIP.  They hid it in the
hold so securely and safely that it was never detected by us or the
Callao authorities.  I was then asked, as one who knew the vessel, to
undertake a private examination of her, with a view of purchasing her
from your father without awakening his suspicions.  I assented. You
have my confession now, Miss Nott.  You know my crime.  I am at your
mercy."

Rosey's arm only tightened around his own.  Her eyes sought his. "And
you didn't find anything?" she said.

The question sounded so oddly like Sleight's, that Renshaw returned a
little stiffly--

"I didn't look."

"Why?" asked Rosey simply.

"Because," stammered Renshaw, with an uneasy consciousness of having
exaggerated his sentiment, "it didn't seem honorable; it didn't seem
fair to you."

"Oh, you silly! you might have looked and told ME."

"But," said Renshaw, "do you think that would have been fair to
Sleight?"

"As fair to him as to us.  For, don't you see, it wouldn't belong to
any of us.  It would belong to the friends or the family of the man who
lost it."

"But there were no heirs," said Renshaw.  "That was proved by some
impostor who pretended to be his brother, and libelled the Pontiac at
Callao, but the courts decided he was a lunatic."

"Then it belongs to the poor pirates who risked their own lives for it,
rather than to Sleight, who did nothing."  She was silent for a moment,
and then resumed with energy, "I believe he was at the bottom of that
attack last night."

"I have thought so too," said Renshaw.

"Then I must go back at once," she continued impulsively.  "Father must
not be left alone."

"Nor must YOU," said Renshaw, quickly.  "Do let me return with you, and
share with you and your father the trouble I have brought upon you.  Do
not," he added in a lower tone, "deprive me of the only chance of
expiating my offense, of making myself worthy your forgiveness."

"I am sure," said Rosey, lowering her lids and half withdrawing her
arm, "I am sure I have nothing to forgive.  You did not believe the
treasure belonged to us any more than to anybody else, until you knew
ME--"

"That is true," said the young man, attempting to take her hand.

"I mean," said Rosey, blushing, and showing a distracting row of little
teeth in one of her infrequent laughs, "oh, you know what I mean."  She
withdrew her arm gently, and became interested in the selection of
certain wayside bay leaves as they passed along.  "All the same, I
don't believe in this treasure," she said abruptly, as if to change the
subject.  "I don't believe it ever was hidden inside the Pontiac."

"That can easily be ascertained now," said Renshaw.

"But it's a pity you didn't find it out while you were about it," said
Rosey.  "It would have saved so much talk and trouble."

"I have told you why I didn't search the ship," responded Renshaw, with
a slight bitterness.  "But it seems I could only avoid being a great
rascal by becoming a great fool."

"You never intended to be a rascal," said Rosey, earnestly, "and you
couldn't be a fool, except in heeding what a silly girl says. I only
meant if you had taken me into your confidence it would have been
better."

"Might I not say the same to you regarding your friend, the old
Frenchman?" returned Renshaw.  "What if I were to confess to you that I
lately suspected him of knowing the secret, and of trying to gain your
assistance?"

Instead of indignantly repudiating the suggestion, to the young man's
great discomfiture, Rosey only knit her pretty brows, and remained for
some minutes silent.  Presently she asked timidly,--

"Do you think it wrong to tell another person's secret for their own
good?"

"No," said Renshaw, promptly.

"Then I'll tell you Monsieur de Ferrieres's!  But only because I
believe from what you have just said that he will turn out to have some
right to the treasure."

Then with kindling eyes, and a voice eloquent with sympathy, Rosey told
the story of her accidental discovery of de Ferrieres's miserable
existence in the loft.  Clothing it with the unconscious poetry of her
fresh, young imagination, she lightly passed over his antique gallantry
and grotesque weakness, exalting only his lonely sufferings and
mysterious wrongs.  Renshaw listened, lost between shame for his late
suspicions and admiration for her thoughtful delicacy, until she began
to speak of de Ferrieres's strange allusions to the foreign papers in
his portmanteau.  "I think some were law papers, and I am almost
certain I saw the word Callao printed on one of them."

"It may be so," said Renshaw, thoughtfully.  "The old Frenchman has
always passed for a harmless, wandering eccentric.  I hardly think
public curiosity has ever even sought to know his name, much less his
history.  But had we not better first try to find if there IS any
property before we examine his claims to it?"

"As you please," said Rosey, with a slight pout; "but you will find it
much easier to discover him than his treasure.  It's always easier to
find the thing you're not looking for."

"Until you want it," said Renshaw, with sudden gravity.

"How pretty it looks over there," said Rosey, turning her conscious
eyes to the opposite mountain.

"Very."

They had reached the top of the hill, and in the near distance the
chimney of Madrono Cottage was even now visible.  At the expected sight
they unconsciously stopped--unconsciously disappointed. Rosey broke the
embarrassing silence.

"There's another way home, but it's a roundabout way," she said timidly.

"Let us take it," said Renshaw.

She hesitated.  "The boat goes at four, and we must return to-night."

"The more reason why we should make the most of our time now," said
Renshaw with a faint smile.  "To-morrow all things may be changed;
to-morrow you may find yourself an heiress, Miss Nott.  To-morrow," he
added, with a slight tremor in his voice, "I may have earned your
forgiveness, only to say farewell to you forever.  Let me keep this
sunshine, this picture, this companionship with you long enough to say
now what perhaps I must not say to-morrow."

They were silent for a moment, and then by a common instinct turned
together into a narrow trail, scarce wide enough for two, that diverged
from the straight practical path before them.  It was indeed a
roundabout way home, so roundabout, in fact, that as they wandered on
it seemed even to double on its track, occasionally lingering long and
becoming indistinct under the shadow of madrono and willow; at one time
stopping blindly before a fallen tree in the hollow, where they had
quite lost it, and had to sit down to recall it; a rough way, often
requiring the mutual help of each other's hands and eyes to tread
together in security; an uncertain way, not to be found without
whispered consultation and concession, and yet a way eventually
bringing them hand in hand, happy and hopeful, to the gate of Madrono
Cottage.  And if there was only just time for Rosey to prepare to take
the boat, it was due to the deviousness of the way.  If a stray curl
was lying loose on Rosey's cheek, and a long hair had caught in
Renshaw's button, it was owing to the roughness of the way; and if in
the tones of their voices and in the glances of their eyes there was a
maturer seriousness, it was due to the dim uncertainty of the path they
had traveled, and would hereafter tread together.



IX

When Mr. Nott had satisfied himself of Renshaw's departure, he coolly
bolted the door at the head of the companion way, thus cutting off any
communication with the lower deck.  Taking a long rifle from the rack
above his berth, he carefully examined the hammer and cap, and then
cautiously let himself down through the forehatch to the deck below.
After a deliberate survey of the still intact fastenings of the hatch
over the forehold, he proceeded quietly to unloose them again with the
aid of the tools that still lay there.  When the hatch was once more
free he lifted it, and, withdrawing a few feet from the opening, sat
himself down, rifle in hand.  A profound silence reigned throughout the
lower deck.

"Ye kin rize up out o' that," said Nott gently.

There was a stealthy rustle below that seemed to approach the hatch,
and then with a sudden bound the Lascar leaped on the deck. But at the
same instant Nott covered him with his rifle.  A slight shade of
disappointment and surprise had crossed the old man's face, and clouded
his small round eyes at the apparition of the Lascar, but his hand was
none the less firm upon the trigger as the frightened prisoner sank on
his knees, with his hands clasped in the attitude of supplication for
mercy.

"Ef you're thinkin' o' skippin' afore I've done with yer," said Nott
with labored gentleness, "I oughter warn ye that it's my style to drop
Injins at two hundred yards, and this deck ain't anywhere mor'n fifty.
It's an uncomfortable style, a nasty style--but it's MY style.  I
thought I'd tell yer, so yer could take it easy where you air.  Where's
Ferrers?"

Even in the man's insane terror, his utter bewilderment at the question
was evident.  "Ferrers?" he gasped; "don't know him, I swear to God,
boss."

"P'r'aps," said Nott, with infinite cunning, "yer don't know the man ez
kem into the loft from the alley last night--p'r'aps yer didn't see an
airy Frenchman with a dyed moustache, eh?  I thought that would fetch
ye!" he continued, as the man started at the evidence that his vision
of last night was a living man.  "P'r'aps you and him didn't break into
this ship last night, jist to run off with my darter Rosey?  P'r'aps
yer don't know Rosey, eh?  P'r'aps yer don't know ez Ferrers wants to
marry her, and hez been hangin' round yer ever since he left--eh?"

Scarcely believing the evidence of his senses that the old man whose
treasure he had been trying to steal was utterly ignorant of his real
offense, and yet uncertain of the penalty of the other crime of which
he was accused, the Lascar writhed his body and stammered vaguely,
"Mercy!  Mercy!"

"Well," said Nott, cautiously, "ez I reckon the hide of a dead Chinee
nigger ain't any more vallyble than that of a dead Injin, I don't care
ef I let up on yer--seein' the cussedness ain't yours. But ef I let yer
off this once, you must take a message to Ferrers from me."

"Let me off this time, boss, and I swear to God I will," said the
Lascar eagerly.

"Ye kin say to Ferrers--let me see--" deliberated Nott, leaning on his
rifle with cautious reflection.  "Ye kin say to Ferrers like this--sez
you, 'Ferrers,' sez you, 'the old man sez that afore you went away you
sez to him, sez you, "I take my honor with me," sez you'--have you got
that?" interrupted Nott suddenly.

"Yes, boss."

"'I take my honor with me,' sez you," repeated Nott slowly. "'Now,' sez
you--'the old man sez, sez he--tell Ferrers, sez he, that his honor
havin' run away agin, he sends it back to him, and ef he ever ketches
it around after this, he'll shoot it on sight.' Hev yer got that?"

"Yes," stammered the bewildered captive.

"Then git!"

The Lascar sprang to his feet with the agility of a panther, leaped
through the hatch above him, and disappeared over the bow of the ship
with an unhesitating directness that showed that every avenue of escape
had been already contemplated by him.  Slipping lightly from the
cutwater to the ground, he continued his flight, only stopping at the
private office of Mr. Sleight.

When Mr. Renshaw and Rosey Nott arrived on board the Pontiac that
evening, they were astonished to find the passage before the cabin
completely occupied with trunks and boxes, and the bulk of their
household goods apparently in the process of removal.  Mr. Nott, who
was superintending the work of two Chinamen, betrayed not only no
surprise at the appearance of the young people, but not the remotest
recognition of their own bewilderment at his occupation.

"Kalkilatin'," he remarked casually to his daughter, "you'd rather look
arter your fixin's, Rosey, I've left 'em till the last. P'r'aps yer and
Mr. Renshaw wouldn't mind sittin' down on that locker until I've
strapped this yer box."

"But what does it all mean, father?" said Rosey, taking the old man by
the lapels of his sea-jacket, and slightly emphasizing her question.
"What in the name of goodness are you doing?"

"Breakin' camp, Rosey dear, breakin' camp, jist ez we uster," replied
Nott with cheerful philosophy.  "Kinder like old times, ain't it?
Lord, Rosey," he continued, stopping and following up the reminiscence,
with the end of the rope in his hand as if it were a clue, "don't ye
mind that day we started outer Livermore Pass, and seed the hull o' the
Californy coast stretchin' yonder--eh? But don't ye be skeered, Rosey
dear," he added quickly, as if in recognition of the alarm expressed in
her face.  "I ain't turning ye outer house and home; I've jist hired
that 'ere Madrono Cottage from the Peters ontil we kin look round."

"But you're not leaving the ship, father," continued Rosey,
impetuously.  "You haven't sold it to that man Sleight?"

Mr. Nott rose and carefully closed the cabin door.  Then drawing a
large wallet from his pocket, he said, "It's sing'lar ye should hev got
the name right the first pop, ain't it, Rosey? but it's Sleight, sure
enough, all the time.  This yer check," he added, producing a paper
from the depths of the wallet, "this yer check for 25,000 dollars is
wot he paid for it only two hours ago."

"But," said Renshaw, springing to his feet furiously, "you're duped,
swindled--betrayed!"

"Young man," said Nott, throwing a certain dignity into his habitual
gesture of placing his hands on Renshaw's shoulders, "I bought this yer
ship five years ago jist ez she stood for 8,000 dollars.  Kalkilatin'
wot she cost me in repairs and taxes, and wot she brought me in since
then, accordin' to my figgerin', I don't call a clear profit of 15,000
dollars much of a swindle."

"Tell him all," said Rosey, quickly, more alarmed at Renshaw's
despairing face than at the news itself.  "Tell him everything,
Dick--Mr. Renshaw; it may not be too late."

In a voice half choked with passionate indignation Renshaw hurriedly
repeated the story of the hidden treasure, and the plot to rescue it,
prompted frequently by Rosey's tenacious memory and assisted by Rosey's
deft and tactful explanations.  But to their surprise the imperturbable
countenance of Abner Nott never altered; a slight moisture of kindly
paternal tolerance of their extravagance glistened in his little eyes,
but nothing more.

"Ef there was a part o' this ship, a plank or a bolt ez I don't know,
ez I hevn't touched with my own hand, and looked into with my own eyes,
thar might be suthin' in that story.  I don't let on to be a sailor
like YOU, but ez I know the ship ez a boy knows his first hoss, as a
woman knows her first babby, I reckon thar ain't no treasure yer,
onless it was brought into the Pontiac last night by them chaps."

"But are you mad!  Sleight would not pay three times the value of the
ship to-day if he were not positive!  And that positive knowledge was
gained last night by the villain who broke into the Pontiac--no doubt
the Lascar."

"Surely," said Nott, meditatively.  "The Lascar!  There's suthin' in
that.  That Lascar I fastened down in the hold last night unbeknownst
to you, Mr. Renshaw, and let him out again this morning ekally
unbeknownst."

"And you let him carry his information to Sleight--without a word!"
said Renshaw, with a sickening sense of Nott's utter fatuity.

"I sent him back with a message to the man he kem from," said Nott,
winking both his eyes at Renshaw, significantly, and making signs
behind his daughter's back.

Rosey, conscious of her lover's irritation, and more eager to soothe
his impatience than from any faith in her suggestion, interfered.  "Why
not examine the place where he was concealed? he may have left some
traces of his search."

The two men looked at each other.  "Seem' ez I've turned the Pontiac
over to Sleight jist ez it stands, I don't know ez it's 'xactly on the
square," said Nott doubtfully.

"You've a right to know at least WHAT you deliver to him," interrupted
Renshaw brusquely: "Bring a lantern."

Followed by Rosey, Renshaw and Nott hurriedly sought the lower deck and
the open hatch of the forehold.  The two men leaped down first with the
lantern, and then assisted Rosey to descend.  Renshaw took a step
forward and uttered a cry.

The rays of the lantern fell on the ship's side.  The Lascar had,
during his forced seclusion, put back the boxes of treasure and
replaced the planking, yet not so carefully but that the quick eye of
Renshaw had discovered it.  The next moment he had stripped away the
planking again, and the hurriedly-restored box which the Lascar had
found fell to the deck, scattering part of its ringing contents.  Rosey
turned pale; Renshaw's eyes flashed fire; only Abner Nott remained
quiet and impassive.

"Are you satisfied you have been duped?" said Renshaw passionately.

To their surprise Mr. Nott stooped down, and picking up one of the
coins handed it gravely to Renshaw.  "Would ye mind heftin' that 'ere
coin in your hand--feelin' it, bitin' it, scrapin' it with a knife, and
kinder seein' how it compares with other coins?"

"What do you mean?" said Renshaw.

"I mean that that yer coin--that ALL the coins in this yer box, that
all the coins in them other boxes--and ther's forty on 'em--is all and
every one of 'em counterfeits!"

The piece dropped unconsciously from Renshaw's hand, and striking
another that lay on the deck gave out a dull, suspicious ring.

"They waz counterfeits got up by them Dutch supercargo sharps for
dealin' with the Injins and cannibals and South Sea heathens ez bows
down to wood and stone.  If satisfied them ez well ez them buttons ye
puts in missionary boxes, I reckon, and 'cepting ez freight, don't cost
nothin'.  I found 'em tucked in the ribs o' the old Pontiac when I
bought her, and I nailed 'em up in thar lest they should fall into
dishonest hands.  It's a lucky thing, Mr. Renshaw, that they comes into
the honest fingers of a square man like Sleight--ain't it?"

He turned his small, guileless eyes upon Renshaw with such child-like
simplicity that it checked the hysterical laugh that was rising to the
young man's lips.

"But did any one know of this but yourself?"

"I reckon not.  I once suspicioned that old cap'en Bowers, who was
always foolin' round the hold yer, must hev noticed the bulge in the
casin', but when he took to axin' questions I axed others--ye know my
style, Rosey?  Come."

He led the way grimly back to the cabin, the young people following;
but turning suddenly at the companionway he observed Renshaw's arm
around the waist of his daughter.

He said nothing until they had reached the cabin, when he closed the
door softly, and looking at them both gently, said with infinite
cunning--

"Ef it isn't too late, Rosey, ye kin tell this young man ez how I
forgive him for havin' diskivered THE TREASURE of the Pontiac."

     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

It was nearly eighteen months afterwards that Mr. Nott one morning
entered the room of his son-in-law at Madrono Cottage.  Drawing him
aside, he said with his old air of mystery, "Now ez Rosey's ailin' and
don't seem to be so eager to diskiver what's become of Mr. Ferrers, I
don't mind tellin' ye that over a year ago I heard he died suddenly in
Sacramento.  Thar was suthin' in the paper about his bein' a lunatic
and claimin' to be a relation to somebody on the Pontiac; but likes ez
not it's only the way those newspaper fellows got hold of the story of
his wantin' to marry Rosey."

========================================
========================================

THANKFUL BLOSSOM


by

BRET HARTE




I

The time was the year of grace 1779; the locality, Morristown, New
Jersey.

It was bitterly cold.  A northeasterly wind had been stiffening the mud
of the morning's thaw into a rigid record of that day's wayfaring on
the Baskingridge road.  The hoof-prints of cavalry, the deep ruts left
by baggage-wagons, and the deeper channels worn by artillery, lay stark
and cold in the waning light of an April day.  There were icicles on
the fences, a rime of silver on the windward bark of maples, and
occasional bare spots on the rocky protuberances of the road, as if
Nature had worn herself out at the knees and elbows through long
waiting for the tardy spring.  A few leaves disinterred by the thaw
became crisp again, and rustled in the wind, making the summer a thing
so remote that all human hope and conjecture fled before them.

Here and there the wayside fences and walls were broken down or
dismantled; and beyond them fields of snow downtrodden and discolored,
and strewn with fragments of leather, camp equipage, harness, and
cast-off clothing, showed traces of the recent encampment and
congregation of men.  On some there were still standing the ruins of
rudely constructed cabins, or the semblance of fortification equally
rude and incomplete.  A fox stealing along a half-filled ditch, a wolf
slinking behind an earthwork, typified the human abandonment and
desolation.

One by one the faint sunset tints faded from the sky; the far-off
crests of the Orange hills grew darker; the nearer files of pines on
the Whatnong Mountain became a mere black background; and, with the
coming-on of night, came too an icy silence that seemed to stiffen and
arrest the very wind itself.  The crisp leaves no longer rustled; the
waving whips of alder and willow snapped no longer; the icicles no
longer dropped a cold fruitage from barren branch and spray; and the
roadside trees relapsed into stony quiet, so that the sound of horse's
hoofs breaking through the thin, dull, lustreless films of ice that
patched the furrowed road, might have been heard by the nearest
Continental picket a mile away.

Either a knowledge of this, or the difficulties of the road, evidently
irritated the viewless horseman.  Long before he became visible, his
voice was heard in half-suppressed objurgation of the road, of his
beast, of the country folk, and the country generally. "Steady, you
jade!"  "Jump, you devil, jump!"  "Curse the road, and the beggarly
farmers that durst not mend it!"  And then the moving bulk of horse and
rider suddenly arose above the hill, floundered and splashed, and then
as suddenly disappeared, and the rattling hoof-beats ceased.

The stranger had turned into a deserted lane still cushioned with
untrodden snow.  A stone wall on one hand--in better keeping and
condition than the boundary monuments of the outlying fields--bespoke
protection and exclusiveness.  Half-way up the lane the rider checked
his speed, and, dismounting, tied his horse to a wayside sapling.  This
done, he went cautiously forward toward the end of the lane, and a
farm-house from whose gable window a light twinkled through the
deepening night.  Suddenly he stopped, hesitated, and uttered an
impatient ejaculation.  The light had disappeared.  He turned sharply
on his heel, and retraced his steps until opposite a farm-shed that
stood a few paces from the wall. Hard by, a large elm cast the gaunt
shadow of its leafless limbs on the wall and surrounding snow.  The
stranger stepped into this shadow, and at once seemed to become a part
of its trembling intricacies.

At the present moment it was certainly a bleak place for a tryst. There
was snow yet clinging to the trunk of the tree, and a film of ice on
its bark; the adjacent wall was slippery with frost, and fringed with
icicles.  Yet in all there was a ludicrous suggestion of some sentiment
past and unseasonable: several dislodged stones of the wall were so
disposed as to form a bench and seats, and under the elm-tree's film of
ice could still be seen carved on its bark the effigy of a heart,
divers initials, and the legend, "Thine Forever."

The stranger, however, kept his eyes fixed only on the farm-shed and
the open field beside it.  Five minutes passed in fruitless expectancy.
Ten minutes!  And then the rising moon slowly lifted herself over the
black range of the Orange hills, and looked at him, blushing a little,
as if the appointment were her own.

The face and figure thus illuminated were those of a strongly built,
handsome man of thirty, so soldierly in bearing that it needed not the
buff epaulets and facings to show his captain's rank in the Continental
army.  Yet there was something in his facial expression that
contradicted the manliness of his presence,--an irritation and
querulousness that were inconsistent with his size and strength.  This
fretfulness increased as the moments went by without sign or motion in
the faintly lit field beyond, until, in peevish exasperation, he began
to kick the nearer stones against the wall.

"Moo-oo-w!"

The soldier started.  Not that he was frightened, nor that he had
failed to recognize in these prolonged syllables the deep-chested,
half-drowsy low of a cow, but that it was so near him--evidently just
beside the wall.  If an object so bulky could have approached him so
near without his knowledge, might not she--

"Moo-oo!"

He drew nearer the wall cautiously.  "So, Cushy!  Mooly!  Come up,
Bossy!" he said persuasively.  "Moo"--but here the low unexpectedly
broke down, and ended in a very human and rather musical little laugh.

"Thankful!" exclaimed the soldier, echoing the laugh a trifle uneasily
and affectedly as a hooded little head arose above the wall.

"Well," replied the figure, supporting a prettily rounded chin on her
hands, as she laid her elbows complacently on the wall,--"well, what
did you expect?  Did you want me to stand here all night, while you
skulked moonstruck under a tree?  Or did you look for me to call you by
name? did you expect me to shout out, 'Capt. Allan Brewster--'"

"Thankful, hush!"

"Capt. Allan Brewster of the Connecticut Contingent," continued the
girl, with an affected raising of a low, pathetic voice that was,
however, inaudible beyond the tree.  "Capt. Brewster, behold me,--your
obleeged and humble servant and sweetheart to command."

Capt. Brewster succeeded, after a slight skirmish at the wall, in
possessing himself of the girl's hand; at which; although still
struggling, she relented slightly.

"It isn't every lad that I'd low for," she said, with an affected pout,
"and there may be others that would not take it amiss; though there be
fine ladies enough at the assembly halls at Morristown as might think
it hoydenish?"

"Nonsense, love," said the captain, who had by this time mounted the
wall, and encircled the girl's waist with his arm.  "Nonsense! you
startled me only.  But," he added, suddenly taking her round chin in
his hand, and turning her face toward the moon with an uneasy
half-suspicion, "why did you take that light from the window?  What has
happened?"

"We had unexpected guests, sweetheart," said Thankful: "the count just
arrived."

"That infernal Hessian!"  He stopped, and gazed questioningly into her
face.  The moon looked upon her at the same time: the face was as
sweet, as placid, as truthful, as her own.  Possibly these two
inconstants understood each other.

"Nay, Allan, he is not a Hessian, but an exiled gentleman from
abroad,--a nobleman--"

"There are no noblemen now," sniffed the trooper contemptuously.
"Congress has so decreed it.  All men are born free and equal."

"But they are not, Allan," said Thankful, with a pretty trouble in her
brows: "even cows are not born equal.  Is yon calf that was dropped
last night by Brindle the equal of my red heifer whose mother come by
herself in a ship from Surrey?  Do they look equal?"

"Titles are but breath," said Capt. Brewster doggedly.  There was an
ominous pause.

"Nay, there is one nobleman left," said Thankful; "and he is my
own,--my nature's nobleman!"

Capt. Brewster did not reply.  From certain arch gestures and wreathed
smiles with which this forward young woman accompanied her statement,
it would seem to be implied that the gentleman who stood before her was
the nobleman alluded to.  At least, he so accepted it, and embraced her
closely, her arms and part of her mantle clinging around his neck.  In
this attitude they remained quiet for some moments, slightly rocking
from side to side like a metronome; a movement, I fancy, peculiarly
bucolic, pastoral, and idyllic, and as such, I wot, observed by
Theocritus and Virgil.

At these supreme moments weak woman usually keeps her wits about her
much better than your superior reasoning masculine animal; and, while
the gallant captain was losing himself upon her perfect lips, Miss
Thankful distinctly heard the farm-gate click, and otherwise noticed
that the moon was getting high and obtrusive.  She half released
herself from the captain's arms, thoughtfully and tenderly--but firmly.
"Tell me all about yourself, Allan dear," she said quietly, making room
for him on the wall,--"all, everything."

She turned upon him her beautiful eyes,--eyes habitually earnest and
even grave in expression, yet holding in their brave brown depths a
sweet, childlike reliance and dependency; eyes with a certain tender,
deprecating droop in the brown-fringed lids, and yet eyes that seemed
to say to every man who looked upon them, "I am truthful: be frank with
me."  Indeed, I am convinced there is not one of my impressible sex,
who, looking in those pleading eyes, would not have perjured himself on
the spot rather than have disappointed their fair owner.

Capt. Brewster's mouth resumed its old expression of discontent.

"Everything is growing worse, Thankful, and the cause is lost. Congress
does nothing, and Washington is not the man for the crisis.  Instead of
marching to Philadelphia, and forcing that wretched rabble of Hancock
and Adams at the point of the bayonet, he writes letters."

"A dignified, formal old fool," interrupted Mistress Thankful
indignantly; "and look at his wife!  Didn't Mistress Ford and Mistress
Baily, ay, and the best blood of Morris County, go down to his
Excellency's in their finest bibs and tuckers, and didn't they find my
lady in a pinafore doing chores?  Vastly polite treatment, indeed!  As
if the whole world didn't know that the general was taken by surprise
when my lady came riding up from Virginia with all those fine
cavaliers, just to see what his Excellency was doing at these assembly
balls.  And fine doings, I dare say."

"This is but idle gossip, Thankful," said Capt. Brewster with the
faintest appearance of self-consciousness; "the assembly balls are
conceived by the general to strengthen the confidence of the townsfolk,
and mitigate the rigors of the winter encampment.  I go there myself
rarely: I have but little taste for junketing and gavotting, with my
country in such need.  No, Thankful!  What we want is a leader; and the
men of Connecticut feel it keenly.  If I have been spoken of in that
regard," added the captain with a slight inflation of his manly breast,
"it is because they know of my sacrifices,--because as New England
yeomen they know my devotion to the cause.  They know of my suffering--"

The bright face that looked into his was suddenly afire with womanly
sympathy, the pretty brow was knit, the sweet eyes overflowed with
tenderness.  "Forgive me, Allan.  I forgot--perhaps, love--perhaps,
dearest, you are hungry now."

"No, not now," replied Captain Brewster, with gloomy stoicism; "yet,"
he added, "it is nearly a week since I have tasted meat."

"I--I--brought a few things with me," continued the girl, with a
certain hesitating timidity.  She reached down, and produced a basket
from the shadow of the wall.  "These chickens"--she held up a pair of
pullets--"the commander-in-chief himself could not buy: I kept them for
MY commander!  And this pot of marmalade, which I know my Allan loves,
is the same I put up last summer.  I thought [very tenderly] you might
like a piece of that bacon you liked so once, dear.  Ah, sweetheart,
shall we ever sit down to our little board?  Shall we ever see the end
of this awful war?  Don't you think, dear [very pleadingly], it would
be best to give it up? King George is not such a very bad man, is he?
I've thought, sweetheart [very confidently], that mayhap you and he
might make it all up without the aid of those Washingtons, who do
nothing but starve one to death.  And if the king only knew you,
Allan,--should see you as I do, sweetheart,--he'd do just as you say."

During this speech she handed him the several articles alluded to; and
he received them, storing them away in such receptacles of his clothing
as were convenient--with this notable difference, that with HER the act
was graceful and picturesque: with him there was a ludicrousness of
suggestion that his broad shoulders and uniform only heightened.

"I think not of myself, lass," he said, putting the eggs in his pocket,
and buttoning the chickens within his martial breast.  "I think not of
myself, and perhaps I often spare that counsel which is but little
heeded.  But I have a duty to my men--to Connecticut. [He here tied the
marmalade up in his handkerchief.]  I confess I have sometimes thought
I might, under provocation, be driven to extreme measures for the good
of the cause.  I make no pretence to leadership, but--"

"With you at the head of the army," broke in Thankful enthusiastically,
"peace would be declared within a fortnight."

There is no flattery, however outrageous, that a man will not accept
from the woman whom he believes loves him.  He will perhaps doubt its
influence in the colder judgment of mankind; but he will consider that
this poor creature, at least, understands him, and in some vague way
represents the eternal but unrecognized verities. And when this is
voiced by lips that are young and warm and red, it is somehow quite as
convincing as the bloodless, remoter utterance of posterity.

Wherefore the trooper complacently buttoned the compliment over his
chest with the pullets.

"I think you must go now, Allan," she said, looking at him with that
pseudo-maternal air which the youngest of women sometimes assume to
their lovers, as if the doll had suddenly changed sex, and grown to
man's estate.  "You must go now, dear; for it may so chance that father
is considering my absence overmuch.  You will come again a' Wednesday,
sweetheart; and you will not go to the assemblies, nor visit Mistress
Judith, nor take any girl pick-a-back again on your black horse; and
you will let me know when you are hungry?"

She turned her brown eyes lovingly, yet with a certain pretty trouble
in the brow, and such a searching, pleading inquiry in her glance, that
the captain kissed her at once.  Then came the final embrace, performed
by the captain in a half-perfunctory, quiet manner, with a due regard
for the friable nature of part of his provisions.  Satisfying himself
of the integrity of the eggs by feeling for them in his pocket, he
waved a military salute with the other hand to Miss Thankful, and was
gone.  A few minutes later the sound of his horse's hoofs rang sharply
from the icy hillside.

But, as he reached the summit, two horsemen wheeled suddenly from the
shadow of the roadside, and bade him halt.

"Capt. Brewster, if this moon does not deceive me?" queried the
foremost stranger with grave civility.

"The same.  Major Van Zandt, I calculate?" returned Brewster
querulously.

"Your calculation is quite right.  I regret Capt. Brewster, that it is
my duty to inform you that you are under arrest."

"By whose orders?"

"The commander-in-chief's."

"For what?"

"Mutinous conduct, and disrespect of your superior officers."

The sword that Capt. Brewster had drawn at the sudden appearance of the
strangers quivered for a moment in his strong hand.  Then, sharply
striking it across the pommel of his saddle, he snapped it in twain,
and cast the pieces at the feet of the speaker.

"Go on," he said doggedly.

"Capt. Brewster," said Major Van Zandt, with infinite gravity, "it is
not for me to point out the danger to you of this outspoken emotion,
except practically in its effect upon the rations you have in your
pocket.  If I mistake not, they have suffered equally with your steel.
Forward, march!"

Capt. Brewster looked down, and then dropped to the rear, as the
discased yolks of Mistress Thankful's most precious gift slid slowly
and pensively over his horse's flanks to the ground.



II

Mistress Thankful remained at the wall until her lover had disappeared.
Then she turned, a mere lissom shadow in that uncertain light, and
glided under the eaves of the shed, and thence from tree to tree of the
orchard, lingering a moment under each as a trout lingers in the shadow
of the bank in passing a shallow, and so reached the farmhouse and the
kitchen door, where she entered. Thence by a back staircase she slipped
to her own bower, from whose window half an hour before she had taken
the signalling light. This she lit again and placed upon a chest of
drawers; and, taking off her hood and a shapeless sleeveless mantle she
had worn, went to the mirror, and proceeded to re-adjust a high horn
comb that had been somewhat displaced by the captain's arm, and
otherwise after the fashion of her sex to remove all traces of a
previous lover. It may be here observed that a man is very apt to come
from the smallest encounter with his dulcinea distrait, bored, or
shame-faced; to forget that his cravat is awry, or that a long blond
hair is adhering to his button.  But as to Mademoiselle--well, looking
at Miss Pussy's sleek paws and spotless face, would you ever know that
she had been at the cream-jug?

Thankful was, I think, satisfied with her appearance.  Small doubt but
she had reason for it.  And yet her gown was a mere slip of flowered
chintz, gathered at the neck, and falling at an angle of fifteen
degrees to within an inch of a short petticoat of gray flannel.  But so
surely is the complete mould of symmetry indicated in the poise or line
of any single member, that looking at the erect carriage of her
graceful brown head, or below to the curves that were lost in her
shapely ankles, or the little feet that hid themselves in the
broad-buckled shoes, you knew that the rest was as genuine and
beautiful.

Mistress Thankful, after a pause, opened the door, and listened. Then
she softly slipped down the back staircase to the front hall. It was
dark; but the door of the "company-room," or parlor, was faintly
indicated by the light that streamed beneath it.  She stood still for a
moment hesitatingly, when suddenly a hand grasped her own, and half
led, half dragged her, into the sitting-room opposite.  It was dark.
There was a momentary fumbling for the tinder-box and flint, a muttered
oath over one or two impeding articles of furniture, and Thankful
laughed.  And then the light was lit; and her father, a gray wrinkled
man of sixty, still holding her hand, stood before her.

"You have been out, mistress!"

"I have," said Thankful.

"And not alone," growled the old man angrily.

"No," said Mistress Thankful, with a smile that began in the corners of
her brown eyes, ran down into the dimpled curves of her mouth, and
finally ended in the sudden revelation of her white teeth,--"no, not
alone."

"With whom?" asked the old man, gradually weakening under her strong,
saucy presence.

"Well, father," said Thankful, taking a seat on a table, and swinging
her little feet somewhat ostentatiously toward him, "I was with Capt.
Allan Brewster of the Connecticut Contingent."

"That man?"

"That man!"

"I forbid you seeing him again."

Thankful gripped the table with a hand on each side of her, to
emphasize the statement, and swinging her feet replied,--

"I shall see him as often as I like, father."

"Thankful Blossom!"

"Abner Blossom!"

"I see you know not," said Mr. Blossom, abandoning the severely
paternal mandatory air for one of confidential disclosure, "I see you
know not his reputation.  He is accused of inciting his regiment to
revolt,--of being a traitor to the cause."

"And since when, Abner Blossom, have YOU felt such concern for the
cause?  Since you refused to sell supplies to the Continental
commissary, except at double profits? since you told me you were glad I
had not polities like Mistress Ford--"

"Hush!" said the father, motioning to the parlor.

"Hush," echoed Thankful indignantly.  "I won't be hushed! Everybody
says 'Hush' to me.  The count says 'Hush!'  Allan says 'Hush!'  You say
'Hush!'  I'm a-weary of this hushing.  Ah, if there was a man who
didn't say it to me!" and Mistress Thankful lifted her fine eyes to the
ceiling.

"You are unwise, Thankful,--foolish, indiscreet.  That is why you
require much monition."

Thankful swung her feet in silence for a few moments, then suddenly
leaped from the table, and, seizing the old man by the lapels of his
coat, fixed her eyes upon him, and said suspiciously.  "Why did you
keep me from going in the company-room?  Why did you bring me in here?"

Blossom senior was staggered for a moment.  "Because, you know, the
count--"

"And you were afraid the count should know I had a sweetheart? Well,
I'll go in and tell him now," she said, marching toward the door.

"Then, why did you not tell him when you slipped out an hour ago? eh,
lass?" queried the old man, grasping her hand.  "But 'tis all one,
Thankful: 'twas not for him I stopped you.  There is a young spark with
him,--ay, came even as you left, lass,--a likely young gallant; and he
and the count are jabbering away in their own lingo, a kind of Italian,
belike; eh, Thankful?"

"I know not," she said thoughtfully.  "Which way came the other?" In
fact, a fear that this young stranger might have witnessed the
captain's embrace began to creep over her.

"From town, my lass."

Thankful turned to her father as if she had been waiting a reply to a
long-asked question: "Well?"

"Were it not well to put on a few furbelows and a tucker?" queried the
old man.  "'Tis a gallant young spark; none of your country folk."

"No," said Thankful, with the promptness of a woman who was looking her
best, and knew it.  And the old man, looking at her, accepted her
judgment, and without another word led her to the parlor door, and,
opening it, said briefly, "My daughter, Mistress Thankful Blossom."

With the opening of the door came the sound of earnest voices that
instantly ceased upon the appearance of Mistress Thankful.  Two
gentlemen lolling before the fire arose instantly, and one came forward
with an air of familiar yet respectful recognition.

"Nay, this is far too great happiness, Mistress Thankful," he said,
with a strongly marked foreign accent, and a still more strongly marked
foreign manner.  "I have been in despair, and my friend here, the Baron
Pomposo, likewise."

The slightest trace of a smile, and the swiftest of reproachful
glances, lit up the dark face of the baron as he bowed low in the
introduction.  Thankful dropped the courtesy of the period,--i. e., a
duck, with semicircular sweep of the right foot forward.  But the right
foot was so pretty, and the grace of the little figure so perfect, that
the baron raised his eyes from the foot to the face in serious
admiration.  In the one rapid feminine glance she had given him, she
had seen that he was handsome; in the second, which she could not help
from his protracted silence, she saw that his beauty centred in his
girlish, half fawn-like dark eyes.

"The baron," explained Mr. Blossom, rubbing his hands together as if
through mere friction he was trying to impart a warmth to the reception
which his hard face discountenanced,--"the baron visits us under
discouragement.  He comes from far countries.  It is the custom of
gentlefolk of--of foreign extraction to wander through strange lands,
commenting upon the habits and doings of the peoples.  He will find in
Jersey," continued Mr. Blossom, apparently appealing to Thankful, yet
really evading her contemptuous glance, "a hard-working yeomanry, ever
ready to welcome the stranger, and account to him, penny for penny, for
all his necessary expenditure; for which purpose, in these troublous
times, he will provide for himself gold or other moneys not affected by
these local disturbances."

"He will find, good friend Blossom," said the baron in a rapid, voluble
way, utterly at variance with the soft, quiet gravity of his eyes,
"Beauty, Grace, Accomplishment, and--eh--Santa Maria, what shall I
say?"  He turned appealingly to the count.

"Virtue," nodded the count.

"Truly, Birtoo! all in the fair lady of thees countries.  Ah, believe
me, honest friend Blossom, there is mooch more in thees than in thoss!"

So much of this speech was addressed to Mistress Thankful, that she had
to show at least one dimple in reply, albeit her brows were slightly
knit, and she had turned upon the speaker her honest, questioning eyes.

"And then the General Washington has been kind enough to offer his
protection," added the count.

"Any fool--any one," supplemented Thankful hastily, with a slight
blush--"may have the general's pass, ay, and his good word.  But what
of Mistress Prudence Bookstaver?--she that has a sweetheart in
Knyphausen's brigade, ay,--I warrant a Hessian, but of gentle blood, as
Mistress Prudence has often told me,--and, look you, all her letters
stopped by the general, ay, I warrant, read by my Lady Washington too,
as if 'twere HER fault that her lad was in arms against Congress.
Riddle me that, now!"

"'Tis but prudence, lass," said Blossom, frowning on the girl. "'Tis
that she might disclose some movement of the army, tending to defeat
the enemy."

"And why should she not try to save her lad from capture or ambuscade
such as befell the Hessian commissary with the provisions that you--"

Mr. Blossom, in an ostensible fatherly embrace, managed to pinch
Mistress Thankful sharply.  "Hush, lass," he said with simulated
playfulness; "your tongue clacks like the Whippany mill.--My daughter
has small concern--'tis the manner of womenfolk--in politics," he
explained to his guests.  "These dangersome days have given her sore
affliction by way of parting comrades of her childhood, and others whom
she has much affected.  It has in some sort soured her."

Mr. Blossom would have recalled this speech as soon as it escaped him,
lest it should lead to a revelation from the truthful Mistress Thankful
of her relations with the Continental captain.  But to his
astonishment, and, I may add, to my own, she showed nothing of that
disposition she had exhibited a few moments before.  On the contrary,
she blushed slightly, and said nothing.

And then the conversation changed,--upon the weather, the hard winter,
the prospects of the Cause, a criticism upon the commander-in-chief's
management of affairs, the attitude of Congress, etc., between Mr.
Blossom and the count; characterized, I hardly need say, by that
positiveness of opinion that distinguishes the unprofessional.  In
another part of the room, it so chanced that Mistress Thankful and the
baron were talking about themselves; the assembly balls; who was the
prettiest woman in Morristown; and whether Gen. Washington's attentions
to Mistress Pyne were only perfunctory gallantry, or what; and if Lady
Washington's hair was really gray; and if that young aide-de-camp,
Major Van Zandt were really in love with Lady or whether his attentions
were only the zeal of a subaltern,--in the midst of which a sudden gust
of wind shook the house; and Mr. Blossom, going to the front door, came
back with the announcement that it was snowing heavily.

And indeed, within that past hour, to their astonished eyes the whole
face of nature had changed.  The moon was gone, the sky hidden in a
blinding, whirling swarm of stinging flakes.  The wind, bitter and
strong, had already fashioned white feathery drifts upon the threshold,
over the painted benches on the porch, and against the door-posts.

Mistress Thankful and the baron had walked to the rear door--the baron
with a slight tropical shudder--to view this meteorological change.  As
Mistress Thankful looked over the snowy landscape, it seemed to her
that all record of her past experience had been effaced: her very
footprints of an hour before were lost; the gray wall on which she
leaned was white and spotless now; even the familiar farm-shed looked
dim and strange and ghostly.  Had she been there? had she seen the
captain? was it all a fancy?  She scarcely knew.

A sudden gust of wind closed the door behind them with a crash, and
sent Mistress Thankful, with a slight feminine scream, forward into the
outer darkness.  But the baron caught her by the waist, and saved her
from Heaven knows what imaginable disaster; and the scene ended in a
half-hysterical laugh.  But the wind then set upon them both with a
malevolent fury; and the baron was, I presume, obliged to draw her
closer to his side.

They were alone, save for the presence of those mischievous
confederates, Nature and Opportunity.  In the half-obscurity of the
storm she could not help turning her mischievous eyes on his.  But she
was perhaps surprised to find them luminous, soft, and, as it seemed to
her at that moment, grave beyond the occasion.  An embarrassment
utterly new and singular seized upon her; and when, as she half feared
yet half expected, he bent down and pressed his lips to hers, she was
for a moment powerless.  But in the next instant she boxed his ears
sharply, and vanished in the darkness. When Mr. Blossom opened the door
to the baron he was surprised to find that gentleman alone, and still
more surprised to find, when they re-entered the house, to see Mistress
Thankful enter at the same moment, demurely, from the front door.

When Mr. Blossom knocked at his daughter's door the next morning it
opened upon her completely dressed, but withal somewhat pale, and, if
the truth must be told, a little surly.

"And you were stirring so early, Thankful," he said: "'twould have been
but decent to have bidden God-speed to the guests, especially the
baron, who seemed much concerned at your absence."

Miss Thankful blushed slightly, but answered with savage celerity, "And
since when is it necessary that I should dance attendance upon every
foreign jack-in-the-box that may lie at the house?"

"He has shown great courtesy to you, mistress, and is a gentleman."

"Courtesy, indeed!" said Mistress Thankful.

"He has not presumed?" said Mr. Blossom suddenly, bringing his cold
gray eyes to bear upon his daughter's.

"No, no," said Thankful hurriedly, flaming a bright scarlet;
"but--nothing. But what have you there? a letter?"

"Ay,--from the captain, I warrant," said Mr. Blossom, handing her a
three-cornered bit of paper: "'twas left here by a camp-follower.
Thankful," he continued, with a meaning glance, "you will heed my
counsel in season.  The captain is not meet for such as you."

Thankful suddenly grew pale and contemptuous again as she snatched the
letter from his hand.  When his retiring footsteps were lost on the
stairs she regained her color, and opened the letter.  It was slovenly
written, grievously misspelled, and read as follows:--


"SWEETHEART: A tyranous Act, begotten in Envy and Jealousie, keeps me
here a prisoner.  Last night I was Basely arrested by Servile Hands for
that Freedom of Thought and Expression for which I have already
Sacrifized so much--aye all that Man hath but Love and Honour.  But the
End is Near.  When for the Maintenance of Power, the Liberties of the
Peoples are subdued by Martial Supremacy and the Dictates of Ambition
the State is Lost.  I lie in Vile Bondage here in Morristown under
charge of Disrespeck--me that a twelvemonth past left a home and
Respectable Connexions to serve my Country.  Believe me still your own
Love, albeit in the Power of Tyrants and condemned it may be to the
scaffold.

"The Messenger is Trustworthy and will speed safely to me such as you
may deliver unto him.  The Provender sanktified by your Hands and made
precious by yr. Love was wrested from me by Servil Hands and the Eggs,
Sweetheart, were somewhat Addled.  The Bacon is, methinks by this time
on the Table of the Comr-in-Chief.  Such is Tyranny and Ambition.
Sweetheart, farewell, for the present.

ALLAN."


Mistress Thankful read this composition once, twice, and then tore it
up.  Then, reflecting that it was the first letter of her lover's that
she had not kept, she tried to put together again the torn fragments,
but vainly, and then in a pet, new to her, cast them from the window.
During the rest of the day she was considerably distraite, and even
manifested more temper than she was wont to do; and later, when her
father rode away on his daily visit to Morristown, she felt strangely
relieved.  By noon the snow ceased, or rather turned into a driving
sleet that again in turn gave way to rain.  By this time she became
absorbed in her household duties,--in which she was usually
skilful,--and in her own thoughts that to-day had a novelty in their
meaning.  In the midst of this, at about dark, her room being in the
rear of the house, she was perhaps unmindful of the trampling of horse
without, or the sound of voices in the hall below.  Neither was
uncommon at that time.  Although protected by the Continental army from
forage or the rudeness of soldiery, the Blossom farm had always been a
halting-place for passing troopers, commissary teamsters, and
reconnoitring officers.  Gen. Sullivan and Col. Hamilton had watered
their horses at its broad, substantial wayside trough, and sat in the
shade of its porch.  Miss Thankful was only awakened from her daydream
by the entrance of the negro farm-hand, Caesar.

"Fo' God, Missy Thankful, them sogers is g'wine into camp in the road,
I reckon, for they's jest makin' theysevs free afo' the house, and
they's an officer in the company-room with his spurs cocked on the
table, readin' a book."

A quick flame leaped into Thankful's cheek, and her pretty brows knit
themselves over darkening eyes.  She arose from her work no longer the
moody girl, but an indignant goddess, and, pushing the servant aside,
swept down the stairs, and threw open the door.

An officer sitting by the fire in an easy, lounging attitude that
justified the servant's criticism, arose instantly with an air of
evident embarrassment and surprise that was, however, as quickly
dominated and controlled by a gentleman's breeding.

"I beg your pardon," he said, with a deep inclination of his handsome
head, "but I had no idea that there was any member of this household at
home--at least, a lady."  He hesitated a moment, catching in the
raising of her brown-fringed lids a sudden revelation of her beauty,
and partly losing his composure.  "I am Major Van Zandt: I have the
honor of addressing--"

"Thankful Blossom," said Thankful a little proudly, divining with a
woman's swift instinct the cause of the major's hesitation.  But her
triumph was checked by a new embarrassment visible in the face of the
officer at the mention of her name.

"Thankful Blossom," repeated the officer quickly.  "You are, then, the
daughter of Abner Blossom?"

"Certainly," said Thankful, turning her inquiring eyes upon him. "He
will be here betimes.  He has gone only to Morristown."  In a new fear
that had taken possession of her, her questioning eyes asked, "Has he
not?"

The officer, answering her eyes rather than her lips, came toward her
gravely.  "He will not return to-day, Mistress Thankful, nor perhaps
even to-morrow.  He is--a prisoner."

Thankful opened her brown eyes aggressively on the major.  "A
prisoner--for what?"

"For aiding and giving comfort to the enemy, and for harboring spies,"
replied the major with military curtness.

Mistress Thankful's cheek flushed slightly at the last sentence: a
recollection of the scene on the porch and the baron's stolen kiss
flashed across her, and for a moment she looked as guilty as if the man
before her had been a witness to the deed.  He saw it, and
misinterpreted her confusion.

"Belike, then," said Mistress Thankful, slightly raising her voice, and
standing squarely before the major, "belike, then, I should be a
prisoner too; for the guests of this house, if they be spies, were MY
guests, and, as my father's daughter, I was their hostess; ay, man, and
right glad to be the hostess of such gallant gentlemen,--gentlemen, I
warrant, too fine to insult a defenceless girl; gentlemen spies that
did not cock their boots on the table, or turn an honest farmer's house
into a tap-room."

An expression of half pain, half amusement, covered the face of the
major, but he made no other reply than by a profound and graceful bow.
Courteous and deprecatory as it was, it apparently exasperated Mistress
Thankful only the more.

"And pray who are these spies, and who is the informer?" said Mistress
Thankful, facing the soldier, with one hand truculently placed on her
flexible hip, and the other slipped behind her. "Methinks 'tis only
honest we should know when and how we have entertained both."

"Your father, Mistress Thankful," said Major Van Zandt gravely, "has
long been suspected of favoring the enemy; but it has been the policy
of the commander-in-chief to overlook the political preferences of
non-combatants, and to strive to win their allegiance to the good cause
by liberal privileges.  But when it was lately discovered that two
strangers, although bearing a pass from him, have been frequenters of
this house under fictitious names--"

"You mean Count Ferdinand and the Baron Pomposo," said Thankful
quickly,--"two honest gentlefolk; and if they choose to pay their
devoirs to a lass--although, perhaps, not a quality lady, yet an honest
girl--"

"Dear Mistress Thankful," said the major with a profound bow and smile,
that, spite of its courtesy, drove Thankful to the verge of wrathful
hysterics, "if you establish that fact,--and, from this slight
acquaintance with your charms, I doubt not you will,--your father is
safe from further inquiry or detention.  The commander-in-chief is a
gentleman who has never underrated the influence of your sex, nor held
himself averse to its fascinations."

"What is the name of this informer?" broke in Mistress Thankful
angrily.  "Who is it that has dared--"

"It is but king's evidence, mayhap, Mistress Thankful; for the informer
is himself under arrest.  It is on the information of Capt. Allan
Brewster of the Connecticut Contingent."

Mistress Thankful whitened, then flushed, and then whitened again. Then
she stood up to the major.

"It's a lie,--a cowardly lie!"

Major Van Zandt bowed.  Mistress Thankful flew up stairs, and in
another moment swept back again into the room in riding hat and habit.

"I suppose I can go and see--my father," she said, without lifting her
eyes to the officer.

"You are free as air, Mistress Thankful.  My orders and instructions,
far from implicating you in your father's offences, do not even suggest
your existence.  Let me help you to your horse."

The girl did not reply.  During that brief interval, however, Caesar
had saddled her white mare, and brought it to the door. Mistress
Thankful, disdaining the offered hand of the major, sprang to the
saddle.

The major still held the reins.  "One moment, Mistress Thankful."

"Let me go!" she said, with suppressed passion.

"One moment, I beg."

His hand still held her bridle-rein.  The mare reared, nearly upsetting
her.  Crimson with rage and mortification, she raised her riding-whip,
and laid it smartly over the face of the man before her.

He dropped the rein instantly.  Then he raised to her a face calm and
colorless, but for a red line extending from his eyebrow to his chin,
and said quietly,--

"I had no desire to detain you.  I only wished to say that when you see
Gen. Washington I know you will be just enough to tell him that Major
Van Zandt knew nothing of your wrongs, or even your presence here,
until you presented them, and that since then he has treated you as
became an officer and a gentleman."

Yet even as he spoke she was gone.  At the moment that her fluttering
skirt swept in a furious gallop down the hillside, the major turned,
and re-entered the house.  The few lounging troopers who were witnesses
of the scene prudently turned their eyes from the white face and
blazing eyes of their officer as he strode by them.  Nevertheless, when
the door closed behind him, contemporary criticism broke out:--

"'Tis a Tory jade, vexed that she cannot befool the major as she has
the captain," muttered Sergeant Tibbitts.

"And going to try her tricks on the general," added Private Hicks.

Howbeit both these critics may have been wrong.  For as Mistress
Thankful thundered down the Morristown road she thought of many things.
She thought of her sweetheart Allan, a prisoner, and pining for HER
help and HER solicitude; and yet--how dared he--if he HAD really
betrayed or misjudged her!  And then she thought bitterly of the count
and the baron, and burned to face the latter, and in some vague way
charge the stolen kiss upon him as the cause of all her shame and
mortification.  And lastly she thought of her father, and began to hate
everybody.  But above all and through all, in her vague fears for her
father, in her passionate indignation against the baron, in her fretful
impatience of Allan, one thing was ever dominant and obtrusive; one
thing she tried to put away, but could not,--the handsome, colorless
face of Major Van Zandt, with the red welt of her riding-whip overlying
its cold outlines.



III

The rising wind, which had ridden much faster than Mistress Thankful,
had increased to a gale by the time it reached Morristown.  It swept
through the leafless maples, and rattled the dry bones of the elms.  It
whistled through the quiet Presbyterian churchyard, as if trying to
arouse the sleepers it had known in days gone by.  It shook the blank,
lustreless windows of the Assembly Rooms over the Freemasons' Tavern,
and wrought in their gusty curtains moving shadows of those amply
petticoated dames and tightly hosed cavaliers who had swung in "Sir
Roger," or jigged in "Money Musk," the night before.

But I fancy it was around the isolated "Ford Mansion," better known as
the "headquarters," that the wind wreaked its grotesque rage. It howled
under its scant eaves, it sang under its bleak porch, it tweaked the
peak of its front gable, it whistled through every chink and cranny of
its square, solid, unpicturesque structure. Situated on a hillside that
descended rapidly to the Whippany River, every summer zephyr that
whispered through the porches of the Morristown farm-houses charged as
a stiff breeze upon the swinging half doors and windows of the "Ford
Mansion"; every wintry wind became a gale that threatened its security.
The sentry who paced before its front porch knew from experience when
to linger under its lee, and adjust his threadbare outer coat to the
bitter north wind.

Within the house something of this cheerlessness prevailed.  It had an
ascetic gloom, which the scant firelight of the reception-room, and the
dying embers on the dining-room hearth, failed to dissipate.  The
central hall was broad, and furnished plainly with a few rush-bottomed
chairs, on one of which half dozed a black body-servant of the
commander-in-chief.  Two officers in the dining-room, drawn close by
the chimney-corner, chatted in undertones, as if mindful that the door
of the drawing-room was open, and their voices might break in upon its
sacred privacy.  The swinging light in the hall partly illuminated it,
or rather glanced gloomily from the black polished furniture, the
lustreless chairs, the quaint cabinet, the silent spinet, the
skeleton-legged centre-table, and finally upon the motionless figure of
a man seated by the fire.

It was a figure since so well known to the civilized world, since so
celebrated in print and painting, as to need no description here.  Its
rare combination of gentle dignity with profound force, of a set
resoluteness of purpose with a philosophical patience, have been so
frequently delivered to a people not particularly remarkable for these
qualities, that I fear it has too often provoked a spirit of playful
aggression, in which the deeper underlying meaning was forgotten.  So
let me add that in manner, physical equipoise, and even in the mere
details of dress, this figure indicated a certain aristocratic
exclusiveness.  It was the presentment of a king,--a king who by the
irony of circumstances was just then waging war against all kingship; a
ruler of men, who just then was fighting for the right of these men to
govern themselves, but whom by his own inherent right he dominated.
From the crown of his powdered head to the silver buckle of his shoe he
was so royal that it was not strange that his brother George of England
and Hanover--ruling by accident, otherwise impiously known as the
"grace of God"--could find no better way of resisting his power than by
calling him "Mr. Washington."

The sound of horses' hoofs, the formal challenge of sentry, the grave
questioning of the officer of the guard, followed by footsteps upon the
porch, did not apparently disturb his meditation.  Nor did the opening
of the outer door, and a charge of cold air into the hall that invaded
even the privacy of the reception-room, and brightened the dying embers
on the hearth, stir his calm pre-occupation.  But an instant later
there was the distinct rustle of a feminine skirt in the hall, a
hurried whispering of men's voices, and then the sudden apparition of a
smooth, fresh-faced young officer over the shoulder of the unconscious
figure.

"I beg your pardon, general," said the officer doubtingly, "but--"

"You are not intruding, Col. Hamilton," said the general quietly.

"There is a young lady without who wishes an audience of your
Excellency.  'Tis Mistress Thankful Blossom,--the daughter of Abner
Blossom, charged with treasonous practice and favoring the enemy, now
in the guard-house at Morristown."

"Thankful Blossom?" repeated the general interrogatively.

"Your Excellency doubtless remembers a little provincial beauty and a
famous toast of the country-side,--the Cressida of our Morristown epic,
who led our gallant.  Connecticut captain astray--"

"You have the advantages, besides the better memory of a younger man,
colonel," said Washington, with a playful smile that slightly reddened
the cheek of his aide-de-camp.  "Yet I think I HAVE heard of this
phenomenon.  By all means, admit her--and her escort."

"She is alone, general," responded the subordinate.

"Then the more reason why we should be polite," returned Washington,
for the first time altering his easy posture, rising to his feet, and
lightly clasping his ruffled hands before him.  "We must not keep her
waiting.  Give her access, my dear colonel, at once; and even as she
came,--ALONE."

The aide-de-camp bowed and withdrew.  In another moment the half-opened
door swung wide to Mistress Thankful Blossom.

She was so beautiful in her simple riding-dress, so quaint and original
in that very beauty, and, above all, so teeming with a certain vital
earnestness of purpose just positive and audacious enough to set off
that beauty, that the grave gentleman before her did not content
himself with the usual formal inclination of courtesy, but actually
advanced, and, taking her cold little hand in his, graciously led her
to the chair he had just vacated.

"Even if your name were not known to me, Mistress Thankful," said the
commander-in-chief, looking down upon her with grave politeness,
"nature has, methinks, spared you the necessity of any introduction to
the courtesy of a gentleman.  But how can I especially serve you?"

Alack! the blaze of Mistress Thankful's brown eyes had become somewhat
dimmed in the grave half-lights of the room, in the graver, deeper
dignity of the erect, soldier-like figure before her.  The bright color
born of the tempest within and without had somehow faded from her
cheek; the sauciness begotten from bullying her horse in the last
half-hour's rapid ride was so subdued by the actual presence of the man
she had come to bully, that I fear she had to use all her self-control
to keep down her inclination to whimper, and to keep back the tears,
that, oddly enough, rose to her sweet eyes as she lifted them to the
quietly critical yet placid glance of her interlocutor.

"I can readily conceive the motive of this visit, Miss Thankful,"
continued Washington, with a certain dignified kindliness that was more
reassuring than the formal gallantry of the period; "and it is, I
protest, to your credit.  A father's welfare, however erring and weak
that father may be, is most seemly in a maiden--"

Thankful's eyes flashed again as she rose to her feet.  Her upper lip,
that had a moment before trembled in a pretty infantine distress, now
stiffened and curled as she confronted the dignified figure before her.
"It is not of my father I would speak," she said saucily: "I did not
ride here alone to-night, in this weather, to talk of HIM; I warrant HE
can speak for himself.  I came here to speak of myself, of lies--ay,
LIES told of me, a poor girl; ay, of cowardly gossip about me and my
sweetheart, Capt. Brewster, now confined in prison because he hath
loved me, a lass without polities or adherence to the cause--as if
'twere necessary every lad should ask the confidence or permission of
yourself or, belike, my Lady Washington, in his preferences."

She paused a moment, out of breath.  With a woman's quickness of
intuition she saw the change in Washington's face,--saw a certain cold
severity overshadowing it.  With a woman's fateful persistency--a
persistency which I humbly suggest might, on occasion, be honorably
copied by our more politic sex--she went on to say what was in her,
even if she were obliged, with a woman's honorable inconsistency, to
unsay it an hour or two later; an inconsistency which I also humbly
protest might be as honorably imitated by us--on occasion.

"It has been said," said Thankful Blossom quickly, "that my father has
given entertainment knowingly to two spies,--two spies that, begging
your Excellency's pardon, and the pardon of Congress, I know only as
two honorable gentlemen who have as honorably tendered me their
affections.  It is said, and basely and most falsely too, that my
sweetheart, Capt. Allan Brewster, has lodged this information.  I have
ridden here to deny it.  I have ridden here to demand of you that an
honest woman's reputation shall not be sacrificed to the interests of
politics; that a prying mob of ragamuffins shall not be sent to an
honest farmer's house to spy and spy--and turn a poor girl out of doors
that they might do it. 'Tis shameful, so it is; there! 'tis most
scandalous, so it is: there, now!  Spies, indeed! what are THEY, pray?"

In the indignation which the recollection of her wrongs had slowly
gathered in her, from the beginning of this speech, she had advanced
her face, rosy with courage, and beautiful in its impertinence, within
a few inches of the dignified features and quiet gray eyes of the great
commander.  To her utter stupefaction, he bent his head and kissed her,
with a grave benignity, full on the centre of her audacious forehead.

"Be seated, I beg, Mistress Blossom," he said, taking her cold hand in
his, and quietly replacing her in the unoccupied chair.  "Be seated, I
beg, and give me, if you can, your attention for a moment.  The officer
intrusted with the ungracious task of occupying your father's house is
a member of my military family, and a gentleman.  If he has so far
forgotten himself--if he has so far disgraced himself and me as--"

"No! no!" uttered Thankful, with feverish alacrity, "the gentleman was
most considerate.  On the contrary--mayhap--I"--she hesitated, and then
came to a full stop, with a heightened color, as a vivid recollection
of that gentleman's face, with the mark of her riding-whip lying across
it, rose before her.

"I was about to say that Major Van Zandt, as a gentleman, has known how
to fully excuse the natural impulses of a daughter," continued
Washington, with a look of perfect understanding; "but let me now
satisfy you on another point, where it would seem we greatly differ."

He walked to the door, and summoned his servant, to whom he gave an
order.  In another moment the fresh-faced young officer who had at
first admitted her re-appeared with a file of official papers.  He
glanced slyly at Thankful Blossom's face with an amused look, as if he
had already heard the colloquy between her and his superior officer,
and had appreciated that which neither of the earnest actors in the
scene had themselves felt,--a certain sense of humor in the situation.

Howbeit, standing before them, Col. Hamilton gravely turned over the
file of papers.  Thankful bit her lips in embarrassment.  A slight
feeling of awe, and a presentiment of some fast-coming shame; a new and
strange consciousness of herself, her surroundings, of the dignity of
the two men before her; an uneasy feeling of the presence of two ladies
who had in some mysterious way entered the room from another door, and
who seemed to be intently regarding her from afar with a curiosity as
if she were some strange animal; and a wild premonition that her whole
future life and happiness depended upon the events of the next few
moments,--so took possession of her, that the brave girl trembled for a
moment in her isolation and loneliness.  In another instant Col.
Hamilton, speaking to his superior, but looking obviously at one of the
ladies who had entered, handed a paper to Washington, and said, "Here
are the charges."

"Read them," said the general coldly.

Col. Hamilton, with a manifest consciousness of another hearer than
Mistress Blossom and his general, read the paper.  It was couched in
phrases of military and legal precision, and related briefly, that upon
the certain and personal knowledge of the writer, Abner Blossom of the
"Blossom Farm" was in the habit of entertaining two gentlemen, namely,
the "Count Ferdinand" and the "Baron Pomposo," suspected enemies of the
cause, and possible traitors to the Continental army.  It was signed by
Allan Brewster, late captain in the Connecticut Contingent.

As Col. Hamilton exhibited the signature, Thankful Blossom had no
difficulty in recognizing the familiar bad hand and equally familiar
mis-spelling of her lover.

She rose to her feet.  With eyes that showed her present trouble and
perplexity as frankly as they had a moment before blazed with her
indignation, she met, one by one, the glances of the group who now
seemed to be closing round her.  Yet with a woman's instinct she felt,
I am constrained to say, more unfriendliness in the silent presence of
the two women than in the possible outspoken criticism of our
much-abused sex.

"Of course," said a voice which Thankful at once, by a woman's unerring
instinct, recognized as the elder of the two ladies, and the legitimate
keeper of the conscience of some one of the men who were present,--"of
course Mistress Thankful will be able to elect which of her lovers
among her country's enemies she will be able to cling to for support in
her present emergency.  She does not seem to have been so special in
her favors as to have positively excluded any one."

"At least, dear Lady Washington, she will not give it to the man who
has proven a traitor to HER," said the younger woman impulsively.
"That is--I beg your ladyship's pardon"--she hesitated, observing in
the dead silence that ensued that the two superior male beings present
looked at each other in lofty astonishment.

"He that is trait'rous to his country," said Lady Washington coldly,
"is apt to be trait'rous elsewhere."

"'Twere as honest to say that he that was trait'rous to his king was
trait'rous to his country," said Mistress Thankful with sudden
audacity, bending her knit brows on Lady Washington.  But that lady
turned dignifiedly away, and Mistress Thankful again faced the general.

"I ask your pardon," she said proudly, "for troubling you with my
wrongs.  But it seems to me that even if another and a greater wrong
were done me by my sweetheart, through jealousy, it would not justify
this accusation against me, even though," she added, darting a wicked
glance at the placid brocaded back of Lady Washington, "even though
that accusation came from one who knows that jealousy may belong to the
wife of a patriot as well as a traitor."  She was herself again after
this speech, although her face was white with the blow she had taken
and returned.

Col. Hamilton passed his hand across his mouth, and coughed slightly.
Gen. Washington, standing by the fire with an impassive face, turned to
Thankful gravely:--

"You are forgetting, Mistress Thankful, that you have not told me how I
can serve you.  It cannot be that you are still concerned in Capt.
Brewster, who has given evidence against your other--FRIENDS, and
tacitly against YOU.  Nor can it be on their account, for I regret to
say they are still free and unknown.  If you come with any information
exculpating them, and showing they are not spies or hostile to the
cause, your father's release shall be certain and speedy.  Let me ask
you a single question:  Why do you believe them honest?"

"Because," said Mistress Thankful, "they were--were--gentlemen."

"Many spies have been of excellent family, good address, and fair
talents," said Washington gravely; "but you have, mayhap, some other
reason."

"Because they talked only to ME," said Mistress Thankful, blushing
mightily; "because they preferred my company to father's; because"--she
hesitated a moment--"because they spoke not of politics, but--of--that
which lads mainly talk of--and--and,"--here she broke down a
little,--"and the baron I only saw once, but he"--here she broke down
utterly--"I know they weren't spies: there, now!"

"I must ask you something more," said Washington, with grave kindness:
"whether you give me the information or not, you will consider, that,
if what you believe is true, it cannot in any way injure the gentlemen
you speak of; while, on the other hand, it may relieve your father of
suspicion.  Will you give to Col. Hamilton, my secretary, a full
description of them,--that fuller description which Capt. Brewster, for
reasons best known to yourself, was unable to give?"

Mistress Thankful hesitated for a moment, and then, with one of her
truthful glances at the commander-in-chief, began a detailed account of
the outward semblance of the count.  Why she began with him, I am
unable to say; but possibly it was because it was easier, for when she
came to describe the baron, she was, I regret to say, somewhat vague
and figurative.  Not so vague, however, but that Col. Hamilton suddenly
started up with a look at his chief, who instantly checked it with a
gesture of his ruffled hand.

"I thank you.  Mistress Thankful," he said quite impassively, "but did
this other gentleman, this baron--"

"Pomposo," said Thankful proudly.  A titter originated in the group of
ladies by the window, and became visible on the fresh face of Col.
Hamilton; but the dignified color of Washington's countenance was
unmoved.

"May I ask if the baron made an honorable tender of his affections to
you," he continued, with respectful gravity,--"if his attentions were
known to your father, and were such as honest Mistress Blossom could
receive?"

"Father introduced him to me, and wanted me to be kind to him. He--he
kissed me, and I slapped his face," said Thankful quickly, with cheeks
as red, I warrant, as the baron's might have been.

The moment the words had escaped her truthful lips, she would have
given her life to recall them.  To her astonishment, however, Col.
Hamilton laughed outright, and the ladies turned and approached her,
but were checked by a slight gesture from the otherwise impassive
figure of the general.

"It is possible, Mistress Thankful," he resumed, with undisturbed
composure, "that one at least of these gentlemen may be known to us,
and that your instincts may be correct.  At least rest assured that we
shall fully inquire into it, and that your father shall have the
benefit of that inquiry."

"I thank your Excellency," said Thankful, still reddening under the
contemplation of her own late frankness, and retreating toward the
door.  "I--think--I--must--go--now.  It is late, and I have far to
ride."

To her surprise, however, Washington stepped forward, and, again taking
her hands in his, said with a grave smile, "For that very reason, if
for none other, you must be our guest to-night, Mistress Thankful
Blossom.  We still retain our Virginian ideas of hospitality, and are
tyrannous enough to make strangers conform to them, even though we have
but perchance the poorest of entertainment to offer them.  Lady
Washington will not permit Mistress Thankful Blossom to leave her roof
to-night until she has partaken of her courtesy as well as her counsel."

"Mistress Thankful Blossom will make us believe that she has at least
in so far trusted our desire to serve her justly, by accepting our poor
hospitality for a single night," said Lady Washington, with a stately
courtesy.

Thankful Blossom still stood irresolutely at the door.  But the next
moment a pair of youthful arms encircled her; and the younger
gentlewoman, looking into her brown eyes with an honest frankness equal
to her own, said caressingly, "Dear Mistress Thankful, though I am but
a guest in her ladyship's house, let me, I pray you, add my voice to
hers.  I am Mistress Schuyler of Albany, at your service, Mistress
Thankful, as Col. Hamilton here will bear me witness, did I need any
interpreter to your honest heart.  Believe me, dear Mistress Thankful,
I sympathize with you, and only beg you to give me an opportunity
to-night to serve you.  You will stay, I know, and you will stay with
me; and we shall talk over the faithlessness of that over-jealous
Yankee captain who has proved himself, I doubt not, as unworthy of YOU
as he is of his country."

Hateful to Thankful as was the idea of being commiserated, she
nevertheless could not resist the gentle courtesy and gracious sympathy
of Miss Schuyler.  Besides, it must be confessed that for the first
time in her life she felt a doubt of the power of her own independence,
and a strange fascination for this young gentlewoman whose arms were
around her, who could so thoroughly sympathize with her, and yet allow
herself to be snubbed by Lady Washington.

"You have a mother, I doubt not?" said Thankful, raising her
questioning eyes to Miss Schuyler.

Irrelevant as this question seemed to the two gentlemen, Miss Schuyler
answered it with feminine intuition: "And you, dear Mistress Thankful--"

"Have none," said Thankful; and here, I regret to say, she whimpered
slightly, at which Miss Schuyler, with tears in her own fine eyes, bent
her head suddenly to Thankful's ear, put her arm about the waist of the
pretty stranger, and then, to the astonishment of Col. Hamilton,
quietly swept her out of the august presence.

When the door had closed upon them, Col. Hamilton turned
half-smilingly, half-inquiringly, to his chief.  Washington returned
his glance kindly but gravely, and then said quietly,--

"If your suspicions jump with mine, colonel, I need not remind you that
it is a matter so delicate that it would be as well if you locked it in
your own breast for the present; at least, that you should not intimate
to the gentleman whom you may have suspected, aught that has passed
this evening."

"As you will, general," said the subaltern respectfully; "but may I
ask"--he hesitated--"if you believe that anything more than a passing
fancy for a pretty girl--"

"When I asked your silence, colonel," interrupted Washington kindly,
laying his hand upon the shoulder of the younger man, "it was because I
thought the matter sufficiently momentous to claim my own private and
especial attention."

"I ask your Excellency's pardon," said the young man, reddening through
his fresh complexion like a girl; "I only meant--"

"That you would ask to be relieved to-night," interrupted Washington,
with a benign smile, "forasmuch as you wished the more to show
entertainment to our dear friend Miss Schuyler, and her guest; a
wayward girl, colonel, but, methinks, an honest one. Treat her of your
own quality, colonel, but discreetly, and not too kindly, lest we have
Mistress Schuyler, another injured damsel, on our hands;" and with a
half playful gesture peculiar to the man, and yet not inconsistent with
his dignity, he half led, half pushed his youthful secretary from the
room.

When the door had closed upon the colonel, Lady Washington rustled
toward her husband, who stood still, quiet and passive, on the
hearthstone.

"You surely see in this escapade nothing of political intrigue--no
treachery?" she said hastily.

"No," said Washington quietly.

"Nothing more than an idle, wanton intrigue with a foolish, vain
country girl?"

"Pardon me, my lady," said Washington gravely.  "I doubt not we may
misjudge her.  'Tis no common rustic lass that can thus stir the
country side.  'Twere an insult to your sex to believe it.  It is not
yet sure that she has not captured even so high game as she has named.
If she has, it would add another interest to a treaty of comity and
alliance."

"That creature!" said Lady Washington,--"that light-o'-love with her
Connecticut captain lover!  Pardon me, but this is preposterous;" and
with a stiff courtesy she swept from the room, leaving the central
figure of history--as such central figures are apt to be left--alone.

Later in the evening Mistress Schuyler so far subdued the tears and
emotions of Thankful, that she was enabled to dry her eyes, and
re-arrange her brown hair in the quaint little mirror in Mistress
Schuyler's chamber; Mistress Schuyler herself lending a touch and
suggestion here and there, after the secret freemasonry of her sex.
"You are well rid of this forsworn captain, dear Mistress Thankful; and
methinks that with hair as beautiful as yours, the new style of wearing
it, though a modish frivolity, is most becoming.  I assure you 'tis
much affected in New York and Philadelphia,--drawn straight back from
the forehead, after this manner, as you see."

The result was, that an hour later Mistress Schuyler and Mistress
Blossom presented themselves to Col. Hamilton in the reception-room,
with a certain freshness and elaboration of toilet that not only quite
shamed the young officer's affaire negligence, but caused him to open
his eyes in astonishment.  "Perhaps she would rather be alone, that she
might indulge her grief," he said doubtingly, in an aside to Miss
Schuyler, "rather than appear in company."

"Nonsense," quoth Mistress Schuyler.  "Is a young woman to mope and
sigh because her lover proves false?"

"But her father is a prisoner," said Hamilton in amazement.

"Can you look me in the face," said Mistress Schuyler mischievously,
"and tell me that you don't know that in twenty-four hours her father
will be cleared of these charges?  Nonsense!  Do you think I have no
eyes in my head?  Do you think I misread the general's face and your
own?"

"But, my dear girl," said the officer in alarm.

"Oh! I told her so, but not WHY," responded Miss Schuyler with a wicked
look in her dark eyes, "though I had warrant enough to do so, to serve
you for keeping a secret from ME!"

And with this Parthian shot she returned to Mistress Thankful, who,
with her face pressed against the window, was looking out on the
moonlit slope beside the Whippany River.

For, by one of those freaks peculiar to the American springtide, the
weather had again marvellously changed.  The rain had ceased, and the
ground was covered with an icing of sleet and snow, that now glittered
under a clear sky and a brilliant moon.  The northeast wind that shook
the loose sashes of the windows had transformed each dripping tree and
shrub to icy stalactites that silvered under the moon's cold touch.

"'Tis a beautiful sight, ladies," said a bluff, hearty, middle-aged
man, joining the group by the window.  "But God send the spring to us
quickly, and spare us any more such cruel changes!  My lady moon looks
fine enough, glittering in yonder treetops; but I doubt not she looks
down upon many a poor fellow shivering under his tattered blankets in
the camp beyond.  Had ye seen the Connecticut tatterdemalions file by
last night, with arms reversed, showing their teeth at his Excellency,
and yet not daring to bite; had ye watched these faint-hearts, these
doubting Thomases, ripe for rebellion against his Excellency, against
the cause, but chiefly against the weather,--ye would pray for a thaw
that would melt the hearts of these men as it would these stubborn
fields around us. Two weeks more of such weather would raise up not one
Allan Brewster, but a dozen such malcontent puppies ripe for a
drum-head court-martial."

"Yet 'tis a fine night, Gen. Sullivan," said Col. Hamilton, sharply
nudging the ribs of his superior officer with his elbow.  "There would
be little trouble on such a night, I fancy, to track our ghostly
visitant."  Both of the ladies becoming interested, and Col. Hamilton
having thus adroitly turned the flank of his superior officer, he went
on, "You should know that the camp, and indeed the whole locality here,
is said to be haunted by the apparition of a gray-coated figure, whose
face is muffled and hidden in his collar, but who has the password pat
to his lips, and whose identity hath baffled the sentries.  This
figure, it is said, forasmuch as it has been seen just before an
assault, an attack, or some tribulation of the army, is believed by
many to be the genius or guardian spirit of the cause, and, as such,
has incited sentries and guards to greater vigilance, and has to some
seemed a premonition of disaster.  Before the last outbreak of the
Connecticut militia, Master Graycoat haunted the outskirts of the
weather-beaten and bedraggled camp, and, I doubt not, saw much of that
preparation that sent that regiment of faint-hearted onion-gatherers to
flaunt their woes and their wrongs in the face of the general himself."

Here Col. Hamilton, in turn, received a slight nudge from Mistress
Schuyler, and ended his speech somewhat abruptly.

Mistress Thankful was not unmindful of both these allusions to her
faithless lover, but only a consciousness of mortification and wounded
pride was awakened by them.  In fact, during the first tempest of her
indignation at his arrest, still later at the arrest of her father, and
finally at the discovery of his perfidy to her, she had forgotten that
he was her lover; she had forgotten her previous tenderness toward him;
and, now that her fire and indignation were spent, only a sense of
numbness and vacancy remained.  All that had gone before seemed not
something to be regretted as her own act, but rather as the act of
another Thankful Blossom, who had been lost that night in the
snow-storm: she felt she had become, within the last twenty-four hours,
not perhaps ANOTHER woman, but for the first time a WOMEN.

Yet it was singular that she felt more confused when, a few moments
later, the conversation turned upon Major Van Zandt: it was still more
singular that she even felt considerably frightened at that confusion.
Finally she found herself listening with alternate irritability, shame,
and curiosity, to praises of that gentleman, of his courage, his
devotion, and his personal graces.  For one wild moment Thankful felt
like throwing herself on the breast of Mistress Schuyler, and
confessing her rudeness to the major; but a conviction that Mistress
Schuyler would share that secret with Col. Hamilton, that Major Van
Zandt might not like that revelation, and, oddly enough associated with
this, a feeling of unconquerable irritability toward that handsome and
gentle young officer, kept her mouth closed.  "Besides," she said to
herself, "he ought to know, if he's such a fine gentleman as they say,
just how I was feeling, and that I don't mean any rudeness to him;" and
with this unanswerable feminine logic poor Thankful to some extent
stilled her own honest little heart.

But not, I fear, entirely.  The night was a restless one to her: like
all impulsive natures, the season of reflection, and perhaps distrust,
came to her upon acts that were already committed, and when reason
seemed to light the way only to despair.  She saw the folly of her
intrusion at the headquarters, as she thought, only when it was too
late to remedy it; she saw the gracelessness and discourtesy of her
conduct to Major Van Zandt, only when distance and time rendered an
apology weak and ineffectual.  I think she cried a little to herself,
lying in the strange gloomy chamber of the healthfully sleeping
Mistress Schuyler, the sweet security of whose manifest goodness and
kindness she alternately hated and envied; and at last, unable to stand
it longer, slipped noiselessly from her bed, and stood very wretched
and disconsolate before the window that looked out upon the slope
toward the Whippany River. The moon on the new-fallen, frigid, and
untrodden snow shone brightly.  Far to the left it glittered on the
bayonet of a sentry pacing beside the river-bank, and gave a sense of
security to the girl that perhaps strengthened another idea that had
grown up in her mind.  Since she could not sleep, why should she not
ramble about until she could?  She had been accustomed to roam about
the farm in all weathers and at all times and seasons.  She recalled to
herself the night--a tempestuous one--when she had risen in serious
concern as to the lying-in of her favorite Alderney heifer, and how she
had saved the life of the calf, a weakling, dropped apparently from the
clouds in the tempest, as it lay beside the barn.  With this in her
mind, she donned her dress again, and, with Mistress Schuyler's mantle
over her shoulders, noiselessly crept down the narrow staircase, passed
the sleeping servant on the settee, and, opening the rear door, in
another moment was inhaling the crisp air, and tripping down the crisp
snow of the hillside.

But Mistress Thankful had overlooked one difference between her own
farm and a military encampment.  She had not proceeded a dozen yards
before a figure apparently started out of the ground beneath her, and,
levelling a bayoneted musket across her path, called, "Halt!"

The hot blood mounted to the girl's cheek at the first imperative
command she had ever received in her life: nevertheless she halted
unconsciously, and without a word confronted the challenger with her
old audacity.

"Who comes there?" reiterated the sentry, still keeping his bayonet
level with her breast.

"Thankful Blossom," she responded promptly.

The sentry brought his musket to a "present."  "Pass, Thankful Blossom,
and God send it soon and the spring with it, and good-night," he said,
with a strong Milesian accent.  And before the still-amazed girl could
comprehend the meaning of his abrupt challenge, or his equally abrupt
departure, he had resumed his monotonous pace in the moonlight.
Indeed, as she stood looking after him, the whole episode, the odd
unreality of the moonlit landscape, the novelty of her position, the
morbid play of her thoughts, seemed to make it part of a dream which
the morning light might dissipate, but could never fully explain.

With something of this feeling still upon her, she kept her way to the
river.  Its banks were still fringed with ice, through which its dark
current flowed noiselessly.  She knew it flowed through the camp where
lay her faithless lover, and for an instant indulged the thought of
following it, and facing him with the proof of his guilt; but even at
the thought she recoiled with a new and sudden doubt in herself, and
stood dreamily watching the shimmer of the moon on the icy banks, until
another, and, it seemed to her, equally unreal vision suddenly stayed
her feet, and drove the blood from her feverish cheeks.

A figure was slowly approaching from the direction of the sleeping
encampment.  Tall, erect, and habited in a gray surtout, with a hood
partially concealing its face, it was the counterfeit presentment of
the ghostly visitant she had heard described. Thankful scarcely
breathed.  The brave little heart that had not quailed before the
sentry's levelled musket a moment before now faltered and stood still,
as the phantom with a slow and majestic tread moved toward her.  She
had only time to gain the shelter of a tree before the figure,
majestically unconscious of her presence, passed slowly by.  Through
all her terror Thankful was still true to a certain rustic habit of
practical perception to observe that the tread of the phantom was quite
audible over the crust of snow, and was visible and palpable as the
imprint of a military boot.

The blood came back to Thankful's cheek, and with it her old audacity.
In another instant she was out from the tree, and tracking with a light
feline tread the apparition that now loomed up the hill before her.
Slipping from tree to tree, she followed until it passed before the
door of a low hut or farm-shed that stood midway up the hill.  Here it
entered, and the door closed behind it.  With every sense feverishly
alert, Thankful, from the secure advantage of a large maple, watched
the door of the hut.  In a few moments it re-opened to the same figure
free of its gray enwrappings.  Forgetful of every thing now, but
detecting the face of the impostor, the fearless girl left the tree,
and placed herself directly in the path of the figure.  At the same
moment it turned toward her inquiringly, and the moonlight fell full
upon the calm, composed features of Gen. Washington.

In her consternation Thankful could only drop an embarrassed courtesy,
and hang out two lovely signals of distress in her cheeks.  The face of
the pseudo ghost alone remained unmoved.

"You are wandering late, Mistress Thankful," he said at last, with a
paternal gravity; "and I fear that the formal restraint of a military
household has already given you some embarrassment. Yonder sentry, for
instance, might have stopped you."

"Oh, he did!" said Thankful quickly; "but it's all right, please your
Excellency.  He asked me 'Who went there,' and I told him; and he was
vastly polite, I assure you."

The grave features of the commander-in-chief relaxed in a smile. "You
are more happy than most of your sex in turning a verbal compliment to
practical account.  For know then, dear young lady, that in honor of
your visit to the headquarters, the password to-night through this
encampment was none other than your own pretty patronymic,--'Thankful
Blossom.'"

The tears glittered in the girl's eyes, and her lip trembled; but, with
all her readiness of speech, she could only say, "Oh, your Excellency."

"Then you DID pass the sentry?" continued Washington, looking at her
intently with a certain grave watchfulness in his gray eyes. "And
doubtless you wandered at the river-bank.  Although I myself, tempted
by the night, sometimes extend my walk as far as yonder shed, it were a
hazardous act for a young lady to pass beyond the protection of the
line."

"Oh! I met no one, your Excellency," said the usually truthful Thankful
hastily, rushing to her first lie with grateful impetuosity.

"And saw no one?" asked Washington quietly.

"No one," said Thankful, raising her brown eyes to the general's.

They both looked at each other,--the naturally most veracious young
woman in the colonies, and the subsequent allegorical impersonation of
truth in America,--and knew each other lied, and, I imagine, respected
each other for it.

"I am glad to hear you say so, Mistress Thankful," said Washington
quietly; "for 'twould have been natural for you to have sought an
interview with your recreant lover in yonder camp, though the attempt
would have been unwise and impossible."

"I had no such thought, your Excellency," said Thankful, who had really
quite forgotten her late intention; "yet, if with your permission I
could hold a few moments' converse with Capt. Brewster, it would
greatly ease my mind."

"'Twould not be well for the present," said Washington thoughtfully.
"But in a day or two Capt. Brewster will be tried by court-martial at
Morristown.  It shall be so ordered that when he is conveyed thither
his guard shall halt at the Blossom Farm.  I will see that the officer
in command gives you an opportunity to see him.  And I think I can
promise also, Mistress Thankful, that your father shall be also present
under his own roof, a free man."

They had reached the entrance to the mansion, and entered the hall.
Thankful turned impulsively, and kissed the extended hand of the
commander.  "You are so good!  I have been so foolish--so very, very
wrong," she said, with a slight trembling of her lip.  "And your
Excellency believes my story; and those gentlemen were NOT spies, but
even as they gave themselves to be."

"I said not that much," replied Washington with a kindly smile, "but no
matter.  Tell me rather, Mistress Thankful, how far your acquaintance
with these gentlemen has gone; or did it end with the box on the ear
that you gave the baron?"

"He had asked me to ride with him to the Baskingridge, and I--had
said--yes," faltered Mistress Thankful.

"Unless I misjudge you, Mistress Thankful, you can without great
sacrifice promise me that you will not see him until I give you my
permission," said Washington, with grave playfulness.

The swinging light shone full in Thankful's truthful eyes as she lifted
them to his.

"I do," she said quietly.

"Good-night," said the commander, with a formal bow.

"Good-night, your Excellency."



IV

The sun was high over the Short Hills when Mistress Thankful, the next
day, drew up her sweating mare beside the Blossom Farm gate. She had
never looked prettier, she had never felt more embarrassed, as she
entered her own house.  During her rapid ride she had already framed a
speech of apology to Major Van Zandt, which, however, utterly fled from
her lips as that officer showed himself respectfully on the threshold.
Yet she permitted him to usurp the functions of the grinning Caesar,
and help her from her horse; albeit she was conscious of exhibiting the
awkward timidity of a bashful rustic, until at last, with a stammering,
"Thank ye," she actually ran up stairs to hide her glowing face and far
too conscious eyelids.

During the rest of that day Major Van Zandt quietly kept out of the
way, without obtrusively seeming to avoid her.  Yet, when they met
casually in the performance of her household duties, the innocent
Mistress Thankful noticed, under her downcast penitential eyelids, that
the eyes of the officer followed her intently.  And thereat she fell
unconsciously to imitating him; and so they eyed each other furtively
like cats, and rubbed themselves along the walls of rooms and passages
when they met, lest they should seem designedly to come near each
other, and enacted the gravest and most formal of genuflexions,
courtesies, and bows, when they accidentally DID meet.  And just at the
close of the second day, as the elegant Major Van Zandt was feeling
himself fast becoming a drivelling idiot and an awkward country booby,
the arrival of a courier from headquarters saved that gentleman his
self-respect forever.

Mistress Thankful was in her sitting-room when he knocked at her door.
She opened it in sudden, conscious trepidation.

"I ask pardon for intruding, Mistress Thankful Blossom," he said
gravely; "but I have here"--he held out a pretentious document--"a
letter for you from headquarters.  May I hope that it contains good
news,--the release of your father.--and that it relieves you from my
presence, and an espionage which I assure you cannot be more unpleasant
to you than it has been to myself."

As he entered the room, Thankful had risen to her feet with the full
intention of delivering to him her little set apology; but, as he ended
his speech, she looked at him blankly, and burst out crying.

Of course he was in an instant at her side, and holding her cold little
hand.  Then she managed to say, between her tears, that she had been
wanting to make an apology to him; that she had wanted to say ever
since she arrived that she had been rude, very rude, and that she knew
he never could forgive her; that she had been trying to say that she
never could forget his gentle forbearance: "only," she added, suddenly
raising her tear-fringed brown lids to the astonished man, "YOU
WOULDN'T EVER LET ME!"

"Dear Mistress Thankful," said the major, in conscience-stricken
horror, "if I have made myself distant to you, believe me it was only
because I feared to intrude upon your sorrow.  I really--dear Mistress
Thankful--I--"

"When you took all the pains to go round the hall instead of through
the dining-room, lest I should ask you to forgive me," sobbed Mistress
Thankful, "I thought--you--must--hate me, and preferred to--"

"Perhaps this letter may mitigate your sorrow, Mistress Thankful," said
the officer, pointing to the letter she still held unconsciously in her
hand.

With a blush at her pre-occupation, Thankful opened the letter.  It was
a half-official document, and ran as follows:--


"The Commander-in-Chief is glad to inform Mistress Thankful Blossom
that the charges preferred against her father have, upon fair
examination, been found groundless and trivial.  The Commander-in-Chief
further begs to inform Mistress Blossom that the gentleman known to her
under the name of the 'Baron Pomposo' was his Excellency Don Juan
Morales, Ambassador and Envoy Extraordinary of the Court of Spain, and
that the gentleman known to her as the 'Count Ferdinand' was Senor
Godoy, Secretary to the Embassy.  The Commander-in-Chief wishes to add
that Mistress Thankful Blossom is relieved of any further obligation of
hospitality toward these honorable gentlemen, as the Commander-in-Chief
regrets to record the sudden and deeply-to-be-deplored death of his
Excellency this morning by typhoid fever, and the possible speedy
return of the Embassy.

"In conclusion, the Commander-in-Chief wishes to bear testimony to the
Truthfulness, Intuition, and Discretion of Mistress Thankful Blossom.

"By order of his Excellency,
  "Gen. GEORGE WASHINGTON.

"ALEX. HAMILTON, Secretary.

"To Mistress THANKFUL BLOSSOM, of Blossom Farm."


Thankful Blossom was silent for a few moments, and then raised her
abashed eyes to Major Van Zandt.  A single glance satisfied her that he
knew nothing of the imposture that had been practised upon her,--knew
nothing of the trap into which her vanity and self-will had led her.

"Dear Mistress Thankful," said the major, seeing the distress in her
face, "I trust the news is not ill.  Surely I gathered from the
sergeant that--"

"What?" said Thankful, looking at him intently.

"That in twenty-four hours at furthest your father would be free, and
that I should be relieved--"

"I know that you are a-weary of your task, major," said Thankful
bitterly: "rejoice, then, to know your information is correct, and that
my father is exonerated--unless--unless this is a forgery, and Gen.
Washington should turn out to be somebody else, and YOU should turn out
to be somebody else--"  And she stopped short, and hid her wet eyes in
the window-curtains.

"Poor girl!" said Major Van Zandt to himself.  "This trouble has
undoubtedly frenzied her.  Fool that I was to lay up the insult of one
that sorrow and excitement had bereft of reason and responsibility!
'Twere better I should retire at once, and leave her to herself," and
the young man slowly retreated toward the door.

But at this moment there were alarming symptoms of distress in the
window-curtain; and the major paused as a voice from its dimity depths
said plaintively, "And YOU are going without forgiving me!"

"Forgive YOU, Mistress Thankful," said the major, striding to the
curtain, and seizing a little hand that was obtruded from its
folds,--"forgive you? rather can you forgive me for the folly--the
cruelty of mistaking--of--of"--and here the major, hitherto famous for
facile compliments, utterly broke down.  But the hand he held was no
longer cold, but warm and intelligent; and in default of coherent
speech he held fast by that as the thread of his discourse, until
Mistress Thankful quietly withdrew it, thanked him for his forgiveness,
and retired deeper behind the curtain.

When he had gone, she threw herself in a chair, and again gave way to a
passionate flood of tears.  In the last twenty-four hours her pride had
been utterly humbled: the independent spirit of this self-willed little
beauty had met for the first time with defeat. When she had got over
her womanly shock at the news of the sham baron's death, she had, I
fear, only a selfish regard at his taking off; believing that if living
he would in some way show the world--which just then consisted of the
headquarters and Major Van Zandt--that he had really made love to her,
and possibly did honorably love her still, and might yet give her an
opportunity to reject him.  And now he was dead, and she was held up to
the world as the conceited plaything of a fine gentleman's masquerading
sport.  That her father's cupidity and ambition made him sanction the
imposture, in her bitterness she never doubted.  No!  Lover, friend,
father--all had been false to her, and the only kindness she had
received was from the men she had wantonly insulted.  Poor little
Blossom! indeed, a most premature Blossom; I fear a most unthankful
Blossom, sitting there shivering in the first chill wind of adversity,
rocking backward and forward, with the skirt of her dimity short-gown
over her shoulders, and her little buckled shoes and clocked stockings
pathetically crossed before her.

But healthy youth is re-active; and in an hour or two Thankful was down
at the cow-shed, with her arms around the neck of her favorite heifer,
to whom she poured out much of her woes, and from whom she won an
intelligent sort of slobbering sympathy.  And then she sharply scolded
Caesar for nothing at all, and a moment after returned to the house
with the air and face of a deeply injured angel, who had been
disappointed in some celestial idea of setting this world right, but
was still not above forgiveness,--a spectacle that sunk Major Van Zandt
into the dark depths of remorse, and eventually sent him to smoke a
pipe of Virginia with his men in the roadside camp; seeing which,
Thankful went early to bed, and cried herself to sleep.  And Nature
possibly followed her example; for at sunset a great thaw set in, and
by midnight the freed rivers and brooks were gurgling melodiously, and
tree and shrub and fence were moist and dripping.

The red dawn at last struggled through the vaporous veil that hid the
landscape.  Then occurred one of those magical changes peculiar to the
climate, yet perhaps pre-eminently notable during that historic winter
and spring.  By ten o'clock on that 3d of May, 1780, a fervent
June-like sun had rent that vaporous veil, and poured its direct rays
upon the gaunt and haggard profile of the Jersey hills.  The chilled
soil responded but feebly to that kiss; perhaps a few of the willows
that yellowed the river-banks took on a deeper color.  But the country
folk were certain that spring had come at last; and even the correct
and self-sustained Major Van Zandt came running in to announce to
Mistress Thankful that one of his men had seen a violet in the meadow.
In another moment Mistress Thankful had donned her cloak and pattens to
view this firstling of the laggard summer.  It was quite natural that
Major Van Zandt should accompany her as she tripped on; and so, without
a thought of their past differences, they ran like very children down
the moist and rocky slope that led to the quaggy meadow.  Such was the
influence of the vernal season.

But the violets were hidden.  Mistress Thankful, regardless of the wet
leaves and her new gown, groped with her fingers among the withered
grasses.  Major Van Zandt leaned against a bowlder, and watched her
with admiring eyes.

"You'll never find flowers that way," she said at last, looking up to
him impatiently.  "Go down on your knees like an honest man. There are
some things in this world worth stooping for."

The major instantly dropped on his knees beside her.  But at that
moment Mistress Thankful found her posies, and rose to her feet. "Stay
where you are," she said mischievously, as she stooped down, and placed
a flower in the lapel of his coat.  "That is to make amends for my
rudeness.  Now get up."

But the major did not rise.  He caught the two little hands that had
seemed to flutter like birds against his breast, and, looking up into
the laughing face above him, said, "Dear Mistress Thankful, dare I
remind you of your own words, that 'there be some things worth stooping
for'?  Think of my love, Mistress Thankful, as a flower,--mayhap not as
gracious to you as your violets, but as honest and--and--and--as--"

"Ready to spring up in a single night," laughed Thankful.  "But no; get
up, major!  What would the fine ladies of Morristown say of your
kneeling at the feet of a country girl,--the play and sport of every
fine gentleman?  What if Mistress Bolton should see her own cavalier,
the modish Major Van Zandt, proffering his affections to the disgraced
sweetheart of a perjured traitor?  Leave go my hand, I pray you,
major,--if you respect--"

She was free, yet she faltered a moment beside him, with tears
quivering on her long brown lashes.  Then she said tremulously, "Rise
up, major.  Let us think no more of this.  I pray you forgive me, if I
have again been rude."

The major struggled to rise to his feet.  But he could not.  And then I
regret to have to record that the fact became obvious that one of his
shapely legs was in a bog-hole, and that he was perceptibly sinking out
of sight.  Whereat Mistress Thankful trilled out a three-syllabled
laugh, looked demure and painfully concerned at his condition, and then
laughed again.  The major joined in her mirth, albeit his face was
crimson.  And then, with a little cry of alarm, she flew to his side,
and put her arms around him.

"Keep away, keep away, for Heaven's sake, Mistress Blossom," he said
quickly, "or I shall plunge you into my mishap, and make you as
ridiculous as myself."

But the quick-witted girl had already leaped to an adjacent bowlder.
"Take off your sash," she said quickly; "fasten it to your belt, and
throw it to me."  He did so.  She straightened herself back on the
rock.  "Now, all together," she cried, with a preliminary strain on the
sash; and then the cords of her well-trained muscles stood out on her
rounded arms, and, with a long pull and a strong pull and a pull all
together, she landed the major upon the rock.  And then she laughed;
and then, inconsistent as it may appear, she became grave, and at once
proceeded to scrape him off, and rub him down with dried leaves, with
fern-twigs, with her handkerchief, with the border of her mantle, as if
he were a child, until he blushed with alternate shame and secret
satisfaction.

They spoke but little on their return to the farm-house, for Mistress
Thankful had again become grave.  And yet the sun shone cheerily above
them; the landscape was filled with the joy of resurrection and new and
awakened life; the breeze whispered gentle promises of hope, and the
fruition of their hopes in the summer to come.  And these two fared on
until they reached the porch, with a half-pleased, half-frightened
consciousness that they were not the same beings who had left it a
half-hour before.

Nevertheless at the porch Mistress Thankful regained something of her
old audacity.  As they stood together in the hall, she handed him back
the sash she had kept with her.  As she did so, she could not help
saying, "There are some things worth stooping for, Major Van Zandt."

But she had not calculated upon the audacity of the man; and as she
turned to fly she was caught by his strong arm, and pinioned to his
side.  She struggled, honestly I think, and perhaps more frightened at
her own feelings than at his strength; but it is to be recorded that he
kissed her in a moment of comparative yielding, and then, frightened
himself, released her quickly, whereat she fled to her room, and threw
herself panting and troubled upon her bed.  For an hour or two she lay
there, with flushed cheeks and conflicting thoughts.  "He must never
kiss me again," she said softly to herself, "unless"--but the
interrupting thought said, "I shall die if he kiss me not again; and I
never can kiss another."  And then she was roused by a footstep upon
the stair, which in that brief time she had learned to know and look
for, and a knock at the door. She opened it to Major Van Zandt, white
and so colorless as to bring out once more the faint red line made by
her riding-whip two days before, as if it had risen again in
accusation.  The blood dropped out of her cheeks as she gazed at him in
silence.

"An escort of dragoons," said Major Van Zandt slowly, and with military
precision, "has just arrived, bringing with them one Capt. Allan
Brewster, of the Connecticut Contingent, on his way to Morristown to be
tried for mutiny and treason.  A private note from Col. Hamilton
instructs me to allow him to have a private audience with you--if YOU
so wish it."

With a woman's swift and too often hopeless intuition, Thankful knew
that this was not the sole contents of the letter, and that her
relations with Capt. Brewster were known to the man before her. But she
drew herself up a little proudly, and, turning her truthful eyes upon
the major, said, "I DO so wish it."

"It shall be done as you desire, Mistress Blossom," returned the
officer with cold politeness, as he turned upon his heel.

"One moment, Major Van Zandt," said Thankful swiftly.

The major turned quickly; but Thankful's eyes were gazing thoughtfully
forward, and scarcely glanced at him.  "I would prefer," she said
timidly and hesitatingly, "that this interview should not take place
under the roof where--where--where--my father lives.  Half-way down the
meadow there is a barn, and before it a broken part of the wall,
fronting on a sycamore-tree.  HE will know where it is.  Tell him I
will see him there in half an hour."

A smile, which the major had tried to make a careless one, curled his
lip satirically as he bowed in reply.  "It is the first time," he said
dryly, "that I believe I have been honored with arranging a tryst for
two lovers; but believe me, Mistress Thankful, I will do my best.  In
half an hour I will turn my prisoner over to you."

In half an hour the punctual Mistress Thankful, with a hood hiding her
pale face, passed the officer in the hall, on the way to her
rendezvous.  An hour later Caesar came with a message that Mistress
Thankful would like to see him.  When the major entered the
sitting-room, he was shocked to find her lying pale and motionless on
the sofa; but as the door closed she rose to her feet, and confronted
him.

"I do not know," she said slowly, "whether you are aware that the man I
just now parted from was for a twelvemonth past my sweetheart, and that
I believed I loved him, and KNEW I was true to him.  If you have not
heard it, I tell you now, for the time will come when you will hear
part of it from the lips of others, and I would rather you should take
the whole truth from mine.  This man was false to me.  He betrayed two
friends of mine as spies.  I could have forgiven it, had it been only
foolish jealousy; but it was, I have since learned from his own lips,
only that he might gratify his spite against the commander-in-chief by
procuring their arrest, and making a serious difficulty in the American
camp, by means of which he hoped to serve his own ends.  He told me
this, believing that I sympathized with him in his hatred of the
commander-in-chief, and in his own wrongs and sufferings.  I confess to
my shame, Major Van Zandt, that two days ago I did believe him, and
that I looked upon you as a mere catch-poll or bailiff of the tyrant.
That I found out how I was deceived when I saw the commander-in-chief,
you, major, who know him so well, need not be told.  Nor was it
necessary for me to tell this man that he had deceived me: for I felt
that--that--was--not--the--only reason--why I could no longer
return--his love."

She paused, as the major approached her earnestly, and waved him back
with her hand.  "He reproached me bitterly with my want of feeling for
his misfortunes," she went on again: "he recalled my past
protestations; he showed me my love-letters; and he told me that if I
were still his true sweetheart I ought to help him.  I told him if he
would never call me by that name again; if he would give up all claim
to me; if he would never speak, write to me, nor see me again; if he
would hand me back my letters,--I would help him."  She stopped: the
blood rushed into her pale face.  "You will remember, major, that I
accepted this man's love as a young, foolish, trustful girl; but when I
made him this offer--he--he accepted it."

"The dog!" said Major Van Zandt.  "But in what way could you help this
double traitor?"

"I HAVE helped him," said Thankful quietly.

"But how?" said Major Van Zandt.

"By becoming a traitor myself," she said, turning upon him almost
fiercely.  "Hear me!  While you were quietly pacing these halls, while
your men were laughing and talking in the road, Caesar was saddling my
white mare, the fleetest in the country.  He led her to the lane below.
That mare is now two miles away, with Capt. Brewster on her back.  Why
do you not start, major?  Look at me.  I am a traitor, and this is my
bribe;" and she drew a package of letters from her bosom, and flung
them on the table.

She had been prepared for an outbreak or exclamation from the man
before her, but not for his cold silence.  "Speak," she cried at last,
passionately.  "Speak!  Open your lips, if only to curse me! Order in
your men to arrest me.  I will proclaim myself guilty, and save your
honor.  But only speak!"

"May I ask," said Major Van Zandt coldly, "why you have twice honored
me with a blow?"

"Because I loved you; because, when I first saw you I saw the only man
that was my master, and I rebelled; because, when I found I could not
help but love you, I knew I never had loved before, and I would wipe
out with one stroke all the past that rose in judgment against me;
because I would not have you ever confronted with one endearing word of
mine that was not meant for you."

Major Van Zandt turned from the window where he had stood, and faced
the girl with sad resignation.  "If I have in my foolishness, Mistress
Thankful, shown you how great was your power over me, when you
descended to this artifice to spare my feelings by confessing your own
love for me, you should have remembered that you were doing that which
forever kept me from wooing or winning you.  If you had really loved me
your heart, as a woman's, would have warned you against that which my
heart, as a gentleman's, has made a law of honor; when I tell you, as
much for the sake of relieving your own conscience as for the sake of
justifying mine, that if this man, a traitor, my prisoner, and your
recognized lover, had escaped from my custody without your assistance,
connivance, or even knowledge, I should have deemed it my duty to
forsake you until I caught him, even if we had been standing before the
altar."

Thankful heard him, but only as a strange voice in the distance, as she
stood with fixed eyes, and breathless, parted lips before him. Yet even
then I fear that, womanlike, she did not comprehend his rhetoric of
honor, but only caught here and there a dull, benumbing idea that he
despised her, and that in her effort to win his love she had killed it,
and ruined him forever.

"If you think it strange," continued the major, "that, believing as I
do, I stand here only to utter moral axioms when my duty calls me to
pursue your lover, I beg you to believe that it is only for your sake.
I wish to allow a reasonable time between your interview with him, and
his escape, that shall save you from any suspicion of complicity.  Do
not think," he added with a sad smile, as the girl made an impatient
step toward him, "do not think I am running any risk.  The man cannot
escape.  A cordon of pickets surrounds the camp for many miles.  He has
not the countersign, and his face and crime are known."

"Yes," said Thankful eagerly, "but a part of his own regiment guards
the Baskingridge road."

"How know you this?" said the major, seizing her hand.

"He told me."

Before she could fall on her knees, and beg his forgiveness, he had
darted from the room, given an order, and returned with cheeks and eyes
blazing.

"Hear me," he said rapidly, taking the girl's two hands, "you know not
what you've done.  I forgive you.  But this is no longer a matter of
duty, but my personal honor.  I shall pursue this man alone.  I shall
return with him, or not at all.  Farewell.  God bless you!"

But before he reached the door she caught him again.  "Only say you
have forgiven me once more."

"I do."

"Guert!"

There was something in the girl's voice more than this first utterance
of his Christian name, that made him pause.

"I told--a--lie--just--now.  There is a fleeter horse in the stable
than my mare; 'tis the roan filly in the second stall."

"God bless you!"

He was gone.  She waited to hear the clatter of his horse's hoofs in
the roadway.  When Caesar came in a few moments later, to tell the news
of Capt. Brewster's escape, the room was empty; but it was soon filled
again by a dozen turbulent troopers.

"Of course she's gone," said Sergeant Tibbitts: "the jade flew with the
captain."

"Ay, 'tis plain enough.  Two horses are gone from the stable besides
the major's," said Private Hicks.

Nor was this military criticism entirely a private one.  When the
courier arrived at headquarters the next morning, it was to bring the
report that Mistress Thankful Blossom, after assisting her lover to
escape had fled with him.  "The renegade is well off our hands," said
Gen. Sullivan gruffly: "he has saved us the public disgrace of a trial.
But this is bad news of Major Van Zandt."

"What news of the major?" asked Washington quickly.

"He pursued the vagabond as far as Springfield, killing his horse, and
falling himself insensible before Major Merton's quarters. Here he
became speedily delirious, fever supervened, and the regimental
surgeon, after a careful examination, pronounced his case one of
small-pox."

A whisper of horror and pity went around the room.  "Another gallant
soldier, who should have died leading a charge, laid by the heels by a
beggar's filthy distemper," growled Sullivan.  "Where will it end?"

"God knows," said Hamilton.  "Poor Van Zandt!  But whither was he
sent,--to the hospital?"

"No: a special permit was granted in his case; and 'tis said he was
removed to the Blossom Farm,--it being remote from neighbors,--and the
house placed under quarantine.  Abner Blossom has prudently absented
himself from the chances of infection, and the daughter has fled.  The
sick man is attended only by a black servant and an ancient crone; so
that, if the poor major escapes with his life or without disfigurement,
pretty Mistress Bolton of Morristown need not be scandalized or
jealous."



V

The ancient crone alluded to in the last chapter had been standing
behind the window-curtains of that bedroom which had been Thankful
Blossom's in the weeks gone by.  She did not move her head, but stood
looking demurely, after the manner of ancient crones, over the summer
landscape.  For the summer had come before the tardy spring was scarce
gone, and the elms before the window no longer lisped, but were
eloquent in the softest zephyrs.  There was the flash of birds in among
the bushes, the occasional droning of bees in and out the open window,
and a perpetually swinging censer of flower incense rising from below.
The farm had put on its gayest bridal raiment; and looking at the old
farm-house shadowed with foliage and green with creeping vines, it was
difficult to conceive that snow had ever lain on its porches, or
icicles swung from its mossy eaves.

"Thankful!" said a voice still tremulous with weakness.

The ancient crone turned, drew aside the curtains, and showed the sweet
face of Thankful Blossom, more beautiful even in its paleness.

"Come here, darling," repeated the voice.

Thankful stepped to the sofa whereon lay the convalescent Major Van
Zandt.

"Tell me, sweetheart," said the major, taking her hand in his, "when
you married me, as you told the chaplain, that you might have the right
to nurse me, did you never think that if death spared me I might be so
disfigured that even you, dear love, would have turned from me with
loathing?"

"That was why I did it, dear," said Thankful mischievously.  "I knew
that the pride, and the sense of honor, and self-devotion of some
people, would have kept them from keeping their promises to a poor
girl."

"But, darling," continued the major, raising her hand to his lips,
"suppose the case had been reversed: suppose you had taken the disease,
that I had recovered without disfigurement, but that this sweet face--"

"I thought of that too," interrupted Thankful.  "Well, what would you
have done, dear?" said the major, with his old mischievous smile.

"I should have died," said Thankful gravely.

"But how?"

"Somehow.  But you are to go to sleep, and not ask impertinent and
frivolous questions; for father is coming to-morrow."

"Thankful, dear, do you know what the trees and the birds said to me as
I lay there tossing with fever?"

"No, dear."

"Thankful Blossom!  Thankful Blossom!  Thankful Blossom is coming!"

"Do you know what I said, sweetheart, as I lifted your dear head from
the ground when you reeled from your horse just as I overtook you at
Springfield?"

"No, dear."

"There are some things in life worth stooping for."

And she winged this Parthian arrow home with a kiss.

========================================
