========================================

THE PHOENIX AND THE CARPET

E. Nesbit



     TO

     My Dear Godson
     HUBERT GRIFFITH
     and his sister
     MARGARET


     TO HUBERT

     Dear Hubert, if I ever found
     A wishing-carpet lying round,
     I'd stand upon it, and I'd say:
     'Take me to Hubert, right away!'
     And then we'd travel very far
     To where the magic countries are
     That you and I will never see,
     And choose the loveliest gifts for you, from me.

     But oh! alack! and well-a-day!
     No wishing-carpets come my way.
     I never found a Phoenix yet,
     And Psammeads are so hard to get!
     So I give you nothing fine--
     Only this book your book and mine,
     And hers, whose name by yours is set;
     Your book, my book, the book of Margaret!

     E. NESBIT
     DYMCHURCH
     September, 1904




CONTENTS

     1 The Egg
     2 The Topless Tower
     3 The Queen Cook
     4 Two Bazaars
     5 The Temple
     6 Doing Good
     7 Mews from Persia
     8 The Cats, the Cow, and the Burglar
     9 The Burglar's Bride
     10 The Hole in the Carpet
     11 The Beginning of the End
     12 The End of the End




CHAPTER 1. THE EGG


It began with the day when it was almost the Fifth of November, and a
doubt arose in some breast--Robert's, I fancy--as to the quality of the
fireworks laid in for the Guy Fawkes celebration.

'They were jolly cheap,' said whoever it was, and I think it was Robert,
'and suppose they didn't go off on the night? Those Prosser kids would
have something to snigger about then.'

'The ones _I_ got are all right,' Jane said; 'I know they are, because
the man at the shop said they were worth thribble the money--'

'I'm sure thribble isn't grammar,' Anthea said.

'Of course it isn't,' said Cyril; 'one word can't be grammar all by
itself, so you needn't be so jolly clever.'

Anthea was rummaging in the corner-drawers of her mind for a very
disagreeable answer, when she remembered what a wet day it was, and how
the boys had been disappointed of that ride to London and back on the
top of the tram, which their mother had promised them as a reward for
not having once forgotten, for six whole days, to wipe their boots on
the mat when they came home from school.

So Anthea only said, 'Don't be so jolly clever yourself, Squirrel. And
the fireworks look all right, and you'll have the eightpence that your
tram fares didn't cost to-day, to buy something more with. You ought to
get a perfectly lovely Catharine wheel for eightpence.'

'I daresay,' said Cyril, coldly; 'but it's not YOUR eightpence anyhow--'

'But look here,' said Robert, 'really now, about the fireworks. We don't
want to be disgraced before those kids next door. They think because
they wear red plush on Sundays no one else is any good.'

'I wouldn't wear plush if it was ever so--unless it was black to be
beheaded in, if I was Mary Queen of Scots,' said Anthea, with scorn.

Robert stuck steadily to his point. One great point about Robert is the
steadiness with which he can stick.

'I think we ought to test them,' he said.

'You young duffer,' said Cyril, 'fireworks are like postage-stamps. You
can only use them once.'

'What do you suppose it means by "Carter's tested seeds" in the
advertisement?'

There was a blank silence. Then Cyril touched his forehead with his
finger and shook his head.

'A little wrong here,' he said. 'I was always afraid of that with poor
Robert. All that cleverness, you know, and being top in algebra so
often--it's bound to tell--'

'Dry up,' said Robert, fiercely. 'Don't you see? You can't TEST seeds if
you do them ALL. You just take a few here and there, and if those
grow you can feel pretty sure the others will be--what do you call
it?--Father told me--"up to sample". Don't you think we ought to sample
the fire-works? Just shut our eyes and each draw one out, and then try
them.'

'But it's raining cats and dogs,' said Jane.

'And Queen Anne is dead,' rejoined Robert. No one was in a very good
temper. 'We needn't go out to do them; we can just move back the table,
and let them off on the old tea-tray we play toboggans with. I don't
know what YOU think, but _I_ think it's time we did something, and
that would be really useful; because then we shouldn't just HOPE the
fireworks would make those Prossers sit up--we should KNOW.'

'It WOULD be something to do,' Cyril owned with languid approval.

So the table was moved back. And then the hole in the carpet, that
had been near the window till the carpet was turned round, showed most
awfully. But Anthea stole out on tip-toe, and got the tray when cook
wasn't looking, and brought it in and put it over the hole.

Then all the fireworks were put on the table, and each of the four
children shut its eyes very tight and put out its hand and grasped
something. Robert took a cracker, Cyril and Anthea had Roman candles;
but Jane's fat paw closed on the gem of the whole collection, the
Jack-in-the-box that had cost two shillings, and one at least of the
party--I will not say which, because it was sorry afterwards--declared
that Jane had done it on purpose. Nobody was pleased. For the worst of
it was that these four children, with a very proper dislike of anything
even faintly bordering on the sneakish, had a law, unalterable as those
of the Medes and Persians, that one had to stand by the results of a
toss-up, or a drawing of lots, or any other appeal to chance, however
much one might happen to dislike the way things were turning out.

'I didn't mean to,' said Jane, near tears. 'I don't care, I'll draw
another--'

'You know jolly well you can't,' said Cyril, bitterly. 'It's settled.
It's Medium and Persian. You've done it, and you'll have to stand by
it--and us too, worse luck. Never mind. YOU'LL have your pocket-money
before the Fifth. Anyway, we'll have the Jack-in-the-box LAST, and get
the most out of it we can.'

So the cracker and the Roman candles were lighted, and they were
all that could be expected for the money; but when it came to the
Jack-in-the-box it simply sat in the tray and laughed at them, as Cyril
said. They tried to light it with paper and they tried to light it with
matches; they tried to light it with Vesuvian fusees from the pocket
of father's second-best overcoat that was hanging in the hall. And then
Anthea slipped away to the cupboard under the stairs where the brooms
and dustpans were kept, and the rosiny fire-lighters that smell so nice
and like the woods where pine-trees grow, and the old newspapers and the
bees-wax and turpentine, and the horrid an stiff dark rags that are used
for cleaning brass and furniture, and the paraffin for the lamps. She
came back with a little pot that had once cost sevenpence-halfpenny when
it was full of red-currant jelly; but the jelly had been all eaten long
ago, and now Anthea had filled the jar with paraffin. She came in, and
she threw the paraffin over the tray just at the moment when Cyril was
trying with the twenty-third match to light the Jack-in-the-box. The
Jack-in-the-box did not catch fire any more than usual, but the paraffin
acted quite differently, and in an instant a hot flash of flame leapt
up and burnt off Cyril's eyelashes, and scorched the faces of all
four before they could spring back. They backed, in four instantaneous
bounds, as far as they could, which was to the wall, and the pillar of
fire reached from floor to ceiling.

'My hat,' said Cyril, with emotion, 'You've done it this time, Anthea.'

The flame was spreading out under the ceiling like the rose of fire in
Mr Rider Haggard's exciting story about Allan Quatermain. Robert and
Cyril saw that no time was to be lost. They turned up the edges of the
carpet, and kicked them over the tray. This cut off the column of fire,
and it disappeared and there was nothing left but smoke and a dreadful
smell of lamps that have been turned too low.

All hands now rushed to the rescue, and the paraffin fire was only a
bundle of trampled carpet, when suddenly a sharp crack beneath their
feet made the amateur firemen start back. Another crack--the carpet
moved as if it had had a cat wrapped in it; the Jack-in-the-box had at
last allowed itself to be lighted, and it was going off with desperate
violence inside the carpet.

Robert, with the air of one doing the only possible thing, rushed to the
window and opened it. Anthea screamed, Jane burst into tears, and
Cyril turned the table wrong way up on top of the carpet heap. But the
firework went on, banging and bursting and spluttering even underneath
the table.

Next moment mother rushed in, attracted by the howls of Anthea, and in a
few moments the firework desisted and there was a dead silence, and
the children stood looking at each other's black faces, and, out of the
corners of their eyes, at mother's white one.

The fact that the nursery carpet was ruined occasioned but little
surprise, nor was any one really astonished that bed should prove the
immediate end of the adventure. It has been said that all roads lead to
Rome; this may be true, but at any rate, in early youth I am quite sure
that many roads lead to BED, and stop there--or YOU do.

The rest of the fireworks were confiscated, and mother was not pleased
when father let them off himself in the back garden, though he said,
'Well, how else can you get rid of them, my dear?'

You see, father had forgotten that the children were in disgrace, and
that their bedroom windows looked out on to the back garden. So that
they all saw the fireworks most beautifully, and admired the skill with
which father handled them.

Next day all was forgotten and forgiven; only the nursery had to
be deeply cleaned (like spring-cleaning), and the ceiling had to be
whitewashed.

And mother went out; and just at tea-time next day a man came with a
rolled-up carpet, and father paid him, and mother said--

'If the carpet isn't in good condition, you know, I shall expect you to
change it.' And the man replied--

'There ain't a thread gone in it nowhere, mum. It's a bargain, if ever
there was one, and I'm more'n 'arf sorry I let it go at the price; but
we can't resist the lydies, can we, sir?' and he winked at father and
went away.

Then the carpet was put down in the nursery, and sure enough there
wasn't a hole in it anywhere.

As the last fold was unrolled something hard and loud-sounding bumped
out of it and trundled along the nursery floor. All the children
scrambled for it, and Cyril got it. He took it to the gas. It was shaped
like an egg, very yellow and shiny, half-transparent, and it had an odd
sort of light in it that changed as you held it in different ways. It
was as though it was an egg with a yolk of pale fire that just showed
through the stone.

'I MAY keep it, mayn't I, mother?' Cyril asked.

And of course mother said no; they must take it back to the man who had
brought the carpet, because she had only paid for a carpet, and not for
a stone egg with a fiery yolk to it.

So she told them where the shop was, and it was in the Kentish Town
Road, not far from the hotel that is called the Bull and Gate. It was
a poky little shop, and the man was arranging furniture outside on the
pavement very cunningly, so that the more broken parts should show as
little as possible. And directly he saw the children he knew them again,
and he began at once, without giving them a chance to speak.

'No you don't' he cried loudly; 'I ain't a-goin' to take back no
carpets, so don't you make no bloomin' errer. A bargain's a bargain, and
the carpet's puffik throughout.'

'We don't want you to take it back,' said Cyril; 'but we found something
in it.'

'It must have got into it up at your place, then,' said the man, with
indignant promptness, 'for there ain't nothing in nothing as I sell.
It's all as clean as a whistle.'

'I never said it wasn't CLEAN,' said Cyril, 'but--'

'Oh, if it's MOTHS,' said the man, 'that's easy cured with borax. But I
expect it was only an odd one. I tell you the carpet's good through and
through. It hadn't got no moths when it left my 'ands--not so much as an
hegg.'

'But that's just it,' interrupted Jane; 'there WAS so much as an egg.'

The man made a sort of rush at the children and stamped his foot.

'Clear out, I say!' he shouted, 'or I'll call for the police. A nice
thing for customers to 'ear you a-coming 'ere a-charging me with finding
things in goods what I sells. 'Ere, be off, afore I sends you off with a
flea in your ears. Hi! constable--'

The children fled, and they think, and their father thinks, that they
couldn't have done anything else. Mother has her own opinion.

But father said they might keep the egg.

'The man certainly didn't know the egg was there when he brought the
carpet,' said he, 'any more than your mother did, and we've as much
right to it as he had.'

So the egg was put on the mantelpiece, where it quite brightened up the
dingy nursery. The nursery was dingy, because it was a basement room,
and its windows looked out on a stone area with a rockery made of
clinkers facing the windows. Nothing grew in the rockery except London
pride and snails.

The room had been described in the house agent's list as a 'convenient
breakfast-room in basement,' and in the daytime it was rather dark. This
did not matter so much in the evenings when the gas was alight, but then
it was in the evening that the blackbeetles got so sociable, and used to
come out of the low cupboards on each side of the fireplace where their
homes were, and try to make friends with the children. At least, I
suppose that was what they wanted, but the children never would.

On the Fifth of November father and mother went to the theatre, and
the children were not happy, because the Prossers next door had lots of
fireworks and they had none.

They were not even allowed to have a bonfire in the garden.

'No more playing with fire, thank you,' was father's answer, when they
asked him.

When the baby had been put to bed the children sat sadly round the fire
in the nursery.

'I'm beastly bored,' said Robert.

'Let's talk about the Psammead,' said Anthea, who generally tried to
give the conversation a cheerful turn.

'What's the good of TALKING?' said Cyril. 'What I want is for something
to happen. It's awfully stuffy for a chap not to be allowed out in the
evenings. There's simply nothing to do when you've got through your
homers.'

Jane finished the last of her home-lessons and shut the book with a
bang.

'We've got the pleasure of memory,' said she. 'Just think of last
holidays.'

Last holidays, indeed, offered something to think of--for they had
been spent in the country at a white house between a sand-pit and a
gravel-pit, and things had happened. The children had found a Psammead,
or sand-fairy, and it had let them have anything they wished for--just
exactly anything, with no bother about its not being really for their
good, or anything like that. And if you want to know what kind of things
they wished for, and how their wishes turned out you can read it all in
a book called Five Children and It (It was the Psammead). If you've not
read it, perhaps I ought to tell you that the fifth child was the baby
brother, who was called the Lamb, because the first thing he ever said
was 'Baa!' and that the other children were not particularly handsome,
nor were they extra clever, nor extraordinarily good. But they were not
bad sorts on the whole; in fact, they were rather like you.

'I don't want to think about the pleasures of memory,' said Cyril; 'I
want some more things to happen.'

'We're very much luckier than any one else, as it is,' said Jane. 'Why,
no one else ever found a Psammead. We ought to be grateful.'

'Why shouldn't we GO ON being, though?' Cyril asked--'lucky, I mean, not
grateful. Why's it all got to stop?'

'Perhaps something will happen,' said Anthea, comfortably. 'Do you know,
sometimes I think we are the sort of people that things DO happen to.'

'It's like that in history,' said Jane: 'some kings are full of
interesting things, and others--nothing ever happens to them, except
their being born and crowned and buried, and sometimes not that.'

'I think Panther's right,' said Cyril: 'I think we are the sort of
people things do happen to. I have a sort of feeling things would happen
right enough if we could only give them a shove. It just wants something
to start it. That's all.'

'I wish they taught magic at school,' Jane sighed. 'I believe if we
could do a little magic it might make something happen.'

'I wonder how you begin?' Robert looked round the room, but he got no
ideas from the faded green curtains, or the drab Venetian blinds, or
the worn brown oil-cloth on the floor. Even the new carpet suggested
nothing, though its pattern was a very wonderful one, and always seemed
as though it were just going to make you think of something.

'I could begin right enough,' said Anthea; 'I've read lots about it. But
I believe it's wrong in the Bible.'

'It's only wrong in the Bible because people wanted to hurt other
people. I don't see how things can be wrong unless they hurt somebody,
and we don't want to hurt anybody; and what's more, we jolly well
couldn't if we tried. Let's get the Ingoldsby Legends. There's a thing
about Abra-cadabra there,' said Cyril, yawning. 'We may as well play at
magic. Let's be Knights Templars. They were awfully gone on magic. They
used to work spells or something with a goat and a goose. Father says
so.'

'Well, that's all right,' said Robert, unkindly; 'you can play the goat
right enough, and Jane knows how to be a goose.'

'I'll get Ingoldsby,' said Anthea, hastily. 'You turn up the hearthrug.'

So they traced strange figures on the linoleum, where the hearthrug had
kept it clean. They traced them with chalk that Robert had nicked
from the top of the mathematical master's desk at school. You know, of
course, that it is stealing to take a new stick of chalk, but it is not
wrong to take a broken piece, so long as you only take one. (I do not
know the reason of this rule, nor who made it.) And they chanted all the
gloomiest songs they could think of. And, of course, nothing happened.
So then Anthea said, 'I'm sure a magic fire ought to be made of
sweet-smelling wood, and have magic gums and essences and things in it.'

'I don't know any sweet-smelling wood, except cedar,' said Robert; 'but
I've got some ends of cedar-wood lead pencil.'

So they burned the ends of lead pencil. And still nothing happened.

'Let's burn some of the eucalyptus oil we have for our colds,' said
Anthea.

And they did. It certainly smelt very strong. And they burned lumps
of camphor out of the big chest. It was very bright, and made a horrid
black smoke, which looked very magical. But still nothing happened. Then
they got some clean tea-cloths from the dresser drawer in the kitchen,
and waved them over the magic chalk-tracings, and sang 'The Hymn of the
Moravian Nuns at Bethlehem', which is very impressive. And still nothing
happened. So they waved more and more wildly, and Robert's tea-cloth
caught the golden egg and whisked it off the mantelpiece, and it fell
into the fender and rolled under the grate.

'Oh, crikey!' said more than one voice.

And every one instantly fell down flat on its front to look under the
grate, and there lay the egg, glowing in a nest of hot ashes.

'It's not smashed, anyhow,' said Robert, and he put his hand under the
grate and picked up the egg. But the egg was much hotter than any one
would have believed it could possibly get in such a short time, and
Robert had to drop it with a cry of 'Bother!' It fell on the top bar of
the grate, and bounced right into the glowing red-hot heart of the fire.

'The tongs!' cried Anthea. But, alas, no one could remember where they
were. Every one had forgotten that the tongs had last been used to fish
up the doll's teapot from the bottom of the water-butt, where the Lamb
had dropped it. So the nursery tongs were resting between the water-butt
and the dustbin, and cook refused to lend the kitchen ones.

'Never mind,' said Robert, 'we'll get it out with the poker and the
shovel.'

'Oh, stop,' cried Anthea. 'Look at it! Look! look! look! I do believe
something IS going to happen!'

For the egg was now red-hot, and inside it something was moving. Next
moment there was a soft cracking sound; the egg burst in two, and out of
it came a flame-coloured bird. It rested a moment among the flames, and
as it rested there the four children could see it growing bigger and
bigger under their eyes.

Every mouth was a-gape, every eye a-goggle.

The bird rose in its nest of fire, stretched its wings, and flew out
into the room. It flew round and round, and round again, and where it
passed the air was warm. Then it perched on the fender. The children
looked at each other. Then Cyril put out a hand towards the bird. It put
its head on one side and looked up at him, as you may have seen a parrot
do when it is just going to speak, so that the children were hardly
astonished at all when it said, 'Be careful; I am not nearly cool yet.'

They were not astonished, but they were very, very much interested.

They looked at the bird, and it was certainly worth looking at. Its
feathers were like gold. It was about as large as a bantam, only its
beak was not at all bantam-shaped. 'I believe I know what it is,' said
Robert. 'I've seen a picture.'

He hurried away. A hasty dash and scramble among the papers on father's
study table yielded, as the sum-books say, 'the desired result'. But
when he came back into the room holding out a paper, and crying, 'I say,
look here,' the others all said 'Hush!' and he hushed obediently and
instantly, for the bird was speaking.

'Which of you,' it was saying, 'put the egg into the fire?'

'He did,' said three voices, and three fingers pointed at Robert.

The bird bowed; at least it was more like that than anything else.

'I am your grateful debtor,' it said with a high-bred air.

The children were all choking with wonder and curiosity--all except
Robert. He held the paper in his hand, and he KNEW. He said so. He
said--

'_I_ know who you are.'

And he opened and displayed a printed paper, at the head of which was a
little picture of a bird sitting in a nest of flames.

'You are the Phoenix,' said Robert; and the bird was quite pleased.

'My fame has lived then for two thousand years,' it said. 'Allow me to
look at my portrait.' It looked at the page which Robert, kneeling down,
spread out in the fender, and said--

'It's not a flattering likeness... And what are these characters?' it
asked, pointing to the printed part.

'Oh, that's all dullish; it's not much about YOU, you know,' said Cyril,
with unconscious politeness; 'but you're in lots of books.'

'With portraits?' asked the Phoenix.

'Well, no,' said Cyril; 'in fact, I don't think I ever saw any portrait
of you but that one, but I can read you something about yourself, if you
like.'

The Phoenix nodded, and Cyril went off and fetched Volume X of the old
Encyclopedia, and on page 246 he found the following:--

'Phoenix--in ornithology, a fabulous bird of antiquity.'

'Antiquity is quite correct,' said the Phoenix, 'but fabulous--well, do
I look it?'

Every one shook its head. Cyril went on--


'The ancients speak of this bird as single, or the only one of its
kind.'

'That's right enough,' said the Phoenix.

'They describe it as about the size of an eagle.'

'Eagles are of different sizes,' said the Phoenix; 'it's not at all a
good description.'

All the children were kneeling on the hearthrug, to be as near the
Phoenix as possible.

'You'll boil your brains,' it said. 'Look out, I'm nearly cool now;' and
with a whirr of golden wings it fluttered from the fender to the table.
It was so nearly cool that there was only a very faint smell of burning
when it had settled itself on the table-cloth.

'It's only a very little scorched,' said the Phoenix, apologetically;
'it will come out in the wash. Please go on reading.'

The children gathered round the table.

'The size of an eagle,' Cyril went on, 'its head finely crested with a
beautiful plumage, its neck covered with feathers of a gold colour, and
the rest of its body purple; only the tail white, and the eyes sparkling
like stars. They say that it lives about five hundred years in the
wilderness, and when advanced in age it builds itself a pile of sweet
wood and aromatic gums, fires it with the wafting of its wings, and thus
burns itself; and that from its ashes arises a worm, which in time grows
up to be a Phoenix. Hence the Phoenicians gave--'

'Never mind what they gave,' said the Phoenix, ruffling its golden
feathers. 'They never gave much, anyway; they always were people who
gave nothing for nothing. That book ought to be destroyed. It's
most inaccurate. The rest of my body was never purple, and as for
my--tail--well, I simply ask you, IS it white?'

It turned round and gravely presented its golden tail to the children.

'No, it's not,' said everybody.

'No, and it never was,' said the Phoenix. 'And that about the worm
is just a vulgar insult. The Phoenix has an egg, like all respectable
birds. It makes a pile--that part's all right--and it lays its egg, and
it burns itself; and it goes to sleep and wakes up in its egg, and comes
out and goes on living again, and so on for ever and ever. I can't tell
you how weary I got of it--such a restless existence; no repose.'

'But how did your egg get HERE?' asked Anthea.

'Ah, that's my life-secret,' said the Phoenix. 'I couldn't tell it to
any one who wasn't really sympathetic. I've always been a misunderstood
bird. You can tell that by what they say about the worm. I might tell
YOU,' it went on, looking at Robert with eyes that were indeed starry.
'You put me on the fire--' Robert looked uncomfortable.

'The rest of us made the fire of sweet-scented woods and gums, though,'
said Cyril.

'And--and it was an accident my putting you on the fire,' said Robert,
telling the truth with some difficulty, for he did not know how the
Phoenix might take it. It took it in the most unexpected manner.

'Your candid avowal,' it said, 'removes my last scruple. I will tell you
my story.'

'And you won't vanish, or anything sudden will you? asked Anthea,
anxiously.

'Why?' it asked, puffing out the golden feathers, 'do you wish me to
stay here?'

'Oh YES,' said every one, with unmistakable sincerity.

'Why?' asked the Phoenix again, looking modestly at the table-cloth.

'Because,' said every one at once, and then stopped short; only Jane
added after a pause, 'you are the most beautiful person we've ever
seen.' 'You are a sensible child,' said the Phoenix, 'and I will NOT
vanish or anything sudden. And I will tell you my tale. I had resided,
as your book says, for many thousand years in the wilderness, which is
a large, quiet place with very little really good society, and I was
becoming weary of the monotony of my existence. But I acquired the habit
of laying my egg and burning myself every five hundred years--and you
know how difficult it is to break yourself of a habit.'

'Yes,' said Cyril; 'Jane used to bite her nails.'

'But I broke myself of it,' urged Jane, rather hurt, 'You know I did.'

'Not till they put bitter aloes on them,' said Cyril.

'I doubt,' said the bird, gravely, 'whether even bitter aloes (the aloe,
by the way, has a bad habit of its own, which it might well cure before
seeking to cure others; I allude to its indolent practice of flowering
but once a century), I doubt whether even bitter aloes could have cured
ME. But I WAS cured. I awoke one morning from a feverish dream--it was
getting near the time for me to lay that tiresome fire and lay that
tedious egg upon it--and I saw two people, a man and a woman. They were
sitting on a carpet--and when I accosted them civilly they narrated to
me their life-story, which, as you have not yet heard it, I will now
proceed to relate. They were a prince and princess, and the story of
their parents was one which I am sure you will like to hear. In early
youth the mother of the princess happened to hear the story of a certain
enchanter, and in that story I am sure you will be interested. The
enchanter--'

'Oh, please don't,' said Anthea. 'I can't understand all these
beginnings of stories, and you seem to be getting deeper and deeper in
them every minute. Do tell us your OWN story. That's what we really want
to hear.'

'Well,' said the Phoenix, seeming on the whole rather flattered, 'to
cut about seventy long stories short (though _I_ had to listen to them
all--but to be sure in the wilderness there is plenty of time), this
prince and princess were so fond of each other that they did not want
any one else, and the enchanter--don't be alarmed, I won't go into
his history--had given them a magic carpet (you've heard of a magic
carpet?), and they had just sat on it and told it to take them right
away from every one--and it had brought them to the wilderness. And as
they meant to stay there they had no further use for the carpet, so they
gave it to me. That was indeed the chance of a lifetime!'

'I don't see what you wanted with a carpet,' said Jane, 'when you've got
those lovely wings.'

'They ARE nice wings, aren't they?' said the Phoenix, simpering and
spreading them out. 'Well, I got the prince to lay out the carpet, and I
laid my egg on it; then I said to the carpet, "Now, my excellent carpet,
prove your worth. Take that egg somewhere where it can't be hatched for
two thousand years, and where, when that time's up, some one will light
a fire of sweet wood and aromatic gums, and put the egg in to hatch;"
and you see it's all come out exactly as I said. The words were no
sooner out of my beak than egg and carpet disappeared. The royal lovers
assisted to arrange my pile, and soothed my last moments. I burnt myself
up and knew no more till I awoke on yonder altar.'

It pointed its claw at the grate.

'But the carpet,' said Robert, 'the magic carpet that takes you anywhere
you wish. What became of that?'

'Oh, THAT?' said the Phoenix, carelessly--'I should say that that is the
carpet. I remember the pattern perfectly.'

It pointed as it spoke to the floor, where lay the carpet which mother
had bought in the Kentish Town Road for twenty-two shillings and
ninepence.

At that instant father's latch-key was heard in the door.

'OH,' whispered Cyril, 'now we shall catch it for not being in bed!'

'Wish yourself there,' said the Phoenix, in a hurried whisper, 'and then
wish the carpet back in its place.'

No sooner said than done. It made one a little giddy, certainly, and a
little breathless; but when things seemed right way up again, there the
children were, in bed, and the lights were out.

They heard the soft voice of the Phoenix through the darkness.

'I shall sleep on the cornice above your curtains,' it said. 'Please
don't mention me to your kinsfolk.'

'Not much good,' said Robert, 'they'd never believe us. I say,' he
called through the half-open door to the girls; 'talk about adventures
and things happening. We ought to be able to get some fun out of a magic
carpet AND a Phoenix.'

'Rather,' said the girls, in bed.

'Children,' said father, on the stairs, 'go to sleep at once. What do
you mean by talking at this time of night?'

No answer was expected to this question, but under the bedclothes Cyril
murmured one.

'Mean?' he said. 'Don't know what we mean. I don't know what anything
means.'

'But we've got a magic carpet AND a Phoenix,' said Robert.

'You'll get something else if father comes in and catches you,' said
Cyril. 'Shut up, I tell you.'

Robert shut up. But he knew as well as you do that the adventures of
that carpet and that Phoenix were only just beginning.

Father and mother had not the least idea of what had happened in their
absence. This is often the case, even when there are no magic carpets or
Phoenixes in the house.

The next morning--but I am sure you would rather wait till the next
chapter before you hear about THAT.



CHAPTER 2. THE TOPLESS TOWER


The children had seen the Phoenix-egg hatched in the flames in their own
nursery grate, and had heard from it how the carpet on their own nursery
floor was really the wishing carpet, which would take them anywhere they
chose. The carpet had transported them to bed just at the right
moment, and the Phoenix had gone to roost on the cornice supporting the
window-curtains of the boys' room.

'Excuse me,' said a gentle voice, and a courteous beak opened, very
kindly and delicately, the right eye of Cyril. 'I hear the slaves below
preparing food. Awaken! A word of explanation and arrangement... I do
wish you wouldn't--'

The Phoenix stopped speaking and fluttered away crossly to the
cornice-pole; for Cyril had hit out, as boys do when they are awakened
suddenly, and the Phoenix was not used to boys, and his feelings, if not
his wings, were hurt.

'Sorry,' said Cyril, coming awake all in a minute. 'Do come back! What
was it you were saying? Something about bacon and rations?'

The Phoenix fluttered back to the brass rail at the foot of the bed.

'I say--you ARE real,' said Cyril. 'How ripping! And the carpet?'

'The carpet is as real as it ever was,' said the Phoenix, rather
contemptuously; 'but, of course, a carpet's only a carpet, whereas a
Phoenix is superlatively a Phoenix.'

'Yes, indeed,' said Cyril, 'I see it is. Oh, what luck! Wake up, Bobs!
There's jolly well something to wake up for today. And it's Saturday,
too.'

'I've been reflecting,' said the Phoenix, 'during the silent watches
of the night, and I could not avoid the conclusion that you were quite
insufficiently astonished at my appearance yesterday. The ancients were
always VERY surprised. Did you, by chance, EXPECT my egg to hatch?'

'Not us,' Cyril said.

'And if we had,' said Anthea, who had come in in her nightie when she
heard the silvery voice of the Phoenix, 'we could never, never have
expected it to hatch anything so splendid as you.'

The bird smiled. Perhaps you've never seen a bird smile?

'You see,' said Anthea, wrapping herself in the boys' counterpane, for
the morning was chill, 'we've had things happen to us before;' and she
told the story of the Psammead, or sand-fairy.

'Ah yes,' said the Phoenix; 'Psammeads were rare, even in my time. I
remember I used to be called the Psammead of the Desert. I was always
having compliments paid me; I can't think why.'

'Can YOU give wishes, then?' asked Jane, who had now come in too.

'Oh, dear me, no,' said the Phoenix, contemptuously, 'at least--but I
hear footsteps approaching. I hasten to conceal myself.' And it did.

I think I said that this day was Saturday. It was also cook's birthday,
and mother had allowed her and Eliza to go to the Crystal Palace with a
party of friends, so Jane and Anthea of course had to help to make beds
and to wash up the breakfast cups, and little things like that. Robert
and Cyril intended to spend the morning in conversation with the
Phoenix, but the bird had its own ideas about this.

'I must have an hour or two's quiet,' it said, 'I really must. My nerves
will give way unless I can get a little rest. You must remember it's two
thousand years since I had any conversation--I'm out of practice, and I
must take care of myself. I've often been told that mine is a valuable
life.' So it nestled down inside an old hatbox of father's, which had
been brought down from the box-room some days before, when a helmet was
suddenly needed for a game of tournaments, with its golden head under
its golden wing, and went to sleep. So then Robert and Cyril moved
the table back and were going to sit on the carpet and wish themselves
somewhere else. But before they could decide on the place, Cyril said--

'I don't know. Perhaps it's rather sneakish to begin without the girls.'

'They'll be all the morning,' said Robert, impatiently. And then a thing
inside him, which tiresome books sometimes call the 'inward monitor',
said, 'Why don't you help them, then?'

Cyril's 'inward monitor' happened to say the same thing at the same
moment, so the boys went and helped to wash up the tea-cups, and to dust
the drawing-room. Robert was so interested that he proposed to clean
the front doorsteps--a thing he had never been allowed to do. Nor was
he allowed to do it on this occasion. One reason was that it had already
been done by cook.

When all the housework was finished, the girls dressed the happy,
wriggling baby in his blue highwayman coat and three-cornered hat, and
kept him amused while mother changed her dress and got ready to take
him over to granny's. Mother always went to granny's every Saturday,
and generally some of the children went with her; but today they were to
keep house. And their hearts were full of joyous and delightful feelings
every time they remembered that the house they would have to keep had a
Phoenix in it, AND a wishing carpet.

You can always keep the Lamb good and happy for quite a long time if you
play the Noah's Ark game with him. It is quite simple. He just sits on
your lap and tells you what animal he is, and then you say the little
poetry piece about whatever animal he chooses to be.

Of course, some of the animals, like the zebra and the tiger, haven't
got any poetry, because they are so difficult to rhyme to. The Lamb
knows quite well which are the poetry animals.

'I'm a baby bear!' said the Lamb, snugging down; and Anthea began:


     'I love my little baby bear,
     I love his nose and toes and hair;
     I like to hold him in my arm,
     And keep him VERY safe and warm.'


And when she said 'very', of course there was a real bear's hug.

Then came the eel, and the Lamb was tickled till he wriggled exactly
like a real one:


     'I love my little baby eel,
     He is so squidglety to feel;
     He'll be an eel when he is big--
     But now he's just--a--tiny SNIG!'


Perhaps you didn't know that a snig was a baby eel? It is, though, and
the Lamb knew it.

'Hedgehog now-!' he said; and Anthea went on:


     'My baby hedgehog, how I like ye,
     Though your back's so prickly-spiky;
     Your front is very soft, I've found,
     So I must love you front ways round!'


And then she loved him front ways round, while he squealed with
pleasure.

It is a very baby game, and, of course, the rhymes are only meant for
very, very small people--not for people who are old enough to read
books, so I won't tell you any more of them.

By the time the Lamb had been a baby lion and a baby weazel, and a baby
rabbit and a baby rat, mother was ready; and she and the Lamb, having
been kissed by everybody and hugged as thoroughly as it is possible to
be when you're dressed for out-of-doors, were seen to the tram by the
boys. When the boys came back, every one looked at every one else and
said--

'Now!'

They locked the front door and they locked the back door, and they
fastened all the windows. They moved the table and chairs off the
carpet, and Anthea swept it.

'We must show it a LITTLE attention,' she said kindly. 'We'll give it
tea-leaves next time. Carpets like tea-leaves.'

Then every one put on its out-door things, because as Cyril said, they
didn't know where they might be going, and it makes people stare if you
go out of doors in November in pinafores and without hats.

Then Robert gently awoke the Phoenix, who yawned and stretched itself,
and allowed Robert to lift it on to the middle of the carpet, where it
instantly went to sleep again with its crested head tucked under its
golden wing as before. Then every one sat down on the carpet.

'Where shall we go?' was of course the question, and it was warmly
discussed. Anthea wanted to go to Japan. Robert and Cyril voted for
America, and Jane wished to go to the seaside.

'Because there are donkeys there,' said she.

'Not in November, silly,' said Cyril; and the discussion got warmer and
warmer, and still nothing was settled.

'I vote we let the Phoenix decide,' said Robert, at last. So they
stroked it till it woke. 'We want to go somewhere abroad,' they said,
'and we can't make up our minds where.'

'Let the carpet make up ITS mind, if it has one,' said the Phoenix.

'Just say you wish to go abroad.'

So they did; and the next moment the world seemed to spin upside down,
and when it was right way up again and they were ungiddy enough to look
about them, they were out of doors.

Out of doors--this is a feeble way to express where they were. They
were out of--out of the earth, or off it. In fact, they were floating
steadily, safely, splendidly, in the crisp clear air, with the pale
bright blue of the sky above them, and far down below the pale bright
sun-diamonded waves of the sea. The carpet had stiffened itself somehow,
so that it was square and firm like a raft, and it steered itself so
beautifully and kept on its way so flat and fearless that no one was at
all afraid of tumbling off. In front of them lay land.

'The coast of France,' said the Phoenix, waking up and pointing with
its wing. 'Where do you wish to go? I should always keep one wish, of
course--for emergencies--otherwise you may get into an emergency from
which you can't emerge at all.'

But the children were far too deeply interested to listen.

'I tell you what,' said Cyril: 'let's let the thing go on and on, and
when we see a place we really want to stop at--why, we'll just stop.
Isn't this ripping?'

'It's like trains,' said Anthea, as they swept over the low-lying
coast-line and held a steady course above orderly fields and straight
roads bordered with poplar trees--'like express trains, only in trains
you never can see anything because of grown-ups wanting the windows
shut; and then they breathe on them, and it's like ground glass, and
nobody can see anything, and then they go to sleep.'

'It's like tobogganing,' said Robert, 'so fast and smooth, only there's
no door-mat to stop short on--it goes on and on.'

'You darling Phoenix,' said Jane, 'it's all your doing. Oh, look at
that ducky little church and the women with flappy cappy things on their
heads.'

'Don't mention it,' said the Phoenix, with sleepy politeness.

'OH!' said Cyril, summing up all the rapture that was in every heart.
'Look at it all--look at it--and think of the Kentish Town Road!'

Every one looked and every one thought. And the glorious, gliding,
smooth, steady rush went on, and they looked down on strange and
beautiful things, and held their breath and let it go in deep sighs, and
said 'Oh!' and 'Ah!' till it was long past dinner-time.

It was Jane who suddenly said, 'I wish we'd brought that jam tart and
cold mutton with us. It would have been jolly to have a picnic in the
air.'

The jam tart and cold mutton were, however, far away, sitting quietly in
the larder of the house in Camden Town which the children were supposed
to be keeping. A mouse was at that moment tasting the outside of the
raspberry jam part of the tart (she had nibbled a sort of gulf, or bay,
through the pastry edge) to see whether it was the sort of dinner she
could ask her little mouse-husband to sit down to. She had had a very
good dinner herself. It is an ill wind that blows nobody any good.

'We'll stop as soon as we see a nice place,' said Anthea. 'I've got
threepence, and you boys have the fourpence each that your trams didn't
cost the other day, so we can buy things to eat. I expect the Phoenix
can speak French.'

The carpet was sailing along over rocks and rivers and trees and towns
and farms and fields. It reminded everybody of a certain time when all
of them had had wings, and had flown up to the top of a church tower,
and had had a feast there of chicken and tongue and new bread and
soda-water. And this again reminded them how hungry they were. And just
as they were all being reminded of this very strongly indeed, they saw
ahead of them some ruined walls on a hill, and strong and upright, and
really, to look at, as good as new--a great square tower.

'The top of that's just the exactly same size as the carpet,' said Jane.
'_I_ think it would be good to go to the top of that, because then none
of the Abby-what's-its-names--I mean natives--would be able to take the
carpet away even if they wanted to. And some of us could go out and get
things to eat--buy them honestly, I mean, not take them out of larder
windows.'

'I think it would be better if we went--' Anthea was beginning; but Jane
suddenly clenched her hands.

'I don't see why I should never do anything I want, just because I'm
the youngest. I wish the carpet would fit itself in at the top of that
tower--so there!'

The carpet made a disconcerting bound, and next moment it was hovering
above the square top of the tower. Then slowly and carefully it began to
sink under them. It was like a lift going down with you at the Army and
Navy Stores.

'I don't think we ought to wish things without all agreeing to them
first,' said Robert, huffishly. 'Hullo! What on earth?'

For unexpectedly and greyly something was coming up all round the four
sides of the carpet. It was as if a wall were being built by magic
quickness. It was a foot high--it was two feet high--three, four, five.
It was shutting out the light--more and more.

Anthea looked up at the sky and the walls that now rose six feet above
them.

'We're dropping into the tower,' she screamed. 'THERE WASN'T ANY TOP TO
IT. So the carpet's going to fit itself in at the bottom.'

Robert sprang to his feet.

'We ought to have--Hullo! an owl's nest.' He put his knee on a jutting
smooth piece of grey stone, and reached his hand into a deep window
slit--broad to the inside of the tower, and narrowing like a funnel to
the outside.

'Look sharp!' cried every one, but Robert did not look sharp enough. By
the time he had drawn his hand out of the owl's nest--there were no eggs
there--the carpet had sunk eight feet below him.

'Jump, you silly cuckoo!' cried Cyril, with brotherly anxiety.

But Robert couldn't turn round all in a minute into a jumping position.
He wriggled and twisted and got on to the broad ledge, and by the time
he was ready to jump the walls of the tower had risen up thirty feet
above the others, who were still sinking with the carpet, and Robert
found himself in the embrasure of a window; alone, for even the owls
were not at home that day. The wall was smoothish; there was no climbing
up, and as for climbing down--Robert hid his face in his hands, and
squirmed back and back from the giddy verge, until the back part of him
was wedged quite tight in the narrowest part of the window slit.

He was safe now, of course, but the outside part of his window was like
a frame to a picture of part of the other side of the tower. It was very
pretty, with moss growing between the stones and little shiny gems; but
between him and it there was the width of the tower, and nothing in it
but empty air. The situation was terrible. Robert saw in a flash that
the carpet was likely to bring them into just the same sort of tight
places that they used to get into with the wishes the Psammead granted
them.

And the others--imagine their feelings as the carpet sank slowly and
steadily to the very bottom of the tower, leaving Robert clinging to the
wall. Robert did not even try to imagine their feelings--he had quite
enough to do with his own; but you can.

As soon as the carpet came to a stop on the ground at the bottom of the
inside of the tower it suddenly lost that raft-like stiffness which had
been such a comfort during the journey from Camden Town to the topless
tower, and spread itself limply over the loose stones and little earthy
mounds at the bottom of the tower, just exactly like any ordinary
carpet. Also it shrank suddenly, so that it seemed to draw away from
under their feet, and they stepped quickly off the edges and stood on
the firm ground, while the carpet drew itself in till it was its proper
size, and no longer fitted exactly into the inside of the tower, but
left quite a big space all round it.

Then across the carpet they looked at each other, and then every chin
was tilted up and every eye sought vainly to see where poor Robert had
got to. Of course, they couldn't see him.

'I wish we hadn't come,' said Jane.

'You always do,' said Cyril, briefly. 'Look here, we can't leave Robert
up there. I wish the carpet would fetch him down.'

The carpet seemed to awake from a dream and pull itself together. It
stiffened itself briskly and floated up between the four walls of the
tower. The children below craned their heads back, and nearly broke
their necks in doing it. The carpet rose and rose. It hung poised darkly
above them for an anxious moment or two; then it dropped down again,
threw itself on the uneven floor of the tower, and as it did so it
tumbled Robert out on the uneven floor of the tower.

'Oh, glory!' said Robert, 'that was a squeak. You don't know how I felt.
I say, I've had about enough for a bit. Let's wish ourselves at home
again and have a go at that jam tart and mutton. We can go out again
afterwards.'

'Righto!' said every one, for the adventure had shaken the nerves of
all. So they all got on to the carpet again, and said--

'I wish we were at home.'

And lo and behold, they were no more at home than before. The carpet
never moved. The Phoenix had taken the opportunity to go to sleep.
Anthea woke it up gently.

'Look here,' she said.

'I'm looking,' said the Phoenix.

'We WISHED to be at home, and we're still here,' complained Jane.

'No,' said the Phoenix, looking about it at the high dark walls of the
tower. 'No; I quite see that.'

'But we wished to be at home,' said Cyril.

'No doubt,' said the bird, politely.

'And the carpet hasn't moved an inch,' said Robert.

'No,' said the Phoenix, 'I see it hasn't.'

'But I thought it was a wishing carpet?'

'So it is,' said the Phoenix.

'Then why--?' asked the children, altogether.

'I did tell you, you know,' said the Phoenix, 'only you are so fond
of listening to the music of your own voices. It is, indeed, the most
lovely music to each of us, and therefore--'

'You did tell us WHAT?' interrupted an Exasperated.

'Why, that the carpet only gives you three wishes a day and YOU'VE HAD
THEM.'

There was a heartfelt silence.

'Then how are we going to get home?' said Cyril, at last.

'I haven't any idea,' replied the Phoenix, kindly. 'Can I fly out and
get you any little thing?'

'How could you carry the money to pay for it?'

'It isn't necessary. Birds always take what they want. It is not
regarded as stealing, except in the case of magpies.'

The children were glad to find they had been right in supposing this to
be the case, on the day when they had wings, and had enjoyed somebody
else's ripe plums.

'Yes; let the Phoenix get us something to eat, anyway,' Robert urged--'
('If it will be so kind you mean,' corrected Anthea, in a whisper); 'if
it will be so kind, and we can be thinking while it's gone.'

So the Phoenix fluttered up through the grey space of the tower and
vanished at the top, and it was not till it had quite gone that Jane
said--

'Suppose it never comes back.'

It was not a pleasant thought, and though Anthea at once said, 'Of
course it will come back; I'm certain it's a bird of its word,' a
further gloom was cast by the idea. For, curiously enough, there was
no door to the tower, and all the windows were far, far too high to be
reached by the most adventurous climber. It was cold, too, and Anthea
shivered.

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'it's like being at the bottom of a well.'

The children waited in a sad and hungry silence, and got little stiff
necks with holding their little heads back to look up the inside of the
tall grey tower, to see if the Phoenix were coming.

At last it came. It looked very big as it fluttered down between the
walls, and as it neared them the children saw that its bigness was
caused by a basket of boiled chestnuts which it carried in one claw.
In the other it held a piece of bread. And in its beak was a very large
pear. The pear was juicy, and as good as a very small drink. When the
meal was over every one felt better, and the question of how to get home
was discussed without any disagreeableness. But no one could think
of any way out of the difficulty, or even out of the tower; for the
Phoenix, though its beak and claws had fortunately been strong enough
to carry food for them, was plainly not equal to flying through the air
with four well-nourished children.

'We must stay here, I suppose,' said Robert at last, 'and shout out
every now and then, and some one will hear us and bring ropes and
ladders, and rescue us like out of mines; and they'll get up a
subscription to send us home, like castaways.'

'Yes; but we shan't be home before mother is, and then father'll take
away the carpet and say it's dangerous or something,' said Cyril.

'I DO wish we hadn't come,' said Jane.

And every one else said 'Shut up,' except Anthea, who suddenly awoke the
Phoenix and said--

'Look here, I believe YOU can help us. Oh, I do wish you would!'

'I will help you as far as lies in my power,' said the Phoenix, at once.
'What is it you want now?'

'Why, we want to get home,' said every one.

'Oh,' said the Phoenix. 'Ah, hum! Yes. Home, you said? Meaning?'

'Where we live--where we slept last night--where the altar is that your
egg was hatched on.'

'Oh, there!' said the Phoenix. 'Well, I'll do my best.' It fluttered on
to the carpet and walked up and down for a few minutes in deep thought.
Then it drew itself up proudly.

'I CAN help you,' it said. 'I am almost sure I can help you. Unless I
am grossly deceived I can help you. You won't mind my leaving you for an
hour or two?' and without waiting for a reply it soared up through the
dimness of the tower into the brightness above.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, 'it said an hour or two. But I've read
about captives and people shut up in dungeons and catacombs and things
awaiting release, and I know each moment is an eternity. Those people
always do something to pass the desperate moments. It's no use our
trying to tame spiders, because we shan't have time.'

'I HOPE not,' said Jane, doubtfully.

'But we ought to scratch our names on the stones or something.'

'I say, talking of stones,' said Robert, 'you see that heap of stones
against the wall over in that corner. Well, I'm certain there's a hole
in the wall there--and I believe it's a door. Yes, look here--the stones
are round like an arch in the wall; and here's the hole--it's all black
inside.'

He had walked over to the heap as he spoke and climbed up to
it--dislodged the top stone of the heap and uncovered a little dark
space.

Next moment every one was helping to pull down the heap of stones, and
very soon every one threw off its jacket, for it was warm work.

'It IS a door,' said Cyril, wiping his face, 'and not a bad thing
either, if--'

He was going to add 'if anything happens to the Phoenix,' but he didn't
for fear of frightening Jane. He was not an unkind boy when he had
leisure to think of such things.

The arched hole in the wall grew larger and larger. It was very, very
black, even compared with the sort of twilight at the bottom of the
tower; it grew larger because the children kept pulling off the stones
and throwing them down into another heap. The stones must have been
there a very long time, for they were covered with moss, and some of
them were stuck together by it. So it was fairly hard work, as Robert
pointed out.

When the hole reached to about halfway between the top of the arch
and the tower, Robert and Cyril let themselves down cautiously on the
inside, and lit matches. How thankful they felt then that they had a
sensible father, who did not forbid them to carry matches, as some boys'
fathers do. The father of Robert and Cyril only insisted on the matches
being of the kind that strike only on the box.

'It's not a door, it's a sort of tunnel,' Robert cried to the girls,
after the first match had flared up, flickered, and gone out. 'Stand
off--we'll push some more stones down!'

They did, amid deep excitement. And now the stone heap was almost
gone--and before them the girls saw the dark archway leading to unknown
things. All doubts and fears as to getting home were forgotten in this
thrilling moment. It was like Monte Cristo--it was like--

'I say,' cried Anthea, suddenly, 'come out! There's always bad air in
places that have been shut up. It makes your torches go out, and then
you die. It's called fire-damp, I believe. Come out, I tell you.'

The urgency of her tone actually brought the boys out--and then every
one took up its jacket and fanned the dark arch with it, so as to
make the air fresh inside. When Anthea thought the air inside 'must be
freshened by now,' Cyril led the way into the arch.

The girls followed, and Robert came last, because Jane refused to tail
the procession lest 'something' should come in after her, and catch at
her from behind. Cyril advanced cautiously, lighting match after match,
and peering before him.

'It's a vaulting roof,' he said, 'and it's all stone--all right,
Panther, don't keep pulling at my jacket! The air must be all right
because of the matches, silly, and there are--look out--there are steps
down.'

'Oh, don't let's go any farther,' said Jane, in an agony of reluctance
(a very painful thing, by the way, to be in). 'I'm sure there are
snakes, or dens of lions, or something. Do let's go back, and come some
other time, with candles, and bellows for the fire-damp.'

'Let me get in front of you, then,' said the stern voice of Robert, from
behind. 'This is exactly the place for buried treasure, and I'm going
on, anyway; you can stay behind if you like.'

And then, of course, Jane consented to go on.

So, very slowly and carefully, the children went down the steps--there
were seventeen of them--and at the bottom of the steps were more
passages branching four ways, and a sort of low arch on the right-hand
side made Cyril wonder what it could be, for it was too low to be the
beginning of another passage.

So he knelt down and lit a match, and stooping very low he peeped in.

'There's SOMETHING,' he said, and reached out his hand. It touched
something that felt more like a damp bag of marbles than anything else
that Cyril had ever touched.

'I believe it IS a buried treasure,' he cried.

And it was; for even as Anthea cried, 'Oh, hurry up, Squirrel--fetch it
out!' Cyril pulled out a rotting canvas bag--about as big as the paper
ones the greengrocer gives you with Barcelona nuts in for sixpence.

'There's more of it, a lot more,' he said.

As he pulled the rotten bag gave way, and the gold coins ran and span
and jumped and bumped and chinked and clinked on the floor of the dark
passage.

I wonder what you would say if you suddenly came upon a buried treasure?
What Cyril said was, 'Oh, bother--I've burnt my fingers!' and as he
spoke he dropped the match. 'AND IT WAS THE LAST!' he added.

There was a moment of desperate silence. Then Jane began to cry.

'Don't,' said Anthea, 'don't, Pussy--you'll exhaust the air if you cry.
We can get out all right.'

'Yes,' said Jane, through her sobs, 'and find the Phoenix has come back
and gone away again--because it thought we'd gone home some other way,
and--Oh, I WISH we hadn't come.'

Every one stood quite still--only Anthea cuddled Jane up to her and
tried to wipe her eyes in the dark.

'D-DON'T,' said Jane; 'that's my EAR--I'm not crying with my ears.'

'Come, let's get on out,' said Robert; but that was not so easy, for no
one could remember exactly which way they had come. It is very difficult
to remember things in the dark, unless you have matches with you, and
then of course it is quite different, even if you don't strike one.

Every one had come to agree with Jane's constant wish--and despair was
making the darkness blacker than ever, when quite suddenly the floor
seemed to tip up--and a strong sensation of being in a whirling lift
came upon every one. All eyes were closed--one's eyes always are in the
dark, don't you think? When the whirling feeling stopped, Cyril said
'Earthquakes!' and they all opened their eyes.

They were in their own dingy breakfast-room at home, and oh, how light
and bright and safe and pleasant and altogether delightful it seemed
after that dark underground tunnel! The carpet lay on the floor, looking
as calm as though it had never been for an excursion in its life. On
the mantelpiece stood the Phoenix, waiting with an air of modest yet
sterling worth for the thanks of the children.

'But how DID you do it?' they asked, when every one had thanked the
Phoenix again and again.

'Oh, I just went and got a wish from your friend the Psammead.'

'But how DID you know where to find it?'

'I found that out from the carpet; these wishing creatures always know
all about each other--they're so clannish; like the Scots, you know--all
related.'

'But, the carpet can't talk, can it?'

'No.'

'Then how--'

'How did I get the Psammead's address? I tell you I got it from the
carpet.'

'DID it speak then?'

'No,' said the Phoenix, thoughtfully, 'it didn't speak, but I gathered
my information from something in its manner. I was always a singularly
observant bird.'

It was not till after the cold mutton and the jam tart, as well as the
tea and bread-and-butter, that any one found time to regret the golden
treasure which had been left scattered on the floor of the underground
passage, and which, indeed, no one had thought of till now, since the
moment when Cyril burnt his fingers at the flame of the last match.

'What owls and goats we were!' said Robert. 'Look how we've always
wanted treasure--and now--'

'Never mind,' said Anthea, trying as usual to make the best of it.
'We'll go back again and get it all, and then we'll give everybody
presents.'

More than a quarter of an hour passed most agreeably in arranging what
presents should be given to whom, and, when the claims of generosity had
been satisfied, the talk ran for fifty minutes on what they would buy
for themselves.

It was Cyril who broke in on Robert's almost too technical account of
the motor-car on which he meant to go to and from school--

'There!' he said. 'Dry up. It's no good. We can't ever go back. We don't
know where it is.'

'Don't YOU know?' Jane asked the Phoenix, wistfully.

'Not in the least,' the Phoenix replied, in a tone of amiable regret.

'Then we've lost the treasure,' said Cyril. And they had.

'But we've got the carpet and the Phoenix,' said Anthea.

'Excuse me,' said the bird, with an air of wounded dignity, 'I do SO
HATE to seem to interfere, but surely you MUST mean the Phoenix and the
carpet?'



CHAPTER 3. THE QUEEN COOK


It was on a Saturday that the children made their first glorious journey
on the wishing carpet. Unless you are too young to read at all, you will
know that the next day must have been Sunday.

Sunday at 18, Camden Terrace, Camden Town, was always a very pretty
day. Father always brought home flowers on Saturday, so that the
breakfast-table was extra beautiful. In November, of course, the flowers
were chrysanthemums, yellow and coppery coloured. Then there were always
sausages on toast for breakfast, and these are rapture, after six days
of Kentish Town Road eggs at fourteen a shilling.

On this particular Sunday there were fowls for dinner, a kind of food
that is generally kept for birthdays and grand occasions, and there
was an angel pudding, when rice and milk and oranges and white icing do
their best to make you happy.

After dinner father was very sleepy indeed, because he had been working
hard all the week; but he did not yield to the voice that said, 'Go and
have an hour's rest.' He nursed the Lamb, who had a horrid cough that
cook said was whooping-cough as sure as eggs, and he said--

'Come along, kiddies; I've got a ripping book from the library, called
The Golden Age, and I'll read it to you.'

Mother settled herself on the drawing-room sofa, and said she could
listen quite nicely with her eyes shut. The Lamb snugged into the
'armchair corner' of daddy's arm, and the others got into a happy heap
on the hearth-rug. At first, of course, there were too many feet and
knees and shoulders and elbows, but real comfort was actually settling
down on them, and the Phoenix and the carpet were put away on the back
top shelf of their minds (beautiful things that could be taken out and
played with later), when a surly solid knock came at the drawing-room
door. It opened an angry inch, and the cook's voice said, 'Please, m',
may I speak to you a moment?'

Mother looked at father with a desperate expression. Then she put her
pretty sparkly Sunday shoes down from the sofa, and stood up in them and
sighed.

'As good fish in the sea,' said father, cheerfully, and it was not till
much later that the children understood what he meant.

Mother went out into the passage, which is called 'the hall', where the
umbrella-stand is, and the picture of the 'Monarch of the Glen' in a
yellow shining frame, with brown spots on the Monarch from the damp
in the house before last, and there was cook, very red and damp in the
face, and with a clean apron tied on all crooked over the dirty one that
she had dished up those dear delightful chickens in. She stood there and
she seemed to get redder and damper, and she twisted the corner of her
apron round her fingers, and she said very shortly and fiercely--

'If you please ma'am, I should wish to leave at my day month.' Mother
leaned against the hatstand. The children could see her looking pale
through the crack of the door, because she had been very kind to the
cook, and had given her a holiday only the day before, and it seemed so
very unkind of the cook to want to go like this, and on a Sunday too.

'Why, what's the matter?' mother said.

'It's them children,' the cook replied, and somehow the children all
felt that they had known it from the first. They did not remember having
done anything extra wrong, but it is so frightfully easy to displease a
cook. 'It's them children: there's that there new carpet in their room,
covered thick with mud, both sides, beastly yellow mud, and sakes alive
knows where they got it. And all that muck to clean up on a Sunday! It's
not my place, and it's not my intentions, so I don't deceive you, ma'am,
and but for them limbs, which they is if ever there was, it's not a bad
place, though I says it, and I wouldn't wish to leave, but--'

'I'm very sorry,' said mother, gently. 'I will speak to the children.
And you had better think it over, and if you REALLY wish to go, tell me
to-morrow.'

Next day mother had a quiet talk with cook, and cook said she didn't
mind if she stayed on a bit, just to see.

But meantime the question of the muddy carpet had been gone into
thoroughly by father and mother. Jane's candid explanation that the
mud had come from the bottom of a foreign tower where there was buried
treasure was received with such chilling disbelief that the others
limited their defence to an expression of sorrow, and of a determination
'not to do it again'. But father said (and mother agreed with him,
because mothers have to agree with fathers, and not because it was her
own idea) that children who coated a carpet on both sides with thick
mud, and when they were asked for an explanation could only talk silly
nonsense--that meant Jane's truthful statement--were not fit to have a
carpet at all, and, indeed, SHOULDN'T have one for a week!

So the carpet was brushed (with tea-leaves, too) which was the only
comfort Anthea could think of, and folded up and put away in the
cupboard at the top of the stairs, and daddy put the key in his trousers
pocket. 'Till Saturday,' said he.

'Never mind,' said Anthea, 'we've got the Phoenix.'

But, as it happened, they hadn't. The Phoenix was nowhere to be found,
and everything had suddenly settled down from the rosy wild beauty of
magic happenings to the common damp brownness of ordinary November life
in Camden Town--and there was the nursery floor all bare boards in
the middle and brown oilcloth round the outside, and the bareness and
yellowness of the middle floor showed up the blackbeetles with terrible
distinctness, when the poor things came out in the evening, as usual, to
try to make friends with the children. But the children never would.

The Sunday ended in gloom, which even junket for supper in the blue
Dresden bowl could hardly lighten at all. Next day the Lamb's cough
was worse. It certainly seemed very whoopy, and the doctor came in his
brougham carriage.

Every one tried to bear up under the weight of the sorrow which it was
to know that the wishing carpet was locked up and the Phoenix mislaid. A
good deal of time was spent in looking for the Phoenix.

'It's a bird of its word,' said Anthea. 'I'm sure it's not deserted us.
But you know it had a most awfully long fly from wherever it was to near
Rochester and back, and I expect the poor thing's feeling tired out and
wants rest. I am sure we may trust it.'

The others tried to feel sure of this, too, but it was hard.

No one could be expected to feel very kindly towards the cook, since it
was entirely through her making such a fuss about a little foreign mud
that the carpet had been taken away.

'She might have told us,' said Jane, 'and Panther and I would have
cleaned it with tea-leaves.'

'She's a cantankerous cat,' said Robert.

'I shan't say what I think about her,' said Anthea, primly, 'because it
would be evil speaking, lying, and slandering.'

'It's not lying to say she's a disagreeable pig, and a beastly
blue-nosed Bozwoz,' said Cyril, who had read The Eyes of Light, and
intended to talk like Tony as soon as he could teach Robert to talk like
Paul.

And all the children, even Anthea, agreed that even if she wasn't a
blue-nosed Bozwoz, they wished cook had never been born.

But I ask you to believe that they didn't do all the things on purpose
which so annoyed the cook during the following week, though I daresay
the things would not have happened if the cook had been a favourite.
This is a mystery. Explain it if you can. The things that had happened
were as follows:

Sunday.--Discovery of foreign mud on both sides of the carpet.

Monday.--Liquorice put on to boil with aniseed balls in a saucepan.
Anthea did this, because she thought it would be good for the Lamb's
cough. The whole thing forgotten, and bottom of saucepan burned out. It
was the little saucepan lined with white that was kept for the baby's
milk.

Tuesday.--A dead mouse found in pantry. Fish-slice taken to dig grave
with. By regrettable accident fish-slice broken. Defence: 'The cook
oughtn't to keep dead mice in pantries.'

Wednesday.--Chopped suet left on kitchen table. Robert added chopped
soap, but he says he thought the suet was soap too.

Thursday.--Broke the kitchen window by falling against it during a
perfectly fair game of bandits in the area.

Friday.--Stopped up grating of kitchen sink with putty and filled sink
with water to make a lake to sail paper boats in. Went away and left the
tap running. Kitchen hearthrug and cook's shoes ruined.

On Saturday the carpet was restored. There had been plenty of time
during the week to decide where it should be asked to go when they did
get it back.

Mother had gone over to granny's, and had not taken the Lamb because he
had a bad cough, which, cook repeatedly said, was whooping-cough as sure
as eggs is eggs.

'But we'll take him out, a ducky darling,' said Anthea. 'We'll take
him somewhere where you can't have whooping-cough. Don't be so silly,
Robert. If he DOES talk about it no one'll take any notice. He's always
talking about things he's never seen.'

So they dressed the Lamb and themselves in out-of-doors clothes, and the
Lamb chuckled and coughed, and laughed and coughed again, poor dear, and
all the chairs and tables were moved off the carpet by the boys, while
Jane nursed the Lamb, and Anthea rushed through the house in one last
wild hunt for the missing Phoenix.

'It's no use waiting for it,' she said, reappearing breathless in the
breakfast-room. 'But I know it hasn't deserted us. It's a bird of its
word.'

'Quite so,' said the gentle voice of the Phoenix from beneath the table.

Every one fell on its knees and looked up, and there was the Phoenix
perched on a crossbar of wood that ran across under the table, and had
once supported a drawer, in the happy days before the drawer had been
used as a boat, and its bottom unfortunately trodden out by Raggett's
Really Reliable School Boots on the feet of Robert.

'I've been here all the time,' said the Phoenix, yawning politely
behind its claw. 'If you wanted me you should have recited the ode of
invocation; it's seven thousand lines long, and written in very pure and
beautiful Greek.'

'Couldn't you tell it us in English?' asked Anthea.

'It's rather long, isn't it?' said Jane, jumping the Lamb on her knee.

'Couldn't you make a short English version, like Tate and Brady?'

'Oh, come along, do,' said Robert, holding out his hand. 'Come along,
good old Phoenix.'

'Good old BEAUTIFUL Phoenix,' it corrected shyly.

'Good old BEAUTIFUL Phoenix, then. Come along, come along,' said Robert,
impatiently, with his hand still held out.

The Phoenix fluttered at once on to his wrist.

'This amiable youth,' it said to the others, 'has miraculously been able
to put the whole meaning of the seven thousand lines of Greek invocation
into one English hexameter--a little misplaced some of the words--but--

'Oh, come along, come along, good old beautiful Phoenix!'

'Not perfect, I admit--but not bad for a boy of his age.'

'Well, now then,' said Robert, stepping back on to the carpet with the
golden Phoenix on his wrist.

'You look like the king's falconer,' said Jane, sitting down on the
carpet with the baby on her lap.

Robert tried to go on looking like it. Cyril and Anthea stood on the
carpet.

'We shall have to get back before dinner,' said Cyril, 'or cook will
blow the gaff.'

'She hasn't sneaked since Sunday,' said Anthea.

'She--' Robert was beginning, when the door burst open and the cook,
fierce and furious, came in like a whirlwind and stood on the corner of
the carpet, with a broken basin in one hand and a threat in the other,
which was clenched.

'Look 'ere!' she cried, 'my only basin; and what the powers am I to
make the beefsteak and kidney pudding in that your ma ordered for your
dinners? You don't deserve no dinners, so yer don't.'

'I'm awfully sorry, cook,' said Anthea gently; 'it was my fault, and
I forgot to tell you about it. It got broken when we were telling our
fortunes with melted lead, you know, and I meant to tell you.'

'Meant to tell me,' replied the cook; she was red with anger, and really
I don't wonder--'meant to tell! Well, _I_ mean to tell, too. I've held
my tongue this week through, because the missus she said to me quiet
like, "We mustn't expect old heads on young shoulders," but now I shan't
hold it no longer. There was the soap you put in our pudding, and me and
Eliza never so much as breathed it to your ma--though well we might--and
the saucepan, and the fish-slice, and--My gracious cats alive! what 'ave
you got that blessed child dressed up in his outdoors for?'

'We aren't going to take him out,' said Anthea; 'at least--' She stopped
short, for though they weren't going to take him out in the Kentish
Town Road, they certainly intended to take him elsewhere. But not at all
where cook meant when she said 'out'. This confused the truthful Anthea.

'Out!' said the cook, 'that I'll take care you don't;' and she snatched
the Lamb from the lap of Jane, while Anthea and Robert caught her by the
skirts and apron. 'Look here,' said Cyril, in stern desperation, 'will
you go away, and make your pudding in a pie-dish, or a flower-pot, or a
hot-water can, or something?'

'Not me,' said the cook, briefly; 'and leave this precious poppet for
you to give his deathercold to.'

'I warn you,' said Cyril, solemnly. 'Beware, ere yet it be too late.'

'Late yourself the little popsey-wopsey,' said the cook, with angry
tenderness. 'They shan't take it out, no more they shan't. And--Where
did you get that there yellow fowl?' She pointed to the Phoenix.

Even Anthea saw that unless the cook lost her situation the loss would
be theirs.

'I wish,' she said suddenly, 'we were on a sunny southern shore, where
there can't be any whooping-cough.'

She said it through the frightened howls of the Lamb, and the sturdy
scoldings of the cook, and instantly the giddy-go-round-and-falling-lift
feeling swept over the whole party, and the cook sat down flat on the
carpet, holding the screaming Lamb tight to her stout print-covered
self, and calling on St Bridget to help her. She was an Irishwoman.

The moment the tipsy-topsy-turvy feeling stopped, the cook opened her
eyes, gave one sounding screech and shut them again, and Anthea took the
opportunity to get the desperately howling Lamb into her own arms.

'It's all right,' she said; 'own Panther's got you. Look at the trees,
and the sand, and the shells, and the great big tortoises. Oh DEAR, how
hot it is!'

It certainly was; for the trusty carpet had laid itself out on a
southern shore that was sunny and no mistake, as Robert remarked. The
greenest of green slopes led up to glorious groves where palm-trees and
all the tropical flowers and fruits that you read of in Westward Ho! and
Fair Play were growing in rich profusion. Between the green, green slope
and the blue, blue sea lay a stretch of sand that looked like a carpet
of jewelled cloth of gold, for it was not greyish as our northern sand
is, but yellow and changing--opal-coloured like sunshine and rainbows.
And at the very moment when the wild, whirling, blinding, deafening,
tumbling upside-downness of the carpet-moving stopped, the children had
the happiness of seeing three large live turtles waddle down to the edge
of the sea and disappear in the water. And it was hotter than you can
possibly imagine, unless you think of ovens on a baking-day.

Every one without an instant's hesitation tore off its
London-in-November outdoor clothes, and Anthea took off the Lamb's
highwayman blue coat and his three-cornered hat, and then his jersey,
and then the Lamb himself suddenly slipped out of his little blue tight
breeches and stood up happy and hot in his little white shirt.

'I'm sure it's much warmer than the seaside in the summer,' said Anthea.
'Mother always lets us go barefoot then.'

So the Lamb's shoes and socks and gaiters came off, and he stood digging
his happy naked pink toes into the golden smooth sand.

'I'm a little white duck-dickie,' said he--'a little white duck-dickie
what swims,' and splashed quacking into a sandy pool.

'Let him,' said Anthea; 'it can't hurt him. Oh, how hot it is!'

The cook suddenly opened her eyes and screamed, shut them, screamed
again, opened her eyes once more and said--

'Why, drat my cats alive, what's all this? It's a dream, I expect.

Well, it's the best I ever dreamed. I'll look it up in the dream-book
to-morrow. Seaside and trees and a carpet to sit on. I never did!'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'it isn't a dream; it's real.'

'Ho yes!' said the cook; 'they always says that in dreams.'

'It's REAL, I tell you,' Robert said, stamping his foot. 'I'm not going
to tell you how it's done, because that's our secret.' He winked heavily
at each of the others in turn. 'But you wouldn't go away and make that
pudding, so we HAD to bring you, and I hope you like it.'

'I do that, and no mistake,' said the cook unexpectedly; 'and it being a
dream it don't matter what I say; and I WILL say, if it's my last word,
that of all the aggravating little varmints--' 'Calm yourself, my good
woman,' said the Phoenix.

'Good woman, indeed,' said the cook; 'good woman yourself' Then she
saw who it was that had spoken. 'Well, if I ever,' said she; 'this is
something like a dream! Yellow fowls a-talking and all! I've heard of
such, but never did I think to see the day.'

'Well, then,' said Cyril, impatiently, 'sit here and see the day now.
It's a jolly fine day. Here, you others--a council!' They walked along
the shore till they were out of earshot of the cook, who still sat
gazing about her with a happy, dreamy, vacant smile.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'we must roll the carpet up and hide it, so
that we can get at it at any moment. The Lamb can be getting rid of
his whooping-cough all the morning, and we can look about; and if the
savages on this island are cannibals, we'll hook it, and take her back.
And if not, we'll LEAVE HER HERE.'

'Is that being kind to servants and animals, like the clergyman said?'
asked Jane.

'Nor she isn't kind,' retorted Cyril.

'Well--anyway,' said Anthea, 'the safest thing is to leave the carpet
there with her sitting on it. Perhaps it'll be a lesson to her, and
anyway, if she thinks it's a dream it won't matter what she says when
she gets home.'

So the extra coats and hats and mufflers were piled on the carpet. Cyril
shouldered the well and happy Lamb, the Phoenix perched on Robert's
wrist, and 'the party of explorers prepared to enter the interior'.

The grassy slope was smooth, but under the trees there were tangled
creepers with bright, strange-shaped flowers, and it was not easy to
walk.

'We ought to have an explorer's axe,' said Robert. 'I shall ask father
to give me one for Christmas.'

There were curtains of creepers with scented blossoms hanging from the
trees, and brilliant birds darted about quite close to their faces.

'Now, tell me honestly,' said the Phoenix, 'are there any birds here
handsomer than I am? Don't be afraid of hurting my feelings--I'm a
modest bird, I hope.'

'Not one of them,' said Robert, with conviction, 'is a patch upon you!'

'I was never a vain bird,' said the Phoenix, 'but I own that you confirm
my own impression. I will take a flight.' It circled in the air for a
moment, and, returning to Robert's wrist, went on, 'There is a path to
the left.'

And there was. So now the children went on through the wood more quickly
and comfortably, the girls picking flowers and the Lamb inviting
the 'pretty dickies' to observe that he himself was a 'little white
real-water-wet duck!'

And all this time he hadn't whooping-coughed once.

The path turned and twisted, and, always threading their way amid a
tangle of flowers, the children suddenly passed a corner and found
themselves in a forest clearing, where there were a lot of pointed
huts--the huts, as they knew at once, of SAVAGES.

The boldest heart beat more quickly. Suppose they WERE cannibals. It was
a long way back to the carpet.

'Hadn't we better go back?' said Jane. 'Go NOW,' she said, and her voice
trembled a little. 'Suppose they eat us.'

'Nonsense, Pussy,' said Cyril, firmly. 'Look, there's a goat tied up.
That shows they don't eat PEOPLE.'

'Let's go on and say we're missionaries,' Robert suggested.

'I shouldn't advise THAT,' said the Phoenix, very earnestly.

'Why not?'

'Well, for one thing, it isn't true,' replied the golden bird.

It was while they stood hesitating on the edge of the clearing that
a tall man suddenly came out of one of the huts. He had hardly any
clothes, and his body all over was a dark and beautiful coppery
colour--just like the chrysanthemums father had brought home on
Saturday. In his hand he held a spear. The whites of his eyes and the
white of his teeth were the only light things about him, except that
where the sun shone on his shiny brown body it looked white, too. If
you will look carefully at the next shiny savage you meet with next to
nothing on, you will see at once--if the sun happens to be shining at
the time--that I am right about this.

The savage looked at the children. Concealment was impossible. He
uttered a shout that was more like 'Oo goggery bag-wag' than anything
else the children had ever heard, and at once brown coppery people leapt
out of every hut, and swarmed like ants about the clearing. There was
no time for discussion, and no one wanted to discuss anything, anyhow.
Whether these coppery people were cannibals or not now seemed to matter
very little.

Without an instant's hesitation the four children turned and ran back
along the forest path; the only pause was Anthea's. She stood back to
let Cyril pass, because he was carrying the Lamb, who screamed with
delight. (He had not whooping-coughed a single once since the carpet
landed him on the island.)

'Gee-up, Squirrel; gee-gee,' he shouted, and Cyril did gee-up. The path
was a shorter cut to the beach than the creeper-covered way by which
they had come, and almost directly they saw through the trees the
shining blue-and-gold-and-opal of sand and sea.

'Stick to it,' cried Cyril, breathlessly.

They did stick to it; they tore down the sands--they could hear behind
them as they ran the patter of feet which they knew, too well, were
copper-coloured.

The sands were golden and opal-coloured--and BARE. There were wreaths of
tropic seaweed, there were rich tropic shells of the kind you would not
buy in the Kentish Town Road under at least fifteen pence a pair.
There were turtles basking lumpily on the water's edge--but no cook, no
clothes, and no carpet.

'On, on! Into the sea!' gasped Cyril. 'They MUST hate water.
I've--heard--savages always--dirty.'

Their feet were splashing in the warm shallows before his breathless
words were ended. The calm baby-waves were easy to go through. It is
warm work running for your life in the tropics, and the coolness of the
water was delicious. They were up to their arm-pits now, and Jane was up
to her chin.

'Look!' said the Phoenix. 'What are they pointing at?'

The children turned; and there, a little to the west was a head--a head
they knew, with a crooked cap upon it. It was the head of the cook.

For some reason or other the savages had stopped at the water's edge
and were all talking at the top of their voices, and all were pointing
copper-coloured fingers, stiff with interest and excitement, at the head
of the cook.

The children hurried towards her as quickly as the water would let them.

'What on earth did you come out here for?' Robert shouted; 'and where on
earth's the carpet?'

'It's not on earth, bless you,' replied the cook, happily; 'it's UNDER
ME--in the water. I got a bit warm setting there in the sun, and I just
says, "I wish I was in a cold bath"--just like that--and next minute
here I was! It's all part of the dream.'

Every one at once saw how extremely fortunate it was that the carpet had
had the sense to take the cook to the nearest and largest bath--the sea,
and how terrible it would have been if the carpet had taken itself and
her to the stuffy little bath-room of the house in Camden Town!

'Excuse me,' said the Phoenix's soft voice, breaking in on the general
sigh of relief, 'but I think these brown people want your cook.'

'To--to eat?' whispered Jane, as well as she could through the water
which the plunging Lamb was dashing in her face with happy fat hands and
feet.

'Hardly,' rejoined the bird. 'Who wants cooks to EAT? Cooks are ENGAGED,
not eaten. They wish to engage her.'

'How can you understand what they say?' asked Cyril, doubtfully.

'It's as easy as kissing your claw,' replied the bird. 'I speak and
understand ALL languages, even that of your cook, which is difficult and
unpleasing. It's quite easy, when you know how it's done. It just comes
to you. I should advise you to beach the carpet and land the cargo--the
cook, I mean. You can take my word for it, the copper-coloured ones will
not harm you now.'

It is impossible not to take the word of a Phoenix when it tells you
to. So the children at once got hold of the corners of the carpet,
and, pulling it from under the cook, towed it slowly in through the
shallowing water, and at last spread it on the sand. The cook, who had
followed, instantly sat down on it, and at once the copper-coloured
natives, now strangely humble, formed a ring round the carpet, and fell
on their faces on the rainbow-and-gold sand. The tallest savage spoke
in this position, which must have been very awkward for him; and Jane
noticed that it took him quite a long time to get the sand out of his
mouth afterwards.

'He says,' the Phoenix remarked after some time, 'that they wish to
engage your cook permanently.'

'Without a character?' asked Anthea, who had heard her mother speak of
such things.

'They do not wish to engage her as cook, but as queen; and queens need
not have characters.'

There was a breathless pause.

'WELL,' said Cyril, 'of all the choices! But there's no accounting for
tastes.'

Every one laughed at the idea of the cook's being engaged as queen; they
could not help it.

'I do not advise laughter,' warned the Phoenix, ruffling out his golden
feathers, which were extremely wet. 'And it's not their own choice. It
seems that there is an ancient prophecy of this copper-coloured tribe
that a great queen should some day arise out of the sea with a white
crown on her head, and--and--well, you see! There's the crown!'

It pointed its claw at cook's cap; and a very dirty cap it was, because
it was the end of the week.

'That's the white crown,' it said; 'at least, it's nearly white--very
white indeed compared to the colour THEY are--and anyway, it's quite
white enough.'

Cyril addressed the cook. 'Look here!' said he, 'these brown people want
you to be their queen. They're only savages, and they don't know any
better. Now would you really like to stay? or, if you'll promise not to
be so jolly aggravating at home, and not to tell any one a word about
to-day, we'll take you back to Camden Town.'

'No, you don't,' said the cook, in firm, undoubting tones. 'I've always
wanted to be the Queen, God bless her! and I always thought what a good
one I should make; and now I'm going to. IF it's only in a dream, it's
well worth while. And I don't go back to that nasty underground kitchen,
and me blamed for everything; that I don't, not till the dream's
finished and I wake up with that nasty bell a rang-tanging in my
ears--so I tell you.'

'Are you SURE,' Anthea anxiously asked the Phoenix, 'that she will be
quite safe here?'

'She will find the nest of a queen a very precious and soft thing,' said
the bird, solemnly.

'There--you hear,' said Cyril. 'You're in for a precious soft thing,
so mind you're a good queen, cook. It's more than you'd any right to
expect, but long may you reign.'

Some of the cook's copper-coloured subjects now advanced from the forest
with long garlands of beautiful flowers, white and sweet-scented, and
hung them respectfully round the neck of their new sovereign.

'What! all them lovely bokays for me!' exclaimed the enraptured cook.
'Well, this here is something LIKE a dream, I must say.'

She sat up very straight on the carpet, and the copper-coloured ones,
themselves wreathed in garlands of the gayest flowers, madly stuck
parrot feathers in their hair and began to dance. It was a dance such as
you have never seen; it made the children feel almost sure that the
cook was right, and that they were all in a dream. Small, strange-shaped
drums were beaten, odd-sounding songs were sung, and the dance got
faster and faster and odder and odder, till at last all the dancers fell
on the sand tired out.

The new queen, with her white crown-cap all on one side, clapped wildly.

'Brayvo!' she cried, 'brayvo! It's better than the Albert Edward
Music-hall in the Kentish Town Road. Go it again!'

But the Phoenix would not translate this request into the
copper-coloured language; and when the savages had recovered their
breath, they implored their queen to leave her white escort and come
with them to their huts.

'The finest shall be yours, O queen,' said they.

'Well--so long!' said the cook, getting heavily on to her feet, when the
Phoenix had translated this request. 'No more kitchens and attics for
me, thank you. I'm off to my royal palace, I am; and I only wish this
here dream would keep on for ever and ever.'

She picked up the ends of the garlands that trailed round her feet,
and the children had one last glimpse of her striped stockings and worn
elastic-side boots before she disappeared into the shadow of the forest,
surrounded by her dusky retainers, singing songs of rejoicing as they
went.

'WELL!' said Cyril, 'I suppose she's all right, but they don't seem to
count us for much, one way or the other.'

'Oh,' said the Phoenix, 'they think you're merely dreams. The prophecy
said that the queen would arise from the waves with a white crown and
surrounded by white dream-children. That's about what they think YOU
are!'

'And what about dinner?' said Robert, abruptly.

'There won't be any dinner, with no cook and no pudding-basin,' Anthea
reminded him; 'but there's always bread-and-butter.'

'Let's get home,' said Cyril.

The Lamb was furiously unwishful to be dressed in his warm clothes
again, but Anthea and Jane managed it, by force disguised as coaxing,
and he never once whooping-coughed.

Then every one put on its own warm things and took its place on the
carpet.

A sound of uncouth singing still came from beyond the trees where the
copper-coloured natives were crooning songs of admiration and respect
to their white-crowned queen. Then Anthea said 'Home,' just as duchesses
and other people do to their coachmen, and the intelligent carpet in
one whirling moment laid itself down in its proper place on the nursery
floor. And at that very moment Eliza opened the door and said--

'Cook's gone! I can't find her anywhere, and there's no dinner ready.
She hasn't taken her box nor yet her outdoor things. She just ran out to
see the time, I shouldn't wonder--the kitchen clock never did give her
satisfaction--and she's got run over or fell down in a fit as likely
as not. You'll have to put up with the cold bacon for your dinners; and
what on earth you've got your outdoor things on for I don't know.
And then I'll slip out and see if they know anything about her at the
police-station.'

But nobody ever knew anything about the cook any more, except the
children, and, later, one other person.


Mother was so upset at losing the cook, and so anxious about her, that
Anthea felt most miserable, as though she had done something very wrong
indeed. She woke several times in the night, and at last decided that
she would ask the Phoenix to let her tell her mother all about it. But
there was no opportunity to do this next day, because the Phoenix, as
usual, had gone to sleep in some out-of-the-way spot, after asking, as a
special favour, not to be disturbed for twenty-four hours.

The Lamb never whooping-coughed once all that Sunday, and mother and
father said what good medicine it was that the doctor had given him. But
the children knew that it was the southern shore where you can't have
whooping-cough that had cured him. The Lamb babbled of coloured sand
and water, but no one took any notice of that. He often talked of things
that hadn't happened.

It was on Monday morning, very early indeed, that Anthea woke and
suddenly made up her mind. She crept downstairs in her night-gown (it
was very chilly), sat down on the carpet, and with a beating heart
wished herself on the sunny shore where you can't have whooping-cough,
and next moment there she was.

The sand was splendidly warm. She could feel it at once, even through
the carpet. She folded the carpet, and put it over her shoulders like
a shawl, for she was determined not to be parted from it for a single
instant, no matter how hot it might be to wear.

Then trembling a little, and trying to keep up her courage by saying
over and over, 'It is my DUTY, it IS my duty,' she went up the forest
path.

'Well, here you are again,' said the cook, directly she saw Anthea.

'This dream does keep on!'

The cook was dressed in a white robe; she had no shoes and stockings
and no cap and she was sitting under a screen of palm-leaves, for it was
afternoon in the island, and blazing hot. She wore a flower wreath
on her hair, and copper-coloured boys were fanning her with peacock's
feathers.

'They've got the cap put away,' she said. 'They seem to think a lot of
it. Never saw one before, I expect.'

'Are you happy?' asked Anthea, panting; the sight of the cook as queen
quite took her breath away.

'I believe you, my dear,' said the cook, heartily. 'Nothing to do unless
you want to. But I'm getting rested now. Tomorrow I'm going to start
cleaning out my hut, if the dream keeps on, and I shall teach them
cooking; they burns everything to a cinder now unless they eats it raw.'

'But can you talk to them?'

'Lor' love a duck, yes!' the happy cook-queen replied; 'it's quite easy
to pick up. I always thought I should be quick at foreign languages.
I've taught them to understand "dinner," and "I want a drink," and "You
leave me be," already.'

'Then you don't want anything?' Anthea asked earnestly and anxiously.

'Not me, miss; except if you'd only go away. I'm afraid of me waking
up with that bell a-going if you keep on stopping here a-talking to me.
Long as this here dream keeps up I'm as happy as a queen.'

'Goodbye, then,' said Anthea, gaily, for her conscience was clear now.

She hurried into the wood, threw herself on the ground, and said
'Home'--and there she was, rolled in the carpet on the nursery floor.

'SHE'S all right, anyhow,' said Anthea, and went back to bed. 'I'm glad
somebody's pleased. But mother will never believe me when I tell her.'

The story is indeed a little difficult to believe. Still, you might try.



CHAPTER 4. TWO BAZAARS


Mother was really a great dear. She was pretty and she was loving, and
most frightfully good when you were ill, and always kind, and almost
always just. That is, she was just when she understood things. But
of course she did not always understand things. No one understands
everything, and mothers are not angels, though a good many of them come
pretty near it. The children knew that mother always WANTED to do what
was best for them, even if she was not clever enough to know exactly
what was the best. That was why all of them, but much more particularly
Anthea, felt rather uncomfortable at keeping the great secret from her
of the wishing carpet and the Phoenix. And Anthea, whose inside mind was
made so that she was able to be much more uncomfortable than the others,
had decided that she MUST tell her mother the truth, however little
likely it was that her mother would believe it.

'Then I shall have done what's right,' said she to the Phoenix; 'and if
she doesn't believe me it won't be my fault--will it?'

'Not in the least,' said the golden bird. 'And she won't, so you're
quite safe.'

Anthea chose a time when she was doing her home-lessons--they were
Algebra and Latin, German, English, and Euclid--and she asked her mother
whether she might come and do them in the drawing-room--'so as to be
quiet,' she said to her mother; and to herself she said, 'And that's not
the real reason. I hope I shan't grow up a LIAR.'

Mother said, 'Of course, dearie,' and Anthea started swimming through
a sea of x's and y's and z's. Mother was sitting at the mahogany bureau
writing letters.

'Mother dear,' said Anthea.

'Yes, love-a-duck,' said mother.

'About cook,' said Anthea. '_I_ know where she is.'

'Do you, dear?' said mother. 'Well, I wouldn't take her back after the
way she has behaved.'

'It's not her fault,' said Anthea. 'May I tell you about it from the
beginning?'

Mother laid down her pen, and her nice face had a resigned expression.
As you know, a resigned expression always makes you want not to tell
anybody anything.

'It's like this,' said Anthea, in a hurry: 'that egg, you know, that
came in the carpet; we put it in the fire and it hatched into the
Phoenix, and the carpet was a wishing carpet--and--'

'A very nice game, darling,' said mother, taking up her pen. 'Now do
be quiet. I've got a lot of letters to write. I'm going to Bournemouth
to-morrow with the Lamb--and there's that bazaar.'

Anthea went back to x y z, and mother's pen scratched busily.

'But, mother,' said Anthea, when mother put down the pen to lick an
envelope, 'the carpet takes us wherever we like--and--'

'I wish it would take you where you could get a few nice Eastern things
for my bazaar,' said mother. 'I promised them, and I've no time to go to
Liberty's now.'

'It shall,' said Anthea, 'but, mother--'

'Well, dear,' said mother, a little impatiently, for she had taken up
her pen again.

'The carpet took us to a place where you couldn't have whooping-cough,
and the Lamb hasn't whooped since, and we took cook because she was
so tiresome, and then she would stay and be queen of the savages. They
thought her cap was a crown, and--'

'Darling one,' said mother, 'you know I love to hear the things you make
up--but I am most awfully busy.'

'But it's true,' said Anthea, desperately.

'You shouldn't say that, my sweet,' said mother, gently. And then Anthea
knew it was hopeless.

'Are you going away for long?' asked Anthea.

'I've got a cold,' said mother, 'and daddy's anxious about it, and the
Lamb's cough.'

'He hasn't coughed since Saturday,' the Lamb's eldest sister
interrupted.

'I wish I could think so,' mother replied. 'And daddy's got to go to
Scotland. I do hope you'll be good children.'

'We will, we will,' said Anthea, fervently. 'When's the bazaar?'

'On Saturday,' said mother, 'at the schools. Oh, don't talk any more,
there's a treasure! My head's going round, and I've forgotten how to
spell whooping-cough.'


Mother and the Lamb went away, and father went away, and there was a new
cook who looked so like a frightened rabbit that no one had the heart to
do anything to frighten her any more than seemed natural to her.

The Phoenix begged to be excused. It said it wanted a week's rest, and
asked that it might not be disturbed. And it hid its golden gleaming
self, and nobody could find it.

So that when Wednesday afternoon brought an unexpected holiday, and
every one decided to go somewhere on the carpet, the journey had to
be undertaken without the Phoenix. They were debarred from any carpet
excursions in the evening by a sudden promise to mother, exacted in the
agitation of parting, that they would not be out after six at night,
except on Saturday, when they were to go to the bazaar, and were pledged
to put on their best clothes, to wash themselves to the uttermost, and
to clean their nails--not with scissors, which are scratchy and bad,
but with flat-sharpened ends of wooden matches, which do no harm to any
one's nails.

'Let's go and see the Lamb,' said Jane.

But every one was agreed that if they appeared suddenly in Bournemouth
it would frighten mother out of her wits, if not into a fit. So they
sat on the carpet, and thought and thought and thought till they almost
began to squint.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'I know. Please carpet, take us somewhere where
we can see the Lamb and mother and no one can see us.'

'Except the Lamb,' said Jane, quickly.

And the next moment they found themselves recovering from the
upside-down movement--and there they were sitting on the carpet, and
the carpet was laid out over another thick soft carpet of brown
pine-needles. There were green pine-trees overhead, and a swift clear
little stream was running as fast as ever it could between steep
banks--and there, sitting on the pine-needle carpet, was mother, without
her hat; and the sun was shining brightly, although it was November--and
there was the Lamb, as jolly as jolly and not whooping at all.

'The carpet's deceived us,' said Robert, gloomily; 'mother will see us
directly she turns her head.'

But the faithful carpet had not deceived them.

Mother turned her dear head and looked straight at them, and DID NOT SEE
THEM!

'We're invisible,' Cyril whispered: 'what awful larks!'

But to the girls it was not larks at all. It was horrible to have mother
looking straight at them, and her face keeping the same, just as though
they weren't there.

'I don't like it,' said Jane. 'Mother never looked at us like that
before. Just as if she didn't love us--as if we were somebody else's
children, and not very nice ones either--as if she didn't care whether
she saw us or not.'

'It is horrid,' said Anthea, almost in tears.

But at this moment the Lamb saw them, and plunged towards the carpet,
shrieking, 'Panty, own Panty--an' Pussy, an' Squiggle--an' Bobs, oh,
oh!'

Anthea caught him and kissed him, so did Jane; they could not help
it--he looked such a darling, with his blue three-cornered hat all on
one side, and his precious face all dirty--quite in the old familiar
way.

'I love you, Panty; I love you--and you, and you, and you,' cried the
Lamb.

It was a delicious moment. Even the boys thumped their baby brother
joyously on the back.

Then Anthea glanced at mother--and mother's face was a pale sea-green
colour, and she was staring at the Lamb as if she thought he had gone
mad. And, indeed, that was exactly what she did think.

'My Lamb, my precious! Come to mother,' she cried, and jumped up and ran
to the baby.

She was so quick that the invisible children had to leap back, or she
would have felt them; and to feel what you can't see is the worst sort
of ghost-feeling. Mother picked up the Lamb and hurried away from the
pinewood.

'Let's go home,' said Jane, after a miserable silence. 'It feels just
exactly as if mother didn't love us.'

But they couldn't bear to go home till they had seen mother meet another
lady, and knew that she was safe. You cannot leave your mother to go
green in the face in a distant pinewood, far from all human aid, and
then go home on your wishing carpet as though nothing had happened.

When mother seemed safe the children returned to the carpet, and said
'Home'--and home they went.

'I don't care about being invisible myself,' said Cyril, 'at least, not
with my own family. It would be different if you were a prince, or a
bandit, or a burglar.'

And now the thoughts of all four dwelt fondly on the dear greenish face
of mother.

'I wish she hadn't gone away,' said Jane; 'the house is simply beastly
without her.'

'I think we ought to do what she said,' Anthea put in. 'I saw something
in a book the other day about the wishes of the departed being sacred.'

'That means when they've departed farther off,' said Cyril. 'India's
coral or Greenland's icy, don't you know; not Bournemouth. Besides, we
don't know what her wishes are.'

'She SAID'--Anthea was very much inclined to cry--'she said, "Get Indian
things for my bazaar;" but I know she thought we couldn't, and it was
only play.'

'Let's get them all the same,' said Robert. 'We'll go the first thing on
Saturday morning.'

And on Saturday morning, the first thing, they went.

There was no finding the Phoenix, so they sat on the beautiful wishing
carpet, and said--

'We want Indian things for mother's bazaar. Will you please take us
where people will give us heaps of Indian things?'

The docile carpet swirled their senses away, and restored them on the
outskirts of a gleaming white Indian town. They knew it was Indian at
once, by the shape of the domes and roofs; and besides, a man went by on
an elephant, and two English soldiers went along the road, talking like
in Mr Kipling's books--so after that no one could have any doubt as to
where they were. They rolled up the carpet and Robert carried it, and
they walked bodily into the town.

It was very warm, and once more they had to take off their
London-in-November coats, and carry them on their arms.

The streets were narrow and strange, and the clothes of the people in
the streets were stranger and the talk of the people was strangest of
all.

'I can't understand a word,' said Cyril. 'How on earth are we to ask for
things for our bazaar?'

'And they're poor people, too,' said Jane; 'I'm sure they are. What we
want is a rajah or something.'

Robert was beginning to unroll the carpet, but the others stopped him,
imploring him not to waste a wish.

'We asked the carpet to take us where we could get Indian things for
bazaars,' said Anthea, 'and it will.'

Her faith was justified.

Just as she finished speaking a very brown gentleman in a turban came
up to them and bowed deeply. He spoke, and they thrilled to the sound of
English words.

'My ranee, she think you very nice childs. She asks do you lose
yourselves, and do you desire to sell carpet? She see you from her
palkee. You come see her--yes?'

They followed the stranger, who seemed to have a great many more teeth
in his smile than are usual, and he led them through crooked streets
to the ranee's palace. I am not going to describe the ranee's palace,
because I really have never seen the palace of a ranee, and Mr Kipling
has. So you can read about it in his books. But I know exactly what
happened there.

The old ranee sat on a low-cushioned seat, and there were a lot of other
ladies with her--all in trousers and veils, and sparkling with tinsel
and gold and jewels. And the brown, turbaned gentleman stood behind a
sort of carved screen, and interpreted what the children said and what
the queen said. And when the queen asked to buy the carpet, the children
said 'No.'

'Why?' asked the ranee.

And Jane briefly said why, and the interpreter interpreted. The queen
spoke, and then the interpreter said--

'My mistress says it is a good story, and you tell it all through
without thought of time.'

And they had to. It made a long story, especially as it had all to be
told twice--once by Cyril and once by the interpreter. Cyril rather
enjoyed himself. He warmed to his work, and told the tale of the Phoenix
and the Carpet, and the Lone Tower, and the Queen-Cook, in language that
grew insensibly more and more Arabian Nightsy, and the ranee and her
ladies listened to the interpreter, and rolled about on their fat
cushions with laughter.

When the story was ended she spoke, and the interpreter explained that
she had said, 'Little one, thou art a heaven-born teller of tales,' and
she threw him a string of turquoises from round her neck.

'OH, how lovely!' cried Jane and Anthea.

Cyril bowed several times, and then cleared his throat and said--

'Thank her very, very much; but I would much rather she gave me some of
the cheap things in the bazaar. Tell her I want them to sell again, and
give the money to buy clothes for poor people who haven't any.'

'Tell him he has my leave to sell my gift and clothe the naked with its
price,' said the queen, when this was translated.

But Cyril said very firmly, 'No, thank you. The things have got to be
sold to-day at our bazaar, and no one would buy a turquoise necklace at
an English bazaar. They'd think it was sham, or else they'd want to know
where we got it.'

So then the queen sent out for little pretty things, and her servants
piled the carpet with them.

'I must needs lend you an elephant to carry them away,' she said,
laughing.

But Anthea said, 'If the queen will lend us a comb and let us wash our
hands and faces, she shall see a magic thing. We and the carpet and all
these brass trays and pots and carved things and stuffs and things will
just vanish away like smoke.'

The queen clapped her hands at this idea, and lent the children a
sandal-wood comb inlaid with ivory lotus-flowers. And they washed their
faces and hands in silver basins. Then Cyril made a very polite farewell
speech, and quite suddenly he ended with the words--

'And I wish we were at the bazaar at our schools.'

And of course they were. And the queen and her ladies were left with
their mouths open, gazing at the bare space on the inlaid marble floor
where the carpet and the children had been.

'That is magic, if ever magic was!' said the queen, delighted with the
incident; which, indeed, has given the ladies of that court something to
talk about on wet days ever since.

Cyril's stories had taken some time, so had the meal of strange sweet
foods that they had had while the little pretty things were being
bought, and the gas in the schoolroom was already lighted. Outside, the
winter dusk was stealing down among the Camden Town houses.

'I'm glad we got washed in India,' said Cyril. 'We should have been
awfully late if we'd had to go home and scrub.'

'Besides,' Robert said, 'it's much warmer washing in India. I shouldn't
mind it so much if we lived there.'

The thoughtful carpet had dumped the children down in a dusky space
behind the point where the corners of two stalls met. The floor was
littered with string and brown paper, and baskets and boxes were heaped
along the wall.

The children crept out under a stall covered with all sorts of
table-covers and mats and things, embroidered beautifully by idle
ladies with no real work to do. They got out at the end, displacing a
sideboard-cloth adorned with a tasteful pattern of blue geraniums. The
girls got out unobserved, so did Cyril; but Robert, as he cautiously
emerged, was actually walked on by Mrs Biddle, who kept the stall. Her
large, solid foot stood firmly on the small, solid hand of Robert and
who can blame Robert if he DID yell a little?

A crowd instantly collected. Yells are very unusual at bazaars, and
every one was intensely interested. It was several seconds before the
three free children could make Mrs Biddle understand that what she
was walking on was not a schoolroom floor, or even, as she presently
supposed, a dropped pin-cushion, but the living hand of a suffering
child. When she became aware that she really had hurt him, she grew very
angry indeed. When people have hurt other people by accident, the one
who does the hurting is always much the angriest. I wonder why.

'I'm very sorry, I'm sure,' said Mrs Biddle; but she spoke more in anger
than in sorrow. 'Come out! whatever do you mean by creeping about under
the stalls, like earwigs?'

'We were looking at the things in the corner.'

'Such nasty, prying ways,' said Mrs Biddle, 'will never make you
successful in life. There's nothing there but packing and dust.'

'Oh, isn't there!' said Jane. 'That's all you know.'

'Little girl, don't be rude,' said Mrs Biddle, flushing violet.

'She doesn't mean to be; but there ARE some nice things there, all the
same,' said Cyril; who suddenly felt how impossible it was to inform the
listening crowd that all the treasures piled on the carpet were mother's
contributions to the bazaar. No one would believe it; and if they did,
and wrote to thank mother, she would think--well, goodness only knew
what she would think. The other three children felt the same.

'I should like to see them,' said a very nice lady, whose friends
had disappointed her, and who hoped that these might be belated
contributions to her poorly furnished stall.

She looked inquiringly at Robert, who said, 'With pleasure, don't
mention it,' and dived back under Mrs Biddle's stall.

'I wonder you encourage such behaviour,' said Mrs Biddle. 'I always
speak my mind, as you know, Miss Peasmarsh; and, I must say, I am
surprised.' She turned to the crowd. 'There is no entertainment here,'
she said sternly. 'A very naughty little boy has accidentally hurt
himself, but only slightly. Will you please disperse? It will only
encourage him in naughtiness if he finds himself the centre of
attraction.'

The crowd slowly dispersed. Anthea, speechless with fury, heard a nice
curate say, 'Poor little beggar!' and loved the curate at once and for
ever.

Then Robert wriggled out from under the stall with some Benares brass
and some inlaid sandalwood boxes.

'Liberty!' cried Miss Peasmarsh. 'Then Charles has not forgotten, after
all.'

'Excuse me,' said Mrs Biddle, with fierce politeness, 'these objects are
deposited behind MY stall. Some unknown donor who does good by stealth,
and would blush if he could hear you claim the things. Of course they
are for me.'

'My stall touches yours at the corner,' said poor Miss Peasmarsh,
timidly, 'and my cousin did promise--'

The children sidled away from the unequal contest and mingled with
the crowd. Their feelings were too deep for words--till at last Robert
said--

'That stiff-starched PIG!'

'And after all our trouble! I'm hoarse with gassing to that trousered
lady in India.'

'The pig-lady's very, very nasty,' said Jane.

It was Anthea who said, in a hurried undertone, 'She isn't very nice,
and Miss Peasmarsh is pretty and nice too. Who's got a pencil?'

It was a long crawl, under three stalls, but Anthea did it. A large
piece of pale blue paper lay among the rubbish in the corner.

She folded it to a square and wrote upon it, licking the pencil at every
word to make it mark quite blackly: 'All these Indian things are for
pretty, nice Miss Peasmarsh's stall.' She thought of adding, 'There is
nothing for Mrs Biddle;' but she saw that this might lead to suspicion,
so she wrote hastily: 'From an unknown donna,' and crept back among the
boards and trestles to join the others.

So that when Mrs Biddle appealed to the bazaar committee, and the corner
of the stall was lifted and shifted, so that stout clergymen and heavy
ladies could get to the corner without creeping under stalls, the blue
paper was discovered, and all the splendid, shining Indian things were
given over to Miss Peasmarsh, and she sold them all, and got thirty-five
pounds for them.

'I don't understand about that blue paper,' said Mrs Biddle. 'It looks
to me like the work of a lunatic. And saying you were nice and pretty!
It's not the work of a sane person.'

Anthea and Jane begged Miss Peasmarsh to let them help her to sell the
things, because it was their brother who had announced the good news
that the things had come. Miss Peasmarsh was very willing, for now her
stall, that had been SO neglected, was surrounded by people who wanted
to buy, and she was glad to be helped. The children noted that Mrs
Biddle had not more to do in the way of selling than she could manage
quite well. I hope they were not glad--for you should forgive your
enemies, even if they walk on your hands and then say it is all your
naughty fault. But I am afraid they were not so sorry as they ought to
have been.

It took some time to arrange the things on the stall. The carpet was
spread over it, and the dark colours showed up the brass and silver and
ivory things. It was a happy and busy afternoon, and when Miss Peasmarsh
and the girls had sold every single one of the little pretty things from
the Indian bazaar, far, far away, Anthea and Jane went off with the
boys to fish in the fishpond, and dive into the bran-pie, and hear the
cardboard band, and the phonograph, and the chorus of singing birds that
was done behind a screen with glass tubes and glasses of water.

They had a beautiful tea, suddenly presented to them by the nice curate,
and Miss Peasmarsh joined them before they had had more than three cakes
each. It was a merry party, and the curate was extremely pleasant to
every one, 'even to Miss Peasmarsh,' as Jane said afterwards.

'We ought to get back to the stall,' said Anthea, when no one could
possibly eat any more, and the curate was talking in a low voice to Miss
Peas marsh about 'after Easter'.

'There's nothing to go back for,' said Miss Peasmarsh gaily; 'thanks to
you dear children we've sold everything.'

'There--there's the carpet,' said Cyril.

'Oh,' said Miss Peasmarsh, radiantly, 'don't bother about the carpet.
I've sold even that. Mrs Biddle gave me ten shillings for it. She said
it would do for her servant's bedroom.'

'Why,' said Jane, 'her servants don't HAVE carpets. We had cook from
her, and she told us so.'

'No scandal about Queen Elizabeth, if YOU please,' said the curate,
cheerfully; and Miss Peasmarsh laughed, and looked at him as though she
had never dreamed that any one COULD be so amusing. But the others were
struck dumb. How could they say, 'The carpet is ours!' For who brings
carpets to bazaars?

The children were now thoroughly wretched. But I am glad to say that
their wretchedness did not make them forget their manners, as it does
sometimes, even with grown-up people, who ought to know ever so much
better.

They said, 'Thank you very much for the jolly tea,' and 'Thanks for
being so jolly,' and 'Thanks awfully for giving us such a jolly time;'
for the curate had stood fish-ponds, and bran-pies, and phonographs, and
the chorus of singing birds, and had stood them like a man. The girls
hugged Miss Peasmarsh, and as they went away they heard the curate say--

'Jolly little kids, yes, but what about--you will let it be directly
after Easter. Ah, do say you will--'

And Jane ran back and said, before Anthea could drag her away, 'What are
you going to do after Easter?'

Miss Peasmarsh smiled and looked very pretty indeed. And the curate
said--

'I hope I am going to take a trip to the Fortunate Islands.'

'I wish we could take you on the wishing carpet,' said Jane.

'Thank you,' said the curate, 'but I'm afraid I can't wait for that. I
must go to the Fortunate Islands before they make me a bishop. I should
have no time afterwards.'

'I've always thought I should marry a bishop,' said Jane: 'his aprons
would come in so useful. Wouldn't YOU like to marry a bishop, Miss
Peasmarsh?'

It was then that they dragged her away.

As it was Robert's hand that Mrs Biddle had walked on, it was decided
that he had better not recall the incident to her mind, and so make
her angry again. Anthea and Jane had helped to sell things at the rival
stall, so they were not likely to be popular.

A hasty council of four decided that Mrs Biddle would hate Cyril less
than she would hate the others, so the others mingled with the crowd,
and it was he who said to her--

'Mrs Biddle, WE meant to have that carpet. Would you sell it to us? We
would give you--'

'Certainly not,' said Mrs Biddle. 'Go away, little boy.'

There was that in her tone which showed Cyril, all too plainly, the
hopelessness of persuasion. He found the others and said--

'It's no use; she's like a lioness robbed of its puppies. We must watch
where it goes--and--Anthea, I don't care what you say. It's our own
carpet. It wouldn't be burglary. It would be a sort of forlorn hope
rescue party--heroic and daring and dashing, and not wrong at all.'

The children still wandered among the gay crowd--but there was no
pleasure there for them any more. The chorus of singing birds sounded
just like glass tubes being blown through water, and the phonograph
simply made a horrid noise, so that you could hardly hear yourself
speak. And the people were buying things they couldn't possibly want,
and it all seemed very stupid. And Mrs Biddle had bought the wishing
carpet for ten shillings. And the whole of life was sad and grey and
dusty, and smelt of slight gas escapes, and hot people, and cake and
crumbs, and all the children were very tired indeed.

They found a corner within sight of the carpet, and there they waited
miserably, till it was far beyond their proper bedtime. And when it was
ten the people who had bought things went away, but the people who had
been selling stayed to count up their money.

'And to jaw about it,' said Robert. 'I'll never go to another bazaar as
long as ever I live. My hand is swollen as big as a pudding. I expect
the nails in her horrible boots were poisoned.'

Just then some one who seemed to have a right to interfere said--

'Everything is over now; you had better go home.'

So they went. And then they waited on the pavement under the gas lamp,
where ragged children had been standing all the evening to listen to
the band, and their feet slipped about in the greasy mud till Mrs Biddle
came out and was driven away in a cab with the many things she hadn't
sold, and the few things she had bought--among others the carpet. The
other stall-holders left their things at the school till Monday morning,
but Mrs Biddle was afraid some one would steal some of them, so she took
them in a cab.

The children, now too desperate to care for mud or appearances, hung
on behind the cab till it reached Mrs Biddle's house. When she and the
carpet had gone in and the door was shut Anthea said--

'Don't let's burgle--I mean do daring and dashing rescue acts--till
we've given her a chance. Let's ring and ask to see her.'

The others hated to do this, but at last they agreed, on condition that
Anthea would not make any silly fuss about the burglary afterwards, if
it really had to come to that.

So they knocked and rang, and a scared-looking parlourmaid opened the
front door. While they were asking for Mrs Biddle they saw her. She was
in the dining-room, and she had already pushed back the table and spread
out the carpet to see how it looked on the floor.

'I knew she didn't want it for her servants' bedroom,' Jane muttered.

Anthea walked straight past the uncomfortable parlourmaid, and the
others followed her. Mrs Biddle had her back to them, and was smoothing
down the carpet with the same boot that had trampled on the hand
of Robert. So that they were all in the room, and Cyril, with great
presence of mind, had shut the room door before she saw them.

'Who is it, Jane?' she asked in a sour voice; and then turning suddenly,
she saw who it was. Once more her face grew violet--a deep, dark violet.
'You wicked daring little things!' she cried, 'how dare you come here?
At this time of night, too. Be off, or I'll send for the police.'

'Don't be angry,' said Anthea, soothingly, 'we only wanted to ask you
to let us have the carpet. We have quite twelve shillings between us,
and--'

'How DARE you?' cried Mrs Biddle, and her voice shook with angriness.

'You do look horrid,' said Jane suddenly.

Mrs Biddle actually stamped that booted foot of hers. 'You rude,
barefaced child!' she said.

Anthea almost shook Jane; but Jane pushed forward in spite of her.

'It really IS our nursery carpet,' she said, 'you ask ANY ONE if it
isn't.'

'Let's wish ourselves home,' said Cyril in a whisper.

'No go,' Robert whispered back, 'she'd be there too, and raving mad as
likely as not. Horrid thing, I hate her!'

'I wish Mrs Biddle was in an angelic good temper,' cried Anthea,
suddenly. 'It's worth trying,' she said to herself.

Mrs Biddle's face grew from purple to violet, and from violet to mauve,
and from mauve to pink. Then she smiled quite a jolly smile.

'Why, so I am!' she said, 'what a funny idea! Why shouldn't I be in a
good temper, my dears.'

Once more the carpet had done its work, and not on Mrs Biddle alone. The
children felt suddenly good and happy.

'You're a jolly good sort,' said Cyril. 'I see that now. I'm sorry we
vexed you at the bazaar to-day.'

'Not another word,' said the changed Mrs Biddle. 'Of course you shall
have the carpet, my dears, if you've taken such a fancy to it. No, no; I
won't have more than the ten shillings I paid.'

'It does seem hard to ask you for it after you bought it at the bazaar,'
said Anthea; 'but it really IS our nursery carpet. It got to the bazaar
by mistake, with some other things.'

'Did it really, now? How vexing!' said Mrs Biddle, kindly. 'Well, my
dears, I can very well give the extra ten shillings; so you take your
carpet and we'll say no more about it. Have a piece of cake before you
go! I'm so sorry I stepped on your hand, my boy. Is it all right now?'

'Yes, thank you,' said Robert. 'I say, you ARE good.'

'Not at all,' said Mrs Biddle, heartily. 'I'm delighted to be able to
give any little pleasure to you dear children.'

And she helped them to roll up the carpet, and the boys carried it away
between them.

'You ARE a dear,' said Anthea, and she and Mrs Biddle kissed each other
heartily.


'WELL!' said Cyril as they went along the street.

'Yes,' said Robert, 'and the odd part is that you feel just as if it
was REAL--her being so jolly, I mean--and not only the carpet making her
nice.'

'Perhaps it IS real,' said Anthea, 'only it was covered up with
crossness and tiredness and things, and the carpet took them away.'

'I hope it'll keep them away,' said Jane; 'she isn't ugly at all when
she laughs.'

The carpet has done many wonders in its day; but the case of Mrs
Biddle is, I think, the most wonderful. For from that day she was never
anything like so disagreeable as she was before, and she sent a lovely
silver tea-pot and a kind letter to Miss Peasmarsh when the pretty lady
married the nice curate; just after Easter it was, and they went to
Italy for their honeymoon.



CHAPTER 5. THE TEMPLE


'I wish we could find the Phoenix,' said Jane. 'It's much better company
than the carpet.'

'Beastly ungrateful, little kids are,' said Cyril.

'No, I'm not; only the carpet never says anything, and it's so helpless.
It doesn't seem able to take care of itself. It gets sold, and taken
into the sea, and things like that. You wouldn't catch the Phoenix
getting sold.'

It was two days after the bazaar. Every one was a little cross--some
days are like that, usually Mondays, by the way. And this was a Monday.

'I shouldn't wonder if your precious Phoenix had gone off for good,'
said Cyril; 'and I don't know that I blame it. Look at the weather!'

'It's not worth looking at,' said Robert. And indeed it wasn't.

'The Phoenix hasn't gone--I'm sure it hasn't,' said Anthea. 'I'll have
another look for it.'

Anthea looked under tables and chairs, and in boxes and baskets, in
mother's work-bag and father's portmanteau, but still the Phoenix showed
not so much as the tip of one shining feather.

Then suddenly Robert remembered how the whole of the Greek invocation
song of seven thousand lines had been condensed by him into one English
hexameter, so he stood on the carpet and chanted--

  'Oh, come along, come along, you good old beautiful Phoenix,'

and almost at once there was a rustle of wings down the kitchen stairs,
and the Phoenix sailed in on wide gold wings.

'Where on earth HAVE you been?' asked Anthea. 'I've looked everywhere
for you.'

'Not EVERYWHERE,' replied the bird, 'because you did not look in the
place where I was. Confess that that hallowed spot was overlooked by
you.'

'WHAT hallowed spot?' asked Cyril, a little impatiently, for time was
hastening on, and the wishing carpet still idle.

'The spot,' said the Phoenix, 'which I hallowed by my golden presence
was the Lutron.'

'The WHAT?'

'The bath--the place of washing.'

'I'm sure you weren't,' said Jane. 'I looked there three times and moved
all the towels.'

'I was concealed,' said the Phoenix, 'on the summit of a metal
column--enchanted, I should judge, for it felt warm to my golden toes,
as though the glorious sun of the desert shone ever upon it.'

'Oh, you mean the cylinder,' said Cyril: 'it HAS rather a comforting
feel, this weather. And now where shall we go?'

And then, of course, the usual discussion broke out as to where they
should go and what they should do. And naturally, every one wanted to do
something that the others did not care about.

'I am the eldest,' Cyril remarked, 'let's go to the North Pole.'

'This weather! Likely!' Robert rejoined. 'Let's go to the Equator.'

'I think the diamond mines of Golconda would be nice,' said Anthea;
'don't you agree, Jane?'

'No, I don't,' retorted Jane, 'I don't agree with you. I don't agree
with anybody.'

The Phoenix raised a warning claw.

'If you cannot agree among yourselves, I fear I shall have to leave
you,' it said.

'Well, where shall we go? You decide!' said all.

'If I were you,' said the bird, thoughtfully, 'I should give the carpet
a rest. Besides, you'll lose the use of your legs if you go everywhere
by carpet. Can't you take me out and explain your ugly city to me?'

'We will if it clears up,' said Robert, without enthusiasm. 'Just look
at the rain. And why should we give the carpet a rest?'

'Are you greedy and grasping, and heartless and selfish?' asked the
bird, sharply.

'NO!' said Robert, with indignation.

'Well then!' said the Phoenix. 'And as to the rain--well, I am not fond
of rain myself. If the sun knew _I_ was here--he's very fond of shining
on me because I look so bright and golden. He always says I repay a
little attention. Haven't you some form of words suitable for use in wet
weather?'

'There's "Rain, rain, go away,"' said Anthea; 'but it never DOES go.'

'Perhaps you don't say the invocation properly,' said the bird.

     'Rain, rain, go away,
     Come again another day,
     Little baby wants to play,'

said Anthea.

'That's quite wrong; and if you say it in that sort of dull way, I can
quite understand the rain not taking any notice. You should open the
window and shout as loud as you can--

     'Rain, rain, go away,
     Come again another day;
     Now we want the sun, and so,
     Pretty rain, be kind and go!

'You should always speak politely to people when you want them to do
things, and especially when it's going away that you want them to do.
And to-day you might add--

     'Shine, great sun, the lovely Phoe-
     Nix is here, and wants to be
     Shone on, splendid sun, by thee!'

'That's poetry!' said Cyril, decidedly.

'It's like it,' said the more cautious Robert.

'I was obliged to put in "lovely",' said the Phoenix, modestly, 'to make
the line long enough.'

'There are plenty of nasty words just that length,' said Jane; but every
one else said 'Hush!' And then they opened the window and shouted the
seven lines as loud as they could, and the Phoenix said all the words
with them, except 'lovely', and when they came to that it looked down
and coughed bashfully.

The rain hesitated a moment and then went away.

'There's true politeness,' said the Phoenix, and the next moment it was
perched on the window-ledge, opening and shutting its radiant wings and
flapping out its golden feathers in such a flood of glorious sunshine as
you sometimes have at sunset in autumn time. People said afterwards that
there had not been such sunshine in December for years and years and
years.

'And now,' said the bird, 'we will go out into the city, and you shall
take me to see one of my temples.'

'Your temples?'

'I gather from the carpet that I have many temples in this land.'

'I don't see how you CAN find anything out from it,' said Jane: 'it
never speaks.'

'All the same, you can pick up things from a carpet,' said the bird;
'I've seen YOU do it. And I have picked up several pieces of information
in this way. That papyrus on which you showed me my picture--I
understand that it bears on it the name of the street of your city in
which my finest temple stands, with my image graved in stone and in
metal over against its portal.'

'You mean the fire insurance office,' said Robert. 'It's not really a
temple, and they don't--'

'Excuse me,' said the Phoenix, coldly, 'you are wholly misinformed. It
IS a temple, and they do.'

'Don't let's waste the sunshine,' said Anthea; 'we might argue as we go
along, to save time.'

So the Phoenix consented to make itself a nest in the breast of Robert's
Norfolk jacket, and they all went out into the splendid sunshine. The
best way to the temple of the Phoenix seemed to be to take the tram, and
on the top of it the children talked, while the Phoenix now and then
put out a wary beak, cocked a cautious eye, and contradicted what the
children were saying.

It was a delicious ride, and the children felt how lucky they were to
have had the money to pay for it. They went with the tram as far as it
went, and when it did not go any farther they stopped too, and got off.
The tram stops at the end of the Gray's Inn Road, and it was Cyril
who thought that one might well find a short cut to the Phoenix Office
through the little streets and courts that lie tightly packed between
Fetter Lane and Ludgate Circus. Of course, he was quite mistaken, as
Robert told him at the time, and afterwards Robert did not forbear to
remind his brother how he had said so. The streets there were small
and stuffy and ugly, and crowded with printers' boys and binders' girls
coming out from work; and these stared so hard at the pretty red coats
and caps of the sisters that they wished they had gone some other way.
And the printers and binders made very personal remarks, advising Jane
to get her hair cut, and inquiring where Anthea had bought that hat.
Jane and Anthea scorned to reply, and Cyril and Robert found that they
were hardly a match for the rough crowd. They could think of nothing
nasty enough to say. They turned a corner sharply, and then Anthea
pulled Jane into an archway, and then inside a door; Cyril and Robert
quickly followed, and the jeering crowd passed by without seein them.

Anthea drew a long breath.

'How awful!' she said. 'I didn't know there were such people, except in
books.'

'It was a bit thick; but it's partly you girls' fault, coming out in
those flashy coats.'

'We thought we ought to, when we were going out with the Phoenix,' said
Jane; and the bird said, 'Quite right, too'--and incautiously put out
his head to give her a wink of encouragement.

And at the same instant a dirty hand reached through the grim balustrade
of the staircase beside them and clutched the Phoenix, and a hoarse
voice said--

'I say, Urb, blowed if this ain't our Poll parrot what we lost. Thank
you very much, lidy, for bringin' 'im home to roost.'

The four turned swiftly. Two large and ragged boys were crouched amid
the dark shadows of the stairs. They were much larger than Robert and
Cyril, and one of them had snatched the Phoenix away and was holding it
high above their heads.

'Give me that bird,' said Cyril, sternly: 'it's ours.'

'Good arternoon, and thankin' you,' the boy went on, with maddening
mockery. 'Sorry I can't give yer tuppence for yer trouble--but I've
'ad to spend my fortune advertising for my vallyable bird in all the
newspapers. You can call for the reward next year.'

'Look out, Ike,' said his friend, a little anxiously; 'it 'ave a beak on
it.'

'It's other parties as'll have the Beak on to 'em presently,' said Ike,
darkly, 'if they come a-trying to lay claims on my Poll parrot. You just
shut up, Urb. Now then, you four little gells, get out er this.'

'Little girls!' cried Robert. 'I'll little girl you!'

He sprang up three stairs and hit out.

There was a squawk--the most bird-like noise any one had ever heard
from the Phoenix--and a fluttering, and a laugh in the darkness, and Ike
said--

'There now, you've been and gone and strook my Poll parrot right in the
fevvers--strook 'im something crool, you 'ave.'

Robert stamped with fury. Cyril felt himself growing pale with rage,
and with the effort of screwing up his brain to make it clever enough to
think of some way of being even with those boys. Anthea and Jane were as
angry as the boys, but it made them want to cry. Yet it was Anthea who
said--

'Do, PLEASE, let us have the bird.'

'Dew, PLEASE, get along and leave us an' our bird alone.'

'If you don't,' said Anthea, 'I shall fetch the police.'

'You better!' said he who was named Urb. 'Say, Ike, you twist the
bloomin' pigeon's neck; he ain't worth tuppence.'

'Oh, no,' cried Jane, 'don't hurt it. Oh, don't; it is such a pet.'

'I won't hurt it,' said Ike; 'I'm 'shamed of you, Urb, for to think of
such a thing. Arf a shiner, miss, and the bird is yours for life.'

'Half a WHAT?' asked Anthea.

'Arf a shiner, quid, thick 'un--half a sov, then.'

'I haven't got it--and, besides, it's OUR bird,' said Anthea.

'Oh, don't talk to him,' said Cyril and then Jane said suddenly--

'Phoenix--dear Phoenix, we can't do anything. YOU must manage it.'

'With pleasure,' said the Phoenix--and Ike nearly dropped it in his
amazement.

'I say, it do talk, suthin' like,' said he.

'Youths,' said the Phoenix, 'sons of misfortune, hear my words.'

'My eyes!' said Ike.

'Look out, Ike,' said Urb, 'you'll throttle the joker--and I see at
wunst 'e was wuth 'is weight in flimsies.'00

'Hearken, O Eikonoclastes, despiser of sacred images--and thou, Urbanus,
dweller in the sordid city. Forbear this adventure lest a worse thing
befall.'

'Luv' us!' said Ike, 'ain't it been taught its schoolin' just!'

'Restore me to my young acolytes and escape unscathed. Retain me--and--'

'They must ha' got all this up, case the Polly got pinched,' said Ike.
'Lor' lumme, the artfulness of them young uns!'

'I say, slosh 'em in the geseech and get clear off with the swag's wot I
say,' urged Herbert.

'Right O,' said Isaac.

'Forbear,' repeated the Phoenix, sternly. 'Who pinched the click off of
the old bloke in Aldermanbury?' it added, in a changed tone.

'Who sneaked the nose-rag out of the young gell's 'and in Bell Court?
Who--'

'Stow it,' said Ike. 'You! ugh! yah!--leave go of me. Bash him off, Urb;
'e'll have my bloomin' eyes outer my ed.'

There were howls, a scuffle, a flutter; Ike and Urb fled up the stairs,
and the Phoenix swept out through the doorway. The children followed and
the Phoenix settled on Robert, 'like a butterfly on a rose,' as Anthea
said afterwards, and wriggled into the breast of his Norfolk jacket,
'like an eel into mud,' as Cyril later said.

'Why ever didn't you burn him? You could have, couldn't you?' asked
Robert, when the hurried flight through the narrow courts had ended in
the safe wideness of Farringdon Street.

'I could have, of course,' said the bird, 'but I didn't think it would
be dignified to allow myself to get warm about a little thing like that.
The Fates, after all, have not been illiberal to me. I have a good many
friends among the London sparrows, and I have a beak and claws.'

These happenings had somewhat shaken the adventurous temper of the
children, and the Phoenix had to exert its golden self to hearten them
up.

Presently the children came to a great house in Lombard Street, and
there, on each side of the door, was the image of the Phoenix carved in
stone, and set forth on shining brass were the words--

     PHOENIX FIRE OFFICE


'One moment,' said the bird. 'Fire? For altars, I suppose?'

'_I_ don't know,' said Robert; he was beginning to feel shy, and that
always made him rather cross.

'Oh, yes, you do,' Cyril contradicted. 'When people's houses are burnt
down the Phoenix gives them new houses. Father told me; I asked him.'

'The house, then, like the Phoenix, rises from its ashes? Well have my
priests dealt with the sons of men!'

'The sons of men pay, you know,' said Anthea; 'but it's only a little
every year.'

'That is to maintain my priests,' said the bird, 'who, in the hour of
affliction, heal sorrows and rebuild houses. Lead on; inquire for the
High Priest. I will not break upon them too suddenly in all my glory.
Noble and honour-deserving are they who make as nought the evil deeds of
the lame-footed and unpleasing Hephaestus.'

'I don't know what you're talking about, and I wish you wouldn't muddle
us with new names. Fire just happens. Nobody does it--not as a deed,
you know,' Cyril explained. 'If they did the Phoenix wouldn't help them,
because its a crime to set fire to things. Arsenic, or something they
call it, because it's as bad as poisoning people. The Phoenix wouldn't
help THEM--father told me it wouldn't.'

'My priests do well,' said the Phoenix. 'Lead on.'

'I don't know what to say,' said Cyril; and the Others said the same.

'Ask for the High Priest,' said the Phoenix. 'Say that you have a
secret to unfold that concerns my worship, and he will lead you to the
innermost sanctuary.'

So the children went in, all four of them, though they didn't like it,
and stood in a large and beautiful hall adorned with Doulton tiles,
like a large and beautiful bath with no water in it, and stately pillars
supporting the roof. An unpleasing representation of the Phoenix in
brown pottery disfigured one wall. There were counters and desks of
mahogany and brass, and clerks bent over the desks and walked behind the
counters. There was a great clock over an inner doorway.

'Inquire for the High Priest,' whispered the Phoenix.

An attentive clerk in decent black, who controlled his mouth but not his
eyebrows, now came towards them. He leaned forward on the counter, and
the children thought he was going to say, 'What can I have the pleasure
of showing you?' like in a draper's; instead of which the young man
said--

'And what do YOU want?'

'We want to see the High Priest.'

'Get along with you,' said the young man.

An elder man, also decent in black coat, advanced.

'Perhaps it's Mr Blank' (not for worlds would I give the name). 'He's a
Masonic High Priest, you know.'

A porter was sent away to look for Mr Asterisk (I cannot give his name),
and the children were left there to look on and be looked on by all
the gentlemen at the mahogany desks. Anthea and Jane thought that they
looked kind. The boys thought they stared, and that it was like their
cheek.

The porter returned with the news that Mr Dot Dash Dot (I dare not
reveal his name) was out, but that Mr--

Here a really delightful gentleman appeared. He had a beard and a kind
and merry eye, and each one of the four knew at once that this was a man
who had kiddies of his own and could understand what you were talking
about. Yet it was a difficult thing to explain.

'What is it?' he asked. 'Mr'--he named the name which I will never
reveal--'is out. Can I do anything?'

'Inner sanctuary,' murmured the Phoenix.

'I beg your pardon,' said the nice gentleman, who thought it was Robert
who had spoken.

'We have something to tell you,' said Cyril, 'but'--he glanced at the
porter, who was lingering much nearer than he need have done--'this is a
very public place.'

The nice gentleman laughed.

'Come upstairs then,' he said, and led the way up a wide and beautiful
staircase. Anthea says the stairs were of white marble, but I am not
sure. On the corner-post of the stairs, at the top, was a beautiful
image of the Phoenix in dark metal, and on the wall at each side was a
flat sort of image of it.

The nice gentleman led them into a room where the chairs, and even the
tables, were covered with reddish leather. He looked at the children
inquiringly.

'Don't be frightened,' he said; 'tell me exactly what you want.'

'May I shut the door?' asked Cyril.

The gentleman looked surprised, but he shut the door.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, 'I know you'll be awfully surprised, and
you'll think it's not true and we are lunatics; but we aren't, and it
is. Robert's got something inside his Norfolk--that's Robert, he's my
young brother. Now don't be upset and have a fit or anything sir. Of
course, I know when you called your shop the "Phoenix" you never thought
there was one; but there is--and Robert's got it buttoned up against his
chest!'

'If it's an old curio in the form of a Phoenix, I dare say the Board--'
said the nice gentleman, as Robert began to fumble with his buttons.

'It's old enough,' said Anthea, 'going by what it says, but--'

'My goodness gracious!' said the gentleman, as the Phoenix, with one
last wriggle that melted into a flutter, got out of its nest in the
breast of Robert and stood up on the leather-covered table.

'What an extraordinarily fine bird!' he went on. 'I don't think I ever
saw one just like it.'

'I should think not,' said the Phoenix, with pardonable pride. And the
gentleman jumped.

'Oh, it's been taught to speak! Some sort of parrot, perhaps?'

'I am,' said the bird, simply, 'the Head of your House, and I have come
to my temple to receive your homage. I am no parrot'--its beak curved
scornfully--'I am the one and only Phoenix, and I demand the homage of
my High Priest.'

'In the absence of our manager,' the gentleman began, exactly as though
he were addressing a valued customer--'in the absence of our manager, I
might perhaps be able--What am I saying?' He turned pale, and passed
his hand across his brow. 'My dears,' he said, 'the weather is unusually
warm for the time of year, and I don't feel quite myself. Do you know,
for a moment I really thought that that remarkable bird of yours had
spoken and said it was the Phoenix, and, what's more, that I'd believed
it.'

'So it did, sir,' said Cyril, 'and so did you.'

'It really--Allow me.'

A bell was rung. The porter appeared.

'Mackenzie,' said the gentleman, 'you see that golden bird?'

'Yes, sir.'

The other breathed a sigh of relief.

'It IS real, then?'

'Yes, sir, of course, sir. You take it in your hand, sir,' said the
porter, sympathetically, and reached out his hand to the Phoenix, who
shrank back on toes curved with agitated indignation.

'Forbear!' it cried; 'how dare you seek to lay hands on me?'

The porter saluted.

'Beg pardon, sir,' he said, 'I thought you was a bird.'

'I AM a bird--THE bird--the Phoenix.'

'Of course you are, sir,' said the porter. 'I see that the first minute,
directly I got my breath, sir.'

'That will do,' said the gentleman. 'Ask Mr Wilson and Mr Sterry to step
up here for a moment, please.'

Mr Sterry and Mr Wilson were in their turn overcome by
amazement--quickly followed by conviction. To the surprise of the
children every one in the office took the Phoenix at its word, and after
the first shock of surprise it seemed to be perfectly natural to every
one that the Phoenix should be alive, and that, passing through London,
it should call at its temple.

'We ought to have some sort of ceremony,' said the nicest
gentleman, anxiously. 'There isn't time to summon the directors and
shareholders--we might do that tomorrow, perhaps. Yes, the board-room
would be best. I shouldn't like it to feel we hadn't done everything in
our power to show our appreciation of its condescension in looking in on
us in this friendly way.'

The children could hardly believe their ears, for they had never thought
that any one but themselves would believe in the Phoenix. And yet every
one did; all the men in the office were brought in by twos and threes,
and the moment the Phoenix opened its beak it convinced the cleverest
of them, as well as those who were not so clever. Cyril wondered how the
story would look in the papers next day. He seemed to see the posters in
the streets:

    PHOENIX FIRE OFFICE
    THE PHOENIX AT ITS TEMPLE
    MEETING TO WELCOME IT
    DELIGHT OF THE MANAGER AND EVERYBODY.

'Excuse our leaving you a moment,' said the nice gentleman, and he went
away with the others; and through the half-closed door the children
could hear the sound of many boots on stairs, the hum of excited voices
explaining, suggesting, arguing, the thumpy drag of heavy furniture
being moved about.

The Phoenix strutted up and down the leather-covered table, looking over
its shoulder at its pretty back.

'You see what a convincing manner I have,' it said proudly.

And now a new gentleman came in and said, bowing low--

'Everything is prepared--we have done our best at so short a notice; the
meeting--the ceremony--will be in the board-room. Will the Honourable
Phoenix walk--it is only a few steps--or would it like to be--would it
like some sort of conveyance?'

'My Robert will bear me to the board-room, if that be the unlovely name
of my temple's inmost court,' replied the bird.

So they all followed the gentleman. There was a big table in the
board-room, but it had been pushed right up under the long windows at
one side, and chairs were arranged in rows across the room--like those
you have at schools when there is a magic lantern on 'Our Eastern
Empire', or on 'The Way We Do in the Navy'. The doors were of carved
wood, very beautiful, with a carved Phoenix above. Anthea noticed that
the chairs in the front rows were of the kind that her mother so loved
to ask the price of in old furniture shops, and never could buy, because
the price was always nearly twenty pounds each. On the mantelpiece were
some heavy bronze candlesticks and a clock, and on the top of the clock
was another image of the Phoenix.

'Remove that effigy,' said the Phoenix to the gentlemen who were there,
and it was hastily taken down. Then the Phoenix fluttered to the middle
of the mantelpiece and stood there, looking more golden than ever. Then
every one in the house and the office came in--from the cashier to the
women who cooked the clerks' dinners in the beautiful kitchen at the top
of the house. And every one bowed to the Phoenix and then sat down in a
chair.

'Gentlemen,' said the nicest gentleman, 'we have met here today--'

The Phoenix was turning its golden beak from side to side.

'I don't notice any incense,' it said, with an injured sniff. A hurried
consultation ended in plates being fetched from the kitchen. Brown
sugar, sealing-wax, and tobacco were placed on these, and something from
a square bottle was poured over it all. Then a match was applied. It was
the only incense that was handy in the Phoenix office, and it certainly
burned very briskly and smoked a great deal.

'We have met here today,' said the gentleman again, 'on an occasion
unparalleled in the annals of this office. Our respected Phoenix--'

'Head of the House,' said the Phoenix, in a hollow voice.

'I was coming to that. Our respected Phoenix, the Head of this ancient
House, has at length done us the honour to come among us. I think I may
say, gentlemen, that we are not insensible to this honour, and that we
welcome with no uncertain voice one whom we have so long desired to see
in our midst.'

Several of the younger clerks thought of saying 'Hear, hear,' but they
feared it might seem disrespectful to the bird.

'I will not take up your time,' the speaker went on, 'by recapitulating
the advantages to be derived from a proper use of our system of fire
insurance. I know, and you know, gentlemen, that our aim has ever been
to be worthy of that eminent bird whose name we bear, and who now adorns
our mantelpiece with his presence. Three cheers, gentlemen, for the
winged Head of the House!'

The cheers rose, deafening. When they had died away the Phoenix was
asked to say a few words.

It expressed in graceful phrases the pleasure it felt in finding itself
at last in its own temple.

'And,' it went on, 'You must not think me wanting in appreciation of
your very hearty and cordial reception when I ask that an ode may be
recited or a choric song sung. It is what I have always been accustomed
to.'

The four children, dumb witnesses of this wonderful scene, glanced a
little nervously across the foam of white faces above the sea of black
coats. It seemed to them that the Phoenix was really asking a little too
much.

'Time presses,' said the Phoenix, 'and the original ode of invocation is
long, as well as being Greek; and, besides, it's no use invoking me when
here I am; but is there not a song in your own tongue for a great day
such as this?'

Absently the manager began to sing, and one by one the rest joined--

     'Absolute security!
     No liability!
     All kinds of property
     insured against fire.
     Terms most favourable,
     Expenses reasonable,
     Moderate rates for annual
     Insurance.'

'That one is NOT my favourite,' interrupted the Phoenix, 'and I think
you've forgotten part of it.'

The manager hastily began another--

     'O Golden Phoenix, fairest bird,
     The whole great world has often heard
     Of all the splendid things we do,
     Great Phoenix, just to honour you.'

'That's better,' said the bird. And every one sang--

     'Class one, for private dwelling-house,
     For household goods and shops allows;
     Provided these are built of brick
     Or stone, and tiled and slated thick.'

'Try another verse,' said the Phoenix, 'further on.'

And again arose the voices of all the clerks and employees and managers
and secretaries and cooks--

    'In Scotland our insurance yields
     The price of burnt-up stacks in fields.'

'Skip that verse,' said the Phoenix.

     'Thatched dwellings and their whole contents
     We deal with--also with their rents;
     Oh, glorious Phoenix, look and see
     That these are dealt with in class three.

     'The glories of your temple throng
     Too thick to go in any song;
     And we attend, O good and wise,
     To "days of grace" and merchandise.

     'When people's homes are burned away
     They never have a cent to pay
     If they have done as all should do,
     O Phoenix, and have honoured you.

     'So let us raise our voice and sing
     The praises of the Phoenix King.
     In classes one and two and three,
     Oh, trust to him, for kind is he!'

'I'm sure YOU'RE very kind,' said the Phoenix; 'and now we must be
going. An thank you very much for a very pleasant time. May you all
prosper as you deserve to do, for I am sure a nicer, pleasanter-spoken
lot of temple attendants I have never met, and never wish to meet. I
wish you all good-day!'

It fluttered to the wrist of Robert and drew the four children from the
room. The whole of the office staff followed down the wide stairs and
filed into their accustomed places, and the two most important officials
stood on the steps bowing till Robert had buttoned the golden bird in
his Norfolk bosom, and it and he and the three other children were lost
in the crowd.

The two most important gentlemen looked at each other earnestly and
strangely for a moment, and then retreated to those sacred inner rooms,
where they toil without ceasing for the good of the House.

And the moment they were all in their places--managers, secretaries,
clerks, and porters--they all started, and each looked cautiously round
to see if any one was looking at him. For each thought that he had
fallen asleep for a few minutes, and had dreamed a very odd dream about
the Phoenix and the board-room. And, of course, no one mentioned it
to any one else, because going to sleep at your office is a thing you
simply MUST NOT do.

The extraordinary confusion of the board-room, with the remains of the
incense in the plates, would have shown them at once that the visit of
the Phoenix had been no dream, but a radiant reality, but no one went
into the board-room again that day; and next day, before the office
was opened, it was all cleaned and put nice and tidy by a lady whose
business asking questions was not part of. That is why Cyril read
the papers in vain on the next day and the day after that; because no
sensible person thinks his dreams worth putting in the paper, and no one
will ever own that he has been asleep in the daytime.

The Phoenix was very pleased, but it decided to write an ode for itself.
It thought the ones it had heard at its temple had been too hastily
composed. Its own ode began--

     'For beauty and for modest worth
     The Phoenix has not its equal on earth.'

And when the children went to bed that night it was still trying to cut
down the last line to the proper length without taking out any of what
it wanted to say.

That is what makes poetry so difficult.



CHAPTER 6. DOING GOOD


'We shan't be able to go anywhere on the carpet for a whole week,
though,' said Robert.

'And I'm glad of it,' said Jane, unexpectedly.

'Glad?' said Cyril; 'GLAD?'

It was breakfast-time, and mother's letter, telling them how they were
all going for Christmas to their aunt's at Lyndhurst, and how father and
mother would meet them there, having been read by every one, lay on the
table, drinking hot bacon-fat with one corner and eating marmalade with
the other.

'Yes, glad,' said Jane. 'I don't want any more things to happen
just now. I feel like you do when you've been to three parties in a
week--like we did at granny's once--and extras in between, toys and
chocs and things like that. I want everything to be just real, and no
fancy things happening at all.' 'I don't like being obliged to keep
things from mother,' said Anthea. 'I don't know why, but it makes me
feel selfish and mean.'

'If we could only get the mater to believe it, we might take her to the
jolliest places,' said Cyril, thoughtfully. 'As it is, we've just got to
be selfish and mean--if it is that--but I don't feel it is.'

'I KNOW it isn't, but I FEEL it is,' said Anthea, 'and that's just as
bad.'

'It's worse,' said Robert; 'if you knew it and didn't feel it, it
wouldn't matter so much.'

'That's being a hardened criminal, father says,' put in Cyril, and he
picked up mother's letter and wiped its corners with his handkerchief,
to whose colour a trifle of bacon-fat and marmalade made but little
difference.

'We're going to-morrow, anyhow,' said Robert. 'Don't,' he added, with
a good-boy expression on his face--'don't let's be ungrateful for our
blessings; don't let's waste the day in saying how horrid it is to keep
secrets from mother, when we all know Anthea tried all she knew to give
her the secret, and she wouldn't take it. Let's get on the carpet and
have a jolly good wish. You'll have time enough to repent of things all
next week.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'let's. It's not really wrong.'

'Well, look here,' said Anthea. 'You know there's something about
Christmas that makes you want to be good--however little you wish it at
other times. Couldn't we wish the carpet to take us somewhere where we
should have the chance to do some good and kind action? It would be an
adventure just the same,' she pleaded.

'I don't mind,' said Cyril. 'We shan't know where we're going, and
that'll be exciting. No one knows what'll happen. We'd best put on our
outers in case--'

'We might rescue a traveller buried in the snow, like St Bernard dogs,
with barrels round our necks,' said Jane, beginning to be interested.

'Or we might arrive just in time to witness a will being signed--more
tea, please,' said Robert, 'and we should see the old man hide it away
in the secret cupboard; and then, after long years, when the rightful
heir was in despair, we should lead him to the hidden panel and--'

'Yes,' interrupted Anthea; 'or we might be taken to some freezing garret
in a German town, where a poor little pale, sick child--'

'We haven't any German money,' interrupted Cyril, 'so THAT'S no go. What
I should like would be getting into the middle of a war and getting hold
of secret intelligence and taking it to the general, and he would make
me a lieutenant or a scout, or a hussar.'

When breakfast was cleared away, Anthea swept the carpet, and the
children sat down on it, together with the Phoenix, who had been
especially invited, as a Christmas treat, to come with them and witness
the good and kind action they were about to do.

Four children and one bird were ready, and the wish was wished.

Every one closed its eyes, so as to feel the topsy-turvy swirl of the
carpet's movement as little as possible.

When the eyes were opened again the children found themselves on the
carpet, and the carpet was in its proper place on the floor of their own
nursery at Camden Town.

'I say,' said Cyril, 'here's a go!'

'Do you think it's worn out? The wishing part of it, I mean?' Robert
anxiously asked the Phoenix.

'It's not that,' said the Phoenix; 'but--well--what did you wish--?'

'Oh! I see what it means,' said Robert, with deep disgust; 'it's like
the end of a fairy story in a Sunday magazine. How perfectly beastly!'

'You mean it means we can do kind and good actions where we are? I see.
I suppose it wants us to carry coals for the cook or make clothes
for the bare heathens. Well, I simply won't. And the last day and
everything. Look here!' Cyril spoke loudly and firmly. 'We want to go
somewhere really interesting, where we have a chance of doing something
good and kind; we don't want to do it here, but somewhere else. See?
Now, then.'

The obedient carpet started instantly, and the four children and one
bird fell in a heap together, and as they fell were plunged in perfect
darkness.

'Are you all there?' said Anthea, breathlessly, through the black dark.
Every one owned that it was there.

'Where are we? Oh! how shivery and wet it is! Ugh!--oh!--I've put my
hand in a puddle!'

'Has any one got any matches?' said Anthea, hopelessly. She felt sure
that no one would have any.

It was then that Robert, with a radiant smile of triumph that was quite
wasted in the darkness, where, of course, no one could see anything,
drew out of his pocket a box of matches, struck a match and lighted a
candle--two candles. And every one, with its mouth open, blinked at the
sudden light.

'Well done Bobs,' said his sisters, and even Cyril's natural brotherly
feelings could not check his admiration of Robert's foresight.

'I've always carried them about ever since the lone tower day,' said
Robert, with modest pride. 'I knew we should want them some day. I kept
the secret well, didn't I?'

'Oh, yes,' said Cyril, with fine scorn. 'I found them the Sunday after,
when I was feeling in your Norfolks for the knife you borrowed off me.
But I thought you'd only sneaked them for Chinese lanterns, or reading
in bed by.'

'Bobs,' said Anthea, suddenly, 'do you know where we are? This is
the underground passage, and look there--there's the money and the
money-bags, and everything.'

By this time the ten eyes had got used to the light of the candles, and
no one could help seeing that Anthea spoke the truth.

'It seems an odd place to do good and kind acts in, though,' said Jane.
'There's no one to do them to.'

'Don't you be too sure,' said Cyril; 'just round the next turning we
might find a prisoner who has languished here for years and years, and
we could take him out on our carpet and restore him to his sorrowing
friends.'

'Of course we could,' said Robert, standing up and holding the candle
above his head to see further off; 'or we might find the bones of a
poor prisoner and take them to his friends to be buried properly--that's
always a kind action in books, though I never could see what bones
matter.'

'I wish you wouldn't,' said Jane.

'I know exactly where we shall find the bones, too,' Robert went on.
'You see that dark arch just along the passage? Well, just inside
there--'

'If you don't stop going on like that,' said Jane, firmly, 'I shall
scream, and then I'll faint--so now then!'

'And _I_ will, too,' said Anthea.

Robert was not pleased at being checked in his flight of fancy.

'You girls will never be great writers,' he said bitterly. 'They just
love to think of things in dungeons, and chains, and knobbly bare human
bones, and--'

Jane had opened her mouth to scream, but before she could decide how you
began when you wanted to faint, the golden voice of the Phoenix spoke
through the gloom.

'Peace!' it said; 'there are no bones here except the small but useful
sets that you have inside you. And you did not invite me to come out
with you to hear you talk about bones, but to see you do some good and
kind action.'

'We can't do it here,' said Robert, sulkily.

'No,' rejoined the bird. 'The only thing we can do here, it seems, is to
try to frighten our little sisters.'

'He didn't, really, and I'm not so VERY little,' said Jane, rather
ungratefully.

Robert was silent. It was Cyril who suggested that perhaps they had
better take the money and go.

'That wouldn't be a kind act, except to ourselves; and it wouldn't be
good, whatever way you look at it,' said Anthea, 'to take money that's
not ours.'

'We might take it and spend it all on benefits to the poor and aged,'
said Cyril.

'That wouldn't make it right to steal,' said Anthea, stoutly.

'I don't know,' said Cyril. They were all standing up now. 'Stealing is
taking things that belong to some one else, and there's no one else.'

'It can't be stealing if--'

'That's right,' said Robert, with ironical approval; 'stand here all day
arguing while the candles burn out. You'll like it awfully when it's all
dark again--and bony.'

'Let's get out, then,' said Anthea. 'We can argue as we go.' So they
rolled up the carpet and went. But when they had crept along to the
place where the passage led into the topless tower they found the way
blocked by a great stone, which they could not move.

'There!' said Robert. 'I hope you're satisfied!'

'Everything has two ends,' said the Phoenix, softly; 'even a quarrel or
a secret passage.'

So they turned round and went back, and Robert was made to go first with
one of the candles, because he was the one who had begun to talk about
bones. And Cyril carried the carpet.

'I wish you hadn't put bones into our heads,' said Jane, as they went
along.

'I didn't; you always had them. More bones than brains,' said Robert.

The passage was long, and there were arches and steps and turnings and
dark alcoves that the girls did not much like passing. The passage ended
in a flight of steps. Robert went up them.

Suddenly he staggered heavily back on to the following feet of Jane, and
everybody screamed, 'Oh! what is it?'

'I've only bashed my head in,' said Robert, when he had groaned for some
time; 'that's all. Don't mention it; I like it. The stairs just go right
slap into the ceiling, and it's a stone ceiling. You can't do good and
kind actions underneath a paving-stone.'

'Stairs aren't made to lead just to paving-stones as a general rule,'
said the Phoenix. 'Put your shoulder to the wheel.'

'There isn't any wheel,' said the injured Robert, still rubbing his
head.

But Cyril had pushed past him to the top stair, and was already shoving
his hardest against the stone above. Of course, it did not give in the
least.

'If it's a trap-door--' said Cyril. And he stopped shoving and began to
feel about with his hands.

'Yes, there is a bolt. I can't move it.'

By a happy chance Cyril had in his pocket the oil-can of his father's
bicycle; he put the carpet down at the foot of the stairs, and he lay
on his back, with his head on the top step and his feet straggling down
among his young relations, and he oiled the bolt till the drops of rust
and oil fell down on his face. One even went into his mouth--open, as he
panted with the exertion of keeping up this unnatural position. Then
he tried again, but still the bolt would not move. So now he tied his
handkerchief--the one with the bacon-fat and marmalade on it--to the
bolt, and Robert's handkerchief to that, in a reef knot, which cannot
come undone however much you pull, and, indeed, gets tighter and tighter
the more you pull it. This must not be confused with a granny knot,
which comes undone if you look at it. And then he and Robert pulled,
and the girls put their arms round their brothers and pulled too, and
suddenly the bolt gave way with a rusty scrunch, and they all rolled
together to the bottom of the stairs--all but the Phoenix, which had
taken to its wings when the pulling began.

Nobody was hurt much, because the rolled-up carpet broke their fall; and
now, indeed, the shoulders of the boys were used to some purpose, for
the stone allowed them to heave it up. They felt it give; dust fell
freely on them.

'Now, then,' cried Robert, forgetting his head and his temper, 'push all
together. One, two, three!'

The stone was heaved up. It swung up on a creaking, unwilling hinge, and
showed a growing oblong of dazzling daylight; and it fell back with a
bang against something that kept it upright. Every one climbed out,
but there was not room for every one to stand comfortably in the
little paved house where they found themselves, so when the Phoenix had
fluttered up from the darkness they let the stone down, and it closed
like a trap-door, as indeed it was.

You can have no idea how dusty and dirty the children were. Fortunately
there was no one to see them but each other. The place they were in
was a little shrine, built on the side of a road that went winding up
through yellow-green fields to the topless tower. Below them were fields
and orchards, all bare boughs and brown furrows, and little houses and
gardens. The shrine was a kind of tiny chapel with no front wall--just a
place for people to stop and rest in and wish to be good. So the Phoenix
told them. There was an image that had once been brightly coloured, but
the rain and snow had beaten in through the open front of the shrine,
and the poor image was dull and weather-stained. Under it was written:
'St Jean de Luz. Priez pour nous.' It was a sad little place, very
neglected and lonely, and yet it was nice, Anthea thought, that poor
travellers should come to this little rest-house in the hurry and worry
of their journeyings and be quiet for a few minutes, and think about
being good. The thought of St Jean de Luz--who had, no doubt, in his
time, been very good and kind--made Anthea want more than ever to do
something kind and good.

'Tell us,' she said to the Phoenix, 'what is the good and kind action
the carpet brought us here to do?'

'I think it would be kind to find the owners of the treasure and tell
them about it,' said Cyril.

'And give it them ALL?' said Jane.

'Yes. But whose is it?'

'I should go to the first house and ask the name of the owner of the
castle,' said the golden bird, and really the idea seemed a good one.

They dusted each other as well as they could and went down the road. A
little way on they found a tiny spring, bubbling out of the hillside and
falling into a rough stone basin surrounded by draggled hart's-tongue
ferns, now hardly green at all. Here the children washed their hands
and faces and dried them on their pocket-handkerchiefs, which always,
on these occasions, seem unnaturally small. Cyril's and Robert's
handkerchiefs, indeed, rather undid the effects of the wash. But in
spite of this the party certainly looked cleaner than before.

The first house they came to was a little white house with green
shutters and a slate roof. It stood in a prim little garden, and down
each side of the neat path were large stone vases for flowers to grow
in; but all the flowers were dead now.

Along one side of the house was a sort of wide veranda, built of poles
and trellis-work, and a vine crawled all over it. It was wider than our
English verandas, and Anthea thought it must look lovely when the
green leaves and the grapes were there; but now there were only dry,
reddish-brown stalks and stems, with a few withered leaves caught in
them.

The children walked up to the front door. It was green and narrow. A
chain with a handle hung beside it, and joined itself quite openly to a
rusty bell that hung under the porch. Cyril had pulled the bell and
its noisy clang was dying away before the terrible thought came to all.
Cyril spoke it.

'My hat!' he breathed. 'We don't know any French!'

At this moment the door opened. A very tall, lean lady, with pale
ringlets like whitey-brown paper or oak shavings, stood before them. She
had an ugly grey dress and a black silk apron. Her eyes were small
and grey and not pretty, and the rims were red, as though she had been
crying.

She addressed the party in something that sounded like a foreign
language, and ended with something which they were sure was a question.
Of course, no one could answer it.

'What does she say?' Robert asked, looking down into the hollow of his
jacket, where the Phoenix was nestling. But before the Phoenix could
answer, the whitey-brown lady's face was lighted up by a most charming
smile.

'You--you ar-r-re fr-r-rom the England!' she cried. 'I love so much
the England. Mais entrez--entrez donc tous! Enter, then--enter all. One
essuyes his feet on the carpet.' She pointed to the mat.

'We only wanted to ask--'

'I shall say you all that what you wish,' said the lady. 'Enter only!'

So they all went in, wiping their feet on a very clean mat, and putting
the carpet in a safe corner of the veranda.

'The most beautiful days of my life,' said the lady, as she shut the
door, 'did pass themselves in England. And since long time I have not
heard an English voice to repeal me the past.'

This warm welcome embarrassed every one, but most the boys, for the
floor of the hall was of such very clean red and white tiles, and
the floor of the sitting-room so very shiny--like a black
looking-glass--that each felt as though he had on far more boots than
usual, and far noisier.

There was a wood fire, very small and very bright, on the hearth--neat
little logs laid on brass fire-dogs. Some portraits of powdered ladies
and gentlemen hung in oval frames on the pale walls. There were silver
candlesticks on the mantelpiece, and there were chairs and a table, very
slim and polite, with slender legs. The room was extremely bare, but
with a bright foreign bareness that was very cheerful, in an odd way of
its own. At the end of the polished table a very un-English little boy
sat on a footstool in a high-backed, uncomfortable-looking chair. He
wore black velvet, and the kind of collar--all frills and lacey--that
Robert would rather have died than wear; but then the little French boy
was much younger than Robert.

'Oh, how pretty!' said every one. But no one meant the little French
boy, with the velvety short knickerbockers and the velvety short hair.

What every one admired was a little, little Christmas-tree, very green,
and standing in a very red little flower-pot, and hung round with very
bright little things made of tinsel and coloured paper. There were tiny
candles on the tree, but they were not lighted yet.

'But yes--is it not that it is genteel?' said the lady. 'Sit down you
then, and let us see.'

The children sat down in a row on the stiff chairs against the wall, and
the lady lighted a long, slim red taper at the wood flame, and then she
drew the curtains and lit the little candles, and when they were all
lighted the little French boy suddenly shouted, 'Bravo, ma tante! Oh,
que c'est gentil,' and the English children shouted 'Hooray!'

Then there was a struggle in the breast of Robert, and out fluttered the
Phoenix--spread his gold wings, flew to the top of the Christmas-tree,
and perched there.

'Ah! catch it, then,' cried the lady; 'it will itself burn--your genteel
parrakeet!'

'It won't,' said Robert, 'thank you.'

And the little French boy clapped his clean and tidy hands; but the lady
was so anxious that the Phoenix fluttered down and walked up and down on
the shiny walnut-wood table.

'Is it that it talks?' asked the lady.

And the Phoenix replied in excellent French. It said, 'Parfaitement,
madame!'

'Oh, the pretty parrakeet,' said the lady. 'Can it say still of other
things?'

And the Phoenix replied, this time in English, 'Why are you sad so near
Christmas-time?'

The children looked at it with one gasp of horror and surprise, for
the youngest of them knew that it is far from manners to notice that
strangers have been crying, and much worse to ask them the reason of
their tears. And, of course, the lady began to cry again, very much
indeed, after calling the Phoenix a bird without a heart; and she could
not find her handkerchief, so Anthea offered hers, which was still very
damp and no use at all. She also hugged the lady, and this seemed to be
of more use than the handkerchief, so that presently the lady stopped
crying, and found her own handkerchief and dried her eyes, and called
Anthea a cherished angel.

'I am sorry we came just when you were so sad,' said Anthea, 'but we
really only wanted to ask you whose that castle is on the hill.'

'Oh, my little angel,' said the poor lady, sniffing, 'to-day and for
hundreds of years the castle is to us, to our family. To-morrow it must
that I sell it to some strangers--and my little Henri, who ignores
all, he will not have never the lands paternal. But what will you? His
father, my brother--Mr the Marquis--has spent much of money, and it the
must, despite the sentiments of familial respect, that I admit that my
sainted father he also--'

'How would you feel if you found a lot of money--hundreds and thousands
of gold pieces?' asked Cyril.

The lady smiled sadly.

'Ah! one has already recounted to you the legend?' she said. 'It is
true that one says that it is long time; oh! but long time, one of our
ancestors has hid a treasure--of gold, and of gold, and of gold--enough
to enrich my little Henri for the life. But all that, my children, it is
but the accounts of fays--'

'She means fairy stories,' whispered the Phoenix to Robert. 'Tell her
what you have found.'

So Robert told, while Anthea and Jane hugged the lady for fear she
should faint for joy, like people in books, and they hugged her with the
earnest, joyous hugs of unselfish delight.

'It's no use explaining how we got in,' said Robert, when he had told
of the finding of the treasure, 'because you would find it a little
difficult to understand, and much more difficult to believe. But we can
show you where the gold is and help you to fetch it away.'

The lady looked doubtfully at Robert as she absently returned the hugs
of the girls.

'No, he's not making it up,' said Anthea; 'it's true, TRUE, TRUE!--and
we are so glad.'

'You would not be capable to torment an old woman?' she said; 'and it is
not possible that it be a dream.'

'It really IS true,' said Cyril; 'and I congratulate you very much.'

His tone of studied politeness seemed to convince more than the raptures
of the others.

'If I do not dream,' she said, 'Henri come to Manon--and you--you shall
come all with me to Mr the Curate. Is it not?'

Manon was a wrinkled old woman with a red and yellow handkerchief
twisted round her head. She took Henri, who was already sleepy with the
excitement of his Christmas-tree and his visitors, and when the lady had
put on a stiff black cape and a wonderful black silk bonnet and a pair
of black wooden clogs over her black cashmere house-boots, the whole
party went down the road to a little white house--very like the one they
had left--where an old priest, with a good face, welcomed them with a
politeness so great that it hid his astonishment.

The lady, with her French waving hands and her shrugging French
shoulders and her trembling French speech, told the story. And now the
priest, who knew no English, shrugged HIS shoulders and waved HIS hands
and spoke also in French.

'He thinks,' whispered the Phoenix, 'that her troubles have turned her
brain. What a pity you know no French!'

'I do know a lot of French,' whispered Robert, indignantly; 'but it's
all about the pencil of the gardener's son and the penknife of the
baker's niece--nothing that anyone ever wants to say.'

'If _I_ speak,' the bird whispered, 'he'll think HE'S mad, too.'

'Tell me what to say.'

'Say "C'est vrai, monsieur. Venez donc voir,"' said the Phoenix; and
then Robert earned the undying respect of everybody by suddenly saying,
very loudly and distinctly--

'Say vray, mossoo; venny dong vwaw.'

The priest was disappointed when he found that Robert's French began and
ended with these useful words; but, at any rate, he saw that if the lady
was mad she was not the only one, and he put on a big beavery hat, and
got a candle and matches and a spade, and they all went up the hill to
the wayside shrine of St John of Luz.

'Now,' said Robert, 'I will go first and show you where it is.'

So they prised the stone up with a corner of the spade, and Robert did
go first, and they all followed and found the golden treasure exactly as
they had left it. And every one was flushed with the joy of performing
such a wonderfully kind action.

Then the lady and the priest clasped hands and wept for joy, as French
people do, and knelt down and touched the money, and talked very fast
and both together, and the lady embraced all the children three times
each, and called them 'little garden angels,' and then she and the
priest shook each other by both hands again, and talked, and talked, and
talked, faster and more Frenchy than you would have believed possible.
And the children were struck dumb with joy and pleasure.

'Get away NOW,' said the Phoenix softly, breaking in on the radiant
dream.

So the children crept away, and out through the little shrine, and the
lady and the priest were so tearfully, talkatively happy that they never
noticed that the guardian angels had gone.

The 'garden angels' ran down the hill to the lady's little house, where
they had left the carpet on the veranda, and they spread it out and
said 'Home,' and no one saw them disappear, except little Henri, who
had flattened his nose into a white button against the window-glass, and
when he tried to tell his aunt she thought he had been dreaming. So that
was all right.

'It is much the best thing we've done,' said Anthea, when they talked
it over at tea-time. 'In the future we'll only do kind actions with the
carpet.'

'Ahem!' said the Phoenix.

'I beg your pardon?' said Anthea.

'Oh, nothing,' said the bird. 'I was only thinking!'



CHAPTER 7. MEWS FROM PERSIA


When you hear that the four children found themselves at Waterloo
Station quite un-taken-care-of, and with no one to meet them, it may
make you think that their parents were neither kind nor careful. But if
you think this you will be wrong. The fact is, mother arranged with Aunt
Emma that she was to meet the children at Waterloo, when they went back
from their Christmas holiday at Lyndhurst. The train was fixed, but not
the day. Then mother wrote to Aunt Emma, giving her careful instructions
about the day and the hour, and about luggage and cabs and things, and
gave the letter to Robert to post. But the hounds happened to meet near
Rufus Stone that morning, and what is more, on the way to the meet they
met Robert, and Robert met them, and instantly forgot all about posting
Aunt Emma's letter, and never thought of it again until he and
the others had wandered three times up and down the platform at
Waterloo--which makes six in all--and had bumped against old gentlemen,
and stared in the faces of ladies, and been shoved by people in a hurry,
and 'by-your-leaved' by porters with trucks, and were quite, quite sure
that Aunt Emma was not there. Then suddenly the true truth of what he
had forgotten to do came home to Robert, and he said, 'Oh, crikey!' and
stood still with his mouth open, and let a porter with a Gladstone bag
in each hand and a bundle of umbrellas under one arm blunder heavily
into him, and never so much as said, 'Where are you shoving to now?' or,
'Look out where you're going, can't you?' The heavier bag smote him at
the knee, and he staggered, but he said nothing.

When the others understood what was the matter I think they told Robert
what they thought of him.

'We must take the train to Croydon,' said Anthea, 'and find Aunt Emma.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, 'and precious pleased those Jevonses would be to see
us and our traps.'

Aunt Emma, indeed, was staying with some Jevonses--very prim people.
They were middle-aged and wore very smart blouses, and they were fond of
matinees and shopping, and they did not care about children.

'I know MOTHER would be pleased to see us if we went back,' said Jane.

'Yes, she would, but she'd think it was not right to show she was
pleased, because it's Bob's fault we're not met. Don't I know the sort
of thing?' said Cyril. 'Besides, we've no tin. No; we've got enough for
a growler among us, but not enough for tickets to the New Forest. We
must just go home. They won't be so savage when they find we've really
got home all right. You know auntie was only going to take us home in a
cab.'

'I believe we ought to go to Croydon,' Anthea insisted.

'Aunt Emma would be out to a dead cert,' said Robert. 'Those Jevonses go
to the theatre every afternoon, I believe. Besides, there's the Phoenix
at home, AND the carpet. I votes we call a four-wheeled cabman.'

A four-wheeled cabman was called--his cab was one of the old-fashioned
kind with straw in the bottom--and he was asked by Anthea to drive them
very carefully to their address. This he did, and the price he asked
for doing so was exactly the value of the gold coin grandpapa had given
Cyril for Christmas. This cast a gloom; but Cyril would never have
stooped to argue about a cab-fare, for fear the cabman should think he
was not accustomed to take cabs whenever he wanted them. For a reason
that was something like this he told the cabman to put the luggage
on the steps, and waited till the wheels of the growler had grittily
retired before he rang the bell.

'You see,' he said, with his hand on the handle, 'we don't want cook
and Eliza asking us before HIM how it is we've come home alone, as if we
were babies.'

Here he rang the bell; and the moment its answering clang was heard,
every one felt that it would be some time before that bell was answered.
The sound of a bell is quite different, somehow, when there is anyone
inside the house who hears it. I can't tell you why that is--but so it
is.

'I expect they're changing their dresses,' said Jane.

'Too late,' said Anthea, 'it must be past five. I expect Eliza's gone to
post a letter, and cook's gone to see the time.'

Cyril rang again. And the bell did its best to inform the listening
children that there was really no one human in the house. They rang
again and listened intently. The hearts of all sank low. It is a
terrible thing to be locked out of your own house, on a dark, muggy
January evening.

'There is no gas on anywhere,' said Jane, in a broken voice.

'I expect they've left the gas on once too often, and the draught blew
it out, and they're suffocated in their beds. Father always said they
would some day,' said Robert cheerfully.

'Let's go and fetch a policeman,' said Anthea, trembling.

'And be taken up for trying to be burglars--no, thank you,' said Cyril.
'I heard father read out of the paper about a young man who got into his
own mother's house, and they got him made a burglar only the other day.'

'I only hope the gas hasn't hurt the Phoenix,' said Anthea. 'It said it
wanted to stay in the bathroom cupboard, and I thought it would be all
right, because the servants never clean that out. But if it's gone and
got out and been choked by gas--And besides, directly we open the door
we shall be choked, too. I KNEW we ought to have gone to Aunt Emma, at
Croydon. Oh, Squirrel, I wish we had. Let's go NOW.'

'Shut up,' said her brother, briefly. 'There's some one rattling the
latch inside.' Every one listened with all its ears, and every one stood
back as far from the door as the steps would allow.

The latch rattled, and clicked. Then the flap of the letter-box lifted
itself--every one saw it by the flickering light of the gas-lamp that
shone through the leafless lime-tree by the gate--a golden eye seemed to
wink at them through the letter-slit, and a cautious beak whispered--

'Are you alone?'

'It's the Phoenix,' said every one, in a voice so joyous, and so full of
relief, as to be a sort of whispered shout.

'Hush!' said the voice from the letter-box slit. 'Your slaves have gone
a-merry-making. The latch of this portal is too stiff for my beak.
But at the side--the little window above the shelf whereon your bread
lies--it is not fastened.'

'Righto!' said Cyril.

And Anthea added, 'I wish you'd meet us there, dear Phoenix.'

The children crept round to the pantry window. It is at the side of the
house, and there is a green gate labelled 'Tradesmen's Entrance', which
is always kept bolted. But if you get one foot on the fence between you
and next door, and one on the handle of the gate, you are over before
you know where you are. This, at least, was the experience of Cyril and
Robert, and even, if the truth must be told, of Anthea and Jane. So in
almost no time all four were in the narrow gravelled passage that runs
between that house and the next.

Then Robert made a back, and Cyril hoisted himself up and got his
knicker-bockered knee on the concrete window-sill. He dived into the
pantry head first, as one dives into water, and his legs waved in the
air as he went, just as your legs do when you are first beginning
to learn to dive. The soles of his boots--squarish muddy
patches--disappeared.

'Give me a leg up,' said Robert to his sisters.

'No, you don't,' said Jane firmly. 'I'm not going to be left outside
here with just Anthea, and have something creep up behind us out of the
dark. Squirrel can go and open the back door.'

A light had sprung awake in the pantry. Cyril always said the Phoenix
turned the gas on with its beak, and lighted it with a waft of its wing;
but he was excited at the time, and perhaps he really did it himself
with matches, and then forgot all about it. He let the others in by the
back door. And when it had been bolted again the children went all over
the house and lighted every single gas-jet they could find. For they
couldn't help feeling that this was just the dark dreary winter's
evening when an armed burglar might easily be expected to appear at any
moment. There is nothing like light when you are afraid of burglars--or
of anything else, for that matter.

And when all the gas-jets were lighted it was quite clear that the
Phoenix had made no mistake, and that Eliza and cook were really out,
and that there was no one in the house except the four children, and the
Phoenix, and the carpet, and the blackbeetles who lived in the cupboards
on each side of the nursery fire-place. These last were very pleased
that the children had come home again, especially when Anthea had
lighted the nursery fire. But, as usual, the children treated the loving
little blackbeetles with coldness and disdain.

I wonder whether you know how to light a fire? I don't mean how to
strike a match and set fire to the corners of the paper in a fire
someone has laid ready, but how to lay and light a fire all by yourself.
I will tell you how Anthea did it, and if ever you have to light one
yourself you may remember how it is done. First, she raked out the ashes
of the fire that had burned there a week ago--for Eliza had actually
never done this, though she had had plenty of time. In doing this Anthea
knocked her knuckle and made it bleed. Then she laid the largest and
handsomest cinders in the bottom of the grate. Then she took a sheet
of old newspaper (you ought never to light a fire with to-day's
newspaper--it will not burn well, and there are other reasons against
it), and tore it into four quarters, and screwed each of these into a
loose ball, and put them on the cinders; then she got a bundle of wood
and broke the string, and stuck the sticks in so that their front ends
rested on the bars, and the back ends on the back of the paper balls.
In doing this she cut her finger slightly with the string, and when she
broke it, two of the sticks jumped up and hit her on the cheek. Then she
put more cinders and some bits of coal--no dust. She put most of that
on her hands, but there seemed to be enough left for her face. Then
she lighted the edges of the paper balls, and waited till she heard the
fizz-crack-crack-fizz of the wood as it began to burn. Then she went and
washed her hands and face under the tap in the back kitchen.

Of course, you need not bark your knuckles, or cut your finger, or
bruise your cheek with wood, or black yourself all over; but otherwise,
this is a very good way to light a fire in London. In the real country
fires are lighted in a different and prettier way.

But it is always good to wash your hands and face afterwards, wherever
you are.

While Anthea was delighting the poor little blackbeetles with the
cheerful blaze, Jane had set the table for--I was going to say tea, but
the meal of which I am speaking was not exactly tea. Let us call it a
tea-ish meal. There was tea, certainly, for Anthea's fire blazed and
crackled so kindly that it really seemed to be affectionately inviting
the kettle to come and sit upon its lap. So the kettle was brought and
tea made. But no milk could be found--so every one had six lumps of
sugar to each cup instead. The things to eat, on the other hand, were
nicer than usual. The boys looked about very carefully, and found in
the pantry some cold tongue, bread, butter, cheese, and part of a cold
pudding--very much nicer than cook ever made when they were at home. And
in the kitchen cupboard was half a Christmassy cake, a pot of strawberry
jam, and about a pound of mixed candied fruit, with soft crumbly slabs
of delicious sugar in each cup of lemon, orange, or citron.

It was indeed, as Jane said, 'a banquet fit for an Arabian Knight.'

The Phoenix perched on Robert's chair, and listened kindly and
politely to all they had to tell it about their visit to Lyndhurst,
and underneath the table, by just stretching a toe down rather far, the
faithful carpet could be felt by all--even by Jane, whose legs were very
short.

'Your slaves will not return to-night,' said the Phoenix. 'They sleep
under the roof of the cook's stepmother's aunt, who is, I gather,
hostess to a large party to-night in honour of her husband's cousin's
sister-in-law's mother's ninetieth birthday.'

'I don't think they ought to have gone without leave,' said Anthea,
'however many relations they have, or however old they are; but I
suppose we ought to wash up.'

'It's not our business about the leave,' said Cyril, firmly, 'but I
simply won't wash up for them. We got it, and we'll clear it away; and
then we'll go somewhere on the carpet. It's not often we get a chance
of being out all night. We can go right away to the other side of the
equator, to the tropical climes, and see the sun rise over the great
Pacific Ocean.'

'Right you are,' said Robert. 'I always did want to see the Southern
Cross and the stars as big as gas-lamps.'

'DON'T go,' said Anthea, very earnestly, 'because I COULDN'T. I'm SURE
mother wouldn't like us to leave the house and I should hate to be left
here alone.'

'I'd stay with you,' said Jane loyally.

'I know you would,' said Anthea gratefully, 'but even with you I'd much
rather not.'

'Well,' said Cyril, trying to be kind and amiable, 'I don't want you to
do anything you think's wrong, BUT--'

He was silent; this silence said many things.

'I don't see,' Robert was beginning, when Anthea interrupted--

'I'm quite sure. Sometimes you just think a thing's wrong, and sometimes
you KNOW. And this is a KNOW time.'

The Phoenix turned kind golden eyes on her and opened a friendly beak to
say--

'When it is, as you say, a "know time", there is no more to be said. And
your noble brothers would never leave you.'

'Of course not,' said Cyril rather quickly. And Robert said so too.

'I myself,' the Phoenix went on, 'am willing to help in any way
possible. I will go personally--either by carpet or on the wing--and
fetch you anything you can think of to amuse you during the evening. In
order to waste no time I could go while you wash up.--Why,' it went on
in a musing voice, 'does one wash up teacups and wash down the stairs?'

'You couldn't wash stairs up, you know,' said Anthea, 'unless you began
at the bottom and went up feet first as you washed. I wish cook would
try that way for a change.'

'I don't,' said Cyril, briefly. 'I should hate the look of her
elastic-side boots sticking up.'

'This is mere trifling,' said the Phoenix. 'Come, decide what I shall
fetch for you. I can get you anything you like.'

But of course they couldn't decide. Many things were suggested--a
rocking-horse, jewelled chessmen, an elephant, a bicycle, a motor-car,
books with pictures, musical instruments, and many other things. But
a musical instrument is agreeable only to the player, unless he has
learned to play it really well; books are not sociable, bicycles cannot
be ridden without going out of doors, and the same is true of motor-cars
and elephants. Only two people can play chess at once with one set of
chessmen (and anyway it's very much too much like lessons for a game),
and only one can ride on a rocking-horse. Suddenly, in the midst of the
discussion, the Phoenix spread its wings and fluttered to the floor, and
from there it spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'from the carpet, that it wants you to let it go
to its old home, where it was born and brought up, and it will return
within the hour laden with a number of the most beautiful and delightful
products of its native land.'

'What IS its native land?'

'I didn't gather. But since you can't agree, and time is passing, and
the tea-things are not washed down--I mean washed up--'

'I votes we do,' said Robert. 'It'll stop all this jaw, anyway. And it's
not bad to have surprises. Perhaps it's a Turkey carpet, and it might
bring us Turkish delight.'

'Or a Turkish patrol,' said Robert.

'Or a Turkish bath,' said Anthea.

'Or a Turkish towel,' said Jane.

'Nonsense,' Robert urged, 'it said beautiful and delightful, and towels
and baths aren't THAT, however good they may be for you. Let it go. I
suppose it won't give us the slip,' he added, pushing back his chair and
standing up.

'Hush!' said the Phoenix; 'how can you? Don't trample on its feelings
just because it's only a carpet.'

'But how can it do it--unless one of us is on it to do the wishing?'
asked Robert. He spoke with a rising hope that it MIGHT be necessary for
one to go and why not Robert? But the Phoenix quickly threw cold water
on his new-born dream.

'Why, you just write your wish on a paper, and pin it on the carpet.'

So a leaf was torn from Anthea's arithmetic book, and on it Cyril wrote
in large round-hand the following:


We wish you to go to your dear native home, and bring back the most
beautiful and delightful productions of it you can--and not to be gone
long, please.

                    (Signed)  CYRIL.
                              ROBERT.
                              ANTHEA.
                              JANE.


Then the paper was laid on the carpet.

'Writing down, please,' said the Phoenix; 'the carpet can't read a paper
whose back is turned to it, any more than you can.'

It was pinned fast, and the table and chairs having been moved, the
carpet simply and suddenly vanished, rather like a patch of water on a
hearth under a fierce fire. The edges got smaller and smaller, and then
it disappeared from sight.

'It may take it some time to collect the beautiful and delightful
things,' said the Phoenix. 'I should wash up--I mean wash down.'

So they did. There was plenty of hot water left in the kettle, and every
one helped--even the Phoenix, who took up cups by their handles with its
clever claws and dipped them in the hot water, and then stood them on
the table ready for Anthea to dry them. But the bird was rather slow,
because, as it said, though it was not above any sort of honest work,
messing about with dish-water was not exactly what it had been brought
up to. Everything was nicely washed up, and dried, and put in its proper
place, and the dish-cloth washed and hung on the edge of the copper
to dry, and the tea-cloth was hung on the line that goes across the
scullery. (If you are a duchess's child, or a king's, or a person of
high social position's child, you will perhaps not know the difference
between a dish-cloth and a tea-cloth; but in that case your nurse has
been better instructed than you, and she will tell you all about it.)
And just as eight hands and one pair of claws were being dried on the
roller-towel behind the scullery door there came a strange sound from
the other side of the kitchen wall--the side where the nursery was. It
was a very strange sound, indeed--most odd, and unlike any other sounds
the children had ever heard. At least, they had heard sounds as much
like it as a toy engine's whistle is like a steam siren's.

'The carpet's come back,' said Robert; and the others felt that he was
right.

'But what has it brought with it?' asked Jane. 'It sounds like
Leviathan, that great beast.'

'It couldn't have been made in India, and have brought elephants? Even
baby ones would be rather awful in that room,' said Cyril. 'I vote we
take it in turns to squint through the keyhole.'

They did--in the order of their ages. The Phoenix, being the eldest by
some thousands of years, was entitled to the first peep. But--

'Excuse me,' it said, ruffling its golden feathers and sneezing softly;
'looking through keyholes always gives me a cold in my golden eyes.'

So Cyril looked.

'I see something grey moving,' said he.

'It's a zoological garden of some sort, I bet,' said Robert, when he had
taken his turn. And the soft rustling, bustling, ruffling, scuffling,
shuffling, fluffling noise went on inside.

'_I_ can't see anything,' said Anthea, 'my eye tickles so.'

Then Jane's turn came, and she put her eye to the keyhole.

'It's a giant kitty-cat,' she said; 'and it's asleep all over the
floor.'

'Giant cats are tigers--father said so.'

'No, he didn't. He said tigers were giant cats. It's not at all the same
thing.'

'It's no use sending the carpet to fetch precious things for you
if you're afraid to look at them when they come,' said the Phoenix,
sensibly. And Cyril, being the eldest, said--

'Come on,' and turned the handle.

The gas had been left full on after tea, and everything in the room
could be plainly seen by the ten eyes at the door. At least, not
everything, for though the carpet was there it was invisible, because it
was completely covered by the hundred and ninety-nine beautiful objects
which it had brought from its birthplace.

'My hat!' Cyril remarked. 'I never thought about its being a PERSIAN
carpet.'

Yet it was now plain that it was so, for the beautiful objects which it
had brought back were cats--Persian cats, grey Persian cats, and there
were, as I have said, 199 of them, and they were sitting on the carpet
as close as they could get to each other. But the moment the children
entered the room the cats rose and stretched, and spread and overflowed
from the carpet to the floor, and in an instant the floor was a sea of
moving, mewing pussishness, and the children with one accord climbed to
the table, and gathered up their legs, and the people next door knocked
on the wall--and, indeed, no wonder, for the mews were Persian and
piercing.

'This is pretty poor sport,' said Cyril. 'What's the matter with the
bounders?'

'I imagine that they are hungry,' said the Phoenix. 'If you were to feed
them--'

'We haven't anything to feed them with,' said Anthea in despair, and she
stroked the nearest Persian back. 'Oh, pussies, do be quiet--we can't
hear ourselves think.'

She had to shout this entreaty, for the mews were growing deafening,
'and it would take pounds' and pounds' worth of cat's-meat.'

'Let's ask the carpet to take them away,' said Robert. But the girls
said 'No.'

'They are so soft and pussy,' said Jane.

'And valuable,' said Anthea, hastily. 'We can sell them for lots and
lots of money.'

'Why not send the carpet to get food for them?' suggested the Phoenix,
and its golden voice came harsh and cracked with the effort it had to be
make to be heard above the increasing fierceness of the Persian mews.

So it was written that the carpet should bring food for 199 Persian
cats, and the paper was pinned to the carpet as before.

The carpet seemed to gather itself together, and the cats dropped off
it, as raindrops do from your mackintosh when you shake it. And the
carpet disappeared.

Unless you have had one-hundred and ninety-nine well-grown Persian cats
in one small room, all hungry, and all saying so in unmistakable mews,
you can form but a poor idea of the noise that now deafened the children
and the Phoenix. The cats did not seem to have been at all properly
brought up. They seemed to have no idea of its being a mistake in
manners to ask for meals in a strange house--let alone to howl for
them--and they mewed, and they mewed, and they mewed, and they mewed,
till the children poked their fingers into their ears and waited in
silent agony, wondering why the whole of Camden Town did not come
knocking at the door to ask what was the matter, and only hoping that
the food for the cats would come before the neighbours did--and before
all the secret of the carpet and the Phoenix had to be given away beyond
recall to an indignant neighbourhood.

The cats mewed and mewed and twisted their Persian forms in and out and
unfolded their Persian tails, and the children and the Phoenix huddled
together on the table.

The Phoenix, Robert noticed suddenly, was trembling.

'So many cats,' it said, 'and they might not know I was the Phoenix.
These accidents happen so quickly. It quite un-mans me.'

This was a danger of which the children had not thought.

'Creep in,' cried Robert, opening his jacket.

And the Phoenix crept in--only just in time, for green eyes had glared,
pink noses had sniffed, white whiskers had twitched, and as Robert
buttoned his coat he disappeared to the waist in a wave of eager grey
Persian fur. And on the instant the good carpet slapped itself down on
the floor. And it was covered with rats--three hundred and ninety-eight
of them, I believe, two for each cat.

'How horrible!' cried Anthea. 'Oh, take them away!'

'Take yourself away,' said the Phoenix, 'and me.'

'I wish we'd never had a carpet,' said Anthea, in tears.

They hustled and crowded out of the door, and shut it, and locked it.
Cyril, with great presence of mind, lit a candle and turned off the gas
at the main.

'The rats'll have a better chance in the dark,' he said.

The mewing had ceased. Every one listened in breathless silence. We all
know that cats eat rats--it is one of the first things we read in our
little brown reading books; but all those cats eating all those rats--it
wouldn't bear thinking of.

Suddenly Robert sniffed, in the silence of the dark kitchen, where the
only candle was burning all on one side, because of the draught.

'What a funny scent!' he said.

And as he spoke, a lantern flashed its light through the window of the
kitchen, a face peered in, and a voice said--

'What's all this row about? You let me in.'

It was the voice of the police!

Robert tip-toed to the window, and spoke through the pane that had
been a little cracked since Cyril accidentally knocked it with a
walking-stick when he was playing at balancing it on his nose. (It was
after they had been to a circus.)

'What do you mean?' he said. 'There's no row. You listen; everything's
as quiet as quiet.' And indeed it was.

The strange sweet scent grew stronger, and the Phoenix put out its beak.

The policeman hesitated.

'They're MUSK-rats,' said the Phoenix. 'I suppose some cats eat
them--but never Persian ones. What a mistake for a well-informed carpet
to make! Oh, what a night we're having!'

'Do go away,' said Robert, nervously. 'We're just going to bed--that's
our bedroom candle; there isn't any row. Everything's as quiet as a
mouse.'

A wild chorus of mews drowned his words, and with the mews were mingled
the shrieks of the musk-rats. What had happened? Had the cats tasted
them before deciding that they disliked the flavour?

'I'm a-coming in,' said the policeman. 'You've got a cat shut up there.'

'A cat,' said Cyril. 'Oh, my only aunt! A cat!'

'Come in, then,' said Robert. 'It's your own look out. I advise you not.
Wait a shake, and I'll undo the side gate.'

He undid the side gate, and the policeman, very cautiously, came in. And
there in the kitchen, by the light of one candle, with the mewing
and the screaming going like a dozen steam sirens, twenty waiting on
motor-cars, and half a hundred squeaking pumps, four agitated voices
shouted to the policeman four mixed and wholly different explanations of
the very mixed events of the evening.

Did you ever try to explain the simplest thing to a policeman?



CHAPTER 8. THE CATS, THE COW, AND THE BURGLAR

The nursery was full of Persian cats and musk-rats that had been brought
there by the wishing carpet. The cats were mewing and the musk-rats were
squeaking so that you could hardly hear yourself speak. In the kitchen
were the four children, one candle, a concealed Phoenix, and a very
visible policeman.

'Now then, look here,' said the Policeman, very loudly, and he pointed
his lantern at each child in turn, 'what's the meaning of this here
yelling and caterwauling. I tell you you've got a cat here, and some
one's a ill-treating of it. What do you mean by it, eh?'

It was five to one, counting the Phoenix; but the policeman, who was
one, was of unusually fine size, and the five, including the Phoenix,
were small. The mews and the squeaks grew softer, and in the comparative
silence, Cyril said--

'It's true. There are a few cats here. But we've not hurt them. It's
quite the opposite. We've just fed them.'

'It don't sound like it,' said the policeman grimly.

'I daresay they're not REAL cats,' said Jane madly, perhaps they're only
dream-cats.'

'I'll dream-cat you, my lady,' was the brief response of the force.

'If you understood anything except people who do murders and stealings
and naughty things like that, I'd tell you all about it,' said Robert;
'but I'm certain you don't. You're not meant to shove your oar into
people's private cat-keepings. You're only supposed to interfere when
people shout "murder" and "stop thief" in the street. So there!'

The policeman assured them that he should see about that; and at this
point the Phoenix, who had been making itself small on the pot-shelf
under the dresser, among the saucepan lids and the fish-kettle, walked
on tip-toed claws in a noiseless and modest manner, and left the room
unnoticed by any one.

'Oh, don't be so horrid,' Anthea was saying, gently and earnestly. 'We
LOVE cats--dear pussy-soft things. We wouldn't hurt them for worlds.
Would we, Pussy?'

And Jane answered that of course they wouldn't. And still the policeman
seemed unmoved by their eloquence.

'Now, look here,' he said, 'I'm a-going to see what's in that room
beyond there, and--'

His voice was drowned in a wild burst of mewing and squeaking. And as
soon as it died down all four children began to explain at once; and
though the squeaking and mewing were not at their very loudest, yet
there was quite enough of both to make it very hard for the policeman
to understand a single word of any of the four wholly different
explanations now poured out to him.

'Stow it,' he said at last. 'I'm a-goin' into the next room in the
execution of my duty. I'm a-goin' to use my eyes--my ears have gone off
their chumps, what with you and them cats.'

And he pushed Robert aside, and strode through the door.

'Don't say I didn't warn you,' said Robert.

'It's tigers REALLY,' said Jane. 'Father said so. I wouldn't go in, if I
were you.'

But the policeman was quite stony; nothing any one said seemed to make
any difference to him. Some policemen are like this, I believe. He
strode down the passage, and in another moment he would have been in the
room with all the cats and all the rats (musk), but at that very instant
a thin, sharp voice screamed from the street outside--

'Murder--murder! Stop thief!'

The policeman stopped, with one regulation boot heavily poised in the
air.

'Eh?' he said.

And again the shrieks sounded shrilly and piercingly from the dark
street outside.

'Come on,' said Robert. 'Come and look after cats while somebody's being
killed outside.' For Robert had an inside feeling that told him quite
plainly WHO it was that was screaming.

'You young rip,' said the policeman, 'I'll settle up with you bimeby.'

And he rushed out, and the children heard his boots going weightily
along the pavement, and the screams also going along, rather ahead of
the policeman; and both the murder-screams and the policeman's boots
faded away in the remote distance.

Then Robert smacked his knickerbocker loudly with his palm, and said--

'Good old Phoenix! I should know its golden voice anywhere.'

And then every one understood how cleverly the Phoenix had caught at
what Robert had said about the real work of a policeman being to look
after murderers and thieves, and not after cats, and all hearts were
filled with admiring affection.

'But he'll come back,' said Anthea, mournfully, 'as soon as it finds the
murderer is only a bright vision of a dream, and there isn't one at all
really.'

'No he won't,' said the soft voice of the clever Phoenix, as it flew
in. 'HE DOES NOT KNOW WHERE YOUR HOUSE IS. I heard him own as much to a
fellow mercenary. Oh! what a night we are having! Lock the door, and let
us rid ourselves of this intolerable smell of the perfume peculiar
to the musk-rat and to the house of the trimmers of beards. If you'll
excuse me, I will go to bed. I am worn out.'

It was Cyril who wrote the paper that told the carpet to take away the
rats and bring milk, because there seemed to be no doubt in any breast
that, however Persian cats may be, they must like milk.

'Let's hope it won't be musk-milk,' said Anthea, in gloom, as she pinned
the paper face-downwards on the carpet. 'Is there such a thing as a
musk-cow?' she added anxiously, as the carpet shrivelled and vanished.
'I do hope not. Perhaps really it WOULD have been wiser to let the
carpet take the cats away. It's getting quite late, and we can't keep
them all night.'

'Oh, can't we?' was the bitter rejoinder of Robert, who had been
fastening the side door. 'You might have consulted me,' he went on. 'I'm
not such an idiot as some people.'

'Why, whatever--'

'Don't you see? We've jolly well GOT to keep the cats all night--oh, get
down, you furry beasts!--because we've had three wishes out of the old
carpet now, and we can't get any more till to-morrow.'

The liveliness of Persian mews alone prevented the occurrence of a
dismal silence.

Anthea spoke first.

'Never mind,' she said. 'Do you know, I really do think they're quieting
down a bit. Perhaps they heard us say milk.'

'They can't understand English,' said Jane. 'You forget they're Persian
cats, Panther.'

'Well,' said Anthea, rather sharply, for she was tired and anxious, 'who
told you "milk" wasn't Persian for milk. Lots of English words are
just the same in French--at least I know "miaw" is, and "croquet", and
"fiance". Oh, pussies, do be quiet! Let's stroke them as hard as we can
with both hands, and perhaps they'll stop.'

So every one stroked grey fur till their hands were tired, and as soon
as a cat had been stroked enough to make it stop mewing it was pushed
gently away, and another mewing mouser was approached by the hands of
the strokers. And the noise was really more than half purr when the
carpet suddenly appeared in its proper place, and on it, instead of rows
of milk-cans, or even of milk-jugs, there was a COW. Not a Persian cow,
either, nor, most fortunately, a musk-cow, if there is such a thing, but
a smooth, sleek, dun-coloured Jersey cow, who blinked large soft eyes at
the gas-light and mooed in an amiable if rather inquiring manner.

Anthea had always been afraid of cows; but now she tried to be brave.

'Anyway, it can't run after me,' she said to herself 'There isn't room
for it even to begin to run.'

The cow was perfectly placid. She behaved like a strayed duchess till
some one brought a saucer for the milk, and some one else tried to milk
the cow into it. Milking is very difficult. You may think it is easy,
but it is not. All the children were by this time strung up to a pitch
of heroism that would have been impossible to them in their ordinary
condition. Robert and Cyril held the cow by the horns; and Jane, when
she was quite sure that their end of the cow was quite secure, consented
to stand by, ready to hold the cow by the tail should occasion arise.
Anthea, holding the saucer, now advanced towards the cow. She remembered
to have heard that cows, when milked by strangers, are susceptible to
the soothing influence of the human voice. So, clutching her saucer very
tight, she sought for words to whose soothing influence the cow might be
susceptible. And her memory, troubled by the events of the night, which
seemed to go on and on for ever and ever, refused to help her with any
form of words suitable to address a Jersey cow in.

'Poor pussy, then. Lie down, then, good dog, lie down!' was all that she
could think of to say, and she said it.

And nobody laughed. The situation, full of grey mewing cats, was too
serious for that. Then Anthea, with a beating heart, tried to milk the
cow. Next moment the cow had knocked the saucer out of her hand and
trampled on it with one foot, while with the other three she had walked
on a foot each of Robert, Cyril, and Jane.

Jane burst into tears. 'Oh, how much too horrid everything is!' she
cried. 'Come away. Let's go to bed and leave the horrid cats with the
hateful cow. Perhaps somebody will eat somebody else. And serve them
right.'

They did not go to bed, but they had a shivering council in the
drawing-room, which smelt of soot--and, indeed, a heap of this lay in
the fender. There had been no fire in the room since mother went
away, and all the chairs and tables were in the wrong places, and the
chrysanthemums were dead, and the water in the pot nearly dried up.
Anthea wrapped the embroidered woolly sofa blanket round Jane and
herself, while Robert and Cyril had a struggle, silent and brief, but
fierce, for the larger share of the fur hearthrug.

'It is most truly awful,' said Anthea, 'and I am so tired. Let's let the
cats loose.'

'And the cow, perhaps?' said Cyril. 'The police would find us at once.
That cow would stand at the gate and mew--I mean moo--to come in. And so
would the cats. No; I see quite well what we've got to do. We must
put them in baskets and leave them on people's doorsteps, like orphan
foundlings.'

'We've got three baskets, counting mother's work one,' said Jane
brightening.

'And there are nearly two hundred cats,' said Anthea, 'besides the
cow--and it would have to be a different-sized basket for her; and then
I don't know how you'd carry it, and you'd never find a doorstep big
enough to put it on. Except the church one--and--'

'Oh, well,' said Cyril, 'if you simply MAKE difficulties--'

'I'm with you,' said Robert. 'Don't fuss about the cow, Panther. It's
simply GOT to stay the night, and I'm sure I've read that the cow is a
remunerating creature, and that means it will sit still and think
for hours. The carpet can take it away in the morning. And as for the
baskets, we'll do them up in dusters, or pillow-cases, or bath-towels.
Come on, Squirrel. You girls can be out of it if you like.'

His tone was full of contempt, but Jane and Anthea were too tired and
desperate to care; even being 'out of it', which at other times they
could not have borne, now seemed quite a comfort. They snuggled down in
the sofa blanket, and Cyril threw the fur hearthrug over them.

'Ah, he said, 'that's all women are fit for--to keep safe and warm,
while the men do the work and run dangers and risks and things.'

'I'm not,' said Anthea, 'you know I'm not.' But Cyril was gone.

It was warm under the blanket and the hearthrug, and Jane snuggled up
close to her sister; and Anthea cuddled Jane closely and kindly, and in
a sort of dream they heard the rise of a wave of mewing as Robert opened
the door of the nursery. They heard the booted search for baskets in
the back kitchen. They heard the side door open and close, and they
knew that each brother had gone out with at least one cat. Anthea's
last thought was that it would take at least all night to get rid of
one hundred and ninety-nine cats by twos. There would be ninety-nine
journeys of two cats each, and one cat over.

'I almost think we might keep the one cat over,' said Anthea. 'I don't
seem to care for cats just now, but I daresay I shall again some day.'
And she fell asleep. Jane also was sleeping.

It was Jane who awoke with a start, to find Anthea still asleep. As, in
the act of awakening, she kicked her sister, she wondered idly why
they should have gone to bed in their boots; but the next moment she
remembered where they were.

There was a sound of muffled, shuffled feet on the stairs. Like the
heroine of the classic poem, Jane 'thought it was the boys', and as
she felt quite wide awake, and not nearly so tired as before, she crept
gently from Anthea's side and followed the footsteps. They went down
into the basement; the cats, who seemed to have fallen into the sleep
of exhaustion, awoke at the sound of the approaching footsteps and mewed
piteously. Jane was at the foot of the stairs before she saw it was not
her brothers whose coming had roused her and the cats, but a burglar.
She knew he was a burglar at once, because he wore a fur cap and a red
and black charity-check comforter, and he had no business where he was.

If you had been stood in jane's shoes you would no doubt have run away
in them, appealing to the police and neighbours with horrid screams. But
Jane knew better. She had read a great many nice stories about burglars,
as well as some affecting pieces of poetry, and she knew that no burglar
will ever hurt a little girl if he meets her when burgling. Indeed, in
all the cases Jane had read of, his burglarishness was almost at once
forgotten in the interest he felt in the little girl's artless prattle.
So if Jane hesitated for a moment before addressing the burglar, it
was only because she could not at once think of any remark sufficiently
prattling and artless to make a beginning with. In the stories and the
affecting poetry the child could never speak plainly, though it always
looked old enough to in the pictures. And Jane could not make up her
mind to lisp and 'talk baby', even to a burglar. And while she hesitated
he softly opened the nursery door and went in.

Jane followed--just in time to see him sit down flat on the floor,
scattering cats as a stone thrown into a pool splashes water.

She closed the door softly and stood there, still wondering whether she
COULD bring herself to say, 'What's 'oo doing here, Mithter Wobber?' and
whether any other kind of talk would do.

Then she heard the burglar draw a long breath, and he spoke.

'It's a judgement,' he said, 'so help me bob if it ain't. Oh, 'ere's a
thing to 'appen to a chap! Makes it come 'ome to you, don't it neither?
Cats an' cats an' cats. There couldn't be all them cats. Let alone the
cow. If she ain't the moral of the old man's Daisy. She's a dream out of
when I was a lad--I don't mind 'er so much. 'Ere, Daisy, Daisy?'

The cow turned and looked at him.

'SHE'S all right,' he went on. 'Sort of company, too. Though them above
knows how she got into this downstairs parlour. But them cats--oh, take
'em away, take 'em away! I'll chuck the 'ole show--Oh, take 'em away.'

'Burglar,' said Jane, close behind him, and he started convulsively,
and turned on her a blank face, whose pale lips trembled. 'I can't take
those cats away.'

'Lor' lumme!' exclaimed the man; 'if 'ere ain't another on 'em. Are you
real, miss, or something I'll wake up from presently?'

'I am quite real,' said Jane, relieved to find that a lisp was not
needed to make the burglar understand her. 'And so,' she added, 'are the
cats.'

'Then send for the police, send for the police, and I'll go quiet. If
you ain't no realler than them cats, I'm done, spunchuck--out of time.
Send for the police. I'll go quiet. One thing, there'd not be room for
'arf them cats in no cell as ever _I_ see.'

He ran his fingers through his hair, which was short, and his eyes
wandered wildly round the roomful of cats.

'Burglar,' said Jane, kindly and softly, 'if you didn't like cats, what
did you come here for?'

'Send for the police,' was the unfortunate criminal's only reply. 'I'd
rather you would--honest, I'd rather.'

'I daren't,' said Jane, 'and besides, I've no one to send. I hate the
police. I wish he'd never been born.'

'You've a feeling 'art, miss,' said the burglar; 'but them cats is
really a little bit too thick.'

'Look here,' said Jane, 'I won't call the police. And I am quite a real
little girl, though I talk older than the kind you've met before when
you've been doing your burglings. And they are real cats--and they want
real milk--and--Didn't you say the cow was like somebody's Daisy that
you used to know?'

'Wish I may die if she ain't the very spit of her,' replied the man.

'Well, then,' said Jane--and a thrill of joyful pride ran through
her--'perhaps you know how to milk cows?'

'Perhaps I does,' was the burglar's cautious rejoinder.

'Then,' said Jane, 'if you will ONLY milk ours--you don't know how we
shall always love you.'

The burglar replied that loving was all very well.

'If those cats only had a good long, wet, thirsty drink of milk,' Jane
went on with eager persuasion, 'they'd lie down and go to sleep as
likely as not, and then the police won't come back. But if they go on
mewing like this he will, and then I don't know what'll become of us, or
you either.'

This argument seemed to decide the criminal. Jane fetched the wash-bowl
from the sink, and he spat on his hands and prepared to milk the cow. At
this instant boots were heard on the stairs.

'It's all up,' said the man, desperately, 'this 'ere's a plant. 'ERE'S
the police.' He made as if to open the window and leap from it.

'It's all right, I tell you,' whispered Jane, in anguish. 'I'll say
you're a friend of mine, or the good clergyman called in, or my uncle,
or ANYTHING--only do, do, do milk the cow. Oh, DON'T go--oh--oh, thank
goodness it's only the boys!'

It was; and their entrance had awakened Anthea, who, with her brothers,
now crowded through the doorway. The man looked about him like a rat
looks round a trap.

'This is a friend of mine,' said Jane; 'he's just called in, and he's
going to milk the cow for us. ISN'T it good and kind of him?'

She winked at the others, and though they did not understand they played
up loyally.

'How do?' said Cyril, 'Very glad to meet you. Don't let us interrupt the
milking.'

'I shall 'ave a 'ead and a 'arf in the morning, and no bloomin' error,'
remarked the burglar; but he began to milk the cow.

Robert was winked at to stay and see that he did not leave off milking
or try to escape, and the others went to get things to put the milk in;
for it was now spurting and foaming in the wash-bowl, and the cats had
ceased from mewing and were crowding round the cow, with expressions of
hope and anticipation on their whiskered faces.

'We can't get rid of any more cats,' said Cyril, as he and his sisters
piled a tray high with saucers and soup-plates and platters and
pie-dishes, 'the police nearly got us as it was. Not the same one--a
much stronger sort. He thought it really was a foundling orphan we'd
got. If it hadn't been for me throwing the two bags of cat slap in
his eye and hauling Robert over a railing, and lying like mice under
a laurel-bush--Well, it's jolly lucky I'm a good shot, that's all.
He pranced off when he'd got the cat-bags off his face--thought we'd
bolted. And here we are.'

The gentle samishness of the milk swishing into the hand-bowl seemed
to have soothed the burglar very much. He went on milking in a sort of
happy dream, while the children got a cap and ladled the warm milk out
into the pie-dishes and plates, and platters and saucers, and set them
down to the music of Persian purrs and lappings.

'It makes me think of old times,' said the burglar, smearing his ragged
coat-cuff across his eyes--'about the apples in the orchard at home,
and the rats at threshing time, and the rabbits and the ferrets, and how
pretty it was seeing the pigs killed.'

Finding him in this softened mood, Jane said--

'I wish you'd tell us how you came to choose our house for your
burglaring to-night. I am awfully glad you did. You have been so kind. I
don't know what we should have done without you,' she added hastily. 'We
all love you ever so. Do tell us.'

The others added their affectionate entreaties, and at last the burglar
said--

'Well, it's my first job, and I didn't expect to be made so welcome, and
that's the truth, young gents and ladies. And I don't know but what it
won't be my last. For this 'ere cow, she reminds me of my father, and I
know 'ow 'e'd 'ave 'ided me if I'd laid 'ands on a 'a'penny as wasn't my
own.'

'I'm sure he would,' Jane agreed kindly; 'but what made you come here?'

'Well, miss,' said the burglar, 'you know best 'ow you come by them
cats, and why you don't like the police, so I'll give myself away free,
and trust to your noble 'earts. (You'd best bale out a bit, the pan's
getting fullish.) I was a-selling oranges off of my barrow--for I ain't
a burglar by trade, though you 'ave used the name so free--an' there was
a lady bought three 'a'porth off me. An' while she was a-pickin' of them
out--very careful indeed, and I'm always glad when them sort gets a few
over-ripe ones--there was two other ladies talkin' over the fence. An'
one on 'em said to the other on 'em just like this--

"'I've told both gells to come, and they can doss in with M'ria and
Jane, 'cause their boss and his missis is miles away and the kids too.
So they can just lock up the 'ouse and leave the gas a-burning, so's
no one won't know, and get back bright an' early by 'leven o'clock. And
we'll make a night of it, Mrs Prosser, so we will. I'm just a-going
to run out to pop the letter in the post." And then the lady what had
chosen the three ha'porth so careful, she said: "Lor, Mrs Wigson, I
wonder at you, and your hands all over suds. This good gentleman'll slip
it into the post for yer, I'll be bound, seeing I'm a customer of his."
So they give me the letter, and of course I read the direction what was
written on it afore I shoved it into the post. And then when I'd sold
my barrowful, I was a-goin' 'ome with the chink in my pocket, and I'm
blowed if some bloomin' thievin' beggar didn't nick the lot whilst I was
just a-wettin' of my whistle, for callin' of oranges is dry work. Nicked
the bloomin' lot 'e did--and me with not a farden to take 'ome to my
brother and his missus.'

'How awful!' said Anthea, with much sympathy.

'Horful indeed, miss, I believe yer,' the burglar rejoined, with deep
feeling. 'You don't know her temper when she's roused. An' I'm sure I
'ope you never may, neither. And I'd 'ad all my oranges off of 'em.
So it came back to me what was wrote on the ongverlope, and I says to
myself, "Why not, seein' as I've been done myself, and if they keeps two
slaveys there must be some pickings?" An' so 'ere I am. But them cats,
they've brought me back to the ways of honestness. Never no more.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'these cats are very valuable--very indeed. And
we will give them all to you, if only you will take them away.'

'I see they're a breedy lot,' replied the burglar. 'But I don't want no
bother with the coppers. Did you come by them honest now? Straight?'

'They are all our very own,' said Anthea, 'we wanted them, but the
confidement--'

'Consignment,' whispered Cyril, 'was larger than we wanted, and they're
an awful bother. If you got your barrow, and some sacks or baskets, your
brother's missus would be awfully pleased. My father says Persian cats
are worth pounds and pounds each.'

'Well,' said the burglar--and he was certainly moved by her remarks--'I
see you're in a hole--and I don't mind lending a helping 'and. I don't
ask 'ow you come by them. But I've got a pal--'e's a mark on cats. I'll
fetch him along, and if he thinks they'd fetch anything above their
skins I don't mind doin' you a kindness.'

'You won't go away and never come back,' said Jane, 'because I don't
think I COULD bear that.'

The burglar, quite touched by her emotion, swore sentimentally that,
alive or dead, he would come back.

Then he went, and Cyril and Robert sent the girls to bed and sat up to
wait for his return. It soon seemed absurd to await him in a state
of wakefulness, but his stealthy tap on the window awoke them readily
enough. For he did return, with the pal and the barrow and the sacks.
The pal approved of the cats, now dormant in Persian repletion, and
they were bundled into the sacks, and taken away on the barrow--mewing,
indeed, but with mews too sleepy to attract public attention.

'I'm a fence--that's what I am,' said the burglar gloomily. 'I never
thought I'd come down to this, and all acause er my kind 'eart.'

Cyril knew that a fence is a receiver of stolen goods, and he replied
briskly--

'I give you my sacred the cats aren't stolen. What do you make the
time?'

'I ain't got the time on me,' said the pal--'but it was just about
chucking-out time as I come by the "Bull and Gate". I shouldn't wonder
if it was nigh upon one now.'

When the cats had been removed, and the boys and the burglar had parted
with warm expressions of friendship, there remained only the cow.

'She must stay all night,' said Robert. 'Cook'll have a fit when she
sees her.'

'All night?' said Cyril. 'Why--it's tomorrow morning if it's one. We can
have another wish!'

So the carpet was urged, in a hastily written note, to remove the cow to
wherever she belonged, and to return to its proper place on the nursery
floor. But the cow could not be got to move on to the carpet. So Robert
got the clothes line out of the back kitchen, and tied one end very
firmly to the cow's horns, and the other end to a bunched-up corner of
the carpet, and said 'Fire away.'

And the carpet and cow vanished together, and the boys went to bed,
tired out and only too thankful that the evening at last was over.

Next morning the carpet lay calmly in its place, but one corner was very
badly torn. It was the corner that the cow had been tied on to.



CHAPTER 9. THE BURGLAR'S BRIDE


The morning after the adventure of the Persian cats, the musk-rats, the
common cow, and the uncommon burglar, all the children slept till it was
ten o'clock; and then it was only Cyril who woke; but he attended to
the others, so that by half past ten every one was ready to help to get
breakfast. It was shivery cold, and there was but little in the house
that was really worth eating.

Robert had arranged a thoughtful little surprise for the absent
servants. He had made a neat and delightful booby trap over the kitchen
door, and as soon as they heard the front door click open and knew the
servants had come back, all four children hid in the cupboard under
the stairs and listened with delight to the entrance--the tumble, the
splash, the scuffle, and the remarks of the servants. They heard the
cook say it was a judgement on them for leaving the place to itself;
she seemed to think that a booby trap was a kind of plant that was quite
likely to grow, all by itself, in a dwelling that was left shut up. But
the housemaid, more acute, judged that someone must have been in the
house--a view confirmed by the sight of the breakfast things on the
nursery table.

The cupboard under the stairs was very tight and paraffiny, however, and
a silent struggle for a place on top ended in the door bursting open
and discharging Jane, who rolled like a football to the feet of the
servants.

'Now,' said Cyril, firmly, when the cook's hysterics had become quieter,
and the housemaid had time to say what she thought of them, 'don't you
begin jawing us. We aren't going to stand it. We know too much. You'll
please make an extra special treacle roley for dinner, and we'll have a
tinned tongue.'

'I daresay,' said the housemaid, indignant, still in her outdoor things
and with her hat very much on one side. 'Don't you come a-threatening
me, Master Cyril, because I won't stand it, so I tell you. You tell
your ma about us being out? Much I care! She'll be sorry for me when she
hears about my dear great-aunt by marriage as brought me up from a child
and was a mother to me. She sent for me, she did, she wasn't expected
to last the night, from the spasms going to her legs--and cook was that
kind and careful she couldn't let me go alone, so--'

'Don't,' said Anthea, in real distress. 'You know where liars go to,
Eliza--at least if you don't--'

'Liars indeed!' said Eliza, 'I won't demean myself talking to you.'

'How's Mrs Wigson?' said Robert, 'and DID you keep it up last night?'

The mouth of the housemaid fell open.

'Did you doss with Maria or Emily?' asked Cyril.

'How did Mrs Prosser enjoy herself?' asked Jane.

'Forbear,' said Cyril, 'they've had enough. Whether we tell or not
depends on your later life,' he went on, addressing the servants. 'If
you are decent to us we'll be decent to you. You'd better make that
treacle roley--and if I were you, Eliza, I'd do a little housework and
cleaning, just for a change.'

The servants gave in once and for all.

'There's nothing like firmness,' Cyril went on, when the breakfast
things were cleared away and the children were alone in the nursery.
'People are always talking of difficulties with servants. It's quite
simple, when you know the way. We can do what we like now and they won't
peach. I think we've broken THEIR proud spirit. Let's go somewhere by
carpet.'

'I wouldn't if I were you,' said the Phoenix, yawning, as it swooped
down from its roost on the curtain pole. 'I've given you one or two
hints, but now concealment is at an end, and I see I must speak out.'

It perched on the back of a chair and swayed to and fro, like a parrot
on a swing.

'What's the matter now?' said Anthea. She was not quite so gentle as
usual, because she was still weary from the excitement of last night's
cats. 'I'm tired of things happening. I shan't go anywhere on the
carpet. I'm going to darn my stockings.'

'Darn!' said the Phoenix, 'darn! From those young lips these strange
expressions--'

'Mend, then,' said Anthea, 'with a needle and wool.'

The Phoenix opened and shut its wings thoughtfully.

'Your stockings,' it said, 'are much less important than they now appear
to you. But the carpet--look at the bare worn patches, look at the great
rent at yonder corner. The carpet has been your faithful friend--your
willing servant. How have you requited its devoted service?'

'Dear Phoenix,' Anthea urged, 'don't talk in that horrid lecturing tone.
You make me feel as if I'd done something wrong. And really it is a
wishing carpet, and we haven't done anything else to it--only wishes.'

'Only wishes,' repeated the Phoenix, ruffling its neck feathers angrily,
'and what sort of wishes? Wishing people to be in a good temper, for
instance. What carpet did you ever hear of that had such a wish asked
of it? But this noble fabric, on which you trample so recklessly' (every
one removed its boots from the carpet and stood on the linoleum), 'this
carpet never flinched. It did what you asked, but the wear and tear must
have been awful. And then last night--I don't blame you about the cats
and the rats, for those were its own choice; but what carpet could stand
a heavy cow hanging on to it at one corner?'

'I should think the cats and rats were worse,' said Robert, 'look at all
their claws.'

'Yes,' said the bird, 'eleven thousand nine hundred and forty of them--I
daresay you noticed? I should be surprised if these had not left their
mark.'

'Good gracious,' said Jane, sitting down suddenly on the floor, and
patting the edge of the carpet softly; 'do you mean it's WEARING OUT?'

'Its life with you has not been a luxurious one,' said the Phoenix.

'French mud twice. Sand of sunny shores twice. Soaking in southern seas
once. India once. Goodness knows where in Persia once. Musk-rat-land
once. And once, wherever the cow came from. Hold your carpet up to the
light, and with cautious tenderness, if YOU please.'

With cautious tenderness the boys held the carpet up to the light; the
girls looked, and a shiver of regret ran through them as they saw how
those eleven thoousand nine hundred and forty claws had run through the
carpet. It was full of little holes: there were some large ones, and
more than one thin place. At one corner a strip of it was torn, and hung
forlornly.

'We must mend it,' said Anthea; 'never mind about my stockings. I can
sew them up in lumps with sewing cotton if there's no time to do them
properly. I know it's awful and no girl would who respected herself,
and all that; but the poor dear carpet's more important than my silly
stockings. Let's go out now this very minute.'

So out they all went, and bought wool to mend the carpet; but there
is no shop in Camden Town where you can buy wishing-wool, no, nor in
Kentish Town either. However, ordinary Scotch heather-mixture fingering
seemed good enough, and this they bought, and all that day Jane and
Anthea darned and darned and darned. The boys went out for a walk in
the afternoon, and the gentle Phoenix paced up and down the table--for
exercise, as it said--and talked to the industrious girls about their
carpet.

'It is not an ordinary, ignorant, innocent carpet from Kidderminster,'
it said, 'it is a carpet with a past--a Persian past. Do you know that
in happier years, when that carpet was the property of caliphs, viziers,
kings, and sultans, it never lay on a floor?'

'I thought the floor was the proper home of a carpet,' Jane interrupted.

'Not of a MAGIC carpet,' said the Phoenix; 'why, if it had been allowed
to lie about on floors there wouldn't be much of it left now. No,
indeed! It has lived in chests of cedarwood, inlaid with pearl and
ivory, wrapped in priceless tissues of cloth of gold, embroidered with
gems of fabulous value. It has reposed in the sandal-wood caskets of
princesses, and in the rose-attar-scented treasure-houses of kings.
Never, never, had any one degraded it by walking on it--except in the
way of business, when wishes were required, and then they always took
their shoes off. And YOU--'

'Oh, DON'T!' said Jane, very near tears. 'You know you'd never have been
hatched at all if it hadn't been for mother wanting a carpet for us to
walk on.'

'You needn't have walked so much or so hard!' said the bird, 'but
come, dry that crystal tear, and I will relate to you the story of the
Princess Zulieka, the Prince of Asia, and the magic carpet.'

'Relate away,' said Anthea--'I mean, please do.'

'The Princess Zulieka, fairest of royal ladies,' began the bird, 'had in
her cradle been the subject of several enchantments. Her grandmother had
been in her day--'

But what in her day Zulieka's grandmother had been was destined never to
be revealed, for Cyril and Robert suddenly burst into the room, and on
each brow were the traces of deep emotion. On Cyril's pale brow stood
beads of agitation and perspiration, and on the scarlet brow of Robert
was a large black smear.

'What ails ye both?' asked the Phoenix, and it added tartly that
story-telling was quite impossible if people would come interrupting
like that.

'Oh, do shut up, for any sake!' said Cyril, sinking into a chair.

Robert smoothed the ruffled golden feathers, adding kindly--

'Squirrel doesn't mean to be a beast. It's only that the MOST AWFUL
thing has happened, and stories don't seem to matter so much. Don't be
cross. You won't be when you've heard what's happened.'

'Well, what HAS happened?' said the bird, still rather crossly; and
Anthea and Jane paused with long needles poised in air, and long
needlefuls of Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool drooping from them.

'The most awful thing you can possibly think of,' said Cyril. 'That nice
chap--our own burglar--the police have got him, on suspicion of stolen
cats. That's what his brother's missis told me.'

'Oh, begin at the beginning!' cried Anthea impatiently.

'Well, then, we went out, and down by where the undertaker's is, with
the china flowers in the window--you know. There was a crowd, and of
course we went to have a squint. And it was two bobbies and our burglar
between them, and he was being dragged along; and he said, "I tell you
them cats was GIVE me. I got 'em in exchange for me milking a cow in a
basement parlour up Camden Town way."

'And the people laughed. Beasts! And then one of the policemen said
perhaps he could give the name and address of the cow, and he said, no,
he couldn't; but he could take them there if they'd only leave go of his
coat collar, and give him a chance to get his breath. And the policeman
said he could tell all that to the magistrate in the morning. He didn't
see us, and so we came away.'

'Oh, Cyril, how COULD you?' said Anthea.

'Don't be a pudding-head,' Cyril advised. 'A fat lot of good it would
have done if we'd let him see us. No one would have believed a word we
said. They'd have thought we were kidding. We did better than let him
see us. We asked a boy where he lived and he told us, and we went there,
and it's a little greengrocer's shop, and we bought some Brazil nuts.
Here they are.' The girls waved away the Brazil nuts with loathing and
contempt.

'Well, we had to buy SOMETHING, and while we were making up our minds
what to buy we heard his brother's missis talking. She said when he came
home with all them miaoulers she thought there was more in it than met
the eye. But he WOULD go out this morning with the two likeliest of
them, one under each arm. She said he sent her out to buy blue ribbon to
put round their beastly necks, and she said if he got three months' hard
it was her dying word that he'd got the blue ribbon to thank for it;
that, and his own silly thieving ways, taking cats that anybody would
know he couldn't have come by in the way of business, instead of things
that wouldn't have been missed, which Lord knows there are plenty such,
and--'

'Oh, STOP!' cried Jane. And indeed it was time, for Cyril seemed like a
clock that had been wound up, and could not help going on. 'Where is he
now?'

'At the police-station,' said Robert, for Cyril was out of breath. 'The
boy told us they'd put him in the cells, and would bring him up
before the Beak in the morning. I thought it was a jolly lark last
night--getting him to take the cats--but now--'

'The end of a lark,' said the Phoenix, 'is the Beak.'

'Let's go to him,' cried both the girls jumping up. 'Let's go and tell
the truth. They MUST believe us.'

'They CAN'T,' said Cyril. 'Just think! If any one came to you with such
a tale, you couldn't believe it, however much you tried. We should only
mix things up worse for him.'

'There must be something we could do,' said Jane, sniffing very
much--'my own dear pet burglar! I can't bear it. And he was so nice,
the way he talked about his father, and how he was going to be so extra
honest. Dear Phoenix, you MUST be able to help us. You're so good and
kind and pretty and clever. Do, do tell us what to do.'

The Phoenix rubbed its beak thoughtfully with its claw.

'You might rescue him,' it said, 'and conceal him here, till the
law-supporters had forgotten about him.'

'That would be ages and ages,' said Cyril, 'and we couldn't conceal him
here. Father might come home at any moment, and if he found the burglar
here HE wouldn't believe the true truth any more than the police would.
That's the worst of the truth. Nobody ever believes it. Couldn't we take
him somewhere else?'

Jane clapped her hands.

'The sunny southern shore!' she cried, 'where the cook is being queen.
He and she would be company for each other!'

And really the idea did not seem bad, if only he would consent to go.

So, all talking at once, the children arranged to wait till evening, and
then to seek the dear burglar in his lonely cell.

Meantime Jane and Anthea darned away as hard as they could, to make the
carpet as strong as possible. For all felt how terrible it would be if
the precious burglar, while being carried to the sunny southern shore,
were to tumble through a hole in the carpet, and be lost for ever in the
sunny southern sea.

The servants were tired after Mrs Wigson's party, so every one went to
bed early, and when the Phoenix reported that both servants were snoring
in a heartfelt and candid manner, the children got up--they had never
undressed; just putting their nightgowns on over their things had been
enough to deceive Eliza when she came to turn out the gas. So they were
ready for anything, and they stood on the carpet and said--

'I wish we were in our burglar's lonely cell.' and instantly they were.

I think every one had expected the cell to be the 'deepest dungeon below
the castle moat'. I am sure no one had doubted that the burglar, chained
by heavy fetters to a ring in the damp stone wall, would be tossing
uneasily on a bed of straw, with a pitcher of water and a mouldering
crust, untasted, beside him. Robert, remembering the underground passage
and the treasure, had brought a candle and matches, but these were not
needed.

The cell was a little white-washed room about twelve feet long and
six feet wide. On one side of it was a sort of shelf sloping a little
towards the wall. On this were two rugs, striped blue and yellow, and a
water-proof pillow. Rolled in the rugs, and with his head on the pillow,
lay the burglar, fast asleep. (He had had his tea, though this the
children did not know--it had come from the coffee-shop round the
corner, in very thick crockery.) The scene was plainly revealed by the
light of a gas-lamp in the passage outside, which shone into the cell
through a pane of thick glass over the door.

'I shall gag him,' said Cyril, 'and Robert will hold him down. Anthea
and Jane and the Phoenix can whisper soft nothings to him while he
gradually awakes.'

This plan did not have the success it deserved, because the burglar,
curiously enough, was much stronger, even in his sleep, than Robert and
Cyril, and at the first touch of their hands he leapt up and shouted out
something very loud indeed.

Instantly steps were heard outside. Anthea threw her arms round the
burglar and whispered--

'It's us--the ones that gave you the cats. We've come to save you, only
don't let on we're here. Can't we hide somewhere?'

Heavy boots sounded on the flagged passage outside, and a firm voice
shouted--

'Here--you--stop that row, will you?'

'All right, governor,' replied the burglar, still with Anthea's arms
round him; 'I was only a-talking in my sleep. No offence.'

It was an awful moment. Would the boots and the voice come in. Yes! No!
The voice said--

'Well, stow it, will you?'

And the boots went heavily away, along the passage and up some sounding
stone stairs.

'Now then,' whispered Anthea.

'How the blue Moses did you get in?' asked the burglar, in a hoarse
whisper of amazement.

'On the carpet,' said Jane, truly.

'Stow that,' said the burglar. 'One on you I could 'a' swallowed, but
four--AND a yellow fowl.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, sternly, 'you wouldn't have believed any one if
they'd told you beforehand about your finding a cow and all those cats
in our nursery.'

'That I wouldn't,' said the burglar, with whispered fervour, 'so help me
Bob, I wouldn't.'

'Well, then,' Cyril went on, ignoring this appeal to his brother, 'just
try to believe what we tell you and act accordingly. It can't do you any
HARM, you know,' he went on in hoarse whispered earnestness. 'You can't
be very much worse off than you are now, you know. But if you'll just
trust to us we'll get you out of this right enough. No one saw us come
in. The question is, where would you like to go?'

'I'd like to go to Boolong,' was the instant reply of the burglar. 'I've
always wanted to go on that there trip, but I've never 'ad the ready at
the right time of the year.'

'Boolong is a town like London,' said Cyril, well meaning, but
inaccurate, 'how could you get a living there?'

The burglar scratched his head in deep doubt.

'It's 'ard to get a 'onest living anywheres nowadays,' he said, and his
voice was sad.

'Yes, isn't it?' said Jane, sympathetically; 'but how about a sunny
southern shore, where there's nothing to do at all unless you want to.'

'That's my billet, miss,' replied the burglar. 'I never did care about
work--not like some people, always fussing about.'

'Did you never like any sort of work?' asked Anthea, severely.

'Lor', lumme, yes,' he answered, 'gardening was my 'obby, so it was. But
father died afore 'e could bind me to a nurseryman, an'--'

'We'll take you to the sunny southern shore,' said Jane; 'you've no idea
what the flowers are like.'

'Our old cook's there,' said Anthea. 'She's queen--'

'Oh, chuck it,' the burglar whispered, clutching at his head with both
hands. 'I knowed the first minute I see them cats and that cow as it was
a judgement on me. I don't know now whether I'm a-standing on my hat or
my boots, so help me I don't. If you CAN get me out, get me, and if you
can't, get along with you for goodness' sake, and give me a chanst
to think about what'll be most likely to go down with the Beak in the
morning.'

'Come on to the carpet, then,' said Anthea, gently shoving. The others
quietly pulled, and the moment the feet of the burglar were planted on
the carpet Anthea wished:

'I wish we were all on the sunny southern shore where cook is.'

And instantly they were. There were the rainbow sands, the tropic
glories of leaf and flower, and there, of course, was the cook, crowned
with white flowers, and with all the wrinkles of crossness and tiredness
and hard work wiped out of her face.

'Why, cook, you're quite pretty!' Anthea said, as soon as she had got
her breath after the tumble-rush-whirl of the carpet. The burglar stood
rubbing his eyes in the brilliant tropic sunlight, and gazing wildly
round him on the vivid hues of the tropic land.

'Penny plain and tuppence coloured!' he exclaimed pensively, 'and well
worth any tuppence, however hard-earned.'

The cook was seated on a grassy mound with her court of copper-coloured
savages around her. The burglar pointed a grimy finger at these.

'Are they tame?' he asked anxiously. 'Do they bite or scratch, or do
anything to yer with poisoned arrows or oyster shells or that?'

'Don't you be so timid,' said the cook. 'Look'e 'ere, this 'ere's only
a dream what you've come into, an' as it's only a dream there's no
nonsense about what a young lady like me ought to say or not, so I'll
say you're the best-looking fellow I've seen this many a day. And the
dream goes on and on, seemingly, as long as you behaves. The things what
you has to eat and drink tastes just as good as real ones, and--'

'Look 'ere,' said the burglar, 'I've come 'ere straight outer the pleece
station. These 'ere kids'll tell you it ain't no blame er mine.'

'Well, you WERE a burglar, you know,' said the truthful Anthea gently.

'Only because I was druv to it by dishonest blokes, as well you knows,
miss,' rejoined the criminal. 'Blowed if this ain't the 'ottest January
as I've known for years.'

'Wouldn't you like a bath?' asked the queen, 'and some white clothes
like me?'

'I should only look a juggins in 'em, miss, thanking you all the same,'
was the reply; 'but a bath I wouldn't resist, and my shirt was only
clean on week before last.'

Cyril and Robert led him to a rocky pool, where he bathed luxuriously.
Then, in shirt and trousers he sat on the sand and spoke.

'That cook, or queen, or whatever you call her--her with the white bokay
on her 'ed--she's my sort. Wonder if she'd keep company!'

'I should ask her.'

'I was always a quick hitter,' the man went on; 'it's a word and a blow
with me. I will.'

In shirt and trousers, and crowned with a scented flowery wreath which
Cyril hastily wove as they returned to the court of the queen, the
burglar stood before the cook and spoke.

'Look 'ere, miss,' he said. 'You an' me being' all forlorn-like, both on
us, in this 'ere dream, or whatever you calls it, I'd like to tell you
straight as I likes yer looks.'

The cook smiled and looked down bashfully.

'I'm a single man--what you might call a batcheldore. I'm mild in my
'abits, which these kids'll tell you the same, and I'd like to 'ave the
pleasure of walkin' out with you next Sunday.'

'Lor!' said the queen cook, ''ow sudden you are, mister.'

'Walking out means you're going to be married,' said Anthea. 'Why not
get married and have done with it? _I_ would.'

'I don't mind if I do,' said the burglar. But the cook said--

'No, miss. Not me, not even in a dream. I don't say anythink ag'in the
young chap's looks, but I always swore I'd be married in church, if at
all--and, anyway, I don't believe these here savages would know how
to keep a registering office, even if I was to show them. No, mister,
thanking you kindly, if you can't bring a clergyman into the dream I'll
live and die like what I am.'

'Will you marry her if we get a clergyman?' asked the match-making
Anthea.

'I'm agreeable, miss, I'm sure,' said he, pulling his wreath straight.
''Ow this 'ere bokay do tiddle a chap's ears to be sure!'

So, very hurriedly, the carpet was spread out, and instructed to fetch
a clergyman. The instructions were written on the inside of Cyril's cap
with a piece of billiard chalk Robert had got from the marker at the
hotel at Lyndhurst. The carpet disappeared, and more quickly than you
would have thought possible it came back, bearing on its bosom the
Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop.

The Reverend Septimus was rather a nice young man, but very much mazed
and muddled, because when he saw a strange carpet laid out at his feet,
in his own study, he naturally walked on it to examine it more closely.
And he happened to stand on one of the thin places that Jane and Anthea
had darned, so that he was half on wishing carpet and half on plain
Scotch heather-mixture fingering, which has no magic properties at all.

The effect of this was that he was only half there--so that the children
could just see through him, as though he had been a ghost. And as for
him, he saw the sunny southern shore, the cook and the burglar and the
children quite plainly; but through them all he saw, quite plainly also,
his study at home, with the books and the pictures and the marble clock
that had been presented to him when he left his last situation.

He seemed to himself to be in a sort of insane fit, so that it did not
matter what he did--and he married the burglar to the cook. The cook
said that she would rather have had a solider kind of a clergyman, one
that you couldn't see through so plain, but perhaps this was real enough
for a dream.

And of course the clergyman, though misty, was really real, and able
to marry people, and he did. When the ceremony was over the clergyman
wandered about the island collecting botanical specimens, for he was a
great botanist, and the ruling passion was strong even in an insane fit.

There was a splendid wedding feast. Can you fancy Jane and Anthea,
and Robert and Cyril, dancing merrily in a ring, hand-in-hand with
copper-coloured savages, round the happy couple, the queen cook and the
burglar consort? There were more flowers gathered and thrown than you
have ever even dreamed of, and before the children took carpet for home
the now married-and-settled burglar made a speech.

'Ladies and gentlemen,' he said, 'and savages of both kinds, only I know
you can't understand what I'm a saying of, but we'll let that pass.
If this is a dream, I'm on. If it ain't, I'm onner than ever. If it's
betwixt and between--well, I'm honest, and I can't say more. I don't
want no more 'igh London society--I've got some one to put my arm around
of; and I've got the whole lot of this 'ere island for my allotment, and
if I don't grow some broccoli as'll open the judge's eye at the cottage
flower shows, well, strike me pink! All I ask is, as these young gents
and ladies'll bring some parsley seed into the dream, and a penn'orth of
radish seed, and threepenn'orth of onion, and I wouldn't mind goin' to
fourpence or fippence for mixed kale, only I ain't got a brown, so I
don't deceive you. And there's one thing more, you might take away the
parson. I don't like things what I can see 'alf through, so here's how!'
He drained a coconut-shell of palm wine.

It was now past midnight--though it was tea-time on the island.

With all good wishes the children took their leave. They also collected
the clergyman and took him back to his study and his presentation clock.

The Phoenix kindly carried the seeds next day to the burglar and his
bride, and returned with the most satisfactory news of the happy pair.

'He's made a wooden spade and started on his allotment,' it said, 'and
she is weaving him a shirt and trousers of the most radiant whiteness.'

The police never knew how the burglar got away. In Kentish Town Police
Station his escape is still spoken of with bated breath as the Persian
mystery.

As for the Reverend Septimus Blenkinsop, he felt that he had had a
very insane fit indeed, and he was sure it was due to over-study. So he
planned a little dissipation, and took his two maiden aunts to Paris,
where they enjoyed a dazzling round of museums and picture galleries,
and came back feeling that they had indeed seen life. He never told his
aunts or any one else about the marriage on the island--because no
one likes it to be generally known if he has had insane fits, however
interesting and unusual.



CHAPTER 10. THE HOLE IN THE CARPET


     Hooray! hooray! hooray!
     Mother comes home to-day;
     Mother comes home to-day,
     Hooray! hooray! hooray!'

Jane sang this simple song directly after breakfast, and the Phoenix
shed crystal tears of affectionate sympathy.

'How beautiful,' it said, 'is filial devotion!'

'She won't be home till past bedtime, though,' said Robert. 'We might
have one more carpet-day.'

He was glad that mother was coming home--quite glad, very glad; but at
the same time that gladness was rudely contradicted by a quite strong
feeling of sorrow, because now they could not go out all day on the
carpet.

'I do wish we could go and get something nice for mother, only she'd
want to know where we got it,' said Anthea. 'And she'd never, never
believe it, the truth. People never do, somehow, if it's at all
interesting.'

'I'll tell you what,' said Robert. 'Suppose we wished the carpet to take
us somewhere where we could find a purse with money in it--then we could
buy her something.'

'Suppose it took us somewhere foreign, and the purse was covered with
strange Eastern devices, embroidered in rich silks, and full of money
that wasn't money at all here, only foreign curiosities, then we
couldn't spend it, and people would bother about where we got it, and we
shouldn't know how on earth to get out of it at all.'

Cyril moved the table off the carpet as he spoke, and its leg caught
in one of Anthea's darns and ripped away most of it, as well as a large
slit in the carpet.

'Well, now you HAVE done it,' said Robert.

But Anthea was a really first-class sister. She did not say a word
till she had got out the Scotch heather-mixture fingering wool and the
darning-needle and the thimble and the scissors, and by that time she
had been able to get the better of her natural wish to be thoroughly
disagreeable, and was able to say quite kindly--

'Never mind, Squirrel, I'll soon mend it.'

Cyril thumped her on the back. He understood exactly how she had felt,
and he was not an ungrateful brother.

'Respecting the purse containing coins,' the Phoenix said, scratching
its invisible ear thoughtfully with its shining claw, 'it might be as
well, perhaps, to state clearly the amount which you wish to find, as
well as the country where you wish to find it, and the nature of the
coins which you prefer. It would be indeed a cold moment when you should
find a purse containing but three oboloi.'

'How much is an oboloi?'

'An obol is about twopence halfpenny,' the Phoenix replied.

'Yes,' said Jane, 'and if you find a purse I suppose it is only because
some one has lost it, and you ought to take it to the policeman.'

'The situation,' remarked the Phoenix, 'does indeed bristle with
difficulties.'

'What about a buried treasure,' said Cyril, 'and every one was dead that
it belonged to?'

'Mother wouldn't believe THAT,' said more than one voice.

'Suppose,' said Robert--'suppose we asked to be taken where we could
find a purse and give it back to the person it belonged to, and they
would give us something for finding it?'

'We aren't allowed to take money from strangers. You know we aren't,
Bobs,' said Anthea, making a knot at the end of a needleful of Scotch
heather-mixture fingering wool (which is very wrong, and you must never
do it when you are darning).

'No, THAT wouldn't do,' said Cyril. 'Let's chuck it and go to the North
Pole, or somewhere really interesting.'

'No,' said the girls together, 'there must be SOME way.'

'Wait a sec,' Anthea added. 'I've got an idea coming. Don't speak.'

There was a silence as she paused with the darning-needle in the air!
Suddenly she spoke:

'I see. Let's tell the carpet to take us somewhere where we can get the
money for mother's present, and--and--and get it some way that she'll
believe in and not think wrong.'

'Well, I must say you are learning the way to get the most out of the
carpet,' said Cyril. He spoke more heartily and kindly than usual,
because he remembered how Anthea had refrained from snarking him about
tearing the carpet.

'Yes,' said the Phoenix, 'you certainly are. And you have to remember
that if you take a thing out it doesn't stay in.'

No one paid any attention to this remark at the time, but afterwards
every one thought of it.

'Do hurry up, Panther,' said Robert; and that was why Anthea did hurry
up, and why the big darn in the middle of the carpet was all open and
webby like a fishing net, not tight and close like woven cloth, which is
what a good, well-behaved darn should be.

Then every one put on its outdoor things, the Phoenix fluttered on to
the mantelpiece and arranged its golden feathers in the glass, and all
was ready. Every one got on to the carpet.

'Please go slowly, dear carpet,' Anthea began; we like to see where
we're going.' And then she added the difficult wish that had been
decided on.

Next moment the carpet, stiff and raftlike, was sailing over the roofs
of Kentish Town.

'I wish--No, I don't mean that. I mean it's a PITY we aren't higher up,'
said Anthea, as the edge of the carpet grazed a chimney-pot.

'That's right. Be careful,' said the Phoenix, in warning tones. 'If you
wish when you're on a wishing carpet, you DO wish, and there's an end of
it.'

So for a short time no one spoke, and the carpet sailed on in calm
magnificence over St Pancras and King's Cross stations and over the
crowded streets of Clerkenwell.

'We're going out Greenwich way,' said Cyril, as they crossed the streak
of rough, tumbled water that was the Thames. 'We might go and have a
look at the Palace.'

On and on the carpet swept, still keeping much nearer to the
chimney-pots than the children found at all comfortable. And then, just
over New Cross, a terrible thing happened.

Jane and Robert were in the middle of the carpet. Part of them was
on the carpet, and part of them--the heaviest part--was on the great
central darn.

'It's all very misty,' said Jane; 'it looks partly like out of doors
and partly like in the nursery at home. I feel as if I was going to have
measles; everything looked awfully rum then, remember.'

'I feel just exactly the same,' Robert said.

'It's the hole,' said the Phoenix; 'it's not measles whatever that
possession may be.'

And at that both Robert and Jane suddenly, and at once, made a bound to
try and get on to the safer part of the carpet, and the darn gave way
and their boots went up, and the heavy heads and bodies of them went
down through the hole, and they landed in a position something between
sitting and sprawling on the flat leads on the top of a high, grey,
gloomy, respectable house whose address was 705, Amersham Road, New
Cross.

The carpet seemed to awaken to new energy as soon as it had got rid of
their weight, and it rose high in the air. The others lay down flat and
peeped over the edge of the rising carpet.

'Are you hurt?' cried Cyril, and Robert shouted 'No,' and next moment
the carpet had sped away, and Jane and Robert were hidden from the sight
of the others by a stack of smoky chimneys.

'Oh, how awful!' said Anthea.

'It might have been worse,' said the Phoenix. 'What would have been
the sentiments of the survivors if that darn had given way when we were
crossing the river?'

'Yes, there's that,' said Cyril, recovering himself. 'They'll be all
right. They'll howl till some one gets them down, or drop tiles into
the front garden to attract attention of passersby. Bobs has got my
one-and-fivepence--lucky you forgot to mend that hole in my pocket,
Panther, or he wouldn't have had it. They can tram it home.'

But Anthea would not be comforted.

'It's all my fault,' she said. 'I KNEW the proper way to darn, and I
didn't do it. It's all my fault. Let's go home and patch the carpet with
your Etons--something really strong--and send it to fetch them.'

'All right,' said Cyril; 'but your Sunday jacket is stronger than my
Etons. We must just chuck mother's present, that's all. I wish--'

'Stop!' cried the Phoenix; 'the carpet is dropping to earth.'

And indeed it was.

It sank swiftly, yet steadily, and landed on the pavement of the
Deptford Road. It tipped a little as it landed, so that Cyril and Anthea
naturally walked off it, and in an instant it had rolled itself up and
hidden behind a gate-post. It did this so quickly that not a single
person in the Deptford Road noticed it. The Phoenix rustled its way into
the breast of Cyril's coat, and almost at the same moment a well-known
voice remarked--

'Well, I never! What on earth are you doing here?'

They were face to face with their pet uncle--their Uncle Reginald.

'We DID think of going to Greenwich Palace and talking about Nelson,'
said Cyril, telling as much of the truth as he thought his uncle could
believe.

'And where are the others?' asked Uncle Reginald.

'I don't exactly know,' Cyril replied, this time quite truthfully.

'Well,' said Uncle Reginald, 'I must fly. I've a case in the County
Court. That's the worst of being a beastly solicitor. One can't take the
chances of life when one gets them. If only I could come with you to the
Painted Hall and give you lunch at the "Ship" afterwards! But, alas! it
may not be.'

The uncle felt in his pocket.

'_I_ mustn't enjoy myself,' he said, 'but that's no reason why you
shouldn't. Here, divide this by four, and the product ought to give you
some desired result. Take care of yourselves. Adieu.'

And waving a cheery farewell with his neat umbrella, the good and
high-hatted uncle passed away, leaving Cyril and Anthea to exchange
eloquent glances over the shining golden sovereign that lay in Cyril's
hand.

'Well!' said Anthea.

'Well!' said Cyril.

'Well!' said the Phoenix.

'Good old carpet!' said Cyril, joyously.

'It WAS clever of it--so adequate and yet so simple,' said the Phoenix,
with calm approval.

'Oh, come on home and let's mend the carpet. I am a beast. I'd forgotten
the others just for a minute,' said the conscience-stricken Anthea.

They unrolled the carpet quickly and slyly--they did not want to attract
public attention--and the moment their feet were on the carpet Anthea
wished to be at home, and instantly they were.

The kindness of their excellent uncle had made it unnecessary for them
to go to such extremes as Cyril's Etons or Anthea's Sunday jacket for
the patching of the carpet.

Anthea set to work at once to draw the edges of the broken darn
together, and Cyril hastily went out and bought a large piece of the
marble-patterned American oil-cloth which careful house-wives use to
cover dressers and kitchen tables. It was the strongest thing he could
think of.

Then they set to work to line the carpet throughout with the oil-cloth.
The nursery felt very odd and empty without the others, and Cyril did
not feel so sure as he had done about their being able to 'tram it'
home. So he tried to help Anthea, which was very good of him, but not
much use to her.

The Phoenix watched them for a time, but it was plainly growing more and
more restless. It fluffed up its splendid feathers, and stood first on
one gilded claw and then on the other, and at last it said--

'I can bear it no longer. This suspense! My Robert--who set my egg to
hatch--in the bosom of whose Norfolk raiment I have nestled so often and
so pleasantly! I think, if you'll excuse me--'

'Yes--DO,' cried Anthea, 'I wish we'd thought of asking you before.'

Cyril opened the window. The Phoenix flapped its sunbright wings and
vanished.

'So THAT'S all right,' said Cyril, taking up his needle and instantly
pricking his hand in a new place.


Of course I know that what you have really wanted to know about all this
time is not what Anthea and Cyril did, but what happened to Jane and
Robert after they fell through the carpet on to the leads of the house
which was called number 705, Amersham Road.

But I had to tell you the other first. That is one of the most annoying
things about stories, you cannot tell all the different parts of them at
the same time.

Robert's first remark when he found himself seated on the damp, cold,
sooty leads was--

'Here's a go!'

Jane's first act was tears.

'Dry up, Pussy; don't be a little duffer,' said her brother, kindly,
'it'll be all right.'

And then he looked about, just as Cyril had known he would, for
something to throw down, so as to attract the attention of the wayfarers
far below in the street. He could not find anything. Curiously enough,
there were no stones on the leads, not even a loose tile. The roof was
of slate, and every single slate knew its place and kept it. But, as so
often happens, in looking for one thing he found another. There was a
trap-door leading down into the house.

And that trap-door was not fastened.

'Stop snivelling and come here, Jane,' he cried, encouragingly. 'Lend a
hand to heave this up. If we can get into the house, we might sneak down
without meeting any one, with luck. Come on.'

They heaved up the door till it stood straight up, and, as they bent to
look into the hole below, the door fell back with a hollow clang on the
leads behind, and with its noise was mingled a blood-curdling scream
from underneath.

'Discovered!' hissed Robert. 'Oh, my cats alive!'

They were indeed discovered.

They found themselves looking down into an attic, which was also
a lumber-room. It had boxes and broken chairs, old fenders and
picture-frames, and rag-bags hanging from nails.

In the middle of the floor was a box, open, half full of clothes. Other
clothes lay on the floor in neat piles. In the middle of the piles of
clothes sat a lady, very fat indeed, with her feet sticking out straight
in front of her. And it was she who had screamed, and who, in fact, was
still screaming.

'Don't!' cried Jane, 'please don't! We won't hurt you.'

'Where are the rest of your gang?' asked the lady, stopping short in the
middle of a scream.

'The others have gone on, on the wishing carpet,' said Jane truthfully.

'The wishing carpet?' said the lady.

'Yes,' said Jane, before Robert could say 'You shut up!' 'You must have
read about it. The Phoenix is with them.'

Then the lady got up, and picking her way carefully between the piles of
clothes she got to the door and through it. She shut it behind her, and
the two children could hear her calling 'Septimus! Septimus!' in a loud
yet frightened way.

'Now,' said Robert quickly; 'I'll drop first.'

He hung by his hands and dropped through the trap-door.

'Now you. Hang by your hands. I'll catch you. Oh, there's no time for
jaw. Drop, I say.'

Jane dropped.

Robert tried to catch her, and even before they had finished the
breathless roll among the piles of clothes, which was what his catching
ended in, he whispered--

'We'll hide--behind those fenders and things; they'll think we've gone
along the roofs. Then, when all is calm, we'll creep down the stairs and
take our chance.'

They hastily hid. A corner of an iron bedstead stuck into Robert's side,
and Jane had only standing room for one foot--but they bore it--and when
the lady came back, not with Septimus, but with another lady, they held
their breath and their hearts beat thickly.

'Gone!' said the first lady; 'poor little things--quite mad, my
dear--and at large! We must lock this room and send for the police.'

'Let me look out,' said the second lady, who was, if possible, older
and thinner and primmer than the first. So the two ladies dragged a box
under the trap-door and put another box on the top of it, and then they
both climbed up very carefully and put their two trim, tidy heads out of
the trap-door to look for the 'mad children'.

'Now,' whispered Robert, getting the bedstead leg out of his side.

They managed to creep out from their hiding-place and out through the
door before the two ladies had done looking out of the trap-door on to
the empty leads.

Robert and Jane tiptoed down the stairs--one flight, two flights. Then
they looked over the banisters. Horror! a servant was coming up with a
loaded scuttle.

The children with one consent crept swiftly through the first open door.

The room was a study, calm and gentlemanly, with rows of books, a
writing table, and a pair of embroidered slippers warming themselves in
the fender. The children hid behind the window-curtains. As they passed
the table they saw on it a missionary-box with its bottom label torn
off, open and empty.

'Oh, how awful!' whispered Jane. 'We shall never get away alive.'

'Hush!' said Robert, not a moment too soon, for there were steps on the
stairs, and next instant the two ladies came into the room. They did not
see the children, but they saw the empty missionary box.

'I knew it,' said one. 'Selina, it WAS a gang. I was certain of it from
the first. The children were not mad. They were sent to distract our
attention while their confederates robbed the house.'

'I am afraid you are right,' said Selina; 'and WHERE ARE THEY NOW?'

'Downstairs, no doubt, collecting the silver milk-jug and sugar-basin
and the punch-ladle that was Uncle Joe's, and Aunt Jerusha's teaspoons.
I shall go down.'

'Oh, don't be so rash and heroic,' said Selina. 'Amelia, we must call
the police from the window. Lock the door. I WILL--I will--'

The words ended in a yell as Selina, rushing to the window, came face to
face with the hidden children.

'Oh, don't!' said Jane; 'how can you be so unkind? We AREN'T burglars,
and we haven't any gang, and we didn't open your missionary-box.
We opened our own once, but we didn't have to use the money, so our
consciences made us put it back and--DON'T! Oh, I wish you wouldn't--'

Miss Selina had seized Jane and Miss Amelia captured Robert. The
children found themselves held fast by strong, slim hands, pink at the
wrists and white at the knuckles.

'We've got YOU, at any rate,' said Miss Amelia. 'Selina, your captive
is smaller than mine. You open the window at once and call "Murder!" as
loud as you can.

Selina obeyed; but when she had opened the window, instead of calling
'Murder!' she called 'Septimus!' because at that very moment she saw her
nephew coming in at the gate.

In another minute he had let himself in with his latch-key and had
mounted the stairs. As he came into the room Jane and Robert each
uttered a shriek of joy so loud and so sudden that the ladies leaped
with surprise, and nearly let them go.

'It's our own clergyman,' cried Jane.

'Don't you remember us?' asked Robert. 'You married our burglar for
us--don't you remember?'

'I KNEW it was a gang,' said Amelia. 'Septimus, these abandoned children
are members of a desperate burgling gang who are robbing the house. They
have already forced the missionary-box and purloined its contents.'

The Reverend Septimus passed his hand wearily over his brow.

'I feel a little faint,' he said, 'running upstairs so quickly.'

'We never touched the beastly box,' said Robert.

'Then your confederates did,' said Miss Selina.

'No, no,' said the curate, hastily. '_I_ opened the box myself.
This morning I found I had not enough small change for the Mothers'
Independent Unity Measles and Croup Insurance payments. I suppose this
is NOT a dream, is it?'

'Dream? No, indeed. Search the house. I insist upon it.'

The curate, still pale and trembling, searched the house, which, of
course, was blamelessly free of burglars.

When he came back he sank wearily into his chair.

'Aren't you going to let us go?' asked Robert, with furious indignation,
for there is something in being held by a strong lady that sets the
blood of a boy boiling in his veins with anger and despair. 'We've never
done anything to you. It's all the carpet. It dropped us on the leads.
WE couldn't help it. You know how it carried you over to the island, and
you had to marry the burglar to the cook.'

'Oh, my head!' said the curate.

'Never mind your head just now,' said Robert; 'try to be honest and
honourable, and do your duty in that state of life!'

'This is a judgement on me for something, I suppose,' said the Reverend
Septimus, wearily, 'but I really cannot at the moment remember what.'

'Send for the police,' said Miss Selina.

'Send for a doctor,' said the curate.

'Do you think they ARE mad, then,' said Miss Amelia.

'I think I am,' said the curate.

Jane had been crying ever since her capture. Now she said-- 'You aren't
now, but perhaps you will be, if--And it would serve you jolly well
right, too.'

'Aunt Selina,' said the curate, 'and Aunt Amelia, believe me, this is
only an insane dream. You will realize it soon. It has happened to me
before. But do not let us be unjust, even in a dream. Do not hold the
children; they have done no harm. As I said before, it was I who opened
the box.'

The strong, bony hands unwillingly loosened their grasp. Robert shook
himself and stood in sulky resentment. But Jane ran to the curate and
embraced him so suddenly that he had not time to defend himself.

'You're a dear,' she said. 'It IS like a dream just at first, but you
get used to it. Now DO let us go. There's a good, kind, honourable
clergyman.'

'I don't know,' said the Reverend Septimus; 'it's a difficult problem.
It is such a very unusual dream. Perhaps it's only a sort of other
life--quite real enough for you to be mad in. And if you're mad, there
might be a dream-asylum where you'd be kindly treated, and in time
restored, cured, to your sorrowing relatives. It is very hard to see
your duty plainly, even in ordinary life, and these dream-circumstances
are so complicated--'

'If it's a dream,' said Robert, 'you will wake up directly, and then
you'd be sorry if you'd sent us into a dream-asylum, because you might
never get into the same dream again and let us out, and so we might stay
there for ever, and then what about our sorrowing relatives who aren't
in the dreams at all?'

But all the curate could now say was, 'Oh, my head!'

And Jane and Robert felt quite ill with helplessness and hopelessness. A
really conscientious curate is a very difficult thing to manage.

And then, just as the hopelessness and the helplessness were getting to
be almost more than they could bear, the two children suddenly felt that
extraordinary shrinking feeling that you always have when you are just
going to vanish. And the next moment they had vanished, and the Reverend
Septimus was left alone with his aunts.

'I knew it was a dream,' he cried, wildly. 'I've had something like
it before. Did you dream it too, Aunt Selina, and you, Aunt Amelia? I
dreamed that you did, you know.'

Aunt Selina looked at him and then at Aunt Amelia. Then she said
boldly--

'What do you mean? WE haven't been dreaming anything. You must have
dropped off in your chair.'

The curate heaved a sigh of relief.

'Oh, if it's only _I_,' he said; 'if we'd all dreamed it I could never
have believed it, never!'

Afterwards Aunt Selina said to the other aunt--

'Yes, I know it was an untruth, and I shall doubtless be punished for it
in due course. But I could see the poor dear fellow's brain giving way
before my very eyes. He couldn't have stood the strain of three dreams.
It WAS odd, wasn't it? All three of us dreaming the same thing at the
same moment. We must never tell dear Seppy. But I shall send an account
of it to the Psychical Society, with stars instead of names, you know.'

And she did. And you can read all about it in one of the society's fat
Blue-books.

Of course, you understand what had happened? The intelligent Phoenix had
simply gone straight off to the Psammead, and had wished Robert and Jane
at home. And, of course, they were at home at once. Cyril and Anthea had
not half finished mending the carpet.

When the joyful emotions of reunion had calmed down a little, they
all went out and spent what was left of Uncle Reginald's sovereign in
presents for mother. They bought her a pink silk handkerchief, a pair of
blue and white vases, a bottle of scent, a packet of Christmas candles,
and a cake of soap shaped and coloured like a tomato, and one that was
so like an orange that almost any one you had given it to would have
tried to peel it--if they liked oranges, of course. Also they bought a
cake with icing on, and the rest of the money they spent on flowers to
put in the vases.

When they had arranged all the things on a table, with the candles stuck
up on a plate ready to light the moment mother's cab was heard, they
washed themselves thoroughly and put on tidier clothes.

Then Robert said, 'Good old Psammead,' and the others said so too.

'But, really, it's just as much good old Phoenix,' said Robert. 'Suppose
it hadn't thought of getting the wish!'

'Ah!' said the Phoenix, 'it is perhaps fortunate for you that I am such
a competent bird.'

'There's mother's cab,' cried Anthea, and the Phoenix hid and they
lighted the candles, and next moment mother was home again.

She liked her presents very much, and found their story of Uncle
Reginald and the sovereign easy and even pleasant to believe.

'Good old carpet,' were Cyril's last sleepy words.

'What there is of it,' said the Phoenix, from the cornice-pole.



CHAPTER 11. THE BEGINNING OF THE END


'Well, I MUST say,' mother said, looking at the wishing carpet as it
lay, all darned and mended and backed with shiny American cloth, on the
floor of the nursery--'I MUST say I've never in my life bought such a
bad bargain as that carpet.'

A soft 'Oh!' of contradiction sprang to the lips of Cyril, Robert, Jane,
and Anthea. Mother looked at them quickly, and said--

'Well, of course, I see you've mended it very nicely, and that was sweet
of you, dears.'

'The boys helped too,' said the dears, honourably.

'But, still--twenty-two and ninepence! It ought to have lasted for
years. It's simply dreadful now. Well, never mind, darlings, you've
done your best. I think we'll have coconut matting next time. A carpet
doesn't have an easy life of it in this room, does it?'

'It's not our fault, mother, is it, that our boots are the really
reliable kind?' Robert asked the question more in sorrow than in anger.

'No, dear, we can't help our boots,' said mother, cheerfully, 'but we
might change them when we come in, perhaps. It's just an idea of mine.
I wouldn't dream of scolding on the very first morning after I've come
home. Oh, my Lamb, how could you?'

This conversation was at breakfast, and the Lamb had been beautifully
good until every one was looking at the carpet, and then it was for him
but the work of a moment to turn a glass dish of syrupy blackberry jam
upside down on his young head. It was the work of a good many minutes
and several persons to get the jam off him again, and this interesting
work took people's minds off the carpet, and nothing more was said just
then about its badness as a bargain and about what mother hoped for from
coconut matting.

When the Lamb was clean again he had to be taken care of while mother
rumpled her hair and inked her fingers and made her head ache over the
difficult and twisted house-keeping accounts which cook gave her on
dirty bits of paper, and which were supposed to explain how it was that
cook had only fivepence-half-penny and a lot of unpaid bills left out
of all the money mother had sent her for house-keeping. Mother was very
clever, but even she could not quite understand the cook's accounts.

The Lamb was very glad to have his brothers and sisters to play with
him. He had not forgotten them a bit, and he made them play all the old
exhausting games: 'Whirling Worlds', where you swing the baby round and
round by his hands; and 'Leg and Wing', where you swing him from side
to side by one ankle and one wrist. There was also climbing Vesuvius.
In this game the baby walks up you, and when he is standing on your
shoulders, you shout as loud as you can, which is the rumbling of the
burning mountain, and then tumble him gently on to the floor, and roll
him there, which is the destruction of Pompeii.

'All the same, I wish we could decide what we'd better say next time
mother says anything about the carpet,' said Cyril, breathlessly ceasing
to be a burning mountain.

'Well, you talk and decide,' said Anthea; 'here, you lovely ducky Lamb.
Come to Panther and play Noah's Ark.'

The Lamb came with his pretty hair all tumbled and his face all dusty
from the destruction of Pompeii, and instantly became a baby snake,
hissing and wriggling and creeping in Anthea's arms, as she said--


     'I love my little baby snake,
     He hisses when he is awake,
     He creeps with such a wriggly creep,
     He wriggles even in his sleep.'


'Crocky,' said the Lamb, and showed all his little teeth. So Anthea went
on--


     'I love my little crocodile,
     I love his truthful toothful smile;
     It is so wonderful and wide,
     I like to see it--FROM OUTSIDE.'


'Well, you see,' Cyril was saying; 'it's just the old bother. Mother
can't believe the real true truth about the carpet, and--'

'You speak sooth, O Cyril,' remarked the Phoenix, coming out from the
cupboard where the blackbeetles lived, and the torn books, and the
broken slates, and odd pieces of toys that had lost the rest of
themselves. 'Now hear the wisdom of Phoenix, the son of the Phoenix--'

'There is a society called that,' said Cyril.

'Where is it? And what is a society?' asked the bird.

'It's a sort of joined-together lot of people--a sort of brotherhood--a
kind of--well, something very like your temple, you know, only quite
different.'

'I take your meaning,' said the Phoenix. 'I would fain see these calling
themselves Sons of the Phoenix.'

'But what about your words of wisdom?'

'Wisdom is always welcome,' said the Phoenix.

'Pretty Polly!' remarked the Lamb, reaching his hands towards the golden
speaker.

The Phoenix modestly retreated behind Robert, and Anthea hastened to
distract the attention of the Lamb by murmuring--


     "I love my little baby rabbit;
     But oh! he has a dreadful habit
     Of paddling out among the rocks
     And soaking both his bunny socks.'


'I don't think you'd care about the sons of the Phoenix, really,' said
Robert. 'I have heard that they don't do anything fiery. They only drink
a great deal. Much more than other people, because they drink lemonade
and fizzy things, and the more you drink of those the more good you
get.'

'In your mind, perhaps,' said Jane; 'but it wouldn't be good in your
body. You'd get too balloony.'

The Phoenix yawned.

'Look here,' said Anthea; 'I really have an idea. This isn't like a
common carpet. It's very magic indeed. Don't you think, if we put Tatcho
on it, and then gave it a rest, the magic part of it might grow, like
hair is supposed to do?'

'It might,' said Robert; 'but I should think paraffin would do as
well--at any rate as far as the smell goes, and that seems to be the
great thing about Tatcho.'

But with all its faults Anthea's idea was something to do, and they did
it.

It was Cyril who fetched the Tatcho bottle from father's washhand-stand.
But the bottle had not much in it.

'We mustn't take it all,' Jane said, 'in case father's hair began to
come off suddenly. If he hadn't anything to put on it, it might all
drop off before Eliza had time to get round to the chemist's for another
bottle. It would be dreadful to have a bald father, and it would all be
our fault.'

'And wigs are very expensive, I believe,' said Anthea. 'Look here, leave
enough in the bottle to wet father's head all over with in case any
emergency emerges--and let's make up with paraffin. I expect it's the
smell that does the good really--and the smell's exactly the same.'

So a small teaspoonful of the Tatcho was put on the edges of the worst
darn in the carpet and rubbed carefully into the roots of the hairs of
it, and all the parts that there was not enough Tatcho for had paraffin
rubbed into them with a piece of flannel. Then the flannel was burned.
It made a gay flame, which delighted the Phoenix and the Lamb.

'How often,' said mother, opening the door--'how often am I to tell you
that you are NOT to play with paraffin? What have you been doing?'

'We have burnt a paraffiny rag,' Anthea answered.

It was no use telling mother what they had done to the carpet. She did
not know it was a magic carpet, and no one wants to be laughed at for
trying to mend an ordinary carpet with lamp-oil.

'Well, don't do it again,' said mother. 'And now, away with melancholy!
Father has sent a telegram. Look!' She held it out, and the children,
holding it by its yielding corners, read--


'Box for kiddies at Garrick. Stalls for us, Haymarket. Meet Charing
Cross, 6.30.'


'That means,' said mother, 'that you're going to see "The Water Babies"
all by your happy selves, and father and I will take you and fetch you.
Give me the Lamb, dear, and you and Jane put clean lace in your red
evening frocks, and I shouldn't wonder if you found they wanted ironing.
This paraffin smell is ghastly. Run and get out your frocks.'

The frocks did want ironing--wanted it rather badly, as it happened;
for, being of tomato-Coloured Liberty silk, they had been found very
useful for tableaux vivants when a red dress was required for Cardinal
Richelieu. They were very nice tableaux, these, and I wish I could tell
you about them; but one cannot tell everything in a story. You would
have been specially interested in hearing about the tableau of the
Princes in the Tower, when one of the pillows burst, and the youthful
Princes were so covered with feathers that the picture might very well
have been called 'Michaelmas Eve; or, Plucking the Geese'.

Ironing the dresses and sewing the lace in occupied some time, and no
one was dull, because there was the theatre to look forward to, and also
the possible growth of hairs on the carpet, for which every one kept
looking anxiously. By four o'clock Jane was almost sure that several
hairs were beginning to grow.

The Phoenix perched on the fender, and its conversation, as usual, was
entertaining and instructive--like school prizes are said to be. But it
seemed a little absent-minded, and even a little sad.

'Don't you feel well, Phoenix, dear?' asked Anthea, stooping to take an
iron off the fire.

'I am not sick,' replied the golden bird, with a gloomy shake of the
head; 'but I am getting old.'

'Why, you've hardly been hatched any time at all.'

'Time,' remarked the Phoenix, 'is measured by heartbeats. I'm sure the
palpitations I've had since I've known you are enough to blanch the
feathers of any bird.'

'But I thought you lived 500 years,' said Robert, and you've hardly
begun this set of years. Think of all the time that's before you.'

'Time,' said the Phoenix, 'is, as you are probably aware, merely a
convenient fiction. There is no such thing as time. I have lived in
these two months at a pace which generously counterbalances 500 years of
life in the desert. I am old, I am weary. I feel as if I ought to lay my
egg, and lay me down to my fiery sleep. But unless I'm careful I shall
be hatched again instantly, and that is a misfortune which I really
do not think I COULD endure. But do not let me intrude these desperate
personal reflections on your youthful happiness. What is the show at the
theatre to-night? Wrestlers? Gladiators? A combat of cameleopards and
unicorns?'

'I don't think so,' said Cyril; 'it's called "The Water Babies", and
if it's like the book there isn't any gladiating in it. There are
chimney-sweeps and professors, and a lobster and an otter and a salmon,
and children living in the water.'

'It sounds chilly.' The Phoenix shivered, and went to sit on the tongs.

'I don't suppose there will be REAL water,' said Jane. 'And theatres are
very warm and pretty, with a lot of gold and lamps. Wouldn't you like to
come with us?'

'_I_ was just going to say that,' said Robert, in injured tones, 'only
I know how rude it is to interrupt. Do come, Phoenix, old chap; it will
cheer you up. It'll make you laugh like any thing. Mr Bourchier always
makes ripping plays. You ought to have seen "Shock-headed Peter" last
year.'

'Your words are strange,' said the Phoenix, 'but I will come with you.
The revels of this Bourchier, of whom you speak, may help me to forget
the weight of my years.' So that evening the Phoenix snugged inside the
waistcoat of Robert's Etons--a very tight fit it seemed both to Robert
and to the Phoenix--and was taken to the play.

Robert had to pretend to be cold at the glittering, many-mirrored
restaurant where they ate dinner, with father in evening dress, with
a very shiny white shirt-front, and mother looking lovely in her grey
evening dress, that changes into pink and green when she moves. Robert
pretended that he was too cold to take off his great-coat, and so sat
sweltering through what would otherwise have been a most thrilling meal.
He felt that he was a blot on the smart beauty of the family, and he
hoped the Phoenix knew what he was suffering for its sake. Of course,
we are all pleased to suffer for the sake of others, but we like them
to know it unless we are the very best and noblest kind of people, and
Robert was just ordinary.

Father was full of jokes and fun, and every one laughed all the time,
even with their mouths full, which is not manners. Robert thought father
would not have been quite so funny about his keeping his over-coat on if
father had known all the truth. And there Robert was probably right.

When dinner was finished to the last grape and the last paddle in the
finger glasses--for it was a really truly grown-up dinner--the children
were taken to the theatre, guided to a box close to the stage, and left.

Father's parting words were: 'Now, don't you stir out of this box,
whatever you do. I shall be back before the end of the play. Be good
and you will be happy. Is this zone torrid enough for the abandonment of
great-coats, Bobs? No? Well, then, I should say you were sickening for
something--mumps or measles or thrush or teething. Goodbye.'

He went, and Robert was at last able to remove his coat, mop his
perspiring brow, and release the crushed and dishevelled Phoenix. Robert
had to arrange his damp hair at the looking-glass at the back of the
box, and the Phoenix had to preen its disordered feathers for some time
before either of them was fit to be seen.

They were very, very early. When the lights went up fully, the Phoenix,
balancing itself on the gilded back of a chair, swayed in ecstasy.

'How fair a scene is this!' it murmured; 'how far fairer than my temple!
Or have I guessed aright? Have you brought me hither to lift up my heart
with emotions of joyous surprise? Tell me, my Robert, is it not that
this, THIS is my true temple, and the other was but a humble shrine
frequented by outcasts?'

'I don't know about outcasts,' said Robert, 'but you can call this your
temple if you like. Hush! the music is beginning.'

I am not going to tell you about the play. As I said before, one can't
tell everything, and no doubt you saw 'The Water Babies' yourselves. If
you did not it was a shame, or, rather, a pity.

What I must tell you is that, though Cyril and Jane and Robert and
Anthea enjoyed it as much as any children possibly could, the pleasure
of the Phoenix was far, far greater than theirs.

'This is indeed my temple,' it said again and again. 'What radiant
rites! And all to do honour to me!'

The songs in the play it took to be hymns in its honour. The choruses
were choric songs in its praise. The electric lights, it said, were
magic torches lighted for its sake, and it was so charmed with the
footlights that the children could hardly persuade it to sit still. But
when the limelight was shown it could contain its approval no longer. It
flapped its golden wings, and cried in a voice that could be heard all
over the theatre:

'Well done, my servants! Ye have my favour and my countenance!'

Little Tom on the stage stopped short in what he was saying. A deep
breath was drawn by hundreds of lungs, every eye in the house turned to
the box where the luckless children cringed, and most people hissed, or
said 'Shish!' or 'Turn them out!'

Then the play went on, and an attendant presently came to the box and
spoke wrathfully.

'It wasn't us, indeed it wasn't,' said Anthea, earnestly; 'it was the
bird.'

The man said well, then, they must keep their bird very quiet.
'Disturbing every one like this,' he said.

'It won't do it again,' said Robert, glancing imploringly at the golden
bird; 'I'm sure it won't.'

'You have my leave to depart,' said the Phoenix gently.

'Well, he is a beauty, and no mistake,' said the attendant, 'only I'd
cover him up during the acts. It upsets the performance.'

And he went.

'Don't speak again, there's a dear,' said Anthea; 'you wouldn't like to
interfere with your own temple, would you?'

So now the Phoenix was quiet, but it kept whispering to the children. It
wanted to know why there was no altar, no fire, no incense, and became
so excited and fretful and tiresome that four at least of the party of
five wished deeply that it had been left at home.

What happened next was entirely the fault of the Phoenix. It was not
in the least the fault of the theatre people, and no one could ever
understand afterwards how it did happen. No one, that is, except the
guilty bird itself and the four children. The Phoenix was balancing
itself on the gilt back of the chair, swaying backwards and forwards and
up and down, as you may see your own domestic parrot do. I mean the grey
one with the red tail. All eyes were on the stage, where the lobster
was delighting the audience with that gem of a song, 'If you can't walk
straight, walk sideways!' when the Phoenix murmured warmly--

'No altar, no fire, no incense!' and then, before any of the children
could even begin to think of stopping it, it spread its bright wings and
swept round the theatre, brushing its gleaming feathers against delicate
hangings and gilded woodwork.

It seemed to have made but one circular wing-sweep, such as you may see
a gull make over grey water on a stormy day. Next moment it was perched
again on the chair-back--and all round the theatre, where it had passed,
little sparks shone like tinsel seeds, then little smoke wreaths curled
up like growing plants--little flames opened like flower-buds. People
whispered--then people shrieked.

'Fire! Fire!' The curtain went down--the lights went up.

'Fire!' cried every one, and made for the doors.

'A magnificent idea!' said the Phoenix, complacently. 'An enormous
altar--fire supplied free of charge. Doesn't the incense smell
delicious?'

The only smell was the stifling smell of smoke, of burning silk, or
scorching varnish.

The little flames had opened now into great flame-flowers. The people in
the theatre were shouting and pressing towards the doors.

'Oh, how COULD you!' cried Jane. 'Let's get out.'

'Father said stay here,' said Anthea, very pale, and trying to speak in
her ordinary voice.

'He didn't mean stay and be roasted,' said Robert. 'No boys on burning
decks for me, thank you.'

'Not much,' said Cyril, and he opened the door of the box.

But a fierce waft of smoke and hot air made him shut it again. It was
not possible to get out that way.

They looked over the front of the box. Could they climb down?

It would be possible, certainly; but would they be much better off?

'Look at the people,' moaned Anthea; 'we couldn't get through.'

And, indeed, the crowd round the doors looked as thick as flies in the
jam-making season.

'I wish we'd never seen the Phoenix,' cried Jane.

Even at that awful moment Robert looked round to see if the bird
had overheard a speech which, however natural, was hardly polite or
grateful.

The Phoenix was gone.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'I've read about fires in papers; I'm sure it's
all right. Let's wait here, as father said.'

'We can't do anything else,' said Anthea bitterly.

'Look here,' said Robert, 'I'm NOT frightened--no, I'm not. The Phoenix
has never been a skunk yet, and I'm certain it'll see us through
somehow. I believe in the Phoenix!'

'The Phoenix thanks you, O Robert,' said a golden voice at his feet, and
there was the Phoenix itself, on the Wishing Carpet.

'Quick!' it said. 'Stand on those portions of the carpet which are truly
antique and authentic--and--'

A sudden jet of flame stopped its words. Alas! the Phoenix had
unconsciously warmed to its subject, and in the unintentional heat of
the moment had set fire to the paraffin with which that morning the
children had anointed the carpet. It burned merrily. The children tried
in vain to stamp it out. They had to stand back and let it burn itself
out. When the paraffin had burned away it was found that it had taken
with it all the darns of Scotch heather-mixture fingering. Only the
fabric of the old carpet was left--and that was full of holes.

'Come,' said the Phoenix, 'I'm cool now.'

The four children got on to what was left of the carpet. Very careful
they were not to leave a leg or a hand hanging over one of the holes. It
was very hot--the theatre was a pit of fire. Every one else had got out.

Jane had to sit on Anthea's lap.

'Home!' said Cyril, and instantly the cool draught from under the
nursery door played upon their legs as they sat. They were all on
the carpet still, and the carpet was lying in its proper place on the
nursery floor, as calm and unmoved as though it had never been to the
theatre or taken part in a fire in its life.

Four long breaths of deep relief were instantly breathed. The draught
which they had never liked before was for the moment quite pleasant. And
they were safe. And every one else was safe. The theatre had been quite
empty when they left. Every one was sure of that.

They presently found themselves all talking at once. Somehow none of
their adventures had given them so much to talk about. None other had
seemed so real.

'Did you notice--?' they said, and 'Do you remember--?'

When suddenly Anthea's face turned pale under the dirt which it had
collected on it during the fire.

'Oh,' she cried, 'mother and father! Oh, how awful! They'll think we're
burned to cinders. Oh, let's go this minute and tell them we aren't.'

'We should only miss them,' said the sensible Cyril.

'Well--YOU go then,' said Anthea, 'or I will. Only do wash your face
first. Mother will be sure to think you are burnt to a cinder if she
sees you as black as that, and she'll faint or be ill or something. Oh,
I wish we'd never got to know that Phoenix.'

'Hush!' said Robert; 'it's no use being rude to the bird. I suppose it
can't help its nature. Perhaps we'd better wash too. Now I come to think
of it my hands are rather--'

No one had noticed the Phoenix since it had bidden them to step on the
carpet. And no one noticed that no one had noticed.

All were partially clean, and Cyril was just plunging into his
great-coat to go and look for his parents--he, and not unjustly, called
it looking for a needle in a bundle of hay--when the sound of father's
latchkey in the front door sent every one bounding up the stairs.

'Are you all safe?' cried mother's voice; 'are you all safe?' and the
next moment she was kneeling on the linoleum of the hall, trying to
kiss four damp children at once, and laughing and crying by turns, while
father stood looking on and saying he was blessed or something.

'But how did you guess we'd come home,' said Cyril, later, when every
one was calm enough for talking.

'Well, it was rather a rum thing. We heard the Garrick was on fire, and
of course we went straight there,' said father, briskly. 'We couldn't
find you, of course--and we couldn't get in--but the firemen told
us every one was safely out. And then I heard a voice at my ear say,
"Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane"--and something touched me on the
shoulder. It was a great yellow pigeon, and it got in the way of my
seeing who'd spoken. It fluttered off, and then some one said in the
other ear, "They're safe at home"; and when I turned again, to see who
it was speaking, hanged if there wasn't that confounded pigeon on my
other shoulder. Dazed by the fire, I suppose. Your mother said it was
the voice of--'

'I said it was the bird that spoke,' said mother, 'and so it was. Or at
least I thought so then. It wasn't a pigeon. It was an orange-coloured
cockatoo. I don't care who it was that spoke. It was true and you're
safe.'

Mother began to cry again, and father said bed was a good place after
the pleasures of the stage.

So every one went there.

Robert had a talk to the Phoenix that night.

'Oh, very well,' said the bird, when Robert had said what he felt,
'didn't you know that I had power over fire? Do not distress yourself.
I, like my high priests in Lombard Street, can undo the work of flames.
Kindly open the casement.'

It flew out.

That was why the papers said next day that the fire at the theatre had
done less damage than had been anticipated. As a matter of fact it had
done none, for the Phoenix spent the night in putting things straight.
How the management accounted for this, and how many of the theatre
officials still believe that they were mad on that night will never be
known.


Next day mother saw the burnt holes in the carpet.

'It caught where it was paraffiny,' said Anthea.

'I must get rid of that carpet at once,' said mother.

But what the children said in sad whispers to each other, as they
pondered over last night's events, was--

'We must get rid of that Phoenix.'



CHAPTER 12. THE END OF THE END


'Egg, toast, tea, milk, tea-cup and saucer, egg-spoon, knife,
butter--that's all, I think,' remarked Anthea, as she put the last
touches to mother's breakfast-tray, and went, very carefully up the
stairs, feeling for every step with her toes, and holding on to the tray
with all her fingers. She crept into mother's room and set the tray on a
chair. Then she pulled one of the blinds up very softly.

'Is your head better, mammy dear?' she asked, in the soft little voice
that she kept expressly for mother's headaches. 'I've brought your
brekkie, and I've put the little cloth with clover-leaves on it, the one
I made you.'

'That's very nice,' said mother sleepily.

Anthea knew exactly what to do for mothers with headaches who had
breakfast in bed. She fetched warm water and put just enough eau de
Cologne in it, and bathed mother's face and hands with the sweet-scented
water. Then mother was able to think about breakfast.

'But what's the matter with my girl?' she asked, when her eyes got used
to the light.

'Oh, I'm so sorry you're ill,' Anthea said. 'It's that horrible fire and
you being so frightened. Father said so. And we all feel as if it was
our faults. I can't explain, but--'

'It wasn't your fault a bit, you darling goosie,' mother said. 'How
could it be?'

'That's just what I can't tell you,' said Anthea. 'I haven't got
a futile brain like you and father, to think of ways of explaining
everything.'

Mother laughed.

'My futile brain--or did you mean fertile?--anyway, it feels very stiff
and sore this morning--but I shall be quite all right by and by. And
don't be a silly little pet girl. The fire wasn't your faults. No; I
don't want the egg, dear. I'll go to sleep again, I think. Don't you
worry. And tell cook not to bother me about meals. You can order what
you like for lunch.'

Anthea closed the door very mousily, and instantly went downstairs and
ordered what she liked for lunch. She ordered a pair of turkeys, a large
plum-pudding, cheese-cakes, and almonds and raisins.

Cook told her to go along, do. And she might as well not have ordered
anything, for when lunch came it was just hashed mutton and semolina
pudding, and cook had forgotten the sippets for the mutton hash and the
semolina pudding was burnt.

When Anthea rejoined the others she found them all plunged in the gloom
where she was herself. For every one knew that the days of the carpet
were now numbered. Indeed, so worn was it that you could almost have
numbered its threads.

So that now, after nearly a month of magic happenings, the time was at
hand when life would have to go on in the dull, ordinary way and Jane,
Robert, Anthea, and Cyril would be just in the same position as the
other children who live in Camden Town, the children whom these four had
so often pitied, and perhaps a little despised.

'We shall be just like them,' Cyril said.

'Except,' said Robert, 'that we shall have more things to remember and
be sorry we haven't got.'

'Mother's going to send away the carpet as soon as she's well enough to
see about that coconut matting. Fancy us with coconut-matting--us! And
we've walked under live coconut-trees on the island where you can't have
whooping-cough.'

'Pretty island,' said the Lamb; 'paint-box sands and sea all shiny
sparkly.'

His brothers and sisters had often wondered whether he remembered that
island. Now they knew that he did.

'Yes,' said Cyril; 'no more cheap return trips by carpet for us--that's
a dead cert.'

They were all talking about the carpet, but what they were all thinking
about was the Phoenix.

The golden bird had been so kind, so friendly, so polite, so
instructive--and now it had set fire to a theatre and made mother ill.

Nobody blamed the bird. It had acted in a perfectly natural manner. But
every one saw that it must not be asked to prolong its visit. Indeed, in
plain English it must be asked to go!

The four children felt like base spies and treacherous friends; and each
in its mind was saying who ought not to be the one to tell the Phoenix
that there could no longer be a place for it in that happy home in
Camden Town. Each child was quite sure that one of them ought to speak
out in a fair and manly way, but nobody wanted to be the one.

They could not talk the whole thing over as they would have liked to do,
because the Phoenix itself was in the cupboard, among the blackbeetles
and the odd shoes and the broken chessmen.

But Anthea tried.

'It's very horrid. I do hate thinking things about people, and not being
able to say the things you're thinking because of the way they would
feel when they thought what things you were thinking, and wondered
what they'd done to make you think things like that, and why you were
thinking them.'

Anthea was so anxious that the Phoenix should not understand what she
said that she made a speech completely baffling to all. It was not till
she pointed to the cupboard in which all believed the Phoenix to be that
Cyril understood.

'Yes,' he said, while Jane and Robert were trying to tell each other how
deeply they didn't understand what Anthea were saying; 'but after recent
eventfulnesses a new leaf has to be turned over, and, after all,
mother is more important than the feelings of any of the lower forms of
creation, however unnatural.'

'How beautifully you do do it,' said Anthea, absently beginning to build
a card-house for the Lamb--'mixing up what you're saying, I mean. We
ought to practise doing it so as to be ready for mysterious occasions.
We're talking about THAT,' she said to Jane and Robert, frowning, and
nodding towards the cupboard where the Phoenix was. Then Robert and Jane
understood, and each opened its mouth to speak.

'Wait a minute,' said Anthea quickly; 'the game is to twist up what you
want to say so that no one can understand what you're saying except the
people you want to understand it, and sometimes not them.'

'The ancient philosophers,' said a golden voice, 'Well understood the
art of which you speak.'

Of course it was the Phoenix, who had not been in the cupboard at all,
but had been cocking a golden eye at them from the cornice during the
whole conversation.

'Pretty dickie!' remarked the Lamb. 'CANARY dickie!'

'Poor misguided infant,' said the Phoenix.

There was a painful pause; the four could not but think it likely that
the Phoenix had understood their very veiled allusions, accompanied as
they had been by gestures indicating the cupboard. For the Phoenix was
not wanting in intelligence.

'We were just saying--' Cyril began, and I hope he was not going to
say anything but the truth. Whatever it was he did not say it, for the
Phoenix interrupted him, and all breathed more freely as it spoke.

'I gather,' it said, 'that you have some tidings of a fatal nature to
communicate to our degraded black brothers who run to and fro for ever
yonder.' It pointed a claw at the cupboard, where the blackbeetles
lived.

'Canary TALK,' said the Lamb joyously; 'go and show mammy.'

He wriggled off Anthea's lap.

'Mammy's asleep,' said Jane, hastily. 'Come and be wild beasts in a cage
under the table.'

But the Lamb caught his feet and hands, and even his head, so often and
so deeply in the holes of the carpet that the cage, or table, had to be
moved on to the linoleum, and the carpet lay bare to sight with all its
horrid holes.

'Ah,' said the bird, 'it isn't long for this world.'

'No,' said Robert; 'everything comes to an end. It's awful.'

'Sometimes the end is peace,' remarked the Phoenix. 'I imagine that
unless it comes soon the end of your carpet will be pieces.'

'Yes,' said Cyril, respectfully kicking what was left of the carpet. The
movement of its bright colours caught the eye of the Lamb, who went down
on all fours instantly and began to pull at the red and blue threads.

'Aggedydaggedygaggedy,' murmured the Lamb; 'daggedy ag ag ag!'

And before any one could have winked (even if they had wanted to, and it
would not have been of the slightest use) the middle of the floor showed
bare, an island of boards surrounded by a sea of linoleum. The magic
carpet was gone, AND SO WAS THE LAMB!

There was a horrible silence. The Lamb--the baby, all alone--had been
wafted away on that untrustworthy carpet, so full of holes and magic.
And no one could know where he was. And no one could follow him because
there was now no carpet to follow on.

Jane burst into tears, but Anthea, though pale and frantic, was
dry-eyed.

'It MUST be a dream,' she said.

'That's what the clergyman said,' remarked Robert forlornly; 'but it
wasn't, and it isn't.'

'But the Lamb never wished,' said Cyril; 'he was only talking Bosh.'

'The carpet understands all speech,' said the Phoenix, 'even Bosh. I
know not this Boshland, but be assured that its tongue is not unknown to
the carpet.'

'Do you mean, then,' said Anthea, in white terror, 'that when he was
saying "Agglety dag," or whatever it was, that he meant something by
it?'

'All speech has meaning,' said the Phoenix.

'There I think you're wrong,' said Cyril; 'even people who talk English
sometimes say things that don't mean anything in particular.'

'Oh, never mind that now,' moaned Anthea; 'you think "Aggety dag" meant
something to him and the carpet?'

'Beyond doubt it held the same meaning to the carpet as to the luckless
infant,' the Phoenix said calmly.

'And WHAT did it mean? Oh WHAT?'

'Unfortunately,' the bird rejoined, 'I never studied Bosh.'

Jane sobbed noisily, but the others were calm with what is sometimes
called the calmness of despair. The Lamb was gone--the Lamb, their own
precious baby brother--who had never in his happy little life been for a
moment out of the sight of eyes that loved him--he was gone. He had gone
alone into the great world with no other companion and protector than a
carpet with holes in it. The children had never really understood
before what an enormously big place the world is. And the Lamb might be
anywhere in it!

'And it's no use going to look for him.' Cyril, in flat and wretched
tones, only said what the others were thinking.

'Do you wish him to return?' the Phoenix asked; it seemed to speak with
some surprise.

'Of course we do!' cried everybody.

'Isn't he more trouble than he's worth?' asked the bird doubtfully.

'No, no. Oh, we do want him back! We do!'

'Then,' said the wearer of gold plumage, 'if you'll excuse me, I'll just
pop out and see what I can do.'

Cyril flung open the window, and the Phoenix popped out.

'Oh, if only mother goes on sleeping! Oh, suppose she wakes up and wants
the Lamb! Oh, suppose the servants come! Stop crying, Jane. It's no
earthly good. No, I'm not crying myself--at least I wasn't till you said
so, and I shouldn't anyway if--if there was any mortal thing we could
do. Oh, oh, oh!'

Cyril and Robert were boys, and boys never cry, of course. Still, the
position was a terrible one, and I do not wonder that they made faces in
their efforts to behave in a really manly way.

And at this awful moment mother's bell rang.

A breathless stillness held the children. Then Anthea dried her eyes.
She looked round her and caught up the poker. She held it out to Cyril.

'Hit my hand hard,' she said; 'I must show mother some reason for my
eyes being like they are. Harder,' she cried as Cyril gently tapped her
with the iron handle. And Cyril, agitated and trembling, nerved himself
to hit harder, and hit very much harder than he intended.

Anthea screamed.

'Oh, Panther, I didn't mean to hurt, really,' cried Cyril, clattering
the poker back into the fender.

'It's--all--right,' said Anthea breathlessly, clasping the hurt hand
with the one that wasn't hurt; 'it's--getting--red.'

It was--a round red and blue bump was rising on the back of it. 'Now,
Robert,' she said, trying to breathe more evenly, 'you go out--oh, I
don't know where--on to the dustbin--anywhere--and I shall tell mother
you and the Lamb are out.'

Anthea was now ready to deceive her mother for as long as ever she
could. Deceit is very wrong, we know, but it seemed to Anthea that it
was her plain duty to keep her mother from being frightened about the
Lamb as long as possible. And the Phoenix might help.

'It always has helped,' Robert said; 'it got us out of the tower, and
even when it made the fire in the theatre it got us out all right. I'm
certain it will manage somehow.'

Mother's bell rang again.

'Oh, Eliza's never answered it,' cried Anthea; 'she never does. Oh, I
must go.'

And she went.

Her heart beat bumpingly as she climbed the stairs. Mother would be
certain to notice her eyes--well, her hand would account for that. But
the Lamb--

'No, I must NOT think of the Lamb, she said to herself, and bit her
tongue till her eyes watered again, so as to give herself something
else to think of. Her arms and legs and back, and even her tear-reddened
face, felt stiff with her resolution not to let mother be worried if she
could help it.

She opened the door softly.

'Yes, mother?' she said.

'Dearest,' said mother, 'the Lamb--'

Anthea tried to be brave. She tried to say that the Lamb and Robert were
out. Perhaps she tried too hard. Anyway, when she opened her mouth no
words came. So she stood with it open. It seemed easier to keep from
crying with one's mouth in that unusual position.

'The Lamb,' mother went on; 'he was very good at first, but he's pulled
the toilet-cover off the dressing-table with all the brushes and
pots and things, and now he's so quiet I'm sure he's in some dreadful
mischief. And I can't see him from here, and if I'd got out of bed to
see I'm sure I should have fainted.'

'Do you mean he's HERE?' said Anthea.

'Of course he's here,' said mother, a little impatiently. 'Where did you
think he was?'

Anthea went round the foot of the big mahogany bed. There was a pause.

'He's not here NOW,' she said.

That he had been there was plain, from the toilet-cover on the floor,
the scattered pots and bottles, the wandering brushes and combs, all
involved in the tangle of ribbons and laces which an open drawer had
yielded to the baby's inquisitive fingers.

'He must have crept out, then,' said mother; 'do keep him with you,
there's a darling. If I don't get some sleep I shall be a wreck when
father comes home.'

Anthea closed the door softly. Then she tore downstairs and burst into
the nursery, crying--

'He must have wished he was with mother. He's been there all the time.
"Aggety dag--"'

The unusual word was frozen on her lip, as people say in books.

For there, on the floor, lay the carpet, and on the carpet, surrounded
by his brothers and by Jane, sat the Lamb. He had covered his face and
clothes with vaseline and violet powder, but he was easily recognizable
in spite of this disguise.

'You are right,' said the Phoenix, who was also present; 'it is evident
that, as you say, "Aggety dag" is Bosh for "I want to be where my mother
is," and so the faithful carpet understood it.'

'But how,' said Anthea, catching up the Lamb and hugging him--'how did
he get back here?'

'Oh,' said the Phoenix, 'I flew to the Psammead and wished that your
infant brother were restored to your midst, and immediately it was so.'

'Oh, I am glad, I am glad!' cried Anthea, still hugging the baby. 'Oh,
you darling! Shut up, Jane! I don't care HOW much he comes off on
me! Cyril! You and Robert roll that carpet up and put it in the
beetle-cupboard. He might say "Aggety dag" again, and it might mean
something quite different next time. Now, my Lamb, Panther'll clean you
a little. Come on.'

'I hope the beetles won't go wishing,' said Cyril, as they rolled up the
carpet.


Two days later mother was well enough to go out, and that evening the
coconut matting came home. The children had talked and talked, and
thought and thought, but they had not found any polite way of telling
the Phoenix that they did not want it to stay any longer.

The days had been days spent by the children in embarrassment, and by
the Phoenix in sleep.

And, now the matting was laid down, the Phoenix awoke and fluttered down
on to it.

It shook its crested head.

'I like not this carpet,' it said; 'it is harsh and unyielding, and it
hurts my golden feet.'

'We've jolly well got to get used to its hurting OUR golden feet,' said
Cyril.

'This, then,' said the bird, 'supersedes the Wishing Carpet.'

'Yes,' said Robert, 'if you mean that it's instead of it.'

'And the magic web?' inquired the Phoenix, with sudden eagerness.

'It's the rag-and-bottle man's day to-morrow,' said Anthea, in a low
voice; 'he will take it away.'

The Phoenix fluttered up to its favourite perch on the chair-back.

'Hear me!' it cried, 'oh youthful children of men, and restrain your
tears of misery and despair, for what must be must be, and I would not
remember you, thousands of years hence, as base ingrates and crawling
worms compact of low selfishness.'

'I should hope not, indeed,' said Cyril.

'Weep not,' the bird went on; 'I really do beg that you won't weep.

I will not seek to break the news to you gently. Let the blow fall at
once. The time has come when I must leave you.'

All four children breathed forth a long sigh of relief.

'We needn't have bothered so about how to break the news to it,'
whispered Cyril.

'Ah, sigh not so,' said the bird, gently. 'All meetings end in partings.
I must leave you. I have sought to prepare you for this. Ah, do not give
way!'

'Must you really go--so soon?' murmured Anthea. It was what she had
often heard her mother say to calling ladies in the afternoon.

'I must, really; thank you so much, dear,' replied the bird, just as
though it had been one of the ladies.

'I am weary,' it went on. 'I desire to rest--after all the happenings
of this last moon I do desire really to rest, and I ask of you one last
boon.'

'Any little thing we can do,' said Robert.

Now that it had really come to parting with the Phoenix, whose favourite
he had always been, Robert did feel almost as miserable as the Phoenix
thought they all did.

'I ask but the relic designed for the rag-and-bottle man. Give me what
is left of the carpet and let me go.'

'Dare we?' said Anthea. 'Would mother mind?'

'I have dared greatly for your sakes,' remarked the bird.

'Well, then, we will,' said Robert.

The Phoenix fluffed out its feathers joyously.

'Nor shall you regret it, children of golden hearts,' it said.
'Quick--spread the carpet and leave me alone; but first pile high the
fire. Then, while I am immersed in the sacred preliminary rites, do ye
prepare sweet-smelling woods and spices for the last act of parting.'

The children spread out what was left of the carpet. And, after all,
though this was just what they would have wished to have happened, all
hearts were sad. Then they put half a scuttle of coal on the fire and
went out, closing the door on the Phoenix--left, at last, alone with the
carpet.

'One of us must keep watch,' said Robert, excitedly, as soon as they
were all out of the room, 'and the others can go and buy sweet woods and
spices. Get the very best that money can buy, and plenty of them.
Don't let's stand to a threepence or so. I want it to have a jolly good
send-off. It's the only thing that'll make us feel less horrid inside.'

It was felt that Robert, as the pet of the Phoenix, ought to have the
last melancholy pleasure of choosing the materials for its funeral pyre.

'I'll keep watch if you like,' said Cyril. 'I don't mind. And, besides,
it's raining hard, and my boots let in the wet. You might call and see
if my other ones are "really reliable" again yet.'

So they left Cyril, standing like a Roman sentinel outside the door
inside which the Phoenix was getting ready for the great change, and
they all went out to buy the precious things for the last sad rites.

'Robert is right,' Anthea said; 'this is no time for being careful about
our money. Let's go to the stationer's first, and buy a whole packet of
lead-pencils. They're cheaper if you buy them by the packet.'

This was a thing that they had always wanted to do, but it needed the
great excitement of a funeral pyre and a parting from a beloved Phoenix
to screw them up to the extravagance.

The people at the stationer's said that the pencils were real
cedar-wood, so I hope they were, for stationers should always speak
the truth. At any rate they cost one-and-fourpence. Also they spent
sevenpence three-farthings on a little sandal-wood box inlaid with
ivory.

'Because,' said Anthea, 'I know sandalwood smells sweet, and when it's
burned it smells very sweet indeed.'

'Ivory doesn't smell at all,' said Robert, 'but I expect when you burn
it it smells most awful vile, like bones.'

At the grocer's they bought all the spices they could remember the names
of--shell-like mace, cloves like blunt nails, peppercorns, the long
and the round kind; ginger, the dry sort, of course; and the beautiful
bloom-covered shells of fragrant cinnamon. Allspice too, and caraway
seeds (caraway seeds that smelt most deadly when the time came for
burning them).

Camphor and oil of lavender were bought at the chemist's, and also a
little scent sachet labelled 'Violettes de Parme'.

They took the things home and found Cyril still on guard. When they had
knocked and the golden voice of the Phoenix had said 'Come in,' they
went in.

There lay the carpet--or what was left of it--and on it lay an egg,
exactly like the one out of which the Phoenix had been hatched.

The Phoenix was walking round and round the egg, clucking with joy and
pride.

'I've laid it, you see,' it said, 'and as fine an egg as ever I laid in
all my born days.'

Every one said yes, it was indeed a beauty.

The things which the children had bought were now taken out of their
papers and arranged on the table, and when the Phoenix had been
persuaded to leave its egg for a moment and look at the materials for
its last fire it was quite overcome.

'Never, never have I had a finer pyre than this will be. You shall not
regret it,' it said, wiping away a golden tear. 'Write quickly: "Go and
tell the Psammead to fulfil the last wish of the Phoenix, and return
instantly".'

But Robert wished to be polite and he wrote--

'Please go and ask the Psammead to be so kind as to fulfil the Phoenix's
last wish, and come straight back, if you please.' The paper was pinned
to the carpet, which vanished and returned in the flash of an eye.

Then another paper was written ordering the carpet to take the egg
somewhere where it wouldn't be hatched for another two thousand years.
The Phoenix tore itself away from its cherished egg, which it watched
with yearning tenderness till, the paper being pinned on, the carpet
hastily rolled itself up round the egg, and both vanished for ever from
the nursery of the house in Camden Town.

'Oh, dear! oh, dear! oh, dear!' said everybody.

'Bear up,' said the bird; 'do you think _I_ don't suffer, being parted
from my precious new-laid egg like this? Come, conquer your emotions and
build my fire.'

'OH!' cried Robert, suddenly, and wholly breaking down, 'I can't BEAR
you to go!'

The Phoenix perched on his shoulder and rubbed its beak softly against
his ear.

'The sorrows of youth soon appear but as dreams,' it said. 'Farewell,
Robert of my heart. I have loved you well.'

The fire had burnt to a red glow. One by one the spices and sweet woods
were laid on it. Some smelt nice and some--the caraway seeds and the
Violettes de Parme sachet among them--smelt worse than you would think
possible.

'Farewell, farewell, farewell, farewell!' said the Phoenix, in a
far-away voice.

'Oh, GOOD-BYE,' said every one, and now all were in tears.

The bright bird fluttered seven times round the room and settled in the
hot heart of the fire. The sweet gums and spices and woods flared and
flickered around it, but its golden feathers did not burn. It seemed to
grow red-hot to the very inside heart of it--and then before the eight
eyes of its friends it fell together, a heap of white ashes, and the
flames of the cedar pencils and the sandal-wood box met and joined above
it.


'Whatever have you done with the carpet?' asked mother next day.

'We gave it to some one who wanted it very much. The name began with a
P,' said Jane.

The others instantly hushed her.

'Oh, well, it wasn't worth twopence,' said mother.

'The person who began with P said we shouldn't lose by it,' Jane went on
before she could be stopped.

'I daresay!' said mother, laughing.

But that very night a great box came, addressed to the children by all
their names. Eliza never could remember the name of the carrier who
brought it. It wasn't Carter Paterson or the Parcels Delivery.

It was instantly opened. It was a big wooden box, and it had to
be opened with a hammer and the kitchen poker; the long nails came
squeaking out, and boards scrunched as they were wrenched off. Inside
the box was soft paper, with beautiful Chinese patterns on it--blue and
green and red and violet. And under the paper--well, almost everything
lovely that you can think of. Everything of reasonable size, I mean;
for, of course, there were no motors or flying machines or thoroughbred
chargers. But there really was almost everything else. Everything that
the children had always wanted--toys and games and books, and chocolate
and candied cherries and paint-boxes and photographic cameras, and all
the presents they had always wanted to give to father and mother and the
Lamb, only they had never had the money for them. At the very bottom
of the box was a tiny golden feather. No one saw it but Robert, and he
picked it up and hid it in the breast of his jacket, which had been
so often the nesting-place of the golden bird. When he went to bed the
feather was gone. It was the last he ever saw of the Phoenix.

Pinned to the lovely fur cloak that mother had always wanted was a
paper, and it said--

'In return for the carpet. With gratitude.--P.'

You may guess how father and mother talked it over. They decided at
last the person who had had the carpet, and whom, curiously enough, the
children were quite unable to describe, must be an insane millionaire
who amused himself by playing at being a rag-and-bone man. But the
children knew better.

They knew that this was the fulfilment, by the powerful Psammead, of the
last wish of the Phoenix, and that this glorious and delightful boxful
of treasures was really the very, very, very end of the Phoenix and the
Carpet.

========================================
========================================

FIVE CHILDREN AND IT




E. NESBIT



TO JOHN BLAND

My Lamb, you are so very small,
You have not learned to read at all.
Yet never a printed book withstands
The urgence of your dimpled hands.
So, though this book is for yourself,
Let mother keep it on the shelf
Till you can read.  O days that Pass,
That day will come too soon, alas!



CONTENTS


1.  Beautiful As the Day
2.  Golden Guineas
3.  Being Wanted
4.  Wings
5.  No Wings
6.  A Castle and No Dinner
7.  A Siege and Bed
8.  Bigger Than the Baker's Boy
9.  Grown Up
10.  Scalps
11.  The Last Wish




CHAPTER 1
BEAUTIFUL AS THE DAY


The house was three miles from the station, but before the dusty
hired fly had rattled along for five minutes the children began to
put their heads out of the carriage window and to say, 'Aren't we
nearly there?'  And every time they passed a house, which was not
very often, they all said, 'Oh, is THIS it?'  But it never was,
till they reached the very top of the hill, just past the
chalk-quarry and before you come to the gravel-pit.  And then there
was a white house with a green garden and an orchard beyond, and
mother said, 'Here we are!'

'How white the house is,' said Robert.

'And look at the roses,' said Anthea.

'And the plums,' said Jane.

'It is rather decent,' Cyril admitted.

The Baby said, 'Wanty go walky'; and the fly stopped with a last
rattle and jolt.

Everyone got its legs kicked or its feet trodden on in the scramble
to get out of the carriage that very minute, but no one seemed to
mind.  Mother, curiously enough, was in no hurry to get out; and
even when she had come down slowly and by the step, and with no
jump at all, she seemed to wish to see the boxes carried in, and
even to pay the driver, instead of joining in that first glorious
rush round the garden and the orchard and the thorny, thistly,
briery, brambly wilderness beyond the broken gate and the dry
fountain at the side of the house.  But the children were wiser,
for once.  It was not really a pretty house at all; it was quite
ordinary, and mother thought it was rather inconvenient, and was
quite annoyed at there being no shelves, to speak of, and hardly a
cupboard in the place.  Father used to say that the ironwork on the
roof and coping was like an architect's nightmare.  But the house
was deep in the country, with no other house in sight, and the
children had been in London for two years, without so much as once
going to the seaside even for a day by an excursion train, and so
the White House seemed to them a sort of Fairy Palace set down in
an Earthly Paradise.  For London is like prison for children,
especially if their relations are not rich.

Of course there are the shops and the theatres, and Maskelyne and
Cook's, and things, but if your people are rather poor you don't
get taken to the theatres, and you can't buy things out of the
shops; and London has none of those nice things that children may
play with without hurting the things or themselves - such as trees
and sand and woods and waters.  And nearly everything in London is
the wrong sort of shape - all straight lines and flat streets,
instead of being all sorts of odd shapes, like things are in the
country.  Trees are all different, as you know, and I am sure some
tiresome person must have told you that there are no two blades of
grass exactly alike.  But in streets, where the blades of grass
don't grow, everything is like everything else.  This is why so
many children who live in towns are so extremely naughty.  They do
not know what is the matter with them, and no more do their fathers
and mothers, aunts, uncles, cousins, tutors, governesses, and
nurses; but I know.  And so do you now.  Children in the country
are naughty sometimes, too, but that is for quite different
reasons.

The children had explored the gardens and the outhouses thoroughly
before they were caught and cleaned for tea, and they saw quite
well that they were certain to be happy at the White House.  They
thought so from the first moment, but when they found the back of
the house covered with jasmine, and in white flower, and smelling
like a bottle of the most expensive scent that is ever given for a
birthday present; and when they had seen the lawn, all green and
smooth, and quite different from the brown grass in the gardens at
Camden Town; and when they had found the stable with a loft over it
and some old hay still left, they were almost certain; and when
Robert had found the broken swing and tumbled out of it and got a
lump on his head the size of an egg, and Cyril had nipped his
finger in the door of a hutch that seemed made to keep rabbits in,
if you ever had any, they had no longer any doubts whatever.

The best part of it all was that there were no rules about not
going to places and not doing things.  In London almost everything
is labelled 'You mustn't touch,' and though the label is invisible,
it's just as bad, because you know it's there, or if you don't you
jolly soon get told.

The White House was on the edge of a hill, with a wood behind it -
and the chalk-quarry on one side and the gravel-pit on the other.
Down at the bottom of the hill was a level plain, with queer-shaped
white buildings where people burnt lime, and a big red brewery and
other houses; and when the big chimneys were smoking and the sun
was setting, the valley looked as if it was filled with golden
mist, and the limekilns and oast-houses glimmered and glittered
till they were like an enchanted city out of the Arabian Nights.

Now that I have begun to tell you about the place, I feel that I
could go on and make this into a most interesting story about all
the ordinary things that the children did - just the kind of things
you do yourself, you know - and you would believe every word of it;
and when I told about the children's being tiresome, as you are
sometimes, your aunts would perhaps write in the margin of the
story with a pencil, 'How true!' or 'How like life!'and you would
see it and very likely be annoyed.  So I will only tell you the
really astonishing things that happened, and you may leave the book
about quite safely, for no aunts and uncles either are likely to
write 'How true!' on the edge of the story.  Grown-up people find
it very difficult to believe really wonderful things, unless they
have what they call proof.  But children will believe almost
anything, and grown-ups know this.  That is why they tell you that
the earth is round like an orange, when you can see perfectly well
that it is flat and lumpy; and why they say that the earth goes
round the sun, when you can see for yourself any day that the sun
gets up in the morning and goes to bed at night like a good sun as
it is, and the earth knows its place, and lies as still as a mouse.
Yet I daresay you believe all that about the earth and the sun, and
if so you will find it quite easy to believe that before Anthea and
Cyril and the others had been a week in the country they had found
a fairy.  At least they called it that, because that was what it
called itself; and of course it knew best, but it was not at all
like any fairy you ever saw or heard of or read about.

It was at the gravel-pits.  Father had to go away suddenly on
business, and mother had gone away to stay with Granny, who was not
very well.  They both went in a great hurry, and when they were
gone the house seemed dreadfully quiet and empty, and the children
wandered from one room to another and looked at the bits of paper
and string on the floors left over from the packing, and not yet
cleared up, and wished they had something to do.  It was Cyril who
said:

'I say, let's take our Margate spades and go and dig in the
gravel-pits.  We can pretend it's seaside.'

'Father said it was once,' Anthea said; 'he says there are shells
there thousands of years old.'

So they went.  Of course they had been to the edge of the
gravel-pit and looked over, but they had not gone down into it for
fear father should say they mustn't play there, and the same with
the chalk-quarry.  The gravel-pit is not really dangerous if you
don't try to climb down the edges, but go the slow safe way round
by the road, as if you were a cart.

Each of the children carried its own spade, and took it in turns to
carry the Lamb.  He was the baby, and they called him that because
'Baa' was the first thing he ever said.  They called Anthea
'Panther', which seems silly when you read it, but when you say it
it sounds a little like her name.

The gravel-pit is very large and wide, with grass growing round the
edges at the top, and dry stringy wildflowers, purple and yellow.
It is like a giant's wash-hand basin.  And there are mounds of
gravel, and holes in the sides of the basin where gravel has been
taken out, and high up in the steep sides there are the little
holes that are the little front doors of the little sand-martins'
little houses.

The children built a castle, of course, but castle-building is
rather poor fun when you have no hope of the swishing tide ever
coming in to fill up the moat and wash away the drawbridge, and, at
the happy last, to wet everybody up to the waist at least.

Cyril wanted to dig out a cave to play smugglers in, but the others
thought it might bury them alive, so it ended in all spades going
to work to dig a hole through the castle to Australia.  These
children, you see, believed that the world was round, and that on
the other side the little Australian boys and girls were really
walking wrong way up, like flies on the ceiling, with their heads
hanging down into the air.

The children dug and they dug and they dug, and their hands got
sandy and hot and red, and their faces got damp and shiny.  The
Lamb had tried to eat the sand, and had cried so hard when he found
that it was not, as he had supposed, brown sugar, that he was now
tired out, and was lying asleep in a warm fat bunch in the middle
of the half-finished castle.  This left his brothers and sisters
free to work really hard, and the hole that was to come out in
Australia soon grew so deep that Jane, who was called Pussy for
short, begged the others to Stop.

'Suppose the bottom of the hole gave way suddenly,' she said, 'and
you tumbled out among the little Australians, all the sand would
get in their eyes.'

'Yes,' said Robert; 'and they would hate us, and throw stones at
us, and not let us see the kangaroos, or opossums, or blue-gums, or
Emu Brand birds, or anything.'

Cyril and Anthea knew that Australia was not quite so near as all
that, but they agreed to stop using the spades and go on with their
hands.  This was quite easy, because the sand at the bottom of the
hole was very soft and fine and dry, like sea-sand.  And there were
little shells in it.

'Fancy it having been wet sea here once, all sloppy and shiny,'
said Jane, 'with fishes and conger-eels and coral and mermaids.'

'And masts of ships and wrecked Spanish treasure.  I wish we could
find a gold doubloon, or something,' Cyril said.

'How did the sea get carried away?' Robert asked.

'Not in a pail, silly,' said his brother.  'Father says the earth
got too hot underneath, like you do in bed sometimes, so it just
hunched up its shoulders, and the sea had to slip off, like the
blankets do off us, and the shoulder was left sticking out, and
turned into dry land.  Let's go and look for shells; I think that
little cave looks likely, and I see something sticking out there
like a bit of wrecked ship's anchor, and it's beastly hot in the
Australian hole.'

The others agreed, but Anthea went on digging.  She always liked to
finish a thing when she had once begun it.  She felt it would be a
disgrace to leave that hole without getting through to Australia.

The cave was disappointing, because there were no shells, and the
wrecked ship's anchor turned out to be only the broken end of a
pickaxe handle, and the cave party were just making up their minds
that the sand makes you thirstier when it is not by the seaside,
and someone had suggested going home for lemonade, when Anthea
suddenly screamed:

'Cyril!  Come here!  Oh, come quick!  It's alive!  It'll get away!
Quick!'

They all hurried back.

'It's a rat, I shouldn't wonder,' said Robert.  'Father says they
infest old places - and this must be pretty old if the sea was here
thousands of years ago.'

'Perhaps it is a snake,' said Jane, shuddering.

'Let's look,' said Cyril, jumping into the hole.  'I'm not afraid
of snakes.  I like them.  If it is a snake I'll tame it, and it
will follow me everywhere, and I'll let it sleep round my neck at
night.'

'No, you won't,' said Robert firmly.  He shared Cyril's bedroom.
'But you may if it's a rat.'

'Oh, don't be silly!' said Anthea; 'it's not a rat, it's MUCH
bigger.  And it's not a snake.  It's got feet; I saw them; and fur!
No - not the spade.  You'll hurt it!  Dig with your hands.'

'And let IT hurt ME instead!  That's so likely, isn't it?' said
Cyril, seizing a spade.

'Oh, don't!' said Anthea.  'Squirrel, DON'T.  I - it sounds silly,
but it said something.  It really and truly did.'

'What?'

'It said, "You let me alone".'

But Cyril merely observed that his sister must have gone off her
nut, and he and Robert dug with spades while Anthea sat on the edge
of the hole, jumping up and down with hotness and anxiety.  They
dug carefully, and presently everyone could see that there really
was something moving in the bottom of the Australian hole.

Then Anthea cried out, 'I'M not afraid.  Let me dig,' and fell on
her knees and began to scratch like a dog does when he has suddenly
remembered where it was that he buried his bone.

'Oh, I felt fur,' she cried, half laughing and half crying.  'I did
indeed!  I did!' when suddenly a dry husky voice in the sand made
them all jump back, and their hearts jumped nearly as fast as they
did.

'Let me alone,' it said.  And now everyone heard the voice and
looked at the others to see if they had too.

'But we want to see you,' said Robert bravely.

'I wish you'd come out,' said Anthea, also taking courage.

'Oh, well - if that's your wish,' the voice said, and the sand
stirred and spun and scattered, and something brown and furry and
fat came rolling out into the hole and the sand fell off it, and it
sat there yawning and rubbing the ends of its eyes with its hands.

'I believe I must have dropped asleep,' it said, stretching itself.

The children stood round the hole in a ring, looking at the
creature they had found.  It was worth looking at.  Its eyes were
on long horns like a snail's eyes, and it could move them in and
out like telescopes; it had ears like a bat's ears, and its tubby
body was shaped like a spider's and covered with thick soft fur;
its legs and arms were furry too, and it had hands and feet like a
monkey's.

'What on earth is it?' Jane said.  'Shall we take it home?'

The thing turned its long eyes to look at her, and said: 'Does she
always talk nonsense, or is it only the rubbish on her head that
makes her silly?'

It looked scornfully at Jane's hat as it spoke.

'She doesn't mean to be silly,' Anthea said gently; we none of us
do, whatever you may think!  Don't be frightened; we don't want to
hurt you, you know.'

'Hurt ME!' it said.  'ME frightened?  Upon my word!  Why, you talk
as if I were nobody in particular.'  All its fur stood out like a
cat's when it is going to fight.

'Well,' said Anthea, still kindly, 'perhaps if we knew who you are
in particular we could think of something to say that wouldn't make
you cross.  Everything we've said so far seems to have.  Who are
you?  And don't get angry!  Because really we don't know.'

'You don't know?' it said.  'Well, I knew the world had changed -
but - well, really - do you mean to tell me seriously you don't
know a Psammead when you see one?'

'A Sammyadd?  That's Greek to me.'

'So it is to everyone,' said the creature sharply.  'Well, in plain
English, then, a SAND-FAIRY.  Don't you know a Sand-fairy when you
see one?'

It looked so grieved and hurt that Jane hastened to say, 'Of course
I see you are, now.  It's quite plain now one comes to look at
you.'

'You came to look at me, several sentences ago,' it said crossly,
beginning to curl up again in the sand.

'Oh - don't go away again!  Do talk some more,' Robert cried.  'I
didn't know you were a Sand-fairy, but I knew directly I saw you
that you were much the wonderfullest thing I'd ever seen.'

The Sand-fairy seemed a shade less disagreeable after this.

'It isn't talking I mind,' it said, 'as long as you're reasonably
civil.  But I'm not going to make polite conversation for you.  If
you talk nicely to me, perhaps I'll answer you, and perhaps I
won't.  Now say something.'

Of course no one could think of anything to say, but at last Robert
thought of 'How long have you lived here?' and he said it at once.

'Oh, ages - several thousand years,' replied the Psammead.

'Tell us all about it.  Do.'

'It's all in books.'

'You aren't!' Jane said.  'Oh, tell us everything you can about
yourself!  We don't know anything about you, and you are so nice.'

The Sand-fairy smoothed his long rat-like whiskers and smiled
between them.

'Do please tell!' said the children all together.

It is wonderful how quickly you get used to things, even the most
astonishing.  Five minutes before, the children had had no more
idea than you that there was such a thing as a sand-fairy in the
world, and now they were talking to it as though they had known it
all their lives.  It drew its eyes in and said:

'How very sunny it is - quite like old times.  Where do you get
your Megatheriums from now?'

'What?' said the children all at once.  It is very difficult always
to remember that 'what' is not polite, especially in moments of
surprise or agitation.

'Are Pterodactyls plentiful now?' the Sand-fairy went on.

The children were unable to reply.

'What do you have for breakfast?' the Fairy said impatiently, 'and
who gives it you?'

'Eggs and bacon, and bread-and-milk, and porridge and things.
Mother gives it us.  What are Mega-what's-its-names and
Ptero-what-do-you-call-thems?  And does anyone have them for
breakfast?'

'Why, almost everyone had Pterodactyl for breakfast in my time!
Pterodactyls were something like crocodiles and something like
birds - I believe they were very good grilled.  You see it was like
this: of course there were heaps of sand-fairies then, and in the
morning early you went out and hunted for them, and when you'd
found one it gave you your wish.  People used to send their little
boys down to the seashore early in the morning before breakfast to
get the day's wishes, and very often the eldest boy in the family
would be told to wish for a Megatherium, ready jointed for cooking.
It was as big as an elephant, you see, so there was a good deal of
meat on it.  And if they wanted fish, the Ichthyosaurus was asked
for - he was twenty to forty feet long, so there was plenty of him.
And for poultry there was the Plesiosaurus; there were nice
pickings on that too.  Then the other children could wish for other
things.  But when people had dinner-parties it was nearly always
Megatheriums; and Ichthyosaurus, because his fins were a great
delicacy and his tail made soup.'

'There must have been heaps and heaps of cold meat left over,' said
Anthea, who meant to be a good housekeeper some day.

'Oh no,' said the Psammead, 'that would never have done.  Why, of
course at sunset what was left over turned into stone.  You find
the stone bones of the Megatherium and things all over the place
even now, they tell me.'

'Who tell you?' asked Cyril; but the Sand-fairy frowned and began
to dig very fast with its furry hands.

'Oh, don't go!' they all cried; 'tell us more about it when it was
Megatheriums for breakfast!  Was the world like this then?'

It stopped digging.

'Not a bit,' it said; 'it was nearly all sand where I lived, and
coal grew on trees, and the periwinkles were as big as tea-trays -
you find them now; they're turned into stone.  We sand-fairies used
to live on the seashore, and the children used to come with their
little flint-spades and flint-pails and make castles for us to live
in.  That's thousands of years ago, but I hear that children still
build castles on the sand.  It's difficult to break yourself of a
habit.'

'But why did you stop living in the castles?' asked Robert.

'It's a sad story,' said the Psammead gloomily.  'It was because
they WOULD build moats to the castles, and the nasty wet bubbling
sea used to come in, and of course as soon as a sand-fairy got wet
it caught cold, and generally died.  And so there got to be fewer
and fewer, and, whenever you found a fairy and had a wish, you used
to wish for a Megatherium, and eat twice as much as you wanted,
because it might be weeks before you got another wish.'

'And did YOU get wet?' Robert inquired.

The Sand-fairy shuddered.  'Only once,' it said; 'the end of the
twelfth hair of my top left whisker - I feel the place still in
damp weather.  It was only once, but it was quite enough for me.
I went away as soon as the sun had dried my poor dear whisker.  I
scurried away to the back of the beach, and dug myself a house deep
in warm dry sand, and there I've been ever since.  And the sea
changed its lodgings afterwards.  And now I'm not going to tell you
another thing.'

'Just one more, please,' said the children.  'Can you give wishes
now?'

'Of course,' said it; 'didn't I give you yours a few minutes ago?
You said, "I wish you'd come out," and I did.'

'Oh, please, mayn't we have another?'

'Yes, but be quick about it.  I'm tired of you.'

I daresay you have often thought what you would do if you had three
wishes given you, and have despised the old man and his wife in the
black-pudding story, and felt certain that if you had the chance
you could think of three really useful wishes without a moment's
hesitation.  These children had often talked this matter over, but,
now the chance had suddenly come to them, they could not make up
their minds.

'Quick,' said the Sand-fairy crossly.  No one could think of
anything, only Anthea did manage to remember a private wish of her
own and jane's which they had never told the boys.  She knew the
boys would not care about it - but still it was better than
nothing.

'I wish we were all as beautiful as the day,' she said in a great
hurry.

The children looked at each other, but each could see that the
others were not any better-looking than usual.  The Psammead pushed
out its long eyes, and seemed to be holding its breath and swelling
itself out till it was twice as fat and furry as before.  Suddenly
it let its breath go in a long sigh.

'I'm really afraid I can't manage it,' it said apologetically; 'I
must be out of practice.'

The children were horribly disappointed.

'Oh, DO try again!' they said.

'Well,' said the Sand-fairy, 'the fact is, I was keeping back a
little strength to give the rest of you your wishes with.  If
you'll be contented with one wish a day amongst the lot of you I
daresay I can screw myself up to it.  Do you agree to that?'

'Yes, oh yes!' said Jane and Anthea.  The boys nodded.  They did
not believe the Sand-fairy could do it.  You can always make girls
believe things much easier than you can boys.

It stretched out its eyes farther than ever, and swelled and
swelled and swelled.

'I do hope it won't hurt itself,' said Anthea.

'Or crack its skin,' Robert said anxiously.

Everyone was very much relieved when the Sand-fairy, after getting
so big that it almost filled up the hole in the sand, suddenly let
out its breath and went back to its proper size.

'That's all right,' it said, panting heavily.  'It'll come easier
to-morrow.'

'Did it hurt much?' asked Anthea.

'Only my poor whisker, thank you,' said he, 'but you're a kind and
thoughtful child.  Good day.'

It scratched suddenly and fiercely with its hands and feet, and
disappeared in the sand.  Then the children looked at each other,
and each child suddenly found itself alone with three perfect
strangers, all radiantly beautiful.

They stood for some moments in perfect silence.  Each thought that
its brothers and sisters had wandered off, and that these strange
children had stolen up unnoticed while it was watching the swelling
form of the Sand-fairy.  Anthea spoke first -

'Excuse me,' she said very politely to Jane, who now had enormous
blue eyes and a cloud of russet hair, 'but have you seen two little
boys and a little girl anywhere about?'

'I was just going to ask you that,' said Jane.  And then Cyril
cried:

'Why, it's YOU!  I know the hole in your pinafore!  You ARE Jane,
aren't you?  And you're the Panther; I can see your dirty
handkerchief that you forgot to change after you'd cut your thumb!
Crikey!  The wish has come off, after all.  I say, am I as handsome
as you are?'

'If you're Cyril, I liked you much better as you were before,' said
Anthea decidedly.  'You look like the picture of the young
chorister, with your golden hair; you'll die young, I shouldn't
wonder.  And if that's Robert, he's like an Italian organ-grinder.
His hair's all black.'

'You two girls are like Christmas cards, then - that's all - silly
Christmas cards,' said Robert angrily.  'And jane's hair is simply
carrots.'

It was indeed of that Venetian tint so much admired by artists.

'Well, it's no use finding fault with each other,' said Anthea;
'let's get the Lamb and lug it home to dinner.  The servants will
admire us most awfully, you'll see.'

Baby was just waking when they got to him, and not one of the
children but was relieved to find that he at least was not as
beautiful as the day, but just the same as usual.

'I suppose he's too young to have wishes naturally,' said Jane.
'We shall have to mention him specially next time.'

Anthea ran forward and held out her arms.

'Come to own Panther, ducky,' she said.

The Baby looked at her disapprovingly, and put a sandy pink thumb
in his mouth, Anthea was his favourite sister.

'Come then,' she said.

'G'way long!' said the Baby.

'Come to own Pussy,' said Jane.

'Wants my Panty,' said the Lamb dismally, and his lip trembled.

'Here, come on, Veteran,' said Robert, 'come and have a yidey on
Yobby's back.'

'Yah, narky narky boy,' howled the Baby, giving way altogether.
Then the children knew the worst.  THE BABY DID NOT KNOW THEM!

They looked at each other in despair, and it was terrible to each,
in this dire emergency, to meet only the beautiful eyes of perfect
strangers, instead of the merry, friendly, commonplace, twinkling,
jolly little eyes of its own brothers and sisters.

'This is most truly awful,' said Cyril when he had tried to lift up
the Lamb, and the Lamb had scratched like a cat and bellowed like
a bull.  'We've got to MAKE FRIENDS with him!  I can't carry him
home screaming like that.  Fancy having to make friends with our
own baby! - it's too silly.'

That, however, was exactly what they had to do.  It took over an
hour, and the task was not rendered any easier by the fact that the
Lamb was by this time as hungry as a lion and as thirsty as a
desert.

At last he consented to allow these strangers to carry him home by
turns, but as he refused to hold on to such new acquaintances he
was a dead weight and most exhausting.

'Thank goodness, we're home!' said Jane, staggering through the
iron gate to where Martha, the nursemaid, stood at the front door
shading her eyes with her hand and looking out anxiously.  'Here!
Do take Baby!'

Martha snatched the Baby from her arms.

'Thanks be, HE'S safe back,' she said.  'Where are the others, and
whoever to goodness gracious are all of you?'

'We're US, of course,' said Robert.

'And who's US, when you're at home?' asked Martha scornfully.

'I tell you it's US, only we're beautiful as the day,' said Cyril.
'I'm Cyril, and these are the others, and we're jolly hungry.  Let
us in, and don't be a silly idiot.'

Martha merely dratted Cyril's impudence and tried to shut the door
in his face.

'I know we LOOK different, but I'm Anthea, and we're so tired, and
it's long past dinner-time.'

'Then go home to your dinners, whoever you are; and if our children
put you up to this playacting you can tell them from me they'll
catch it, so they know what to expect!'  With that she did bang the
door.  Cyril rang the bell violently.  No answer.  Presently cook
put her head out of a bedroom window and said:

'If you don't take yourselves off, and that precious sharp, I'll go
and fetch the police.'  And she slammed down the window.

'It's no good,' said Anthea.  'Oh, do, do come away before we get
sent to prison!'

The boys said it was nonsense, and the law of England couldn't put
you in prison for just being as beautiful as the day, but all the
same they followed the others out into the lane.

'We shall be our proper selves after sunset, I suppose,' said Jane.

'I don't know,' Cyril said sadly; 'it mayn't be like that now -
things have changed a good deal since Megatherium times.'

'Oh,' cried Anthea suddenly, 'perhaps we shall turn into stone at
sunset, like the Megatheriums did, so that there mayn't be any of
us left over for the next day.'

She began to cry, so did Jane.  Even the boys turned pale.  No one
had the heart to say anything.

It was a horrible afternoon.  There was no house near where the
children could beg a crust of bread or even a glass of water.  They
were afraid to go to the village, because they had seen Martha go
down there with a basket, and there was a local constable.  True,
they were all as beautiful as the day, but that is a poor comfort
when you are as hungry as a hunter and as thirsty as a sponge.

Three times they tried in vain to get the servants in the White
House to let them in and listen to their tale.  And then Robert
went alone, hoping to be able to climb in at one of the back
windows and so open the door to the others.  But all the windows
were out of reach, and Martha emptied a toilet-jug of cold water
over him from a top window, and said:

'Go along with you, you nasty little Eyetalian monkey."

It came at last to their sitting down in a row under the hedge,
with their feet in a dry ditch, waiting for sunset, and wondering
whether, when the sun did set, they would turn into stone, or only
into their own old natural selves; and each of them still felt
lonely and among strangers, and tried not to look at the others,
for, though their voices were their own, their faces were so
radiantly beautiful as to be quite irritating to look at.

'I don't believe we SHALL turn to stone,' said Robert, breaking a
long miserable silence, 'because the Sand-fairy said he'd give us
another wish to-morrow, and he couldn't if we were stone, could
he?'

The others said 'No,' but they weren't at all comforted.

Another silence, longer and more miserable, was broken by Cyril's
suddenly saying, 'I don't want to frighten you girls, but I believe
it's beginning with me already.  My foot's quite dead.  I'm turning
to stone, I know I am, and so will you in a minute.'

'Never mind,' said Robert kindly, 'perhaps you'll be the only stone
one, and the rest of us will be all right, and we'll cherish your
statue and hang garlands on it.'

But when it turned out that Cyril's foot had only gone to sleep
through his sitting too long with it under him, and when it came to
life in an agony of pins and needles, the others were quite cross.

'Giving us such a fright for nothing!' said Anthea.

The third and miserablest silence of all was broken by Jane.  She
said: 'If we DO come out of this all right, we'll ask the Sammyadd
to make it so that the servants don't notice anything different, no
matter what wishes we have.'

The others only grunted.  They were too wretched even to make good
resolutions.

At last hunger and fright and crossness and tiredness - four very
nasty things - all joined together to bring one nice thing, and
that was sleep.  The children lay asleep in a row, with their
beautiful eyes shut and their beautiful mouths open.  Anthea woke
first.  The sun had set, and the twilight was coming on.

Anthea pinched herself very hard, to make sure, and when she found
she could still feel pinching she decided that she was not stone,
and then she pinched the others.  They, also, were soft.

'Wake up,' she said, almost in tears of joy; 'it's all right, we're
not stone.  And oh, Cyril, how nice and ugly you do look, with your
old freckles and your brown hair and your little eyes.  And so do
you all!' she added, so that they might not feel jealous.

When they got home they were very much scolded by Martha, who told
them about the strange children.

'A good-looking lot, I must say, but that impudent.'

'I know,' said Robert, who knew by experience how hopeless it would
be to try to explain things to Martha.

'And where on earth have you been all this time, you naughty little
things, you?'

'In the lane.'

'Why didn't you come home hours ago?'

'We couldn't because of THEM,' said Anthea.

'Who?'

'The children who were as beautiful as the day.  They kept us there
till after sunset.  We couldn't come back till they'd gone.  You
don't know how we hated them!  Oh, do, do give us some supper - we
are so hungry.'

'Hungry!  I should think so,' said Martha angrily; 'out all day
like this.  Well, I hope it'll be a lesson to you not to go picking
up with strange children - down here after measles, as likely as
not!  Now mind, if you see them again, don't you speak to them -
not one word nor so much as a look - but come straight away and
tell me.  I'll spoil their beauty for them!'

'If ever we DO see them again we'll tell you,' Anthea said; and
Robert, fixing his eyes fondly on the cold beef that was being
brought in on a tray by cook, added in heartfelt undertones -

'And we'll take jolly good care we never DO see them again.'

And they never have.



CHAPTER 2
GOLDEN GUINEAS


Anthea woke in the morning from a very real sort of dream, in which
she was walking in the Zoological Gardens on a pouring wet day
without any umbrella.  The animals seemed desperately unhappy
because of the rain, and were all growling gloomily.  When she
awoke, both the growling and the rain went on just the same.  The
growling was the heavy regular breathing of her sister Jane, who
had a slight cold and was still asleep.  The rain fell in slow
drops on to Anthea's face from the wet corner of a bath-towel which
her brother Robert was gently squeezing the water out of, to wake
her up, as he now explained.

'Oh, drop it!' she said rather crossly; so he did, for he was not
a brutal brother, though very ingenious in apple-pie beds,
booby-traps, original methods of awakening sleeping relatives, and
the other little accomplishments which make home happy.

'I had such a funny dream,' Anthea began.

'So did I,' said Jane, wakening suddenly and without warning.  'I
dreamed we found a Sand-fairy in the gravel-pits, and it said it
was a Sammyadd, and we might have a new wish every day, and -'

'But that's what I dreamed,' said Robert.  'I was just going to
tell you - and we had the first wish directly it said so.  And I
dreamed you girls were donkeys enough to ask for us all to be
beautiful as the day, and we jolly well were, and it was perfectly
beastly.'

'But CAN different people all dream the same thing?' said Anthea,
sitting up in bed, 'because I dreamed all that as well as about the
Zoo and the rain; and Baby didn't know us in my dream, and the
servants shut us out of the house because the radiantness of our
beauty was such a complete disguise, and -'

The voice of the eldest brother sounded from across the landing.

'Come on, Robert,' it said, 'you'll be late for breakfast again -
unless you mean to shirk your bath like you did on Tuesday.'

'I say, come here a sec,' Robert replied.  'I didn't shirk it; I
had it after brekker in father's dressing-room, because ours was
emptied away.'

Cyril appeared in the doorway, partially clothed.

'Look here,' said Anthea, 'we've all had such an odd dream.  We've
all dreamed we found a Sand-fairy.'

Her voice died away before Cyril's contemptuous glance.  'Dream?'
he said, 'you little sillies, it's TRUE.  I tell you it all
happened.  That's why I'm so keen on being down early.  We'll go up
there directly after brekker, and have another wish.  Only we'll
make up our minds, solid, before we go, what it is we do want, and
no one must ask for anything unless the others agree first.  No
more peerless beauties for this child, thank you.  Not if I know
it!'

The other three dressed, with their mouths open.  If all that dream
about the Sand-fairy was real, this real dressing seemed very like
a dream, the girls thought.  Jane felt that Cyril was right, but
Anthea was not sure, till after they had seen Martha and heard her
full and plain reminders about their naughty conduct the day
before.  Then Anthea was sure.  'Because,' said she, 'servants
never dream anything but the things in the Dream-book, like snakes
and oysters and going to a wedding - that means a funeral, and
snakes are a false female friend, and oysters are babies.'

'Talking of babies,' said Cyril, 'where's the Lamb?'
'Martha's going to take him to Rochester to see her cousins.
Mother said she might.  She's dressing him now,' said Jane, 'in his
very best coat and hat.  Bread-and-butter, please.'

'She seems to like taking him too,' said Robert in a tone of
wonder.

'Servants do like taking babies to see their relations,' Cyril
said.  'I've noticed it before - especially in their best things.'

'I expect they pretend they're their own babies, and that they're
not servants at all, but married to noble dukes of high degree, and
they say the babies are the little dukes and duchesses,' Jane
suggested dreamily, taking more marmalade.  'I expect that's what
Martha'll say to her cousin.  She'll enjoy herself most
frightfully-'

'She won't enjoy herself most frightfully carrying our infant duke
to Rochester,' said Robert, 'not if she's anything like me - she
won't.'

'Fancy walking to Rochester with the Lamb on your back!  Oh,
crikey!' said Cyril in full agreement.

'She's going by carrier,' said Jane.  'Let's see them off, then we
shall have done a polite and kindly act, and we shall be quite sure
we've got rid of them for the day.'

So they did.

Martha wore her Sunday dress of two shades of purple, so tight in
the chest that it made her stoop, and her blue hat with the pink
cornflowers and white ribbon.  She had a yellow-lace collar with a
green bow.  And the Lamb had indeed his very best cream-coloured
silk coat and hat.  It was a smart party that the carrier's cart
picked up at the Cross Roads.  When its white tilt and red wheels
had slowly vanished in a swirl of chalk-dust -

'And now for the Sammyadd!' said Cyril, and off they went.

As they went they decided on the wish they would ask for.  Although
they were all in a great hurry they did not try to climb down the
sides of the gravel-pit, but went round by the safe lower road, as
if they had been carts.  They had made a ring of stones round the
place where the Sand-fairy had disappeared, so they easily found
the spot.  The sun was burning and bright, and the sky was deep
blue - without a cloud.  The sand was very hot to touch.

'Oh - suppose it was only a dream, after all,' Robert said as the
boys uncovered their spades from the sand-heap where they had
buried them and began to dig.

'Suppose you were a sensible chap,' said Cyril; 'one's quite as
likely as the other!'
'Suppose you kept a civil tongue in your head,' Robert snapped.

'Suppose we girls take a turn,' said Jane, laughing.  'You boys
seem to be getting very warm.'

'Suppose you don't come shoving your silly oar in,' said Robert,
who was now warm indeed.

'We won't,' said Anthea quickly.  'Robert dear, don't be so grumpy
- we won't say a word, you shall be the one to speak to the Fairy
and tell him what we've decided to wish for.  You'll say it much
better than we shall.'

'Suppose you drop being a little humbug,' said Robert, but not
crossly.  'Look out - dig with your hands, now!'

So they did, and presently uncovered the spider-shaped brown hairy
body, long arms and legs, bat's ears and snail's eyes of the
Sand-fairy himself.  Everyone drew a deep breath of satisfaction,
for now of course it couldn't have been a dream.

The Psammead sat up and shook the sand out of its fur.

'How's your left whisker this morning?' said Anthea politely.

'Nothing to boast of,' said it, 'it had rather a restless night.
But thank you for asking.'

'I say,' said Robert, 'do you feel up to giving wishes to-day,
because we very much want an extra besides the regular one?  The
extra's a very little one,' he added reassuringly.

'Humph!' said the Sand-fairy.  (If you read this story aloud,
please pronounce 'humph' exactly as it is spelt, for that is how he
said it.) 'Humph!  Do you know, until I heard you being
disagreeable to each other just over my head, and so loud too, I
really quite thought I had dreamed you all.  I do have very odd
dreams sometimes.'

'Do you?'Jane hurried to say, so as to get away from the subject of
disagreeableness.  'I wish,' she added politely, 'you'd tell us
about your dreams - they must be awfully interesting.'

'Is that the day's wish?' said the Sand-fairy, yawning.

Cyril muttered something about 'just like a girl,' and the rest
stood silent.  If they said 'Yes,' then good-bye to the other
wishes they had decided to ask for.  If they said 'No,' it would be
very rude, and they had all been taught manners, and had learned a
little too, which is not at all the same thing.  A sigh of relief
broke from all lips when the Sand-fairy said:

'If I do I shan't have strength to give you a second wish; not even
good tempers, or common sense, or manners, or little things like
that.'

'We don't want you to put yourself out at all about these things,
we can manage them quite well ourselves,' said Cyril eagerly; while
the others looked guiltily at each other, and wished the Fairy
would not keep all on about good tempers, but give them one good
rowing if it wanted to, and then have done with it.

'Well,' said the Psammead, putting out his long snail's eyes so
suddenly that one of them nearly went into the round boy's eyes of
Robert, 'let's have the little wish first.'

'We don't want the servants to notice the gifts you give us.'

'Are kind enough to give us,' said Anthea in a whisper.

'Are kind enough to give us, I mean,' said Robert.

The Fairy swelled himself out a bit, let his breath go, and said -

'I've done THAT for you - it was quite easy.  People don't notice
things much, anyway.  What's the next wish?'

'We want,' said Robert slowly, 'to be rich beyond the dreams of
something or other.'

'Avarice,' said Jane.

'So it is,' said the Fairy unexpectedly.  'But it won't do you much
good, that's one comfort,' it muttered to itself.  'Come - I can't
go beyond dreams, you know!  How much do you want, and will you
have it in gold or notes?'

'Gold, please - and millions of it.'

'This gravel-pit full be enough?' said the Fairy in an off-hand
manner.

'Oh YES!'

'Then get out before I begin, or you'll be buried alive in it.'

It made its skinny arms so long, and waved them so frighteningly,
that the children ran as hard as they could towards the road by
which carts used to come to the gravel-pits.  Only Anthea had
presence of mind enough to shout a timid 'Good-morning, I hope your
whisker will be better to-morrow,' as she ran.


On the road they turned and looked back, and they had to shut their
eyes, and open them very slowly, a little bit at a time, because
the sight was too dazzling for their eyes to be able to bear it.
It was something like trying to look at the sun at high noon on
Midsummer Day.  For the whole of the sand-pit was full, right up to
the very top, with new shining gold pieces, and all the little
sand-martins' little front doors were covered out of sight.  Where
the road for the carts wound into the gravel-pit the gold lay in
heaps like stones lie by the roadside, and a great bank of shining
gold shelved down from where it lay flat and smooth between the
tall sides of the gravel-pit.  And all the gleaming heap was minted
gold.  And on the sides and edges of these countless coins the
midday sun shone and sparkled, and glowed and gleamed till the
quarry looked like the mouth of a smelting furnace, or one of the
fairy halls that you see sometimes in the sky at sunset.

The children stood with their mouths open, and no one said a word.

At last Robert stopped and picked up one of the loose coins from
the edge of the heap by the cart-road, and looked at it.  He looked
on both sides.  Then he said in a low voice, quite different to his
own, 'It's not sovereigns.'

'It's gold, anyway,' said Cyril.  And now they all began to talk at
once.  They all picked up the golden treasure by handfuls, and let
it run through their fingers like water, and the chink it made as
it fell was wonderful music.  At first they quite forgot to think
of spending the money, it was so nice to play with.  Jane sat down
between two heaps of gold and Robert began to bury her, as you bury
your father in sand when you are at the seaside and he has gone to
sleep on the beach with his newspaper over his face.  But Jane was
not half buried before she cried out, 'Oh, stop, it's too heavy!
It hurts!

Robert said 'Bosh!' and went on.

'Let me out, I tell you,' cried Jane, and was taken out, very
white, and trembling a little.

'You've no idea what it's like,' said she; 'it's like stones on you
- or like chains.'

'Look here,' Cyril said, 'if this is to do us any good, it's no
good our staying gasping at it like this.  Let's fill our pockets
and go and buy things.  Don't you forget, it won't last after
sunset.  I wish we'd asked the Sammyadd why things don't turn to
stone.  Perhaps this will.  I'll tell you what, there's a pony and
cart in the village.'

'Do you want to buy that?' asked Jane.

'No, silly - we'll HIRE it.  And then we'll go to Rochester and buy
heaps and heaps of things.  Look here, let's each take as much as
we can carry.  But it's not sovereigns.  They've got a man's head
on one side and a thing like the ace of spades on the other.  Fill
your pockets with it, I tell you, and come along.  You can jaw as
we go - if you must jaw.'

Cyril sat down and began to fill his pockets.
'You made fun of me for getting father to have nine pockets in my
Norfolks,' said he, 'but now you see!'

They did.  For when Cyril had filled his nine pockets and his
handkerchief and the space between himself and his shirt front with
the gold coins, he had to stand up.  But he staggered, and had to
sit down again in a hurry-

'Throw out some of the cargo,' said Robert.  'You'll sink the ship,
old chap.  That comes of nine pockets.'

And Cyril had to.

Then they set off to walk to the village.  It was more than a mile,
and the road was very dusty indeed, and the sun seemed to get
hotter and hotter, and the gold in their pockets got heavier and
heavier.

It was Jane who said, 'I don't see how we're to spend it all.
There must be thousands of pounds among the lot of us.  I'm going
to leave some of mine behind this stump in the hedge.  And directly
we get to the village we'll buy some biscuits; I know it's long
past dinner-time.'  She took out a handful or two of gold and hid
it in the hollows of an old hornbeam.  'How round and yellow they
are,' she said.  'Don't you wish they were gingerbread nuts and we
were going to eat them?'

'Well, they're not, and we're not,' said Cyril.  'Come on!'

But they came on heavily and wearily.  Before they reached the
village, more than one stump in the hedge concealed its little
hoard of hidden treasure.  Yet they reached the village with about
twelve hundred guineas in their pockets.  But in spite of this
inside wealth they looked quite ordinary outside, and no one would
have thought they could have more than a half-crown each at the
outside.  The haze of heat, the blue of the wood smoke, made a sort
of dim misty cloud over the red roofs of the village.  The four sat
down heavily on the first bench they came to- It happened to be
outside the Blue Boar Inn.

It was decided that Cyril should go into the Blue Boar and ask for
ginger-beer, because, as Anthea said, 'It is not wrong for men to
go into public houses, only for children.  And Cyril is nearer to
being a man than us, because he is the eldest.'  So he went.  The
others sat in the sun and waited.

'Oh, hats, how hot it is!' said Robert.  'Dogs put their tongues
out when they're hot; I wonder if it would cool us at all to put
out ours?'

'We might try,'Jane said; and they all put their tongues out as far
as ever they could go, so that it quite stretched their throats,
but it only seemed to make them thirstier than ever, besides
annoying everyone who went by.  So they took their tongues in
again, just as Cyril came back with the ginger-beer.

'I had to pay for it out of my own two-and-sevenpence, though, that
I was going to buy rabbits with,' he said.  'They wouldn't change
the gold.  And when I pulled out a handful the man just laughed and
said it was card-counters.  And I got some sponge-cakes too, out of
a glass jar on the bar-counter.  And some biscuits with caraways
in.'

The sponge-cakes were both soft and dry and the biscuits were dry
too, and yet soft, which biscuits ought not to be.  But the
ginger-beer made up for everything.

'It's my turn now to try to buy something with the money,' Anthea
said, 'I'm next eldest.  Where is the pony-cart kept?'

It was at The Chequers, and Anthea went in the back way to the
yard, because they all knew that little girls ought not to go into
the bars of public-houses.  She came out, as she herself said,
'pleased but not proud'.

'He'll be ready in a brace of shakes, he says,' she remarked, 'and
he's to have one sovereign - or whatever it is - to drive us in to
Rochester and back, besides waiting there till we've got everything
we want.  I think I managed very well.'

'You think yourself jolly clever, I daresay,' said Cyril moodily.
'How did you do it?'

'I wasn't jolly clever enough to go taking handfuls of money out of
my pocket, to make it seem cheap, anyway,' she retorted.  'I just
found a young man doing something to a horse's leg with a sponge
and a pail.  And I held out one sovereign, and I said, "Do you know
what this is?" He said, "No," and he'd call his father.  And the
old man came, and he said it was a spade guinea; and he said was it
my own to do as I liked with, and I said "Yes"; and I asked about
the pony-cart, and I said he could have the guinea if he'd drive us
in to Rochester.  And his name is S.  Crispin.  And he said, "Right
oh".'

It was a new sensation to be driven in a smart pony-trap along
pretty country roads, it was very pleasant too (which is not always
the case with new sensations), quite apart from the beautiful plans
of spending the money which each child made as they went along,
silently of course and quite to itself, for they felt it would
never have done to let the old innkeeper hear them talk in the
affluent sort of way they were thinking.  The old man put them down
by the bridge at their request.

'If you were going to buy a carriage and horses, where would you
go?' asked Cyril, as if he were only asking for the sake of
something to say.

'Billy Peasemarsh, at the Saracen's Head,' said the old man
promptly.  'Though all forbid I should recommend any man where it's
a question of horses, no more than I'd take anybody else's
recommending if I was a-buying one.  But if your pa's thinking of
a turnout of any sort, there ain't a straighter man in Rochester,
nor a civiller spoken, than Billy, though I says it.'

'Thank you,' said Cyril.  'The Saracen's Head.'

And now the children began to see one of the laws of nature turn
upside down and stand on its head like an acrobat.  Any grown-up
persons would tell you that money is hard to get and easy to spend.
But the fairy money had been easy to get, and spending it was not
only hard, it was almost impossible.  The tradespeople of Rochester
seemed to shrink, to a trades-person, from the glittering fairy
gold ('furrin money' they called it, for the most part).  To begin
with, Anthea, who had had the misfortune to sit on her hat earlier
in the day, wished to buy another.  She chose a very beautiful one,
trimmed with pink roses and the blue breasts of peacocks.  It was
marked in the window, 'Paris Model, three guineas'.

'I'm glad,' she said, 'because, if it says guineas, it means
guineas, and not sovereigns, which we haven't got.'

But when she took three of the spade guineas in her hand, which was
by this time rather dirty owing to her not having put on gloves
before going to the gravel-pit, the black-silk young lady in the
shop looked very hard at her, and went and whispered something to
an older and uglier lady, also in black silk, and then they gave
her back the money and said it was not current coin.

'It's good money,' said Anthea, 'and it's my own.'

'I daresay,' said the lady, 'but it's not the kind of money that's
fashionable now, and we don't care about taking it.'

'I believe they think we've stolen it,' said Anthea, rejoining the
others in the street; 'if we had gloves they wouldn't think we were
so dishonest.  It's my hands being so dirty fills their minds with
doubts.'

So they chose a humble shop, and the girls bought cotton gloves,
the kind at sixpence three-farthings, but when they offered a
guinea the woman looked at it through her spectacles and said she
had no change; so the gloves had to be paid for out of Cyril's
two-and-sevenpence that he meant to buy rabbits with, and so had
the green imitation crocodile-skin purse at ninepence-halfpenny
which had been bought at the same time.  They tried several more
shops, the kinds where you buy toys and scent, and silk
handkerchiefs and books, and fancy boxes of stationery, and
photographs of objects of interest in the vicinity.  But nobody
cared to change a guinea that day in Rochester, and as they went
from shop to shop they got dirtier and dirtier, and their hair got
more and more untidy, and Jane slipped and fell down on a part of
the road where a water-cart had just gone by.  Also they got very
hungry, but they found no one would give them anything to eat for
their guineas.  After trying two pastrycooks in vain, they became
so hungry, perhaps from the smell of the cake in the shops, as
Cyril suggested, that they formed a plan of campaign in whispers
and carried it out in desperation.  They marched into a third
pastrycook's - Beale his name was - and before the people behind
the counter could interfere each child had seized three new penny
buns, clapped the three together between its dirty hands, and taken
a big bite out of the triple sandwich.  Then they stood at bay,
with the twelve buns in their hands and their mouths very full
indeed.  The shocked pastrycook bounded round the corner.

'Here,' said Cyril, speaking as distinctly as he could, and holding
out the guinea he got ready before entering the shop, 'pay yourself
out of that.'

Mr Beale snatched the coin, bit it, and put it in his pocket.

'Off you go,' he said, brief and stern like the man in the song.

'But the change?' said Anthea, who had a saving mind.

'Change!' said the man.  'I'll change you!  Hout you goes; and you
may think yourselves lucky I don't send for the police to find out
where you got it!'

In the Castle Gardens the millionaires finished the buns, and
though the curranty softness of these were delicious, and acted
like a charm in raising the spirits of the party, yet even the
stoutest heart quailed at the thought of venturing to sound Mr
Billy Peasemarsh at the Saracen's Head on the subject of a horse
and carriage.  The boys would have given up the idea, but Jane was
always a hopeful child, and Anthea generally an obstinate one, and
their earnestness prevailed.

The whole party, by this time indescribably dirty, therefore betook
itself to the Saracen's Head.  The yard-method of attack having
been successful at The Chequers was tried again here.  Mr
Peasemarsh was in the yard, and Robert opened the business in these
terms -

'They tell me you have a lot of horses and carriages to sell.'  It
had been agreed that Robert should be spokesman, because in books
it is always the gentlemen who buy horses, and not ladies, and
Cyril had had his go at the Blue Boar.

'They tell you true, young man,' said Mr Peasemarsh.  He was a long
lean man, with very blue eyes and a tight mouth and narrow lips.

'We should like to buy some, please,' said Robert politely.

'I daresay you would.'

'Will you show us a few, please?  To choose from.'
'Who are you a-kiddin of?' inquired Mr Billy Peasemarsh.  'Was you
sent here of a message?'

'I tell you,' said Robert, 'we want to buy some horses and
carriages, and a man told us you were straight and civil spoken,
but I shouldn't wonder if he was mistaken.'

'Upon my sacred!' said Mr Peasemarsh.  'Shall I trot the whole
stable out for your Honour's worship to see?  Or shall I send round
to the Bishop's to see if he's a nag or two to dispose of?'

'Please do,' said Robert, 'if it's not too much trouble.  It would
be very kind of you.'

Mr Peasemarsh put his hands in his pockets and laughed, and they
did not like the way he did it.  Then he shouted 'Willum!'

A stooping ostler appeared in a stable door.

'Here, Willum, come and look at this 'ere young dook!  Wants to buy
the whole stud, lock, stock, and bar'l.  And ain't got tuppence in
his pocket to bless hisself with, I'll go bail!'

Willum's eyes followed his master's pointing thumb with
contemptuous interest.

'Do 'e, for sure?' he said.

But Robert spoke, though both the girls were now pulling at his
jacket and begging him to 'come along'.  He spoke, and he was very
angry; he said:

'I'm not a young duke, and I never pretended to be.  And as for
tuppence - what do you call this?'  And before the others could
stop him he had pulled out two fat handfuls of shining guineas, and
held them out for Mr Peasemarsh to look at.  He did look.  He
snatched one up in his finger and thumb.  He bit it, and Jane
expected him to say, 'The best horse in my stables is at your
service.'  But the others knew better.  Still it was a blow, even
to the most desponding, when he said shortly:

'Willum, shut the yard doors,' and Willum grinned and went to shut
them.

'Good-afternoon,' said Robert hastily; 'we shan't buy any of your
horses now, whatever you say, and I hope it'll be a lesson to you.'
He had seen a little side gate open, and was moving towards it as
he spoke.  But Billy Peasemarsh put himself in the way.

'Not so fast, you young off-scouring!' he said.  'Willum, fetch the
pleece.'

Willum went.  The children stood huddled together like frightened
sheep, and Mr Peasemarsh spoke to them till the pleece arrived.  He
said many things.  Among other things he said:

'Nice lot you are, aren't you, coming tempting honest men with your
guineas!'

'They ARE our guineas,' said Cyril boldly.

'Oh, of course we don't know all about that, no more we don't - oh
no - course not!  And dragging little gells into it, too.  'Ere -
I'll let the gells go if you'll come along to the pleece quiet.'

'We won't be let go,' said Jane heroically; 'not without the boys.
It's our money just as much as theirs, you wicked old man.'

'Where'd you get it, then?' said the man, softening slightly, which
was not at all what the boys expected when Jane began to call
names.

Jane cast a silent glance of agony at the others.

'Lost your tongue, eh?  Got it fast enough when it's for calling
names with.  Come, speak up!  Where'd you get it?'

'Out of the gravel-pit,' said truthful Jane.

'Next article,' said the man.

'I tell you we did,' Jane said.  'There's a fairy there - all over
brown fur - with ears like a bat's and eyes like a snail's, and he
gives you a wish a day, and they all come true.'

'Touched in the head, eh?' said the man in a low voice, 'all the
more shame to you boys dragging the poor afflicted child into your
sinful burglaries.'

'She's not mad; it's true,' said Anthea; 'there is a fairy.  If I
ever see him again I'll wish for something for you; at least I
would if vengeance wasn't wicked - so there!'

'Lor' lumme,' said Billy Peasemarsh, 'if there ain't another on
'em!'

And now Willum came -back with a spiteful grin on his face, and at
his back a policeman, with whom Mr Peasemarsh spoke long in a
hoarse earnest whisper.

'I daresay you're right,' said the policeman at last.  'Anyway,
I'll take 'em up on a charge of unlawful possession, pending
inquiries.  And the magistrate will deal with the case.  Send the
afflicted ones to a home, as likely as not, and the boys to a
reformatory.  Now then, come along, youngsters!  No use making a
fuss.  You bring the gells along, Mr Peasemarsh, sir, and I'll
shepherd the boys.'

Speechless with rage and horror, the four children were driven
along the streets of Rochester.  Tears of anger and shame blinded
them, so that when Robert ran right into a passer-by he did not
recognize her till a well--known voice said, 'Well, if ever I did!
Oh, Master Robert, whatever have you been a doing of now?'  And
another voice, quite as well known, said, 'Panty; want go own
Panty!'

They had run into Martha and the baby!

Martha behaved admirably.  She refused to believe a word of the
policeman's story, or of Mr Peasemarsh's either, even when they
made Robert turn out his pockets in an archway and show the
guineas.

'I don't see nothing,' she said.  'You've gone out of your senses,
you two!  There ain't any gold there - only the poor child's hands,
all over crock and dirt, and like the very chimbley.  Oh, that I
should ever see the day!'

And the children thought this very noble of Martha, even if rather
wicked, till they remembered how the Fairy had promised that the
servants should never notice any of the fairy gifts.  So of course
Martha couldn't see the gold, and so was only speaking the truth,
and that was quite right, of course, but not extra noble.

It was getting dusk when they reached the police-station.  The
policeman told his tale to an inspector, who sat in a large bare
room with a thing like a clumsy nursery-fender at one end to put
prisoners in.  Robert wondered whether it was a cell or a dock.

'Produce the coins, officer,' said the inspector.

'Turn out your pockets,' said the constable.

Cyril desperately plunged his hands in his pockets, stood still a
moment, and then began to laugh - an odd sort of laugh that hurt,
and that felt much more like crying.  His pockets were empty.  So
were the pockets of the others.  For of course at sunset all the
fairy gold had vanished away.

'Turn out your pockets, and stop that noise,' said the inspector.

Cyril turned out his pockets, every one of the nine which enriched
his Norfolk suit.  And every pocket was empty.

'Well!' said the inspector.

'I don't know how they done it - artful little beggars!  They
walked in front of me the 'ole way, so as for me to keep my eye on
them and not to attract a crowd and obstruct the traffic.'

'It's very remarkable,' said the inspector, frowning.

'If you've quite done a-browbeating of the innocent children,' said
Martha, 'I'll hire a private carriage and we'll drive home to their
papa's mansion.  You'll hear about this again, young man! - I told
you they hadn't got any gold, when you were pretending to see it in
their poor helpless hands.  It's early in the day for a constable
on duty not to be able to trust his own eyes.  As to the other one,
the less said the better; he keeps the Saracen's Head, and he knows
best what his liquor's like.'

'Take them away, for goodness' sake,' said the inspector crossly.
But as they left the police-station he said, 'Now then!' to the
policeman and Mr Pease- marsh, and he said it twenty times as
crossly as he had spoken to Martha.


Martha was as good as her word.  She took them home in a very grand
carriage, because the carrier's cart was gone, and, though she had
stood by them so nobly with the police, she was so angry with them
as soon as they were alone for 'trapseing into Rochester by
themselves', that none of them dared to mention the old man with
the pony-cart from the village who was waiting for them in
Rochester.  And so, after one day of boundless wealth, the children
found themselves sent to bed in deep disgrace, and only enriched by
two pairs of cotton gloves, dirty inside because of the state of
the hands they had been put on to cover, an imitation
crocodile-skin purse, and twelve penny buns long since digested.

The thing that troubled them most was the fear that the old
gentleman's guinea might have disappeared at sunset with all the
rest, so they went down to the village next day to apologize for
not meeting him in Rochester, and to see.  They found him very
friendly.  The guinea had NOT disappeared, and he had bored a hole
in it and hung it on his watch-chain.  As for the guinea the baker
took, the children felt they could not care whether it had vanished
or not, which was not perhaps very honest, but on the other hand
was not wholly unnatural.  But afterwards this preyed on Anthea's
mind, and at last she secretly sent twelve stamps by post to 'Mr
Beale, Baker, Rochester'.  Inside she wrote, 'To pay for the buns.'
I hope the guinea did disappear, for that pastrycook was really not
at all a nice man, and, besides, penny buns are seven for sixpence
in all really respectable shops.



CHAPTER 3
BEING WANTED


The morning after the children had been the possessors of boundless
wealth, and had been unable to buy anything really useful or
enjoyable with it, except two pairs of cotton gloves, twelve penny
buns, an imitation crocodile-skin purse, and a ride in a pony-cart,
they awoke without any of the enthusiastic happiness which they had
felt on the previous day when they remembered how they had had the
luck to find a Psammead, or Sand-fairy; and to receive its promise
to grant them a new wish every day.  For now they had had two
wishes, Beauty and Wealth, and neither had exactly made them happy.
But the happening of strange things, even if they are not
completely pleasant things, is more amusing than those times when
nothing happens but meals, and they are not always completely
pleasant, especially on the days when it is cold mutton or hash.

There was no chance of talking things over before breakfast,
because everyone overslept itself, as it happened, and it needed a
vigorous and determined struggle to get dressed so as to be only
ten minutes late for breakfast.  During this meal some efforts were
made to deal with the question of the Psammead in an impartial
spirit, but it is very difficult to discuss anything thoroughly and
at the same time to attend faithfully to your baby brother's
breakfast needs.  The Baby was particularly lively that morning.
He not only wriggled his body through the bar of his high chair,
and hung by his head, choking and purple, but he collared a
tablespoon with desperate suddenness, hit Cyril heavily on the head
with it, and then cried because it was taken away from him.  He put
his fat fist in his bread-and-milk, and demanded 'nam', which was
only allowed for tea.  He sang, he put his feet on the table - he
clamoured to 'go walky'.  The conversation was something like this:


'Look here - about that Sand-fairy - Look out! - he'll have the
milk over.'

Milk removed to a safe distance.

'Yes - about that Fairy - No, Lamb dear, give Panther the narky
poon.'

Then Cyril tried.  'Nothing we've had yet has turned out - He
nearly had the mustard that time!'

'I wonder whether we'd better wish - Hullo! you've done it now, my
boy!'  And, in a flash of glass and pink baby-paws, the bowl of
golden carp in the middle of the table rolled on its side, and
poured a flood of mixed water and goldfish into the Baby's lap and
into the laps of the others.

Everyone was almost as much upset as the goldfish: the Lamb only
remaining calm.  When the pool on the floor had been mopped up, and
the leaping, gasping goldfish had been collected and put back in
the water, the Baby was taken away to be entirely redressed by
Martha, and most of the others had to change completely.  The
pinafores and jackets that had been bathed in goldfish-and-water
were hung out to dry, and then it turned out that Jane must either
mend the dress she had torn the day before or appear all day in her
best petticoat.  It was white and soft and frilly, and trimmed with
lace, and very, very pretty, quite as pretty as a frock, if not
more so.  Only it was NOT a frock, and Martha's word was law.  She
wouldn't let Jane wear her best frock, and she refused to listen
for a moment to Robert's suggestion that Jane should wear her best
petticoat and call it a dress.

'It's not respectable,' she said.  And when people say that, it's
no use anyone's saying anything.  You will find this out for
yourselves some day.

So there was nothing for it but for Jane to mend her frock.  The
hole had been torn the day before when she happened to tumble down
in the High Street of Rochester, just where a water-cart had passed
on its silvery way.  She had grazed her knee, and her stocking was
much more than grazed, and her dress was cut by the same stone
which had attended to the knee and the stocking.  Of course the
others were not such sneaks as to abandon a comrade in misfortune,
so they all sat on the grass-plot round the sundial, and Jane
darned away for dear life.  The Lamb was still in the hands of
Martha having its clothes changed, so conversation was possible.

Anthea and Robert timidly tried to conceal their inmost thought,
which was that the Psammead was not to be trusted; but Cyril said:

'Speak out - say what you've got to say - I hate hinting, and
"don't know", and sneakish ways like that.'

So then Robert said, as in honour bound: 'Sneak yourself - Anthea
and me weren't so goldfishy as you two were, so we got changed
quicker, and we've had time to think it over, and if you ask me -'

'I didn't ask you,' said Jane, biting off a needleful of thread as
she had always been strictly forbidden to do.

'I don't care who asks or who doesn't,' said Robert, but Anthea and
I think the Sammyadd is a spiteful brute.  If it can give us our
wishes I suppose it can give itself its own, and I feel almost sure
it wishes every time that our wishes shan't do us any good.  Let's
let the tiresome beast alone, and just go and have a jolly good
game of forts, on our own, in the chalk-pit.'

(You will remember that the happily situated house where these
children were spending their holidays lay between a chalk-quarry
and a gravel-pit.)

Cyril and Jane were more hopeful - they generally were.

'I don't think the Sammyadd does it on purpose,' Cyril said; 'and,
after all, it WAS silly to wish for boundless wealth.  Fifty pounds
in two-shilling pieces would have been much more sensible.  And
wishing to be beautiful as the day was simply donkeyish.  I don't
want to be disagreeable, but it was.  We must try to find a really
useful wish, and wish it.'

Jane dropped her work and said:

'I think so too, it's too silly to have a chance like this and not
use it.  I never heard of anyone else outside a book who had such
a chance; there must be simply heaps of things we could wish for
that wouldn't turn out Dead Sea fish, like these two things have.
Do let's think hard, and wish something nice, so that we can have
a real jolly day - what there is left of it.'

Jane darned away again like mad, for time was indeed getting on,
and everyone began to talk at once.  If you had been there you
could not possibly have made head or tail of the talk, but these
children were used to talking 'by fours', as soldiers march, and
each of them could say what it had to say quite comfortably, and
listen to the agreeable sound of its own voice, and at the same
time have three-quarters of two sharp ears to spare for listening
to what the others said.  That is an easy example in multiplication
of vulgar fractions, but, as I daresay you can't do even that, I
won't ask you to tell me whether 3/4 X 2 = 1 1/2, but I will ask
you to believe me that this was the amount of ear each child was
able to lend to the others.  Lending ears was common in Roman
times, as we learn from Shakespeare; but I fear I am getting too
instructive.

When the frock was darned, the start for the gravel-pit was delayed
by Martha's insisting on everybody's washing its hands - which was
nonsense, because nobody had been doing anything at all, except
Jane, and how can you get dirty doing nothing?  That is a difficult
question, and I cannot answer it on paper.  In real life I could
very soon show you - or you me, which is much more likely.

During the conversation in which the six ears were lent (there were
four children, so THAT sum comes right), it had been decided that
fifty pounds in two-shilling pieces was the right wish to have.
And the lucky children, who could have anything in the wide world
by just wishing for it, hurriedly started for the gravel-pit to
express their wishes to the Psammead.  Martha caught them at the
gate, and insisted on their taking the Baby with them.

'Not want him indeed!  Why, everybody 'ud want him, a duck!  with
all their hearts they would; and you know you promised your ma to
take him out every blessed day,' said Martha.

'I know we did,' said Robert in gloom, 'but I wish the Lamb wasn't
quite so young and small.  It would be much better fun taking him
out.'

'He'll mend of his youngness with time,' said Martha; 'and as for
his smallness, I don't think you'd fancy carrying of him any more,
however big he was.  Besides he can walk a bit, bless his precious
fat legs, a ducky!  He feels the benefit of the new-laid air, so he
does, a pet!'  With this and a kiss, she plumped the Lamb into
Anthea's arms, and went back to make new pinafores on the
sewing-machine.  She was a rapid performer on this instrument.

The Lamb laughed with pleasure, and said, 'Walky wif Panty,' and
rode on Robert's back with yells of joy, and tried to feed Jane
with stones, and altogether made himself so agreeable that nobody
could long be sorry that he was of the party.

The enthusiastic Jane even suggested that they should devote a
week's wishes to assuring the Baby's future, by asking such gifts
for him as the good fairies give to Infant Princes in proper
fairy-tales, but Anthea soberly reminded her that as the
Sand-fairy's wishes only lasted till sunset they could not ensure
any benefit to the Baby's later years; and Jane owned that it would
be better to wish for fifty pounds in two-shilling pieces, and buy
the Lamb a three-pound-fifteen rocking-horse, like those in the
Army and Navy Stores list, with part of the money.

It was settled that, as soon as they had wished for the money and
got it, they would get Mr Crispin to drive them into Rochester
again, taking Martha with them, if they could not get out of taking
her.  And they would make a list of the things they really wanted
before they started.  Full of high hopes and excellent resolutions,
they went round the safe slow cart-road to the gravel-pits, and as
they went in between the mounds of gravel a sudden thought came to
them, and would have turned their ruddy cheeks pale if they had
been children in a book.  Being real live children, it only made
them stop and look at each other with rather blank and silly
expressions.  For now they remembered that yesterday, when they had
asked the Psammead for boundless wealth, and it was getting ready
to fill the quarry with the minted gold of bright guineas -
millions of them - it had told the children to run along outside
the quarry for fear they should be buried alive in the heavy
splendid treasure.  And they had run.  And so it happened that they
had not had time to mark the spot where the Psammead was, with a
ring of stones, as before.  And it was this thought that put such
silly expressions on their faces.

'Never mind,' said the hopeful Jane, 'we'll soon find him.'

But this, though easily said, was hard in the doing.  They looked
and they looked, and though they found their seaside spades,
nowhere could they find the Sand-fairy.

At last they had to sit down and rest - not at all because they
were weary or disheartened, of course, but because the Lamb
insisted on being put down, and you cannot look very carefully
after anything you may have happened to lose in the sand if you
have an active baby to look after at the same time.  Get someone to
drop your best knife in the sand next time you go to the seaside,
and then take your baby brother with you when you go to look for
it, and you will see that I am right.

The Lamb, as Martha had said, was feeling the benefit of the
country air, and he was as frisky as a sandhopper.  The elder ones
longed to go on talking about the new wishes they would have when
(or if) they found the Psammead again.  But the Lamb wished to
enjoy himself.

He watched his opportunity and threw a handful of sand into
Anthea's face, and then suddenly burrowed his own head in the sand
and waved his fat legs in the air.  Then of course the sand got
into his eyes, as it had into Anthea's, and he howled.

The thoughtful Robert had brought one solid brown bottle of
ginger-beer with him, relying on a thirst that had never yet failed
him.  This had to be uncorked hurriedly - it was the only wet thing
within reach, and it was necessary to wash the sand out of the
Lamb's eyes somehow.  Of course the ginger hurt horribly, and he
howled more than ever.  And, amid his anguish of kicking, the
bottle was upset and the beautiful ginger-beer frothed out into the
sand and was lost for ever.

It was then that Robert, usually a very patient brother, so far
forgot himself as to say:

'Anybody would want him, indeed!  Only they don't; Martha doesn't,
not really, or she'd jolly well keep him with her.  He's a little
nuisance, that's what he is.  It's too bad.  I only wish everybody
DID want him with all their hearts; we might get some peace in our
lives.'

The Lamb stopped howling now, because Jane had suddenly remembered
that there is only one safe way of taking things out of little
children's eyes, and that is with your own soft wet tongue.  It is
quite easy if you love the Baby as much as you ought to.

Then there was a little silence.  Robert was not proud of himself
for having been so cross, and the others were not proud of him
either.  You often notice that sort of silence when someone has
said something it ought not to - and everyone else holds its tongue
and waits for the one who oughtn't to have said it is sorry.

The silence was broken by a sigh - a breath suddenly let out.  The
children's heads turned as if there had been a string tied to each
nose, and someone had pulled all the strings at once.

And everyone saw the Sand-fairy sitting quite close to them, with
the expression which it used as a smile on its hairy face.

'Good-morning,' it said; 'I did that quite easily!  Everyone wants
him now.'

'It doesn't matter,' said Robert sulkily, because he knew he had
been behaving rather like a pig.  'No matter who wants him -
there's no one here to - anyhow.'

'Ingratitude,' said the Psammead, 'is a dreadful vice.'

'We're not ungrateful,'Jane made haste to say, 'but we didn't
REALLY want that wish.  Robert only just said it.  Can't you take
it back and give us a new one?'

'No - I can't,' the Sand-fairy said shortly; 'chopping and changing
- it's not business.  You ought to be careful what you do wish.
There was a little boy once, he'd wished for a Plesiosaurus instead
of an Ichthyosaurus, because he was too lazy to remember the easy
names of everyday things, and his father had been very vexed with
him, and had made him go to bed before tea-time, and wouldn't let
him go out in the nice flint boat along with the other children -
it was the annual school-treat next day - and he came and flung
himself down near me on the morning of the treat, and he kicked his
little prehistoric legs about and said he wished he was dead.  And
of course then he was.'

'How awful!' said the children all together.

'Only till sunset, of course,' the Psammead said; 'still it was
quite enough for his father and mother.  And he caught it when he
woke up - I can tell you.  He didn't turn to stone - I forget why
- but there must have been some reason.  They didn't know being
dead is only being asleep, and you're bound to wake up somewhere or
other, either where you go to sleep or in some better place.  You
may be sure he caught it, giving them such a turn.  Why, he wasn't
allowed to taste Megatherium for a month after that.  Nothing but
oysters and periwinkles, and common things like that.'

All the children were quite crushed by this terrible tale.  They
looked at the Psammead in horror.  Suddenly the Lamb perceived that
something brown and furry was near him.

'Poof, poof, poofy,' he said, and made a grab.

'It's not a pussy,' Anthea was beginning, when the Sand-fairy
leaped back.

'Oh, my left whisker!' it said; 'don't let him touch me.  He's
wet.'

Its fur stood on end with horror - and indeed a good deal of the
ginger-beer had been spilt on the blue smock of the Lamb.

The Psammead dug with its hands and feet, and vanished in an
instant and a whirl of sand.

The children marked the spot with a ring of stones.

'We may as well get along home,' said Robert.  'I'll say I'm sorry;
but anyway if it's no good it's no harm, and we know where the
sandy thing is for to-morrow.'

The others were noble.  No one reproached Robert at all.  Cyril
picked up the Lamb, who was now quite himself again, and off they
went by the safe cart-road.

The cart-road from the gravel-pits joins the road almost directly.

At the gate into the road the party stopped to shift the Lamb from
Cyril's back to Robert's.  And as they paused a very smart open
carriage came in sight, with a coachman and a groom on the box, and
inside the carriage a lady - very grand indeed, with a dress all
white lace and red ribbons and a parasol all red and white - and a
white fluffy dog on her lap with a red ribbon round its neck.  She
looked at the children, and particularly at the Baby, and she
smiled at him.  The children were used to this, for the Lamb was,
as all the servants said, a 'very taking child'.  So they waved
their hands politely to the lady and expected her to drive on.  But
she did not.  Instead she made the coachman stop.  And she beckoned
to Cyril, and when he went up to the carriage she said:

'What a dear darling duck of a baby!  Oh, I SHOULD so like to adopt
it!  Do you think its mother would mind?'

'She'd mind very much indeed,' said Anthea shortly.

'Oh, but I should bring it up in luxury, you know.  I am Lady
Chittenden.  You must have seen my photograph in the illustrated
papers.  They call me a beauty, you know, but of course that's all
nonsense.  Anyway -'

She opened the carriage door and jumped out.  She had the
wonderfullest red high-heeled shoes with silver buckles.  'Let me
hold him a minute,' she said.  And she took the Lamb and held him
very awkwardly, as if she was not used to babies.

Then suddenly she jumped into the carriage with the Lamb in her
arms and slammed the door and said, 'Drive on!'

The Lamb roared, the little white dog barked, and the coachman
hesitated.

'Drive on, I tell you!' cried the lady; and the coachman did, for,
as he said afterwards, it was as much as his place was worth not
to.

The four children looked at each other, and then with one accord
they rushed after the carriage and held on behind.  Down the dusty
road went the smart carriage, and after it, at double-quick time,
ran the twinkling legs of the Lamb's brothers and sisters.

The Lamb howled louder and louder, but presently his howls changed
by slow degree to hiccupy gurgles, and then all was still and they
knew he had gone to sleep.

The carriage went on, and the eight feet that twinkled through the
dust were growing quite stiff and tired before the carriage stopped
at the lodge of a grand park.  The children crouched down behind
the carriage, and the lady got out.  She looked at the Baby as it
lay on the carriage seat, and hesitated.

'The darling - I won't disturb it,' she said, and went into the
lodge to talk to the woman there about a setting of Buff Orpington
eggs that had not turned out well.

The coachman and footman sprang from the box and bent over the
sleeping Lamb.

'Fine boy - wish he was mine,' said the coachman.

'He wouldn't favour YOU much,' said the groom sourly; 'too
'andsome.'

The coachman pretended not to hear.  He said:

'Wonder at her now - I do really!  Hates kids.  Got none of her
own, and can't abide other folkses'.'

The children, crouching in the white dust under the carriage,
exchanged uncomfortable glances.

'Tell you what,' the coachman went on firmly, 'blowed if I don't
hide the little nipper in the hedge and tell her his brothers took
'im!  Then I'll come back for him afterwards.'

'No, you don't,' said the footman.  'I've took to that kid so as
never was.  If anyone's to have him, it's me - so there!'

'Stow your gab!' the coachman rejoined.  'You don't want no kids,
and, if you did, one kid's the same as another to you.  But I'm a
married man and a judge of breed.  I knows a first-rate yearling
when I sees him.  I'm a-goin' to 'ave him, an' least said soonest
mended.'

'I should 'a' thought,' said the footman sneeringly, you'd a'most
enough.  What with Alfred, an' Albert, an' Louise, an' Victor
Stanley, and Helena Beatrice, and another -'

The coachman hit the footman in the chin - the foot- man hit the
coachman in the waistcoat - the next minute the two were fighting
here and there, in and out, up and down, and all over everywhere,
and the little dog jumped on the box of the carriage and began
barking like mad.

Cyril, still crouching in the dust, waddled on bent legs to the
side of the carriage farthest from the battlefield.  He unfastened
the door of the carriage - the two men were far too much occupied
with their quarrel to notice anything - took the Lamb in his arms,
and, still stooping, carried the sleeping baby a dozen yards along
the road to where a stile led into a wood.  The others followed,
and there among the hazels and young oaks and sweet chestnuts,
covered by high strong-scented bracken, they all lay hidden till
the angry voices of the men were hushed at the angry voice of the
red-and-white lady, and, after a long and anxious search, the
carriage at last drove away.

'My only hat!' said Cyril, drawing a deep breath as the sound of
wheels at last died away.  'Everyone DOES want him now - and no
mistake!  That Sammyadd has done us again!  Tricky brute!  For any
sake, let's get the kid safe home.'

So they peeped out, and finding on the right hand only lonely white
road, and nothing but lonely white road on the left, they took
courage, and the road, Anthea carrying the sleeping Lamb.

Adventures dogged their footsteps.  A boy with a bundle of faggots
on his back dropped his bundle by the roadside and asked to look at
the Baby, and then offered to carry him; but Anthea was not to be
caught that way twice.  They all walked on, but the boy followed,
and Cyril and Robert couldn't make him go away till they had more
than once invited him to smell their fists.  Afterwards a little
girl in a blue-and-white checked pinafore actually followed them
for a quarter of a mile crying for 'the precious Baby', and then
she was only got rid of by threats of tying her to a tree in the
wood with all their pocket-handkerchiefs.  'So that the bears can
come and eat you as soon as it gets dark,' said Cyril severely.
Then she went off crying.  It presently seemed wise, to the
brothers and sisters of the Baby, who was wanted by everyone, to
hide in the hedge whenever they saw anyone coming, and thus they
managed to prevent the Lamb from arousing the inconvenient
affection of a milkman, a stone-breaker, and a man who drove a cart
with a paraffin barrel at the back of it.  They were nearly home
when the worst thing of all happened.  Turning a corner suddenly
they came upon two vans, a tent, and a company of gipsies encamped
by the side of the road.  The vans were hung all round with wicker
chairs and cradles, and flower-stands and feather brushes.  A lot
of ragged children were industriously making dust-pies in the road,
two men lay on the grass smoking, and three women were doing the
family washing in an old red watering-can with the top broken off.

In a moment all the gipsies, men, women, and children, surrounded
Anthea and the Baby.

'Let me hold him, little lady,' said one of the gipsy women, who
had a mahogany-coloured face and dust-coloured hair; 'I won't hurt
a hair of his head, the little picture!'

'I'd rather not,' said Anthea.

'Let me have him,' said the other woman, whose face was also of the
hue of mahogany, and her hair jet-black, in greasy curls.  'I've
nineteen of my own, so I have.'

'No,' said Anthea bravely, but her heart beat so that it nearly
choked her.

Then one of the men pushed forward.

'Swelp me if it ain't!' he cried, 'my own long-lost cheild!  Have
he a strawberry mark on his left ear?  No?  Then he's my own babby,
stolen from me in hinnocent hinfancy.  'And 'im over - and we'll
not 'ave the law on yer this time.'

He snatched the Baby from Anthea, who turned scarlet and burst into
tears of pure rage.

The others were standing quite still; this was much the most
terrible thing that had ever happened to them.  Even being taken up
by the police in Rochester was nothing to this.  Cyril was quite
white, and his hands trembled a little, but he made a sign to the
others to shut up.  He was silent a minute, thinking hard.  Then he
said:

'We don't want to keep him if he's yours.  But you see he's used to
us.  You shall have him if you want him.'

'No, no!' cried Anthea - and Cyril glared at her.

'Of course we want him,' said the women, trying to get the Baby out
of the man's arms.  The Lamb howled loudly.

'Oh, he's hurt!' shrieked Anthea; and Cyril, in a savage undertone,
bade her 'Stow it!'

'You trust to me,' he whispered.  'Look here,' he went on, 'he's
awfully tiresome with people he doesn't know very well.  Suppose we
stay here a bit till he gets used to you, and then when it's
bedtime I give you my word of honour we'll go away and let you keep
him if you want to.  And then when we're gone you can decide which
of you is to have him, as you all want him so much.'

'That's fair enough,' said the man who was holding the Baby, trying
to loosen the red neckerchief which the Lamb had caught hold of and
drawn round his mahogany throat so tight that he could hardly
breathe.  The gipsies whispered together, and Cyril took the chance
to whisper too.  He said, 'Sunset! we'll get away then.'

And then his brothers and sisters were filled with wonder and
admiration at his having been so clever as to remember this.

'Oh, do let him come to us!' said Jane.  'See we'll sit down here
and take care of him for you till he gets used to you.'

'What about dinner?' said Robert suddenly.  The others looked at
him with scorn.  'Fancy bothering about your beastly dinner when
your br - I mean when the Baby' - Jane whispered hotly.  Robert
carefully winked at her and went on:

'You won't mind my just running home to get our dinner?' he said to
the gipsy; 'I can bring it out here in a basket.'

His brother and sisters felt themselves very noble, and despised
him.  They did not know his thoughtful secret intention.  But the
gipsies did in a minute.
'Oh yes!' they said; 'and then fetch the police with a pack of lies
about it being your baby instead of ours!  D'jever catch a weasel
asleep?' they asked.

'If you're hungry you can pick a bit along of us,' said the
light-haired gipsy woman, not unkindly.  'Here, Levi, that blessed
kid'll howl all his buttons off.  Give him to the little lady, and
let's see if they can't get him used to us a bit.'

So the Lamb was handed back; but the gipsies crowded so closely
that he could not possibly stop howling.  Then the man with the red
handkerchief said:

'Here, Pharaoh, make up the fire; and you girls see to the pot.
Give the kid a chanst.'  So the gipsies, very much against their
will, went off to their work, and the children and the Lamb were
left sitting on the grass.

'He'll be all right at sunset,'Jane whispered.  'But, oh, it is
awful!  Suppose they are frightfully angry when they come to their
senses!  They might beat us, or leave us tied to trees, or
something.'

'No, they won't,' Anthea said.  ('Oh, my Lamb, don't cry any more,
it's all right, Panty's got oo, duckie!) They aren't unkind people,
or they wouldn't be going to give us any dinner.'

'Dinner?' said Robert.  'I won't touch their nasty dinner.  It
would choke me!'

The others thought so too then.  But when the dinner was ready - it
turned out to be supper, and happened between four and five - they
were all glad enough to take what they could get.  It was boiled
rabbit, with onions, and some bird rather like a chicken, but
stringier about its legs and with a stronger taste.  The Lamb had
bread soaked in hot water and brown sugar sprinkled on the top.  He
liked this very much, and consented to let the two gipsy women feed
him with it, as he sat on Anthea's lap.  All that long hot
afternoon Robert and Cyril and Anthea and Jane had to keep the Lamb
amused and happy, while the gipsies looked eagerly on.  By the time
the shadows grew long and black across the meadows he had really
'taken to' the woman with the light hair, and even consented to
kiss his hand to the children, and to stand up and bow, with his
hand on his chest - 'like a gentleman' - to the two men.  The whole
gipsy camp was in raptures with him, and his brothers and sisters
could not help taking some pleasure in showing off his
accomplishments to an audience so interested and enthusiastic.  But
they longed for sunset.

'We're getting into the habit of longing for sunset,' Cyril
whispered.  'How I do wish we could wish something really sensible,
that would be of some use, so that we should be quite sorry when
sunset came.'

The shadows got longer and longer, and at last there were no
separate shadows any more, but one soft glowing shadow over
everything; for the sun was out of sight - behind the hill - but he
had not really set yet.  The people who make the laws about
lighting bicycle lamps are the people who decide when the sun sets;
he has to do it, too, to the minute, or they would know the reason
why!

But the gipsies were getting impatient.

'Now, young uns,' the red-handkerchief man said,'it's time you were
laying of your heads on your pillowses - so it is!  The kid's all
right and friendly with us now - so you just hand him over and
sling that hook o' yours like you said.'

The women and children came crowding round the Lamb, arms were held
out, fingers snapped invitingly, friendly faces beaming with
admiring smiles; but all failed to tempt the loyal Lamb.  He clung
with arms and legs to Jane, who happened to be holding him, and
uttered the gloomiest roar of the whole day.

'It's no good,' the woman said, 'hand the little poppet over, miss.
We'll soon quiet him.'

And still the sun would not set.

'Tell her about how to put him to bed,' whispered Cyril; 'anything
to gain time - and be ready to bolt when the sun really does make
up its silly old mind to set.'

'Yes, I'll hand him over in just one minute,' Anthea began, talking
very fast - 'but do let me just tell you he has a warm bath every
night and cold in the morning, and he has a crockery rabbit to go
into the warm bath with him, and little Samuel saying his prayers
in white china on a red cushion for the cold bath; and if you let
the soap get into his eyes, the Lamb -'

'Lamb kyes,' said he - he had stopped roaring to listen.

The woman laughed.  'As if I hadn't never bath'd a babby!'  she
said.  'Come - give us a hold of him.  Come to 'Melia, my
precious.'

'G'way, ugsie!' replied the Lamb at once.

'Yes, but,' Anthea went on, 'about his meals; you really MUST let
me tell you he has an apple or a banana every morning, and
bread-and-milk for breakfast, and an egg for his tea sometimes, and
-'

'I've brought up ten,' said the black-ringleted woman, 'besides the
others.  Come, miss, 'and 'im over - I can't bear it no longer.  I
just must give him a hug.'

'We ain't settled yet whose he's to be, Esther,' said one of the
men.

'It won't be you, Esther, with seven of 'em at your tail a'ready.'

'I ain't so sure of that,' said Esther's husband.

'And ain't I nobody, to have a say neither?' said the husband of
'Melia.

Zillah, the girl, said, 'An' me?  I'm a single girl - and no one
but 'im to look after - I ought to have him.'

'Hold yer tongue!'

'Shut your mouth!'

'Don't you show me no more of your imperence!'

Everyone was getting very angry.  The dark gipsy faces were
frowning and anxious-looking.  Suddenly a change swept over them,
as if some invisible sponge had wiped away these cross and anxious
expressions, and left only a blank.

The children saw that the sun really HAD set.  But they were afraid
to move.  And the gipsies were feeling so muddled, because of the
invisible sponge that had washed all the feelings of the last few
hours out of their hearts, that they could not say a word.

The children hardly dared to breathe.  Suppose the gipsies, when
they recovered speech, should be furious to think how silly they
had been all day.

It was an awkward moment.  Suddenly Anthea, greatly daring, held
out the Lamb to the red-handkerchief man.

'Here he is!' she said.

The man drew back.  'I shouldn't like to deprive you, miss,' he
said hoarsely.

'Anyone who likes can have my share of him,' said the other man.

'After all, I've got enough of my own,' said Esther.

'He's a nice little chap, though,' said Amelia.  She was the only
one who now looked affectionately at the whimpering Lamb.

Zillah said, 'If I don't think I must have had a touch of the sun.
I don't want him.'

'Then shall we take him away?' said Anthea.

'Well, suppose you do,' said Pharaoh heartily, 'and we'll say no
more about it!'

And with great haste all the gipsies began to be busy about their
tents for the night.  All but Amelia.  She went with the children
as far as the bend in the road - and there she said:

'Let me give him a kiss, miss - I don't know what made us go for to
behave so silly.  Us gipsies don't steal babies, whatever they may
tell you when you're naughty.  We've enough of our own, mostly.
But I've lost all mine.'

She leaned towards the Lamb; and he, looking in her eyes,
unexpectedly put up a grubby soft paw and stroked her face.

'Poor, poor!' said the Lamb.  And he let the gipsy woman kiss him,
and, what is more, he kissed her brown cheek in return - a very
nice kiss, as all his kisses are, and not a wet one like some
babies give.  The gipsy woman moved her finger about on his
forehead, as if she had been writing something there, and the same
with his chest and his hands and his feet; then she said:

'May he be brave, and have the strong head to think with, and the
strong heart to love with, and the strong hands to work with, and
the strong feet to travel with, and always come safe home to his
own.'  Then she said something in a strange language no one could
understand, and suddenly added:

'Well, I must be saying "so long" - and glad to have made your
acquaintance.'  And she turned and went back to her home - the tent
by the grassy roadside.

The children looked after her till she was out of sight.  Then
Robert said, 'How silly of her!  Even sunset didn't put her right.
What rot she talked!'

'Well,' said Cyril, 'if you ask me, I think it was rather decent of
her -'

'Decent?' said Anthea; 'it was very nice indeed of her.  I think
she's a dear.'

'She's just too frightfully nice for anything,' said Jane.

And they went home - very late for tea and unspeakably late for
dinner.  Martha scolded, of course.  But the Lamb was safe.

'I say - it turned out we wanted the Lamb as much as anyone,' said
Robert, later.

'Of course.'

'But do you feel different about it now the sun's set?'

'No,' said all the others together.
'Then it's lasted over sunset with us.'

'No, it hasn't,' Cyril explained.  'The wish didn't do anything to
US.  We always wanted him with all our hearts when we were our
proper selves, only we were all pigs this morning; especially you,
Robert.'  Robert bore this much with a strange calm.

'I certainly THOUGHT I didn't want him this morning,' said he.
'Perhaps I was a pig.  But everything looked so different when we
thought we were going to lose him.'



CHAPTER 4
WINGS


The next day was very wet - too wet to go out, and far too wet to
think of disturbing a Sand-fairy so sensitive to water that he
still, after thousands of years, felt the pain of once having had
his left whisker wetted.  It was a long day, and it was not till
the afternoon that all the children suddenly decided to write
letters to their mother.  It was Robert who had the misfortune to
upset the ink-pot - an unusually deep and full one - straight into
that part of Anthea's desk where she had long pretended that an
arrangement of gum and cardboard painted with Indian ink was a
secret drawer.  It was not exactly Robert's fault; it was only his
misfortune that he chanced to be lifting the ink across the desk
just at the moment when Anthea had got it open, and that that same
moment should have been the one chosen by the Lamb to get under the
table and break his squeaking bird.  There was a sharp convenient
wire inside the bird, and of course the Lamb ran the wire into
Robert's leg at once; and so, without anyone's meaning to, the
secret drawer was flooded with ink.  At the same time a stream was
poured over Anthea's half-finished letter.  So that her letter was
something like this:


DARLING MOTHER, I hope you are quite well, and I hope Granny is
better.  The other day we ...


Then came a flood of ink, and at the bottom these words in pencil
-


It was not me upset the ink, but it took such a time clearing up,
so no more as it is post-time.  - From your loving daughter,
                                   ANTHEA.


Robert's letter had not even been begun.  He had been drawing a
ship on the blotting-paper while he was trying to think of what to
say.  And of course after the ink was upset he had to help Anthea
to clean out her desk, and he promised to make her another secret
drawer, better than the other.  And she said, 'Well, make it now.'
So it was post-time and his letter wasn't done.  And the secret
drawer wasn't done either.

Cyril wrote a long letter, very fast, and then went to set a trap
for slugs that he had read about in the Home-made Gardener, and
when it was post-time the letter could not be found, and it never
was found.  Perhaps the slugs ate it.

jane's letter was the only one that went.  She meant to tell her
mother all about the Psammead - in fact -they had all meant to do
this - but she spent so long thinking how to spell the word that
there was no time to tell the story properly, and it is useless to
tell a story unless you do tell it properly, so she had to be
contented with this -


MY DEAR MOTHER DEAR,

We are all as as good as we can, like you told us to, and the Lamb
has a little cold, but Martha says it is nothing, only he upset the
goldfish into himself yesterday morning.  When we were up at the
sand-pit the other day we went round by the safe way where carts
go, and we found a --


Half an hour went by before Jane felt quite sure that they could
none of them spell Psammead.  And they could not find it in the
dictionary either, though they looked.  Then Jane hastily finished
her letter.



We found a strange thing, but it is nearly post-time, so no more at
present from your little girl,
                         JANE.

Ps.  - If you could have a wish come true, what would you have?


Then the postman was heard blowing his horn, and Robert rushed out
in the rain to stop his cart and give him the letter.  And that was
how it happened that, though all the children meant to tell their
mother about the Sand-fairy, somehow or other she never got to
know.  There were other reasons why she never got to know, but
these come later.

The next day Uncle Richard came and took them all to Maidstone in
a wagonette - all except the Lamb.  Uncle Richard was the very best
kind of uncle.  He bought them toys at Maidstone.  He took them
into a shop and let them choose exactly what they wanted, without
any restrictions about price, and no nonsense about things being
instructive.  It is very wise to let children choose exactly what
they like, because they are very foolish and inexperienced, and
sometimes they will choose a really instructive thing without
meaning to.  This happened to Robert, who chose, at the last
moment, and in a great hurry, a box with pictures on it of winged
bulls with men's heads and winged men with eagles' heads.  He
thought there would be animals inside, the same as on the box.
When he got it home it was a Sunday puzzle about ancient Nineveh!
The others chose in haste, and were happy at leisure.  Cyril had a
model engine, and the girls had two dolls, as well as a china
tea-set with forget-me-nots on it, to be 'between them'.  The boys'
'between them' was bow and arrows.

Then Uncle Richard took them on the beautiful Medway in a boat, and
then they all had tea at a beautiful pastrycook's, and when they
reached home it was far too late to have any wishes that day.

They did not tell Uncle Richard anything about the Psammead.  I do
not know why.  And they do not know why.  But I daresay you can
guess.

The day after Uncle Richard had behaved so handsomely was a very
hot day indeed.  The people who decide what the weather is to be,
and put its orders down for it in the newspapers every morning,
said afterwards that it was the hottest day there had been for
years.  They had ordered it to be 'warmer - some showers', and
warmer it certainly was.  In fact it was so busy being warmer that
it had no time to attend to the order about showers, so there
weren't any.

Have you ever been up at five o'clock on a fine summer morning?  It
is very beautiful.  The sunlight is pinky and yellowy, and all the
grass and trees are covered with dew-diamonds.  And all the shadows
go the opposite way to the way they do in the evening, which is
very interesting and makes you feel as though you were in a new
other world.

Anthea awoke at five.  She had made herself wake, and I must tell
you how it is done, even if it keeps you waiting for the story to
go on.

You get into bed at night, and lie down quite flat on your little
back with your hands straight down by your sides.  Then you say 'I
must wake up at five' (or six, or seven, or eight, or nine, or
whatever the time is that you want), and as you say it you push
your chin down on to your chest and then bang your head back on the
pillow.  And you do this as many times as there are ones in the
time you want to wake up at.  (It is quite an easy sum.) Of course
everything depends on your really wanting to get up at five (or
six, or seven, or eight, or nine); if you don't really want to,
it's all of no use.  But if you do - well, try it and see.  Of
course in this, as in doing Latin proses or getting into mischief,
practice makes perfect.  Anthea was quite perfect.

At the very moment when she opened her eyes she heard the
black-and-gold clock down in the dining-room strike eleven.  So she
knew it was three minutes to five.  The black-and-gold clock always
struck wrong, but it was all right when you knew what it meant.  It
was like a person talking a foreign language.  If you know the
language it is just as easy to understand as English.  And Anthea
knew the clock language.  She was very sleepy, but she jumped out
of bed and put her face and hands into a basin of cold water.  This
is a fairy charm that prevents your wanting to get back into bed
again.  Then she dressed, and folded up her nightgown.  She did not
tumble it together by the sleeves, but folded it by the seams from
the hem, and that will show you the kind of well-brought-up little
girl she was.

Then she took her shoes in her hand and crept softly down the
stairs.  She opened the dining-room window and climbed out.  It
would have been just as easy to go out by the door, but the window
was more romantic, and less likely to be noticed by Martha.

'I will always get up at five,' she said to herself.  'It was quite
too awfully pretty for anything.'

Her heart was beating very fast, for she was carrying out a plan
quite her own.  She could not be sure that it was a good plan, but
she was quite sure that it would not be any better if she were to
tell the others about it.  And she had a feeling that, right or
wrong, she would rather go through with it alone.  She put on her
shoes under the iron veranda, on the red-and-yellow shining tiles,
and then she ran straight to the sand-pit, and found the Psammead's
place, and dug it out; it was very cross indeed.

'It's too bad,' it said, fluffing up its fur like pigeons do their
feathers at Christmas time.  'The weather's arctic, and it's the
middle of the night.'

'I'm so sorry,' said Anthea gently, and she took off her white
pinafore and covered the Sand-fairy up with it, all but its head,
its bat's ears, and its eyes that were like a snail's eyes.

'Thank you,' it said, 'that's better.  What's the wish this
morning?'

'I don't know,' said she; 'that's just it.  You see we've been very
unlucky, so far.  I wanted to talk to you about it.  But - would
you mind not giving me any wishes till after breakfast?  It's so
hard to talk to anyone if they jump out at you with wishes you
don't really want!'

'You shouldn't say you wish for things if you don't wish for them.
In the old days people almost always knew whether it was
Megatherium or Ichthyosaurus they really wanted for dinner.'

'I'll try not,' said Anthea, 'but I do wish -'

'Look out!' said the Psammead in a warning voice, and it began to
blow itself out.

'Oh, this isn't a magic wish - it's just - I should be so glad if
you'd not swell yourself out and nearly burst to give me anything
just now.  Wait till the others are here.'

'Well, well,' it said indulgently, but it shivered.

'Would you,' asked Anthea kindly - 'would you like to come and sit
on my lap?  You'd be warmer, and I could turn the skirt of my frock
up round you.  I'd be very careful.'

Anthea had never expected that it would, but it did.

'Thank you,' it said; 'you really are rather thoughtful.'  It crept
on to her lap and snuggled down, and she put her arms round it with
a rather frightened gentleness.  'Now then!' it said.

'Well then,' said Anthea, 'everything we have wished has turned out
rather horrid.  I wish you would advise us.  You are so old, you
must be very wise.'

'I was always generous from a child,' said the Sand-fairy.  'I've
spent the whole of my waking hours in giving.  But one thing I
won't give - that's advice.'

'You see,' Anthea went on, it's such a wonderful thing - such a
splendid, glorious chance.  It's so good and kind and dear of you
to give us our wishes, and it seems such a pity it should all be
wasted just because we are too silly to know what to wish for.'

Anthea had meant to say that - and she had not wanted to say it
before the others.  It's one thing to say you're silly, and quite
another to say that other people are.

'Child,' said the Sand-fairy sleepily, 'I can only advise you to
think before you speak -'

'But I thought you never gave advice.'

'That piece doesn't count,' it said.  'You'll never take it!
Besides, it's not original.  It's in all the copy-books.'

'But won't you just say if you think wings would be a silly wish?'

'Wings?' it said.  'I should think you might do worse.  Only, take
care you aren't flying high at sunset.  There was a little Ninevite
boy I heard of once.  He was one of King Sennacherib's sons, and a
traveller brought him a Psammead.  He used to keep it in a box of
sand on the palace terrace.  It was a dreadful degradation for one
of us, of course; still the boy was the Assyrian King's son.  And
one day he wished for wings and got them.  But he forgot that they
would turn into stone at sunset, and when they did he fell slap on
to one of the winged lions at the top of his father's great
staircase; and what with HIS stone wings and the lions' stone wings
- well, it's not a pretty story!  But I believe the boy enjoyed
himself very much till then.'

'Tell me,' said Anthea, 'why don't our wishes turn into stone now?
Why do they just vanish?'

'Autres temps, autres moeurs,' said the creature.

'Is that the Ninevite language?' asked Anthea, who had learned no
foreign language at school except French.

'What I mean is,' the Psammead went on, 'that in the old days
people wished for good solid everyday gifts - Mammoths and
Pterodactyls and things - and those could be turned into stone as
easy as not.  But people wish such high-flying fanciful things
nowadays.  How are you going to turn being beautiful as the day, or
being wanted by everybody, into stone?  You see it can't be done.
And it would never do to have two rules, so they simply vanish.  If
being beautiful as the day COULD be turned into stone it would last
an awfully long time, you know - much longer than you would.  just
look at the Greek statues.  It's just as well as it is.  Good-bye.
I AM so sleepy.'

It jumped off her lap - dug frantically, and vanished.

Anthea was late for breakfast.  It was Robert who quietly poured a
spoonful of treacle down the Lamb's frock, so that he had to be
taken away and washed thoroughly directly after breakfast.  And it
was of course a very naughty thing to do; yet it served two
purposes - it delighted the Lamb, who loved above all things to be
completely sticky, and it engaged Martha's attention so that the
others could slip away to the sand-pit without the Lamb.

They did it, and in the lane Anthea, breathless from the scurry of
that slipping, panted out -

'I want to propose we take turns to wish.  Only, nobody's to have
a wish if the others don't think it's a nice wish.  Do you agree?'

'Who's to have first wish?' asked Robert cautiously.

'Me, if you don't mind,' said Anthea apologetically.  'And I've
thought about it - and it's wings.'

There was a silence.  The others rather wanted to find fault, but
it was hard, because the word 'wings' raised a flutter of joyous
excitement in every breast.

'Not so dusty,' said Cyril generously; and Robert added, 'Really,
Panther, you're not quite such a fool as you look.'

Jane said, 'I think it would be perfectly lovely.  It's like a
bright dream of delirium.'
They found the Sand-fairy easily.  Anthea said:

'I wish we all had beautiful wings to fly with.'

The Sand-fairy blew himself out, and next moment each child felt a
funny feeling, half heaviness and half lightness, on its shoulders.
The Psammead put its head on one side and turned its snail's eyes
from one to the other.

'Not so dusty,' it said dreamily.  'But really, Robert, you're not
quite such an angel as you look.'  Robert almost blushed.

The wings were very big, and more beautiful than you can possibly
imagine - for they were soft and smooth, and every feather lay
neatly in its place.  And the feathers were of the most lovely
mixed changing colours, like the rainbow, or iridescent glass, or
the beautiful scum that sometimes floats on water that is not at
all nice to drink.

'Oh - but can we fly?'Jane said, standing anxiously first on one
foot and then on the other.

'Look out!' said Cyril; 'you're treading on my wing.'

'Does it hurt?' asked Anthea with interest; but no one answered,
for Robert had spread his wings and jumped up, and now he was
slowly rising in the air.  He looked very awkward in his
knickerbocker suit - his boots in particular hung helplessly, and
seemed much larger than when he was standing in them.  But the
others cared but little how he looked - or how they looked, for
that matter.  For now they all spread out their wings and rose in
the air.  Of course you all know what flying feels like, because
everyone has dreamed about flying, and it seems so beautifully easy
- only, you can never remember how you did it; and as a rule you
have to do it without wings, in your dreams, which is more clever
and uncommon, but not so easy to remember the rule for.  Now the
four children rose flapping from the ground, and you can't think
how good the air felt running against their faces.  Their wings
were tremendously wide when they were spread out, and they had to
fly quite a long way apart so as not to get in each other's way.
But little things like this are easily learned.

All the words in the English Dictionary, and in the Greek Lexicon
as well, are, I find, of no use at all to tell you exactly what it
feels like to be flying, so I Will not try.  But I will say that to
look DOWN on the fields and woods, instead of along at them, is
something like looking at a beautiful live map, where, instead of
silly colours on paper, you have real moving sunny woods and green
fields laid out one after the other.  As Cyril said, and I can't
think where he got hold of such a strange expression, 'It does you
a fair treat!'  It was most wonderful and more like real magic than
any wish the children had had yet.  They flapped and flew and
sailed on their great rainbow wings, between green earth and blue
sky; and they flew right over Rochester and then swerved round
towards Maidstone, and presently they all began to feel extremely
hungry.  Curiously enough, this happened when they were flying
rather low, and just as they were crossing an orchard where some
early plums shone red and ripe.

They paused on their wings.  I cannot explain to you how this is
done, but it is something like treading water when you are
swimming, and hawks do it extremely well.

'Yes, I daresay,' said Cyril, though no one had spoken.  'But
stealing is stealing even if you've got wings.'

'Do you really think so?' said Jane briskly.  'If you've got wings
you're a bird, and no one minds birds breaking the commandments.
At least, they MAY mind, but the birds always do it, and no one
scolds them or sends them to prison.'

It was not so easy to perch on a plum-tree as you might think,
because the rainbow wings were so very large; but somehow they all
managed to do it, and the plums were certainly very sweet and
juicy.

Fortunately, it was not till they had all had quite as many plums
as were good for them that they saw a stout man, who looked exactly
as though he owned the plum-trees, come hurrying through the
orchard gate with a thick stick, and with one accord they
disentangled their wings from the plum-laden branches and began to
fly.

The man stopped short, with his mouth open.  For he had seen the
boughs of his trees moving and twitching, and he had said to
himself, 'The young varmints - at it again!'  And he had come out
at once, for the lads of the village had taught him in past seasons
that plums want looking after.  But when he saw the rainbow wings
flutter up out of the plum-tree he felt that he must have gone
quite mad, and he did not like the feeling at all.  And when Anthea
looked down and saw his mouth go slowly open, and stay so, and his
face become green and mauve in patches, she called out:

'Don't be frightened,' and felt hastily in her pocket for a
threepenny-bit with a hole in it, which she had meant to hang on a
ribbon round her neck, for luck.  She hovered round the unfortunate
plum-owner, and said, 'We have had some of your plums; we thought
it wasn't stealing, but now I am not so sure.  So here's some money
to pay for them.'

She swooped down towards the terror-stricken grower of plums, and
slipped the coin into the pocket of his jacket, and in a few flaps
she had rejoined the others.

The farmer sat down on the grass, suddenly and heavily.

'Well - I'm blessed!' he said.  'This here is what they call
delusions, I suppose.  But this here threepenny' - he had pulled it
out and bitten it - 'THAT'S real enough.  Well, from this day forth
I'll be a better man.  It's the kind of thing to sober a chap for
life, this is.  I'm glad it was only wings, though.  I'd rather see
birds as aren't there, and couldn't be, even if they pretend to
talk, than some things as I could name.'

He got up slowly and heavily, and went indoors, and he was so nice
to his wife that day that she felt quite happy, and said to
herself, 'Law, whatever have a-come to the man!' and smartened
herself up and put a blue ribbon bow at the place where her collar
fastened on, and looked so pretty that he was kinder than ever.  So
perhaps the winged children really did do one good thing that day.
If so, it was the only one; for really there is nothing like wings
for getting you into trouble.  But, on the other hand, if you arc
in trouble, there is nothing like wings for getting you out of it.

This was the case in the matter of the fierce dog who sprang out at
them when they had folded up their wings as small as possible and
were going up to a farm door to ask for a crust of bread and
cheese, for in spite of the plums they were soon just as hungry as
ever again.

Now there is no doubt whatever that, if the four had been ordinary
wingless children, that black and fierce dog would have had a good
bite out of the brown-stockinged leg of Robert, who was the
nearest.  But at first growl there was a flutter of wings, and the
dog was left to strain at his chain and stand on his hind-legs as
if he were trying to fly too.

They tried several other farms, but at those where there were no
dogs the people were far too frightened to do anything but scream;
and at last when it was nearly four o'clock, and their wings were
getting miserably stiff and tired, they alighted on a church-tower
and held a council of war.

'We can't possibly fly all the way home without dinner or tea,'
said Robert with desperate decision.

'And nobody will give us any dinner, or even lunch, let alone tea,'
said Cyril.

'Perhaps the clergyman here might,' suggested Anthea.  'He must
know all about angels -'

'Anybody could see we're not that,' said Jane.  'Look at Robert's
boots and Squirrel's plaid necktie.'

'Well,' said Cyril firmly, 'if the country you're in won't SELL
provisions, you TAKE them.  In wars I mean.  I'm quite certain you
do.  And even in other stories no good brother would allow his
little sisters to starve in the midst of plenty.'

'Plenty?' repeated Robert hungrily; and the others looked vaguely
round the bare leads of the church- tower, and murmured, 'In the
midst of?'

'Yes,' said Cyril impressively.  'There is a larder window at the
side of the clergyman's house, and I saw things to eat inside -
custard pudding and cold chicken and tongue - and pies - and jam.
It's rather a high window - but with wings -'

'How clever of you!' said Jane.

'Not at all,' said Cyril modestly; 'any born general - Napoleon or
the Duke of Marlborough - would have seen it just the same as I
did.'

'It seems very wrong,' said Anthea.

'Nonsense,' said Cyril.  'What was it Sir Philip Sidney said when
the soldier wouldn't stand him a drink? - "My necessity is greater
than his".'

'We'll club our money, though, and leave it to pay for the things,
won't we?'  Anthea was persuasive, and very nearly in tears,
because it is most trying to feel enormously hungry and unspeakably
sinful at one and the same time.

'Some of it,' was the cautious reply.

Everyone now turned out its pockets on the lead roof of the tower,
where visitors for the last hundred and fifty years had cut their
own and their sweethearts' initials with penknives in the soft
lead.  There was five-and-sevenpence-halfpenny altogether, and even
the upright Anthea admitted that that was too much to pay for four
peoples dinners.  Robert said he thought eighteen pence.

And half-a-crown was finally agreed to be 'hand- some'.

So Anthea wrote on the back of her last term's report, which
happened to be in her pocket, and from which she first tore her own
name and that of the school, the following letter:


DEAR REVEREND CLERGYMAN,

We are very hungry indeed because of having to fly all day, and we
think it is not stealing when you are starving to death.  We are
afraid to ask you for fear you should say 'No', because of course
you know about angels, but you would not think we were angels.  We
will only take the nessessities of life, and no pudding or pie, to
show you it is not grediness but true starvation that makes us make
your larder stand and deliver.  But we are not highwaymen by trade.


'Cut it short,' said the others with one accord.  And Anthea
hastily added:

Our intentions are quite honourable if you only knew.  And here is
half-a-crown to show we are sinseer and grateful.  Thank you for
your kind hospitality.
                              FROM Us FOUR.


The half-crown was wrapped in this letter, and all the children
felt that when the clergyman had read it he would understand
everything, as well as anyone could who had not seen the wings.

'Now,' said Cyril,"of course there's some risk; we'd better fly
straight down the other side of the tower and then flutter low
across the churchyard and in through the shrubbery.  There doesn't
seem to be anyone about.  But you never know.  The window looks out
into the shrubbery.  It is embowered in foliage, like a window in
a story.  I'll go in and get the things.  Robert and Anthea can
take them as I hand them out through the window; and Jane can keep
watch - her eyes are sharp - and whistle if she sees anyone about.
Shut up, Robert! she can whistle quite well enough for that,
anyway.  It ought not to be a very good whistle - it'll sound more
natural and birdlike.  Now then - off we go!'

I cannot pretend that stealing is right.  I can only say that on
this occasion it did not look like stealing to the hungry four, but
appeared in the light of a fair and reasonable business
transaction.  They had never happened to learn that a tongue -
hardly cut into - a chicken and a half, a loaf of bread, and a
syphon of soda-water cannot be bought in shops for half-a-crown.
These were the necessaries of life, which Cyril handed out of the
larder window when, quite unobserved and without hindrance or
adventure, he had led the others to that happy spot.  He felt that
to refrain from jam, apple turnovers, cake, and mixed candied peel
was a really heroic act - and I agree with him.  He was also proud
of not taking the custard pudding - and there I think he was wrong
- because if he had taken it there would have been a difficulty
about returning the dish; no one, however starving, has a right to
steal china pie-dishes with little pink flowers on them.  The
soda-water syphon was different.  They could not do without
something to drink, and as the maker's name was on it they felt
sure it would be returned to him wherever they might leave it.  If
they had time they would take it back themselves.  The man appeared
to live in Rochester, which would not be much out of their way
home.

Everything was carried up to the top of the tower, and laid down on
a sheet of kitchen paper which Cyril had found on the top shelf of
the larder.  As he unfolded it, Anthea said, 'I don't think THAT'S
a necessity of life.'

'Yes, it is,' said he.  'We must put the things down somewhere to
cut them up; and I heard father say the other day people got
diseases from germans in rain-water.  Now there must be lots of
rain-water here - and when it dries up the germans are left, and
they'd get into the things, and we should all die of scarlet
fever.'

'What are germans?'

'Little waggly things you see with microscopes,' said Cyril, with
a scientific air.  'They give you every illness you can think of!
I'm sure the paper was a necessary, just as much as the bread and
meat and water.  Now then!  Oh, my eyes, I am hungry!'

I do not wish to describe the picnic party on the top of the tower.
You can imagine well enough what it is like to carve a chicken and
a tongue with a knife that has only one blade - and that snapped
off short about half-way down.  But it was done.  Eating with your
fingers is greasy and difficult - and paper dishes soon get to look
very spotty and horrid.  But one thing you CAN'T imagine, and that
is how soda-water behaves when you try to drink it straight out of
a syphon - especially a quite full one.  But if imagination will
not help you, experience will, and you can easily try it for
yourself if you can get a grown-up to give you the syphon.  If you
want to have a really thorough experience, put the tube in your
mouth and press the handle very suddenly and very hard.  You had
better do it when you are alone - and out of doors is best for this
experiment.

However you eat them, tongue and chicken and new bread are very
good things, and no one minds being sprinkled a little with
soda-water on a really fine hot day.  So that everyone enjoyed the
dinner very much indeed, and everyone ate as much as it possibly
could: first, because it was extremely hungry; and secondly,
because, as I said, tongue and chicken and new bread are very nice.

Now, I daresay you will have noticed that if you have to wait for
your dinner till long after the proper time, and then eat a great
deal more dinner than usual, and sit in the hot sun on the top of
a church-tower - or even anywhere else - you become soon and
strangely sleepy.  Now Anthea and Jane and Cyril and Robert were
very like you in many ways, and when they had eaten all they could,
and drunk all there was, they became sleepy, strangely and soon -
especially Anthea, because she had got up so early.

One by one they left off talking and leaned back, and before it was
a quarter of an hour after dinner they had all curled round and
tucked themselves up under their large soft warm wings and were
fast asleep.  And the sun was sinking slowly in the west.  (I must
say it was in the west, because it is usual in books to say so, for
fear careless people should think it was setting in the east.  In
point of fact, it was not exactly in the west either - but that's
near enough.) The sun, I repeat, was sinking slowly in the west,
and the children slept warmly and happily on - for wings are cosier
than eiderdown quilts to sleep under.  The shadow of the
church-tower fell across the churchyard, and across the Vicarage,
and across the field beyond; and presently there were no more
shadows, and the sun had set, and the wings were gone.  And still
the children slept.  But not for long.  Twilight is very beautiful,
but it is chilly; and you know, however sleepy you are, you wake up
soon enough if your brother or sister happens to be up first and
pulls your blankets off you.  The four wingless children shivered
and woke.  And there they were - on the top of a church-tower in
the dusky twilight, with blue stars coming out by ones and twos and
tens and twenties over their heads - miles away from home, with
three-and-three-halfpence in their pockets, and a doubtful act
about the necessities of life to be accounted for if anyone found
them with the soda-water syphon.

They looked at each other.  Cyril spoke first, picking up the
syphon:

'We'd better get along down and get rid of this beastly thing.
It's dark enough to leave it on the clergyman's doorstep, I should
think.  Come on.'

There was a little turret at the corner of the tower, and the
little turret had a door in it.  They had noticed this when they
were eating, but had not explored it, as you would have done in
their place.  Because, of course, when you have wings, and can
explore the whole sky, doors seem hardly worth exploring.

Now they turned towards it.

'Of course,' said Cyril, 'this is the way down.'

It was.  But the door was locked on the inside!

And the world was growing darker and darker.  And they were miles
from home.  And there was the soda-water syphon.

I shall not tell you whether anyone cried, nor if so, how many
cried, nor who cried.  You will be better employed in making up
your minds what you would have done if you had been in their place.



CHAPTER 5
NO WINGS


Whether anyone cried or not, there was certainly an interval during
which none of the party was quite itself.  When they grew calmer,
Anthea put her handkerchief in her pocket and her arm round Jane,
and said:

'It can't be for more than one night.  We can signal with our
handkerchiefs in the morning.  They'll be dry then.  And someone
will come up and let us out -'

'And find the syphon,' said Cyril gloomily; 'and we shall be sent
to prison for stealing -'

'You said it wasn't stealing.  You said you were sure it wasn't.'

'I'm not sure NOW,' said Cyril shortly.

'Let's throw the beastly thing slap away among the trees,' said
Robert, 'then no one can do anything to us.'

'Oh yes' - Cyril's laugh was not a lighthearted one - 'and hit some
chap on the head, and be murderers as well as - as the other
thing.'

'But we can't stay up here all night,' said Jane; 'and I want my
tea.'

'You CAN'T want your tea,' said Robert; 'you've only just had your
dinner.'

'But I do want it,' she said; 'especially when you begin talking
about stopping up here all night.  Oh, Panther - I want to go home!
I want to go home!'

'Hush, hush,' Anthea said.  'Don't, dear.  It'll be all right,
somehow.  Don't, don't -'

'Let her cry,' said Robert desperately; 'if she howls loud enough,
someone may hear and come and let us out.'

'And see the soda-water thing,' said Anthea swiftly.  'Robert,
don't be a brute.  Oh, Jane, do try to be a man!  It's just the
same for all of us.'

Jane did try to 'be a man' - and reduced her howls to sniffs.

There was a pause.  Then Cyril said slowly, 'Look here.  We must
risk that syphon.  I'll button it up inside my jacket - perhaps no
one will notice it.  You others keep well in front of me.  There
are lights in the clergyman's house.  They've not gone to bed yet.
We must just yell as loud as ever we can.  Now all scream when I
say three.  Robert, you do the yell like the railway engine, and
I'll do the coo-ee like father's.  The girls can do as they please.
One, two, three!'

A fourfold yell rent the silent peace of the evening, and a maid at
one of the Vicarage windows paused with her hand on the blind-cord.

'One, two, three!'  Another yell, piercing and complex, startled
the owls and starlings to a flutter of feathers in the belfry
below.  The maid fled from the Vicarage window and ran down the
Vicarage stairs and into the Vicarage kitchen, and fainted as soon
as she had explained to the man-servant and the cook and the cook's
cousin that she had seen a ghost.  It was quite untrue, of course,
but I suppose the girl's nerves were a little upset by the yelling.

'One, two, three!'  The Vicar was on his doorstep by this time, and
there was no mistaking the yell that greeted him.

'Goodness me,' he said to his wife, 'my dear, someone's being
murdered in the church!  Give me my hat and a thick stick, and tell
Andrew to come after me.  I expect it's the lunatic who stole the
tongue.'

The children had seen the flash of light when the Vicar opened his
front door.  They had seen his dark form on the doorstep, and they
had paused for breath, and also to see what he would do.

When he turned back for his hat, Cyril said hastily:

'He thinks he only fancied he heard something.  You don't half
yell!  Now!  One, two, three!'

It was certainly a whole yell this time, and the Vicar's wife flung
her arms round her husband and screamed a feeble echo of it.

'You shan't go!' she said, 'not alone.  Jessie!' - the maid
unfainted and came out of the kitchen - 'send Andrew at once.
There's a dangerous lunatic in the church, and he must go
immediately and catch it.'

'I expect he WILL catch it too,' said Jessie to herself as she went
through the kitchen door.  'Here, Andrew,' she said, there's
someone screaming like mad in the church, and the missus says
you're to go along and catch it.'

'Not alone, I don't,' said Andrew in low firm tones.  To his master
he merely said, 'Yes, sir.'

'You heard those screams?'

'I did think I noticed a sort of something,' said Andrew.

'Well, come on, then,' said the Vicar.  'My dear, I MUST go!' He
pushed her gently into the sitting-room, banged the door, and
rushed out, dragging Andrew by the arm.

A volley of yells greeted them.  As it died into silence Andrew
shouted, 'Hullo, you there!  Did you call?'

'Yes,' shouted four far-away voices.

'They seem to be in the air,' said the Vicar.  'Very remarkable.'

'Where are you?' shouted Andrew: and Cyril replied in his deepest
voice, very slow and loud:

'CHURCH!  TOWER!  TOP!'

'Come down, then!' said Andrew; and the same voice replied:

'CAN'T!  DOOR LOCKED!'

'My goodness!' said the Vicar.  'Andrew, fetch the stable lantern.
Perhaps it would be as well to fetch another man from the village.'

'With the rest of the gang about, very likely.  No, sir; if this
'ere ain't a trap - well, may I never!  There's cook's cousin at
the back door now.  He's a keeper, sir, and used to dealing with
vicious characters.  And he's got his gun, sir.'

'Hullo there!' shouted Cyril from the church-tower; 'come up and
let us out.'

'We're a-coming,' said Andrew.  'I'm a-going to get a policeman and
a gun.'

'Andrew, Andrew,' said the Vicar, 'that's not the truth.'

'It's near enough, sir, for the likes of them.'

So Andrew fetched the lantern and the cook's cousin; and the
Vicar's wife begged them all to be very careful.

They went across the churchyard - it was quite dark now - and as
they went they talked.  The Vicar was certain a lunatic was on the
church-tower - the one who had written the mad letter, and taken
the cold tongue and things.  Andrew thought it was a 'trap'; the
cook's cousin alone was calm.  'Great cry, little wool,' said he;
'dangerous chaps is quieter.'  He was not at all afraid.  But then
he had a gun.  That was why he was asked to lead the way up the
worn steep dark steps of the church-tower.  He did lead the way,
with the lantern in one hand and the gun in the other.  Andrew went
next.  He pretended afterwards that this was because he was braver
than his master, but really it was because he thought of traps, and
he did not like the idea of being behind the others for fear
someone should come soffly up behind him and catch hold of his legs
in the dark.  They went on and on, and round and round the little
corkscrew staircase - then through the bell-ringers' loft, where
the bell-ropes hung with soft furry ends like giant caterpillars -
then up another stair into the belfry, where the big quiet bells
are - and then on, up a ladder with broad steps - and then up a
little stone stair.  And at the top of that there was a little
door.  And the door was bolted on the stair side.

The cook's cousin, who was a gamekeeper, kicked at the door, and
said:

'Hullo, you there!'

The children were holding on to each other on the other side of the
door, and trembling with anxiousness - and very hoarse with their
howls.  They could hardly speak, but Cyril managed to reply
huskily:

'Hullo, you there!'

'How did you get up there?'

It was no use saying 'We flew up', so Cyril said:

'We got up - and then we found the door was locked and we couldn't
get down.  Let us out - do.'

'How many of you are there?' asked the keeper.

'Only four,' said Cyril.

'Are you armed?'

'Are we what?'

'I've got my gun handy - so you'd best not try any tricks,' said
the keeper.  'If we open the door, will you promise to come quietly
down, and no nonsense?'

'Yes - oh YES!' said all the children together.

'Bless me,' said the Vicar, 'surely that was a female voice?'

'Shall I open the door, Sir?' said the keeper.  Andrew went down a
few steps, 'to leave room for the others' he said afterwards.

'Yes,' said the Vicar, 'open the door.  Remember,' he said through
the keyhole, 'we have come to release you.  You will keep your
promise to refrain from violence?'

'How this bolt do stick,' said the keeper; 'anyone 'ud think it
hadn't been drawed for half a year.'  As a matter of fact it
hadn't.

When all the bolts were drawn, the keeper spoke deep-chested words
through the keyhole.

'I don't open,' said he, 'till you've gone over to the other side
of the tower.  And if one of you comes at me I fire.  Now!'

'We're all over on the other side,' said the voices.

The keeper felt pleased with himself, and owned himself a bold man
when he threw open that door, and, stepping out into the leads,
flashed the full light of the stable lantern on to the group of
desperadoes standing against the parapet on the other side of the
tower.

He lowered his gun, and he nearly dropped the lantern.

'So help me,' he cried, 'if they ain't a pack of kiddies!'

The Vicar now advanced.

'How did you come here?' he asked severely.  'Tell me at once.  '

'Oh, take us down,' said Jane, catching at his coat, 'and we'll
tell you anything you like.  You won't believe us, but it doesn't
matter.  Oh, take us down!'

The others crowded round him, with the same entreaty.  All but
Cyril.  He had enough to do with the soda-water syphon, which would
keep slipping down under his jacket.  It needed both hands to keep
it steady in its place.

But he said, standing as far out of the lantern light as possible:

'Please do take us down.'

So they were taken down.  It is no joke to go down a strange
church-tower in the dark, but the keeper helped them - only, Cyril
had to be independent because of the soda-water syphon.  It would
keep trying to get away.  Half-way down the ladder it all but
escaped.  Cyril just caught it by its spout, and as nearly as
possible lost his footing.  He was trembling and pale when at last
they reached the bottom of the winding stair and stepped out on to
the flags of the church-porch.

Then suddenly the keeper caught Cyril and Robert each by an arm.

'You bring along the gells, sir,' said he; 'you and Andrew can
manage them.'

'Let go!' said Cyril; 'we aren't running away.  We haven't hurt
your old church.  Leave go!'

'You just come along,' said the keeper; and Cyril dared not oppose
him with violence, because just then the syphon began to slip
again.

So they were all marched into the Vicarage study, and the Vicar's
wife came rushing in.

'Oh, William, are you safe?' she cried.

Robert hastened to allay her anxiety.

'Yes,' he said, 'he's quite safe.  We haven't hurt him at all.  And
please, we're very late, and they'll be anxious at home.  Could you
send us home in your carriage?'

'Or perhaps there's a hotel near where we could get a carriage
from,' said Anthea.  'Martha will be very anxious as it is.'

The Vicar had sunk into a chair, overcome by emotion and amazement.

Cyril had also sat down, and was leaning forward with his elbows on
his knees because of that soda-water syphon.

'But how did you come to be locked up in the church-tower?' asked
the Vicar.

'We went up,' said Robert slowly, 'and we were tired, and we all
went to sleep, and when we woke up we found the door was locked, so
we yelled.'

'I should think you did!' said the Vicar's wife.  'Frightening
everybody out of their wits like this!  You ought to be ashamed of
yourselves.'

'We are,' said Jane gently.

'But who locked the door?' asked the Vicar.

'I don't know at all,' said Robert, with perfect truth.  'Do please
send us home.'

'Well, really,' said the Vicar, 'I suppose we'd better.  Andrew,
put the horse to, and you can take them home.'

'Not alone, I don't,' said Andrew to himself.

'And,' the Vicar went on, 'let this be a lesson to you ...'  He
went on talking, and the children listened miserably.  But the
keeper was not listening.  He was looking at the unfortunate Cyril.
He knew all about poachers of course, so he knew how people look
when they're hiding something.  The Vicar had just got to the part
about trying to grow up to be a blessing to your parents, and not
a trouble and a disgrace, when the keeper suddenly said:

'Arst him what he's got there under his jacket'; and Cyril knew
that concealment was at an end.  So he stood up, and squared his
shoulders and tried to look noble, like the boys in books that no
one can look in the face of and doubt that they come of brave and
noble families and will be faithful to the death, and he pulled out
the soda-water syphon and said:

'Well, there you are, then.'

There was a silence.  Cyril went on - there was nothing else for
it:

'Yes, we took this out of your larder, and some chicken and tongue
and bread.  We were very hungry, and we didn't take the custard or
jam.  We only took bread and meat and water - and we couldn't help
its being the soda kind -just the necessaries of life; and we left
half-a-crown to pay for it, and we left a letter.  And we're very
sorry.  And my father will pay a fine or anything you like, but
don't send us to prison.  Mother would be so vexed.  You know what
you said about not being a disgrace.  Well, don't you go and do it
to us - that's all!  We're as sorry as we can be.  There!'

'However did you get up to the larder window?' said Mrs Vicar.

'I can't tell you that,' said Cyril firmly.

'Is this the whole truth you've been telling me?' asked the
clergyman.

'No,' answered Jane suddenly; 'it's all true, but it's not the
whole truth.  We can't tell you that.  It's no good asking.  Oh, do
forgive us and take us home!'  She ran to the Vicar's wife and
threw her arms round her.  The Vicar's wife put her arms round
Jane, and the keeper whispered behind his hand to the Vicar:

'They're all right, sir - I expect it's a pal they're standing by.
Someone put 'em up to it, and they won't peach.  Game little kids.'

'Tell me,' said the Vicar kindly, 'are you screening someone else?
Had anyone else anything to do with this?'

'Yes,' said Anthea, thinking of the Psammead; 'but it wasn't their
fault.'

'Very well, my dears,' said the Vicar, 'then let's say no more
about it.  Only just tell us why you wrote such an odd letter.'

'I don't know,' said Cyril.  'You see, Anthea wrote it in such a
hurry, and it really didn't seem like stealing then.  But
afterwards, when we found we couldn't get down off the
church-tower, it seemed just exactly like it.  We are all very
sorry -'

'Say no more about it,' said the Vicar's wife; 'but another time
just think before you take other people's tongues.  Now - some cake
and milk before you go home?'

When Andrew came to say that the horse was put to, and was he
expected to be led alone into the trap that he had plainly seen
from the first, he found the children eating cake and drinking milk
and laughing at the Vicar's jokes.  Jane was sitting on the Vicar's
wife's lap.

So you see they got off better than they deserved.

The gamekeeper, who was the cook's cousin, asked leave to drive
home with them, and Andrew was only too glad to have someone to
protect him from the trap he was so certain of.

When the wagonette reached their own house, between the
chalk-quarry and the gravel-pit, the children were very sleepy, but
they felt that they and the keeper were friends for life.

Andrew dumped the children down at the iron gate without a word.
'You get along home,' said the Vicarage cook's cousin, who was a
gamekeeper.  'I'll get me home on Shanks' mare.'

So Andrew had to drive off alone, which he did not like at all, and
it was the keeper that was cousin to the Vicarage cook who went
with the children to the door, and, when they had been swept to bed
in a whirlwind of reproaches, remained to explain to Martha and the
cook and the housemaid exactly what had happened.  He explained so
well that Martha was quite amiable the next morning.

After that he often used to come over and see Martha; and in the
end - but that is another story, as dear Mr Kipling says.

Martha was obliged to stick to what she had said the night before
about keeping the children indoors the next day for a punishment.
But she wasn't at all snarky about it, and agreed to let Robert go
out for half an hour to get something he particularly wanted.
This, of course, was the day's wish.

Robert rushed to the gravel-pit, found the Psammead, and presently
wished for - But that, too, is another story.



CHAPTER 6
A CASTLE AND NO DINNER


The others were to be kept in as a punishment for the misfortunes
of the day before.  Of course Martha thought it was naughtiness,
and not misfortune - so you must not blame her.  She only thought
she was doing her duty.  You know grown-up people often say they do
not like to punish you, and that they only do it for your own good,
and that it hurts them as much as it hurts you - and this is really
very often the truth.

Martha certainly hated having to punish the children quite as much
as they hated to be punished.  For one thing, she knew what a noise
there would be in the house all day.  And she had other reasons.

'I declare,' she said to the cook, 'it seems almost a shame keeping
of them indoors this lovely day; but they are that audacious,
they'll be walking in with their heads knocked off some of these
days, if I don't put my foot down.  You make them a cake for tea
to-morrow, dear.  And we'll have Baby along of us soon as we've got
a bit forrard with our work.  Then they can have a good romp with
him out of the way.  Now, Eliza, come, get on with them beds.
Here's ten o'clock nearly, and no rabbits caught!'

People say that in Kent when they mean 'and no work done'.

So all the others were kept in, but Robert, as I have said, was
allowed to go out for half an hour to get something they all
wanted.  And that, of course, was the day's wish.
He had no difficulty in finding the Sand-fairy, for the day was
already so hot that it had actually, for the first time, come out
of its own accord, and it was sitting in a sort of pool of soft
sand, stretching itself, and trimming its whiskers, and turning its
snail's eyes round and round.

'Ha!' it said when its left eye saw Robert; 'I've been looking out
for you.  Where are the rest of you?  Not smashed themselves up
with those wings, I hope?'

'No,' said Robert; 'but the wings got us into a row, just like all
the wishes always do.  So the others are kept indoors, and I was
only let out for half-an-hour - to get the wish.  So please let me
wish as quickly as I can.'

'Wish away,' said the Psammead, twisting itself round in the sand.
But Robert couldn't wish away.  He forgot all the things he had
been thinking about, and nothing would come into his head but
little things for himself, like toffee, a foreign stamp album, or
a clasp- knife with three blades and a corkscrew.  He sat down to
think better, but it was no use.  He could only think of things the
others would not have cared for - such as a football, or a pair of
leg-guards, or to be able to lick Simpkins minor thoroughly when he
went back to school.

'Well,' said the Psammead at last, 'you'd better hurry up with that
wish of yours.  Time flies.'

'I know it does,' said Robert.  'I can't think what to wish for.
I wish you could give one of the others their wish without their
having to come here to ask for it.  Oh, DON'T!'

But it was too late.  The Psammead had blown itself out to about
three times its proper size, and now it collapsed like a pricked
bubble, and with a deep sigh leaned back against the edge of its
sand-pool, quite faint with the effort.

'There!' it said in a weak voice; 'it was tremendously hard - but
I did it.  Run along home, or they're sure to wish for something
silly before you get there.'

They were - quite sure; Robert felt this, and as he ran home his
mind was deeply occupied with the sort of wishes he might find they
had wished in his absence.  They might wish for rabbits, or white
mice, or chocolate, or a fine day to-morrow, or even - and that was
most likely - someone might have said, 'I do wish to goodness
Robert would hurry up.'  Well, he WAS hurrying up, and so they
would have their wish, and the day would be wasted.  Then he tried
to think what they could wish for - something that would be amusing
indoors.  That had been his own difficulty from the beginning.  So
few things are amusing indoors when the sun is shining outside and
you mayn't go out, however much you want to.  Robert was running as
fast as he could, but when he turned the corner that ought to have
brought him within sight of the architect's nightmare - the
ornamental iron-work on the top of the house - he opened his eyes
so wide that he had to drop into a walk; for you cannot run with
your eyes wide open.  Then suddenly he stopped short, for there was
no house to be seen.  The front-garden railings were gone too, and
where the house had stood - Robert rubbed his eyes and looked
again.  Yes, the others HAD wished - there was no doubt about that
- and they must have wished that they lived in a castle; for there
the castle stood black and stately, and very tall and broad, with
battlements and lancet windows, and eight great towers; and, where
the garden and the orchard had been, there were white things dotted
like mushrooms.  Robert walked slowly on, and as he got nearer he
saw that these were tents) and men in armour were walking about
among the tents - crowds and crowds of them.

'Oh, crikey!' said Robert fervently.  'They HAVE!  They've wished
for a castle, and it's being besieged!  It's just like that
Sand-fairy!  I wish we'd never seen the beastly thing!'

At the little window above the great gateway, across the moat that
now lay where the garden had been but half an hour ago, someone was
waving something pale dust-coloured.  Robert thought it was one of
Cyril's handkerchiefs.  They had never been white since the day
when he had upset the bottle of 'Combined Toning and Fixing
Solution' into the drawer where they were.  Robert waved back, and
immediately felt that he had been unwise.  For his signal had been
seen by the besieging force, and two men in steel-caps were coming
towards him.  They had high brown boots on their long legs, and
they came towards him with such great strides that Robert
remembered the shortness of his own legs and did not run away.  He
knew it would be useless to himself, and he feared it might be
irritating to the foe.  So he stood still, and the two men seemed
quite pleased with him.

'By my halidom,' said one, 'a brave varlet this!'

Robert felt pleased at being CALLED brave, and somehow it made him
FEEL brave.  He passed over the 'varlet'.  It was the way people
talked in historical romances for the young, he knew, and it was
evidently not meant for rudeness.  He only hoped he would be able
to understand what they said to him.  He had not always been able
quite to follow the conversations in the historical romances for
the young.

'His garb is strange,' said the other.  'Some outlandish treachery,
belike.'

'Say, lad, what brings thee hither?'

Robert knew this meant, 'Now then, youngster, what are you up to
here, eh?' - so he said:

'If you please, I want to go home.'

'Go, then!' said the man in the longest boots; 'none hindereth, and
nought lets us to follow.  Zooks!' he added in a cautious
undertone, 'I misdoubt me but he beareth tidings to the besieged.'

'Where dwellest thou, young knave?' inquired the man with the
largest steel-cap.

'Over there,' said Robert; and directly he had said it he knew he
ought to have said 'Yonder!'

'Ha - sayest so?' rejoined the longest boots.  'Come hither, boy.
This is a matter for our leader.'

And to the leader Robert was dragged forthwith - by the reluctant
ear.

The leader was the most glorious creature Robert had ever seen.  He
was exactly like the pictures Robert had so often admired in the
historical romances.  He had armour, and a helmet, and a horse, and
a crest, and feathers, and a shield, and a lance, and a sword.  His
armour and his weapons were all, I am almost sure, of quite
different periods.  The shield was thirteenth-century, while the
sword was of the pattern used in the Peninsular War.  The cuirass
was of the time of Charles I, and the helmet dated from the Second
Crusade.  The arms on the shield were very grand - three red
running lions on a blue ground.  The tents were of the latest brand
and the whole appearance of camp, army, and leader might have been
a shock to some.  But Robert was dumb with admiration, and it all
seemed to him perfectly correct, because he knew no more of
heraldry or archaeology than the gifted artists who usually drew
the pictures for the historical romances.  The scene was indeed
'exactly like a picture'.  He admired it all so much that he felt
braver than ever.

'Come hither, lad,' said the glorious leader, when the men in
Cromwellian steel-caps had said a few low eager words.  And he took
off his helmet, because he could not see properly with it on.  He
had a kind face, and long fair hair.  'Have no fear; thou shalt
take no scathe,' he said.

Robert was glad of that.  He wondered what 'scathe' was, and if it
was nastier than the senna tea which he had to take sometimes.

'Unfold thy tale without alarm,' said the leader kindly.  'Whence
comest thou, and what is thine intent?'

'My what?' said Robert.

'What seekest thou to accomplish?  What is thine errand, that thou
wanderest here alone among these rough men-at-arms?  Poor child,
thy mother's heart aches for thee e'en now, I'll warrant me.'

'I don't think so,' said Robert; 'you see, she doesn't know I'm
out.'

The leader wiped away a manly tear, exactly as a leader in a
historical romance would have done, and said:

'Fear not to speak the truth, my child; thou hast nought to fear
from Wulfric de Talbot.'

Robert had a wild feeling that this glorious leader of the
besieging party - being himself part of a wish - would be able to
understand better than Martha, or the gipsies, or the policeman in
Rochester, or the clergyman of yesterday, the true tale of the
wishes and the Psammead.  The only difficulty was that he knew he
could never remember enough 'quothas' and 'beshrew me's', and
things like that, to make his talk sound like the talk of a boy in
a historical romance.  However, he began boldly enough, with a
sentence straight out of Ralph de Courcy; or, The Boy Crusader.  He
said:

'Grammercy for thy courtesy, fair sir knight.  The fact is, it's
like this - and I hope you're not in a hurry, because the story's
rather a breather.  Father and mother are away, and when we were
down playing in the sand-pits we found a Psammead.'

'I cry thee mercy!  A Sammyadd?' said the knight.

'Yes, a sort of - of fairy, or enchanter - yes, that's it, an
enchanter; and he said we could have a wish every day, and we
wished first to be beautiful.'

'Thy wish was scarce granted,' muttered one of the men-at-arms,
looking at Robert, who went on as if he had not heard, though he
thought the remark very rude indeed.

'And then we wished for money - treasure, you know; but we couldn't
spend it.  And yesterday we wished for wings, and we got them, and
we had a ripping time to begin with -'

'Thy speech is strange and uncouth,' said Sir Wulfric de Talbot.
'Repeat thy words - what hadst thou?'

'A ripping - I mean a jolly - no - we were contented with our lot
- that's what I mean; only, after that we got into an awful fix.'

'What is a fix?  A fray, mayhap?'

'No - not a fray.  A - a - a tight place.'

'A dungeon?  Alas for thy youthful fettered limbs!' said the
knight, with polite sympathy.

'It wasn't a dungeon.  We just - just encountered undeserved
misfortunes,' Robert explained, 'and to-day we are punished by not
being allowed to go out.  That's where I live,' - he pointed to the
castle.  'The others are in there, and they're not allowed to go
out.  It's all the Psammead's - I mean the enchanter's fault.  I
wish we'd never seen him.'

'He is an enchanter of might?'

'Oh yes - of might and main.  Rather!'

'And thou deemest that it is the spells of the enchanter whom thou
hast angered that have lent strength to the besieging party,' said
the gallant leader; 'but know thou that Wulfric de Talbot needs no
enchanter's aid to lead his followers to victory.'

'No, I'm sure you don't,' said Robert, with hasty courtesy; 'of
course not - you wouldn't, you know.  But, all the same, it's
partly his fault, but we're most to blame.  You couldn't have done
anything if it hadn't been for us.'

'How now, bold boy?' asked Sir Wulfric haughtily.  'Thy speech is
dark, and eke scarce courteous.  Unravel me this riddle!'

'Oh,' said Robert desperately, 'of course you don't know it, but
you're not REAL at all.  You're only here because the others must
have been idiots enough to wish for a castle - and when the sun
sets you'll just vanish away, and it'll be all right.'

The captain and the men-at-arms exchanged glances, at first
pitying, and then sterner, as the longest-booted man said, 'Beware,
noble my lord; the urchin doth but feign madness to escape from our
clutches.  Shall we not bind him?'

'I'm no more mad than you are,' said Robert angrily, 'perhaps not
so much - only, I was an idiot to think you'd understand anything.
Let me go - I haven't done anything to you.'

'Whither?' asked the knight, who seemed to have believed all the
enchanter story till it came to his own share in it.  'Whither
wouldst thou wend?'

'Home, of course.'  Robert pointed to the castle.

'To carry news of succour?  Nay!'

'All right then,' said Robert, struck by a sudden idea; 'then let
me go somewhere else.'  His mind sought eagerly among his memories
of the historical romance.

'Sir Wulfric de Talbot,' he said slowly, 'should think foul scorn
to - to keep a chap - I mean one who has done him no hurt - when he
wants to cut off quietly - I mean to depart without violence.'

'This to my face!  Beshrew thee for a knave!' replied Sir Wulfric.
But the appeal seemed to have gone home.  'Yet thou sayest sooth,'
he added thoughtfully.  'Go where thou wilt,' he added nobly, 'thou
art free.  Wulfric de Talbot warreth not with babes, and Jakin here
shall bear thee company.'
'All right,' said Robert wildly.  'Jakin will enjoy himself, I
think.  Come on, Jakin.  Sir Wulfric, I salute thee.'

He saluted after the modern military manner, and set off running to
the sand-pit, Jakin's long boots keeping up easily.

He found the Fairy.  He dug it up, he woke it up,

he implored it to give him one more wish.

'I've done two to-day already,' it grumbled, 'and one was as stiff
a bit of work as ever I did.'

'Oh, do, do, do, do, DO!' said Robert, while Jakin looked on with
an expression of open-mouthed horror at the strange beast that
talked, and gazed with its snail's eyes at him.

'Well, what is it?' snapped the Psammead, with cross sleepiness.

'I wish I was with the others,' said Robert.  And the Psammead
began to swell.  Robert never thought of wishing the castle and the
siege away.  Of course he knew they had all come out of a wish, but
swords and daggers and pikes and lances seemed much too real to be
wished away.  Robert lost consciousness for an instant.  When he
opened his eyes the others were crowding round him.

'We never heard you come in,' they said.  'How awfully jolly of you
to wish it to give us our wish!'

'Of course we understood that was what you'd done.'

'But you ought to have told us.  Suppose we'd wished something
silly.'

'Silly?' said Robert, very crossly indeed.  'How much sillier could
you have been, I'd like to know?  You nearly settled ME - I can
tell you.'

Then he told his story, and the others admitted that it certainly
had been rough on him.  But they praised his courage and cleverness
so much that he presently got back his lost temper, and felt braver
than ever, and consented to be captain of the besieged force.

'We haven't done anything yet,' said Anthea comfortably; 'we waited
for you.  We're going to shoot at them through these little
loopholes with the bow and arrows uncle gave you, and you shall
have first shot.'

'I don't think I would,' said Robert cautiously; 'you don't know
what they're like near to.  They've got REAL bows and arrows - an
awful length - and swords and pikes and daggers, and all sorts of
sharp things.  They're all quite, quite real.  It's not just a - a
picture, or a vision, or anything; they can hurt us - or kill us
even, I shouldn't wonder.  I can feel my ear all sore still.  Look
here - have you explored the castle?  Because I think we'd better
let them alone as long as they let us alone.  I heard that Jakin
man say they weren't going to attack till just before sundown.  We
can be getting ready for the attack.  Are there any soldiers in the
castle to defend it?'

'We don't know,' said Cyril.  'You see, directly I'd wished we were
in a besieged castle, everything seemed to go upside down, and,when
it came straight we looked out of the window, and saw the camp and
things and you - and of course we kept on looking at everything.
Isn't this room jolly?  It's as real as real!'

It was.  It was square, with stone walls four feet thick, and great
beams for ceiling.  A low door at the corner led to a flight of
steps, up and down.  The children went down; they found themselves
in a great arched gatehouse - the enormous doors were shut and
barred.  There was a window in a little room at the bottom of the
round turret up which the stair wound, rather larger than the other
windows, and looking through it they saw that the drawbridge was up
and the portcullis down; the moat looked very wide and deep.
Opposite the great door that led to the moat was another great
door, with a little door in it.  The children went through this,
and found themselves in a big paved courtyard, with the great grey
walls of the castle rising dark and heavy on all four sides.

Near the middle of the courtyard stood Martha, moving her right
hand backwards and forwards in the air.  The cook was stooping down
and moving her hands, also in a very curious way.  But.  the oddest
and at the same time most terrible thing was the Lamb, who was
sitting on nothing, about three feet from the ground, laughing
happily.

The children ran towards him.  Just as Anthea was reaching out her
arms to take him, Martha said crossly, 'Let him alone - do, miss,
when he is good.'

'But what's he DOING?' said Anthea.

'Doing?  Why, a-setting in his high chair as good as gold, a
precious, watching me doing of the ironing.  Get along with you, do
- my iron's cold again.'

She went towards the cook, and seemed to poke an invisible fire
with an unseen poker - the cook seemed to be putting an unseen dish
into an invisible oven.

'Run along with you, do,' she said; 'I'm behindhand as it is.  You
won't get no dinner if you come a-hindering of me like this.  Come,
off you goes, or I'll pin a dishcloth to some of your tails.'

'You're sure the Lamb's all right?' asked Jane anxiously.

'Right as ninepence, if you don't come unsettling of him.  I
thought you'd like to be rid of him for to-day; but take him, if
you want him, for gracious' sake.'

'No, no,' they said, and hastened away.  They would have to defend
the castle presently, and the Lamb was safer even suspended in
mid-air in an invisible kitchen than in the guardroom of a besieged
castle.  They went through the first doorway they came to, and sat
down helplessly on a wooden bench that ran along the room inside.

'How awful!' said Anthea and Jane together; and Jane added, 'I feel
as if I was in a mad asylum.'

'What does it mean?' Anthea said.  'It's creepy; I don't like it.
I wish we'd wished for something plain - a rocking-horse, or a
donkey, or something.'

'It's no use wishing NOW,' said Robert bitterly; and Cyril said:

'Do dry up a sec; I want to think.'

He buried his face in his hands, and the others looked about them.
They were in a long room with an arched roof.  There were wooden
tables along it, and one across at the end of the room, on a sort
of raised platform.  The room was very dim and dark.  The floor was
strewn with dry things like sticks, and they did not smell nice.

Cyril sat up suddenly and said:

'Look here - it's all right.  I think it's like this.  You know, we
wished that the servants shouldn't notice any difference when we
got wishes.  And nothing happens to the Lamb unless we specially
wish it to.  So of course they don't notice the castle or anything.
But then the castle is on the same place where our house was - is,
I mean - and the servants have to go on being in the house, or else
they would notice.  But you can't have a castle mixed up with our
house - and so we can't see the house, because we see the castle;
and they can't see the castle, because they go on seeing the house;
and so -'

'Oh, DON'T!' said Jane; 'you make my head go all swimmy, like being
on a roundabout.  It doesn't matter!  Only, I hope we shall be able
to see our dinner, that's all - because if it's invisible it'll be
unfeelable as well, and then we can't eat it!  I KNOW it will,
because I tried to feel if I could feel the Lamb's chair, and there
was nothing under him at all but air.  And we can't eat air, and I
feel just as if I hadn't had any breakfast for years and years.'

'It's no use thinking about it,' said Anthea.  'Let's go on
exploring.  Perhaps we might find something to eat.'

This lighted hope in every breast, and they went on exploring the
castle.  But though it was the most perfect and delightful castle
you can possibly imagine, and furnished in the most complete and
beautiful manner, neither food nor men-at-arms were to be found in
it.
'If only you'd thought of wishing to be besieged in a castle
thoroughly garrisoned and provisioned!' said Jane reproachfully.

'You can't think of everything, you know,' said Anthea.  'I should
think it must be nearly dinner-time by now.'

It wasn't; but they hung about watching the strange movements of
the servants in the middle of the courtyard, because, of course,
they couldn't be sure where the dining-room of the invisible house
was.  Presently they saw Martha carrying an invisible tray across
the courtyard, for it seemed that, by the most fortunate accident,
the dining-room of the house and the banqueting-hall of the castle
were in the same place.  But oh, how their hearts sank when they
perceived that the tray was invisible!

They waited in wretched silence while Martha went through the form
of carving an unseen leg of mutton and serving invisible greens and
potatoes with a spoon that no one could see.  When she had left the
room, the children looked at the empty table, and then at each
other.

'This is worse than anything,' said Robert, who had not till now
been particularly keen on his dinner.

'I'm not so very hungry,' said Anthea, trying to make the best of
things, as usual.

Cyril tightened his belt ostentatiously.  Jane burst into tears.



CHAPTER 7
A SIEGE AND BED


The children were sitting in the gloomy banqueting-hall, at the end
of one of the long bare wooden tables.  There was now no hope.
Martha had brought in the dinner, and the dinner was invisible, and
unfeelable too; for, when they rubbed their hands along the table,
they knew but too well that for them there was nothing there BUT
table.

Suddenly Cyril felt in his pocket.

'Right, oh!' he cried.  'Look here!  Biscuits.'

Rather broken and crumbled, certainly, but still biscuits.  Three
whole ones, and a generous handful of crumbs and fragments.

'I got them this morning - cook - and I'd quite forgotten,' he
explained as he divided them with scrupulous fairness into four
heaps.

They were eaten in a happy silence, though they tasted a little
oddly, because they had been in Cyril's pocket all the morning with
a hank of tarred twine, some green fir-cones, and a ball of
cobbler's wax.

'Yes, but look here, Squirrel,' said Robert; 'you're so clever at
explaining about invisibleness and all that.  How is it the
biscuits are here, and all the bread and meat and things have
disappeared?'

'I don't know,' said Cyril after a pause, 'unless it's because WE
had them.  Nothing about us has changed.  Everything's in my pocket
all right.'

'Then if we HAD the mutton it would be real,' said Robert.  'Oh,
don't I wish we could find it!'

'But we can't find it.  I suppose it isn't ours till we've got it
in our mouths.'

'Or in our pockets,' said Jane, thinking of the biscuits.

'Who puts mutton in their pockets, goose-girl?' said Cyril.  'But
I know - at any rate, I'll try it!'

He leaned over the table with his face about an inch from it, and
kept opening and shutting his mouth as if he were taking bites out
of air.

'It's no good,' said Robert in deep dejection.  'You'll only -
Hullo!'

Cyril stood up with a grin of triumph, holding a square piece of
bread in his mouth.  It was quite real.  Everyone saw it.  It is
true that, directly he bit a piece off, the rest vanished; but it
was all right, because he knew he had it in his hand though he
could neither see nor feel it.  He took another bite from the air
between his fingers, and it turned into bread as he bit.  The next
moment all the others were following his example, and opening and
shutting their mouths an inch or so from the bare-looking table.
Robert captured a slice of mutton, and - but I think I will draw a
veil over the rest of this painful scene.  It is enough to say that
they all had enough mutton, and that when Martha came to change the
plates she said she had never seen such a mess in all her born
days.

The pudding was, fortunately, a plain suet roly-poly, and in answer
to Martha's questions the children all with one accord said that
they would NOT have treacle on it - nor jam, nor sugar - 'Just
plain, please,' they said.  Martha said, 'Well, I never - what
next, I wonder!' and went away.

Then ensued another scene on which I will not dwell, for nobody
looks nice picking up slices of suet pudding from the table in its
mouth, like a dog.
The great thing, after all, was that they had had dinner; and now
everyone felt more courage to prepare for the attack that was to be
delivered before sunset.  Robert, as captain, insisted on climbing
to the top of one of the towers to reconnoitre, so up they all
went.  And now they could see all round the castle, and could see,
too, that beyond the moat, on every side, the tents of the
besieging party were pitched.  Rather uncomfortable shivers ran
down the children's backs as they saw that all the men were very
busy cleaning or sharpening their arms, re-stringing their bows,
and polishing their shields.  A large party came along the road,
with horses dragging along the great trunk of a tree; and Cyril
felt quite pale, because he knew this was for a battering-ram.

'What a good thing we've got a moat,' he said; 'and what a good
thing the drawbridge is up - I should never have known how to work
it.'

'Of course it would be up in a besieged castle.'

'You'd think there ought to have been soldiers in it, wouldn't
you?' said Robert.

'You see you don't know how long it's been besieged,' said Cyril
darkly; 'perhaps most of the brave defenders were killed quite
early in the siege and all the provisions eaten, and now there are
only a few intrepid survivors - that's us, and we are going to
defend it to the death.'

'How do you begin - defending to the death, I mean?' asked Anthea.

'We ought to be heavily armed - and then shoot at them when they
advance to the attack.'

'They used to pour boiling lead down on besiegers when they got too
close,' said Anthea.  'Father showed me the holes on purpose for
pouring it down through at Bodiam Castle.  And there are holes like
it in the gate-tower here.'

'I think I'm glad it's only a game; it IS only a game, isn't it?'
said Jane.

But no one answered.

The children found plenty of strange weapons in the castle, and if
they were armed at all it was soon plain that they would be, as
Cyril said, 'armed heavily' - for these swords and lances and
crossbows were far too weighty even for Cyril's manly strength; and
as for the longbows, none of the children could even begin to bend
them.  The daggers were better; but Jane hoped that the besiegers
would not come close enough for daggers to be of any use.

'Never mind, we can hurl them like javelins,' said Cyril, 'or drop
them on people's heads.  I say - there are lots of stones on the
other side of the courtyard.  If we took some of those up, just to
drop on their heads if they were to try swimming the moat.'

So a heap of stones grew apace, up in the room above the gate; and
another heap, a shiny spiky dangerous-looking heap, of daggers and
knives.

As Anthea was crossing the courtyard for more stones, a sudden and
valuable idea came to her.  She went to Martha and said, 'May we
have just biscuits for tea?  We're going to play at besieged
castles, and we'd like the biscuits to provision the garrison.  Put
mine in my pocket, please, my hands are so dirty.  And I'll tell
the others to fetch theirs.'

This was indeed a happy thought, for now with four generous
handfuls of air, which turned to biscuit as Martha crammed it into
their pockets, the garrison was well provisioned till sundown.

They brought up some iron pots of cold water to pour on the
besiegers instead of hot lead, with which the castle did not seem
to be provided.

The afternoon passed with wonderful quickness.  It was very
exciting; but none of them, except Robert, could feel all the time
that this was real deadly dangerous work.  To the others, who had
only seen the camp and the besiegers from a distance, the whole
thing seemed half a game of make-believe, and half a splendidly
distinct and perfectly safe dream.  But it was only now and then
that Robert could feel this.

When it seemed to be tea-time the biscuits were eaten with water
from the deep well in the courtyard, drunk out of horns.  Cyril
insisted on putting by eight of the biscuits, in case anyone should
feel faint in stress of battle.

just as he was putting away the reserve biscuits in a sort of
little stone cupboard without a door, a sudden sound made him drop
three.  It was the loud fierce cry of a trumpet.

'You see it IS real,' said Robert, 'and they are going to attack.'

All rushed to the narrow windows.

'Yes,' said Robert, 'they're all coming out of their tents and
moving about like ants.  There's that Jakin dancing about where the
bridge joins on.  I wish he could see me put my tongue out at him!
Yah!'

The others were far too pale to wish to put their tongues out at
anybody.  They looked at Robert with surprised respect.  Anthea
said:

'You really ARE brave, Robert.'

'Rot!' Cyril's pallor turned to redness now, all in a minute.
'He's been getting ready to be brave all the afternoon.  And I
wasn't ready, that's all.  I shall be braver than he is in half a
jiffy.'

'Oh dear!' said Jane, 'what does it matter which of
you is the bravest?  I think Cyril was a perfect silly to wish for
a castle, and I don't want to play.'

'It ISN'T' - Robert was beginning sternly, but Anthea
interrupted -


'Oh yes, you do,' she said coaxingly; 'it's a very nice game,
really, because they can't possibly get in, and if they do the
women and children are always spared by civilized armies.'

'But are you quite, quite sure they ARE civilized?' asked Jane,
panting.  'They seem to be such a long time ago.'

'Of course they are.'  Anthea pointed cheerfully through the narrow
window.  'Why, look at the little flags on their lances, how bright
they are - and how fine the leader is!  Look, that's him - isn't
it, Robert? - on the grey horse.'

Jane consented to look, and the scene was almost too pretty to be
alarming.  The green turf, the white tents, the flash of pennoned
lances, the gleam of armour, and the bright colours of scarf and
tunic - it was just like a splendid coloured picture.  The trumpets
were sounding, and when the trumpets stopped for breath the
children could hear the cling-clang of armour and the murmur of
voices.

A trumpeter came forward to the edge of the moat, which now seemed
very much narrower than at first, and blew the longest and loudest
blast they had yet heard.  When the blaring noise had died away, a
man who was with the trumpeter shouted:

'What ho, within there!' and his voice came plainly to the garrison
in the gate-house.

'Hullo there!' Robert bellowed back at once.

'In the name of our Lord the King, and of our good lord and trusty
leader Sir Wulfric de Talbot, we summon this castle to surrender -
on pain of fire and sword and no quarter.  Do ye surrender?'

'No,' bawled Robert, 'of course we don't!  Never,

Never, NEVER!'

The man answered back:

'Then your fate be on your own heads.'

'Cheer,' said Robert in a fierce whisper.  'Cheer to show them we
aren't afraid, and rattle the daggers to make more noise.  One,
two, three!  Hip, hip, hooray!  Again - Hip, hip, hooray!  One more
- Hip, hip, hooray!'  The cheers were rather high and weak, but the
rattle of the daggers lent them strength and depth.

There was another shout from the camp across the moat - and then
the beleaguered fortress felt that the attack had indeed begun.

It was getting rather dark in the room above the great gate, and
Jane took a very little courage as she remembered that sunset
couldn't be far off now.

'The moat is dreadfully thin,' said Anthea.

'But they can't get into the castle even if they do swim over,'
said Robert.  And as he spoke he heard feet on the stair outside -
heavy feet and the clank of steel.  No one breathed for a moment.
The steel and the feet went on up the turret stairs.  Then Robert
sprang softly to the door.  He pulled off his shoes.

'Wait here,' he whispered, and stole quickly and softly after the
boots and the spur-clank.  He peeped into the upper room.  The man
was there - and it was Jakin, all dripping with moat-water, and he
was fiddling about with the machinery which Robert felt sure worked
the drawbridge.  Robert banged the door suddenly, and turned the
great key in the lock, just as Jakin sprang to the inside of the
door.  Then he tore downstairs and into the little turret at the
foot of the tower where the biggest window was.

'We ought to have defended THIS!' he cried to the others as they
followed him.  He was just in time.  Another man had swum over, and
his fingers were on the window-ledge.  Robert never knew how the
man had managed to climb up out of the water.  But he saw the
clinging fingers, and hit them as hard as he could with an iron bar
that he caught up from the floor.  The man fell with a plop-plash
into the moat-water.  In another moment Robert was outside the
little room, had banged its door and was shooting home the enormous
bolts, and calling to Cyril to lend a hand.

Then they stood in the arched gate-house, breathing hard and
looking at each other.  jane's mouth was open.

'Cheer up, jenny,' said Robert - 'it won't last much longer.'

There was a creaking above, and something rattled and shook.  The
pavement they stood on seemed to tremble.  Then a crash told them
that the drawbridge had been lowered to its place.

'That's that beast Jakin,' said Robert.  'There's still the
portcullis; I'm almost certain that's worked from lower down.'

And now the drawbridge rang and echoed hollowly to the hoofs of
horses and the tramp of armed men.
'Up - quick!' cried Robert.  'Let's drop things on them.'

Even the girls were feeling almost brave now.  They followed Robert
quickly, and under his directions began to drop stones out through
the long narrow windows.  There was a confused noise below, and
some groans.

'Oh dear!' said Anthea, putting down the stone she was just going
to drop out.  'I'm afraid we've hurt somebody!'

Robert caught up the stone in a fury.

'I should just hope we HAD!' he said; 'I'd give something for a
jolly good boiling kettle of lead.  Surrender, indeed!'

And now came more tramping, and a pause, and then the thundering
thump of the battering-ram.  And the little room was almost quite
dark.

'We've held it,' cried Robert, 'we won't surrender!  The sun MUST
set in a minute.  Here - they're all jawing underneath again.  Pity
there's no time to get more stones!  Here, pour that water down on
them.  It's no good, of course, but they'll hate it.'

'Oh dear!' said Jane; 'don't you think we'd better surrender?'

'Never!' said Robert; 'we'll have a parley if you like, but we'll
never surrender.  Oh, I'll be a soldier when I grow up - you just
see if I don't.  I won't go into the Civil Service, whatever anyone
says.'

'Let's wave a handkerchief and ask for a parley,' Jane pleaded.  'I
don't believe the sun's going to set to-night at all.'

'Give them the water first - the brutes!' said the bloodthirsty
Robert.  So Anthea tilted the pot over the nearest lead-hole, and
poured.  They heard a splash below, but no one below seemed to have
felt it.  And again the ram battered the great door.  Anthea
paused.

'How idiotic,' said Robert, lying flat on the floor and putting one
eye to the lead hole.  'Of course the holes go straight down into
the gate-house - that's for when the enemy has got past the door
and the portcullis, and almost all is lost.  Here, hand me the
pot.'  He crawled on to the three-cornered window-ledge in the
middle of the wall, and, taking the pot from Anthea, poured the
water out through the arrow-slit.

And as he began to pour, the noise of the battering-ram and the
trampling of the foe and the shouts of 'Surrender!' and 'De Talbot
for ever!' all suddenly stopped and went out like the snuff of a
candle; the little dark room seemed to whirl round and turn
topsy-turvy, and when the children came to themselves there they
were safe and sound, in the big front bedroom of their own house -
the house with the ornamental nightmare iron-top to the roof.

They all crowded to the window and looked out.  The moat and the
tents and the besieging force were all gone - and there was the
garden with its tangle of dahlias and marigolds and asters and late
roses, and the spiky iron railings and the quiet white road.

Everyone drew a deep breath.

'And that's all right!' said Robert.  'I told you so!  And, I say,
we didn't surrender, did we?'

'Aren't you glad now I wished for a castle?' asked Cyril.

'I think I am NOW,' said Anthea slowly.  'But I wouldn't wish for
it again, I think, Squirrel dear!'

'Oh, it was simply splendid!' said Jane unexpectedly.  'I wasn't
frightened a bit.'

'Oh, I say!' Cyril was beginning, but Anthea stopped him.

'Look here,' she said, 'it's just come into my head.  This is the
very first thing we've wished for that hasn't got us into a row.
And there hasn't been the least little scrap of a row about this.
Nobody's raging downstairs, we're safe and sound, we've had an
awfully jolly day - at least, not jolly exactly, but you know what
I mean.  And we know now how brave Robert is - and Cyril too, of
course,' she added hastily, 'and Jane as well.  And we haven't got
into a row with a single grown-up.'

The door was opened suddenly and fiercely.

'You ought to be ashamed of yourselves,' said the voice of Martha,
and they could tell by her voice that she was very angry indeed.
'I thought you couldn't last through the day without getting up to
some doggery!  A person can't take a breath of air on the front
doorstep but you must be emptying the wash-hand jug on to their
heads!  Off you go to bed, the lot of you, and try to get up better
children in the morning.  Now then - don't let me have to tell you
twice.  If I find any of you not in bed in ten minutes I'll let you
know it, that's all!  A new cap, and everything!'

She flounced out amid a disregarded chorus of regrets and
apologies.  The children were very sorry, but really it was not
their faults.  You can't help it if you are pouring water on a
besieging foe, and your castle suddenly changes into your house -
and everything changes with it except the water, and that happens
to fall on somebody else's clean cap.

'I don't know why the water didn't change into nothing, though,'
said Cyril.

'Why should it?' asked Robert.  'Water's water all the world over.'
'I expect the castle well was the same as ours in the stable-yard,'
said Jane.  And that was really the case.

'I thought we couldn't get through a wish-day without a row,' said
Cyril; 'it was much too good to be true.  Come on, Bobs, my
military hero.  If we lick into bed sharp she won't be so frumious,
and perhaps she'll bong us up some supper.  I'm jolly hungry!
Good-night, kids.'

'Good-night.  I hope the castle won't come creeping back in the
night,' said Jane.

'Of course it won't,' said Anthea briskly, 'but Martha will - not
in the night, but in a minute.  Here, turn round, I'll get that
knot out of your pinafore strings.'

'Wouldn't it have been degrading for Sir Wulfric de Talbot,' said
Jane dreamily, 'if he could have known that half the besieged
garrison wore pinafores?'

'And the other half knickerbockers.  Yes - frightfully.  Do stand
still - you're only tightening the knot,' said Anthea.



CHAPTER 8
BIGGER THAN THE BAKER'S BOY


'Look here,' said Cyril.  'I've got an idea.'

'Does it hurt much?' said Robert sympathetically.

'Don't be a jackape!  I'm not humbugging.'

'Shut up, Bobs!' said Anthea.

'Silence for the Squirrel's oration,' said Robert.

Cyril balanced himself on the edge of the water-butt in the
backyard, where they all happened to be, and spoke.

'Friends, Romans, countrymen - and women - we found a Sammyadd.  We
have had wishes.  We've had wings, and being beautiful as the day
- ugh! - that was pretty jolly beastly if you like - and wealth and
castles, and that rotten gipsy business with the Lamb.  But we're
no forrader.  We haven't really got anything worth having for our
wishes.'

'We've had things happening,' said Robert; 'that's always
something.'

'It's not enough, unless they're the right things,' said Cyril
firmly.  'Now I've been thinking -'
'Not really?' whispered Robert.

'In the silent what's-its-names of the night.  It's like suddenly
being asked something out of history - the date of the Conquest or
something; you know it all right all the time, but when you're
asked it all goes out of your head.  Ladies and gentlemen, you know
jolly well that when we're all rotting about in the usual way heaps
of things keep cropping up, and then real earnest wishes come into
the heads of the beholder -'

'Hear, hear!' said Robert.

'- of the beholder, however stupid he is,' Cyril went on.  'Why,
even Robert might happen to think of a really useful wish if he
didn't injure his poor little brains trying so hard to think.  -
Shut up, Bobs, I tell you! - You'll have the whole show over.'

A struggle on the edge of a water-butt is exciting, but damp.  When
it was over, and the boys were partially dried, Anthea said:

'It really was you began it, Bobs.  Now honour is satisfied) do let
Squirrel go on.  We're wasting the whole morning.'

'Well then,' said Cyril, still wringing the water out of the tails
of his jacket, 'I'll call it pax if Bobs will.'

'Pax then,' said Robert sulkily.  'But I've got a lump as big as a
cricket ball over my eye.'

Anthea patiently offered a dust-coloured handkerchief, and Robert
bathed his wounds in silence.  'Now, Squirrel,' she said.

'Well then - let's just play bandits, or forts, or soldiers, or any
of the old games.  We're dead sure to think of something if we try
not to.  You always do.'

The others consented.  Bandits was hastily chosen for the game.
'It's as good as anything else,' said Jane gloomily.  It must be
owned that Robert was at first but a half-hearted bandit, but when
Anthea had borrowed from Martha the red-spotted handkerchief in
which the keeper had brought her mushrooms that morning, and had
tied up Robert's head with it so that he could be the wounded hero
who had saved the bandit captain's life the day before, he cheered
up wonderfully.  All were soon armed.  Bows and arrows slung on the
back look well; and umbrellas and cricket stumps stuck through the
belt give a fine impression of the wearer's being armed to the
teeth.  The white cotton hats that men wear in the country nowadays
have a very brigandish effect when a few turkey's feathers are
stuck in them.  The Lamb's mail-cart was covered with a
red-and-blue checked tablecloth, and made an admirable
baggage-wagon.  The Lamb asleep inside it was not at all in the
way.  So the banditti set out along the road that led to the
sand-pit.

'We ought to be near the Sammyadd,' said Cyril, 'in case we think
of anything suddenly.'

It is all very well to make up your minds to play bandits - or
chess, or ping-pong, or any other agreeable game - but it is not
easy to do it with spirit when all the wonderful wishes you can
think of, or can't think of, are waiting for you round the corner.
The game was dragging a little, and some of the bandits were
beginning to feel that the others were disagreeable things, and
were saying so candidly, when the baker's boy came along the road
with loaves in a basket.  The opportunity was not one to be lost.

'Stand and deliver!' cried Cyril.

'Your money or your life!' said Robert.

And they stood on each side of the baker's boy.  Unfortunately, he
did not seem to enter into the spirit of the thing at all.  He was
a baker's boy of an unusually large size.  He merely said:

'Chuck it now, d'ye hear!' and pushed the bandits aside most
disrespectfully.

Then Robert lassoed him with jane's skipping-rope, and instead of
going round his shoulders, as Robert intended, it went round his
feet and tripped him up.  The basket was upset, the beautiful new
loaves went bumping and bouncing all over the dusty chalky road.
The girls ran to pick them up, and all in a moment Robert and the
baker's boy were fighting it out, man to man, with Cyril to see
fair play, and the skipping-rope twisting round their legs like an
interested snake that wished to be a peacemaker.  It did not
succeed; indeed the way the boxwood handles sprang up and hit the
fighters on the shins and ankles was not at all peace-making.  I
know this is the second fight - or contest - in this chapter, but
I can't help it.  It was that sort of day.  You know yourself there
are days when rows seem to keep on happening, quite without your
meaning them to.  If I were a writer of tales of adventure such as
those which used to appear in The Boys of England when I was young,
of course I should be able to describe the fight, but I cannot do
it.  I never can see what happens during a fight, even when it is
only dogs.  Also, if I had been one of these Boys of England
writers, Robert would have got the best of it.  But I am like
George Washington - I cannot tell a lie, even about a cherry-tree,
much less about a fight, and I cannot conceal from you that Robert
was badly beaten, for the second time that day.  The baker's boy
blacked his other eye, and, being ignorant of the first rules of
fair play and gentlemanly behaviour, he also pulled Robert's hair,
and kicked him on the knee.  Robert always used to say he could
have licked the butcher if it hadn't been for the girls.  But I am
not sure.  Anyway, what happened was this, and very painful it was
to self-respecting boys.

Cyril was just tearing off his coat so as to help his brother in
proper style, when Jane threw her arms round his legs and began to
cry and ask him not to go and be beaten too.  That 'too' was very
nice for Robert, as you can imagine - but it was nothing to what he
felt when Anthea rushed in between him and the baker's boy, and
caught that unfair and degraded fighter round the waist, imploring
him not to fight any more.

'Oh, don't hurt my brother any more!' she said in floods of tears.
'He didn't mean it - it's only play.  And I'm sure he's very
sorry.'

You see how unfair this was to Robert.  Because, if the baker's boy
had had any right and chivalrous instincts, and had yielded to
Anthea's pleading and accepted her despicable apology, Robert could
not, in honour, have done anything to him at a future time.  But
Robert's fears, if he had any, were soon dispelled.  Chivalry was
a stranger to the breast of the baker's boy.  He pushed Anthea away
very roughly, and he chased Robert with kicks and unpleasant
conversation right down the road to the sand-pit, and there, with
one last kick, he landed him in a heap of sand.

'I'D larn you, you young varmint!' he said, and went off to pick up
his loaves and go about his business.  Cyril, impeded by Jane,
could do nothing without hurting her, for she clung round his legs
with the strength of despair.  The baker's boy went off red and
damp about the face; abusive to the last, he called them a pack of
silly idiots, and disappeared round the corner.  Then jane's grasp
loosened.  Cyril turned away in silent dignity to follow Robert,
and the girls followed him, weeping without restraint.

It was not a happy party that flung itself down in the sand beside
the sobbing Robert.  For Robert was sobbing - mostly with rage.
Though of course I know that a really heroic boy is always dry-eyed
after a fight.  But then he always wins, which had not been the
case with Robert.

Cyril was angry with Jane; Robert was furious with Anthea; the
girls were miserable; and not one of the four was pleased with the
baker's boy.  There was, as French writers say, 'a silence full of
emotion'.

Then Robert dug his toes and his hands into the sand and wriggled
in his rage.  'He'd better wait till I'm grown up - the cowardly
brute!  Beast! - I hate him!  But I'll pay him out.  just because
he's bigger than me.'

'You began,' said Jane incautiously.

'I know I did, silly - but I was only rotting - and he kicked me -
look here -'

Robert tore down a stocking and showed a purple bruise touched up
with red.  'I only wish I was bigger than him, that's all.'

He dug his fingers in the sand, and sprang up, for his hand had
touched something furry.  It was the Psammead, of course - 'On the
look-out to make sillies of them as usual,' as Cyril remarked
later.  And of course the next moment Robert's wish was granted,
and he was bigger than the baker's boy.  Oh, but much, much bigger.
He was bigger than the big policeman who used to be at the crossing
at the Mansion House years ago - the one who was so kind in helping
old ladies over the crossing - and he was the biggest man I have
ever seen, as well as the kindest.  No one had a foot-rule in its
pocket, so Robert could not be measured - but he was taller than
your father would be if he stood on your mother's head, which I am
sure he would never be unkind enough to do.  He must have been ten
or eleven feet high, and as broad as a boy of that height ought to
be.  his Norfolk suit had fortunately grown too, and now he stood
up in it - with one of his enormous stockings turned down to show
the gigantic bruise on his vast leg.  Immense tears of fury still
stood on his flushed giant face.  He looked so surprised, and he
was so large to be wearing an Eton collar, that the others could
not help laughing.

'The Sammyadd's done us again,' said Cyril.

'Not us - ME,' said Robert.  'If you'd got any decent feeling you'd
try to make it make you the same size.  You've no idea how silly it
feels,' he added thoughtlessly.

'And I don't want to; I can jolly well see how silly it looks,'
Cyril was beginning; but Anthea said:

'Oh, DON'T!  I don't know what's the matter with you boys to-day.
Look here, Squirrel, let's play fair.  It is hateful for poor old
Bobs, all alone up there.  Let's ask the Sammyadd for another wish,
and, if it will, I do really think we ought to be made the same
size.'

The others agreed, but not gaily; but when they found the Psammead,
it wouldn't.

'Not I,' it said crossly, rubbing its face with its feet.  He's a
rude violent boy, and it'll do him good to be the wrong size for a
bit.  What did he want to come digging me out with his nasty wet
hands for?  He nearly touched me!  He's a perfect savage.  A boy of
the Stone Age would have had more sense.'

Robert's hands had indeed been wet - with tears.

'Go away and leave me in peace, do,' the Psammead went on.  'I
can't think why you don't wish for something sensible - something
to eat or drink, or good manners, or good tempers.  Go along with
you, do!'

It almost snarled as it shook its whiskers, and turned a sulky
brown back on them.  The most hopeful felt that further parley was
vain.  They turned again to the colossal Robert.

'Whatever shall we do?' they said; and they all said it.

'First,' said Robert grimly, 'I'm going to reason with that baker's
boy.  I shall catch him at the end of the road.'

'Don't hit a chap littler than yourself, old man,' said Cyril.

'Do I look like hitting him?' said Robert scornfully.  'Why, I
should KILL him.  But I'll give him something to remember.  Wait
till I pull up my stocking.'  He pulled up his stocking, which was
as large as a small bolster-case, and strode off.  His strides were
six or seven feet long, so that it was quite easy for him to be at
the bottom of the hill, ready to meet the baker's boy when he came
down swinging the empty basket to meet his master's cart, which had
been leaving bread at the cottages along the road.

Robert crouched behind a haystack in the farmyard, that is at the
corner, and when he heard the boy come whistling along, he jumped
out at him and caught him by the collar.

'Now,' he said, and his voice was about four times its usual size,
just as his body was four times its, 'I'm going to teach you to
kick boys smaller than you.'

He lifted up the baker's boy and set him on the top of the
haystack, which was about sixteen feet from the ground, and then he
sat down on the roof of the cowshed and told the baker's boy
exactly what he thought of him.  I don't think the boy heard it all
- he was in a sort of trance of terror.  When Robert had said
everything he could think of, and some things twice over, he shook
the boy and said:

'And now get down the best way you can,' and left him.

I don't know how the baker's boy got down, but I do know that he
missed the cart, and got into the very hottest of hot water when he
turned up at last at the bakehouse.  I am sorry for him, but, after
all, it was quite right that he should be taught that English boys
mustn't use their feet when they fight, but their fists.  Of course
the water he got into only became hotter when he tried to tell his
master about the boy he had licked and the giant as high as a
church, because no one could possibly believe such a tale as that.
Next day the tale was believed - but that was too late to be of any
use to the baker's boy.

When Robert rejoined the others he found them in the garden.
Anthea had thoughtfully asked Martha to let them have dinner out
there - because the dining-room was rather small, and it would have
been so awkward to have a brother the size of Robert in there.  The
Lamb, who had slept peacefully during the whole stormy morning, was
now found to be sneezing, and Martha said he had a cold and would
be better indoors.

'And really it's just as well,' said Cyril, 'for I don't believe
he'd ever have stopped screaming if he'd once seen you the awful
size you are!'

Robert was indeed what a draper would call an 'out-size' in boys.
He found himself able to step right over the iron gate in the front
garden.

Martha brought out the dinner - it was cold veal and baked
potatoes, with sago pudding and stewed plums to follow.

She of course did not notice that Robert was anything but the usual
size, and she gave him as much meat and potatoes as usual and no
more.  You have no idea how small your usual helping of dinner
looks when you are many times your proper size.  Robert groaned,
and asked for more bread.  But Martha would not go on giving more
bread for ever.  She was in a hurry, because the keeper intended to
call on his way to Benenhurst Fair, and she wished to be dressed
smartly before he came.

'I wish WE were going to the Fair,' said Robert.

'You can't go anywhere that size,' said Cyril.

'Why not?' said Robert.  'They have giants at fairs, much bigger
ones than me.'

'Not much, they don't,' Cyril was beginning, when Jane screamed
'Oh!' with such loud suddenness that they all thumped her on the
back and asked whether she had swallowed a plum-stone.

'No,' she said, breathless from being thumped, 'it's - it's not a
plum-stone.  it's an idea.  Let's take Robert to the Fair, and get
them to give us money for showing him!  Then we really shall get
something out of the old Sammyadd at last!'

'Take me, indeed!' said Robert indignantly.  'Much more likely me
take you!'

And so it turned out.  The idea appealed irresistibly to everyone
but Robert, and even he was brought round by Anthea's suggestion
that he should have a double share of any money they might make.
There was a little old pony-trap in the coach-house - the kind that
is called a governess-cart.  It seemed desirable to get to the Fair
as quickly as possible, so Robert - who could now take enormous
steps and so go very fast indeed - consented to wheel the others in
this.  It was as easy to him now as wheeling the Lamb in the
mail-cart had been in the morning.  The Lamb's cold prevented his
being of the party.

It was a strange sensation being wheeled in a pony-carriage by a
giant.  Everyone enjoyed the journey except Robert and the few
people they passed on the way.  These mostly went into what looked
like some kind of standing-up fits by the roadside, as Anthea said.
just outside Benenhurst, Robert hid in a barn, and the others went
on to the Fair.

There were some swings, and a hooting tooting blaring
merry-go-round, and a shooting-gallery and coconut shies.
Resisting an impulse to win a coconut - or at least to attempt the
enterprise - Cyril went up to the woman who was loading little guns
before the array of glass bottles on strings against a sheet of
canvas.

'Here you are, little gentleman!' she said.  'Penny a shot!'

'No, thank you,' said Cyril, 'we are here on business, not on
pleasure.  Who's the master?'

'The what?'

'The master - the head - the boss of the show.'

'Over there,' she said, pointing to a stout man in a dirty linen
jacket who was sleeping in the sun; 'but I don't advise you to wake
him sudden.  His temper's contrary, especially these hot days.
Better have a shot while you're waiting.'

'It's rather important,' said Cyril.  'It'll be very profitable to
him.  I think he'll be sorry if we take it away.'

'Oh, if it's money in his pocket,' said the woman.  'No kid now?
What is it?'

'It's a GIANT.'

'You ARE kidding?'

'Come along and see,' said Anthea.

The woman looked doubtfully at them, then she called to a ragged
little girl in striped stockings and a dingy white petticoat that
came below her brown frock, and leaving her in charge of the
'shooting-gallery' she turned to Anthea and said, 'Well, hurry up!
But if you ARE kidding, you'd best say so.  I'm as mild as milk
myself, but my Bill he's a fair terror and -'

Anthea led the way to the barn.  'It really IS a giant,' she said.
'He's a giant little boy - in Norfolks like my brother's there.
And we didn't bring him up to the Fair because people do stare so,
and they seem to go into kind of standing-up fits when they see
him.  And we thought perhaps you'd like to show him and get
pennies; and if you like to pay us something, you can - only, it'll
have to be rather a lot, because we promised him he should have a
double share of whatever we made.'

The woman murmured something indistinct, of which the children
could only hear the words, 'Swelp me!' 'balmy,' and 'crumpet,'
which conveyed no definite idea to their minds.
She had taken Anthea's hand, and was holding it very firmly; and
Anthea could not help wondering what would happen if Robert should
have wandered off or turned his proper size during the interval.
But she knew that the Psammead's gifts really did last till sunset,
however inconvenient their lasting might be; and she did not think,
somehow, that Robert would care to go out alone while he was that
size.

When they reached the barn and Cyril called 'Robert!' there was a
stir among the loose hay, and Robert began to come out.  His hand
and arm came first - then a foot and leg.  When the woman saw the
hand she said 'My!' but when she saw the foot she said 'Upon my
civvy!' and when, by slow and heavy degrees, the whole of Robert's
enormous bulk was at last completely disclosed, she drew a long
breath and began to say many things, compared with which 'balmy'
and 'crumpet' seemed quite ordinary.  She dropped into
understandable English at last.

'What'll you take for him?' she said excitedly.  'Anything in
reason.  We'd have a special van built - leastways, I know where
there's a second-hand one would do up handsome - what a baby
elephant had, as died.  What'll you take?  He's soft, ain't he?
Them giants mostly is - but I never see - no, never!  What'll you
take?  Down on the nail.  We'll treat him like a king, and give him
first-rate grub and a doss fit for a bloomin' dook.  He must be
dotty or he wouldn't need you kids to cart him about.  What'll you
take for him?'

'They won't take anything,' said Robert sternly.  'I'm no more soft
than you are - not so much, I shouldn't wonder.  I'll come and be
a show for to-day if you'll give me' - he hesitated at the enormous
price he was about to ask - 'if you'll give me fifteen shillings.'

'Done,' said the woman, so quickly that Robert felt he had been
unfair to himself, and wished he had asked thirty.  'Come on now -
and see my Bill - and we'll fix a price for the season.  I dessay
you might get as much as two quid a week reg'lar.  Come on - and
make yourself as small as you can, for gracious' sake!'

This was not very small, and a crowd gathered quickly, so that it
was at the head of an enthusiastic procession that Robert entered
the trampled meadow where the Fair was held, and passed over the
stubbly yellow dusty grass to the door of the biggest tent.  He
crept in, and the woman went to call her Bill.  He was the big
sleeping man, and he did not seem at all pleased at being awakened.
Cyril, watching through a slit in the tent, saw him scowl and shake
a heavy fist and a sleepy head.  Then the woman went on speaking
very fast.  Cyril heard 'Strewth,' and 'biggest draw you ever, so
help me!' and he began to share Robert's feeling that fifteen
shillings was indeed far too little.  Bill slouched up to the tent
and entered.  When he beheld the magnificent proportions of Robert
he said but little - 'Strike me pink!' were the only words the
children could afterwards remember - but he produced fifteen
shillings, mainly in sixpences and coppers, and handed it to
Robert.

'We'll fix up about what you're to draw when the show's over
to-night,' he said with hoarse heartiness.  'Lor' love a duck!
you'll be that happy with us you'll never want to leave us.  Can
you do a song now - or a bit of a breakdown?'

'Not to-day,' said Robert, rejecting the idea of trying to sing 'As
once in May', a favourite of his mother's, and the only song he
could think of at the moment.

'Get Levi and clear them bloomin' photos out.  Clear the tent.
Stick up a curtain or suthink,' the man went on.  'Lor', what a
pity we ain't got no tights his size!  But we'll have 'em before
the week's out.  Young man, your fortune's made.  It's a good thing
you came to me, and not to some chaps as I could tell you on.  I've
known blokes as beat their giants, and starved 'em too; so I'll
tell you straight, you're in luck this day if you never was afore.
'Cos I'm a lamb, I am - and I don't deceive you.'

'I'm not afraid of anyone's beating ME,' said Robert, looking down
on the 'lamb'.  Robert was crouched on his knees, because the tent
was not big enough for him to stand upright in, but even in that
position he could still look down on most people.  'But I'm awfully
hungry I wish you'd get me something to eat.'

'Here, 'Becca,' said the hoarse Bill.  'Get him some grub - the
best you've got, mind!'  Another whisper followed, of which the
children only heard, 'Down in black and white - first thing
to-morrow.'

Then the woman went to get the food - it was only bread and cheese
when it came, but it was delightful to the large and empty Robert;
and the man went to post sentinels round the tent, to give the
alarm if Robert should attempt to escape with his fifteen
shillings.

'As if we weren't honest,' said Anthea indignantly when the meaning
of the sentinels dawned on her.

Then began a very strange and wonderful afternoon.

Bill was a man who knew his business.  In a very little while, the
photographic views, the spyglasses you look at them through, so
that they really seem rather real, and the lights you see them by,
were all packed away.  A curtain - it was an old red-and-black
carpet really - was run across the tent.  Robert was concealed
behind, and Bill was standing on a trestle-table outside the tent
making a speech.  It was rather a good speech.  It began by saying
that the giant it was his privilege to introduce to the public that
day was the eldest son of the Emperor of San Francisco, compelled
through an unfortunate love affair with the Duchess of the Fiji
Islands to leave his own country and take refuge in England - the
land of liberty - where freedom was the right of every man, no
matter how big he was.  It ended by the announcement that the first
twenty who came to the tent door should see the giant for
threepence apiece.  'After that,' said Bill, 'the price is riz, and
I don't undertake to say what it won't be riz to.  So now's yer
time.'

A young man squiring his sweetheart on her afternoon out was the
first to come forward.  For that occasion his was the princely
attitude - no expense spared - money no object.  His girl wished to
see the giant?  Well, she should see the giant, even though seeing
the giant cost threepence each and the other entertainments were
all penny ones.

The flap of the tent was raised - the couple entered.  Next moment
a wild shriek from the girl thrilled through all present.  Bill
slapped his leg.  'That's done the trick!' he whispered to 'Becca.
It was indeed a splendid advertisement of the charms of Robert.
When the girl came out she was pale and trembling, and a crowd was
round the tent.


'What was it like?' asked a bailiff.

'Oh! - horrid! - you wouldn't believe,' she said.  'It's as big as
a barn, and that fierce.  It froze the blood in my bones.  I
wouldn't ha' missed seeing it for anything.'

The fierceness was only caused by Robert's trying not to laugh.
But the desire to do that soon left him, and before sunset he was
more inclined to cry than to laugh, and more inclined to sleep than
either.  For, by ones and twos and threes, people kept coming in
all the afternoon, and Robert had to shake hands with those who
wished it, and allow himself to be punched and pulled and patted
and thumped, so that people might make sure he was really real.

The other children sat on a bench and watched and waited, and were
very bored indeed.  It seemed to them that this was the hardest way
of earning money that could have been invented.  And only fifteen
shillings!  Bill had taken four times that already, for the news of
the giant had spread, and tradespeople in carts, and gentlepeople
in carriages, came from far and near.  One gentleman with an
eyeglass, and a very large yellow rose in his buttonhole, offered
Robert, in an obliging whisper, ten pounds a week to appear at the
Crystal Palace.  Robert had to say 'No'.

'I can't,' he said regretfully.  'It's no use promising what you
can't do.'

'Ah, poor fellow, bound for a term of years, I suppose!  Well,
here's my card; when your time's up come to me.'

'I will - if I'm the same size then,' said Robert truthfully.

'If you grow a bit, so much the better,' said the gentleman.
When he had gone, Robert beckoned Cyril and said:

'Tell them I must and will have an easy.  And I want my tea.'

Tea was provided, and a paper hastily pinned on the tent.  It said:

     CLOSED FOR HALF AN HOUR
     WHILE THE GIANT GETS HIS TEA

Then there was a hurried council.

'How am I to get away?' said Robert.  'I've been thinking about it
all the afternoon.'

'Why, walk out when the sun sets and you're your right size.  They
can't do anything to us.'

Robert opened his eyes.  'Why, they'd nearly kill us,' he said,
'when they saw me get my right size.  No, we must think of some
other way.  We MUST be alone when the sun sets.'

'I know,' said Cyril briskly, and he went to the door, outside
which Bill was smoking a clay pipe and talking in a low voice to
'Becca.  Cyril heard him say - 'Good as havin' a fortune left you.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'you can let people come in again in a
minute.  He's nearly finished his tea.  But he must be left alone
when the sun sets.  He's very queer at that time of day, and if
he's worried I won't answer for the consequences.'

'Why - what comes over him?' asked Bill.

'I don't know; it's - it's a sort of a change,' said Cyril
candidly.  'He isn't at all like himself - you'd hardly know him.
He's very queer indeed.  Someone'll get hurt if he's not alone
about sunset.'  This was true.

'He'll pull round for the evening, I s'pose?'

'Oh yes - half an hour after sunset he'll be quite himself again.'

'Best humour him,' said the woman.

And so, at what Cyril judged was about half an hour before sunset,
the tent was again closed 'whilst the giant gets his supper'.

The crowd was very merry about the giant's meals and their coming
so close together.

'Well, he can pick a bit,' Bill owned.  'You see he has to eat
hearty, being the size he is.'

Inside the tent the four children breathlessly arranged a plan of
retreat.
'You go NOW,' said Cyril to the girls, 'and get along home as fast
as you can.  Oh, never mind the beastly pony-cart; we'll get that
to-morrow.  Robert and I are dressed the same.  We'll manage
somehow, like Sydney Carton did.  Only, you girls MUST get out, or
it's all no go.  We can run, but you can't - whatever you may
think.  No, Jane, it's no good Robert going out and knocking people
down.  The police would follow him till he turned his proper size,
and then arrest him like a shot.  Go you must!  If you don't, I'll
never speak to you again.  It was you got us into this mess really,
hanging round people's legs the way you did this morning.  Go, I
tell you!'

And Jane and Anthea went.

'We're going home,' they said to Bill.  'We're leaving the giant
with you.  Be kind to him.'  And that, as Anthea said afterwards,
was very deceitful, but what were they to do?

When they had gone, Cyril went to Bill.

'Look here,' he said, 'he wants some ears of corn - there's some in
the next field but one.  I'll just run and get it.  Oh, and he says
can't you loop up the tent at the back a bit?  He says he's
stifling for a breath of air.  I'll see no one peeps in at him.
I'll cover him up, and he can take a nap while I go for the corn.
He WILL have it - there's no holding him when he gets like this.'

The giant was made comfortable with a heap of sacks and an old
tarpaulin.  The curtain was looped up, and the brothers were left
alone.  They matured their plan in whispers.  Outside, the
merry-go-round blared out its comic tunes, screaming now and then
to attract public notice.

Half a minute after the sun had set, a boy in a Norfolk suit came
out past Bill.

'I'm off for the corn,' he said, and mingled quickly with the
crowd.

At the same instant a boy came out of the back of the tent past
'Becca, posted there as sentinel.

'I'm off after the corn,' said this boy also.  And he, too, moved
away quietly and was lost in the crowd.  The front-door boy was
Cyril; the back-door was Robert - now, since sunset, once more his
proper size.  They walked quickly through the field, and along the
road, where Robert caught Cyril up.  Then they ran.  They were home
as soon as the girls were, for it was a long way, and they ran most
of it.  It was indeed a very long way, as they found when they had
to go and drag the pony-trap home next morning, with no enormous
Robert to wheel them in it as if it were a mail-cart, and they were
babies and he was their gigantic nursemaid.


I cannot possibly tell you what Bill and 'Becca said when they
found that the giant had gone.  For one thing, I do not know.



CHAPTER 9
GROWN UP


Cyril had once pointed out that ordinary life is full of occasions
on which a wish would be most useful.  And this thought filled his
mind when he happened to wake early on the morning after the
morning after Robert had wished to be bigger than the baker's boy,
and had been it.  The day that lay between these two days had been
occupied entirely by getting the governess-cart home from
Benenhurst.

Cyril dressed hastily; he did not take a bath, because tin baths
are so noisy, and he had no wish to rouse Robert, and he slipped
off alone, as Anthea had once done, and ran through the dewy
morning to the sand-pit.  He dug up the Psammead very carefully and
kindly, and began the conversation by asking it whether it still
felt any ill effects from the contact with the tears of Robert the
day before yesterday.  The Psammead was in a good temper.  It
replied politely.

'And now, what can I do for you?' it said.  'I suppose you've come
here so early to ask for something for yourself, something your
brothers and sisters aren't to know about eh?  Now, do be persuaded
for your own good!  Ask for a good fat Megatherium and have done
with it.'

'Thank you - not to-day, I think,' said Cyril cautiously.  'What I
really wanted to say was - you know how you're always wishing for
things when you're playing at anything?'

'I seldom play,' said the Psammead coldly.

'Well, you know what I mean,' Cyril went on impatiently.  'What I
want to say is: won't you let us have our wish just when we think
of it, and just where we happen to be?  So that we don't have to
come and disturb you again,' added the crafty Cyril.

'It'll only end in your wishing for something you don't really
want, like you did about the castle,' said the Psammead, stretching
its brown arms and yawning.  'It's always the same since people
left off eating really wholesome things.  However, have it your own
way.  Good-bye.'

'Good-bye,' said Cyril politely.

'I'll tell you what,' said the Psammead suddenly, shooting out its
long snail's eyes - 'I'm getting tired of you - all of you.  You
have no more sense than so many oysters.  Go along with you!'
And Cyril went.

'What an awful long time babies STAY babies,' said Cyril after the
Lamb had taken his watch out of his pocket while he wasn't
noticing, and with coos and clucks of naughty rapture had opened
the case and used the whole thing as a garden spade, and when even
immersion in a wash-hand basin had failed to wash the mould from
the works and make the watch go again.  Cyril had said several
things in the heat of the moment; but now he was calmer, and had
even consented to carry the Lamb part of the way to the woods.
Cyril had persuaded the others to agree to his plan, and not to
wish for anything more till they really did wish it.  Meantime it
seemed good to go to the woods for nuts, and on the mossy grass
under a sweet chestnut-tree the five were sitting.  The Lamb was
pulling up the moss by fat handfuls, and Cyril was gloomily
contemplating the ruins of his watch.

'He does grow,' said Anthea.  'Doesn't oo, precious?'

'Me grow,' said the Lamb cheerfully - 'me grow big boy, have guns
an' mouses - an' - an' ...'  Imagination or vocabulary gave out
here.  But anyway it was the longest speech the Lamb had ever made,
and it charmed everyone, even Cyril, who tumbled the Lamb over and
rolled him in the moss to the music of delighted squeals.

'I suppose he'll be grown up some day,' Anthea was saying, dreamily
looking up at the blue of the sky that showed between the long
straight chestnut-leaves.  But at that moment the Lamb, struggling
gaily with Cyril, thrust a stoutly-shod little foot against his
brother's chest; there was a crack! - the innocent Lamb had broken
the glass of father's second-best Waterbury watch, which Cyril had
borrowed without leave.

'Grow up some day!' said Cyril bitterly, plumping the Lamb down on
the grass.  'I daresay he will when nobody wants him to.  I wish to
goodness he would -'

'OH, take care!' cried Anthea in an agony of apprehension.  But it
was too late - like music to a song her words and Cyril's came out
together - Anthea - 'Oh, take care!' Cyril - 'Grow up now!'

The faithful Psammead was true to its promise, and there, before
the horrified eyes of its brothers and sisters, the Lamb suddenly
and violently grew up.  It was the most terrible moment.  The
change was not so sudden as the wish-changes usually were.  The
Baby's face changed first.  It grew thinner and larger, lines came
in the forehead, the eyes grew more deep-set and darker in colour,
the mouth grew longer and thinner; most terrible of all, a little
dark moustache appeared on the lip of one who was still - except as
to the face - a two-year-old baby in a linen smock and white
open-work socks.

'Oh, I wish it wouldn't!  Oh, I wish it wouldn't!  You boys might
wish as well!'  They all wished hard, for the sight was enough to
dismay the most heartless.  They all wished so hard, indeed, that
they felt quite giddy and almost lost consciousness; but the
wishing was quite vain, for, when the wood ceased to whirl round,
their dazzled eyes were riveted at once by the spectacle of a very
proper-looking young man in flannels and a straw hat - a young man
who wore the same little black moustache which just before they had
actually seen growing upon the Baby's lip.  This, then, was the
Lamb - grown up!  Their own Lamb!  It was a terrible moment.  The
grown-up Lamb moved gracefully across the moss and settled himself
against the trunk of the sweet chestnut.  He tilted the straw hat
over his eyes.  He was evidently weary.  He was going to sleep.
The Lamb - the original little tiresome beloved Lamb often went to
sleep at odd times and in unexpected places.  Was this new Lamb in
the grey flannel suit and the pale green necktie like the other
Lamb? or had his mind grown up together with his body?

That was the question which the others, in a hurried council held
among the yellowing bracken a few yards from the sleeper, debated
eagerly.

'Whichever it is, it'll be just as awful,' said Anthea.  'If his
inside senses are grown up too, he won't stand our looking after
him; and if he's still a baby inside of him how on earth are we to
get him to do anything?  And it'll be getting on for dinner-time in
a minute 'And we haven't got any nuts,' said Jane.

'Oh, bother nuts!' said Robert; 'but dinner's different - I didn't
have half enough dinner yesterday.  Couldn't we tie him to the tree
and go home to our dinners and come back afterwards?'

'A fat lot of dinner we should get if we went back without the
Lamb!' said Cyril in scornful misery.  'And it'll be just the same
if we go back with him in the state he is now.  Yes, I know it's my
doing; don't rub it in!  I know I'm a beast, and not fit to live;
you can take that for settled, and say no more about it.  The
question is, what are we going to do?'

'Let's wake him up, and take him into Rochester or Maidstone and
get some grub at a pastrycook's,' said Robert hopefully.

'Take him?' repeated Cyril.  'Yes - do!  It's all MY fault - I
don't deny that - but you'll find you've got your work cut out for
you if you try to take that young man anywhere.  The Lamb always
was spoilt, but now he's grown up he's a demon - simply.  I can see
it.  Look at his mouth.'

'Well then,' said Robert, 'let's wake him up and see what HE'LL do.
Perhaps HE'LL take us to Maidstone and stand Sam.  He ought to have
a lot of money in the pockets of those extra-special bags.  We MUST
have dinner, anyway.'

They drew lots with little bits of bracken.  It fell to jane's lot
to waken the grown-up Lamb.

She did it gently by tickling his nose with a twig of wild
honeysuckle.  He said 'Bother the flies!' twice, and then opened
his eyes.

'Hullo, kiddies!' he said in a languid tone, 'still here?  What's
the giddy hour?  You'll be late for your grub!'

'I know we shall,' said Robert bitterly.

'Then cut along home,' said the grown-up Lamb.

'What about your grub, though?' asked Jane.

'Oh, how far is it to the station, do you think?  I've a sort of
notion that I'll run up to town and have some lunch at the club.'

Blank misery fell like a pall on the four others.  The Lamb - alone
- unattended - would go to town and have lunch at a club!  Perhaps
he would also have tea there.  Perhaps sunset would come upon him
amid the dazzling luxury of club-land, and a helpless cross sleepy
baby would find itself alone amid unsympathetic waiters, and would
wail miserably for 'Panty' from the depths of a club arm-chair!
The picture moved Anthea almost to tears.

'Oh no, Lamb ducky, you mustn't do that!' she cried incautiously.

The grown-up Lamb frowned.  'My dear Anthea,' he said, 'how often
am I to tell you that my name is Hilary or St Maur or Devereux? -
any of my baptismal names are free to my little brothers and
sisters, but NOT "Lamb" - a relic of foolish and far-off
childhood.'

This was awful.  He was their elder brother now, was he?  Well, of
course he was, if he was grown up - since they weren't.  Thus, in
whispers, Anthea and Robert.

But the almost daily adventures resulting from the Psammead wishes
were making the children wise beyond their years.

'Dear Hilary,' said Anthea, and the others choked at the name, 'you
know father didn't wish you to go to London.  He wouldn't like us
to be left alone without you to take care of us.  Oh, deceitful
beast that I am!' she added to herself.

'Look here,' said Cyril, 'if you're our elder brother, why not
behave as such and take us over to Maidstone and give us a jolly
good blow-out, and we'll go on the river afterwards?'

'I'm infinitely obliged to you,' said the Lamb courteously, 'but I
should prefer solitude.  Go home to your lunch - I mean your
dinner.  Perhaps I may look in about tea-time - or I may not be
home till after you are in your beds.'

Their beds!  Speaking glances flashed between the wretched four.
Much bed there would be for them if they went home without the
Lamb.

'We promised mother not to lose sight of you if we took you
out,'Jane said before the others could stop her.

'Look here, Jane,' said the grown-up Lamb, putting his hands in his
pockets and looking down at her, 'little girls should be seen and
not heard.  You kids must learn not to make yourselves a nuisance.
Run along home now - and perhaps, if you're good, I'll give you
each a penny to-morrow.'

'Look here,' said Cyril, in the best 'man to man' tone at his
command, 'where are you going, old man?  You might let Bobs and me
come with you - even if you don't want the girls.'

This was really rather noble of Cyril, for he never did care much
about being seen in public with the Lamb, who of course after
sunset would be a baby again.

The 'man to man' tone succeeded.

'I shall just run over to Maidstone on my bike,' said the new Lamb
airily, fingering the little black moustache.  'I can lunch at The
Crown - and perhaps I'll have a pull on the river; but I can't take
you all on the machine - now, can I?  Run along home, like good
children.'

The position was desperate.  Robert exchanged a despairing look
with Cyril.  Anthea detached a pin from her waistband, a pin whose
withdrawal left a gaping chasm between skirt and bodice, and handed
it furtively to Robert - with a grimace of the darkest and deepest
meaning.  Robert slipped away to the road.  There, sure enough,
stood a bicycle - a beautiful new free-wheel.  Of course Robert
understood at once that if the Lamb was grown up he MUST have a
bicycle.  This had always been one of Robert's own reasons for
wishing to be grown up.  He hastily began to use the pin - eleven
punctures in the back tyre, seven in the front.  He would have made
the total twenty-two but for the rustling of the yellow
hazel-leaves, which warned him of the approach of the others.  He
hastily leaned a hand on each wheel, and was rewarded by the
'whish' of what was left of the air escaping from eighteen neat
pin-holes.

'Your bike's run down,' said Robert, wondering how he could so soon
have learned to deceive.

'So it is,' said Cyril.

'It's a puncture,' said Anthea, stooping down, and standing up
again with a thorn which she had got ready for the purpose.  'Look
here.'

The grown-up Lamb (or Hilary, as I suppose one must now call him)
fixed his pump and blew up the tyre.  The punctured state of it was
soon evident.

'I suppose there's a cottage somewhere near - where one could get
a pail of water?' said the Lamb.

There was; and when the number of punctures had been made manifest,
it was felt to be a special blessing that the cottage provided
'teas for cyclists'.  It provided an odd sort of tea-and-hammy meal
for the Lamb and his brothers.  This was paid for out of the
fifteen shillings which had been earned by Robert when he was a
giant - for the Lamb, it appeared, had unfortunately no money about
him.  This was a great disappointment for the others; but it is a
thing that will happen, even to the most grown-up of us.  However,
Robert had enough to eat, and that was something.  Quietly but
persistently the miserable four took it in turns to try to persuade
the Lamb (or St Maur) to spend the rest of the day in the woods.
There was not very much of the day left by the time he had mended
the eighteenth puncture.  He looked up from the completed work with
a sigh of relief, and suddenly put his tie straight.

'There's a lady coming,' he said briskly - 'for goodness' sake, get
out of the way.  Go home - hide - vanish somehow!  I can't be seen
with a pack of dirty kids.'  His brothers and sisters were indeed
rather dirty, because, earlier in the day, the Lamb, in his infant
state, had sprinkled a good deal of garden soil over them.  The
grown-up Lamb's voice was so tyrant-like, as Jane said afterwards,
that they actually retreated to the back garden, and left him with
his little moustache and his flannel suit to meet alone the young
lady, who now came up the front garden wheeling a bicycle.

The woman of the house came out, and the young lady spoke to her -
the Lamb raised his hat as she passed him - and the children could
not hear what she said, though they were craning round the corner
by the pig-pail and listening with all their ears.  They felt it to
be 'perfectly fair,' as Robert said, 'with that wretched Lamb in
that condition.'

When the Lamb spoke in a languid voice heavy with politeness, they
heard well enough.

'A puncture?' he was saying.  'Can I not be of any assistance?  If
you could allow me -?'

There was a stifled explosion of laughter behind the pig-pail - the
grown-up Lamb (otherwise Devereux) turned the tail of an angry eye
in its direction.

'You're very kind,' said the lady, looking at the Lamb.  She looked
rather shy, but, as the boys put it, there didn't seem to be any
nonsense about her.

'But oh,' whispered Cyril behind the pig-pail, 'I should have
thought he'd had enough bicycle-mending for one day - and if she
only knew that really and truly he's only a whiny-piny, silly
little baby!'

'He's not,' Anthea murmured angrily.  'He's a dear - if people only
let him alone.  It's our own precious Lamb still, whatever silly
idiots may turn him into - isn't he, Pussy?'

Jane doubtfully supposed so.

Now, the Lamb - whom I must try to remember to call St Maur - was
examining the lady's bicycle and talking to her with a very
grown-up manner indeed.  No one could possibly have supposed, to
see and hear him, that only that very morning he had been a chubby
child of two years breaking other people's Waterbury watches.
Devereux (as he ought to be called for the future) took out a gold
watch when he had mended the lady's bicycle, and all the onlookers
behind the pig-pail said 'Oh!' - because it seemed so unfair that
the Baby, who had only that morning destroyed two cheap but honest
watches, should now, in the grown-upness Cyril's folly had raised
him to, have a real gold watch - with a chain and seals!

Hilary (as I will now term him) withered his brothers and sisters
with a glance, and then said to the lady - with whom he seemed to
be quite friendly:

'If you will allow me, I will ride with you as far as the Cross
Roads; it is getting late, and there are tramps about.'

No one will ever know what answer the young lady intended to give
to this gallant offer, for, directly Anthea heard it made, she
rushed out, knocking against the pig-pail, which overflowed in a
turbid stream, and caught the Lamb (I suppose I ought to say
Hilary) by the arm.  The others followed, and in an instant the
four dirty children were visible, beyond disguise.

'Don't let him,' said Anthea to the lady, and she spoke with
intense earnestness; 'he's not fit to go with anyone!'

'Go away, little girl!' said St Maur (as we will now call him) in
a terrible voice.  'Go home at once!'

'You'd much better not have anything to do with him,' the now
reckless Anthea went on.  'He doesn't know who he is.  He's
something very different from what you think he is.'

'What do you mean?' asked the lady not unnaturally, while Devereux
(as I must term the grown-up Lamb) tried vainly to push Anthea
away.  The others backed her up, and she stood solid as a rock.

'You just let him go with you,' said Anthea, 'you'll soon see what
I mean!  How would you like to suddenly see a poor little helpless
baby spinning along downhill beside you with its feet up on a
bicycle it had lost control Of?'

The lady had turned rather pale.

'Who are these very dirty children?' she asked the grown-up Lamb
(sometimes called St Maur in these pages).

'I don't know,' he lied miserably.

'Oh, Lamb! how can you?' cried Jane - 'when you know perfectly well
you're our own little baby brother that we're so fond of.  We're
his big brothers and sisters,' she explained, turning to the lady,
who with trembling hands was now turning her bicycle towards the
gate, 'and we've got to take care of him.  And we must get him home
before sunset, or I don't know whatever will become of us.  You
see, he's sort of under a spell - enchanted - you know what I
mean!'

Again and again the Lamb (Devereux, I mean) had tried to stop
Jane's eloquence, but Robert and Cyril held him, one by each leg,
and no proper explanation was possible.  The lady rode hastily
away, and electrified her relatives at dinner by telling them of
her escape from a family of dangerous lunatics.  'The little girl's
eyes were simply those of a maniac.  I can't think how she came to
be at large,' she said.

When her bicycle had whizzed away down the road, Cyril spoke
gravely.

'Hilary, old chap,' he said, 'you must have had a sunstroke or
something.  And the things you've been saying to that lady!  Why,
if we were to tell you the things you've said when you are yourself
again, say to- morrow morning, you wouldn't even understand them -
let alone believe them!  You trust to me, old chap, and come home
now, and if you're not yourself in the morning we'll ask the
milkman to ask the doctor to come.'

The poor grown-up Lamb (St Maur was really one of his Christian
names) seemed now too bewildered to resist.

'Since you seem all to be as mad as the whole worshipful company of
hatters,' he said bitterly, 'I suppose I HAD better take you home.
But you're not to suppose I shall pass this over.  I shall have
something to say to you all to-morrow morning.'

'Yes, you will, my Lamb,' said Anthea under her breath, 'but it
won't be at all the sort of thing you think it's going to be.'

In her heart she could hear the pretty, soft little loving voice of
the baby Lamb - so different from the affected tones of the
dreadful grown-up Lamb (one of whose names was Devereux) - saying,
'Me love Panty - wants to come to own Panty.'

'Oh, let's get home, for goodness' sake,' she said.  'You shall say
whatever you like in the morning - if you can,' she added in a
whisper.
It was a gloomy party that went home through the soft evening.
During Anthea's remarks Robert had again made play with the pin and
the bicycle tyre and the Lamb (whom they had to call St Maur or
Devereux or Hilary) seemed really at last to have had his fill of
bicycle-mending.  So the machine was wheeled.

The sun was just on the point of setting when they arrived at the
White House.  The four elder children would have liked to linger in
the lane till the complete sunsetting turned the grown-up Lamb
(whose Christian names I will not further weary you by repeating)
into their own dear tiresome baby brother.  But he, in his
grown-upness, insisted on going on, and thus he was met in the
front garden by Martha.

Now you remember that, as a special favour, the Psammead had
arranged that the servants in the house should never notice any
change brought about by the wishes of the children.  Therefore
Martha merely saw the usual party, with the baby Lamb, about whom
she had been desperately anxious all the afternoon, trotting beside
Anthea on fat baby legs, while the children, of course, still saw
the grown-up Lamb (never mind what names he was christened by), and
Martha rushed at him and caught him in her arms, exclaiming:

'Come to his own Martha, then - a precious poppet!'

The grown-up Lamb (whose names shall now be buried in oblivion)
struggled furiously.  An expression of intense horror and annoyance
was seen on his face.  But Martha was stronger than he.  She lifted
him up and carried him into the house.  None of the children will
ever forget that picture.  The neat grey-flannel-suited grown-up
young man with the green tie and the little black moustache -
fortunately, he was slightly built, and not tall - struggling in
the sturdy arms of Martha, who bore him away helpless, imploring
him, as she went, to be a good boy now, and come and have his nice
bremmilk!  Fortunately, the sun set as they reached the doorstep,
the bicycle disappeared, and Martha was seen to carry into the
house the real live darling sleepy two-year-old Lamb.  The grown-up
Lamb (nameless hence- forth) was gone for ever.

'For ever,' said Cyril, 'because, as soon as ever the Lamb's old
enough to be bullied, we must jolly well begin to bully him, for
his own sake - so that he mayn't grow up like that.'

'You shan't bully him,' said Anthea stoutly; 'not if I can stop
it.'

'We must tame him by kindness,' said Jane.

'You see,' said Robert, 'if he grows up in the usual way, there'll
be plenty of time to correct him as he goes along.  The awful thing
to-day was his growing up so suddenly.  There was no time to
improve him at all.'

'He doesn't want any improving,' said Anthea as the voice of the
Lamb came cooing through the open door, just as she had heard it in
her heart that afternoon:

'Me loves Panty - wants to come to own Panty!'



CHAPTER 10
SCALPS


Probably the day would have been a greater success if Cyril had not
been reading The Last of the Mohicans.  The story was running in
his head at breakfast, and as he took his third cup of tea he said
dreamily, 'I wish there were Red Indians in England - not big ones,
you know, but little ones, just about the right size for us to
fight.'

Everyone disagreed with him at the time, and no one attached any
importance to the incident.  But when they went down to the
sand-pit to ask for a hundred pounds in two-shilling pieces with
Queen Victoria's head on, to prevent mistakes - which they had
always felt to be a really reasonable wish that must turn out well
- they found out that they had done it again!  For the Psammead,
which was very cross and sleepy, said:

'Oh, don't bother me.  You've had your wish.'

'I didn't know it,' said Cyril.

'Don't you remember yesterday?' said the Sand-fairy, still more
disagreeably.  'You asked me to let you have your wishes wherever
you happened to be, and you wished this morning, and you've got
it.'

'Oh, have we?' said Robert.  'What is it?'

'So you've forgotten?' said the Psammead, beginning to burrow.
'Never mind; you'll know soon enough.  And I wish you joy of it!
A nice thing you've let yourselves in for!'

'We always do, somehow,' said Jane sadly.

And now the odd thing was that no one could remember anyone's
having wished for anything that morning.  The wish about the Red
Indians had not stuck in anyone's head.  It was a most anxious
morning.  Everyone was trying to remember what had been wished for,
and no one could, and everyone kept expecting something awful to
happen every minute.  It was most agitating; they knew, from what
the Psammead had said, that they must have wished for something
more than usually undesirable, and they spent several hours in most
agonizing uncertainty.  It was not till nearly dinner-time that
Jane tumbled over The Last of the Mohicans - which had, of course,
been left face downwards on the floor - and when Anthea had picked
her and the book up she suddenly said, 'I know!' and sat down flat
on the carpet.

'Oh, Pussy, how awful!  It was Indians he wished for - Cyril - at
breakfast, don't you remember?  He said, "I wish there were Red
Indians in England," - and now there are, and they're going about
scalping people all over the country, like as not.'

'Perhaps they're only in Northumberland and Durham,' said Jane
soothingly.  It was almost impossible to believe that it could
really hurt people much to be scalped so far away as that.

'Don't you believe it!' said Anthea.  'The Sammyadd said we'd let
ourselves in for a nice thing.  That means they'll come HERE.  And
suppose they scalped the Lamb!'

'Perhaps the scalping would come right again at sunset,' said Jane;
but she did not speak so hopefully as usual.

'Not it!' said Anthea.  'The things that grow out of the wishes
don't go.  Look at the fifteen shillings!  Pussy, I'm going to
break something, and you must let me have every penny of money
you've got.  The Indians will come HERE, don't you see?  That
spiteful Psammead as good as said so.  You see what my plan is?
Come on!'

Jane did not see at all.  But she followed her sister meekly into
their mother's bedroom.

Anthea lifted down the heavy water-jug - it had a pattern of storks
and long grasses on it, which Anthea never forgot.  She carried it
into the dressing-room, and carefully emptied the water out of it
into the bath.  Then she took the jug back into the bedroom and
dropped it on the floor.  You know how a jug always breaks if you
happen to drop it by accident.  If you happen to drop it on
purpose, it is quite different.  Anthea dropped that jug three
times, and it was as unbroken as ever.  So at last she had to take
her father's boot-tree and break the jug with that in cold blood.
It was heartless work.

Next she broke open the missionary-box with the poker.  Jane told
her that it was wrong, of course, but Anthea shut her lips very
tight and then said:

'Don't be silly - it's a matter of life and death.'

There was not very much in the missionary-box - only
seven-and-fourpence - but the girls between them had nearly four
shillings.  This made over eleven shillings, as you will easily
see.

Anthea tied up the money in a corner of her pocket-handkerchief.
'Come on, Jane!' she said, and ran down to the farm.  She knew that
the farmer was going into Rochester that afternoon.  In fact it had
been arranged that he was to take the four children with him.  They
had planned this in the happy hour when they believed that they
were going to get that hundred pounds, in two-shilling pieces, out
of the Psammead.  They had arranged to pay the farmer two shillings
each for the ride.  Now Anthea hastily explained to him that they
could not go, but would he take Martha and the Baby instead?  He
agreed, but he was not pleased to get only half-a-crown instead of
eight shillings.

Then the girls ran home again.  Anthea was agitated, but not
flurried.  When she came to think it over afterwards, she could not
help seeing that she had acted with the most far-seeing
promptitude, just like a born general.  She fetched a little box
from her corner drawer, and went to find Martha, who was laying the
cloth and not in the best of tempers.

'Look here,' said Anthea.  'I've broken the toilet-jug in mother's
room.'

'Just like you - always up to some mischief,' said Martha, dumping
down a salt-cellar with a bang.

'Don't be cross, Martha dear,' said Anthea.  'I've got enough money
to pay for a new one - if only you'll be a dear and go and buy it
for us.  Your cousins keep a china-shop, don't they?  And I would
like you to get it to-day, in case mother comes home to-morrow.
You know she said she might, perhaps.'

'But you're all going into town yourselves,' said Martha.

'We can't afford to, if we get the new jug,' said Anthea; 'but
we'll pay for you to go, if you'll take the Lamb.  And I say,
Martha, look here - I'll give you my Liberty box, if you'll go.
Look, it's most awfully pretty - all inlaid with real silver and
ivory and ebony like King Solomon's temple.'

'I see,' said Martha; 'no, I don't want your box, miss.  What you
want is to get the precious Lamb off your hands for the afternoon.
Don't you go for to think I don't see through you!'

This was so true that Anthea longed to deny it at once - Martha had
no business to know so much.  But she held her tongue.

Martha set down the bread with a bang that made it jump off its
trencher.

'I DO want the jug got,' said Anthea softly.  'You WILL go, won't
you?'

'Well, just for this once, I don't mind; but mind you don't get
into none of your outrageous mischief while I'm gone - that's all!'

'He's going earlier than he thought,' said Anthea eagerly.  'You'd
better hurry and get dressed.  Do put on that lovely purple frock,
Martha, and the hat with the pink cornflowers, and the yellow-lace
collar.  Jane'll finish laying the cloth, and I'll wash the Lamb
and get him ready.'

As she washed the unwilling Lamb, and hurried him into his best
clothes, Anthea peeped out of the window from time to time; so far
all was well - she could see no Red Indians.  When with a rush and
a scurry and some deepening of the damask of Martha's complexion
she and the Lamb had been got off, Anthea drew a deep breath.

'HE'S safe!' she said, and, to jane's horror, flung herself down on
the floor and burst into floods of tears.  Jane did not understand
at all how a person could be so brave and like a general, and then
suddenly give way and go flat like an air-balloon when you prick
it.  It is better not to go flat, of course, but you will observe
that Anthea did not give way till her aim was accomplished.  She
had got the dear Lamb out of danger - she felt certain the Red
Indians would be round the White House or nowhere - the farmer's
cart would not come back till after sunset, so she could afford to
cry a little.  It was partly with joy that she cried, because she
had done what she meant to do.  She cried for about three minutes,
while Jane hugged her miserably and said at five-second intervals,
'Don't cry, Panther dear!'

Then she jumped up, rubbed her eyes hard with the corner of her
pinafore, so that they kept red for the rest of the day, and
started to tell the boys.  But just at that moment cook rang the
dinner-bell, and nothing could be said till they had all been
helped to minced beef.  Then cook left the room, and Anthea told
her tale.  But it is a mistake to tell a thrilling tale when people
are eating minced beef and boiled potatoes.  There seemed somehow
to be something about the food that made the idea of Red Indians
seem flat and unbelievable.  The boys actually laughed, and called
Anthea a little silly.

'Why,' said Cyril, 'I'm almost sure it was before I said that, that
Jane said she wished it would be a fine day.'

'It wasn't,' said Jane briefly.

'Why, if it was Indians,' Cyril went on - 'salt, please, and
mustard - I must have something to make this mush go down - if it
was Indians, they'd have been infesting the place long before this
- you know they would.  I believe it's the fine day.'

'Then why did the Sammyadd say we'd let ourselves in for a nice
thing?' asked Anthea.  She was feeling very cross.  She knew she
had acted with nobility and discretion, and after that it was very
hard to be called a little silly, especially when she had the
weight of a burglared missionary-box and about seven-and-fourpence,
mostly in coppers, lying like lead upon her conscience.

There was a silence, during which cook took away the mincy plates
and brought in the treacle-pudding.  As soon as she had retired,
Cyril began again.

'Of course I don't mean to say,' he admitted, 'that it wasn't a
good thing to get Martha and the Lamb out of the light for the
afternoon; but as for Red Indians - why, you know jolly well the
wishes always come that very minute.  If there was going to be Red
Indians, they'd be here now.'

'I expect they are,' said Anthea; 'they're lurking amid the
undergrowth, for anything you know.  I do think you're most beastly
unkind.'

'Indians almost always DO lurk, really, though, don't they?' put in
Jane, anxious for peace.

No, they don't,' said Cyril tartly.  'And I'm not unkind, I'm only
truthful.  And I say it was utter rot breaking the water-jug; and
as for the missionary-box, I believe it's a treason-crime, and I
shouldn't wonder if you could be hanged for it, if any of us was to
split -'

'Shut up, can't you?' said Robert; but Cyril couldn't.  You see, he
felt in his heart that if there SHOULD be Indians they would be
entirely his own fault, so he did not wish to believe in them.  And
trying not to believe things when in your heart you are almost sure
they are true, is as bad for the temper as anything I know.

'It's simply idiotic,' he said, 'talking about Indians, when you
can see for yourselves that it's Jane who's got her wish.  Look
what a fine day it is - OH - '

He had turned towards the window to point out the fineness of the
day - the others turned too - and a frozen silence caught at Cyril,
and none of the others felt at all like breaking it.  For there,
peering round the corner of the window, among the red leaves of the
Virginia creeper, was a face - a brown face, with a long nose and
a tight mouth and very bright eyes.  And the face was painted in
coloured patches.  It had long black hair, and in the hair were
feathers!

Every child's mouth in the room opened, and stayed open.  The
treacle-pudding was growing white and cold on their plates.  No one
could move.

Suddenly the feathered head was cautiously withdrawn, and the spell
was broken.  I am sorry to say that Anthea's first words were very
like a girl.

'There, now!' she said.  'I told you so!'

Treacle-pudding had now definitely ceased to charm.  Hastily
wrapping their portions in a Spectator of the week before the week
before last, they hid them behind the crinkled-paper
stove-ornament, and fled upstairs to reconnoitre and to hold a
hurried council.

'Pax,' said Cyril handsomely when they reached their mother's
bedroom.  'Panther, I'm sorry if I was a brute.'

'All right,' said Anthea, 'but you see now!'

No further trace of Indians, however, could be discerned from the
windows.

'Well,' said Robert, 'what are we to do?'

'The only thing I can think of,' said Anthea, who was now generally
admitted to be the heroine of the day, 'is - if we dressed up as
like Indians as we can, and looked out of the windows, or even went
out.  They might think we were the powerful leaders of a large
neighbouring tribe, and - and not do anything to us, you know, for
fear of awful vengeance.'

'But Eliza, and the cook?' said Jane.

'You forget - they can't notice anything,' said Robert.  'They
wouldn't notice anything out of the way, even if they were scalped
or roasted at a slow fire.'

'But would they come right at sunset?'

'Of course.  You can't be really scalped or burned to death without
noticing it, and you'd be sure to notice it next day, even if it
escaped your attention at the time,' said Cyril.  'I think Anthea's
right, but we shall want a most awful lot of feathers.'

'I'll go down to the hen-house,' said Robert.  'There's one of the
turkeys in there - it's not very well.  I could cut its feathers
without it minding much.  It's very bad - doesn't seem to care what
happens to it.  Get me the cutting-out scissors.'

Earnest reconnoitring convinced them all that no Indians were in
the poultry-yard.  Robert went.  In five minutes he came back -
pale, but with many feathers.

'Look here,' he said, 'this is jolly serious.  I cut off the
feathers, and when I turned to come out there was an Indian
squinting at me from under the old hen-coop.  I just brandished the
feathers and yelled, and got away before he could get the coop off
the top of himself.  Panther, get the coloured blankets off our
beds, and look slippy, can't you?'

It is wonderful how like an Indian you can make yourselves with
blankets and feathers and coloured scarves.  Of course none of the
children happened to have long black hair, but there was a lot of
black calico that had been got to cover school-books with.  They
cut strips of this into a sort of fine fringe, and fastened it
round their heads with the amber-coloured ribbons off the girls'
Sunday dresses.  Then they stuck turkeys' feathers in the ribbons.
The calico looked very like long black hair, especially when the
strips began to curl up a bit.

'But our faces,' said Anthea, 'they're not at all the right colour.
We're all rather pale, and I'm sure I don't know why, but Cyril is
the colour of putty.'

'I'm not,' said Cyril.

'The real Indians outside seem to be brownish,' said Robert
hastily.  'I think we ought to be really RED - it's sort of
superior to have a red skin, if you are one.'

The red ochre cook used for the kitchen bricks seemed to be about
the reddest thing in the house.  The children mixed some in a
saucer with milk, as they had seen cook do for the kitchen floor.
Then they carefully painted each other's faces and hands with it,
till they were quite as red as any Red Indian need be - if not
redder.

They knew at once that they must look very terrible when they met
Eliza in the passage, and she screamed aloud.  This unsolicited
testimonial pleased them very much.  Hastily telling her not to be
a goose, and that it was only a game, the four blanketed,
feathered, really and truly Redskins went boldly out to meet the
foe.  I say boldly.  That is because I wish to be polite.  At any
rate, they went.

Along the hedge dividing the wilderness from the garden was a row
of dark heads, all highly feathered.

'It's our only chance,' whispered Anthea.  'Much better than to
wait for their blood-freezing attack.  We must pretend like mad.
Like that game of cards where you pretend you've got aces when you
haven't.  Fluffing they call it, I think.  Now then.  Whoop!'

With four wild war-whoops - or as near them as English children
could be expected to go without any previous practice - they rushed
through the gate and struck four warlike attitudes in face of the
line of Red Indians.  These were all about the same height, and
that height was Cyril's.

'I hope to goodness they can talk English,' said Cyril through his
attitude.

Anthea knew they could, though she never knew how she came to know
it.  She had a white towel tied to a walking-stick.  This was a
flag of truce, and she waved it, in the hope that the Indians would
know what it was.  Apparently they did - for one who was browner
than the others stepped forward.

'Ye seek a pow-wow?' he said in excellent English.  'I am Golden
Eagle, of the mighty tribe of Rock-dwellers.'
'And I,' said Anthea, with a sudden inspiration, 'am the Black
Panther - chief of the - the - the - Mazawattee tribe.  My brothers
- I don't mean - yes, I do - the tribe - I mean the Mazawattees -
are in ambush below the brow of yonder hill.'

'And what mighty warriors be these?' asked Golden Eagle, turning to
the others.

Cyril said he was the great chief Squirrel, of the Moning Congo
tribe, and, seeing that Jane was sucking her thumb and could
evidently think of no name for herself, he added, 'This great
warrior is Wild Cat - Pussy Ferox we call it in this land - leader
of the vast Phiteezi tribe.'

And thou, valorous Redskin?' Golden Eagle inquired suddenly of
Robert, who, taken unawares, could only reply that he was Bobs,
leader of the Cape Mounted Police.

'And now,' said Black Panther, 'our tribes, if we just whistle them
up, will far outnumber your puny forces; so resistance is useless.
Return, therefore, to your own land, O brother, and smoke pipes of
peace in your wampums with your squaws and your medicine-men, and
dress yourselves in the gayest wigwams, and eat happily of the
juicy fresh-caught moccasins.'

'You've got it all wrong,' murmured Cyril angrily.  But Golden
Eagle only looked inquiringly at her.

'Thy customs are other than ours, O Black Panther,' he said.
'Bring up thy tribe, that we may hold pow-wow in state before them,
as becomes great chiefs.'

'We'll bring them up right enough,' said Anthea, 'with their bows
and arrows, and tomahawks, and scalping-knives, and everything you
can think of, if you don't look sharp and go.'

She spoke bravely enough, but the hearts of all the children were
beating furiously, and their breath came in shorter and shorter
gasps.  For the little real Red Indians were closing up round them
- coming nearer and nearer with angry murmurs - so that they were
the centre of a crowd of dark, cruel faces.

'It's no go,' whispered Robert.  'I knew it wouldn't be.  We must
make a bolt for the Psammead.  It might help us.  If it doesn't -
well, I suppose we shall come alive again at sunset.  I wonder if
scalping hurts as much as they say.'

'I'll wave the flag again,' said Anthea.  'If they stand back,
we'll run for it.'

She waved the towel, and the chief commanded his followers to stand
back.  Then, charging wildly at the place where the line of Indians
was thinnest, the four children started to run.  Their first rush
knocked down some half-dozen Indians, over whose blanketed bodies
the children leaped, and made straight for the sand-Pit.  This was
no time for the safe easy way by which carts go down - right over
the edge of the sand-pit they went, among the yellow and pale
purple flowers and dried grasses, past the little sand-martins'
little front doors, skipping, clinging, bounding, stumbling,
sprawling, and finally rolling.

Yellow Eagle and his followers came up with them just at the very
spot where they had seen the Psammead that morning.

Breathless and beaten, the wretched children now awaited their
fate.  Sharp knives and axes gleamed round them, but worse than
these was the cruel light in the eyes of Golden Eagle and his
followers.

'Ye have lied to us, O Black Panther of the Mazawattees - and thou,
too, Squirrel of the Moning Congos.  These also, Pussy Ferox of the
Phiteezi, and Bobs of the Cape Mounted Police - these also have
lied to us, if not with their tongue, yet by their silence.  Ye
have lied under the cover of the Truce-flag of the Pale-face.  Ye
have no followers.  Your tribes are far away - following the
hunting trail.  What shall be their doom?' he concluded, turning
with a bitter smile to the other Red Indians.

'Build we the fire!' shouted his followers; and at once a dozen
ready volunteers started to look for fuel.  The four children, each
held between two strong little Indians, cast despairing glances
round them.  Oh, if they could only see the Psammead!

'Do you mean to scalp us first and then roast us?' asked Anthea
desperately.

'Of course!'  Redskin opened his eyes at her.  'It's always done.'

The Indians had formed a ring round the children, and now sat on
the ground gazing at their captives.  There was a threatening
silence.

Then slowly, by twos and threes, the Indians who had gone to look
for firewood came back, and they came back empty-handed.  They had
not been able to find a single stick of wood, for a fire!  No one
ever can, as a matter of fact, in that part of Kent.

The children drew a deep breath of relief, but it ended in a moan
of terror.  For bright knives were being brandished all about them.
Next moment each child was seized by an Indian; each closed its
eyes and tried not to scream.  They waited for the sharp agony of
the knife.  It did not come.  Next moment they were released, and
fell in a trembling heap.  Their heads did not hurt at all.  They
only felt strangely cool!  Wild war-whoops rang in their ears.
When they ventured to open their eyes they saw four of their foes
dancing round them with wild leaps and screams, and each of the
four brandished in his hand a scalp of long flowing black hair.
They put their hands to their heads - their own scalps were safe!
The poor untutored savages had indeed scalped the children.  But
they had only, so to speak, scalped them of the black calico
ringlets!

The children fell into each other's arms, sobbing and laughing.

'Their scalps are ours,' chanted the chief; 'ill-rooted were their
ill-fated hairs!  They came off in the hands of the victors -
without struggle, without resistance, they yielded their scalps to
the conquering Rock-dwellers!  Oh, how little a thing is a scalp so
lightly won!'

'They'll take our real ones in a minute; you see if they don't,'
said Robert, trying to rub some of the red ochre off his face and
hands on to his hair.

'Cheated of our just and fiery revenge are we,' the chant went on
- 'but there are other torments than the scalping-knife and the
flames.  Yet is the slow fire the correct thing.  O strange
unnatural country, wherein a man may find no wood to burn his
enemy! - Ah, for the boundless forests of my native land, where the
great trees for thousands of miles grow but to furnish firewood
wherewithal to burn our foes.  Ah, would we were but in our native
forest once more!'

Suddenly, like a flash of lightning, the golden gravel shone all
round the four children instead of the dusky figures.  For every
single Indian had vanished on the instant at their leader's word.
The Psammead must have been there all the time.  And it had given
the Indian chief his wish.


Martha brought home a jug with a pattern of storks and long grasses
on it.  Also she brought back all Anthea's money.

'My cousin, she give me the jug for luck; she said it was an odd
one what the basin of had got smashed.'

'Oh, Martha, you arc a dear!' sighed Anthea, throwing her arms
round her.

'Yes,' giggled Martha, 'you'd better make the most of me while
you've got me.  I shall give your ma notice directly minute she
comes back.'

'Oh, Martha, we haven't been so very horrid to you, have we?' asked
Anthea, aghast.

'Oh, it ain't that, miss.'  Martha giggled more than ever.  'I'm
a-goin' to be married.  It's Beale the gamekeeper.  He's been
a-proposin' to me off and on ever since you come home from the
clergyman's where you got locked up on the church-tower.  And
to-day I said the word an' made him a happy man.'

Anthea put the seven-and-fourpence back in the missionary-box, and
pasted paper over the place where the poker had broken it.  She was
very glad to be able to do this, and she does not know to this day
whether breaking open a missionary-box is or is not a hanging
matter.



CHAPTER 11
THE LAST WISH


Of course you, who see above that this is the eleventh (and last)
chapter, know very well that the day of which this chapter tells
must be the last on which Cyril, Anthea, Robert, and Jane will have
a chance of getting anything out of the Psammead, or Sand-fairy.

But the children themselves did not know this.  They were full of
rosy visions, and, whereas on other days they had often found it
extremely difficult to think of anything really nice to wish for,
their brains were now full of the most beautiful and sensible
ideas.  'This,' as Jane remarked afterwards, 'is always the way.'
Everyone was up extra early that morning, and these plans were
hopefully discussed in the garden before breakfast.  The old idea
of one hundred pounds in modern florins was still first favourite,
but there were others that ran it close - the chief of these being
the 'pony each' idea.  This had a great advantage.  You could wish
for a pony each during the morning, ride it all day, have it vanish
at sunset, and wish it back again next day.  Which would be an
economy of litter and stabling.  But at breakfast two things
happened.  First, there was a letter from mother.  Granny was
better, and mother and father hoped to be home that very afternoon.
A cheer arose.  And of course this news at once scattered all the
before-breakfast wish-ideas.  For everyone saw quite plainly that
the wish for the day must be something to please mother and not to
please themselves.

'I wonder what she WOULD like,' pondered Cyril.

'She'd like us all to be good,' said Jane primly.

'Yes - but that's so dull for us,' Cyril rejoined; 'and, besides,
I should hope we could be that without sand-fairies to help us.
No; it must be something splendid, that we couldn't possibly get
without wishing for.'

'Look out,' said Anthea in a warning voice; 'don't forget
yesterday.  Remember, we get our wishes now just wherever we happen
to be when we say "I wish".  Don't let's let ourselves in for
anything silly - to-day of all days.'

'All right,' said Cyril.  'You needn't jaw.'

just then Martha came in with a jug full of hot water for the
teapot - and a face full of importance for the children.

'A blessing we're all alive to eat our breakfasses!' she said
darkly.

'Why, whatever's happened?' everybody asked.

'Oh, nothing,' said Martha, 'only it seems nobody's safe from being
murdered in their beds nowadays.'

'Why,' said Jane as an agreeable thrill of horror ran down her back
and legs and out at her toes, 'has anyone been murdered in their
beds?'

'Well - not exactly,' said Martha; 'but they might just as well.
There's been burglars over at Peasmarsh Place - Beale's just told
me - and they've took every single one of Lady Chittenden's
diamonds and jewels and things, and she's a-goin' out of one
fainting fit into another, with hardly time to say "Oh, my
diamonds!" in between.  And Lord Chittenden's away in London.'

'Lady Chittenden,' said Anthea; 'we've seen her.  She wears a
red-and-white dress, and she has no children of her own and can't
abide other folkses'.'

'That's her,' said Martha.  'Well, she's put all her trust in
riches, and you see how she's served.  They say the diamonds and
things was worth thousands of thousands of pounds.  There was a
necklace and a river - whatever that is - and no end of bracelets;
and a tarrer and ever so many rings.  But there, I mustn't stand
talking and all the place to clean down afore your ma comes home.'

'I don't see why she should ever have had such lots of diamonds,'
said Anthea when Martha had Bounced off.  'She was rather a nasty
lady, I thought.  And mother hasn't any diamonds, and hardly any
jewels - the topaz necklace, and the sapphire ring daddy gave her
when they were engaged, and the garnet star, and the little pearl
brooch with great-grandpapa's hair in it - that's about all.'

'When I'm grown up I'll buy mother no end of diamonds,' said
Robert, 'if she wants them.  I shall make so much money exploring
in Africa I shan't know what to do with it.'

'Wouldn't it be jolly,' said Jane dreamily, 'if mother could find
all those lovely things, necklaces and rivers of diamonds and
tarrers?'

'TI--ARAS,' said Cyril.

'Ti--aras, then - and rings and everything in her room when she
came home?  I wish she would.'  The others gazed at her in horror.

'Well, she WILL,' said Robert; 'you've wished, my good Jane - and
our only chance now is to find the Psammead, and if it's in a good
temper it MAY take back the wish and give us another.  If not -
well - goodness knows what we're in for! - the police, of course,
and - Don't cry, silly!  We'll stand by you.  Father says we need
never be afraid if we don't do anything wrong and always speak the
truth.'

But Cyril and Anthea exchanged gloomy glances.  They remembered how
convincing the truth about the Psammead had been once before when
told to the police.

It was a day of misfortunes.  Of course the Psammead could not be
found.  Nor the jewels, though every one Of the children searched
their mother's room again and again.

'Of course,' Robert said, 'WE couldn't find them.  It'll be mother
who'll do that.  Perhaps she'll think they've been in the house for
years and years, and never know they are the stolen ones at all.'

'Oh yes!' Cyril was very scornful; 'then mother will be a receiver
of stolen goods, and you know jolly well what THAT'S worse than.'

Another and exhaustive search of the sand-pit failed to reveal the
Psammead, so the children went back to the house slowly and sadly.

'I don't care,' said Anthea stoutly, 'we'll tell mother the truth,
and she'll give back the jewels - and make everything all right.'


'Do you think so?' said Cyril slowly.  'Do you think She'll believe
us?  Could anyone believe about a Sammyadd unless they'd seen it?
She'll think we're pretending.  Or else she'll think we're raving
mad, and then we shall be sent to Bedlam.  How would you like it?'
- he turned suddenly on the miserable Jane - 'how would you like
it, to be shut up in an iron cage with bars and padded walls, and
nothing to do but stick straws in your hair all day, and listen to
the howlings and ravings of the other maniacs?  Make up your minds
to it, all of you.  It's no use telling mother.'

'But it's true,' said Jane.

'Of course it is, but it's not true enough for grown-up people to
believe it,' said Anthea.  'Cyril's right.  Let's put flowers in
all the vases, and try not to think about diamonds.  After all,
everything has come right in the end all the other times.'

So they filled all the pots they could find with flowers - asters
and zinnias, and loose-leaved late red roses from the wall of the
stable-yard, till the house was a perfect bower.

And almost as soon as dinner was cleared away mother arrived, and
was clasped in eight loving arms.  It was very difficult indeed not
to tell her all about the Psammead at once, because they had got
into the habit of telling her everything.  But they did succeed in
not telling her.
Mother, on her side, had plenty to tell them - about Granny, and
Granny's pigeons, and Auntie Emma's lame tame donkey.  She was very
delighted with the flowery-boweryness of the house; and everything
seemed so natural and pleasant, now that she was home again, that
the children almost thought they must have dreamed the Psammead.

But, when mother moved towards the stairs to go UP to her bedroom
and take off her bonnet, the eight arms clung round her just as if
she only had two children, one the Lamb and the other an octopus.

'Don't go up, mummy darling,' said Anthea; 'let me take your things
up for you.'

'Or I will,' said Cyril.

'We want you to come and look at the rose-tree,' said Robert.

'Oh, don't go up!' said Jane helplessly.

'Nonsense, dears,' said mother briskly, 'I'm not such an old woman
yet that I can't take my bonnet off in the proper place.  Besides,
I must wash these black hands of mine.'

So up she went, and the children, following her, exchanged glances
of gloomy foreboding.

Mother took off her bonnet - it was a very pretty hat, really, with
white roses on it - and when she had taken it off she went to the
dressing-table to do her pretty hair.

On the table between the ring-stand and the pincushion lay a green
leather case.  Mother opened it.

'Oh, how lovely!' she cried.  It was a ring, a large pearl with
shining many-lighted diamonds set round it.  'Wherever did this
come from?' mother asked, trying it on her wedding finger, which it
fitted beautifully.  'However did it come here?'

'I don't know,' said each of the children truthfully.

'Father must have told Martha to put it here,' mother said.  'I'll
run down and ask her.'

'Let me look at it,' said Anthea, who knew Martha would not be able
to see the ring.  But when Martha was asked, of course she denied
putting the ring there, and so did Eliza and cook.

Mother came back to her bedroom, very much interested and pleased
about the ring.  But, when she opened the dressing-table drawer and
found a long case containing an almost priceless diamond necklace,
she was more interested still, though not so pleased.  In the
wardrobe, when she went to put away her 'bonnet', she found a tiara
and several brooches, and the rest of the jewellery turned up in
various parts of the room during the next half-hour.  The children
looked more and more uncomfortable, and now Jane began to sniff.

Mother looked at her gravely.

'Jane,' she said, 'I am sure you know something about this.  Now
think before you speak, and tell me the truth.'

'We found a Fairy,' said Jane obediently.

'No nonsense, please,' said her mother sharply.

'Don't be silly, Jane,' Cyril interrupted.  Then he went on
desperately.  'Look here, mother, we've never seen the things
before, but Lady Chittenden at Peasmarsh Place lost all her
jewellery by wicked burglars last night.  Could this possibly be
it?'

All drew a deep breath.  They were saved.

'But how could they have put it here?  And why should they?' asked
mother, not unreasonably.  'Surely it would have been easier and
safer to make off with it?'

'Suppose,' said Cyril, 'they thought it better to wait for - for
sunset - nightfall, I mean, before they went off with it.  No one
but us knew that you were coming back to-day.'

'I must send for the police at once,' said mother distractedly.
'Oh, how I wish daddy were here!'

'Wouldn't it be better to wait till he DOES come?' asked Robert,
knowing that his father would not be home before sunset.

'No, no; I can't wait a minute with all this on my mind,' cried
mother.  'All this' was the heap of jewel-cases on the bed.  They
put them all in the wardrobe, and mother locked it.  Then mother
called Martha.

'Martha,' she said, 'has any stranger been into MY room since I've
been away?  Now, answer me truthfully.'

'No, mum,' answered Martha; 'leastways, what I mean to say -'

She stopped.

'Come,' said her mistress kindly; 'I see someone has.  You must
tell me at once.  Don't be frightened.  I'm sure you haven't done
anything wrong.'

Martha burst into heavy sobs.

'I was a-goin' to give you warning this very day, mum, to leave at
the end of my month, so I was - on account of me being going to
make a respectable young man happy.  A gamekeeper he is by trade,
mum - and I wouldn't deceive you - of the name of Beale.  And it's
as true as I stand here, it Was your coming home in such a hurry,
and no warning given, out of the kindness of his heart it was, as
he says, "Martha, my beauty," he says - which I ain't and never
was, but you know how them men will go on - "I can't see you
a-toiling and a-moiling and not lend a 'elping 'and; which mine is
a strong arm and it's yours, Martha, my dear," says he.  And so he
helped me a-cleanin' of the windows, but outside, mum, the whole
time, and me in; if I never say another breathing word it's the
gospel truth.'

'Were you with him the whole time?' asked her mistress.

'Him outside and me in, I was,' said Martha; 'except for fetching
up a fresh pail and the leather that that slut of a Eliza 'd hidden
away behind the mangle.'

'That will do,' said the children's mother.  'I am not pleased with
you, Martha, but you have spoken the truth, and that counts for
something.'

When Martha had gone, the children clung round their mother.

'Oh, mummy darling,' cried Anthea, 'it isn't Beale's fault, it
isn't really!  He's a great dear; he is, truly and honourably, and
as honest as the day.  Don't let the police take him, mummy!  oh,
don't, don't, don't!'

It was truly awful.  Here was an innocent man accused of robbery
through that silly wish of Jane's, and it was absolutely useless to
tell the truth.  All longed to, but they thought of the straws in
the hair and the shrieks of the other frantic maniacs, and they
could not do it.

'Is there a cart hereabouts?' asked mother feverishly.  'A trap of
any sort?  I must drive in to Rochester and tell the police at
once.'

All the children sobbed, 'There's a cart at the farm, but, oh,
don't go! - don't go! - oh, don't go! - wait till daddy comes
home!'

Mother took not the faintest notice.  When she had set her mind on
a thing she always went straight through with it; she was rather
like Anthea in this respect.

'Look here, Cyril,' she said, sticking on her hat with long sharp
violet-headed pins, 'I leave you in charge.  Stay in the
dressing-room.  You can pretend to be swimming boats in the bath,
or something.  Say I gave you leave.  But stay there, with the
landing door open; I've locked the other.  And don't let anyone go
into my room.  Remember, no one knows the jewels are there except
me, and all of you, and the wicked thieves who put them there.
Robert, you stay in the garden and watch the windows.  If anyone
tries to get in you must run and tell the two farm men that I'll
send up to wait in the kitchen.  I'll tell them there are dangerous
characters about - that's true enough.  Now, remember, I trust you
both.  But I don't think they'll try it till after dark, so you're
quite safe.  Good-bye, darlings.'

And she locked her bedroom door and went off with the key in her
pocket.

The children could not help admiring the dashing and decided way in
which she had acted.  They thought how useful she would have been
in organizing escape from some of the tight places in which they
had found themselves of late in consequence of their ill-timed
wishes.

'She's a born general,' said Cyril - 'but I don't know what's going
to happen to us.  Even if the girls were to hunt for that beastly
Sammyadd and find it, and get it to take the jewels away again,
mother would only think we hadn't looked out properly and let the
burglars sneak in and nick them - or else the police will think
WE'VE got them - or else that she's been fooling them.  Oh, it's a
pretty decent average ghastly mess this time, and no mistake!'


He savagely made a paper boat and began to float it in the bath, as
he had been told to do.

Robert went into the garden and sat down on the worn yellow grass,
with his miserable head between his helpless hands.

Anthea and Jane whispered together in the passage downstairs, where
the coconut matting was - with the hole in it that you always
caught your foot in if you were not careful.  Martha's voice could
be heard in the kitchen - grumbling loud and long.

'It's simply quite too dreadfully awful,' said Anthea.  'How do you
know all the diamonds are there, too?  If they aren't, the police
will think mother and father have got them, and that they've only
given up some of them for a kind of desperate blind.  And they'll
be put in prison, and we shall be branded outcasts, the children of
felons.  And it won't be at all nice for father and mother either,'
she added, by a candid afterthought.

'But what can WE do?' asked Jane.

'Nothing - at least we might look for the Psammead again.  It's a
very, very hot day.  He may have come out to warm that whisker of
his.'

'He won't give us any more beastly wishes to-day,' said Jane
flatly.  'He gets crosser and crosser every time we see him.  I
believe he hates having to give wishes.'

Anthea had been shaking her head gloomily - now she stopped shaking
it so suddenly that it really looked as though she were pricking up
her ears.

'What is it?' asked Jane.  'Oh, have you thought of something?'

'Our one chance,' cried Anthea dramatically; 'the last lone-lorn
forlorn hope.  Come on.'

At a brisk trot she led the way to the sand-pit.  Oh, joy! - there
was the Psammead, basking in a golden sandy hollow and preening its
whiskers happily in the glowing afternoon sun.  The moment it saw
them it whisked round and began to burrow - it evidently preferred
its own company to theirs.  But Anthea was too quick for it.  She
caught it by its furry shoulders gently but firmly, and held it.

'Here - none of that!' said the Psammead.  'Leave go of me, will
you?'

But Anthea held him fast.

'Dear kind darling Sammyadd,' she said breathlessly.

'Oh yes - it's all very well,' it said; 'you want another wish, I
expect.  But I can't keep on slaving from morning till night giving
people their wishes.  I must have SOME time to myself.'

'Do you hate giving wishes?' asked Anthea gently, and her voice
trembled with excitement.

'Of course I do,' it said.  'Leave go of me or I'll bite! - I
really will - I mean it.  Oh, well, if you choose to risk it.'

Anthea risked it and held on.

'Look here,' she said, 'don't bite me - listen to reason.  If
you'll only do what we want to-day, we'll never ask you for another
wish as long as we live.'

The Psammead was much moved.

'I'd do anything,' it said in a tearful voice.  'I'd almost burst
myself to give you one wish after another, as long as I held out,
if you'd only never, never ask me to do it after to-day.  If you
knew how I hate to blow myself out with other people's wishes, and
how frightened I am always that I shall strain a muscle or
something.  And then to wake up every morning and know you've GOT
to do it.  You don't know what it is - you don't know what it is,
you don't!'  Its voice cracked with emotion, and the last 'don't'
was a squeak.

Anthea set it down gently on the sand.

'It's all over now,' she said soothingly.  'We promise faithfully
never to ask for another wish after to-day.'
'Well, go ahead,' said the Psammead; 'let's get it over.'

'How many can you do?'

'I don't know - as long as I can hold out.'

'Well, first, I wish Lady Chittenden may find she's never lost her
jewels.'

The Psammead blew itself out, collapsed, and said, 'Done.'

'I wish, said Anthea more slowly, 'mother mayn't get to the
police.'

'Done,' said the creature after the proper interval.

'I wish,' said Jane suddenly, 'mother could forget all about the
diamonds.'

'Done,' said the Psammead; but its voice was weaker.

'Wouldn't you like to rest a little?' asked Anthea considerately.

'Yes, please,' said the Psammead; 'and, before we go further, will
you wish something for me?'

'Can't you do wishes for yourself?'

'Of course not,' it said; 'we were always expected to give each
other our wishes - not that we had any to speak of in the good old
Megatherium days.  just wish, will you, that you may never be able,
any of you, to tell anyone a word about ME.'

'Why?' asked Jane.

'Why, don't you see, if you told grown-ups I should have no peace
of my life.  They'd get hold of me, and they wouldn't wish silly
things like you do, but real earnest things; and the scientific
people would hit on some way of making things last after sunset, as
likely as not; and they'd ask for a graduated income-tax, and
old-age pensions and manhood suffrage, and free secondary
education, and dull things like that; and get them, and keep them,
and the whole world would be turned topsy-turvy.  Do wish it!
Quick!'

Anthea repeated the Psammead's wish, and it blew itself out to a
larger size than they had yet seen it attain.

'And now,' it said as it collapsed, 'can I do anything more for
you?'

'Just one thing; and I think that clears everything up, doesn't it,
Jane?  I wish Martha to forget about the diamond ring, and mother
to forget about the keeper cleaning the windows.'
'It's like the "Brass Bottle",' said Jane.

'Yes, I'm glad we read that or I should never have thought of it.'

'Now,' said the Psammead faintly, 'I'm almost worn out.  Is there
anything else?'

'No; only thank you kindly for all you've done for us, and I hope
you'll have a good long sleep, and I hope we shall see you again
some day.'

'Is that a wish?' it said in a weak voice.

'Yes, please,' said the two girls together.

Then for the last time in this story they saw the Psammead blow
itself out and collapse suddenly.  It nodded to them, blinked its
long snail's eyes, burrowed, and disappeared, scratching fiercely
to the last, and the sand closed over it.

'I hope we've done right?' said Jane.

'I'm sure we have,' said Anthea.  'Come on home and tell the boys.'

Anthea found Cyril glooming over his paper boats, and told him.
Jane told Robert.  The two tales were only just ended when mother
walked in, hot and dusty.  She explained that as she was being
driven into Rochester to buy the girls' autumn school-dresses the
axle had broken, and but for the narrowness of the lane and the
high soft hedges she would have been thrown out.  As it was, she
was not hurt, but she had had to walk home.  'And oh, my dearest
dear chicks,' she said, 'I am simply dying for a cup of tea!  Do
run and see if the kettle boils!'

'So you see it's all right,'Jane whispered.  'She doesn't
remember.'

'No more does Martha,' said Anthea, who had been to ask after the
state of the kettle.

As the servants sat at their tea, Beale the gamekeeper dropped in.
He brought the welcome news that Lady Chittenden's diamonds had not
been lost at all.  Lord Chittenden had taken them to be re-set and
cleaned, and the maid who knew about it had gone for a holiday.  So
that was all right.

'I wonder if we ever shall see the Psammead again,' said Jane
wistfully as they walked in the garden, while mother was putting
the Lamb to bed.

'I'm sure we shall,' said Cyril, 'if you really wished it.'

'We've promised never to ask it for another wish,' said Anthea.

'I never want to,' said Robert earnestly.

They did see it again, of course, but not in this story.  And it
was not in a sand-pit either, but in a very, very, very different
place.  It was in a -- But I must say no more.





*Project Gutenberg Etext of Five Children and It, by E. Nesbit*

========================================
========================================

THE STORY OF THE TREASURE SEEKERS

by E. Nesbit

Being the adventures of the Bastable children in search of a fortune




TO OSWALD BARRON Without whom this book could never have been written

The Treasure Seekers is dedicated in memory of childhoods identical but
for the accidents of time and space


CONTENTS

     1.  The Council of Ways and Means
     2.  Digging for Treasure
     3.  Being Detectives
     4.  Good Hunting
     5.  The Poet and the Editor
     6.  Noel's Princess
     7.  Being Bandits
     8.  Being Editors
     9.  The G. B.
     10. Lord Tottenham
     11. Castilian Amoroso
     12. The Nobleness of Oswald
     13. The Robber and the Burglar
     14. The Divining-rod
     15. 'Lo, the Poor Indian!'
     16. The End of the Treasure-seeking




CHAPTER 1. THE COUNCIL OF WAYS AND MEANS

This is the story of the different ways we looked for treasure, and I
think when you have read it you will see that we were not lazy about the
looking.

There are some things I must tell before I begin to tell about the
treasure-seeking, because I have read books myself, and I know how
beastly it is when a story begins, "'Alas!" said Hildegarde with a deep
sigh, "we must look our last on this ancestral home"'--and then some one
else says something--and you don't know for pages and pages where the
home is, or who Hildegarde is, or anything about it. Our ancestral home
is in the Lewisham Road. It is semi-detached and has a garden, not a
large one. We are the Bastables. There are six of us besides Father. Our
Mother is dead, and if you think we don't care because I don't tell you
much about her you only show that you do not understand people at all.
Dora is the eldest. Then Oswald--and then Dicky. Oswald won the Latin
prize at his preparatory school--and Dicky is good at sums. Alice
and Noel are twins: they are ten, and Horace Octavius is my youngest
brother. It is one of us that tells this story--but I shall not tell you
which: only at the very end perhaps I will. While the story is going
on you may be trying to guess, only I bet you don't. It was Oswald
who first thought of looking for treasure. Oswald often thinks of very
interesting things. And directly he thought of it he did not keep it
to himself, as some boys would have done, but he told the others, and
said--

'I'll tell you what, we must go and seek for treasure: it is always what
you do to restore the fallen fortunes of your House.'

Dora said it was all very well. She often says that. She was trying to
mend a large hole in one of Noel's stockings. He tore it on a nail when
we were playing shipwrecked mariners on top of the chicken-house the day
H. O. fell off and cut his chin: he has the scar still. Dora is the only
one of us who ever tries to mend anything. Alice tries to make things
sometimes. Once she knitted a red scarf for Noel because his chest
is delicate, but it was much wider at one end than the other, and he
wouldn't wear it. So we used it as a pennon, and it did very well,
because most of our things are black or grey since Mother died; and
scarlet was a nice change. Father does not like you to ask for new
things. That was one way we had of knowing that the fortunes of the
ancient House of Bastable were really fallen. Another way was that there
was no more pocket-money--except a penny now and then to the little
ones, and people did not come to dinner any more, like they used to,
with pretty dresses, driving up in cabs--and the carpets got holes in
them--and when the legs came off things they were not sent to be mended,
and we gave _up_ having the gardener except for the front garden, and
not that very often. And the silver in the big oak plate-chest that is
lined with green baize all went away to the shop to have the dents
and scratches taken out of it, and it never came back. We think Father
hadn't enough money to pay the silver man for taking out the dents and
scratches. The new spoons and forks were yellowy-white, and not so heavy
as the old ones, and they never shone after the first day or two.

Father was very ill after Mother died; and while he was ill his
business-partner went to Spain--and there was never much money
afterwards. I don't know why. Then the servants left and there was only
one, a General. A great deal of your comfort and happiness depends on
having a good General. The last but one was nice: she used to make jolly
good currant puddings for us, and let us have the dish on the floor
and pretend it was a wild boar we were killing with our forks. But the
General we have now nearly always makes sago puddings, and they are
the watery kind, and you cannot pretend anything with them, not even
islands, like you do with porridge.

Then we left off going to school, and Father said we should go to a good
school as soon as he could manage it. He said a holiday would do us all
good. We thought he was right, but we wished he had told us he couldn't
afford it. For of course we knew.

Then a great many people used to come to the door with envelopes with
no stamps on them, and sometimes they got very angry, and said they
were calling for the last time before putting it in other hands. I asked
Eliza what that meant, and she kindly explained to me, and I was so
sorry for Father.

And once a long, blue paper came; a policeman brought it, and we were
so frightened. But Father said it was all right, only when he went up
to kiss the girls after they were in bed they said he had been crying,
though I'm sure that's not true. Because only cowards and snivellers
cry, and my Father is the bravest man in the world.

So you see it was time we looked for treasure and Oswald said so, and
Dora said it was all very well. But the others agreed with Oswald. So we
held a council. Dora was in the chair--the big dining-room chair, that
we let the fireworks off from, the Fifth of November when we had the
measles and couldn't do it in the garden. The hole has never been
mended, so now we have that chair in the nursery, and I think it was
cheap at the blowing-up we boys got when the hole was burnt.

'We must do something,' said Alice, 'because the exchequer is empty.'
She rattled the money-box as she spoke, and it really did rattle because
we always keep the bad sixpence in it for luck.

'Yes--but what shall we do?' said Dicky. 'It's so jolly easy to say
let's do _something_.' Dicky always wants everything settled exactly.
Father calls him the Definite Article.

'Let's read all the books again. We shall get lots of ideas out of
them.' It was Noel who suggested this, but we made him shut up, because
we knew well enough he only wanted to get back to his old books. Noel
is a poet. He sold some of his poetry once--and it was printed, but that
does not come in this part of the story.

Then Dicky said, 'Look here. We'll be quite quiet for ten minutes by
the clock--and each think of some way to find treasure. And when we've
thought we'll try all the ways one after the other, beginning with the
eldest.'

'I shan't be able to think in ten minutes, make it half an hour,' said
H. O. His real name is Horace Octavius, but we call him H. O. because of
the advertisement, and it's not so very long ago he was afraid to pass
the hoarding where it says 'Eat H. O.' in big letters. He says it was
when he was a little boy, but I remember last Christmas but one, he woke
in the middle of the night crying and howling, and they said it was the
pudding. But he told me afterwards he had been dreaming that they really
_had_ come to eat H. O., and it couldn't have been the pudding, when you
come to think of it, because it was so very plain.

Well, we made it half an hour--and we all sat quiet, and thought and
thought. And I made up my mind before two minutes were over, and I
saw the others had, all but Dora, who is always an awful time over
everything. I got pins and needles in my leg from sitting still so long,
and when it was seven minutes H. O. cried out--'Oh, it must be more than
half an hour!'

H. O. is eight years old, but he cannot tell the clock yet. Oswald could
tell the clock when he was six.

We all stretched ourselves and began to speak at once, but Dora put up
her hands to her ears and said--

'One at a time, please. We aren't playing Babel.' (It is a very good
game. Did you ever play it?)

So Dora made us all sit in a row on the floor, in ages, and then she
pointed at us with the finger that had the brass thimble on. Her silver
one got lost when the last General but two went away. We think she must
have forgotten it was Dora's and put it in her box by mistake. She was a
very forgetful girl. She used to forget what she had spent money on, so
that the change was never quite right.

Oswald spoke first. 'I think we might stop people on Blackheath--with
crape masks and horse-pistols--and say "Your money or your life!
Resistance is useless, we are armed to the teeth"--like Dick Turpin
and Claude Duval. It wouldn't matter about not having horses, because
coaches have gone out too.'

Dora screwed up her nose the way she always does when she is going to
talk like the good elder sister in books, and said, 'That would be
very wrong: it's like pickpocketing or taking pennies out of Father's
great-coat when it's hanging in the hall.'

I must say I don't think she need have said that, especially before the
little ones--for it was when I was only four.

But Oswald was not going to let her see he cared, so he said--

'Oh, very well. I can think of lots of other ways. We could rescue an
old gentleman from deadly Highwaymen.'

'There aren't any,' said Dora.

'Oh, well, it's all the same--from deadly peril, then. There's plenty
of that. Then he would turn out to be the Prince of Wales, and he would
say, "My noble, my cherished preserver! Here is a million pounds a year.
Rise up, Sir Oswald Bastable."'

But the others did not seem to think so, and it was Alice's turn to say.

She said, 'I think we might try the divining-rod. I'm sure I could do
it. I've often read about it. You hold a stick in your hands, and when
you come to where there is gold underneath the stick kicks about. So you
know. And you dig.'

'Oh,' said Dora suddenly, 'I have an idea. But I'll say last. I hope the
divining-rod isn't wrong. I believe it's wrong in the Bible.'

'So is eating pork and ducks,' said Dicky. 'You can't go by that.'

'Anyhow, we'll try the other ways first,' said Dora. 'Now, H. O.'

'Let's be Bandits,' said H. O. 'I dare say it's wrong but it would be
fun pretending.'

'I'm sure it's wrong,' said Dora.

And Dicky said she thought everything wrong. She said she didn't, and
Dicky was very disagreeable. So Oswald had to make peace, and he said--

'Dora needn't play if she doesn't want to. Nobody asked her. And, Dicky,
don't be an idiot: do dry up and let's hear what Noel's idea is.'

Dora and Dicky did not look pleased, but I kicked Noel under the table
to make him hurry up, and then he said he didn't think he wanted to
play any more. That's the worst of it. The others are so jolly ready to
quarrel. I told Noel to be a man and not a snivelling pig, and at last
he said he had not made up his mind whether he would print his poetry in
a book and sell it, or find a princess and marry her.

'Whichever it is,' he added, 'none of you shall want for anything,
though Oswald did kick me, and say I was a snivelling pig.'

'I didn't,' said Oswald, 'I told you not to be.' And Alice explained to
him that that was quite the opposite of what he thought. So he agreed to
drop it.

Then Dicky spoke.

'You must all of you have noticed the advertisements in the papers,
telling you that ladies and gentlemen can easily earn two pounds a
week in their spare time, and to send two shillings for sample and
instructions, carefully packed free from observation. Now that we don't
go to school all our time is spare time. So I should think we could
easily earn twenty pounds a week each. That would do us very well. We'll
try some of the other things first, and directly we have any money we'll
send for the sample and instructions. And I have another idea, but I
must think about it before I say.'

We all said, 'Out with it--what's the other idea?'

But Dicky said, 'No.' That is Dicky all over. He never will show you
anything he's making till it's quite finished, and the same with his
inmost thoughts. But he is pleased if you seem to want to know, so
Oswald said--

'Keep your silly old secret, then. Now, Dora, drive ahead. We've all
said except you.'

Then Dora jumped up and dropped the stocking and the thimble (it rolled
away, and we did not find it for days), and said--

'Let's try my way _now_. Besides, I'm the eldest, so it's only fair.
Let's dig for treasure. Not any tiresome divining-rod--but just plain
digging. People who dig for treasure always find it. And then we shall
be rich and we needn't try your ways at all. Some of them are rather
difficult: and I'm certain some of them are wrong--and we must always
remember that wrong things--'

But we told her to shut up and come on, and she did.

I couldn't help wondering as we went down to the garden, why Father
had never thought of digging there for treasure instead of going to his
beastly office every day.



CHAPTER 2. DIGGING FOR TREASURE

I am afraid the last chapter was rather dull. It is always dull in books
when people talk and talk, and don't do anything, but I was obliged to
put it in, or else you wouldn't have understood all the rest. The best
part of books is when things are happening. That is the best part of
real things too. This is why I shall not tell you in this story about
all the days when nothing happened. You will not catch me saying, 'thus
the sad days passed slowly by'--or 'the years rolled on their weary
course'--or 'time went on'--because it is silly; of course time goes
on--whether you say so or not. So I shall just tell you the nice,
interesting parts--and in between you will understand that we had our
meals and got up and went to bed, and dull things like that. It would be
sickening to write all that down, though of course it happens. I said
so to Albert-next-door's uncle, who writes books, and he said, 'Quite
right, that's what we call selection, a necessity of true art.' And he
is very clever indeed. So you see.

I have often thought that if the people who write books for children
knew a little more it would be better. I shall not tell you anything
about us except what I should like to know about if I was reading the
story and you were writing it. Albert's uncle says I ought to have put
this in the preface, but I never read prefaces, and it is not much good
writing things just for people to skip. I wonder other authors have
never thought of this.

Well, when we had agreed to dig for treasure we all went down into the
cellar and lighted the gas. Oswald would have liked to dig there, but
it is stone flags. We looked among the old boxes and broken chairs and
fenders and empty bottles and things, and at last we found the spades we
had to dig in the sand with when we went to the seaside three years ago.
They are not silly, babyish, wooden spades, that split if you look at
them, but good iron, with a blue mark across the top of the iron part,
and yellow wooden handles. We wasted a little time getting them dusted,
because the girls wouldn't dig with spades that had cobwebs on them.
Girls would never do for African explorers or anything like that, they
are too beastly particular.

It was no use doing the thing by halves. We marked out a sort of square
in the mouldy part of the garden, about three yards across, and began
to dig. But we found nothing except worms and stones--and the ground was
very hard.

So we thought we'd try another part of the garden, and we found a
place in the big round flower bed, where the ground was much softer. We
thought we'd make a smaller hole to begin with, and it was much better.
We dug and dug and dug, and it was jolly hard work! We got very hot
digging, but we found nothing.

Presently Albert-next-door looked over the wall. We do not like him very
much, but we let him play with us sometimes, because his father is dead,
and you must not be unkind to orphans, even if their mothers are
alive. Albert is always very tidy. He wears frilly collars and velvet
knickerbockers. I can't think how he can bear to.

So we said, 'Hallo!'

And he said, 'What are you up to?'

'We're digging for treasure,' said Alice; 'an ancient parchment revealed
to us the place of concealment. Come over and help us. When we have
dug deep enough we shall find a great pot of red clay, full of gold and
precious jewels.'

Albert-next-door only sniggered and said, 'What silly nonsense!' He
cannot play properly at all. It is very strange, because he has a very
nice uncle. You see, Albert-next-door doesn't care for reading, and he
has not read nearly so many books as we have, so he is very foolish and
ignorant, but it cannot be helped, and you just have to put up with it
when you want him to do anything. Besides, it is wrong to be angry with
people for not being so clever as you are yourself. It is not always
their faults.

So Oswald said, 'Come and dig! Then you shall share the treasure when
we've found it.'

But he said, 'I shan't--I don't like digging--and I'm just going in to
my tea.'

'Come along and dig, there's a good boy,' Alice said. 'You can use my
spade. It's much the best--'

So he came along and dug, and when once he was over the wall we kept him
at it, and we worked as well, of course, and the hole got deep. Pincher
worked too--he is our dog and he is very good at digging. He digs for
rats in the dustbin sometimes, and gets very dirty. But we love our dog,
even when his face wants washing.

'I expect we shall have to make a tunnel,' Oswald said, 'to reach the
rich treasure.' So he jumped into the hole and began to dig at one side.
After that we took it in turns to dig at the tunnel, and Pincher was
most useful in scraping the earth out of the tunnel--he does it with
his back feet when you say 'Rats!' and he digs with his front ones, and
burrows with his nose as well.

At last the tunnel was nearly a yard long, and big enough to creep
along to find the treasure, if only it had been a bit longer. Now it was
Albert's turn to go in and dig, but he funked it.

'Take your turn like a man,' said Oswald--nobody can say that Oswald
doesn't take his turn like a man. But Albert wouldn't. So we had to make
him, because it was only fair.

'It's quite easy,' Alice said. 'You just crawl in and dig with your
hands. Then when you come out we can scrape out what you've done, with
the spades. Come--be a man. You won't notice it being dark in the tunnel
if you shut your eyes tight. We've all been in except Dora--and she
doesn't like worms.'

'I don't like worms neither.' Albert-next-door said this; but we
remembered how he had picked a fat red and black worm up in his fingers
and thrown it at Dora only the day before. So we put him in.

But he would not go in head first, the proper way, and dig with his
hands as we had done, and though Oswald was angry at the time, for he
hates snivellers, yet afterwards he owned that perhaps it was just
as well. You should never be afraid to own that perhaps you were
mistaken--but it is cowardly to do it unless you are quite sure you are
in the wrong.

'Let me go in feet first,' said Albert-next-door. 'I'll dig with my
boots--I will truly, honour bright.'

So we let him get in feet first--and he did it very slowly and at last
he was in, and only his head sticking out into the hole; and all the
rest of him in the tunnel.

'Now dig with your boots,' said Oswald; 'and, Alice, do catch hold of
Pincher, he'll be digging again in another minute, and perhaps it would
be uncomfortable for Albert if Pincher threw the mould into his eyes.'

You should always try to think of these little things. Thinking of other
people's comfort makes them like you. Alice held Pincher, and we all
shouted, 'Kick! dig with your feet, for all you're worth!'

So Albert-next-door began to dig with his feet, and we stood on the
ground over him, waiting--and all in a minute the ground gave way, and
we tumbled together in a heap: and when we got up there was a little
shallow hollow where we had been standing, and Albert-next-door was
underneath, stuck quite fast, because the roof of the tunnel had tumbled
in on him. He is a horribly unlucky boy to have anything to do with.

It was dreadful the way he cried and screamed, though he had to own it
didn't hurt, only it was rather heavy and he couldn't move his legs. We
would have dug him out all right enough, in time, but he screamed so we
were afraid the police would come, so Dicky climbed over the wall, to
tell the cook there to tell Albert-next-door's uncle he had been buried
by mistake, and to come and help dig him out.

Dicky was a long time gone. We wondered what had become of him, and all
the while the screaming went on and on, for we had taken the loose earth
off Albert's face so that he could scream quite easily and comfortably.

Presently Dicky came back and Albert-next-door's uncle came with him. He
has very long legs, and his hair is light and his face is brown. He has
been to sea, but now he writes books. I like him.

He told his nephew to stow it, so Albert did, and then he asked him if
he was hurt--and Albert had to say he wasn't, for though he is a coward,
and very unlucky, he is not a liar like some boys are.

'This promises to be a protracted if agreeable task,' said
Albert-next-door's uncle, rubbing his hands and looking at the hole with
Albert's head in it. 'I will get another spade,' so he fetched the big
spade out of the next-door garden tool-shed, and began to dig his nephew
out.

'Mind you keep very still,' he said, 'or I might chunk a bit out of you
with the spade.' Then after a while he said--

'I confess that I am not absolutely insensible to the dramatic interest
of the situation. My curiosity is excited. I own that I should like to
know how my nephew happened to be buried. But don't tell me if you'd
rather not. I suppose no force was used?'

'Only moral force,' said Alice. They used to talk a lot about moral
force at the High School where she went, and in case you don't know what
it means I'll tell you that it is making people do what they don't want
to, just by slanging them, or laughing at them, or promising them things
if they're good.

'Only moral force, eh?' said Albert-next-door's uncle. 'Well?'

'Well,' Dora said, 'I'm very sorry it happened to Albert--I'd rather it
had been one of us. It would have been my turn to go into the tunnel,
only I don't like worms, so they let me off. You see we were digging for
treasure.'

'Yes,' said Alice, 'and I think we were just coming to the underground
passage that leads to the secret hoard, when the tunnel fell in on
Albert. He _is_ so unlucky,' and she sighed.

Then Albert-next-door began to scream again, and his uncle wiped his
face--his own face, not Albert's--with his silk handkerchief, and then
he put it in his trousers pocket. It seems a strange place to put a
handkerchief, but he had his coat and waistcoat off and I suppose he
wanted the handkerchief handy. Digging is warm work.

He told Albert-next-door to drop it, or he wouldn't proceed further
in the matter, so Albert stopped screaming, and presently his uncle
finished digging him out. Albert did look so funny, with his hair all
dusty and his velvet suit covered with mould and his face muddy with
earth and crying.

We all said how sorry we were, but he wouldn't say a word back to us. He
was most awfully sick to think he'd been the one buried, when it might
just as well have been one of us. I felt myself that it was hard lines.

'So you were digging for treasure,' said Albert-next-door's uncle,
wiping his face again with his handkerchief. 'Well, I fear that your
chances of success are small. I have made a careful study of the whole
subject. What I don't know about buried treasure is not worth knowing.
And I never knew more than one coin buried in any one garden--and that
is generally--Hullo--what's that?'

He pointed to something shining in the hole he had just dragged Albert
out of. Oswald picked it up. It was a half-crown. We looked at each
other, speechless with surprise and delight, like in books.

'Well, that's lucky, at all events,' said Albert-next-door's uncle.

'Let's see, that's fivepence each for you.'

'It's fourpence--something; I can't do fractions,' said Dicky; 'there
are seven of us, you see.'

'Oh, you count Albert as one of yourselves on this occasion, eh?'

'Of course,' said Alice; 'and I say, he was buried after all. Why
shouldn't we let him have the odd somethings, and we'll have fourpence
each.'

We all agreed to do this, and told Albert-next-door we would bring his
share as soon as we could get the half-crown changed. He cheered up a
little at that, and his uncle wiped his face again--he did look hot--and
began to put on his coat and waistcoat.

When he had done it he stooped and picked up something. He held it up,
and you will hardly believe it, but it is quite true--it was another
half-crown!

'To think that there should be two!' he said; 'in all my experience of
buried treasure I never heard of such a thing!'

I wish Albert-next-door's uncle would come treasure-seeking with us
regularly; he must have very sharp eyes: for Dora says she was looking
just the minute before at the very place where the second half-crown was
picked up from, and _she_ never saw it.



CHAPTER 3. BEING DETECTIVES

The next thing that happened to us was very interesting. It was as real
as the half-crowns--not just pretending. I shall try to write it as like
a real book as I can. Of course we have read Mr Sherlock Holmes, as
well as the yellow-covered books with pictures outside that are so badly
printed; and you get them for fourpence-halfpenny at the bookstall when
the corners of them are beginning to curl up and get dirty, with people
looking to see how the story ends when they are waiting for trains. I
think this is most unfair to the boy at the bookstall. The books are
written by a gentleman named Gaboriau, and Albert's uncle says they are
the worst translations in the world--and written in vile English. Of
course they're not like Kipling, but they're jolly good stories. And we
had just been reading a book by Dick Diddlington--that's not his right
name, but I know all about libel actions, so I shall not say what his
name is really, because his books are rot. Only they put it into our
heads to do what I am going to narrate.

It was in September, and we were not to go to the seaside because it is
so expensive, even if you go to Sheerness, where it is all tin cans and
old boots and no sand at all. But every one else went, even the people
next door--not Albert's side, but the other. Their servant told Eliza
they were all going to Scarborough, and next day sure enough all the
blinds were down and the shutters up, and the milk was not left any
more. There is a big horse-chestnut tree between their garden and ours,
very useful for getting conkers out of and for making stuff to rub on
your chilblains. This prevented our seeing whether the blinds were
down at the back as well, but Dicky climbed to the top of the tree and
looked, and they were.

It was jolly hot weather, and very stuffy indoors--we used to play a
good deal in the garden. We made a tent out of the kitchen clothes-horse
and some blankets off our beds, and though it was quite as hot in the
tent as in the house it was a very different sort of hotness. Albert's
uncle called it the Turkish Bath. It is not nice to be kept from the
seaside, but we know that we have much to be thankful for. We might be
poor little children living in a crowded alley where even at summer
noon hardly a ray of sunlight penetrates; clothed in rags and with bare
feet--though I do not mind holes in my clothes myself, and bare
feet would not be at all bad in this sort of weather. Indeed we do,
sometimes, when we are playing at things which require it. It was
shipwrecked mariners that day, I remember, and we were all in the
blanket tent. We had just finished eating the things we had saved, at
the peril of our lives, from the st-sinking vessel. They were rather
nice things. Two-pennyworth of coconut candy--it was got in Greenwich,
where it is four ounces a penny--three apples, some macaroni--the
straight sort that is so useful to suck things through--some raw rice,
and a large piece of cold suet pudding that Alice nicked from the larder
when she went to get the rice and macaroni. And when we had finished
some one said--

'I should like to be a detective.'

I wish to be quite fair, but I cannot remember exactly who said it.
Oswald thinks he said it, and Dora says it was Dicky, but Oswald is too
much of a man to quarrel about a little thing like that.

'I should like to be a detective,' said--perhaps it was Dicky, but I
think not--'and find out strange and hidden crimes.'

'You have to be much cleverer than you are,' said H. O.

'Not so very,' Alice said, 'because when you've read the books you know
what the things mean: the red hair on the handle of the knife, or the
grains of white powder on the velvet collar of the villain's overcoat. I
believe we could do it.'

'I shouldn't like to have anything to do with murders,' said Dora;
'somehow it doesn't seem safe--'

'And it always ends in the poor murderer being hanged,' said Alice.

We explained to her why murderers have to be hanged, but she only said,
'I don't care. I'm sure no one would ever do murdering _twice_. Think
of the blood and things, and what you would see when you woke up in the
night! I shouldn't mind being a detective to lie in wait for a gang
of coiners, now, and spring upon them unawares, and secure
them--single-handed, you know, or with only my faithful bloodhound.'

She stroked Pincher's ears, but he had gone to sleep because he knew
well enough that all the suet pudding was finished. He is a very
sensible dog. 'You always get hold of the wrong end of the stick,'
Oswald said. 'You can't choose what crimes you'll be a detective about.
You just have to get a suspicious circumstance, and then you look for a
clue and follow it up. Whether it turns out a murder or a missing will
is just a fluke.'

'That's one way,' Dicky said. 'Another is to get a paper and find
two advertisements or bits of news that fit. Like this: "Young Lady
Missing," and then it tells about all the clothes she had on, and the
gold locket she wore, and the colour of her hair, and all that; and then
in another piece of the paper you see, "Gold locket found," and then it
all comes out.'

We sent H. O. for the paper at once, but we could not make any of the
things fit in. The two best were about how some burglars broke into
a place in Holloway where they made preserved tongues and invalid
delicacies, and carried off a lot of them. And on another page there
was, 'Mysterious deaths in Holloway.'

Oswald thought there was something in it, and so did Albert's uncle when
we asked him, but the others thought not, so Oswald agreed to drop it.
Besides, Holloway is a long way off. All the time we were talking about
the paper Alice seemed to be thinking about something else, and when we
had done she said--

'I believe we might be detectives ourselves, but I should not like to
get anybody into trouble.'

'Not murderers or robbers?' Dicky asked.

'It wouldn't be murderers,' she said; 'but I _have_ noticed something
strange. Only I feel a little frightened. Let's ask Albert's uncle
first.'

Alice is a jolly sight too fond of asking grown-up people things. And we
all said it was tommyrot, and she was to tell us.

'Well, promise you won't do anything without me,' Alice said, and we
promised. Then she said--

'This is a dark secret, and any one who thinks it is better not to be
involved in a career of crime-discovery had better go away ere yet it be
too late.'

So Dora said she had had enough of tents, and she was going to look at
the shops. H. O. went with her because he had twopence to spend. They
thought it was only a game of Alice's but Oswald knew by the way she
spoke. He can nearly always tell. And when people are not telling the
truth Oswald generally knows by the way they look with their eyes.
Oswald is not proud of being able to do this. He knows it is through no
merit of his own that he is much cleverer than some people.

When they had gone, the rest of us got closer together and said--

'Now then.'

'Well,' Alice said, 'you know the house next door? The people have gone
to Scarborough. And the house is shut up. But last night _I saw a light
in the windows_.'

We asked her how and when, because her room is in the front, and she
couldn't possibly have seen. And then she said--

'I'll tell you if you boys will promise not ever to go fishing again
without me.'

So we had to promise.

Then she said--

'It was last night. I had forgotten to feed my rabbits and I woke up and
remembered it. And I was afraid I should find them dead in the morning,
like Oswald did.'

'It wasn't my fault,' Oswald said; 'there was something the matter with
the beasts. I fed them right enough.'

Alice said she didn't mean that, and she went on--

'I came down into the garden, and I saw a light in the house, and dark
figures moving about. I thought perhaps it was burglars, but Father
hadn't come home, and Eliza had gone to bed, so I couldn't do anything.
Only I thought perhaps I would tell the rest of you.'

'Why didn't you tell us this morning?' Noel asked. And Alice explained
that she did not want to get any one into trouble, even burglars. 'But
we might watch to-night,' she said, 'and see if we see the light again.'

'They might have been burglars,' Noel said. He was sucking the last bit
of his macaroni. 'You know the people next door are very grand. They
won't know us--and they go out in a real private carriage sometimes. And
they have an "At Home" day, and people come in cabs. I daresay they have
piles of plate and jewellery and rich brocades, and furs of price and
things like that. Let us keep watch to-night.'

'It's no use watching to-night,' Dicky said; 'if it's only burglars they
won't come again. But there are other things besides burglars that are
discovered in empty houses where lights are seen moving.'

'You mean coiners,' said Oswald at once. 'I wonder what the reward is
for setting the police on their track?'

Dicky thought it ought to be something fat, because coiners are always
a desperate gang; and the machinery they make the coins with is so heavy
and handy for knocking down detectives.

Then it was tea-time, and we went in; and Dora and H. O. had clubbed
their money together and bought a melon; quite a big one, and only a
little bit squashy at one end. It was very good, and then we washed the
seeds and made things with them and with pins and cotton. And nobody
said any more about watching the house next door.

Only when we went to bed Dicky took off his coat and waistcoat, but he
stopped at his braces, and said--

'What about the coiners?'

Oswald had taken off his collar and tie, and he was just going to say
the same, so he said, 'Of course I meant to watch, only my collar's
rather tight, so I thought I'd take it off first.'

Dicky said he did not think the girls ought to be in it, because there
might be danger, but Oswald reminded him that they had promised Alice,
and that a promise is a sacred thing, even when you'd much rather
not. So Oswald got Alice alone under pretence of showing her a
caterpillar--Dora does not like them, and she screamed and ran away when
Oswald offered to show it her. Then Oswald explained, and Alice agreed
to come and watch if she could. This made us later than we ought to have
been, because Alice had to wait till Dora was quiet and then creep out
very slowly, for fear of the boards creaking. The girls sleep with their
room-door open for fear of burglars. Alice had kept on her clothes
under her nightgown when Dora wasn't looking, and presently we got down,
creeping past Father's study, and out at the glass door that leads on
to the veranda and the iron steps into the garden. And we went down very
quietly, and got into the chestnut-tree; and then I felt that we had
only been playing what Albert's uncle calls our favourite instrument--I
mean the Fool. For the house next door was as dark as dark. Then
suddenly we heard a sound--it came from the gate at the end of the
garden. All the gardens have gates; they lead into a kind of lane that
runs behind them. It is a sort of back way, very convenient when you
don't want to say exactly where you are going. We heard the gate at the
end of the next garden click, and Dicky nudged Alice so that she
would have fallen out of the tree if it had not been for Oswald's
extraordinary presence of mind. Oswald squeezed Alice's arm tight, and
we all looked; and the others were rather frightened because really we
had not exactly expected anything to happen except perhaps a light. But
now a muffled figure, shrouded in a dark cloak, came swiftly up the
path of the next-door garden. And we could see that under its cloak the
figure carried a mysterious burden. The figure was dressed to look like
a woman in a sailor hat.

We held our breath as it passed under the tree where we were, and then
it tapped very gently on the back door and was let in, and then a light
appeared in the window of the downstairs back breakfast-room. But the
shutters were up.

Dicky said, 'My eye!' and wouldn't the others be sick to think they
hadn't been in this! But Alice didn't half like it--and as she is a girl
I do not blame her. Indeed, I thought myself at first that perhaps
it would be better to retire for the present, and return later with a
strongly armed force.

'It's not burglars,' Alice whispered; 'the mysterious stranger was
bringing things in, not taking them out. They must be coiners--and oh,
Oswald!--don't let's! The things they coin with must hurt very much. Do
let's go to bed!'

But Dicky said he was going to see; if there was a reward for finding
out things like this he would like to have the reward.

'They locked the back door,' he whispered, 'I heard it go. And I could
look in quite well through the holes in the shutters and be back over
the wall long before they'd got the door open, even if they started to
do it at once.'

There were holes at the top of the shutters the shape of hearts, and the
yellow light came out through them as well as through the chinks of the
shutters.

Oswald said if Dicky went he should, because he was the eldest; and
Alice said, 'If any one goes it ought to be me, because I thought of
it.'

So Oswald said, 'Well, go then'; and she said, 'Not for anything!' And
she begged us not to, and we talked about it in the tree till we were
all quite hoarse with whispering.

At last we decided on a plan of action.

Alice was to stay in the tree, and scream 'Murder!' if anything
happened. Dicky and I were to get down into the next garden and take it
in turns to peep.

So we got down as quietly as we could, but the tree made much more noise
than it does in the day, and several times we paused, fearing that all
was discovered. But nothing happened.

There was a pile of red flower-pots under the window and one very large
one was on the window-ledge. It seemed as if it was the hand of Destiny
had placed it there, and the geranium in it was dead, and there was
nothing to stop your standing on it--so Oswald did. He went first
because he is the eldest, and though Dicky tried to stop him because he
thought of it first it could not be, on account of not being able to say
anything.

So Oswald stood on the flower-pot and tried to look through one of the
holes. He did not really expect to see the coiners at their fell work,
though he had pretended to when we were talking in the tree. But if he
had seen them pouring the base molten metal into tin moulds the shape of
half-crowns he would not have been half so astonished as he was at the
spectacle now revealed.

At first he could see little, because the hole had unfortunately been
made a little too high, so that the eye of the detective could only see
the Prodigal Son in a shiny frame on the opposite wall. But Oswald held
on to the window-frame and stood on tiptoe and then he _saw_.

There was no furnace, and no base metal, no bearded men in leathern
aprons with tongs and things, but just a table with a table-cloth on it
for supper, and a tin of salmon and a lettuce and some bottled beer. And
there on a chair was the cloak and the hat of the mysterious stranger,
and the two people sitting at the table were the two youngest grown-up
daughters of the lady next door, and one of them was saying--

'So I got the salmon three-halfpence cheaper, and the lettuces are only
six a penny in the Broadway, just fancy! We must save as much as ever we
can on our housekeeping money if we want to go away decent next year.'

And the other said, 'I wish we could _all_ go _every_ year, or
else--Really, I almost wish--'

And all the time Oswald was looking Dicky was pulling at his jacket to
make him get down and let Dicky have a squint. And just as she said 'I
almost,' Dicky pulled too hard and Oswald felt himself toppling on the
giddy verge of the big flower-pots. Putting forth all his strength our
hero strove to recover his equi-what's-its-name, but it was now lost
beyond recall.

'You've done it this time!' he said, then he fell heavily among the
flower-pots piled below. He heard them crash and rattle and crack, and
then his head struck against an iron pillar used for holding up the
next-door veranda. His eyes closed and he knew no more.

Now you will perhaps expect that at this moment Alice would have cried
'Murder!' If you think so you little know what girls are. Directly she
was left alone in that tree she made a bolt to tell Albert's uncle all
about it and bring him to our rescue in case the coiner's gang was a
very desperate one. And just when I fell, Albert's uncle was getting
over the wall. Alice never screamed at all when Oswald fell, but Dicky
thinks he heard Albert's uncle say, 'Confound those kids!' which would
not have been kind or polite, so I hope he did not say it.

The people next door did not come out to see what the row was. Albert's
uncle did not wait for them to come out. He picked up Oswald and carried
the insensible body of the gallant young detective to the wall, laid it
on the top, and then climbed over and bore his lifeless burden into our
house and put it on the sofa in Father's study. Father was out, so
we needn't have _crept_ so when we were getting into the garden. Then
Oswald was restored to consciousness, and his head tied up, and sent
to bed, and next day there was a lump on his young brow as big as a
turkey's egg, and very uncomfortable.

Albert's uncle came in next day and talked to each of us separately.
To Oswald he said many unpleasant things about ungentlemanly to spy on
ladies, and about minding your own business; and when I began to tell
him what I had heard he told me to shut up, and altogether he made me
more uncomfortable than the bump did.

Oswald did not say anything to any one, but next day, as the shadows of
eve were falling, he crept away, and wrote on a piece of paper, 'I want
to speak to you,' and shoved it through the hole like a heart in the top
of the next-door shutters. And the youngest young lady put an eye to
the heart-shaped hole, and then opened the shutter and said 'Well?' very
crossly. Then Oswald said--

'I am very sorry, and I beg your pardon. We wanted to be detectives, and
we thought a gang of coiners infested your house, so we looked through
your window last night. I saw the lettuce, and I heard what you said
about the salmon being three-halfpence cheaper, and I know it is very
dishonourable to pry into other people's secrets, especially ladies',
and I never will again if you will forgive me this once.'

Then the lady frowned and then she laughed, and then she said--

'So it was you tumbling into the flower-pots last night? We thought it
was burglars. It frightened us horribly. Why, what a bump on your poor
head!'

And then she talked to me a bit, and presently she said she and her
sister had not wished people to know they were at home, because--And
then she stopped short and grew very red, and I said, 'I thought you
were all at Scarborough; your servant told Eliza so. Why didn't you want
people to know you were at home?'

The lady got redder still, and then she laughed and said--

'Never mind the reason why. I hope your head doesn't hurt much. Thank
you for your nice, manly little speech. _You've_ nothing to be ashamed
of, at any rate.' Then she kissed me, and I did not mind. And then she
said, 'Run away now, dear. I'm going to--I'm going to pull up the blinds
and open the shutters, and I want to do it at _once_, before it gets
dark, so that every one can see we're at home, and not at Scarborough.'



CHAPTER 4. GOOD HUNTING

When we had got that four shillings by digging for treasure we ought, by
rights, to have tried Dicky's idea of answering the advertisement about
ladies and gentlemen and spare time and two pounds a week, but there
were several things we rather wanted.

Dora wanted a new pair of scissors, and she said she was going to get
them with her eight-pence. But Alice said--

'You ought to get her those, Oswald, because you know you broke the
points off hers getting the marble out of the brass thimble.'

It was quite true, though I had almost forgotten it, but then it was H.
O. who jammed the marble into the thimble first of all. So I said--

'It's H. O.'s fault as much as mine, anyhow. Why shouldn't he pay?'

Oswald didn't so much mind paying for the beastly scissors, but he hates
injustice of every kind.

'He's such a little kid,' said Dicky, and of course H. O. said he wasn't
a little kid, and it very nearly came to being a row between them. But
Oswald knows when to be generous; so he said--

'Look here! I'll pay sixpence of the scissors, and H. O. shall pay the
rest, to teach him to be careful.'

H. O. agreed: he is not at all a mean kid, but I found out afterwards
that Alice paid his share out of her own money.

Then we wanted some new paints, and Noel wanted a pencil and a halfpenny
account-book to write poetry with, and it does seem hard never to have
any apples. So, somehow or other nearly all the money got spent, and we
agreed that we must let the advertisement run loose a little longer.

'I only hope,' Alice said, 'that they won't have got all the ladies and
gentlemen they want before we have got the money to write for the sample
and instructions.'

And I was a little afraid myself, because it seemed such a splendid
chance; but we looked in the paper every day, and the advertisement was
always there, so we thought it was all right.

Then we had the detective try-on--and it proved no go; and then, when
all the money was gone, except a halfpenny of mine and twopence of
Noel's and three-pence of Dicky's and a few pennies that the girls had
left, we held another council.

Dora was sewing the buttons on H. O.'s Sunday things. He got himself a
knife with his money, and he cut every single one of his best buttons
off. You've no idea how many buttons there are on a suit. Dora counted
them. There are twenty-four, counting the little ones on the sleeves
that don't undo.

Alice was trying to teach Pincher to beg; but he has too much sense
when he knows you've got nothing in your hands, and the rest of us were
roasting potatoes under the fire. We had made a fire on purpose,
though it was rather warm. They are very good if you cut away the burnt
parts--but you ought to wash them first, or you are a dirty boy.

'Well, what can we do?' said Dicky. 'You are so fond of saying "Let's do
something!" and never saying what.'

'We can't try the advertisement yet. Shall we try rescuing some one?'
said Oswald. It was his own idea, but he didn't insist on doing it,
though he is next to the eldest, for he knows it is bad manners to make
people do what you want, when they would rather not.

'What was Noel's plan?' Alice asked.

'A Princess or a poetry book,' said Noel sleepily. He was lying on his
back on the sofa, kicking his legs. 'Only I shall look for the Princess
all by myself. But I'll let you see her when we're married.'

'Have you got enough poetry to make a book?' Dicky asked that, and it
was rather sensible of him, because when Noel came to look there were
only seven of his poems that any of us could understand. There was the
'Wreck of the Malabar', and the poem he wrote when Eliza took us to hear
the Reviving Preacher, and everybody cried, and Father said it must have
been the Preacher's Eloquence. So Noel wrote:

    O Eloquence and what art thou?
    Ay what art thou? because we cried
    And everybody cried inside
    When they came out their eyes were red--
    And it was your doing Father said.

But Noel told Alice he got the first line and a half from a book a boy
at school was going to write when he had time. Besides this there were
the 'Lines on a Dead Black Beetle that was poisoned'--

    O Beetle how I weep to see
       Thee lying on thy poor back!
    It is so very sad indeed.
       You were so shiny and black.
    I wish you were alive again
    But Eliza says wishing it is nonsense and a shame.

It was very good beetle poison, and there were hundreds of them lying
dead--but Noel only wrote a piece of poetry for one of them. He said he
hadn't time to do them all, and the worst of it was he didn't know which
one he'd written it to--so Alice couldn't bury the beetle and put the
lines on its grave, though she wanted to very much.

Well, it was quite plain that there wasn't enough poetry for a book.

'We might wait a year or two,' said Noel. 'I shall be sure to make some
more some time. I thought of a piece about a fly this morning that knew
condensed milk was sticky.'

'But we want the money _now_,' said Dicky, 'and you can go on writing
just the same. It will come in some time or other.'

'There's poetry in newspapers,' said Alice. 'Down, Pincher! you'll never
be a clever dog, so it's no good trying.'

'Do they pay for it?' Dicky thought of that; he often thinks of things
that are really important, even if they are a little dull.

'I don't know. But I shouldn't think any one would let them print their
poetry without. I wouldn't I know.' That was Dora; but Noel said he
wouldn't mind if he didn't get paid, so long as he saw his poetry
printed and his name at the end.

'We might try, anyway,' said Oswald. He is always willing to give other
people's ideas a fair trial.

So we copied out 'The Wreck of the Malabar' and the other six poems on
drawing-paper--Dora did it, she writes best--and Oswald drew a picture
of the Malabar going down with all hands. It was a full-rigged schooner,
and all the ropes and sails were correct; because my cousin is in the
Navy, and he showed me.

We thought a long time whether we'd write a letter and send it by post
with the poetry--and Dora thought it would be best. But Noel said he
couldn't bear not to know at once if the paper would print the poetry,
So we decided to take it.

I went with Noel, because I am the eldest, and he is not old enough to
go to London by himself. Dicky said poetry was rot--and he was glad he
hadn't got to make a fool of himself. That was because there was not
enough money for him to go with us. H. O. couldn't come either, but
he came to the station to see us off, and waved his cap and called out
'Good hunting!' as the train started.

There was a lady in spectacles in the corner. She was writing with a
pencil on the edges of long strips of paper that had print all down
them. When the train started she asked--

'What was that he said?'

So Oswald answered--

'It was "Good hunting"--it's out of the Jungle Book!' 'That's very
pleasant to hear,' the lady said; 'I am very pleased to meet people who
know their Jungle Book. And where are you off to--the Zoological Gardens
to look for Bagheera?'

We were pleased, too, to meet some one who knew the Jungle Book.

So Oswald said--

'We are going to restore the fallen fortunes of the House of
Bastable--and we have all thought of different ways--and we're going to
try them all. Noel's way is poetry. I suppose great poets get paid?'

The lady laughed--she was awfully jolly--and said she was a sort of
poet, too, and the long strips of paper were the proofs of her new book
of stories. Because before a book is made into a real book with pages
and a cover, they sometimes print it all on strips of paper, and the
writer make marks on it with a pencil to show the printers what idiots
they are not to understand what a writer means to have printed.

We told her all about digging for treasure, and what we meant to do.
Then she asked to see Noel's poetry--and he said he didn't like--so she
said, 'Look here--if you'll show me yours I'll show you some of mine.'
So he agreed.

The jolly lady read Noel's poetry, and she said she liked it very much.
And she thought a great deal of the picture of the Malabar. And then she
said, 'I write serious poetry like yours myself; too, but I have a piece
here that I think you will like because it's about a boy.' She gave it
to us--and so I can copy it down, and I will, for it shows that some
grown-up ladies are not so silly as others. I like it better than Noel's
poetry, though I told him I did not, because he looked as if he was
going to cry. This was very wrong, for you should always speak the
truth, however unhappy it makes people. And I generally do. But I did
not want him crying in the railway carriage. The lady's piece of poetry:

    Oh when I wake up in my bed
    And see the sun all fat and red,
    I'm glad to have another day
    For all my different kinds of play.

    There are so many things to do--
    The things that make a man of you,
    If grown-ups did not get so vexed
    And wonder what you will do next.

    I often wonder whether they
    Ever made up our kinds of play--
    If they were always good as gold
    And only did what they were told.

    They like you best to play with tops
    And toys in boxes, bought in shops;
    They do not even know the names
    Of really interesting games.

    They will not let you play with fire
    Or trip your sister up with wire,
    They grudge the tea-tray for a drum,
    Or booby-traps when callers come.

    They don't like fishing, and it's true
    You sometimes soak a suit or two:
    They look on fireworks, though they're dry,
    With quite a disapproving eye.

    They do not understand the way
    To get the most out of your day:
    They do not know how hunger feels
    Nor what you need between your meals.

    And when you're sent to bed at night,
    They're happy, but they're not polite.
    For through the door you hear them say:
    '_He's_ done _his_ mischief for the day!'

She told us a lot of other pieces but I cannot remember them, and she
talked to us all the way up, and when we got nearly to Cannon Street she
said--

'I've got two new shillings here! Do you think they would help to smooth
the path to Fame?'

Noel said, 'Thank you,' and was going to take the shilling. But Oswald,
who always remembers what he is told, said--

'Thank you very much, but Father told us we ought never to take anything
from strangers.'

'That's a nasty one,' said the lady--she didn't talk a bit like a real
lady, but more like a jolly sort of grown-up boy in a dress and hat--'a
very nasty one! But don't you think as Noel and I are both poets I might
be considered a sort of relation? You've heard of brother poets, haven't
you? Don't you think Noel and I are aunt and nephew poets, or some
relationship of that kind?'

I didn't know what to say, and she went on--

'It's awfully straight of you to stick to what your Father tells you,
but look here, you take the shillings, and here's my card. When you
get home tell your Father all about it, and if he says No, you can just
bring the shillings back to me.'

So we took the shillings, and she shook hands with us and said,
'Good-bye, and good hunting!'

We did tell Father about it, and he said it was all right, and when
he looked at the card he told us we were highly honoured, for the lady
wrote better poetry than any other lady alive now. We had never heard of
her, and she seemed much too jolly for a poet. Good old Kipling! We owe
him those two shillings, as well as the Jungle books!



CHAPTER 5. THE POET AND THE EDITOR

It was not bad sport--being in London entirely on our own hook. We asked
the way to Fleet Street, where Father says all the newspaper offices
are. They said straight on down Ludgate Hill--but it turned out to be
quite another way. At least _we_ didn't go straight on.

We got to St Paul's. Noel _would_ go in, and we saw where Gordon was
buried--at least the monument. It is very flat, considering what a man
he was.

When we came out we walked a long way, and when we asked a policeman he
said we'd better go back through Smithfield. So we did. They don't burn
people any more there now, so it was rather dull, besides being a long
way, and Noel got very tired. He's a peaky little chap; it comes of
being a poet, I think. We had a bun or two at different shops--out of
the shillings--and it was quite late in the afternoon when we got to
Fleet Street. The gas was lighted and the electric lights. There is a
jolly Bovril sign that comes off and on in different coloured lamps. We
went to the Daily Recorder office, and asked to see the Editor. It is a
big office, very bright, with brass and mahogany and electric lights.

They told us the Editor wasn't there, but at another office. So we went
down a dirty street, to a very dull-looking place. There was a man there
inside, in a glass case, as if he was a museum, and he told us to write
down our names and our business. So Oswald wrote--

           OSWALD BASTABLE
            NOEL BASTABLE
      BUSINESS VERY PRIVATE INDEED

Then we waited on the stone stairs; it was very draughty. And the man in
the glass case looked at us as if we were the museum instead of him. We
waited a long time, and then a boy came down and said--

'The Editor can't see you. Will you please write your business?' And he
laughed. I wanted to punch his head.

But Noel said, 'Yes, I'll write it if you'll give me a pen and ink, and
a sheet of paper and an envelope.'

The boy said he'd better write by post. But Noel is a bit pig-headed;
it's his worst fault. So he said--'No, I'll write it _now_.' So I backed
him up by saying--

'Look at the price penny stamps are since the coal strike!'

So the boy grinned, and the man in the glass case gave us pen and paper,
and Noel wrote. Oswald writes better than he does; but Noel would do it;
and it took a very long time, and then it was inky.

    DEAR MR EDITOR, I want you to print my poetry and pay for it,
    and I am a friend of Mrs Leslie's; she is a poet too.

    Your affectionate friend,

    NOEL BASTABLE.

He licked the envelope a good deal, so that that boy shouldn't read it
going upstairs; and he wrote 'Very private' outside, and gave the letter
to the boy. I thought it wasn't any good; but in a minute the grinning
boy came back, and he was quite respectful, and said--'The Editor says,
please will you step up?'

We stepped up. There were a lot of stairs and passages, and a queer sort
of humming, hammering sound and a very funny smell. The boy was now very
polite, and said it was the ink we smelt, and the noise was the printing
machines.

After going through a lot of cold passages we came to a door; the boy
opened it, and let us go in. There was a large room, with a big, soft,
blue-and-red carpet, and a roaring fire, though it was only October; and
a large table with drawers, and littered with papers, just like the one
in Father's study. A gentleman was sitting at one side of the table; he
had a light moustache and light eyes, and he looked very young to be an
editor--not nearly so old as Father. He looked very tired and sleepy,
as if he had got up very early in the morning; but he was kind, and we
liked him. Oswald thought he looked clever. Oswald is considered a judge
of faces.

'Well,' said he, 'so you are Mrs Leslie's friends?'

'I think so,' said Noel; 'at least she gave us each a shilling, and she
wished us "good hunting!"'

'Good hunting, eh? Well, what about this poetry of yours? Which is the
poet?'

I can't think how he could have asked! Oswald is said to be a very
manly-looking boy for his age. However, I thought it would look duffing
to be offended, so I said--

'This is my brother Noel. He is the poet.' Noel had turned quite pale.
He is disgustingly like a girl in some ways. The Editor told us to sit
down, and he took the poems from Noel, and began to read them. Noel got
paler and paler; I really thought he was going to faint, like he did
when I held his hand under the cold-water tap, after I had accidentally
cut him with my chisel. When the Editor had read the first poem--it was
the one about the beetle--he got up and stood with his back to us. It
was not manners; but Noel thinks he did it 'to conceal his emotion,' as
they do in books. He read all the poems, and then he said--

'I like your poetry very much, young man. I'll give you--let me see; how
much shall I give you for it?'

'As much as ever you can,' said Noel. 'You see I want a good deal of
money to restore the fallen fortunes of the house of Bastable.'

The gentleman put on some eye-glasses and looked hard at us. Then he sat
down.

'That's a good idea,' said he. 'Tell me how you came to think of it.
And, I say, have you had any tea? They've just sent out for mine.'

He rang a tingly bell, and the boy brought in a tray with a teapot and
a thick cup and saucer and things, and he had to fetch another tray for
us, when he was told to; and we had tea with the Editor of the Daily
Recorder. I suppose it was a very proud moment for Noel, though I
did not think of that till afterwards. The Editor asked us a lot of
questions, and we told him a good deal, though of course I did not tell
a stranger all our reasons for thinking that the family fortunes wanted
restoring. We stayed about half an hour, and when we were going away he
said again--

'I shall print all your poems, my poet; and now what do you think
they're worth?'

'I don't know,' Noel said. 'You see I didn't write them to sell.'

'Why did you write them then?' he asked.

Noel said he didn't know; he supposed because he wanted to.

'Art for Art's sake, eh?' said the Editor, and he seemed quite
delighted, as though Noel had said something clever.

'Well, would a guinea meet your views?' he asked.

I have read of people being at a loss for words, and dumb with emotion,
and I've read of people being turned to stone with astonishment, or
joy, or something, but I never knew how silly it looked till I saw Noel
standing staring at the Editor with his mouth open. He went red and he
went white, and then he got crimson, as if you were rubbing more and
more crimson lake on a palette. But he didn't say a word, so Oswald had
to say--

'I should jolly well think so.'

So the Editor gave Noel a sovereign and a shilling, and he shook hands
with us both, but he thumped Noel on the back and said--

'Buck up, old man! It's your first guinea, but it won't be your last.
Now go along home, and in about ten years you can bring me some more
poetry. Not before--see? I'm just taking this poetry of yours because I
like it very much; but we don't put poetry in this paper at all. I shall
have to put it in another paper I know of.'

'What _do_ you put in your paper?' I asked, for Father always takes the
Daily Chronicle, and I didn't know what the Recorder was like. We chose
it because it has such a glorious office, and a clock outside lighted
up.

'Oh, news,' said he, 'and dull articles, and things about Celebrities.
If you know any Celebrities, now?'

Noel asked him what Celebrities were.

'Oh, the Queen and the Princes, and people with titles, and people who
write, or sing, or act--or do something clever or wicked.'

'I don't know anybody wicked,' said Oswald, wishing he had known Dick
Turpin, or Claude Duval, so as to be able to tell the Editor things
about them. 'But I know some one with a title--Lord Tottenham.'

'The mad old Protectionist, eh? How did you come to know him?'

'We don't know him to speak to. But he goes over the Heath every day at
three, and he strides along like a giant--with a black cloak like Lord
Tennyson's flying behind him, and he talks to himself like one o'clock.'

'What does he say?' The Editor had sat down again, and he was fiddling
with a blue pencil.

'We only heard him once, close enough to understand, and then he said,
"The curse of the country, sir--ruin and desolation!" And then he went
striding along again, hitting at the furze-bushes as if they were the
heads of his enemies.'

'Excellent descriptive touch,' said the Editor. 'Well, go on.'

'That's all I know about him, except that he stops in the middle of the
Heath every day, and he looks all round to see if there's any one about,
and if there isn't, he takes his collar off.'

The Editor interrupted--which is considered rude--and said--

'You're not romancing?'

'I beg your pardon?' said Oswald. 'Drawing the long bow, I mean,' said
the Editor.

Oswald drew himself up, and said he wasn't a liar.

The Editor only laughed, and said romancing and lying were not at all
the same; only it was important to know what you were playing at. So
Oswald accepted his apology, and went on.

'We were hiding among the furze-bushes one day, and we saw him do it. He
took off his collar, and he put on a clean one, and he threw the other
among the furze-bushes. We picked it up afterwards, and it was a beastly
paper one!'

'Thank you,' said the Editor, and he got up and put his hand in his
pocket. 'That's well worth five shillings, and there they are. Would you
like to see round the printing offices before you go home?'

I pocketed my five bob, and thanked him, and I said we should like it
very much. He called another gentleman and said something we couldn't
hear. Then he said good-bye again; and all this time Noel hadn't said a
word. But now he said, 'I've made a poem about you. It is called "Lines
to a Noble Editor." Shall I write it down?'

The Editor gave him the blue pencil, and he sat down at the Editor's
table and wrote. It was this, he told me afterwards as well as he could
remember--

    May Life's choicest blessings be your lot
    I think you ought to be very blest
    For you are going to print my poems--
    And you may have this one as well as the rest.

'Thank you,' said the Editor. 'I don't think I ever had a poem addressed
to me before. I shall treasure it, I assure you.'

Then the other gentleman said something about Maecenas, and we went off
to see the printing office with at least one pound seven in our pockets.

It _was_ good hunting, and no mistake!

But he never put Noel's poetry in the Daily Recorder. It was quite a
long time afterwards we saw a sort of story thing in a magazine, on the
station bookstall, and that kind, sleepy-looking Editor had written it,
I suppose. It was not at all amusing. It said a lot about Noel and me,
describing us all wrong, and saying how we had tea with the Editor;
and all Noel's poems were in the story thing. I think myself the Editor
seemed to make game of them, but Noel was quite pleased to see them
printed--so that's all right. It wasn't my poetry anyhow, I am glad to
say.



CHAPTER 6. NOEL'S PRINCESS

She happened quite accidentally. We were not looking for a Princess at
all just then; but Noel had said he was going to find a Princess all by
himself; and marry her--and he really did. Which was rather odd, because
when people say things are going to befall, very often they don't. It
was different, of course, with the prophets of old.

We did not get any treasure by it, except twelve chocolate drops; but we
might have done, and it was an adventure, anyhow.

Greenwich Park is a jolly good place to play in, especially the parts
that aren't near Greenwich. The parts near the Heath are first-rate.
I often wish the Park was nearer our house; but I suppose a Park is a
difficult thing to move.

Sometimes we get Eliza to put lunch in a basket, and we go up to the
Park. She likes that--it saves cooking dinner for us; and sometimes she
says of her own accord, 'I've made some pasties for you, and you might
as well go into the Park as not. It's a lovely day.'

She always tells us to rinse out the cup at the drinking-fountain, and
the girls do; but I always put my head under the tap and drink. Then you
are an intrepid hunter at a mountain stream--and besides, you're sure
it's clean. Dicky does the same, and so does H. O. But Noel always
drinks out of the cup. He says it is a golden goblet wrought by
enchanted gnomes.

The day the Princess happened was a fine, hot day, last October, and we
were quite tired with the walk up to the Park.

We always go in by the little gate at the top of Croom's Hill. It is
the postern gate that things always happen at in stories. It was dusty
walking, but when we got in the Park it was ripping, so we rested a bit,
and lay on our backs, and looked up at the trees, and wished we could
play monkeys. I have done it before now, but the Park-keeper makes a row
if he catches you.

When we'd rested a little, Alice said--

'It was a long way to the enchanted wood, but it is very nice now we are
there. I wonder what we shall find in it?'

'We shall find deer,' said Dicky, 'if we go to look; but they go on the
other side of the Park because of the people with buns.'

Saying buns made us think of lunch, so we had it; and when we had done
we scratched a hole under a tree and buried the papers, because we know
it spoils pretty places to leave beastly, greasy papers lying about. I
remember Mother teaching me and Dora that, when we were quite little.
I wish everybody's parents would teach them this useful lesson, and the
same about orange peel.

When we'd eaten everything there was, Alice whispered--

'I see the white witch bear yonder among the trees! Let's track it and
slay it in its lair.'

'I am the bear,' said Noel; so he crept away, and we followed him among
the trees. Often the witch bear was out of sight, and then you didn't
know where it would jump out from; but sometimes we saw it, and just
followed.

'When we catch it there'll be a great fight,' said Oswald; 'and I shall
be Count Folko of Mont Faucon.'

'I'll be Gabrielle,' said Dora. She is the only one of us who likes
doing girl's parts.

'I'll be Sintram,' said Alice; 'and H. O. can be the Little Master.'

'What about Dicky?'

'Oh, I can be the Pilgrim with the bones.'

'Hist!' whispered Alice. 'See his white fairy fur gleaming amid yonder
covert!'

And I saw a bit of white too. It was Noel's collar, and it had come
undone at the back.

We hunted the bear in and out of the trees, and then we lost him
altogether; and suddenly we found the wall of the Park--in a place where
I'm sure there wasn't a wall before. Noel wasn't anywhere about, and
there was a door in the wall. And it was open; so we went through.

'The bear has hidden himself in these mountain fastnesses,' Oswald said.
'I will draw my good sword and after him.'

So I drew the umbrella, which Dora always will bring in case it rains,
because Noel gets a cold on the chest at the least thing--and we went
on.

The other side of the wall it was a stable yard, all cobble-stones.

There was nobody about--but we could hear a man rubbing down a horse
and hissing in the stable; so we crept very quietly past, and Alice
whispered--

''Tis the lair of the Monster Serpent; I hear his deadly hiss! Beware!
Courage and despatch!'

We went over the stones on tiptoe, and we found another wall with
another door in it on the other side. We went through that too, on
tiptoe. It really was an adventure. And there we were in a shrubbery,
and we saw something white through the trees. Dora said it was the white
bear. That is so like Dora. She always begins to take part in a play
just when the rest of us are getting tired of it. I don't mean this
unkindly, because I am very fond of Dora. I cannot forget how kind she
was when I had bronchitis; and ingratitude is a dreadful vice. But it is
quite true.

'It is not a bear,' said Oswald; and we all went on, still on tiptoe,
round a twisty path and on to a lawn, and there was Noel. His collar had
come undone, as I said, and he had an inky mark on his face that he made
just before we left the house, and he wouldn't let Dora wash it off,
and one of his bootlaces was coming down. He was standing looking at a
little girl; she was the funniest little girl you ever saw.

She was like a china doll--the sixpenny kind; she had a white face, and
long yellow hair, done up very tight in two pigtails; her forehead was
very big and lumpy, and her cheeks came high up, like little shelves
under her eyes. Her eyes were small and blue. She had on a funny black
frock, with curly braid on it, and button boots that went almost up to
her knees. Her legs were very thin. She was sitting in a hammock chair
nursing a blue kitten--not a sky-blue one, of course, but the colour
of a new slate pencil. As we came up we heard her say to Noel--'Who are
you?'

Noel had forgotten about the bear, and he was taking his favourite part,
so he said--'I'm Prince Camaralzaman.'

The funny little girl looked pleased--

'I thought at first you were a common boy,' she said. Then she saw the
rest of us and said--

'Are you all Princesses and Princes too?'

Of course we said 'Yes,' and she said--

'I am a Princess also.' She said it very well too, exactly as if it were
true. We were very glad, because it is so seldom you meet any children
who can begin to play right off without having everything explained to
them. And even then they will say they are going to 'pretend to be' a
lion, or a witch, or a king. Now this little girl just said 'I _am_ a
Princess.' Then she looked at Oswald and said, 'I fancy I've seen you at
Baden.'

Of course Oswald said, 'Very likely.'

The little girl had a funny voice, and all her words were quite plain,
each word by itself; she didn't talk at all like we do.

H. O. asked her what the cat's name was, and she said 'Katinka.' Then
Dicky said--

'Let's get away from the windows; if you play near windows some one
inside generally knocks at them and says "Don't".'

The Princess put down the cat very carefully and said--

'I am forbidden to walk off the grass.'

'That's a pity,' said Dora.

'But I will if you like,' said the Princess.

'You mustn't do things you are forbidden to do,' Dora said; but Dicky
showed us that there was some more grass beyond the shrubs with only a
gravel path between. So I lifted the Princess over the gravel, so that
she should be able to say she hadn't walked off the grass. When we got
to the other grass we all sat down, and the Princess asked us if
we liked 'dragees' (I know that's how you spell it, for I asked
Albert-next-door's uncle).

We said we thought not, but she pulled a real silver box out of her
pocket and showed us; they were just flat, round chocolates. We had two
each. Then we asked her her name, and she began, and when she began she
went on, and on, and on, till I thought she was never going to stop. H.
O. said she had fifty names, but Dicky is very good at figures, and he
says there were only eighteen. The first were Pauline, Alexandra, Alice,
and Mary was one, and Victoria, for we all heard that, and it ended
up with Hildegarde Cunigonde something or other, Princess of something
else.

When she'd done, H. O. said, 'That's jolly good! Say it again!' and she
did, but even then we couldn't remember it. We told her our names, but
she thought they were too short, so when it was Noel's turn he said he
was Prince Noel Camaralzaman Ivan Constantine Charlemagne James John
Edward Biggs Maximilian Bastable Prince of Lewisham, but when she asked
him to say it again of course he could only get the first two names
right, because he'd made it up as he went on.

So the Princess said, 'You are quite old enough to know your own name.'
She was very grave and serious.

She told us that she was the fifth cousin of Queen Victoria. We asked
who the other cousins were, but she did not seem to understand. She went
on and said she was seven times removed. She couldn't tell us what that
meant either, but Oswald thinks it means that the Queen's cousins are
so fond of her that they will keep coming bothering, so the Queen's
servants have orders to remove them. This little girl must have been
very fond of the Queen to try so often to see her, and to have been
seven times removed. We could see that it is considered something to
be proud of; but we thought it was hard on the Queen that her cousins
wouldn't let her alone.

Presently the little girl asked us where our maids and governesses were.

We told her we hadn't any just now. And she said--

'How pleasant! And did you come here alone?'

'Yes,' said Dora; 'we came across the Heath.'

'You are very fortunate,' said the little girl. She sat very upright on
the grass, with her fat little hands in her lap. 'I should like to go on
the Heath. There are donkeys there, with white saddle covers. I should
like to ride them, but my governess will not permit.'

'I'm glad we haven't a governess,' H. O. said. 'We ride the donkeys
whenever we have any pennies, and once I gave the man another penny to
make it gallop.'

'You are indeed fortunate!' said the Princess again, and when she looked
sad the shelves on her cheeks showed more than ever. You could have laid
a sixpence on them quite safely if you had had one.

'Never mind,' said Noel; 'I've got a lot of money. Come out and have a
ride now.' But the little girl shook her head and said she was afraid it
would not be correct.

Dora said she was quite right; then all of a sudden came one of those
uncomfortable times when nobody can think of anything to say, so we sat
and looked at each other. But at last Alice said we ought to be going.

'Do not go yet,' the little girl said. 'At what time did they order your
carriage?'

'Our carriage is a fairy one, drawn by griffins, and it comes when we
wish for it,' said Noel.

The little girl looked at him very queerly, and said, 'That is out of a
picture-book.'

Then Noel said he thought it was about time he was married if we were to
be home in time for tea. The little girl was rather stupid over it,
but she did what we told her, and we married them with Dora's
pocket-handkerchief for a veil, and the ring off the back of one of the
buttons on H. O.'s blouse just went on her little finger.

Then we showed her how to play cross-touch, and puss in the corner,
and tag. It was funny, she didn't know any games but battledore and
shuttlecock and les graces. But she really began to laugh at last and
not to look quite so like a doll.

She was Puss and was running after Dicky when suddenly she stopped short
and looked as if she was going to cry. And we looked too, and there were
two prim ladies with little mouths and tight hair. One of them said in
quite an awful voice, 'Pauline, who are these children?' and her voice
was gruff; with very curly R's.

The little girl said we were Princes and Princesses--which was silly, to
a grown-up person that is not a great friend of yours.

The gruff lady gave a short, horrid laugh, like a husky bark, and said--

'Princes, indeed! They're only common children!'

Dora turned very red and began to speak, but the little girl cried out
'Common children! Oh, I am so glad! When I am grown up I'll always play
with common children.'

And she ran at us, and began to kiss us one by one, beginning
with Alice; she had got to H. O. when the horrid lady said--'Your
Highness--go indoors at once!'

The little girl answered, 'I won't!'

Then the prim lady said--'Wilson, carry her Highness indoors.'

And the little girl was carried away screaming, and kicking with her
little thin legs and her buttoned boots, and between her screams she
shrieked:

'Common children! I am glad, glad, glad! Common children! Common
children!'

The nasty lady then remarked--'Go at once, or I will send for the
police!'

So we went. H. O. made a face at her and so did Alice, but Oswald took
off his cap and said he was sorry if she was annoyed about anything;
for Oswald has always been taught to be polite to ladies, however nasty.
Dicky took his off, too, when he saw me do it; he says he did it first,
but that is a mistake. If I were really a common boy I should say it was
a lie.

Then we all came away, and when we got outside Dora said, 'So she was
really a Princess. Fancy a Princess living _there_!'

'Even Princesses have to live somewhere,' said Dicky.

'And I thought it was play. And it was real. I wish I'd known! I should
have liked to ask her lots of things,' said Alice.

H. O. said he would have liked to ask her what she had for dinner and
whether she had a crown.

I felt, myself, we had lost a chance of finding out a great deal about
kings and queens. I might have known such a stupid-looking little girl
would never have been able to pretend, as well as that.

So we all went home across the Heath, and made dripping toast for tea.

When we were eating it Noel said, 'I wish I could give _her_ some! It is
very good.'

He sighed as he said it, and his mouth was very full, so we knew he was
thinking of his Princess. He says now that she was as beautiful as the
day, but we remember her quite well, and she was nothing of the kind.



CHAPTER 7. BEING BANDITS

Noel was quite tiresome for ever so long after we found the Princess. He
would keep on wanting to go to the Park when the rest of us didn't, and
though we went several times to please him, we never found that door
open again, and all of us except him knew from the first that it would
be no go.

So now we thought it was time to do something to rouse him from the
stupor of despair, which is always done to heroes when anything baffling
has occurred. Besides, we were getting very short of money again--the
fortunes of your house cannot be restored (not so that they will last,
that is), even by the one pound eight we got when we had the 'good
hunting.' We spent a good deal of that on presents for Father's
birthday. We got him a paper-weight, like a glass bun, with a picture
of Lewisham Church at the bottom; and a blotting-pad, and a box of
preserved fruits, and an ivory penholder with a view of Greenwich
Park in the little hole where you look through at the top. He was most
awfully pleased and surprised, and when he heard how Noel and Oswald had
earned the money to buy the things he was more surprised still. Nearly
all the rest of our money went to get fireworks for the Fifth of
November. We got six Catherine wheels and four rockets; two hand-lights,
one red and one green; a sixpenny maroon; two Roman-candles--they cost
a shilling; some Italian streamers, a fairy fountain, and a tourbillon
that cost eighteen-pence and was very nearly worth it.

But I think crackers and squibs are a mistake. It's true you get a lot
of them for the money, and they are not bad fun for the first two or
three dozen, but you get jolly sick of them before you've let off your
sixpenn'orth. And the only amusing way is not allowed: it is putting
them in the fire.

It always seems a long time till the evening when you have got fireworks
in the house, and I think as it was a rather foggy day we should have
decided to let them off directly after breakfast, only Father had said
he would help us to let them off at eight o'clock after he had had his
dinner, and you ought never to disappoint your father if you can help
it.

You see we had three good reasons for trying H. O.'s idea of restoring
the fallen fortunes of our house by becoming bandits on the Fifth of
November. We had a fourth reason as well, and that was the best reason
of the lot. You remember Dora thought it would be wrong to be bandits.
And the Fifth of November came while Dora was away at Stroud staying
with her godmother. Stroud is in Gloucestershire. We were determined to
do it while she was out of the way, because we did not think it wrong,
and besides we meant to do it anyhow.

We held a Council, of course, and laid our plans very carefully. We let
H. O. be Captain, because it was his idea. Oswald was Lieutenant. Oswald
was quite fair, because he let H. O. call himself Captain; but Oswald is
the eldest next to Dora, after all.

Our plan was this. We were all to go up on to the Heath. Our house is in
the Lewisham Road, but it's quite close to the Heath if you cut up the
short way opposite the confectioner's, past the nursery gardens and
the cottage hospital, and turn to the left again and afterwards to the
right. You come out then at the top of the hill, where the big guns are
with the iron fence round them, and where the bands play on Thursday
evenings in the summer.

We were to lurk in ambush there, and waylay an unwary traveller. We were
to call upon him to surrender his arms, and then bring him home and put
him in the deepest dungeon below the castle moat; then we were to load
him with chains and send to his friends for ransom.

You may think we had no chains, but you are wrong, because we used
to keep two other dogs once, besides Pincher, before the fall of the
fortunes of the ancient House of Bastable. And they were quite big dogs.

It was latish in the afternoon before we started. We thought we could
lurk better if it was nearly dark. It was rather foggy, and we waited
a good while beside the railings, but all the belated travellers were
either grown up or else they were Board School children. We weren't
going to get into a row with grown-up people--especially strangers--and
no true bandit would ever stoop to ask a ransom from the relations of
the poor and needy. So we thought it better to wait.

As I said, it was Guy Fawkes Day, and if it had not been we should never
have been able to be bandits at all, for the unwary traveller we did
catch had been forbidden to go out because he had a cold in his head.
But he would run out to follow a guy, without even putting on a coat or
a comforter, and it was a very damp, foggy afternoon and nearly dark, so
you see it was his own fault entirely, and served him jolly well right.

We saw him coming over the Heath just as we were deciding to go home
to tea. He had followed that guy right across to the village (we call
Blackheath the village; I don't know why), and he was coming back
dragging his feet and sniffing.

'Hist, an unwary traveller approaches!' whispered Oswald.

'Muffle your horses' heads and see to the priming of your pistols,'
muttered Alice. She always will play boys' parts, and she makes Ellis
cut her hair short on purpose. Ellis is a very obliging hairdresser.

'Steal softly upon him,' said Noel; 'for lo! 'tis dusk, and no human
eyes can mark our deeds.'

So we ran out and surrounded the unwary traveller. It turned out to be
Albert-next-door, and he was very frightened indeed until he saw who we
were.

'Surrender!' hissed Oswald, in a desperate-sounding voice, as he caught
the arm of the Unwary. And Albert-next-door said, 'All right! I'm
surrendering as hard as I can. You needn't pull my arm off.'

We explained to him that resistance was useless, and I think he saw that
from the first. We held him tight by both arms, and we marched him home
down the hill in a hollow square of five.

He wanted to tell us about the guy, but we made him see that it was not
proper for prisoners to talk to the guard, especially about guys that
the prisoner had been told not to go after because of his cold.

When we got to where we live he said, 'All right, I don't want to tell
you. You'll wish I had afterwards. You never saw such a guy.'

'I can see _you_!' said H. O. It was very rude, and Oswald told him so
at once, because it is his duty as an elder brother. But H. O. is very
young and does not know better yet, and besides it wasn't bad for H. O.

Albert-next-door said, 'You haven't any manners, and I want to go in to
my tea. Let go of me!'

But Alice told him, quite kindly, that he was not going in to his tea,
but coming with us.

'I'm not,' said Albert-next-door; 'I'm going home. Leave go! I've got
a bad cold. You're making it worse.' Then he tried to cough, which was
very silly, because we'd seen him in the morning, and he'd told us where
the cold was that he wasn't to go out with. When he had tried to cough,
he said, 'Leave go of me! You see my cold's getting worse.'

'You should have thought of that before,' said Dicky; 'you're coming in
with us.'

'Don't be a silly,' said Noel; 'you know we told you at the very
beginning that resistance was useless. There is no disgrace in yielding.
We are five to your one.'

By this time Eliza had opened the door, and we thought it best to take
him in without any more parlaying. To parley with a prisoner is not done
by bandits.

Directly we got him safe into the nursery, H. O. began to jump about and
say, 'Now you're a prisoner really and truly!'

And Albert-next-door began to cry. He always does. I wonder he didn't
begin long before--but Alice fetched him one of the dried fruits we
gave Father for his birthday. It was a green walnut. I have noticed
the walnuts and the plums always get left till the last in the box; the
apricots go first, and then the figs and pears; and the cherries, if
there are any.

So he ate it and shut up. Then we explained his position to him, so that
there should be no mistake, and he couldn't say afterwards that he had
not understood.

'There will be no violence,' said Oswald--he was now Captain of the
Bandits, because we all know H. O. likes to be Chaplain when we
play prisoners--'no violence. But you will be confined in a dark,
subterranean dungeon where toads and snakes crawl, and but little of the
light of day filters through the heavily mullioned windows. You will be
loaded with chains. Now don't begin again, Baby, there's nothing to
cry about; straw will be your pallet; beside you the gaoler will set a
ewer--a ewer is only a jug, stupid; it won't eat you--a ewer with water;
and a mouldering crust will be your food.'

But Albert-next-door never enters into the spirit of a thing. He mumbled
something about tea-time.

Now Oswald, though stern, is always just, and besides we were all rather
hungry, and tea was ready. So we had it at once, Albert-next-door and
all--and we gave him what was left of the four-pound jar of apricot jam
we got with the money Noel got for his poetry. And we saved our crusts
for the prisoner.

Albert-next-door was very tiresome. Nobody could have had a nicer prison
than he had. We fenced him into a corner with the old wire nursery
fender and all the chairs, instead of putting him in the coal-cellar
as we had first intended. And when he said the dog-chains were cold the
girls were kind enough to warm his fetters thoroughly at the fire before
we put them on him.

We got the straw cases of some bottles of wine someone sent Father
one Christmas--it is some years ago, but the cases are quite good. We
unpacked them very carefully and pulled them to pieces and scattered
the straw about. It made a lovely straw pallet, and took ever so long to
make--but Albert-next-door has yet to learn what gratitude really is.
We got the bread trencher for the wooden platter where the prisoner's
crusts were put--they were not mouldy, but we could not wait till they
got so, and for the ewer we got the toilet jug out of the spare-room
where nobody ever sleeps. And even then Albert-next-door couldn't be
happy like the rest of us. He howled and cried and tried to get out, and
he knocked the ewer over and stamped on the mouldering crusts. Luckily
there was no water in the ewer because we had forgotten it, only dust
and spiders. So we tied him up with the clothes-line from the back
kitchen, and we had to hurry up, which was a pity for him. We might have
had him rescued by a devoted page if he hadn't been so tiresome. In fact
Noel was actually dressing up for the page when Albert-next-door kicked
over the prison ewer.

We got a sheet of paper out of an old exercise-book, and we made H. O.
prick his own thumb, because he is our little brother and it is our duty
to teach him to be brave. We none of us mind pricking ourselves; we've
done it heaps of times. H. O. didn't like it, but he agreed to do it,
and I helped him a little because he was so slow, and when he saw the
red bead of blood getting fatter and bigger as I squeezed his thumb he
was very pleased, just as I had told him he would be.

This is what we wrote with H. O.'s blood, only the blood gave out when
we got to 'Restored', and we had to write the rest with crimson lake,
which is not the same colour, though I always use it, myself, for
painting wounds.

While Oswald was writing it he heard Alice whispering to the prisoner
that it would soon be over, and it was only play. The prisoner left off
howling, so I pretended not to hear what she said. A Bandit Captain has
to overlook things sometimes. This was the letter--

    'Albert Morrison is held a prisoner by Bandits.
    On payment of three thousand pounds he will be
    restored to his sorrowing relatives, and all
    will be forgotten and forgiven.'

I was not sure about the last part, but Dicky was certain he had seen it
in the paper, so I suppose it must have been all right.

We let H. O. take the letter; it was only fair, as it was his blood it
was written with, and told him to leave it next door for Mrs Morrison.

H. O. came back quite quickly, and Albert-next-door's uncle came with
him.

'What is all this, Albert?' he cried. 'Alas, alas, my nephew! Do I find
you the prisoner of a desperate band of brigands?'

'Bandits,' said H. O; 'you know it says bandits.'

'I beg your pardon, gentlemen,' said Albert-next-door's uncle, 'bandits
it is, of course. This, Albert, is the direct result of the pursuit of
the guy on an occasion when your doting mother had expressly warned you
to forgo the pleasures of the chase.'

Albert said it wasn't his fault, and he hadn't wanted to play.

'So ho!' said his uncle, 'impenitent too! Where's the dungeon?'

We explained the dungeon, and showed him the straw pallet and the ewer
and the mouldering crusts and other things.

'Very pretty and complete,' he said. 'Albert, you are more highly
privileged than ever I was. No one ever made me a nice dungeon when I
was your age. I think I had better leave you where you are.'

Albert began to cry again and said he was sorry, and he would be a good
boy.

'And on this old familiar basis you expect me to ransom you, do you?
Honestly, my nephew, I doubt whether you are worth it. Besides, the sum
mentioned in this document strikes me as excessive: Albert really is
_not_ worth three thousand pounds. Also by a strange and unfortunate
chance I haven't the money about me. Couldn't you take less?'

We said perhaps we could.

'Say eightpence,' suggested Albert-next-door's uncle, 'which is all the
small change I happen to have on my person.'

'Thank you very much,' said Alice as he held it out; 'but are you sure
you can spare it? Because really it was only play.'

'Quite sure. Now, Albert, the game is over. You had better run home to
your mother and tell her how much you've enjoyed yourself.'

When Albert-next-door had gone his uncle sat in the Guy Fawkes armchair
and took Alice on his knee, and we sat round the fire waiting till it
would be time to let off our fireworks. We roasted the chestnuts he
sent Dicky out for, and he told us stories till it was nearly seven. His
stories are first-rate--he does all the parts in different voices. At
last he said--

'Look here, young-uns. I like to see you play and enjoy yourselves, and
I don't think it hurts Albert to enjoy himself too.'

'I don't think he did much,' said H. O. But I knew what
Albert-next-door's uncle meant because I am much older than H. O. He
went on--

'But what about Albert's mother? Didn't you think how anxious she would
be at his not coming home? As it happens I saw him come in with you, so
we knew it was all right. But if I hadn't, eh?'

He only talks like that when he is very serious, or even angry. Other
times he talks like people in books--to us, I mean.

We none of us said anything. But I was thinking. Then Alice spoke.

Girls seem not to mind saying things that we don't say. She put her arms
round Albert-next-door's uncle's neck and said--

'We're very, very sorry. We didn't think about his mother. You see we
try very hard not to think about other people's mothers because--'

Just then we heard Father's key in the door and Albert-next-door's uncle
kissed Alice and put her down, and we all went down to meet Father. As
we went I thought I heard Albert-next-door's uncle say something that
sounded like 'Poor little beggars!'

He couldn't have meant us, when we'd been having such a jolly time, and
chestnuts, and fireworks to look forward to after dinner and everything!



CHAPTER 8. BEING EDITORS

It was Albert's uncle who thought of our trying a newspaper. He said he
thought we should not find the bandit business a paying industry, as a
permanency, and that journalism might be.

We had sold Noel's poetry and that piece of information about Lord
Tottenham to the good editor, so we thought it would not be a bad idea
to have a newspaper of our own. We saw plainly that editors must be very
rich and powerful, because of the grand office and the man in the glass
case, like a museum, and the soft carpets and big writing-table. Besides
our having seen a whole handful of money that the editor pulled out
quite carelessly from his trousers pocket when he gave me my five bob.

Dora wanted to be editor and so did Oswald, but he gave way to her
because she is a girl, and afterwards he knew that it is true what it
says in the copy-books about Virtue being its own Reward. Because you've
no idea what a bother it is. Everybody wanted to put in everything just
as they liked, no matter how much room there was on the page. It was
simply awful! Dora put up with it as long as she could and then she said
if she wasn't let alone she wouldn't go on being editor; they could be
the paper's editors themselves, so there.

Then Oswald said, like a good brother: 'I will help you if you like,
Dora,' and she said, 'You're more trouble than all the rest of them!
Come and be editor and see how you like it. I give it up to you.'
But she didn't, and we did it together. We let Albert-next-door be
sub-editor, because he had hurt his foot with a nail in his boot that
gathered.

When it was done Albert-next-door's uncle had it copied for us in
typewriting, and we sent copies to all our friends, and then of course
there was no one left that we could ask to buy it. We did not think of
that until too late. We called the paper the Lewisham Recorder; Lewisham
because we live there, and Recorder in memory of the good editor. I
could write a better paper on my head, but an editor is not allowed to
write all the paper. It is very hard, but he is not. You just have to
fill up with what you can get from other writers. If I ever have time I
will write a paper all by myself. It won't be patchy. We had no time to
make it an illustrated paper, but I drew the ship going down with all
hands for the first copy. But the typewriter can't draw ships, so it was
left out in the other copies. The time the first paper took to write out
no one would believe! This was the Newspaper:

          THE LEWISHAM RECORDER

    EDITORS:  DORA AND OSWALD BASTABLE

             ------------             EDITORIAL NOTE

Every paper is written for some reason. Ours is because we want to sell
it and get money. If what we have written brings happiness to any sad
heart we shall not have laboured in vain. But we want the money too.
Many papers are content with the sad heart and the happiness, but we are
not like that, and it is best not to be deceitful. EDITORS.

There will be two serial stories; One by Dicky and one by all of us. In
a serial story you only put in one chapter at a time. But we shall put
all our serial story at once, if Dora has time to copy it. Dicky's will
come later on.

            SERIAL STORY
             BY US ALL

         CHAPTER I--by Dora

The sun was setting behind a romantic-looking tower when two strangers
might have been observed descending the crest of the hill. The eldest,
a man in the prime of life; the other a handsome youth who reminded
everybody of Quentin Durward. They approached the Castle, in which the
fair Lady Alicia awaited her deliverers. She leaned from the castellated
window and waved her lily hand as they approached. They returned her
signal, and retired to seek rest and refreshment at a neighbouring
hostelry.

             ------------         CHAPTER II--by Alice

The Princess was very uncomfortable in the tower, because her fairy
godmother had told her all sorts of horrid things would happen if she
didn't catch a mouse every day, and she had caught so many mice that now
there were hardly any left to catch. So she sent her carrier pigeon to
ask the noble Strangers if they could send her a few mice--because she
would be of age in a few days and then it wouldn't matter. So the fairy
godmother--- (I'm very sorry, but there's no room to make the chapters
any longer.-ED.)

             ------------         CHAPTER III--by the Sub-Editor

(I can't--I'd much rather not--I don't know how.)

            ------------         CHAPTER IV--by Dicky

I must now retrace my steps and tell you something about our hero. You
must know he had been to an awfully jolly school, where they had turkey
and goose every day for dinner, and never any mutton, and as many helps
of pudding as a fellow cared to send up his plate for--so of course they
had all grown up very strong, and before he left school he challenged
the Head to have it out man to man, and he gave it him, I tell you. That
was the education that made him able to fight Red Indians, and to be the
stranger who might have been observed in the first chapter.

             ------------         CHAPTER V--by Noel

I think it's time something happened in this story. So then the dragon
he came out, blowing fire out of his nose, and he said--

'Come on, you valiant man and true, I'd like to have a set-to along of
you!'

(That's bad English.--ED. I don't care; it's what the dragon said. Who
told you dragons didn't talk bad English?--Noel.)

So the hero, whose name was Noeloninuris, replied--

     'My blade is sharp, my axe is keen,
     You're not nearly as big
     As a good many dragons I've seen.'

(Don't put in so much poetry, Noel. It's not fair, because none of the
others can do it.--ED.)

And then they went at it, and he beat the dragon, just as he did the
Head in Dicky's part of the Story, and so he married the Princess, and
they lived--- (No they didn't--not till the last chapter.--ED.)

             ------------         CHAPTER VI--by H. O.

I think it's a very nice Story--but what about the mice? I don't want to
say any more. Dora can have what's left of my chapter.

             ------------         CHAPTER VII--by the Editors

And so when the dragon was dead there were lots of mice, because he used
to kill them for his tea but now they rapidly multiplied and ravaged the
country, so the fair lady Alicia, sometimes called the Princess, had
to say she would not marry any one unless they could rid the country of
this plague of mice. Then the Prince, whose real name didn't begin
with N, but was Osrawalddo, waved his magic sword, and the dragon stood
before them, bowing gracefully. They made him promise to be good, and
then they forgave him; and when the wedding breakfast came, all the
bones were saved for him. And so they were married and lived happy ever
after.

(What became of the other stranger?--NOEL. The dragon ate him because he
asked too many questions.--EDITORS.)

This is the end of the story.

            INSTRUCTIVE

It only takes four hours and a quarter now to get from London to
Manchester; but I should not think any one would if they could help it.

A DREADFUL WARNING. A wicked boy told me a very instructive thing about
ginger. They had opened one of the large jars, and he happened to take
out quite a lot, and he made it all right by dropping marbles in, till
there was as much ginger as before. But he told me that on the Sunday,
when it was coming near the part where there is only juice generally, I
had no idea what his feelings were. I don't see what he could have said
when they asked him. I should be sorry to act like it.

             ------------             SCIENTIFIC

Experiments should always be made out of doors. And don't use
benzoline.--DICKY. (That was when he burnt his eyebrows off.--ED.)

The earth is 2,400 miles round, and 800 through--at least I think so,
but perhaps it's the other way.--DICKY. (You ought to have been sure
before you began.--ED.)

             ------------            SCIENTIFIC COLUMN

In this so-called Nineteenth Century Science is but too little
considered in the nurseries of the rich and proud. But we are not like
that.

It is not generally known that if you put bits of camphor in luke-warm
water it will move about. If you drop sweet oil in, the camphor will
dart away and then stop moving. But don't drop any till you are tired
of it, because the camphor won't any more afterwards. Much amusement and
instruction is lost by not knowing things like this.

If you put a sixpence under a shilling in a wine-glass, and blow hard
down the side of the glass, the sixpence will jump up and sit on the top
of the shilling. At least I can't do it myself, but my cousin can. He is
in the Navy.

             ------------         ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS

Noel. You are very poetical, but I am sorry to say it will not do.

Alice. Nothing will ever make your hair curl, so it's no use. Some
people say it's more important to tidy up as you go along. I don't mean
you in particular, but every one.

H. O. We never said you were tubby, but the Editor does not know any
cure.

Noel. If there is any of the paper over when this newspaper is finished,
I will exchange it for your shut-up inkstand, or the knife that has the
useful thing in it for taking stones out of horses' feet, but you can't
have it without.

H. O. There are many ways how your steam engine might stop working.
You might ask Dicky. He knows one of them. I think it is the way yours
stopped.

Noel. If you think that by filling the garden with sand you can make
crabs build their nests there you are not at all sensible.

You have altered your poem about the battle of Waterloo so often, that
we cannot read it except where the Duke waves his sword and says some
thing we can't read either. Why did you write it on blotting-paper with
purple chalk?--ED. (Because YOU KNOW WHO sneaked my pencil.--NOEL.)

             ------------             POETRY

    The Assyrian came down like a wolf on the fold,
    And the way he came down was awful, I'm told;
    But it's nothing to the way one of the Editors comes down on me,
    If I crumble my bread-and-butter or spill my tea.
                                               NOEL.
             ------------             CURIOUS FACTS

If you hold a guinea-pig up by his tail his eyes drop out.

You can't do half the things yourself that children in books do, making
models or soon. I wonder why?--ALICE.

If you take a date's stone out and put in an almond and eat them
together, it is prime. I found this out.--SUB-EDITOR.

If you put your wet hand into boiling lead it will not hurt you if you
draw it out quickly enough. I have never tried this.--DORA.

             ------------           THE PURRING CLASS

         (Instructive Article)

If I ever keep a school everything shall be quite different. Nobody
shall learn anything they don't want to. And sometimes instead of having
masters and mistresses we will have cats, and we will dress up in cat
skins and learn purring. 'Now, my dears,' the old cat will say, 'one,
two, three all purr together,' and we shall purr like anything.

She won't teach us to mew, but we shall know how without teaching.
Children do know some things without being taught.--ALICE.

             ------------             POETRY
      (Translated into French by Dora)

     Quand j'etais jeune et j'etais fou
     J'achetai un violon pour dix-huit sous
     Et tous les airs que je jouai
     Etait over the hills and far away.

              Another piece of it

     Mercie jolie vache qui fait
     Bon lait pour mon dejeuner
     Tous les matins tous les soirs
     Mon pain je mange, ton lait je boire.

             ------------             RECREATIONS

It is a mistake to think that cats are playful. I often try to get a cat
to play with me, and she never seems to care about the game, no matter
how little it hurts.--H. O.

Making pots and pans with clay is fun, but do not tell the grown-ups. It
is better to surprise them; and then you must say at once how easily it
washes off--much easier than ink.--DICKY.

             ------------    SAM REDFERN, OR THE BUSH RANGER'S BURIAL

             By Dicky

'Well, Annie, I have bad news for you,' said Mr Ridgway, as he entered
the comfortable dining-room of his cabin in the Bush. 'Sam Redfern the
Bushranger is about this part of the Bush just now. I hope he will not
attack us with his gang.'

'I hope not,' responded Annie, a gentle maiden of some sixteen summers.

Just then came a knock at the door of the hut, and a gruff voice asked
them to open the door.

'It is Sam Redfern the Bushranger, father,' said the girl.

'The same,' responded the voice, and the next moment the hall door was
smashed in, and Sam Redfern sprang in, followed by his gang.

             ------------             CHAPTER II

Annie's Father was at once overpowered, and Annie herself lay bound with
cords on the drawing-room sofa. Sam Redfern set a guard round the lonely
hut, and all human aid was despaired of. But you never know. Far away in
the Bush a different scene was being enacted.

'Must be Injuns,' said a tall man to himself as he pushed his way
through the brushwood. It was Jim Carlton, the celebrated detective. 'I
know them,' he added; 'they are Apaches.' just then ten Indians in full
war-paint appeared. Carlton raised his rifle and fired, and slinging
their scalps on his arm he hastened towards the humble log hut where
resided his affianced bride, Annie Ridgway, sometimes known as the
Flower of the Bush.

             ------------             CHAPTER III

The moon was low on the horizon, and Sam Redfern was seated at a
drinking bout with some of his boon companions.

They had rifled the cellars of the hut, and the rich wines flowed like
water in the golden goblets of Mr Ridgway.

But Annie had made friends with one of the gang, a noble, good-hearted
man who had joined Sam Redfern by mistake, and she had told him to go
and get the police as quickly as possible.

'Ha! ha!' cried Redfern, 'now I am enjoying myself!' He little knew that
his doom was near upon him.

Just then Annie gave a piercing scream, and Sam Redfern got up, seizing
his revolver. 'Who are you?' he cried, as a man entered.

'I am Jim Carlton, the celebrated detective,' said the new arrival.

Sam Redfern's revolver dropped from his nerveless fingers, but the next
moment he had sprung upon the detective with the well-known activity of
the mountain sheep, and Annie shrieked, for she had grown to love the
rough Bushranger.

(To be continued at the end of the paper if there is room.)

             ------------             SCHOLASTIC

A new slate is horrid till it is washed in milk. I like the green spots
on them to draw patterns round. I know a good way to make a slate-pencil
squeak, but I won't put it in because I don't want to make it
common.--SUB-EDITOR.

Peppermint is a great help with arithmetic. The boy who was second in
the Oxford Local always did it. He gave me two. The examiner said to
him, 'Are you eating peppermints?' And he said, 'No, Sir.'

He told me afterwards it was quite true, because he was only sucking
one. I'm glad I wasn't asked. I should never have thought of that, and I
could have had to say 'Yes.'--OSWALD.

             ------------        THE WRECK OF THE 'MALABAR'

             By Noel

(Author of 'A Dream of Ancient Ancestors.') He isn't really--but he put
it in to make it seem more real.

    Hark! what is that noise of rolling
       Waves and thunder in the air?
    'Tis the death-knell of the sailors
       And officers and passengers of the good ship Malabar.

    It was a fair and lovely noon
       When the good ship put out of port
    And people said 'ah little we think
       How soon she will be the elements' sport.'

    She was indeed a lovely sight
       Upon the billows with sails spread.
    But the captain folded his gloomy arms,
       Ah--if she had been a life-boat instead!

    See the captain stern yet gloomy
       Flings his son upon a rock,
    Hoping that there his darling boy
       May escape the wreck.

    Alas in vain the loud winds roared
       And nobody was saved.
    That was the wreck of the Malabar,
       Then let us toll for the brave.
                                    NOEL.

             ------------            GARDENING NOTES

It is useless to plant cherry-stones in the hope of eating the fruit,
because they don't!

Alice won't lend her gardening tools again, because the last time Noel
left them out in the rain, and I don't like it. He said he didn't.

             ------------            SEEDS AND BULBS

These are useful to play at shop with, until you are ready. Not at
dinner-parties, for they will not grow unless uncooked. Potatoes are
not grown with seed, but with chopped-up potatoes. Apple trees are grown
from twigs, which is less wasteful.

Oak trees come from acorns. Every one knows this. When Noel says he
could grow one from a peach stone wrapped up in oak leaves, he shows
that he knows nothing about gardening but marigolds, and when I passed
by his garden I thought they seemed just like weeds now the flowers have
been picked.

A boy once dared me to eat a bulb.

Dogs are very industrious and fond of gardening. Pincher is always
planting bones, but they never grow up. There couldn't be a bone tree.
I think this is what makes him bark so unhappily at night. He has never
tried planting dog-biscuit, but he is fonder of bones, and perhaps he
wants to be quite sure about them first.

             ------------     SAM REDFERN, OR THE BUSHRANGER'S BURIAL

                By Dicky

             ------------         CHAPTER IV AND LAST

This would have been a jolly good story if they had let me finish it at
the beginning of the paper as I wanted to. But now I have forgotten how
I meant it to end, and I have lost my book about Red Indians, and all my
Boys of England have been sneaked. The girls say 'Good riddance!' so I
expect they did it. They want me just to put in which Annie married, but
I shan't, so they will never know.

We have now put everything we can think of into the paper. It takes a
lot of thinking about. I don't know how grown-ups manage to write all
they do. It must make their heads ache, especially lesson books.

Albert-next-door only wrote one chapter of the serial story, but he
could have done some more if he had wanted to. He could not write out
any of the things because he cannot spell. He says he can, but it takes
him such a long time he might just as well not be able. There are one or
two things more. I am sick of it, but Dora says she will write them in.

LEGAL ANSWER WANTED. A quantity of excellent string is offered if you
know whether there really is a law passed about not buying gunpowder
under thirteen.--DICKY.

The price of this paper is one shilling each, and sixpence extra for the
picture of the Malabar going down with all hands. If we sell one hundred
copies we will write another paper.

                  *   *   *

And so we would have done, but we never did. Albert-next-door's uncle
gave us two shillings, that was all. You can't restore fallen fortunes
with two shillings!



CHAPTER 9. THE G. B.

Being editors is not the best way to wealth. We all feel this now, and
highwaymen are not respected any more like they used to be.

I am sure we had tried our best to restore our fallen fortunes. We felt
their fall very much, because we knew the Bastables had been rich once.
Dora and Oswald can remember when Father was always bringing nice things
home from London, and there used to be turkeys and geese and wine and
cigars come by the carrier at Christmas-time, and boxes of candied fruit
and French plums in ornamental boxes with silk and velvet and gilding
on them. They were called prunes, but the prunes you buy at the grocer's
are quite different. But now there is seldom anything nice brought from
London, and the turkey and the prune people have forgotten Father's
address.

'How _can_ we restore those beastly fallen fortunes?' said Oswald.
'We've tried digging and writing and princesses and being editors.'

'And being bandits,' said H. O.

'When did you try that?' asked Dora quickly. 'You know I told you it was
wrong.'

'It wasn't wrong the way we did it,' said Alice, quicker still, before
Oswald could say, 'Who asked you to tell us anything about it?'
which would have been rude, and he is glad he didn't. 'We only caught
Albert-next-door.'

'Oh, Albert-next-door!' said Dora contemptuously, and I felt more
comfortable; for even after I didn't say, 'Who asked you, and cetera,'
I was afraid Dora was going to come the good elder sister over us. She
does that a jolly sight too often.

Dicky looked up from the paper he was reading and said, 'This sounds
likely,' and he read out--

    'L100 secures partnership in lucrative business for sale of
    useful patent.  L10 weekly.  No personal attendance necessary.
    Jobbins, 300, Old Street Road.'

'I wish we could secure that partnership,' said Oswald. He is twelve,
and a very thoughtful boy for his age.

Alice looked up from her painting. She was trying to paint a fairy
queen's frock with green bice, and it wouldn't rub. There is something
funny about green bice. It never will rub off; no matter how expensive
your paintbox is--and even boiling water is very little use.

She said, 'Bother the bice! And, Oswald, it's no use thinking about
that. Where are we to get a hundred pounds?'

'Ten pounds a week is five pounds to us,' Oswald went on--he had done
the sum in his head while Alice was talking--'because partnership means
halves. It would be A1.'

Noel sat sucking his pencil--he had been writing poetry as usual. I saw
the first two lines--

     I wonder why Green Bice
     Is never very nice.

Suddenly he said, 'I wish a fairy would come down the chimney and drop a
jewel on the table--a jewel worth just a hundred pounds.'

'She might as well give you the hundred pounds while she was about it,'
said Dora.

'Or while she was about it she might as well give us five pounds a
week,' said Alice.

'Or fifty,' said I.

'Or five hundred,' said Dicky.

I saw H. O. open his mouth, and I knew he was going to say, 'Or five
thousand,' so I said--

'Well, she won't give us fivepence, but if you'd only do as I am always
saying, and rescue a wealthy old gentleman from deadly peril he would
give us a pot of money, and we could have the partnership and five
pounds a week. Five pounds a week would buy a great many things.'

Then Dicky said, 'Why shouldn't we borrow it?' So we said, 'Who from?'
and then he read this out of the paper--

     MONEY PRIVATELY WITHOUT FEES
     THE BOND STREET BANK
     Manager, Z. Rosenbaum.

     Advances cash from L20 to L10,000 on ladies' or gentlemen's
     note of hand alone, without security.  No fees.  No inquiries.
     Absolute privacy guaranteed.

'What does it all mean?' asked H. O.

'It means that there is a kind gentleman who has a lot of money, and he
doesn't know enough poor people to help, so he puts it in the paper
that he will help them, by lending them his money--that's it, isn't it,
Dicky?'

Dora explained this and Dicky said, 'Yes.' And H. O. said he was a
Generous Benefactor, like in Miss Edgeworth. Then Noel wanted to know
what a note of hand was, and Dicky knew that, because he had read it in
a book, and it was just a letter saying you will pay the money when you
can, and signed with your name.

'No inquiries!' said Alice. 'Oh--Dicky--do you think he would?'

'Yes, I think so,' said Dicky. 'I wonder Father doesn't go to this kind
gentleman. I've seen his name before on a circular in Father's study.'

'Perhaps he has.' said Dora.

But the rest of us were sure he hadn't, because, of course, if he had,
there would have been more money to buy nice things. Just then Pincher
jumped up and knocked over the painting-water. He is a very careless
dog. I wonder why painting-water is always such an ugly colour? Dora ran
for a duster to wipe it up, and H. O. dropped drops of the water on his
hands and said he had got the plague. So we played at the plague for a
bit, and I was an Arab physician with a bath-towel turban, and cured
the plague with magic acid-drops. After that it was time for dinner, and
after dinner we talked it all over and settled that we would go and see
the Generous Benefactor the very next day. But we thought perhaps the G.
B.--it is short for Generous Benefactor--would not like it if there were
so many of us. I have often noticed that it is the worst of our being
six--people think six a great many, when it's children. That sentence
looks wrong somehow. I mean they don't mind six pairs of boots, or six
pounds of apples, or six oranges, especially in equations, but they
seem to think you ought not to have five brothers and sisters. Of course
Dicky was to go, because it was his idea. Dora had to go to Blackheath
to see an old lady, a friend of Father's, so she couldn't go. Alice
said _she_ ought to go, because it said, 'Ladies _and_ gentlemen,' and
perhaps the G. B. wouldn't let us have the money unless there were both
kinds of us.

H. O. said Alice wasn't a lady; and she said _he_ wasn't going, anyway.
Then he called her a disagreeable cat, and she began to cry.

But Oswald always tries to make up quarrels, so he said--

'You're little sillies, both of you!'

And Dora said, 'Don't cry, Alice; he only meant you weren't a grown-up
lady.'

Then H. O. said, 'What else did you think I meant, Disagreeable?'

So Dicky said, 'Don't be disagreeable yourself, H. O. Let her alone and
say you're sorry, or I'll jolly well make you!'

So H. O. said he was sorry. Then Alice kissed him and said she was sorry
too; and after that H. O. gave her a hug, and said, 'Now I'm _really and
truly_ sorry,' So it was all right.

Noel went the last time any of us went to London, so he was out of it,
and Dora said she would take him to Blackheath if we'd take H. O. So as
there'd been a little disagreeableness we thought it was better to take
him, and we did. At first we thought we'd tear our oldest things a bit
more, and put some patches of different colours on them, to show the
G. B. how much we wanted money. But Dora said that would be a sort
of cheating, pretending we were poorer than we are. And Dora is right
sometimes, though she is our elder sister. Then we thought we'd better
wear our best things, so that the G. B. might see we weren't so very
poor that he couldn't trust us to pay his money back when we had it. But
Dora said that would be wrong too. So it came to our being quite honest,
as Dora said, and going just as we were, without even washing our faces
and hands; but when I looked at H. O. in the train I wished we had not
been quite so particularly honest.

Every one who reads this knows what it is like to go in the train, so I
shall not tell about it--though it was rather fun, especially the part
where the guard came for the tickets at Waterloo, and H. O. was under
the seat and pretended to be a dog without a ticket. We went to Charing
Cross, and we just went round to Whitehall to see the soldiers and then
by St James's for the same reason--and when we'd looked in the shops a
bit we got to Brook Street, Bond Street. It was a brass plate on a
door next to a shop--a very grand place, where they sold bonnets and
hats--all very bright and smart, and no tickets on them to tell you
the price. We rang a bell and a boy opened the door and we asked for Mr
Rosenbaum. The boy was not polite; he did not ask us in. So then Dicky
gave him his visiting card; it was one of Father's really, but the
name is the same, Mr Richard Bastable, and we others wrote our names
underneath. I happened to have a piece of pink chalk in my pocket and we
wrote them with that.

Then the boy shut the door in our faces and we waited on the step. But
presently he came down and asked our business. So Dicky said--

'Money advanced, young shaver! and don't be all day about it!'

And then he made us wait again, till I was quite stiff in my legs, but
Alice liked it because of looking at the hats and bonnets, and at last
the door opened, and the boy said--

'Mr Rosenbaum will see you,' so we wiped our feet on the mat, which said
so, and we went up stairs with soft carpets and into a room. It was a
beautiful room. I wished then we had put on our best things, or at least
washed a little. But it was too late now.

The room had velvet curtains and a soft, soft carpet, and it was full
of the most splendid things. Black and gold cabinets, and china, and
statues, and pictures. There was a picture of a cabbage and a pheasant
and a dead hare that was just like life, and I would have given worlds
to have it for my own. The fur was so natural I should never have been
tired of looking at it; but Alice liked the one of the girl with
the broken jug best. Then besides the pictures there were clocks and
candlesticks and vases, and gilt looking-glasses, and boxes of cigars
and scent and things littered all over the chairs and tables. It was a
wonderful place, and in the middle of all the splendour was a little old
gentleman with a very long black coat and a very long white beard and a
hookey nose--like a falcon. And he put on a pair of gold spectacles and
looked at us as if he knew exactly how much our clothes were worth.

And then, while we elder ones were thinking how to begin, for we had
all said 'Good morning' as we came in, of course, H. O. began before we
could stop him. He said:

'Are you the G. B.?'

'The _what_?' said the little old gentleman.

'The G. B.,' said H. O., and I winked at him to shut up, but he didn't
see me, and the G. B. did. He waved his hand at _me_ to shut up, so I
had to, and H. O. went on--'It stands for Generous Benefactor.'

The old gentleman frowned. Then he said, 'Your Father sent you here, I
suppose?'

'No he didn't,' said Dicky. 'Why did you think so?'

The old gentleman held out the card, and I explained that we took that
because Father's name happens to be the same as Dicky's.

'Doesn't he know you've come?'

'No,' said Alice, 'we shan't tell him till we've got the partnership,
because his own business worries him a good deal and we don't want to
bother him with ours till it's settled, and then we shall give him half
our share.'

The old gentleman took off his spectacles and rumpled his hair with his
hands, then he said, 'Then what _did_ you come for?'

'We saw your advertisement,' Dicky said, 'and we want a hundred pounds
on our note of hand, and my sister came so that there should be both
kinds of us; and we want it to buy a partnership with in the lucrative
business for sale of useful patent. No personal attendance necessary.'

'I don't think I quite follow you,' said the G. B. 'But one thing I
should like settled before entering more fully into the matter: why did
you call me Generous Benefactor?'

'Well, you see,' said Alice, smiling at him to show she wasn't
frightened, though I know really she was, awfully, 'we thought it was so
_very_ kind of you to try to find out the poor people who want money and
to help them and lend them your money.'

'Hum!' said the G. B. 'Sit down.'

He cleared the clocks and vases and candlesticks off some of the chairs,
and we sat down. The chairs were velvety, with gilt legs. It was like a
king's palace.

'Now,' he said, 'you ought to be at school, instead of thinking about
money. Why aren't you?'

We told him that we should go to school again when Father could manage
it, but meantime we wanted to do something to restore the fallen
fortunes of the House of Bastable. And we said we thought the lucrative
patent would be a very good thing. He asked a lot of questions, and we
told him everything we didn't think Father would mind our telling, and
at last he said--

'You wish to borrow money. When will you repay it?'

'As soon as we've got it, of course,' Dicky said.

Then the G. B. said to Oswald, 'You seem the eldest,' but I explained to
him that it was Dicky's idea, so my being eldest didn't matter. Then he
said to Dicky--'You are a minor, I presume?'

Dicky said he wasn't yet, but he had thought of being a mining engineer
some day, and going to Klondike.

'Minor, not miner,' said the G. B. 'I mean you're not of age?'

'I shall be in ten years, though,' said Dicky. 'Then you might repudiate
the loan,' said the G. B., and Dicky said 'What?'

Of course he ought to have said 'I beg your pardon. I didn't quite catch
what you said'--that is what Oswald would have said. It is more polite
than 'What.'

'Repudiate the loan,' the G. B repeated. 'I mean you might say you would
not pay me back the money, and the law could not compel you to do so.'

'Oh, well, if you think we're such sneaks,' said Dicky, and he got
up off his chair. But the G. B. said, 'Sit down, sit down; I was only
joking.'

Then he talked some more, and at last he said--'I don't advise you to
enter into that partnership. It's a swindle. Many advertisements are.
And I have not a hundred pounds by me to-day to lend you. But I will
lend you a pound, and you can spend it as you like. And when you are
twenty-one you shall pay me back.'

'I shall pay you back long before that,' said Dicky. 'Thanks, awfully!
And what about the note of hand?'

'Oh,' said the G. B., 'I'll trust to your honour. Between gentlemen, you
know--and ladies'--he made a beautiful bow to Alice--'a word is as good
as a bond.'

Then he took out a sovereign, and held it in his hand while he talked
to us. He gave us a lot of good advice about not going into business
too young, and about doing our lessons--just swatting a bit, on our own
hook, so as not to be put in a low form when we went back to school. And
all the time he was stroking the sovereign and looking at it as if he
thought it very beautiful. And so it was, for it was a new one. Then at
last he held it out to Dicky, and when Dicky put out his hand for it the
G. B. suddenly put the sovereign back in his pocket.

'No,' he said, 'I won't give you the sovereign. I'll give you fifteen
shillings, and this nice bottle of scent. It's worth far more than the
five shillings I'm charging you for it. And, when you can, you shall pay
me back the pound, and sixty per cent interest--sixty per cent, sixty
per cent.'

'What's that?' said H. O.

The G. B. said he'd tell us that when we paid back the sovereign, but
sixty per cent was nothing to be afraid of. He gave Dicky the money. And
the boy was made to call a cab, and the G. B. put us in and shook hands
with us all, and asked Alice to give him a kiss, so she did, and H. O.
would do it too, though his face was dirtier than ever. The G. B. paid
the cabman and told him what station to go to, and so we went home.

That evening Father had a letter by the seven-o'clock post. And when
he had read it he came up into the nursery. He did not look quite so
unhappy as usual, but he looked grave.

'You've been to Mr Rosenbaum's,' he said.

So we told him all about it. It took a long time, and Father sat in the
armchair. It was jolly. He doesn't often come and talk to us now. He has
to spend all his time thinking about his business. And when we'd told
him all about it he said--

'You haven't done any harm this time, children; rather good than harm,
indeed. Mr Rosenbaum has written me a very kind letter.'

'Is he a friend of yours, Father?' Oswald asked. 'He is an
acquaintance,' said my father, frowning a little, 'we have done some
business together. And this letter--' he stopped and then said: 'No;
you didn't do any harm to-day; but I want you for the future not to do
anything so serious as to try to buy a partnership without consulting
me, that's all. I don't want to interfere with your plays and pleasures;
but you will consult me about business matters, won't you?'

Of course we said we should be delighted, but then Alice, who was
sitting on his knee, said, 'We didn't like to bother you.'

Father said, 'I haven't much time to be with you, for my business takes
most of my time. It is an anxious business--but I can't bear to think of
your being left all alone like this.'

He looked so sad we all said we liked being alone. And then he looked
sadder than ever.

Then Alice said, 'We don't mean that exactly, Father. It is rather
lonely sometimes, since Mother died.'

Then we were all quiet a little while. Father stayed with us till we
went to bed, and when he said good night he looked quite cheerful. So we
told him so, and he said--

'Well, the fact is, that letter took a weight off my mind.' I can't
think what he meant--but I am sure the G. B. would be pleased if he
could know he had taken a weight off somebody's mind. He is that sort of
man, I think.

We gave the scent to Dora. It is not quite such good scent as we thought
it would be, but we had fifteen shillings--and they were all good, so is
the G. B.

And until those fifteen shillings were spent we felt almost as jolly as
though our fortunes had been properly restored. You do not notice your
general fortune so much, as long as you have money in your pocket. This
is why so many children with regular pocket-money have never felt
it their duty to seek for treasure. So, perhaps, our not having
pocket-money was a blessing in disguise. But the disguise was quite
impenetrable, like the villains' in the books; and it seemed still more
so when the fifteen shillings were all spent. Then at last the others
agreed to let Oswald try his way of seeking for treasure, but they were
not at all keen about it, and many a boy less firm than Oswald would
have chucked the whole thing. But Oswald knew that a hero must rely on
himself alone. So he stuck to it, and presently the others saw their
duty, and backed him up.



CHAPTER 10. LORD TOTTENHAM

Oswald is a boy of firm and unswerving character, and he had never
wavered from his first idea. He felt quite certain that the books were
right, and that the best way to restore fallen fortunes was to rescue an
old gentleman in distress. Then he brings you up as his own son: but
if you preferred to go on being your own father's son I expect the old
gentleman would make it up to you some other way. In the books the least
thing does it--you put up the railway carriage window--or you pick up
his purse when he drops it--or you say a hymn when he suddenly asks you
to, and then your fortune is made.

The others, as I said, were very slack about it, and did not seem to
care much about trying the rescue. They said there wasn't any deadly
peril, and we should have to make one before we could rescue the old
gentleman from it, but Oswald didn't see that that mattered. However, he
thought he would try some of the easier ways first, by himself.

So he waited about the station, pulling up railway carriage windows for
old gentlemen who looked likely--but nothing happened, and at last the
porters said he was a nuisance. So that was no go. No one ever asked him
to say a hymn, though he had learned a nice short one, beginning 'New
every morning'--and when an old gentleman did drop a two-shilling piece
just by Ellis's the hairdresser's, and Oswald picked it up, and was
just thinking what he should say when he returned it, the old gentleman
caught him by the collar and called him a young thief. It would have
been very unpleasant for Oswald if he hadn't happened to be a very
brave boy, and knew the policeman on that beat very well indeed. So the
policeman backed him up, and the old gentleman said he was sorry, and
offered Oswald sixpence. Oswald refused it with polite disdain, and
nothing more happened at all.

When Oswald had tried by himself and it had not come off, he said to the
others, 'We're wasting our time, not trying to rescue the old gentleman
in deadly peril. Come--buck up! Do let's do something!'

It was dinner-time, and Pincher was going round getting the bits off
the plates. There were plenty because it was cold-mutton day. And Alice
said--

'It's only fair to try Oswald's way--he has tried all the things the
others thought of. Why couldn't we rescue Lord Tottenham?'

Lord Tottenham is the old gentleman who walks over the Heath every day
in a paper collar at three o'clock--and when he gets halfway, if there
is no one about, he changes his collar and throws the dirty one into the
furze-bushes.

Dicky said, 'Lord Tottenham's all right--but where's the deadly peril?'

And we couldn't think of any. There are no highwaymen on Blackheath now,
I am sorry to say. And though Oswald said half of us could be highwaymen
and the other half rescue party, Dora kept on saying it would be wrong
to be a highwayman--and so we had to give that up.

Then Alice said, 'What about Pincher?'

And we all saw at once that it could be done.

Pincher is very well bred, and he does know one or two things, though we
never could teach him to beg. But if you tell him to hold on--he will do
it, even if you only say 'Seize him!' in a whisper.

So we arranged it all. Dora said she wouldn't play; she said she thought
it was wrong, and she knew it was silly--so we left her out, and she
went and sat in the dining-room with a goody-book, so as to be able to
say she didn't have anything to do with it, if we got into a row over
it.

Alice and H. O. were to hide in the furze-bushes just by where Lord
Tottenham changes his collar, and they were to whisper, 'Seize him!' to
Pincher; and then when Pincher had seized Lord Tottenham we were to
go and rescue him from his deadly peril. And he would say, 'How can I
reward you, my noble young preservers?' and it would be all right.

So we went up to the Heath. We were afraid of being late. Oswald told
the others what Procrastination was--so they got to the furze-bushes a
little after two o'clock, and it was rather cold. Alice and H. O. and
Pincher hid, but Pincher did not like it any more than they did, and as
we three walked up and down we heard him whining. And Alice kept saying,
'I _am_ so cold! Isn't he coming yet?' And H. O. wanted to come out
and jump about to warm himself. But we told him he must learn to be
a Spartan boy, and that he ought to be very thankful he hadn't got a
beastly fox eating his inside all the time. H. O. is our little brother,
and we are not going to let it be our fault if he grows up a milksop.
Besides, it was not really cold. It was his knees--he wears socks. So
they stayed where they were. And at last, when even the other three who
were walking about were beginning to feel rather chilly, we saw Lord
Tottenham's big black cloak coming along, flapping in the wind like a
great bird. So we said to Alice--

'Hist! he approaches. You'll know when to set Pincher on by hearing Lord
Tottenham talking to himself--he always does while he is taking off his
collar.'

Then we three walked slowly away whistling to show we were not thinking
of anything. Our lips were rather cold, but we managed to do it.

Lord Tottenham came striding along, talking to himself. People call him
the mad Protectionist. I don't know what it means--but I don't think
people ought to call a Lord such names.

As he passed us he said, 'Ruin of the country, sir! Fatal error, fatal
error!' And then we looked back and saw he was getting quite near where
Pincher was, and Alice and H. O. We walked on--so that he shouldn't
think we were looking--and in a minute we heard Pincher's bark, and then
nothing for a bit; and then we looked round, and sure enough good old
Pincher had got Lord Tottenham by the trouser leg and was holding on
like billy-ho, so we started to run.

Lord Tottenham had got his collar half off--it was sticking out sideways
under his ear--and he was shouting, 'Help, help, murder!' exactly as if
some one had explained to him beforehand what he was to do. Pincher was
growling and snarling and holding on. When we got to him I stopped and
said--

'Dicky, we must rescue this good old man.'

Lord Tottenham roared in his fury, 'Good old man be--' something or
othered. 'Call the dog off.'

So Oswald said, 'It is a dangerous task--but who would hesitate to do an
act of true bravery?'

And all the while Pincher was worrying and snarling, and Lord Tottenham
shouting to us to get the dog away. He was dancing about in the road
with Pincher hanging on like grim death; and his collar flapping about,
where it was undone.

Then Noel said, 'Haste, ere yet it be too late.' So I said to Lord
Tottenham--

'Stand still, aged sir, and I will endeavour to alleviate your
distress.'

He stood still, and I stooped down and caught hold of Pincher and
whispered, 'Drop it, sir; drop it!'

So then Pincher dropped it, and Lord Tottenham fastened his collar
again--he never does change it if there's any one looking--and he said--

'I'm much obliged, I'm sure. Nasty vicious brute! Here's something to
drink my health.'

But Dicky explained that we are teetotallers, and do not drink people's
healths. So Lord Tottenham said, 'Well, I'm much obliged any way. And
now I come to look at you--of course, you're not young ruffians, but
gentlemen's sons, eh? Still, you won't be above taking a tip from an old
boy--I wasn't when I was your age,' and he pulled out half a sovereign.

It was very silly; but now we'd done it I felt it would be beastly mean
to take the old boy's chink after putting him in such a funk. He didn't
say anything about bringing us up as his own sons--so I didn't know what
to do. I let Pincher go, and was just going to say he was very welcome,
and we'd rather not have the money, which seemed the best way out of it,
when that beastly dog spoiled the whole show. Directly I let him go he
began to jump about at us and bark for joy, and try to lick our faces.
He was so proud of what he'd done. Lord Tottenham opened his eyes and he
just said, 'The dog seems to know you.'

And then Oswald saw it was all up, and he said, 'Good morning,' and
tried to get away. But Lord Tottenham said--

'Not so fast!' And he caught Noel by the collar. Noel gave a howl, and
Alice ran out from the bushes. Noel is her favourite. I'm sure I don't
know why. Lord Tottenham looked at her, and he said--

'So there are more of you!' And then H. O. came out.

'Do you complete the party?' Lord Tottenham asked him. And H. O. said
there were only five of us this time.

Lord Tottenham turned sharp off and began to walk away, holding Noel by
the collar. We caught up with him, and asked him where he was going, and
he said, 'To the Police Station.' So then I said quite politely, 'Well,
don't take Noel; he's not strong, and he easily gets upset. Besides, it
wasn't his doing. If you want to take any one take me--it was my very
own idea.'

Dicky behaved very well. He said, 'If you take Oswald I'll go too, but
don't take Noel; he's such a delicate little chap.'

Lord Tottenham stopped, and he said, 'You should have thought of that
before.' Noel was howling all the time, and his face was very white, and
Alice said--

'Oh, do let Noel go, dear, good, kind Lord Tottenham; he'll faint if you
don't, I know he will, he does sometimes. Oh, I wish we'd never done it!
Dora said it was wrong.'

'Dora displayed considerable common sense,' said Lord Tottenham, and he
let Noel go. And Alice put her arm round Noel and tried to cheer him up,
but he was all trembly, and as white as paper.

Then Lord Tottenham said--

'Will you give me your word of honour not to try to escape?'

So we said we would.

'Then follow me,' he said, and led the way to a bench. We all followed,
and Pincher too, with his tail between his legs--he knew something was
wrong. Then Lord Tottenham sat down, and he made Oswald and Dicky and
H. O. stand in front of him, but he let Alice and Noel sit down. And he
said--

'You set your dog on me, and you tried to make me believe you were
saving me from it. And you would have taken my half-sovereign. Such
conduct is most--No--you shall tell me what it is, sir, and speak the
truth.'

So I had to say it was most ungentlemanly, but I said I hadn't been
going to take the half-sovereign.

'Then what did you do it for?' he asked. 'The truth, mind.'

So I said, 'I see now it was very silly, and Dora said it was wrong,
but it didn't seem so till we did it. We wanted to restore the fallen
fortunes of our house, and in the books if you rescue an old gentleman
from deadly peril, he brings you up as his own son--or if you prefer
to be your father's son, he starts you in business, so that you end in
wealthy affluence; and there wasn't any deadly peril, so we made Pincher
into one--and so--' I was so ashamed I couldn't go on, for it did seem
an awfully mean thing. Lord Tottenham said--

'A very nice way to make your fortune--by deceit and trickery. I have a
horror of dogs. If I'd been a weak man the shock might have killed me.
What do you think of yourselves, eh?'

We were all crying except Oswald, and the others say he was; and Lord
Tottenham went on--'Well, well, I see you're sorry. Let this be a lesson
to you; and we'll say no more about it. I'm an old man now, but I was
young once.'

Then Alice slid along the bench close to him, and put her hand on his
arm: her fingers were pink through the holes in her woolly gloves, and
said, 'I think you're very good to forgive us, and we are really very,
very sorry. But we wanted to be like the children in the books--only
we never have the chances they have. Everything they do turns out all
right. But we _are_ sorry, very, very. And I know Oswald wasn't going to
take the half-sovereign. Directly you said that about a tip from an old
boy I began to feel bad inside, and I whispered to H. O. that I wished
we hadn't.'

Then Lord Tottenham stood up, and he looked like the Death of Nelson,
for he is clean shaved and it is a good face, and he said--

'Always remember never to do a dishonourable thing, for money or for
anything else in the world.'

And we promised we would remember. Then he took off his hat, and we took
off ours, and he went away, and we went home. I never felt so cheap in
all my life! Dora said, 'I told you so,' but we didn't mind even that so
much, though it was indeed hard to bear. It was what Lord Tottenham had
said about ungentlemanly. We didn't go on to the Heath for a week after
that; but at last we all went, and we waited for him by the bench. When
he came along Alice said, 'Please, Lord Tottenham, we have not been on
the Heath for a week, to be a punishment because you let us off. And we
have brought you a present each if you will take them to show you are
willing to make it up.'

He sat down on the bench, and we gave him our presents. Oswald gave him
a sixpenny compass--he bought it with my own money on purpose to give
him. Oswald always buys useful presents. The needle would not move after
I'd had it a day or two, but Lord Tottenham used to be an admiral, so
he will be able to make that go all right. Alice had made him a
shaving-case, with a rose worked on it. And H. O. gave him his
knife--the same one he once cut all the buttons off his best suit with.
Dicky gave him his prize, Naval Heroes, because it was the best thing he
had, and Noel gave him a piece of poetry he had made himself--

    When sin and shame bow down the brow
    Then people feel just like we do now.
    We are so sorry with grief and pain
    We never will be so ungentlemanly again.

Lord Tottenham seemed very pleased. He thanked us, and talked to us for
a bit, and when he said good-bye he said--

'All's fair weather now, mates,' and shook hands.

And whenever we meet him he nods to us, and if the girls are with us
he takes off his hat, so he can't really be going on thinking us
ungentlemanly now.



CHAPTER 11. CASTILIAN AMOROSO

One day when we suddenly found that we had half a crown we decided that
we really ought to try Dicky's way of restoring our fallen fortunes
while yet the deed was in our power. Because it might easily have
happened to us never to have half a crown again. So we decided to dally
no longer with being journalists and bandits and things like them, but
to send for sample and instructions how to earn two pounds a week each
in our spare time. We had seen the advertisement in the paper, and we
had always wanted to do it, but we had never had the money to spare
before, somehow. The advertisement says: 'Any lady or gentleman
can easily earn two pounds a week in their spare time. Sample and
instructions, two shillings. Packed free from observation.' A good deal
of the half-crown was Dora's. It came from her godmother; but she said
she would not mind letting Dicky have it if he would pay her back before
Christmas, and if we were sure it was right to try to make our fortune
that way. Of course that was quite easy, because out of two pounds a
week in your spare time you can easily pay all your debts, and have
almost as much left as you began with; and as to the right we told her
to dry up.

Dicky had always thought that this was really the best way to restore
our fallen fortunes, and we were glad that now he had a chance of trying
because of course we wanted the two pounds a week each, and besides, we
were rather tired of Dicky's always saying, when our ways didn't turn
out well, 'Why don't you try the sample and instructions about our spare
time?'

When we found out about our half-crown we got the paper. Noel was
playing admirals in it, but he had made the cocked hat without tearing
the paper, and we found the advertisement, and it said just the same as
ever. So we got a two-shilling postal order and a stamp, and what was
left of the money it was agreed we would spend in ginger-beer to drink
success to trade.

We got some nice paper out of Father's study, and Dicky wrote the
letter, and we put in the money and put on the stamp, and made H. O.
post it. Then we drank the ginger-beer, and then we waited for the
sample and instructions. It seemed a long time coming, and the postman
got quite tired of us running out and stopping him in the street to ask
if it had come.

But on the third morning it came. It was quite a large parcel, and
it was packed, as the advertisement said it would be, 'free from
observation.' That means it was in a box; and inside the box was some
stiff browny cardboard, crinkled like the galvanized iron on the tops of
chicken-houses, and inside that was a lot of paper, some of it printed
and some scrappy, and in the very middle of it all a bottle, not
very large, and black, and sealed on the top of the cork with yellow
sealing-wax.

We looked at it as it lay on the nursery table, and while all the others
grabbed at the papers to see what the printing said, Oswald went to look
for the corkscrew, so as to see what was inside the bottle. He found
the corkscrew in the dresser drawer--it always gets there, though it is
supposed to be in the sideboard drawer in the dining-room--and when he
got back the others had read most of the printed papers.

'I don't think it's much good, and I don't think it's quite nice to sell
wine,' Dora said 'and besides, it's not easy to suddenly begin to sell
things when you aren't used to it.'

'I don't know,' said Alice; 'I believe I could.' They all looked rather
down in the mouth, though, and Oswald asked how you were to make your
two pounds a week.

'Why, you've got to get people to taste that stuff in the bottle. It's
sherry--Castilian Amoroso its name is--and then you get them to buy it,
and then you write to the people and tell them the other people want the
wine, and then for every dozen you sell you get two shillings from the
wine people, so if you sell twenty dozen a week you get your two pounds.
I don't think we shall sell as much as that,' said Dicky.

'We might not the first week,' Alice said, 'but when people found out
how nice it was, they would want more and more. And if we only got ten
shillings a week it would be something to begin with, wouldn't it?'

Oswald said he should jolly well think it would, and then Dicky took the
cork out with the corkscrew. The cork broke a good deal, and some of
the bits went into the bottle. Dora got the medicine glass that has
the teaspoons and tablespoons marked on it, and we agreed to have a
teaspoonful each, to see what it was like.

'No one must have more than that,' Dora said, 'however nice it is.'

Dora behaved rather as if it were her bottle. I suppose it was, because
she had lent the money for it.

Then she measured out the teaspoonful, and she had first go, because of
being the eldest. We asked at once what it was like, but Dora could not
speak just then.

Then she said, 'It's like the tonic Noel had in the spring; but perhaps
sherry ought to be like that.'

Then it was Oswald's turn. He thought it was very burny; but he said
nothing. He wanted to see first what the others would say.

Dicky said his was simply beastly, and Alice said Noel could taste next
if he liked.

Noel said it was the golden wine of the gods, but he had to put his
handkerchief up to his mouth all the same, and I saw the face he made.

Then H. O. had his, and he spat it out in the fire, which was very rude
and nasty, and we told him so.

Then it was Alice's turn. She said, 'Only half a teaspoonful for me,
Dora. We mustn't use it all up.' And she tasted it and said nothing.

Then Dicky said: 'Look here, I chuck this. I'm not going to hawk round
such beastly stuff. Any one who likes can have the bottle. Quis?'

And Alice got out 'Ego' before the rest of us. Then she said, 'I know
what's the matter with it. It wants sugar.'

And at once we all saw that that was all there was the matter with the
stuff. So we got two lumps of sugar and crushed it on the floor with one
of the big wooden bricks till it was powdery, and mixed it with some of
the wine up to the tablespoon mark, and it was quite different, and not
nearly so nasty.

'You see it's all right when you get used to it,' Dicky said. I think he
was sorry he had said 'Quis?' in such a hurry.

'Of course,' Alice said, 'it's rather dusty. We must crush the sugar
carefully in clean paper before we put it in the bottle.'

Dora said she was afraid it would be cheating to make one bottle nicer
than what people would get when they ordered a dozen bottles, but Alice
said Dora always made a fuss about everything, and really it would be
quite honest.

'You see,' she said, 'I shall just tell them, quite truthfully, what
we have done to it, and when their dozens come they can do it for
themselves.'

So then we crushed eight more lumps, very cleanly and carefully between
newspapers, and shook it up well in the bottle, and corked it up with a
screw of paper, brown and not news, for fear of the poisonous printing
ink getting wet and dripping down into the wine and killing people. We
made Pincher have a taste, and he sneezed for ever so long, and after
that he used to go under the sofa whenever we showed him the bottle.

Then we asked Alice who she would try and sell it to. She said: 'I shall
ask everybody who comes to the house. And while we are doing that, we
can be thinking of outside people to take it to. We must be careful:
there's not much more than half of it left, even counting the sugar.'

We did not wish to tell Eliza--I don't know why. And she opened the door
very quickly that day, so that the Taxes and a man who came to our house
by mistake for next door got away before Alice had a chance to try them
with the Castilian Amoroso. But about five Eliza slipped out for half an
hour to see a friend who was making her a hat for Sunday, and while
she was gone there was a knock. Alice went, and we looked over the
banisters. When she opened the door, she said at once, 'Will you walk
in, please?' The person at the door said, 'I called to see your Pa,
miss. Is he at home?'

Alice said again, 'Will you walk in, please?'

Then the person--it sounded like a man--said, 'He is in, then?'

But Alice only kept on saying, 'Will you walk in, please?' so at last
the man did, rubbing his boots very loudly on the mat.

Then Alice shut the front door, and we saw that it was the butcher, with
an envelope in his hand. He was not dressed in blue, like when he is
cutting up the sheep and things in the shop, and he wore knickerbockers.
Alice says he came on a bicycle. She led the way into the dining-room,
where the Castilian Amoroso bottle and the medicine glass were standing
on the table all ready.

The others stayed on the stairs, but Oswald crept down and looked
through the door-crack.

'Please sit down,' said Alice quite calmly, though she told me
afterwards I had no idea how silly she felt. And the butcher sat down.
Then Alice stood quite still and said nothing, but she fiddled with
the medicine glass and put the screw of brown paper straight in the
Castilian bottle.

'Will you tell your Pa I'd like a word with him?' the butcher said, when
he got tired of saying nothing.

'He'll be in very soon, I think,' Alice said.

And then she stood still again and said nothing. It was beginning to
look very idiotic of her, and H. O. laughed. I went back and cuffed him
for it quite quietly, and I don't think the butcher heard.

But Alice did, and it roused her from her stupor. She spoke suddenly,
very fast indeed--so fast that I knew she had made up what she was going
to say before. She had got most of it out of the circular.

She said, 'I want to call your attention to a sample of sherry wine I
have here. It is called Castilian something or other, and at the price
it is unequalled for flavour and bouquet.'

The butcher said, 'Well--I never!'

And Alice went on, 'Would you like to taste it?'

'Thank you very much, I'm sure, miss,' said the butcher.

Alice poured some out.

The butcher tasted a very little. He licked his lips, and we thought
he was going to say how good it was. But he did not. He put down the
medicine glass with nearly all the stuff left in it (we put it back in
the bottle afterwards to save waste) and said, 'Excuse me, miss, but
isn't it a little sweet?--for sherry I mean?'

'The _Real_ isn't,' said Alice. 'If you order a dozen it will come quite
different to that--we like it best with sugar. I wish you _would_ order
some.' The butcher asked why.

Alice did not speak for a minute, and then she said--

'I don't mind telling _you_: you are in business yourself, aren't
you? We are trying to get people to buy it, because we shall have two
shillings for every dozen we can make any one buy. It's called a purr
something.'

'A percentage. Yes, I see,' said the butcher, looking at the hole in the
carpet.

'You see there are reasons,' Alice went on, 'why we want to make our
fortunes as quickly as we can.'

'Quite so,' said the butcher, and he looked at the place where the paper
is coming off the wall.

'And this seems a good way,' Alice went on. 'We paid two shillings for
the sample and instructions, and it says you can make two pounds a week
easily in your leisure time.'

'I'm sure I hope you may, miss,' said the butcher. And Alice said again
would he buy some?

'Sherry is my favourite wine,' he said. Alice asked him to have some
more to drink.

'No, thank you, miss,' he said; 'it's my favourite wine, but it doesn't
agree with me; not the least bit. But I've an uncle drinks it. Suppose I
ordered him half a dozen for a Christmas present? Well, miss, here's the
shilling commission, anyway,' and he pulled out a handful of money and
gave her the shilling.

'But I thought the wine people paid that,' Alice said.

But the butcher said not on half-dozens they didn't. Then he said he
didn't think he'd wait any longer for Father--but would Alice ask Father
to write him?

Alice offered him the sherry again, but he said something about 'Not
for worlds!'--and then she let him out and came back to us with the
shilling, and said, 'How's that?'

And we said 'A1.'

And all the evening we talked of our fortune that we had begun to make.

Nobody came next day, but the day after a lady came to ask for money to
build an orphanage for the children of dead sailors. And we saw her. I
went in with Alice. And when we had explained to her that we had only
a shilling and we wanted it for something else, Alice suddenly said,
'Would you like some wine?'

And the lady said, 'Thank you very much,' but she looked surprised.

She was not a young lady, and she had a mantle with beads, and the beads
had come off in places--leaving a browny braid showing, and she had
printed papers about the dead sailors in a sealskin bag, and the
seal had come off in places, leaving the skin bare. We gave her a
tablespoonful of the wine in a proper wine-glass out of the sideboard,
because she was a lady. And when she had tasted it she got up in a very
great hurry, and shook out her dress and snapped her bag shut, and said,
'You naughty, wicked children! What do you mean by playing a trick like
this? You ought to be ashamed of yourselves! I shall write to your Mamma
about it. You dreadful little girl!--you might have poisoned me. But
your Mamma...'

Then Alice said, 'I'm very sorry; the butcher liked it, only he said it
was sweet. And please don't write to Mother. It makes Father so unhappy
when letters come for her!'--and Alice was very near crying.

'What do you mean, you silly child?' said the lady, looking quite
bright and interested. 'Why doesn't your Father like your Mother to have
letters--eh?'

And Alice said, 'OH, you...!' and began to cry, and bolted out of the
room.

Then I said, 'Our Mother is dead, and will you please go away now?'

The lady looked at me a minute, and then she looked quite different, and
she said, 'I'm very sorry. I didn't know. Never mind about the wine. I
daresay your little sister meant it kindly.' And she looked round the
room just like the butcher had done. Then she said again, 'I didn't
know--I'm very sorry...'

So I said, 'Don't mention it,' and shook hands with her, and let her
out. Of course we couldn't have asked her to buy the wine after what
she'd said. But I think she was not a bad sort of person. I do like
a person to say they're sorry when they ought to be--especially a
grown-up. They do it so seldom. I suppose that's why we think so much of
it.

But Alice and I didn't feel jolly for ever so long afterwards. And when
I went back into the dining-room I saw how different it was from when
Mother was here, and we are different, and Father is different, and
nothing is like it was. I am glad I am not made to think about it every
day.

I went and found Alice, and told her what the lady had said, and when
she had finished crying we put away the bottle and said we would not try
to sell any more to people who came. And we did not tell the others--we
only said the lady did not buy any--but we went up on the Heath, and
some soldiers went by and there was a Punch-and-judy show, and when we
came back we were better.

The bottle got quite dusty where we had put it, and perhaps the dust of
ages would have laid thick and heavy on it, only a clergyman called when
we were all out. He was not our own clergyman--Mr Bristow is our own
clergyman, and we all love him, and we would not try to sell sherry
to people we like, and make two pounds a week out of them in our spare
time. It was another clergyman, just a stray one; and he asked Eliza if
the dear children would not like to come to his little Sunday school. We
always spend Sunday afternoons with Father. But as he had left the name
of his vicarage with Eliza, and asked her to tell us to come, we thought
we would go and call on him, just to explain about Sunday afternoons,
and we thought we might as well take the sherry with us.

'I won't go unless you all go too,' Alice said, 'and I won't do the
talking.'

Dora said she thought we had much better not go; but we said 'Rot!' and
it ended in her coming with us, and I am glad she did.

Oswald said he would do the talking if the others liked, and he learned
up what to say from the printed papers.

We went to the Vicarage early on Saturday afternoon, and rang at the
bell. It is a new red house with no trees in the garden, only very
yellow mould and gravel. It was all very neat and dry. Just before we
rang the bell we heard some one inside call 'Jane! Jane!' and we thought
we would not be Jane for anything. It was the sound of the voice that
called that made us sorry for her.

The door was opened by a very neat servant in black, with a white apron;
we saw her tying the strings as she came along the hall, through the
different-coloured glass in the door. Her face was red, and I think she
was Jane.

We asked if we could see Mr Mallow.

The servant said Mr Mallow was very busy with his sermon just then, but
she would see.

But Oswald said, 'It's all right. He asked us to come.'

So she let us all in and shut the front door, and showed us into a very
tidy room with a bookcase full of a lot of books covered in black cotton
with white labels, and some dull pictures, and a harmonium. And Mr
Mallow was writing at a desk with drawers, copying something out of a
book. He was stout and short, and wore spectacles.

He covered his writing up when we went in--I didn't know why. He looked
rather cross, and we heard Jane or somebody being scolded outside by the
voice. I hope it wasn't for letting us in, but I have had doubts.

'Well,' said the clergyman, 'what is all this about?'

'You asked us to call,' Dora said, 'about your little Sunday school. We
are the Bastables of Lewisham Road.'

'Oh--ah, yes,' he said; 'and shall I expect you all to-morrow?'

He took up his pen and fiddled with it, and he did not ask us to sit
down. But some of us did.

'We always spend Sunday afternoon with Father,' said Dora; 'but we
wished to thank you for being so kind as to ask us.'

'And we wished to ask you something else!' said Oswald; and he made
a sign to Alice to get the sherry ready in the glass. She did--behind
Oswald's back while he was speaking.

'My time is limited,' said Mr Mallow, looking at his watch; 'but
still--' Then he muttered something about the fold, and went on: 'Tell
me what is troubling you, my little man, and I will try to give you any
help in my power. What is it you want?'

Then Oswald quickly took the glass from Alice, and held it out to him,
and said, 'I want your opinion on that.'

'On _that_,' he said. 'What is it?'

'It is a shipment,' Oswald said; 'but it's quite enough for you to
taste.' Alice had filled the glass half-full; I suppose she was too
excited to measure properly.

'A shipment?' said the clergyman, taking the glass in his hand.

'Yes,' Oswald went On; 'an exceptional opportunity. Full-bodied and
nutty.'

'It really does taste rather like one kind of Brazil-nut.' Alice put her
oar in as usual.

The Vicar looked from Alice to Oswald, and back again, and Oswald went
on with what he had learned from the printing. The clergyman held the
glass at half-arm's-length, stiffly, as if he had caught cold.

'It is of a quality never before offered at the price. Old Delicate
Amoro--what's its name--'

'Amorolio,' said H. O.

'Amoroso,' said Oswald. 'H. O., you just shut up--Castilian
Amoroso--it's a true after-dinner wine, stimulating and yet...'

'_Wine_?' said Mr Mallow, holding the glass further off. 'Do you
_know_,' he went on, making his voice very thick and strong (I expect he
does it like that in church), 'have you never been _taught_ that it is
the drinking of _wine_ and _spirits_--yes, and _beer_, which makes half
the homes in England full of _wretched_ little children, and _degraded_,
_miserable_ parents?'

'Not if you put sugar in it,' said Alice firmly; 'eight lumps and shake
the bottle. We have each had more than a teaspoonful of it, and we were
not ill at all. It was something else that upset H. O. Most likely all
those acorns he got out of the Park.'

The clergyman seemed to be speechless with conflicting emotions, and
just then the door opened and a lady came in. She had a white cap with
lace, and an ugly violet flower in it, and she was tall, and looked
very strong, though thin. And I do believe she had been listening at the
door.

'But why,' the Vicar was saying, 'why did you bring this dreadful fluid,
this curse of our country, to _me_ to taste?'

'Because we thought you might buy some,' said Dora, who never sees when
a game is up. 'In books the parson loves his bottle of old port; and new
sherry is just as good--with sugar--for people who like sherry. And if
you would order a dozen of the wine, then we should get two shillings.'

The lady said (and it _was_ the voice), 'Good gracious! Nasty, sordid
little things! Haven't they any one to teach them better?'

And Dora got up and said, 'No, we are not those things you say; but we
are sorry we came here to be called names. We want to make our fortune
just as much as Mr Mallow does--only no one would listen to us if we
preached, so it's no use our copying out sermons like him.'

And I think that was smart of Dora, even if it was rather rude.

Then I said perhaps we had better go, and the lady said, 'I should think
so!'

But when we were going to wrap up the bottle and glass the clergyman
said, 'No; you can leave that,' and we were so upset we did, though it
wasn't his after all.

We walked home very fast and not saying much, and the girls went up to
their rooms. When I went to tell them tea was ready, and there was
a teacake, Dora was crying like anything and Alice hugging her. I am
afraid there is a great deal of crying in this chapter, but I can't help
it. Girls will sometimes; I suppose it is their nature, and we ought to
be sorry for their affliction.

'It's no good,' Dora was saying, 'you all hate me, and you think I'm
a prig and a busybody, but I do try to do right--oh, I do! Oswald, go
away; don't come here making fun of me!'

So I said, 'I'm not making fun, Sissy; don't cry, old girl.'

Mother taught me to call her Sissy when we were very little and before
the others came, but I don't often somehow, now we are old. I patted her
on the back, and she put her head against my sleeve, holding on to Alice
all the time, and she went on. She was in that laughy-cryey state when
people say things they wouldn't say at other times.

'Oh dear, oh dear--I do try, I do. And when Mother died she said, "Dora,
take care of the others, and teach them to be good, and keep them out of
trouble and make them happy." She said, "Take care of them for me, Dora
dear." And I have tried, and all of you hate me for it; and to-day I let
you do this, though I knew all the time it was silly.'

I hope you will not think I was a muff but I kissed Dora for some time.
Because girls like it. And I will never say again that she comes the
good elder sister too much. And I have put all this in though I do hate
telling about it, because I own I have been hard on Dora, but I never
will be again. She is a good old sort; of course we never knew before
about what Mother told her, or we wouldn't have ragged her as we did. We
did not tell the little ones, but I got Alice to speak to Dicky, and we
three can sit on the others if requisite.

This made us forget all about the sherry; but about eight o'clock there
was a knock, and Eliza went, and we saw it was poor Jane, if her name
was Jane, from the Vicarage. She handed in a brown-paper parcel and a
letter. And three minutes later Father called us into his study.

On the table was the brown-paper parcel, open, with our bottle and glass
on it, and Father had a letter in his hand. He Pointed to the bottle and
sighed, and said, 'What have you been doing now?' The letter in his hand
was covered with little black writing, all over the four large pages.

So Dicky spoke up, and he told Father the whole thing, as far as he knew
it, for Alice and I had not told about the dead sailors' lady.

And when he had done, Alice said, 'Has Mr Mallow written to you to say
he will buy a dozen of the sherry after all? It is really not half bad
with sugar in it.'

Father said no, he didn't think clergymen could afford such expensive
wine; and he said _he_ would like to taste it. So we gave him what there
was left, for we had decided coming home that we would give up trying
for the two pounds a week in our spare time.

Father tasted it, and then he acted just as H. O. had done when he had
his teaspoonful, but of course we did not say anything. Then he laughed
till I thought he would never stop.

I think it was the sherry, because I am sure I have read somewhere about
'wine that maketh glad the heart of man'. He had only a very little,
which shows that it was a good after-dinner wine, stimulating, and yet
...I forget the rest.

But when he had done laughing he said, 'It's all right, kids. Only don't
do it again. The wine trade is overcrowded; and besides, I thought you
promised to consult me before going into business?'

'Before buying one I thought you meant,' said Dicky. 'This was only on
commission.' And Father laughed again. I am glad we got the Castilian
Amoroso, because it did really cheer Father up, and you cannot always do
that, however hard you try, even if you make jokes, or give him a comic
paper.



CHAPTER 12. THE NOBLENESS OF OSWALD

The part about his nobleness only comes at the end, but you would
not understand it unless you knew how it began. It began, like nearly
everything about that time, with treasure-seeking.

Of course as soon as we had promised to consult my Father about business
matters we all gave up wanting to go into business. I don't know how it
is, but having to consult about a thing with grown-up people, even
the bravest and the best, seems to make the thing not worth doing
afterwards.

We don't mind Albert's uncle chipping in sometimes when the thing's
going on, but we are glad he never asked us to promise to consult him
about anything. Yet Oswald saw that my Father was quite right; and I
daresay if we had had that hundred pounds we should have spent it on the
share in that lucrative business for the sale of useful patent, and then
found out afterwards that we should have done better to spend the money
in some other way. My Father says so, and he ought to know. We had
several ideas about that time, but having so little chink always stood
in the way.

This was the case with H. O.'s idea of setting up a coconut-shy on this
side of the Heath, where there are none generally. We had no sticks
or wooden balls, and the greengrocer said he could not book so many as
twelve dozen coconuts without Mr Bastable's written order. And as we did
not wish to consult my Father it was decided to drop it. And when Alice
dressed up Pincher in some of the dolls' clothes and we made up our
minds to take him round with an organ as soon as we had taught him to
dance, we were stopped at once by Dicky's remembering how he had once
heard that an organ cost seven hundred pounds. Of course this was
the big church kind, but even the ones on three legs can't be got for
one-and-sevenpence, which was all we had when we first thought of it. So
we gave that up too.

It was a wet day, I remember, and mutton hash for dinner--very tough
with pale gravy with lumps in it. I think the others would have left a
good deal on the sides of their plates, although they know better, only
Oswald said it was a savoury stew made of the red deer that Edward shot.
So then we were the Children of the New Forest, and the mutton tasted
much better. No one in the New Forest minds venison being tough and the
gravy pale.

Then after dinner we let the girls have a dolls' tea-party, on condition
they didn't expect us boys to wash up; and it was when we were drinking
the last of the liquorice water out of the little cups that Dicky said--

'This reminds me.'

So we said, 'What of?'

Dicky answered us at once, though his mouth was full of bread with
liquorice stuck in it to look like cake. You should not speak with your
mouth full, even to your own relations, and you shouldn't wipe your
mouth on the back of your hand, but on your handkerchief, if you have
one. Dicky did not do this. He said--

'Why, you remember when we first began about treasure-seeking, I said
I had thought of something, only I could not tell you because I hadn't
finished thinking about it.'

We said 'Yes.'

'Well, this liquorice water--'

'Tea,' said Alice softly.

'Well, tea then--made me think.' He was going on to say what it made him
think, but Noel interrupted and cried out, 'I say; let's finish off this
old tea-party and have a council of war.'

So we got out the flags and the wooden sword and the drum, and Oswald
beat it while the girls washed up, till Eliza came up to say she had the
jumping toothache, and the noise went through her like a knife. So of
course Oswald left off at once. When you are polite to Oswald he never
refuses to grant your requests.

When we were all dressed up we sat down round the camp fire, and Dicky
began again.

'Every one in the world wants money. Some people get it. The people who
get it are the ones who see things. I have seen one thing.'

Dicky stopped and smoked the pipe of peace. It is the pipe we did
bubbles with in the summer, and somehow it has not got broken yet.
We put tea-leaves in it for the pipe of peace, but the girls are not
allowed to have any. It is not right to let girls smoke. They get to
think too much of themselves if you let them do everything the same as
men. Oswald said, 'Out with it.'

'I see that glass bottles only cost a penny. H. O., if you dare to
snigger I'll send you round selling old bottles, and you shan't have any
sweets except out of the money you get for them. And the same with you,
Noel.'

'Noel wasn't sniggering,' said Alice in a hurry; 'it is only his taking
so much interest in what you were saying makes him look like that. Be
quiet, H. O., and don't you make faces, either. Do go on, Dicky dear.'

So Dicky went on.

'There must be hundreds of millions of bottles of medicines sold every
year. Because all the different medicines say, "Thousands of cures
daily," and if you only take that as two thousand, which it must be, at
least, it mounts up. And the people who sell them must make a great deal
of money by them because they are nearly always two-and-ninepence
the bottle, and three-and-six for one nearly double the size. Now the
bottles, as I was saying, don't cost anything like that.'

'It's the medicine costs the money,' said Dora; 'look how expensive
jujubes are at the chemist's, and peppermints too.'

'That's only because they're nice,' Dicky explained; 'nasty things are
not so dear. Look what a lot of brimstone you get for a penny, and the
same with alum. We would not put the nice kinds of chemist's things in
our medicine.'

Then he went on to tell us that when we had invented our medicine we
would write and tell the editor about it, and he would put it in
the paper, and then people would send their two-and-ninepence and
three-and-six for the bottle nearly double the size, and then when the
medicine had cured them they would write to the paper and their letters
would be printed, saying how they had been suffering for years, and
never thought to get about again, but thanks to the blessing of our
ointment--'

Dora interrupted and said, 'Not ointment--it's so messy.' And Alice
thought so too. And Dicky said he did not mean it, he was quite decided
to let it be in bottles. So now it was all settled, and we did not
see at the time that this would be a sort of going into business, but
afterwards when Albert's uncle showed us we saw it, and we were sorry.
We only had to invent the medicine. You might think that was easy,
because of the number of them you see every day in the paper, but it is
much harder than you think. First we had to decide what sort of illness
we should like to cure, and a 'heated discussion ensued', like in
Parliament.

Dora wanted it to be something to make the complexion of dazzling
fairness, but we remembered how her face came all red and rough when
she used the Rosabella soap that was advertised to make the darkest
complexion fair as the lily, and she agreed that perhaps it was better
not. Noel wanted to make the medicine first and then find out what
it would cure, but Dicky thought not, because there are so many more
medicines than there are things the matter with us, so it would be
easier to choose the disease first. Oswald would have liked wounds.
I still think it was a good idea, but Dicky said, 'Who has wounds,
especially now there aren't any wars? We shouldn't sell a bottle a day!'
So Oswald gave in because he knows what manners are, and it was Dicky's
idea. H. O. wanted a cure for the uncomfortable feeling that they give
you powders for, but we explained to him that grown-up people do not
have this feeling, however much they eat, and he agreed. Dicky said
he did not care a straw what the loathsome disease was, as long as we
hurried up and settled on something. Then Alice said--

'It ought to be something very common, and only one thing. Not the pains
in the back and all the hundreds of things the people have in somebody's
syrup. What's the commonest thing of all?'

And at once we said, 'Colds.'

So that was settled.

Then we wrote a label to go on the bottle. When it was written it would
not go on the vinegar bottle that we had got, but we knew it would go
small when it was printed. It was like this:

                 BASTABLE'S
           CERTAIN CURE FOR COLDS
Coughs, Asthma, Shortness of Breath, and all infections of the Chest

     One dose gives immediate relief
   It will cure your cold in one bottle
     Especially the larger size at 3s. 6d.
       Order at once of the Makers
       To prevent disappointment

               Makers:

     D., O., R., A., N., and H. O. BASTABLE
             150, Lewisham Road, S.E.

    (A halfpenny for all bottles returned)

             ------------

Of course the next thing was for one of us to catch a cold and try what
cured it; we all wanted to be the one, but it was Dicky's idea, and he
said he was not going to be done out of it, so we let him. It was only
fair. He left off his undershirt that very day, and next morning he
stood in a draught in his nightgown for quite a long time. And we damped
his day-shirt with the nail-brush before he put it on. But all was vain.
They always tell you that these things will give you cold, but we found
it was not so.

So then we all went over to the Park, and Dicky went right into the
water with his boots on, and stood there as long as he could bear it,
for it was rather cold, and we stood and cheered him on. He walked home
in his wet clothes, which they say is a sure thing, but it was no go,
though his boots were quite spoiled. And three days after Noel began to
cough and sneeze.

So then Dicky said it was not fair.

'I can't help it,' Noel said. 'You should have caught it yourself, then
it wouldn't have come to me.'

And Alice said she had known all along Noel oughtn't to have stood about
on the bank cheering in the cold.

Noel had to go to bed, and then we began to make the medicines; we were
sorry he was out of it, but he had the fun of taking the things.

We made a great many medicines. Alice made herb tea. She got sage and
thyme and savory and marjoram and boiled them all up together with salt
and water, but she _would_ put parsley in too. Oswald is sure parsley is
not a herb. It is only put on the cold meat and you are not supposed to
eat it. It kills parrots to eat parsley, I believe. I expect it was the
parsley that disagreed so with Noel. The medicine did not seem to do the
cough any good.

Oswald got a pennyworth of alum, because it is so cheap, and some
turpentine which every one knows is good for colds, and a little sugar
and an aniseed ball. These were mixed in a bottle with water, but Eliza
threw it away and said it was nasty rubbish, and I hadn't any money to
get more things with.

Dora made him some gruel, and he said it did his chest good; but of
course that was no use, because you cannot put gruel in bottles and say
it is medicine. It would not be honest, and besides nobody would believe
you.

Dick mixed up lemon-juice and sugar and a little of the juice of the red
flannel that Noel's throat was done up in. It comes out beautifully
in hot water. Noel took this and he liked it. Noel's own idea was
liquorice-water, and we let him have it, but it is too plain and black
to sell in bottles at the proper price.

Noel liked H. O.'s medicine the best, which was silly of him, because it
was only peppermints melted in hot water, and a little cobalt to make
it look blue. It was all right, because H. O.'s paint-box is the French
kind, with Couleurs non Veneneuses on it. This means you may suck your
brushes if you want to, or even your paints if you are a very little
boy.

It was rather jolly while Noel had that cold. He had a fire in his
bedroom which opens out of Dicky's and Oswald's, and the girls used to
read aloud to Noel all day; they will not read aloud to you when you are
well. Father was away at Liverpool on business, and Albert's uncle was
at Hastings. We were rather glad of this, because we wished to give
all the medicines a fair trial, and grown-ups are but too fond of
interfering. As if we should have given him anything poisonous!

His cold went on--it was bad in his head, but it was not one of the kind
when he has to have poultices and can't sit up in bed. But when it had
been in his head nearly a week, Oswald happened to tumble over Alice on
the stairs. When we got up she was crying.

'Don't cry silly!' said Oswald; 'you know I didn't hurt you.' I was very
sorry if I had hurt her, but you ought not to sit on the stairs in the
dark and let other people tumble over you. You ought to remember how
beastly it is for them if they do hurt you.

'Oh, it's not that, Oswald,' Alice said. 'Don't be a pig! I am so
miserable. Do be kind to me.'

So Oswald thumped her on the back and told her to shut up.

'It's about Noel,' she said. 'I'm sure he's very ill; and playing about
with medicines is all very well, but I know he's ill, and Eliza won't
send for the doctor: she says it's only a cold. And I know the doctor's
bills are awful. I heard Father telling Aunt Emily so in the summer. But
he _is_ ill, and perhaps he'll die or something.'

Then she began to cry again. Oswald thumped her again, because he knows
how a good brother ought to behave, and said, 'Cheer up.' If we had been
in a book Oswald would have embraced his little sister tenderly, and
mingled his tears with hers.

Then Oswald said, 'Why not write to Father?'

And she cried more and said, 'I've lost the paper with the address. H.
O. had it to draw on the back of, and I can't find it now; I've looked
everywhere. I'll tell you what I'm going to do. No I won't. But I'm
going out. Don't tell the others. And I say, Oswald, do pretend I'm in
if Eliza asks. Promise.'

'Tell me what you're going to do,' I said. But she said 'No'; and there
was a good reason why not. So I said I wouldn't promise if it came to
that. Of course I meant to all right. But it did seem mean of her not to
tell me.

So Alice went out by the side door while Eliza was setting tea, and she
was a long time gone; she was not in to tea. When Eliza asked Oswald
where she was he said he did not know, but perhaps she was tidying
her corner drawer. Girls often do this, and it takes a long time. Noel
coughed a good bit after tea, and asked for Alice.

Oswald told him she was doing something and it was a secret. Oswald did
not tell any lies even to save his sister. When Alice came back she was
very quiet, but she whispered to Oswald that it was all right. When
it was rather late Eliza said she was going out to post a letter. This
always takes her an hour, because she _will_ go to the post-office
across the Heath instead of the pillar-box, because once a boy dropped
fusees in our pillar-box and burnt the letters. It was not any of us;
Eliza told us about it. And when there was a knock at the door a long
time after we thought it was Eliza come back, and that she had forgotten
the back-door key. We made H. O. go down to open the door, because it
is his place to run about: his legs are younger than ours. And we heard
boots on the stairs besides H. O.'s, and we listened spellbound till the
door opened, and it was Albert's uncle. He looked very tired.

'I am glad you've come,' Oswald said. 'Alice began to think Noel--'

Alice stopped me, and her face was very red, her nose was shiny too,
with having cried so much before tea.

She said, 'I only said I thought Noel ought to have the doctor. Don't
you think he ought?' She got hold of Albert's uncle and held on to him.

'Let's have a look at you, young man,' said Albert's uncle, and he sat
down on the edge of the bed. It is a rather shaky bed, the bar that
keeps it steady underneath got broken when we were playing burglars last
winter. It was our crowbar. He began to feel Noel's pulse, and went on
talking.

'It was revealed to the Arab physician as he made merry in his tents on
the wild plains of Hastings that the Presence had a cold in its head. So
he immediately seated himself on the magic carpet, and bade it bear him
hither, only pausing in the flight to purchase a few sweetmeats in the
bazaar.'

He pulled out a jolly lot of chocolate and some butterscotch, and grapes
for Noel. When we had all said thank you, he went on.

'The physician's are the words of wisdom: it's high time this kid was
asleep. I have spoken. Ye have my leave to depart.'

So we bunked, and Dora and Albert's uncle made Noel comfortable for the
night.

Then they came to the nursery which we had gone down to, and he sat down
in the Guy Fawkes chair and said, 'Now then.'

Alice said, 'You may tell them what I did. I daresay they'll all be in a
wax, but I don't care.'

'I think you were very wise,' said Albert's uncle, pulling her close to
him to sit on his knee. 'I am very glad you telegraphed.'

So then Oswald understood what Alice's secret was. She had gone out and
sent a telegram to Albert's uncle at Hastings. But Oswald thought she
might have told him. Afterwards she told me what she had put in the
telegram. It was, 'Come home. We have given Noel a cold, and I think we
are killing him.' With the address it came to tenpence-halfpenny.

Then Albert's uncle began to ask questions, and it all came out,
how Dicky had tried to catch the cold, but the cold had gone to Noel
instead, and about the medicines and all. Albert's uncle looked very
serious.

'Look here,' he said, 'You're old enough not to play the fool like this.
Health is the best thing you've got; you ought to know better than to
risk it. You might have killed your little brother with your precious
medicines. You've had a lucky escape, certainly. But poor Noel!'

'Oh, do you think he's going to die?' Alice asked that, and she was
crying again.

'No, no,' said Albert's uncle; 'but look here. Do you see how silly
you've been? And I thought you promised your Father--' And then he gave
us a long talking-to. He can make you feel most awfully small. At last
he stopped, and we said we were very sorry, and he said, 'You know I
promised to take you all to the pantomime?'

So we said, 'Yes,' and knew but too well that now he wasn't going to.
Then he went on--

'Well, I will take you if you like, or I will take Noel to the sea for a
week to cure his cold. Which is it to be?'

Of course he knew we should say, 'Take Noel' and we did; but Dicky told
me afterwards he thought it was hard on H. O.

Albert's uncle stayed till Eliza came in, and then he said good night in
a way that showed us that all was forgiven and forgotten.

And we went to bed. It must have been the middle of the night when
Oswald woke up suddenly, and there was Alice with her teeth chattering,
shaking him to wake him.

'Oh, Oswald!' she said, 'I am so unhappy. Suppose I should die in the
night!'

Oswald told her to go to bed and not gas. But she said, 'I must tell
you; I wish I'd told Albert's uncle. I'm a thief, and if I die to-night
I know where thieves go to.' So Oswald saw it was no good and he sat
up in bed and said--'Go ahead.' So Alice stood shivering and said--'I
hadn't enough money for the telegram, so I took the bad sixpence out of
the exchequer. And I paid for it with that and the fivepence I had. And
I wouldn't tell you, because if you'd stopped me doing it I couldn't
have borne it; and if you'd helped me you'd have been a thief too. Oh,
what shall I do?'

Oswald thought a minute, and then he said--

'You'd better have told me. But I think it will be all right if we pay
it back. Go to bed. Cross with you? No, stupid! Only another time you'd
better not keep secrets.'

So she kissed Oswald, and he let her, and she went back to bed.

The next day Albert's uncle took Noel away, before Oswald had time to
persuade Alice that we ought to tell him about the sixpence. Alice was
very unhappy, but not so much as in the night: you can be very miserable
in the night if you have done anything wrong and you happen to be awake.
I know this for a fact.

None of us had any money except Eliza, and she wouldn't give us any
unless we said what for; and of course we could not do that because of
the honour of the family. And Oswald was anxious to get the sixpence to
give to the telegraph people because he feared that the badness of that
sixpence might have been found out, and that the police might come for
Alice at any moment. I don't think I ever had such an unhappy day. Of
course we could have written to Albert's uncle, but it would have taken
a long time, and every moment of delay added to Alice's danger. We
thought and thought, but we couldn't think of any way to get that
sixpence. It seems a small sum, but you see Alice's liberty depended
on it. It was quite late in the afternoon when I met Mrs Leslie on the
Parade. She had a brown fur coat and a lot of yellow flowers in her
hands. She stopped to speak to me, and asked me how the Poet was. I told
her he had a cold, and I wondered whether she would lend me sixpence if
I asked her, but I could not make up my mind how to begin to say it. It
is a hard thing to say--much harder than you would think. She talked to
me for a bit, and then she suddenly got into a cab, and said--

'I'd no idea it was so late,' and told the man where to go. And just as
she started she shoved the yellow flowers through the window and said,
'For the sick poet, with my love,' and was driven off.

Gentle reader, I will not conceal from you what Oswald did. He knew all
about not disgracing the family, and he did not like doing what I am
going to say: and they were really Noel's flowers, only he could not
have sent them to Hastings, and Oswald knew he would say 'Yes' if Oswald
asked him. Oswald sacrificed his family pride because of his little
sister's danger. I do not say he was a noble boy--I just tell you what
he did, and you can decide for yourself about the nobleness.

He put on his oldest clothes--they're much older than any you would
think he had if you saw him when he was tidy--and he took those yellow
chrysanthemums and he walked with them to Greenwich Station and waited
for the trains bringing people from London. He sold those flowers in
penny bunches and got tenpence. Then he went to the telegraph office at
Lewisham, and said to the lady there:

'A little girl gave you a bad sixpence yesterday. Here are six good
pennies.'

The lady said she had not noticed it, and never mind, but Oswald knew
that 'Honesty is the best Policy', and he refused to take back the
pennies. So at last she said she should put them in the plate on Sunday.
She is a very nice lady. I like the way she does her hair.

Then Oswald went home to Alice and told her, and she hugged him, and
said he was a dear, good, kind boy, and he said 'Oh, it's all right.'

We bought peppermint bullseyes with the fourpence I had over, and the
others wanted to know where we got the money, but we would not tell.

Only afterwards when Noel came home we told him, because they were his
flowers, and he said it was quite right. He made some poetry about it. I
only remember one bit of it.

    The noble youth of high degree
    Consents to play a menial part,
    All for his sister Alice's sake,
    Who was so dear to his faithful heart.

But Oswald himself has never bragged about it. We got no treasure out of
this, unless you count the peppermint bullseyes.



CHAPTER 13. THE ROBBER AND THE BURGLAR

A day or two after Noel came back from Hastings there was snow; it was
jolly. And we cleared it off the path. A man to do it is sixpence at
least, and you should always save when you can. A penny saved is a penny
earned. And then we thought it would be nice to clear it off the top of
the portico, where it lies so thick, and the edges as if they had been
cut with a knife. And just as we had got out of the landing-window on
to the portico, the Water Rates came up the path with his book that he
tears the thing out of that says how much you have got to pay, and the
little ink-bottle hung on to his buttonhole in case you should pay him.
Father says the Water Rates is a sensible man, and knows it is always
well to be prepared for whatever happens, however unlikely. Alice said
afterwards that she rather liked the Water Rates, really, and Noel said
he had a face like a good vizier, or the man who rewards the honest boy
for restoring the purse, but we did not think about these things at
the time, and as the Water Rates came up the steps, we shovelled down
a great square slab of snow like an avalanche--and it fell right on
his head. Two of us thought of it at the same moment, so it was quite a
large avalanche. And when the Water Rates had shaken himself he rang the
bell. It was Saturday, and Father was at home. We know now that it is
very wrong and ungentlemanly to shovel snow off porticoes on to the
Water Rates, or any other person, and we hope he did not catch a cold,
and we are very sorry. We apologized to the Water Rates when Father told
us to. We were all sent to bed for it.

We all deserved the punishment, because the others would have shovelled
down snow just as we did if they'd thought of it--only they are not
so quick at thinking of things as we are. And even quite wrong things
sometimes lead to adventures; as every one knows who has ever read about
pirates or highwaymen.

Eliza hates us to be sent to bed early, because it means her having to
bring meals up, and it means lighting the fire in Noel's room ever so
much earlier than usual. He had to have a fire because he still had a
bit of a cold. But this particular day we got Eliza into a good temper
by giving her a horrid brooch with pretending amethysts in it, that an
aunt once gave to Alice, so Eliza brought up an extra scuttle of coals,
and when the greengrocer came with the potatoes (he is always late on
Saturdays) she got some chestnuts from him. So that when we heard Father
go out after his dinner, there was a jolly fire in Noel's room, and
we were able to go in and be Red Indians in blankets most comfortably.
Eliza had gone out; she says she gets things cheaper on Saturday
nights. She has a great friend, who sells fish at a shop, and he is
very generous, and lets her have herrings for less than half the natural
price.

So we were all alone in the house; Pincher was out with Eliza, and we
talked about robbers. And Dora thought it would be a dreadful trade, but
Dicky said--

'I think it would be very interesting. And you would only rob rich
people, and be very generous to the poor and needy, like Claude Duval.'
Dora said, 'It is wrong to be a robber.'

'Yes,' said Alice, 'you would never know a happy hour. Think of trying
to sleep with the stolen jewels under your bed, and remembering all the
quantities of policemen and detectives that there are in the world!'

'There are ways of being robbers that are not wrong,' said Noel; 'if you
can rob a robber it is a right act.'

'But you can't,' said Dora; 'he is too clever, and besides, it's wrong
anyway.'

'Yes you can, and it isn't; and murdering him with boiling oil is a
right act, too, so there!' said Noel. 'What about Ali Baba? Now then!'
And we felt it was a score for Noel.

'What would you do if there _was_ a robber?' said Alice.

H. O. said he would kill him with boiling oil; but Alice explained that
she meant a real robber--now--this minute--in the house.

Oswald and Dicky did not say; but Noel said he thought it would only be
fair to ask the robber quite politely and quietly to go away, and then
if he didn't you could deal with him.

Now what I am going to tell you is a very strange and wonderful thing,
and I hope you will be able to believe it. I should not, if a boy told
me, unless I knew him to be a man of honour, and perhaps not then unless
he gave his sacred word. But it is true, all the same, and it only shows
that the days of romance and daring deeds are not yet at an end.

Alice was just asking Noel _how_ he would deal with the robber who
wouldn't go if he was asked politely and quietly, when we heard a noise
downstairs--quite a plain noise, not the kind of noise you fancy you
hear. It was like somebody moving a chair. We held our breath and
listened and then came another noise, like some one poking a fire.
Now, you remember there was no one _to_ poke a fire or move a chair
downstairs, because Eliza and Father were both out. They could not have
come in without our hearing them, because the front door is as hard to
shut as the back one, and whichever you go in by you have to give a slam
that you can hear all down the street.

H. O. and Alice and Dora caught hold of each other's blankets and looked
at Dicky and Oswald, and every one was quite pale. And Noel whispered--

'It's ghosts, I know it is'--and then we listened again, but there was
no more noise. Presently Dora said in a whisper--

'Whatever shall we do? Oh, whatever shall we do--what _shall_ we do?'
And she kept on saying it till we had to tell her to shut up.

O reader, have you ever been playing Red Indians in blankets round a
bedroom fire in a house where you thought there was no one but you--and
then suddenly heard a noise like a chair, and a fire being poked,
downstairs? Unless you have you will not be able to imagine at all what
it feels like. It was not like in books; our hair did not stand on end
at all, and we never said 'Hist!' once, but our feet got very cold,
though we were in blankets by the fire, and the insides of Oswald's
hands got warm and wet, and his nose was cold like a dog's, and his ears
were burning hot.

The girls said afterwards that they shivered with terror, and their
teeth chattered, but we did not see or hear this at the time.

'Shall we open the window and call police?' said Dora; and then Oswald
suddenly thought of something, and he breathed more freely and he said--

'I _know_ it's not ghosts, and I don't believe it's robbers. I expect
it's a stray cat got in when the coals came this morning, and she's
been hiding in the cellar, and now she's moving about. Let's go down and
see.'

The girls wouldn't, of course; but I could see that they breathed more
freely too. But Dicky said, 'All right; I will if you will.'

H. O. said, 'Do you think it's _really_ a cat?' So we said he had better
stay with the girls. And of course after that we had to let him and
Alice both come. Dora said if we took Noel down with his cold, she would
scream 'Fire!' and 'Murder!' and she didn't mind if the whole street
heard.

So Noel agreed to be getting his clothes on, and the rest of us said we
would go down and look for the cat.

Now Oswald _said_ that about the cat, and it made it easier to go down,
but in his inside he did not feel at all sure that it might not be
robbers after all. Of course, we had often talked about robbers before,
but it is very different when you sit in a room and listen and listen
and listen; and Oswald felt somehow that it would be easier to go down
and see what it was, than to wait, and listen, and wait, and wait, and
listen, and wait, and then perhaps to hear _it_, whatever it was, come
creeping slowly up the stairs as softly as _it_ could with _its_ boots
off, and the stairs creaking, towards the room where we were with the
door open in case of Eliza coming back suddenly, and all dark on the
landings. And then it would have been just as bad, and it would have
lasted longer, and you would have known you were a coward besides. Dicky
says he felt all these same things. Many people would say we were young
heroes to go down as we did; so I have tried to explain, because no
young hero wishes to have more credit than he deserves.

The landing gas was turned down low--just a blue bead--and we four went
out very softly, wrapped in our blankets, and we stood on the top of the
stairs a good long time before we began to go down. And we listened and
listened till our ears buzzed.

And Oswald whispered to Dicky, and Dicky went into our room and fetched
the large toy pistol that is a foot long, and that has the trigger
broken, and I took it because I am the eldest; and I don't think either
of us thought it was the cat now. But Alice and H. O. did. Dicky got the
poker out of Noel's room, and told Dora it was to settle the cat with
when we caught her.

Then Oswald whispered, 'Let's play at burglars; Dicky and I are armed
to the teeth, we will go first. You keep a flight behind us, and be
a reinforcement if we are attacked. Or you can retreat and defend the
women and children in the fortress, if you'd rather.'

But they said they would be a reinforcement.

Oswald's teeth chattered a little when he spoke. It was not with
anything else except cold.

So Dicky and Oswald crept down, and when we got to the bottom of the
stairs, we saw Father's study door just ajar, and the crack of light.
And Oswald was so pleased to see the light, knowing that burglars prefer
the dark, or at any rate the dark lantern, that he felt really sure it
_was_ the cat after all, and then he thought it would be fun to make
the others upstairs think it was really a robber. So he cocked the
pistol--you can cock it, but it doesn't go off--and he said, 'Come on,
Dick!' and he rushed at the study door and burst into the room, crying,
'Surrender! you are discovered! Surrender, or I fire! Throw up your
hands!'

And, as he finished saying it, he saw before him, standing on the study
hearthrug, a Real Robber. There was no mistake about it. Oswald was
sure it was a robber, because it had a screwdriver in its hands, and was
standing near the cupboard door that H. O. broke the lock off; and there
were gimlets and screws and things on the floor. There is nothing in
that cupboard but old ledgers and magazines and the tool chest, but of
course, a robber could not know that beforehand.

When Oswald saw that there really was a robber, and that he was so
heavily armed with the screwdriver, he did not feel comfortable. But he
kept the pistol pointed at the robber, and--you will hardly believe it,
but it is true--the robber threw down the screwdriver clattering on the
other tools, and he _did_ throw up his hands, and said--

'I surrender; don't shoot me! How many of you are there?'

So Dicky said, 'You are outnumbered. Are you armed?'

And the robber said, 'No, not in the least.'

And Oswald said, still pointing the pistol, and feeling very strong and
brave and as if he was in a book, 'Turn out your pockets.'

The robber did: and while he turned them out, we looked at him. He was
of the middle height, and clad in a black frock-coat and grey trousers.
His boots were a little gone at the sides, and his shirt-cuffs were
a bit frayed, but otherwise he was of gentlemanly demeanour. He had a
thin, wrinkled face, with big, light eyes that sparkled, and then looked
soft very queerly, and a short beard. In his youth it must have been of
a fair golden colour, but now it was tinged with grey. Oswald was sorry
for him, especially when he saw that one of his pockets had a large hole
in it, and that he had nothing in his pockets but letters and string and
three boxes of matches, and a pipe and a handkerchief and a thin tobacco
pouch and two pennies. We made him put all the things on the table, and
then he said--

'Well, you've caught me; what are you going to do with me? Police?'

Alice and H. O. had come down to be reinforcements, when they heard a
shout, and when Alice saw that it was a Real Robber, and that he had
surrendered, she clapped her hands and said, 'Bravo, boys!' and so did
H. O. And now she said, 'If he gives his word of honour not to escape,
I shouldn't call the police: it seems a pity. Wait till Father comes
home.'

The robber agreed to this, and gave his word of honour, and asked if he
might put on a pipe, and we said 'Yes,' and he sat in Father's armchair
and warmed his boots, which steamed, and I sent H. O. and Alice to
put on some clothes and tell the others, and bring down Dicky's and my
knickerbockers, and the rest of the chestnuts.

And they all came, and we sat round the fire, and it was jolly. The
robber was very friendly, and talked to us a great deal.

'I wasn't always in this low way of business,' he said, when Noel said
something about the things he had turned out of his pockets. 'It's
a great come-down to a man like me. But, if I must be caught, it's
something to be caught by brave young heroes like you. My stars! How you
did bolt into the room,--"Surrender, and up with your hands!" You might
have been born and bred to the thief-catching.'

Oswald is sorry if it was mean, but he could not own up just then that
he did not think there was any one in the study when he did that brave
if rash act. He has told since.

'And what made you think there was any one in the house?' the robber
asked, when he had thrown his head back, and laughed for quite half a
minute. So we told him. And he applauded our valour, and Alice and H.
O. explained that they would have said 'Surrender,' too, only they were
reinforcements. The robber ate some of the chestnuts--and we sat and
wondered when Father would come home, and what he would say to us for
our intrepid conduct. And the robber told us of all the things he had
done before he began to break into houses. Dicky picked up the tools
from the floor, and suddenly he said--

'Why, this is Father's screwdriver and his gimlets, and all! Well, I do
call it jolly cheek to pick a man's locks with his own tools!'

'True, true,' said the robber. 'It is cheek, of the jolliest! But you
see I've come down in the world. I was a highway robber once, but
horses are so expensive to hire--five shillings an hour, you know--and
I couldn't afford to keep them. The highwayman business isn't what it
was.'

'What about a bike?' said H. O.

But the robber thought cycles were low--and besides you couldn't go
across country with them when occasion arose, as you could with a trusty
steed. And he talked of highwaymen as if he knew just how we liked
hearing it.

Then he told us how he had been a pirate captain--and how he had sailed
over waves mountains high, and gained rich prizes--and how he _did_
begin to think that here he had found a profession to his mind.

'I don't say there are no ups and downs in it,' he said, 'especially
in stormy weather. But what a trade! And a sword at your side, and the
Jolly Roger flying at the peak, and a prize in sight. And all the black
mouths of your guns pointed at the laden trader--and the wind in your
favour, and your trusty crew ready to live and die for you! Oh--but it's
a grand life!'

I did feel so sorry for him. He used such nice words, and he had a
gentleman's voice.

'I'm sure you weren't brought up to be a pirate,' said Dora. She had
dressed even to her collar--and made Noel do it too--but the rest of us
were in blankets with just a few odd things put on anyhow underneath.

The robber frowned and sighed.

'No,' he said, 'I was brought up to the law. I was at Balliol, bless
your hearts, and that's true anyway.' He sighed again, and looked hard
at the fire.

'That was my Father's college,' H. O. was beginning, but Dicky
said--'Why did you leave off being a pirate?'

'A pirate?' he said, as if he had not been thinking of such things.

'Oh, yes; why I gave it up because--because I could not get over the
dreadful sea-sickness.'

'Nelson was sea-sick,' said Oswald.

'Ah,' said the robber; 'but I hadn't his luck or his pluck, or
something. He stuck to it and won Trafalgar, didn't he? "Kiss me,
Hardy"--and all that, eh? _I_ couldn't stick to it--I had to resign. And
nobody kissed _me_.'

I saw by his understanding about Nelson that he was really a man who had
been to a good school as well as to Balliol.

Then we asked him, 'And what did you do then?'

And Alice asked if he was ever a coiner, and we told him how we had
thought we'd caught the desperate gang next door, and he was very much
interested and said he was glad he had never taken to coining.

'Besides, the coins are so ugly nowadays,' he said, 'no one could really
find any pleasure in making them. And it's a hole-and-corner business
at the best, isn't it?--and it must be a very thirsty one--with the hot
metal and furnaces and things.'

And again he looked at the fire.

Oswald forgot for a minute that the interesting stranger was a robber,
and asked him if he wouldn't have a drink. Oswald has heard Father do
this to his friends, so he knows it is the right thing. The robber said
he didn't mind if he did. And that is right, too.

And Dora went and got a bottle of Father's ale--the Light Sparkling
Family--and a glass, and we gave it to the robber. Dora said she would
be responsible.

Then when he had had a drink he told us about bandits, but he said it
was so bad in wet weather. Bandits' caves were hardly ever properly
weathertight. And bush-ranging was the same.

'As a matter of fact,' he said, 'I was bush-ranging this afternoon,
among the furze-bushes on the Heath, but I had no luck. I stopped the
Lord Mayor in his gilt coach, with all his footmen in plush and gold
lace, smart as cockatoos. But it was no go. The Lord Mayor hadn't a
stiver in his pockets. One of the footmen had six new pennies: the Lord
Mayor always pays his servants' wages in new pennies. I spent fourpence
of that in bread and cheese, that on the table's the tuppence. Ah, it's
a poor trade!' And then he filled his pipe again.

We had turned out the gas, so that Father should have a jolly good
surprise when he did come home, and we sat and talked as pleasant as
could be. I never liked a new man better than I liked that robber. And I
felt so sorry for him. He told us he had been a war-correspondent and
an editor, in happier days, as well as a horse-stealer and a colonel of
dragoons.

And quite suddenly, just as we were telling him about Lord Tottenham and
our being highwaymen ourselves, he put up his hand and said 'Shish!' and
we were quiet and listened.

There was a scrape, scrape, scraping noise; it came from downstairs.

'They're filing something,' whispered the robber, 'here--shut up, give
me that pistol, and the poker. There is a burglar now, and no mistake.'

'It's only a toy one and it won't go off,' I said, 'but you can cock
it.'

Then we heard a snap. 'There goes the window bar,' said the robber
softly. 'Jove! what an adventure! You kids stay here, I'll tackle it.'

But Dicky and I said we should come. So he let us go as far as the
bottom of the kitchen stairs, and we took the tongs and shovel with us.
There was a light in the kitchen; a very little light. It is curious we
never thought, any of us, that this might be a plant of our robber's to
get away. We never thought of doubting his word of honour. And we were
right.

That noble robber dashed the kitchen door open, and rushed in with the
big toy pistol in one hand and the poker in the other, shouting out just
like Oswald had done--

'Surrender! You are discovered! Surrender, or I'll fire! Throw up your
hands!' And Dicky and I rattled the tongs and shovel so that he might
know there were more of us, all bristling with weapons.

And we heard a husky voice in the kitchen saying--

'All right, governor! Stow that scent sprinkler. I'll give in. Blowed if
I ain't pretty well sick of the job, anyway.'

Then we went in. Our robber was standing in the grandest manner with his
legs very wide apart, and the pistol pointing at the cowering burglar.
The burglar was a large man who did not mean to have a beard, I think,
but he had got some of one, and a red comforter, and a fur cap, and his
face was red and his voice was thick. How different from our own robber!
The burglar had a dark lantern, and he was standing by the plate-basket.
When we had lit the gas we all thought he was very like what a burglar
ought to be.

He did not look as if he could ever have been a pirate or a highwayman,
or anything really dashing or noble, and he scowled and shuffled his
feet and said: 'Well, go on: why don't yer fetch the pleece?'

'Upon my word, I don't know,' said our robber, rubbing his chin.
'Oswald, why don't we fetch the police?'

It is not every robber that I would stand Christian names from, I can
tell you but just then I didn't think of that. I just said--'Do you mean
I'm to fetch one?'

Our robber looked at the burglar and said nothing.

Then the burglar began to speak very fast, and to look different ways
with his hard, shiny little eyes.

'Lookee 'ere, governor,' he said, 'I was stony broke, so help me, I
was. And blessed if I've nicked a haporth of your little lot. You know
yourself there ain't much to tempt a bloke,' he shook the plate-basket
as if he was angry with it, and the yellowy spoons and forks rattled. 'I
was just a-looking through this 'ere Bank-ollerday show, when you come.
Let me off, sir. Come now, I've got kids of my own at home, strike me
if I ain't--same as yours--I've got a nipper just about 'is size, and
what'll come of them if I'm lagged? I ain't been in it long, sir, and I
ain't 'andy at it.'

'No,' said our robber; 'you certainly are not.' Alice and the others
had come down by now to see what was happening. Alice told me afterwards
they thought it really was the cat this time.

'No, I ain't 'andy, as you say, sir, and if you let me off this once
I'll chuck the whole blooming bizz; rake my civvy, I will. Don't be hard
on a cove, mister; think of the missis and the kids. I've got one just
the cut of little missy there bless 'er pretty 'eart.'

'Your family certainly fits your circumstances very nicely,' said our
robber. Then Alice said--

'Oh, do let him go! If he's got a little girl like me, whatever will she
do? Suppose it was Father!'

'I don't think he's got a little girl like you, my dear,' said our
robber, 'and I think he'll be safer under lock and key.'

'You ask yer Father to let me go, miss,' said the burglar; ''e won't
'ave the 'art to refuse you.'

'If I do,' said Alice, 'will you promise never to come back?'

'Not me, miss,' the burglar said very earnestly, and he looked at the
plate-basket again, as if that alone would be enough to keep him away,
our robber said afterwards.

'And will you be good and not rob any more?' said Alice.

'I'll turn over a noo leaf, miss, so help me.'

Then Alice said--'Oh, do let him go! I'm sure he'll be good.'

But our robber said no, it wouldn't be right; we must wait till Father
came home. Then H. O. said, very suddenly and plainly:

'I don't think it's at all fair, when you're a robber yourself.'

The minute he'd said it the burglar said, 'Kidded, by gum!'--and then
our robber made a step towards him to catch hold of him, and before you
had time to think 'Hullo!' the burglar knocked the pistol up with one
hand and knocked our robber down with the other, and was off out of
the window like a shot, though Oswald and Dicky did try to stop him by
holding on to his legs.

And that burglar had the cheek to put his head in at the window and say,
'I'll give yer love to the kids and the missis'--and he was off like
winking, and there were Alice and Dora trying to pick up our robber, and
asking him whether he was hurt, and where. He wasn't hurt at all, except
a lump at the back of his head. And he got up, and we dusted the kitchen
floor off him. Eliza is a dirty girl.

Then he said, 'Let's put up the shutters. It never rains but it pours.
Now you've had two burglars I daresay you'll have twenty.' So we put up
the shutters, which Eliza has strict orders to do before she goes out,
only she never does, and we went back to Father's study, and the robber
said, 'What a night we are having!' and put his boots back in the fender
to go on steaming, and then we all talked at once. It was the most
wonderful adventure we ever had, though it wasn't treasure-seeking--at
least not ours. I suppose it was the burglar's treasure-seeking, but
he didn't get much--and our robber said he didn't believe a word about
those kids that were so like Alice and me.

And then there was the click of the gate, and we said, 'Here's Father,'
and the robber said, 'And now for the police.'

Then we all jumped up. We did like him so much, and it seemed so unfair
that he should be sent to prison, and the horrid, lumping big burglar
not.

And Alice said, 'Oh, _no_--run! Dicky will let you out at the back door.
Oh, do go, go _now_.'

And we all said, 'Yes, _go_,' and pulled him towards the door, and gave
him his hat and stick and the things out of his pockets.

But Father's latchkey was in the door, and it was too late.

Father came in quickly, purring with the cold, and began to say, 'It's
all right, Foulkes, I've got--' And then he stopped short and stared
at us. Then he said, in the voice we all hate, 'Children, what is the
meaning of all this?' And for a minute nobody spoke.

Then my Father said, 'Foulkes, I must really apologize for these very
naughty--' And then our robber rubbed his hands and laughed, and cried
out:

'You're mistaken, my dear sir, I'm not Foulkes; I'm a robber, captured
by these young people in the most gallant manner. "Hands up, surrender,
or I fire," and all the rest of it. My word, Bastable, but you've got
some kids worth having! I wish my Denny had their pluck.'

Then we began to understand, and it was like being knocked down, it was
so sudden. And our robber told us he wasn't a robber after all. He was
only an old college friend of my Father's, and he had come after dinner,
when Father was just trying to mend the lock H. O. had broken, to ask
Father to get him a letter to a doctor about his little boy Denny, who
was ill. And Father had gone over the Heath to Vanbrugh Park to see some
rich people he knows and get the letter. And he had left Mr Foulkes to
wait till he came back, because it was important to know at once whether
Father could get the letter, and if he couldn't Mr Foulkes would have
had to try some one else directly.

We were dumb with amazement.

Our robber told my Father about the other burglar, and said he was
sorry he'd let him escape, but my Father said, 'Oh, it's all right: poor
beggar; if he really had kids at home: you never can tell--forgive us
our debts, don't you know; but tell me about the first business. It must
have been moderately entertaining.'

Then our robber told my Father how I had rushed into the room with a
pistol, crying out... but you know all about that. And he laid it on
so thick and fat about plucky young-uns, and chips of old blocks, and
things like that, that I felt I was purple with shame, even under the
blanket. So I swallowed that thing that tries to prevent you speaking
when you ought to, and I said, 'Look here, Father, I didn't really think
there was any one in the study. We thought it was a cat at first, and
then I thought there was no one there, and I was just larking. And when
I said surrender and all that, it was just the game, don't you know?'

Then our robber said, 'Yes, old chap; but when you found there really
_was_ someone there, you dropped the pistol and bunked, didn't you, eh?'

And I said, 'No; I thought, "Hullo! here's a robber! Well, it's all up,
I suppose, but I may as well hold on and see what happens."'

And I was glad I'd owned up, for Father slapped me on the back, and
said I was a young brick, and our robber said I was no funk anyway, and
though I got very hot under the blanket I liked it, and I explained that
the others would have done the same if they had thought of it.

Then Father got up some more beer, and laughed about Dora's
responsibility, and he got out a box of figs he had bought for us, only
he hadn't given it to us because of the Water Rates, and Eliza came in
and brought up the bread and cheese, and what there was left of the
neck of mutton--cold wreck of mutton, Father called it--and we had a
feast--like a picnic--all sitting anywhere, and eating with our fingers.
It was prime. We sat up till past twelve o'clock, and I never felt so
pleased to think I was not born a girl. It was hard on the others; they
would have done just the same if they'd thought of it. But it does make
you feel jolly when your pater says you're a young brick!

When Mr Foulkes was going, he said to Alice, 'Good-bye, Hardy.'

And Alice understood, of course, and kissed him as hard as she could.

And she said, 'I wanted to, when you said no one kissed you when you
left off being a pirate.' And he said, 'I know you did, my dear.' And
Dora kissed him too, and said, 'I suppose none of these tales were
true?'

And our robber just said, 'I tried to play the part properly, my dear.'

And he jolly well did play it, and no mistake. We have often seen him
since, and his boy Denny, and his girl Daisy, but that comes in another
story.

And if any of you kids who read this ever had two such adventures in one
night you can just write and tell me. That's all.



CHAPTER 14. THE DIVINING-ROD

You have no idea how uncomfortable the house was on the day when we
sought for gold with the divining-rod. It was like a spring-cleaning in
the winter-time. All the carpets were up, because Father had told Eliza
to make the place decent as there was a gentleman coming to dinner the
next day. So she got in a charwoman, and they slopped water about, and
left brooms and brushes on the stairs for people to tumble over. H. O.
got a big bump on his head in that way, and when he said it was too bad,
Eliza said he should keep in the nursery then, and not be where he'd no
business. We bandaged his head with a towel, and then he stopped crying
and played at being England's wounded hero dying in the cockpit, while
every man was doing his duty, as the hero had told them to, and Alice
was Hardy, and I was the doctor, and the others were the crew. Playing
at Hardy made us think of our own dear robber, and we wished he was
there, and wondered if we should ever see him any more.

We were rather astonished at Father's having anyone to dinner, because
now he never seems to think of anything but business. Before Mother died
people often came to dinner, and Father's business did not take up so
much of his time and was not the bother it is now. And we used to see
who could go furthest down in our nightgowns and get nice things to
eat, without being seen, out of the dishes as they came out of the
dining-room. Eliza can't cook very nice things. She told Father she was
a good plain cook, but he says it was a fancy portrait. We stayed in the
nursery till the charwoman came in and told us to be off--she was going
to make one job of it, and have our carpet up as well as all the
others, now the man was here to beat them. It came up, and it was very
dusty--and under it we found my threepenny-bit that I lost ages ago,
which shows what Eliza is. H. O. had got tired of being the wounded
hero, and Dicky was so tired of doing nothing that Dora said she knew
he'd begin to tease Noel in a minute; then of course Dicky said he
wasn't going to tease anybody--he was going out to the Heath. He said
he'd heard that nagging women drove a man from his home, and now he
found it was quite true. Oswald always tries to be a peacemaker, so he
told Dicky to shut up and not make an ass of himself. And Alice said,
'Well, Dora began'--And Dora tossed her chin up and said it wasn't any
business of Oswald's any way, and no one asked Alice's opinion. So we
all felt very uncomfortable till Noel said, 'Don't let's quarrel about
nothing. You know let dogs delight--and I made up another piece while
you were talking--

    Quarrelling is an evil thing,
    It fills with gall life's cup;
    For when once you begin
    It takes such a long time to make it up.'

We all laughed then and stopped jawing at each other. Noel is very funny
with his poetry. But that piece happened to come out quite true. You
begin to quarrel and then you can't stop; often, long before the others
are ready to cry and make it up, I see how silly it is, and I want to
laugh; but it doesn't do to say so--for it only makes the others crosser
than they were before. I wonder why that is?

Alice said Noel ought to be poet laureate, and she actually went out
in the cold and got some laurel leaves--the spotted kind--out of
the garden, and Dora made a crown and we put it on him. He was quite
pleased; but the leaves made a mess, and Eliza said, 'Don't.' I believe
that's a word grown-ups use more than any other. Then suddenly Alice
thought of that old idea of hers for finding treasure, and she said--'Do
let's try the divining-rod.'

So Oswald said, 'Fair priestess, we do greatly desire to find gold
beneath our land, therefore we pray thee practise with the divining-rod,
and tell us where we can find it.'

'Do ye desire to fashion of it helms and hauberks?' said Alice.

'Yes,' said Noel; 'and chains and ouches.'

'I bet you don't know what an "ouch" is,' said Dicky.

'Yes I do, so there!' said Noel. 'It's a carcanet. I looked it out in
the dicker, now then!' We asked him what a carcanet was, but he wouldn't
say.

'And we want to make fair goblets of the gold,' said Oswald.

'Yes, to drink coconut milk out of,' said H. O.

'And we desire to build fair palaces of it,' said Dicky.

'And to buy things,' said Dora; 'a great many things. New Sunday frocks
and hats and kid gloves and--'

She would have gone on for ever so long only we reminded her that we
hadn't found the gold yet.

By this Alice had put on the nursery tablecloth, which is green, and
tied the old blue and yellow antimacassar over her head, and she said--

'If your intentions are correct, fear nothing and follow me.'

And she went down into the hall. We all followed chanting 'Heroes.' It
is a gloomy thing the girls learnt at the High School, and we always use
it when we want a priestly chant.

Alice stopped short by the hat-stand, and held up her hands as well as
she could for the tablecloth, and said--

'Now, great altar of the golden idol, yield me the divining-rod that I
may use it for the good of the suffering people.'

The umbrella-stand was the altar of the golden idol, and it yielded her
the old school umbrella. She carried it between her palms.

'Now,' she said, 'I shall sing the magic chant. You mustn't say
anything, but just follow wherever I go--like follow my leader, you
know--and when there is gold underneath the magic rod will twist in the
hand of the priestess like a live thing that seeks to be free. Then you
will dig, and the golden treasure will be revealed. H. O., if you make
that clatter with your boots they'll come and tell us not to. Now come
on all of you.'

So she went upstairs and down and into every room. We followed her
on tiptoe, and Alice sang as she went. What she sang is not out of a
book--Noel made it up while she was dressing up for the priestess.

    Ashen rod cold
    That here I hold,
    Teach me where to find the gold.

When we came to where Eliza was, she said, 'Get along with you'; but
Dora said it was only a game, and we wouldn't touch anything, and our
boots were quite clean, and Eliza might as well let us. So she did.

It was all right for the priestess, but it was a little dull for the
rest of us, because she wouldn't let us sing, too; so we said we'd had
enough of it, and if she couldn't find the gold we'd leave off and play
something else. The priestess said, 'All right, wait a minute,' and went
on singing. Then we all followed her back into the nursery, where the
carpet was up and the boards smelt of soft soap. Then she said, 'It
moves, it moves! Once more the choral hymn!' So we sang 'Heroes' again,
and in the middle the umbrella dropped from her hands.

'The magic rod has spoken,' said Alice; 'dig here, and that with courage
and despatch.' We didn't quite see how to dig, but we all began to
scratch on the floor with our hands, but the priestess said, 'Don't
be so silly! It's the place where they come to do the gas. The board's
loose. Dig an you value your lives, for ere sundown the dragon who
guards this spoil will return in his fiery fury and make you his
unresisting prey.'

So we dug--that is, we got the loose board up. And Alice threw up her
arms and cried--

'See the rich treasure--the gold in thick layers, with silver and
diamonds stuck in it!'

'Like currants in cake,' said H. O.

'It's a lovely treasure,' said Dicky yawning. 'Let's come back and carry
it away another day.'

But Alice was kneeling by the hole.

'Let me feast my eyes on the golden splendour,' she said, 'hidden these
long centuries from the human eye. Behold how the magic rod has led
us to treasures more--Oswald, don't push so!--more bright than ever
monarch--I say, there _is_ something down there, really. I saw it
shine!'

We thought she was kidding, but when she began to try to get into the
hole, which was much too small, we saw she meant it, so I said, 'Let's
have a squint,' and I looked, but I couldn't see anything, even when I
lay down on my stomach. The others lay down on their stomachs too and
tried to see, all but Noel, who stood and looked at us and said we were
the great serpents come down to drink at the magic pool. He wanted to be
the knight and slay the great serpents with his good sword--he even drew
the umbrella ready--but Alice said, 'All right, we will in a minute. But
now--I'm sure I saw it; do get a match, Noel, there's a dear.'

'What did you see?' asked Noel, beginning to go for the matches very
slowly.

'Something bright, away in the corner under the board against the beam.'

'Perhaps it was a rat's eye,' Noel said, 'or a snake's,' and we did
not put our heads quite so close to the hole till he came back with the
matches.

Then I struck a match, and Alice cried, 'There it is!' And there it was,
and it was a half-sovereign, partly dusty and partly bright. We think
perhaps a mouse, disturbed by the carpets being taken up, may have
brushed the dust of years from part of the half-sovereign with his tail.
We can't imagine how it came there, only Dora thinks she remembers once
when H. O. was very little Mother gave him some money to hold, and he
dropped it, and it rolled all over the floor. So we think perhaps this
was part of it. We were very glad. H. O. wanted to go out at once and
buy a mask he had seen for fourpence. It had been a shilling mask, but
now it was going very cheap because Guy Fawkes' Day was over, and it was
a little cracked at the top. But Dora said, 'I don't know that it's our
money. Let's wait and ask Father.'

But H. O. did not care about waiting, and I felt for him. Dora is rather
like grown-ups in that way; she does not seem to understand that when
you want a thing you do want it, and that you don't wish to wait, even a
minute.

So we went and asked Albert-next-door's uncle. He was pegging away at
one of the rotten novels he has to write to make his living, but he said
we weren't interrupting him at all.

'My hero's folly has involved him in a difficulty,' he said. 'It is his
own fault. I will leave him to meditate on the incredible fatuity--the
hare-brained recklessness--which have brought him to this pass. It will
be a lesson to him. I, meantime, will give myself unreservedly to the
pleasures of your conversation.'

That's one thing I like Albert's uncle for. He always talks like a book,
and yet you can always understand what he means. I think he is more like
us, inside of his mind, than most grown-up people are. He can pretend
beautifully. I never met anyone else so good at it, except our robber,
and we began it, with him. But it was Albert's uncle who first taught
us how to make people talk like books when you're playing things, and he
made us learn to tell a story straight from the beginning, not starting
in the middle like most people do. So now Oswald remembered what he had
been told, as he generally does, and began at the beginning, but when he
came to where Alice said she was the priestess, Albert's uncle said--

'Let the priestess herself set forth the tale in fitting speech.'

So Alice said, 'O high priest of the great idol, the humblest of thy
slaves took the school umbrella for a divining-rod, and sang the song of
inver--what's-it's-name?'

'Invocation perhaps?' said Albert's uncle. 'Yes; and then I went about
and about and the others got tired, so the divining-rod fell on a
certain spot, and I said, "Dig", and we dug--it was where the loose
board is for the gas men--and then there really and truly was a
half-sovereign lying under the boards, and here it is.'

Albert's uncle took it and looked at it.

'The great high priest will bite it to see if it's good,' he said, and
he did. 'I congratulate you,' he went on; 'you are indeed among those
favoured by the Immortals. First you find half-crowns in the garden, and
now this. The high priest advises you to tell your Father, and ask if
you may keep it. My hero has become penitent, but impatient. I must pull
him out of this scrape. Ye have my leave to depart.'

Of course we know from Kipling that that means, 'You'd better bunk, and
be sharp about it,' so we came away. I do like Albert's uncle.

I shall be like that when I'm a man. He gave us our Jungle books, and he
is awfully clever, though he does have to write grown-up tales.

We told Father about it that night. He was very kind. He said we
might certainly have the half-sovereign, and he hoped we should enjoy
ourselves with our treasure-trove.

Then he said, 'Your dear Mother's Indian Uncle is coming to dinner here
to-morrow night. So will you not drag the furniture about overhead,
please, more than you're absolutely obliged; and H. O. might wear
slippers or something. I can always distinguish the note of H. O.'s
boots.'

We said we would be very quiet, and Father went on--

'This Indian Uncle is not used to children, and he is coming to talk
business with me. It is really important that he should be quiet. Do you
think, Dora, that perhaps bed at six for H. O. and Noel--'

But H. O. said, 'Father, I really and truly won't make a noise. I'll
stand on my head all the evening sooner than disturb the Indian Uncle
with my boots.'

And Alice said Noel never made a row anyhow. So Father laughed and
said, 'All right.' And he said we might do as we liked with the
half-sovereign. 'Only for goodness' sake don't try to go in for business
with it,' he said. 'It's always a mistake to go into business with an
insufficient capital.'

We talked it over all that evening, and we decided that as we were not
to go into business with our half-sovereign it was no use not spending
it at once, and so we might as well have a right royal feast. The next
day we went out and bought the things. We got figs, and almonds and
raisins, and a real raw rabbit, and Eliza promised to cook it for us
if we would wait till tomorrow, because of the Indian Uncle coming to
dinner. She was very busy cooking nice things for him to eat. We got the
rabbit because we are so tired of beef and mutton, and Father hasn't
a bill at the poultry shop. And we got some flowers to go on the
dinner-table for Father's party. And we got hardbake and raspberry noyau
and peppermint rock and oranges and a coconut, with other nice things.
We put it all in the top long drawer. It is H. O.'s play drawer, and we
made him turn his things out and put them in Father's old portmanteau.
H. O. is getting old enough now to learn to be unselfish, and besides,
his drawer wanted tidying very badly. Then we all vowed by the honour of
the ancient House of Bastable that we would not touch any of the
feast till Dora gave the word next day. And we gave H. O. some of the
hardbake, to make it easier for him to keep his vow. The next day was
the most rememorable day in all our lives, but we didn't know that then.
But that is another story. I think that is such a useful way to know
when you can't think how to end up a chapter. I learnt it from another
writer named Kipling. I've mentioned him before, I believe, but he
deserves it!



CHAPTER 15. 'LO, THE POOR INDIAN!'

It was all very well for Father to ask us not to make a row because the
Indian Uncle was coming to talk business, but my young brother's boots
are not the only things that make a noise. We took his boots away and
made him wear Dora's bath slippers, which are soft and woolly, and
hardly any soles to them; and of course we wanted to see the Uncle,
so we looked over the banisters when he came, and we were as quiet
as mice--but when Eliza had let him in she went straight down to the
kitchen and made the most awful row you ever heard, it sounded like the
Day of judgement, or all the saucepans and crockery in the house being
kicked about the floor, but she told me afterwards it was only the
tea-tray and one or two cups and saucers, that she had knocked over in
her flurry. We heard the Uncle say, 'God bless my soul!' and then
he went into Father's study and the door was shut--we didn't see him
properly at all that time.

I don't believe the dinner was very nice. Something got burned I'm
sure--for we smelt it. It was an extra smell, besides the mutton.

I know that got burned. Eliza wouldn't have any of us in the kitchen
except Dora--till dinner was over. Then we got what was left of the
dessert, and had it on the stairs--just round the corner where they
can't see you from the hall, unless the first landing gas is lighted.
Suddenly the study door opened and the Uncle came out and went and felt
in his greatcoat pocket. It was his cigar-case he wanted. We saw that
afterwards. We got a much better view of him then. He didn't look like
an Indian but just like a kind of brown, big Englishman, and of course
he didn't see us, but we heard him mutter to himself--

'Shocking bad dinner! Eh!--what?'

When he went back to the study he didn't shut the door properly. That
door has always been a little tiresome since the day we took the lock
off to get out the pencil sharpener H. O. had shoved into the keyhole.
We didn't listen--really and truly--but the Indian Uncle has a very big
voice, and Father was not going to be beaten by a poor Indian in talking
or anything else--so he spoke up too, like a man, and I heard him say it
was a very good business, and only wanted a little capital--and he said
it as if it was an imposition he had learned, and he hated having to
say it. The Uncle said, 'Pooh, pooh!' to that, and then he said he
was afraid that what that same business wanted was not capital but
management. Then I heard my Father say, 'It is not a pleasant subject:
I am sorry I introduced it. Suppose we change it, sir. Let me fill your
glass.' Then the poor Indian said something about vintage--and that
a poor, broken-down man like he was couldn't be too careful. And then
Father said, 'Well, whisky then,' and afterwards they talked about
Native Races and Imperial something or other and it got very dull.

So then Oswald remembered that you must not hear what people do not
intend you to hear--even if you are not listening and he said, 'We ought
not to stay here any longer. Perhaps they would not like us to hear--'

Alice said, 'Oh, do you think it could possibly matter?' and went and
shut the study door softly but quite tight. So it was no use staying
there any longer, and we went to the nursery.

Then Noel said, 'Now I understand. Of course my Father is making a
banquet for the Indian, because he is a poor, broken-down man. We might
have known that from "Lo, the poor Indian!" you know.'

We all agreed with him, and we were glad to have the thing explained,
because we had not understood before what Father wanted to have people
to dinner for--and not let us come in.

'Poor people are very proud,' said Alice, 'and I expect Father thought
the Indian would be ashamed, if all of us children knew how poor he
was.'

Then Dora said, 'Poverty is no disgrace. We should honour honest
Poverty.'

And we all agreed that that was so.

'I wish his dinner had not been so nasty,' Dora said, while Oswald put
lumps of coal on the fire with his fingers, so as not to make a noise.
He is a very thoughtful boy, and he did not wipe his fingers on his
trouser leg as perhaps Noel or H. O. would have done, but he just rubbed
them on Dora's handkerchief while she was talking.

'I am afraid the dinner was horrid.' Dora went on. 'The table looked
very nice with the flowers we got. I set it myself, and Eliza made me
borrow the silver spoons and forks from Albert-next-door's Mother.'

'I hope the poor Indian is honest,' said Dicky gloomily, 'when you are a
poor, broken-down man silver spoons must be a great temptation.'

Oswald told him not to talk such tommy-rot because the Indian was a
relation, so of course he couldn't do anything dishonourable. And Dora
said it was all right any way, because she had washed up the spoons and
forks herself and counted them, and they were all there, and she had
put them into their wash-leather bag, and taken them back to
Albert-next-door's Mother.

'And the brussels sprouts were all wet and swimmy,' she went on, 'and
the potatoes looked grey--and there were bits of black in the gravy--and
the mutton was bluey-red and soft in the middle. I saw it when it came
out. The apple-pie looked very nice--but it wasn't quite done in the
apply part. The other thing that was burnt--you must have smelt it, was
the soup.'

'It is a pity,' said Oswald; 'I don't suppose he gets a good dinner
every day.'

'No more do we,' said H. O., 'but we shall to-morrow.'

I thought of all the things we had bought with our half-sovereign--the
rabbit and the sweets and the almonds and raisins and figs and the
coconut: and I thought of the nasty mutton and things, and while I was
thinking about it all Alice said--

'Let's ask the poor Indian to come to dinner with _us_ to-morrow.' I
should have said it myself if she had given me time.

We got the little ones to go to bed by promising to put a note on their
dressing-table saying what had happened, so that they might know the
first thing in the morning, or in the middle of the night if they
happened to wake up, and then we elders arranged everything.

I waited by the back door, and when the Uncle was beginning to go Dicky
was to drop a marble down between the banisters for a signal, so that I
could run round and meet the Uncle as he came out.

This seems like deceit, but if you are a thoughtful and considerate boy
you will understand that we could not go down and say to the Uncle in
the hall under Father's eye, 'Father has given you a beastly, nasty
dinner, but if you will come to dinner with us tomorrow, we will show
you our idea of good things to eat.' You will see, if you think it over,
that this would not have been at all polite to Father.

So when the Uncle left, Father saw him to the door and let him out, and
then went back to the study, looking very sad, Dora says.

As the poor Indian came down our steps he saw me there at the gate.

I did not mind his being poor, and I said, 'Good evening, Uncle,' just
as politely as though he had been about to ascend into one of the gilded
chariots of the rich and affluent, instead of having to walk to the
station a quarter of a mile in the mud, unless he had the money for a
tram fare.

'Good evening, Uncle.' I said it again, for he stood staring at me.
I don't suppose he was used to politeness from boys--some boys are
anything but--especially to the Aged Poor.

So I said, 'Good evening, Uncle,' yet once again. Then he said--

'Time you were in bed, young man. Eh!--what?'

Then I saw I must speak plainly with him, man to man. So I did. I said--

'You've been dining with my Father, and we couldn't help hearing you
say the dinner was shocking. So we thought as you're an Indian, perhaps
you're very poor'--I didn't like to tell him we had heard the dreadful
truth from his own lips, so I went on, 'because of "Lo, the poor
Indian"--you know--and you can't get a good dinner every day. And we are
very sorry if you're poor; and won't you come and have dinner with
us to-morrow--with us children, I mean? It's a very, very good
dinner--rabbit, and hardbake, and coconut--and you needn't mind us
knowing you're poor, because we know honourable poverty is no disgrace,
and--' I could have gone on much longer, but he interrupted me to
say--'Upon my word! And what's your name, eh?'

'Oswald Bastable,' I said; and I do hope you people who are reading this
story have not guessed before that I was Oswald all the time.

'Oswald Bastable, eh? Bless my soul!' said the poor Indian. 'Yes, I'll
dine with you, Mr Oswald Bastable, with all the pleasure in life. Very
kind and cordial invitation, I'm sure. Good night, sir. At one o'clock,
I presume?'

'Yes, at one,' I said. 'Good night, sir.'

Then I went in and told the others, and we wrote a paper and put it on
the boy's dressing-table, and it said--

'The poor Indian is coming at one. He seemed very grateful to me for my
kindness.'

We did not tell Father that the Uncle was coming to dinner with us,
for the polite reason that I have explained before. But we had to tell
Eliza; so we said a friend was coming to dinner and we wanted everything
very nice. I think she thought it was Albert-next-door, but she was in
a good temper that day, and she agreed to cook the rabbit and to make a
pudding with currants in it. And when one o'clock came the Indian Uncle
came too. I let him in and helped him off with his greatcoat, which was
all furry inside, and took him straight to the nursery. We were to have
dinner there as usual, for we had decided from the first that he would
enjoy himself more if he was not made a stranger of. We agreed to treat
him as one of ourselves, because if we were too polite, he might think
it was our pride because he was poor.

He shook hands with us all and asked our ages, and what schools we went
to, and shook his head when we said we were having a holiday just now. I
felt rather uncomfortable--I always do when they talk about schools--and
I couldn't think of anything to say to show him we meant to treat him
as one of ourselves. I did ask if he played cricket. He said he had not
played lately. And then no one said anything till dinner came in. We had
all washed our faces and hands and brushed our hair before he came in,
and we all looked very nice, especially Oswald, who had had his hair
cut that very morning. When Eliza had brought in the rabbit and gone
out again, we looked at each other in silent despair, like in books.
It seemed as if it were going to be just a dull dinner like the one the
poor Indian had had the night before; only, of course, the things to
eat would be nicer. Dicky kicked Oswald under the table to make him say
something--and he had his new boots on, too!--but Oswald did not kick
back; then the Uncle asked--

'Do you carve, sir, or shall I?'

Suddenly Alice said--

'Would you like grown-up dinner, Uncle, or play-dinner?'

He did not hesitate a moment, but said, 'Play-dinner, by all means.
Eh!--what?' and then we knew it was all right.

So we at once showed the Uncle how to be a dauntless hunter. The rabbit
was the deer we had slain in the green forest with our trusty yew bows,
and we toasted the joints of it, when the Uncle had carved it, on bits
of firewood sharpened to a point. The Uncle's piece got a little burnt,
but he said it was delicious, and he said game was always nicer when you
had killed it yourself. When Eliza had taken away the rabbit bones and
brought in the pudding, we waited till she had gone out and shut the
door, and then we put the dish down on the floor and slew the pudding in
the dish in the good old-fashioned way. It was a wild boar at bay, and
very hard indeed to kill, even with forks. The Uncle was very fierce
indeed with the pudding, and jumped and howled when he speared it, but
when it came to his turn to be helped, he said, 'No, thank you; think of
my liver. Eh!--what?'

But he had some almonds and raisins--when we had climbed to the top of
the chest of drawers to pluck them from the boughs of the great trees;
and he had a fig from the cargo that the rich merchants brought in their
ship--the long drawer was the ship--and the rest of us had the sweets
and the coconut. It was a very glorious and beautiful feast, and when it
was over we said we hoped it was better than the dinner last night. And
he said:

'I never enjoyed a dinner more.' He was too polite to say what he really
thought about Father's dinner. And we saw that though he might be poor,
he was a true gentleman.

He smoked a cigar while we finished up what there was left to eat, and
told us about tiger shooting and about elephants. We asked him about
wigwams, and wampum, and mocassins, and beavers, but he did not seem
to know, or else he was shy about talking of the wonders of his native
land.

We liked him very much indeed, and when he was going at last, Alice
nudged me, and I said--'There's one and threepence farthing left out
of our half-sovereign. Will you take it, please, because we do like you
very much indeed, and we don't want it, really; and we would rather you
had it.' And I put the money into his hand.

'I'll take the threepenny-bit,' he said, turning the money over and
looking at it, 'but I couldn't rob you of the rest. By the way, where
did you get the money for this most royal spread--half a sovereign you
said--eh, what?'

We told him all about the different ways we had looked for treasure, and
when we had been telling some time he sat down, to listen better and at
last we told him how Alice had played at divining-rod, and how it really
had found a half-sovereign.

Then he said he would like to see her do it again. But we explained that
the rod would only show gold and silver, and that we were quite sure
there was no more gold in the house, because we happened to have looked
very carefully.

'Well, silver, then,' said he; 'let's hide the plate-basket, and little
Alice shall make the divining-rod find it. Eh!--what?'

'There isn't any silver in the plate-basket now,' Dora said. 'Eliza
asked me to borrow the silver spoons and forks for your dinner last
night from Albert-next-door's Mother. Father never notices, but she
thought it would be nicer for you. Our own silver went to have the dents
taken out; and I don't think Father could afford to pay the man for
doing it, for the silver hasn't come back.'

'Bless my soul!' said the Uncle again, looking at the hole in the big
chair that we burnt when we had Guy Fawkes' Day indoors. 'And how much
pocket-money do you get? Eh!--what?'

'We don't have any now,' said Alice; 'but indeed we don't want the other
shilling. We'd much rather you had it, wouldn't we?'

And the rest of us said, 'Yes.' The Uncle wouldn't take it, but he asked
a lot of questions, and at last he went away. And when he went he said--

'Well, youngsters, I've enjoyed myself very much. I shan't forget your
kind hospitality. Perhaps the poor Indian may be in a position to ask
you all to dinner some day.'

Oswald said if he ever could we should like to come very much, but he
was not to trouble to get such a nice dinner as ours, because we could
do very well with cold mutton and rice pudding. We do not like these
things, but Oswald knows how to behave. Then the poor Indian went away.

We had not got any treasure by this party, but we had had a very good
time, and I am sure the Uncle enjoyed himself.

We were so sorry he was gone that we could none of us eat much tea;
but we did not mind, because we had pleased the poor Indian and enjoyed
ourselves too. Besides, as Dora said, 'A contented mind is a continual
feast,' so it did not matter about not wanting tea.

Only H. O. did not seem to think a continual feast was a contented mind,
and Eliza gave him a powder in what was left of the red-currant jelly
Father had for the nasty dinner.

But the rest of us were quite well, and I think it must have been the
coconut with H. O. We hoped nothing had disagreed with the Uncle, but we
never knew.



CHAPTER 16. THE END OF THE TREASURE-SEEKING

Now it is coming near the end of our treasure-seeking, and the end was
so wonderful that now nothing is like it used to be. It is like as
if our fortunes had been in an earthquake, and after those, you know,
everything comes out wrong-way up.

The day after the Uncle speared the pudding with us opened in gloom and
sadness. But you never know. It was destined to be a day when things
happened. Yet no sign of this appeared in the early morning. Then all
was misery and upsetness. None of us felt quite well; I don't know why:
and Father had one of his awful colds, so Dora persuaded him not to go
to London, but to stay cosy and warm in the study, and she made him some
gruel. She makes it better than Eliza does; Eliza's gruel is all little
lumps, and when you suck them it is dry oatmeal inside.

We kept as quiet as we could, and I made H. O. do some lessons, like the
G. B. had advised us to. But it was very dull. There are some days
when you seem to have got to the end of all the things that could ever
possibly happen to you, and you feel you will spend all the rest of your
life doing dull things just the same way. Days like this are generally
wet days. But, as I said, you never know.

Then Dicky said if things went on like this he should run away to sea,
and Alice said she thought it would be rather nice to go into a convent.
H. O. was a little disagreeable because of the powder Eliza had given
him, so he tried to read two books at once, one with each eye, just
because Noel wanted one of the books, which was very selfish of him, so
it only made his headache worse. H. O. is getting old enough to learn by
experience that it is wrong to be selfish, and when he complained about
his head Oswald told him whose fault it was, because I am older than
he is, and it is my duty to show him where he is wrong. But he began to
cry, and then Oswald had to cheer him up because of Father wanting to be
quiet. So Oswald said--

'They'll eat H. O. if you don't look out!' And Dora said Oswald was too
bad.

Of course Oswald was not going to interfere again, so he went to look
out of the window and see the trams go by, and by and by H. O. came and
looked out too, and Oswald, who knows when to be generous and forgiving,
gave him a piece of blue pencil and two nibs, as good as new, to keep.

As they were looking out at the rain splashing on the stones in the
street they saw a four-wheeled cab come lumbering up from the way the
station is. Oswald called out--

'Here comes the coach of the Fairy Godmother. It'll stop here, you see
if it doesn't!'

So they all came to the window to look. Oswald had only said that about
stopping and he was stricken with wonder and amaze when the cab really
did stop. It had boxes on the top and knobby parcels sticking out of
the window, and it was something like going away to the seaside and
something like the gentleman who takes things about in a carriage with
the wooden shutters up, to sell to the drapers' shops. The cabman got
down, and some one inside handed out ever so many parcels of different
shapes and sizes, and the cabman stood holding them in his arms and
grinning over them.

Dora said, 'It is a pity some one doesn't tell him this isn't the
house.' And then from inside the cab some one put out a foot feeling for
the step, like a tortoise's foot coming out from under his shell
when you are holding him off the ground, and then a leg came and more
parcels, and then Noel cried--

'It's the poor Indian!'

And it was.

Eliza opened the door, and we were all leaning over the banisters.
Father heard the noise of parcels and boxes in the hall, and he came out
without remembering how bad his cold was. If you do that yourself when
you have a cold they call you careless and naughty. Then we heard the
poor Indian say to Father--

'I say, Dick, I dined with your kids yesterday--as I daresay they've
told you. Jolliest little cubs I ever saw! Why didn't you let me see
them the other night? The eldest is the image of poor Janey--and as to
young Oswald, he's a man! If he's not a man, I'm a nigger! Eh!--what?
And Dick, I say, I shouldn't wonder if I could find a friend to put a
bit into that business of yours--eh?'

Then he and Father went into the study and the door was shut--and we
went down and looked at the parcels. Some were done up in old, dirty
newspapers, and tied with bits of rag, and some were in brown paper and
string from the shops, and there were boxes. We wondered if the Uncle
had come to stay and this was his luggage, or whether it was to sell.
Some of it smelt of spices, like merchandise--and one bundle Alice felt
certain was a bale. We heard a hand on the knob of the study door after
a bit, and Alice said--

'Fly!' and we all got away but H. O., and the Uncle caught him by the
leg as he was trying to get upstairs after us.

'Peeping at the baggage, eh?' said the Uncle, and the rest of us came
down because it would have been dishonourable to leave H. O. alone in a
scrape, and we wanted to see what was in the parcels.

'I didn't touch,' said H. O. 'Are you coming to stay? I hope you are.'

'No harm done if you did touch,' said the good, kind, Indian man to all
of us. 'For all these parcels are _for you_.'

I have several times told you about our being dumb with amazement and
terror and joy, and things like that, but I never remember us being
dumber than we were when he said this.

The Indian Uncle went on: 'I told an old friend of mine what a
pleasant dinner I had with you, and about the threepenny-bit, and the
divining-rod, and all that, and he sent all these odds and ends as
presents for you. Some of the things came from India.'

'Have you come from India, Uncle?' Noel asked; and when he said 'Yes'
we were all very much surprised, for we never thought of his being that
sort of Indian. We thought he was the Red kind, and of course his not
being accounted for his ignorance of beavers and things.

He got Eliza to help, and we took all the parcels into the nursery and
he undid them and undid them and undid them, till the papers lay thick
on the floor. Father came too and sat in the Guy Fawkes chair. I cannot
begin to tell you all the things that kind friend of Uncle's had sent
us. He must be a very agreeable person.

There were toys for the kids and model engines for Dick and me, and a
lot of books, and Japanese china tea-sets for the girls, red and white
and gold--there were sweets by the pound and by the box--and long yards
and yards of soft silk from India, to make frocks for the girls--and a
real Indian sword for Oswald and a book of Japanese pictures for Noel,
and some ivory chess men for Dicky: the castles of the chessmen are
elephant-and-castles. There is a railway station called that; I never
knew what it meant before. The brown paper and string parcels had boxes
of games in them--and big cases of preserved fruits and things. And the
shabby old newspaper parcels and the boxes had the Indian things in. I
never saw so many beautiful things before. There were carved fans
and silver bangles and strings of amber beads, and necklaces of uncut
gems--turquoises and garnets, the Uncle said they were--and shawls and
scarves of silk, and cabinets of brown and gold, and ivory boxes and
silver trays, and brass things. The Uncle kept saying, 'This is for you,
young man,' or 'Little Alice will like this fan,'or 'Miss Dora would
look well in this green silk, I think. Eh!--what?'

And Father looked on as if it was a dream, till the Uncle suddenly gave
him an ivory paper-knife and a box of cigars, and said, 'My old friend
sent you these, Dick; he's an old friend of yours too, he says.' And he
winked at my Father, for H. O. and I saw him. And my Father winked back,
though he has always told us not to.

That was a wonderful day. It was a treasure, and no mistake! I never saw
such heaps and heaps of presents, like things out of a fairy-tale--and
even Eliza had a shawl. Perhaps she deserved it, for she did cook the
rabbit and the pudding; and Oswald says it is not her fault if her nose
turns up and she does not brush her hair. I do not think Eliza likes
brushing things. It is the same with the carpets. But Oswald tries to
make allowances even for people who do not wash their ears.

The Indian Uncle came to see us often after that, and his friend always
sent us something. Once he tipped us a sovereign each--the Uncle brought
it; and once he sent us money to go to the Crystal Palace, and the Uncle
took us; and another time to a circus; and when Christmas was near the
Uncle said--

'You remember when I dined with you, some time ago, you promised to dine
with me some day, if I could ever afford to give a dinner-party. Well,
I'm going to have one--a Christmas party. Not on Christmas Day, because
every one goes home then--but on the day after. Cold mutton and rice
pudding. You'll come? Eh!--what?'

We said we should be delighted, if Father had no objection, because that
is the proper thing to say, and the poor Indian, I mean the Uncle, said,
'No, your Father won't object--he's coming too, bless your soul!'

We all got Christmas presents for the Uncle. The girls made him a
handkerchief case and a comb bag, out of some of the pieces of silk he
had given them. I got him a knife with three blades; H. O. got a siren
whistle, a very strong one, and Dicky joined with me in the knife, and
Noel would give the Indian ivory box that Uncle's friend had sent on the
wonderful Fairy Cab day. He said it was the very nicest thing he had,
and he was sure Uncle wouldn't mind his not having bought it with his
own money.

I think Father's business must have got better--perhaps Uncle's friend
put money in it and that did it good, like feeding the starving. Anyway
we all had new suits, and the girls had the green silk from India made
into frocks, and on Boxing Day we went in two cabs--Father and the girls
in one, and us boys in the other.

We wondered very much where the Indian Uncle lived, because we had not
been told. And we thought when the cab began to go up the hill towards
the Heath that perhaps the Uncle lived in one of the poky little houses
up at the top of Greenwich. But the cab went right over the Heath and in
at some big gates, and through a shrubbery all white with frost like
a fairy forest, because it was Christmas time. And at last we stopped
before one of those jolly, big, ugly red houses with a lot of windows,
that are so comfortable inside, and on the steps was the Indian Uncle,
looking very big and grand, in a blue cloth coat and yellow sealskin
waistcoat, with a bunch of seals hanging from it.

'I wonder whether he has taken a place as butler here?' said Dicky.

'A poor, broken-down man--'

Noel thought it was very likely, because he knew that in these big
houses there were always thousands of stately butlers.

The Uncle came down the steps and opened the cab door himself, which I
don't think butlers would expect to have to do. And he took us in. It
was a lovely hall, with bear and tiger skins on the floor, and a big
clock with the faces of the sun and moon dodging out when it was day or
night, and Father Time with a scythe coming out at the hours, and the
name on it was 'Flint. Ashford. 1776'; and there was a fox eating a
stuffed duck in a glass case, and horns of stags and other animals over
the doors.

'We'll just come into my study first,' said the Uncle, 'and wish each
other a Merry Christmas.' So then we knew he wasn't the butler, but it
must be his own house, for only the master of the house has a study.

His study was not much like Father's. It had hardly any books, but
swords and guns and newspapers and a great many boots, and boxes half
unpacked, with more Indian things bulging out of them.

We gave him our presents and he was awfully pleased. Then he gave us his
Christmas presents. You must be tired of hearing about presents, but
I must remark that all the Uncle's presents were watches; there was a
watch for each of us, with our names engraved inside, all silver except
H. O.'s, and that was a Waterbury, 'To match his boots,' the Uncle said.
I don't know what he meant.

Then the Uncle looked at Father, and Father said, 'You tell them, sir.'

So the Uncle coughed and stood up and made a speech. He said--

'Ladies and gentlemen, we are met together to discuss an important
subject which has for some weeks engrossed the attention of the
honourable member opposite and myself.'

I said, 'Hear, hear,' and Alice whispered, 'What happened to the
guinea-pig?' Of course you know the answer to that.

The Uncle went on--

'I am going to live in this house, and as it's rather big for me, your
Father has agreed that he and you shall come and live with me. And so,
if you're agreeable, we're all going to live here together, and, please
God, it'll be a happy home for us all. Eh!--what?'

He blew his nose and kissed us all round. As it was Christmas I did
not mind, though I am much too old for it on other dates. Then he said,
'Thank you all very much for your presents; but I've got a present here
I value more than anything else I have.'

I thought it was not quite polite of him to say so, till I saw that
what he valued so much was a threepenny-bit on his watch-chain, and, of
course, I saw it must be the one we had given him.

He said, 'You children gave me that when you thought I was the poor
Indian, and I'll keep it as long as I live. And I've asked some friends
to help us to be jolly, for this is our house-warming. Eh!--what?'

Then he shook Father by the hand, and they blew their noses; and then
Father said, 'Your Uncle has been most kind--most--'

But Uncle interrupted by saying, 'Now, Dick, no nonsense!' Then H. O.
said, 'Then you're not poor at all?' as if he were very disappointed.
The Uncle replied, 'I have enough for my simple wants, thank you, H.
O.; and your Father's business will provide him with enough for yours.
Eh!--what?'

Then we all went down and looked at the fox thoroughly, and made the
Uncle take the glass off so that we could see it all round and then the
Uncle took us all over the house, which is the most comfortable one I
have ever been in. There is a beautiful portrait of Mother in Father's
sitting-room. The Uncle must be very rich indeed. This ending is like
what happens in Dickens's books; but I think it was much jollier to
happen like a book, and it shows what a nice man the Uncle is, the way
he did it all.

Think how flat it would have been if the Uncle had said, when we first
offered him the one and threepence farthing, 'Oh, I don't want your
dirty one and three-pence! I'm very rich indeed.' Instead of which he
saved up the news of his wealth till Christmas, and then told us all
in one glorious burst. Besides, I can't help it if it is like Dickens,
because it happens this way. Real life is often something like books.

Presently, when we had seen the house, we were taken into the
drawing-room, and there was Mrs Leslie, who gave us the shillings and
wished us good hunting, and Lord Tottenham, and Albert-next-door's
Uncle--and Albert-next-door, and his Mother (I'm not very fond of her),
and best of all our own Robber and his two kids, and our Robber had a
new suit on. The Uncle told us he had asked the people who had been kind
to us, and Noel said, 'Where is my noble editor that I wrote the poetry
to?'

The Uncle said he had not had the courage to ask a strange editor to
dinner; but Lord Tottenham was an old friend of Uncle's, and he had
introduced Uncle to Mrs Leslie, and that was how he had the pride and
pleasure of welcoming her to our house-warming. And he made her a bow
like you see on a Christmas card.

Then Alice asked, 'What about Mr Rosenbaum? He was kind; it would have
been a pleasant surprise for him.'

But everybody laughed, and Uncle said--

'Your father has paid him the sovereign he lent you. I don't think he
could have borne another pleasant surprise.'

And I said there was the butcher, and he was really kind; but they only
laughed, and Father said you could not ask all your business friends to
a private dinner.

Then it was dinner-time, and we thought of Uncle's talk about cold
mutton and rice. But it was a beautiful dinner, and I never saw such a
dessert! We had ours on plates to take away into another sitting-room,
which was much jollier than sitting round the table with the grown-ups.
But the Robber's kids stayed with their Father. They were very shy and
frightened, and said hardly anything, but looked all about with very
bright eyes. H. O. thought they were like white mice; but afterwards we
got to know them very well, and in the end they were not so mousy. And
there is a good deal of interesting stuff to tell about them; but I
shall put all that in another book, for there is no room for it in this
one. We played desert islands all the afternoon and drank Uncle's health
in ginger wine. It was H. O. that upset his over Alice's green silk
dress, and she never even rowed him. Brothers ought not to have
favourites, and Oswald would never be so mean as to have a favourite
sister, or, if he had, wild horses should not make him tell who it was.

And now we are to go on living in the big house on the Heath, and it is
very jolly.

Mrs Leslie often comes to see us, and our own Robber and
Albert-next-door's uncle. The Indian Uncle likes him because he has been
in India too and is brown; but our Uncle does not like Albert-next-door.
He says he is a muff. And I am to go to Rugby, and so are Noel and H.
O., and perhaps to Balliol afterwards. Balliol is my Father's college.
It has two separate coats of arms, which many other colleges are not
allowed. Noel is going to be a poet and Dicky wants to go into Father's
business.

The Uncle is a real good old sort; and just think, we should never have
found him if we hadn't made up our minds to be Treasure Seekers! Noel
made a poem about it--

    Lo! the poor Indian from lands afar,
    Comes where the treasure seekers are;
    We looked for treasure, but we find
    The best treasure of all is the Uncle good and kind.

I thought it was rather rot, but Alice would show it to the Uncle, and
he liked it very much. He kissed Alice and he smacked Noel on the back,
and he said, 'I don't think I've done so badly either, if you come
to that, though I was never a regular professional treasure seeker.
Eh!--what?'

========================================
========================================

THE RAILWAY CHILDREN

By E. Nesbit


               To my dear son Paul Bland,
               behind whose knowledge of railways
               my ignorance confidently shelters.


Contents.

     I.    The beginning of things.
     II.   Peter's coal-mine.
     III.  The old gentleman.
     IV.   The engine-burglar.
     V.    Prisoners and captives.
     VI.   Saviours of the train.
     VII.  For valour.
     VIII. The amateur fireman.
     IX.   The pride of Perks.
     X.    The terrible secret.
     XI.   The hound in the red jersey.
     XII.  What Bobbie brought home.
     XIII. The hound's grandfather.
     XIV.  The End.




Chapter I. The beginning of things.


They were not railway children to begin with. I don't suppose they had
ever thought about railways except as a means of getting to Maskelyne
and Cook's, the Pantomime, Zoological Gardens, and Madame Tussaud's.
They were just ordinary suburban children, and they lived with their
Father and Mother in an ordinary red-brick-fronted villa, with coloured
glass in the front door, a tiled passage that was called a hall, a
bath-room with hot and cold water, electric bells, French windows, and
a good deal of white paint, and 'every modern convenience', as the
house-agents say.

There were three of them. Roberta was the eldest. Of course, Mothers
never have favourites, but if their Mother HAD had a favourite, it might
have been Roberta. Next came Peter, who wished to be an Engineer when he
grew up; and the youngest was Phyllis, who meant extremely well.

Mother did not spend all her time in paying dull calls to dull ladies,
and sitting dully at home waiting for dull ladies to pay calls to her.
She was almost always there, ready to play with the children, and read
to them, and help them to do their home-lessons. Besides this she used
to write stories for them while they were at school, and read them
aloud after tea, and she always made up funny pieces of poetry for their
birthdays and for other great occasions, such as the christening of the
new kittens, or the refurnishing of the doll's house, or the time when
they were getting over the mumps.

These three lucky children always had everything they needed: pretty
clothes, good fires, a lovely nursery with heaps of toys, and a Mother
Goose wall-paper. They had a kind and merry nursemaid, and a dog who was
called James, and who was their very own. They also had a Father who was
just perfect--never cross, never unjust, and always ready for a game--at
least, if at any time he was NOT ready, he always had an excellent
reason for it, and explained the reason to the children so interestingly
and funnily that they felt sure he couldn't help himself.

You will think that they ought to have been very happy. And so they
were, but they did not know HOW happy till the pretty life in the Red
Villa was over and done with, and they had to live a very different life
indeed.

The dreadful change came quite suddenly.

Peter had a birthday--his tenth. Among his other presents was a model
engine more perfect than you could ever have dreamed of. The other
presents were full of charm, but the Engine was fuller of charm than any
of the others were.

Its charm lasted in its full perfection for exactly three days. Then,
owing either to Peter's inexperience or Phyllis's good intentions, which
had been rather pressing, or to some other cause, the Engine suddenly
went off with a bang. James was so frightened that he went out and did
not come back all day. All the Noah's Ark people who were in the tender
were broken to bits, but nothing else was hurt except the poor little
engine and the feelings of Peter. The others said he cried over it--but
of course boys of ten do not cry, however terrible the tragedies may be
which darken their lot. He said that his eyes were red because he had a
cold. This turned out to be true, though Peter did not know it was when
he said it, the next day he had to go to bed and stay there. Mother
began to be afraid that he might be sickening for measles, when suddenly
he sat up in bed and said:

"I hate gruel--I hate barley water--I hate bread and milk. I want to get
up and have something REAL to eat."

"What would you like?" Mother asked.

"A pigeon-pie," said Peter, eagerly, "a large pigeon-pie. A very large
one."

So Mother asked the Cook to make a large pigeon-pie. The pie was made.
And when the pie was made, it was cooked. And when it was cooked, Peter
ate some of it. After that his cold was better. Mother made a piece of
poetry to amuse him while the pie was being made. It began by saying
what an unfortunate but worthy boy Peter was, then it went on:

      He had an engine that he loved
        With all his heart and soul,
      And if he had a wish on earth
        It was to keep it whole.

      One day--my friends, prepare your minds;
        I'm coming to the worst--
      Quite suddenly a screw went mad,
        And then the boiler burst!

      With gloomy face he picked it up
        And took it to his Mother,
      Though even he could not suppose
        That she could make another;

      For those who perished on the line
        He did not seem to care,
      His engine being more to him
        Than all the people there.

      And now you see the reason why
        Our Peter has been ill:
      He soothes his soul with pigeon-pie
        His gnawing grief to kill.

      He wraps himself in blankets warm
        And sleeps in bed till late,
      Determined thus to overcome
        His miserable fate.

      And if his eyes are rather red,
        His cold must just excuse it:
      Offer him pie; you may be sure
        He never will refuse it.

Father had been away in the country for three or four days. All Peter's
hopes for the curing of his afflicted Engine were now fixed on his
Father, for Father was most wonderfully clever with his fingers. He
could mend all sorts of things. He had often acted as veterinary surgeon
to the wooden rocking-horse; once he had saved its life when all human
aid was despaired of, and the poor creature was given up for lost, and
even the carpenter said he didn't see his way to do anything. And it was
Father who mended the doll's cradle when no one else could; and with a
little glue and some bits of wood and a pen-knife made all the Noah's
Ark beasts as strong on their pins as ever they were, if not stronger.

Peter, with heroic unselfishness, did not say anything about his Engine
till after Father had had his dinner and his after-dinner cigar. The
unselfishness was Mother's idea--but it was Peter who carried it out.
And needed a good deal of patience, too.

At last Mother said to Father, "Now, dear, if you're quite rested, and
quite comfy, we want to tell you about the great railway accident, and
ask your advice."

"All right," said Father, "fire away!"

So then Peter told the sad tale, and fetched what was left of the
Engine.

"Hum," said Father, when he had looked the Engine over very carefully.

The children held their breaths.

"Is there NO hope?" said Peter, in a low, unsteady voice.

"Hope? Rather! Tons of it," said Father, cheerfully; "but it'll want
something besides hope--a bit of brazing say, or some solder, and a new
valve. I think we'd better keep it for a rainy day. In other words, I'll
give up Saturday afternoon to it, and you shall all help me."

"CAN girls help to mend engines?" Peter asked doubtfully.

"Of course they can. Girls are just as clever as boys, and don't you
forget it! How would you like to be an engine-driver, Phil?"

"My face would be always dirty, wouldn't it?" said Phyllis, in
unenthusiastic tones, "and I expect I should break something."

"I should just love it," said Roberta--"do you think I could when I'm
grown up, Daddy? Or even a stoker?"

"You mean a fireman," said Daddy, pulling and twisting at the engine.
"Well, if you still wish it, when you're grown up, we'll see about
making you a fire-woman. I remember when I was a boy--"

Just then there was a knock at the front door.

"Who on earth!" said Father. "An Englishman's house is his castle, of
course, but I do wish they built semi-detached villas with moats and
drawbridges."

Ruth--she was the parlour-maid and had red hair--came in and said that
two gentlemen wanted to see the master.

"I've shown them into the Library, Sir," said she.

"I expect it's the subscription to the Vicar's testimonial," said
Mother, "or else it's the choir holiday fund. Get rid of them quickly,
dear. It does break up an evening so, and it's nearly the children's
bedtime."

But Father did not seem to be able to get rid of the gentlemen at all
quickly.

"I wish we HAD got a moat and drawbridge," said Roberta; "then, when we
didn't want people, we could just pull up the drawbridge and no one else
could get in. I expect Father will have forgotten about when he was a
boy if they stay much longer."

Mother tried to make the time pass by telling them a new fairy story
about a Princess with green eyes, but it was difficult because they
could hear the voices of Father and the gentlemen in the Library, and
Father's voice sounded louder and different to the voice he generally
used to people who came about testimonials and holiday funds.

Then the Library bell rang, and everyone heaved a breath of relief.

"They're going now," said Phyllis; "he's rung to have them shown out."

But instead of showing anybody out, Ruth showed herself in, and she
looked queer, the children thought.

"Please'm," she said, "the Master wants you to just step into the study.
He looks like the dead, mum; I think he's had bad news. You'd best
prepare yourself for the worst, 'm--p'raps it's a death in the family or
a bank busted or--"

"That'll do, Ruth," said Mother gently; "you can go."

Then Mother went into the Library. There was more talking. Then the bell
rang again, and Ruth fetched a cab. The children heard boots go out and
down the steps. The cab drove away, and the front door shut. Then Mother
came in. Her dear face was as white as her lace collar, and her eyes
looked very big and shining. Her mouth looked like just a line of pale
red--her lips were thin and not their proper shape at all.

"It's bedtime," she said. "Ruth will put you to bed."

"But you promised we should sit up late tonight because Father's come
home," said Phyllis.

"Father's been called away--on business," said Mother. "Come, darlings,
go at once."

They kissed her and went. Roberta lingered to give Mother an extra hug
and to whisper:

"It wasn't bad news, Mammy, was it? Is anyone dead--or--"

"Nobody's dead--no," said Mother, and she almost seemed to push Roberta
away. "I can't tell you anything tonight, my pet. Go, dear, go NOW."

So Roberta went.

Ruth brushed the girls' hair and helped them to undress. (Mother almost
always did this herself.) When she had turned down the gas and left them
she found Peter, still dressed, waiting on the stairs.

"I say, Ruth, what's up?" he asked.

"Don't ask me no questions and I won't tell you no lies," the red-headed
Ruth replied. "You'll know soon enough."

Late that night Mother came up and kissed all three children as they
lay asleep. But Roberta was the only one whom the kiss woke, and she lay
mousey-still, and said nothing.

"If Mother doesn't want us to know she's been crying," she said to
herself as she heard through the dark the catching of her Mother's
breath, "we WON'T know it. That's all."

When they came down to breakfast the next morning, Mother had already
gone out.

"To London," Ruth said, and left them to their breakfast.

"There's something awful the matter," said Peter, breaking his egg.
"Ruth told me last night we should know soon enough."

"Did you ASK her?" said Roberta, with scorn.

"Yes, I did!" said Peter, angrily. "If you could go to bed without
caring whether Mother was worried or not, I couldn't. So there."

"I don't think we ought to ask the servants things Mother doesn't tell
us," said Roberta.

"That's right, Miss Goody-goody," said Peter, "preach away."

"I'M not goody," said Phyllis, "but I think Bobbie's right this time."

"Of course. She always is. In her own opinion," said Peter.

"Oh, DON'T!" cried Roberta, putting down her egg-spoon; "don't let's be
horrid to each other. I'm sure some dire calamity is happening. Don't
let's make it worse!"

"Who began, I should like to know?" said Peter.

Roberta made an effort, and answered:--

"I did, I suppose, but--"

"Well, then," said Peter, triumphantly. But before he went to school he
thumped his sister between the shoulders and told her to cheer up.

The children came home to one o'clock dinner, but Mother was not there.
And she was not there at tea-time.

It was nearly seven before she came in, looking so ill and tired that
the children felt they could not ask her any questions. She sank into an
arm-chair. Phyllis took the long pins out of her hat, while Roberta took
off her gloves, and Peter unfastened her walking-shoes and fetched her
soft velvety slippers for her.

When she had had a cup of tea, and Roberta had put eau-de-Cologne on her
poor head that ached, Mother said:--

"Now, my darlings, I want to tell you something. Those men last night
did bring very bad news, and Father will be away for some time. I am
very worried about it, and I want you all to help me, and not to make
things harder for me."

"As if we would!" said Roberta, holding Mother's hand against her face.

"You can help me very much," said Mother, "by being good and happy
and not quarrelling when I'm away"--Roberta and Peter exchanged guilty
glances--"for I shall have to be away a good deal."

"We won't quarrel. Indeed we won't," said everybody. And meant it, too.

"Then," Mother went on, "I want you not to ask me any questions about
this trouble; and not to ask anybody else any questions."

Peter cringed and shuffled his boots on the carpet.

"You'll promise this, too, won't you?" said Mother.

"I did ask Ruth," said Peter, suddenly. "I'm very sorry, but I did."

"And what did she say?"

"She said I should know soon enough."

"It isn't necessary for you to know anything about it," said Mother;
"it's about business, and you never do understand business, do you?"

"No," said Roberta; "is it something to do with Government?" For Father
was in a Government Office.

"Yes," said Mother. "Now it's bed-time, my darlings. And don't YOU
worry. It'll all come right in the end."

"Then don't YOU worry either, Mother," said Phyllis, "and we'll all be
as good as gold."

Mother sighed and kissed them.

"We'll begin being good the first thing tomorrow morning," said Peter,
as they went upstairs.

"Why not NOW?" said Roberta.

"There's nothing to be good ABOUT now, silly," said Peter.

"We might begin to try to FEEL good," said Phyllis, "and not call
names."

"Who's calling names?" said Peter. "Bobbie knows right enough that when
I say 'silly', it's just the same as if I said Bobbie."

"WELL," said Roberta.

"No, I don't mean what you mean. I mean it's just a--what is it Father
calls it?--a germ of endearment! Good night."

The girls folded up their clothes with more than usual neatness--which
was the only way of being good that they could think of.

"I say," said Phyllis, smoothing out her pinafore, "you used to say
it was so dull--nothing happening, like in books. Now something HAS
happened."

"I never wanted things to happen to make Mother unhappy," said Roberta.
"Everything's perfectly horrid."

Everything continued to be perfectly horrid for some weeks.

Mother was nearly always out. Meals were dull and dirty. The
between-maid was sent away, and Aunt Emma came on a visit. Aunt Emma was
much older than Mother. She was going abroad to be a governess. She
was very busy getting her clothes ready, and they were very ugly, dingy
clothes, and she had them always littering about, and the sewing-machine
seemed to whir--on and on all day and most of the night. Aunt Emma
believed in keeping children in their proper places. And they more than
returned the compliment. Their idea of Aunt Emma's proper place was
anywhere where they were not. So they saw very little of her. They
preferred the company of the servants, who were more amusing. Cook,
if in a good temper, could sing comic songs, and the housemaid, if she
happened not to be offended with you, could imitate a hen that has laid
an egg, a bottle of champagne being opened, and could mew like two cats
fighting. The servants never told the children what the bad news was
that the gentlemen had brought to Father. But they kept hinting
that they could tell a great deal if they chose--and this was not
comfortable.

One day when Peter had made a booby trap over the bath-room door, and
it had acted beautifully as Ruth passed through, that red-haired
parlour-maid caught him and boxed his ears.

"You'll come to a bad end," she said furiously, "you nasty little limb,
you! If you don't mend your ways, you'll go where your precious Father's
gone, so I tell you straight!"

Roberta repeated this to her Mother, and next day Ruth was sent away.

Then came the time when Mother came home and went to bed and stayed
there two days and the Doctor came, and the children crept wretchedly
about the house and wondered if the world was coming to an end.

Mother came down one morning to breakfast, very pale and with lines
on her face that used not to be there. And she smiled, as well as she
could, and said:--

"Now, my pets, everything is settled. We're going to leave this house,
and go and live in the country. Such a ducky dear little white house. I
know you'll love it."

A whirling week of packing followed--not just packing clothes, like when
you go to the seaside, but packing chairs and tables, covering their
tops with sacking and their legs with straw.

All sorts of things were packed that you don't pack when you go to
the seaside. Crockery, blankets, candlesticks, carpets, bedsteads,
saucepans, and even fenders and fire-irons.

The house was like a furniture warehouse. I think the children enjoyed
it very much. Mother was very busy, but not too busy now to talk to
them, and read to them, and even to make a bit of poetry for Phyllis to
cheer her up when she fell down with a screwdriver and ran it into her
hand.

"Aren't you going to pack this, Mother?" Roberta asked, pointing to the
beautiful cabinet inlaid with red turtleshell and brass.

"We can't take everything," said Mother.

"But we seem to be taking all the ugly things," said Roberta.

"We're taking the useful ones," said Mother; "we've got to play at being
Poor for a bit, my chickabiddy."

When all the ugly useful things had been packed up and taken away in a
van by men in green-baize aprons, the two girls and Mother and Aunt Emma
slept in the two spare rooms where the furniture was all pretty. All
their beds had gone. A bed was made up for Peter on the drawing-room
sofa.

"I say, this is larks," he said, wriggling joyously, as Mother tucked
him up. "I do like moving! I wish we moved once a month."

Mother laughed.

"I don't!" she said. "Good night, Peterkin."

As she turned away Roberta saw her face. She never forgot it.

"Oh, Mother," she whispered all to herself as she got into bed, "how
brave you are! How I love you! Fancy being brave enough to laugh when
you're feeling like THAT!"

Next day boxes were filled, and boxes and more boxes; and then late in
the afternoon a cab came to take them to the station.

Aunt Emma saw them off. They felt that THEY were seeing HER off, and
they were glad of it.

"But, oh, those poor little foreign children that she's going to
governess!" whispered Phyllis. "I wouldn't be them for anything!"

At first they enjoyed looking out of the window, but when it grew dusk
they grew sleepier and sleepier, and no one knew how long they had been
in the train when they were roused by Mother's shaking them gently and
saying:--

"Wake up, dears. We're there."

They woke up, cold and melancholy, and stood shivering on the draughty
platform while the baggage was taken out of the train. Then the engine,
puffing and blowing, set to work again, and dragged the train away. The
children watched the tail-lights of the guard's van disappear into the
darkness.

This was the first train the children saw on that railway which was in
time to become so very dear to them. They did not guess then how they
would grow to love the railway, and how soon it would become the centre
of their new life, nor what wonders and changes it would bring to them.
They only shivered and sneezed and hoped the walk to the new house would
not be long. Peter's nose was colder than he ever remembered it to have
been before. Roberta's hat was crooked, and the elastic seemed tighter
than usual. Phyllis's shoe-laces had come undone.

"Come," said Mother, "we've got to walk. There aren't any cabs here."

The walk was dark and muddy. The children stumbled a little on the rough
road, and once Phyllis absently fell into a puddle, and was picked up
damp and unhappy. There were no gas-lamps on the road, and the road was
uphill. The cart went at a foot's pace, and they followed the gritty
crunch of its wheels. As their eyes got used to the darkness, they could
see the mound of boxes swaying dimly in front of them.

A long gate had to be opened for the cart to pass through, and after
that the road seemed to go across fields--and now it went down hill.
Presently a great dark lumpish thing showed over to the right.

"There's the house," said Mother. "I wonder why she's shut the
shutters."

"Who's SHE?" asked Roberta.

"The woman I engaged to clean the place, and put the furniture straight
and get supper."

There was a low wall, and trees inside.

"That's the garden," said Mother.

"It looks more like a dripping-pan full of black cabbages," said Peter.

The cart went on along by the garden wall, and round to the back of the
house, and here it clattered into a cobble-stoned yard and stopped at
the back door.

There was no light in any of the windows.

Everyone hammered at the door, but no one came.

The man who drove the cart said he expected Mrs. Viney had gone home.

"You see your train was that late," said he.

"But she's got the key," said Mother. "What are we to do?"

"Oh, she'll have left that under the doorstep," said the cart man;
"folks do hereabouts." He took the lantern off his cart and stooped.

"Ay, here it is, right enough," he said.

He unlocked the door and went in and set his lantern on the table.

"Got e'er a candle?" said he.

"I don't know where anything is." Mother spoke rather less cheerfully
than usual.

He struck a match. There was a candle on the table, and he lighted it.
By its thin little glimmer the children saw a large bare kitchen with
a stone floor. There were no curtains, no hearth-rug. The kitchen
table from home stood in the middle of the room. The chairs were in one
corner, and the pots, pans, brooms, and crockery in another. There was
no fire, and the black grate showed cold, dead ashes.

As the cart man turned to go out after he had brought in the boxes,
there was a rustling, scampering sound that seemed to come from inside
the walls of the house.

"Oh, what's that?" cried the girls.

"It's only the rats," said the cart man. And he went away and shut the
door, and the sudden draught of it blew out the candle.

"Oh, dear," said Phyllis, "I wish we hadn't come!" and she knocked a
chair over.

"ONLY the rats!" said Peter, in the dark.



Chapter II. Peter's coal-mine.


"What fun!" said Mother, in the dark, feeling for the matches on the
table. "How frightened the poor mice were--I don't believe they were
rats at all."

She struck a match and relighted the candle and everyone looked at each
other by its winky, blinky light.

"Well," she said, "you've often wanted something to happen and now it
has. This is quite an adventure, isn't it? I told Mrs. Viney to get us
some bread and butter, and meat and things, and to have supper ready. I
suppose she's laid it in the dining-room. So let's go and see."

The dining-room opened out of the kitchen. It looked much darker than
the kitchen when they went in with the one candle. Because the kitchen
was whitewashed, but the dining-room was dark wood from floor to
ceiling, and across the ceiling there were heavy black beams. There was
a muddled maze of dusty furniture--the breakfast-room furniture from
the old home where they had lived all their lives. It seemed a very long
time ago, and a very long way off.

There was the table certainly, and there were chairs, but there was no
supper.

"Let's look in the other rooms," said Mother; and they looked. And in
each room was the same kind of blundering half-arrangement of furniture,
and fire-irons and crockery, and all sorts of odd things on the floor,
but there was nothing to eat; even in the pantry there were only a rusty
cake-tin and a broken plate with whitening mixed in it.

"What a horrid old woman!" said Mother; "she's just walked off with the
money and not got us anything to eat at all."

"Then shan't we have any supper at all?" asked Phyllis, dismayed,
stepping back on to a soap-dish that cracked responsively.

"Oh, yes," said Mother, "only it'll mean unpacking one of those big
cases that we put in the cellar. Phil, do mind where you're walking to,
there's a dear. Peter, hold the light."

The cellar door opened out of the kitchen. There were five wooden steps
leading down. It wasn't a proper cellar at all, the children thought,
because its ceiling went up as high as the kitchen's. A bacon-rack hung
under its ceiling. There was wood in it, and coal. Also the big cases.

Peter held the candle, all on one side, while Mother tried to open the
great packing-case. It was very securely nailed down.

"Where's the hammer?" asked Peter.

"That's just it," said Mother. "I'm afraid it's inside the box. But
there's a coal-shovel--and there's the kitchen poker."

And with these she tried to get the case open.

"Let me do it," said Peter, thinking he could do it better himself.
Everyone thinks this when he sees another person stirring a fire, or
opening a box, or untying a knot in a bit of string.

"You'll hurt your hands, Mammy," said Roberta; "let me."

"I wish Father was here," said Phyllis; "he'd get it open in two shakes.
What are you kicking me for, Bobbie?"

"I wasn't," said Roberta.

Just then the first of the long nails in the packing-case began to come
out with a scrunch. Then a lath was raised and then another, till all
four stood up with the long nails in them shining fiercely like iron
teeth in the candle-light.

"Hooray!" said Mother; "here are some candles--the very first thing! You
girls go and light them. You'll find some saucers and things. Just drop
a little candle-grease in the saucer and stick the candle upright in
it."

"How many shall we light?"

"As many as ever you like," said Mother, gaily. "The great thing is
to be cheerful. Nobody can be cheerful in the dark except owls and
dormice."

So the girls lighted candles. The head of the first match flew off and
stuck to Phyllis's finger; but, as Roberta said, it was only a little
burn, and she might have had to be a Roman martyr and be burned whole if
she had happened to live in the days when those things were fashionable.

Then, when the dining-room was lighted by fourteen candles, Roberta
fetched coal and wood and lighted a fire.

"It's very cold for May," she said, feeling what a grown-up thing it was
to say.

The fire-light and the candle-light made the dining-room look very
different, for now you could see that the dark walls were of wood,
carved here and there into little wreaths and loops.

The girls hastily 'tidied' the room, which meant putting the chairs
against the wall, and piling all the odds and ends into a corner and
partly hiding them with the big leather arm-chair that Father used to
sit in after dinner.

"Bravo!" cried Mother, coming in with a tray full of things. "This is
something like! I'll just get a tablecloth and then--"

The tablecloth was in a box with a proper lock that was opened with a
key and not with a shovel, and when the cloth was spread on the table, a
real feast was laid out on it.

Everyone was very, very tired, but everyone cheered up at the sight of
the funny and delightful supper. There were biscuits, the Marie and the
plain kind, sardines, preserved ginger, cooking raisins, and candied
peel and marmalade.

"What a good thing Aunt Emma packed up all the odds and ends out of the
Store cupboard," said Mother. "Now, Phil, DON'T put the marmalade spoon
in among the sardines."

"No, I won't, Mother," said Phyllis, and put it down among the Marie
biscuits.

"Let's drink Aunt Emma's health," said Roberta, suddenly; "what should
we have done if she hadn't packed up these things? Here's to Aunt Emma!"

And the toast was drunk in ginger wine and water, out of
willow-patterned tea-cups, because the glasses couldn't be found.

They all felt that they had been a little hard on Aunt Emma. She wasn't
a nice cuddly person like Mother, but after all it was she who had
thought of packing up the odds and ends of things to eat.

It was Aunt Emma, too, who had aired all the sheets ready; and the men
who had moved the furniture had put the bedsteads together, so the beds
were soon made.

"Good night, chickies," said Mother. "I'm sure there aren't any rats.
But I'll leave my door open, and then if a mouse comes, you need only
scream, and I'll come and tell it exactly what I think of it."

Then she went to her own room. Roberta woke to hear the little
travelling clock chime two. It sounded like a church clock ever so far
away, she always thought. And she heard, too, Mother still moving about
in her room.

Next morning Roberta woke Phyllis by pulling her hair gently, but quite
enough for her purpose.

"Wassermarrer?" asked Phyllis, still almost wholly asleep.

"Wake up! wake up!" said Roberta. "We're in the new house--don't you
remember? No servants or anything. Let's get up and begin to be useful.
We'll just creep down mouse-quietly, and have everything beautiful
before Mother gets up. I've woke Peter. He'll be dressed as soon as we
are."

So they dressed quietly and quickly. Of course, there was no water in
their room, so when they got down they washed as much as they thought
was necessary under the spout of the pump in the yard. One pumped and
the other washed. It was splashy but interesting.

"It's much more fun than basin washing," said Roberta. "How sparkly
the weeds are between the stones, and the moss on the roof--oh, and the
flowers!"

The roof of the back kitchen sloped down quite low. It was made
of thatch and it had moss on it, and house-leeks and stonecrop and
wallflowers, and even a clump of purple flag-flowers, at the far corner.

"This is far, far, far and away prettier than Edgecombe Villa," said
Phyllis. "I wonder what the garden's like."

"We mustn't think of the garden yet," said Roberta, with earnest energy.
"Let's go in and begin to work."

They lighted the fire and put the kettle on, and they arranged the
crockery for breakfast; they could not find all the right things, but
a glass ash-tray made an excellent salt-cellar, and a newish baking-tin
seemed as if it would do to put bread on, if they had any.

When there seemed to be nothing more that they could do, they went out
again into the fresh bright morning.

"We'll go into the garden now," said Peter. But somehow they couldn't
find the garden. They went round the house and round the house. The yard
occupied the back, and across it were stables and outbuildings. On the
other three sides the house stood simply in a field, without a yard
of garden to divide it from the short smooth turf. And yet they had
certainly seen the garden wall the night before.

It was a hilly country. Down below they could see the line of the
railway, and the black yawning mouth of a tunnel. The station was out of
sight. There was a great bridge with tall arches running across one end
of the valley.

"Never mind the garden," said Peter; "let's go down and look at the
railway. There might be trains passing."

"We can see them from here," said Roberta, slowly; "let's sit down a
bit."

So they all sat down on a great flat grey stone that had pushed itself
up out of the grass; it was one of many that lay about on the hillside,
and when Mother came out to look for them at eight o'clock, she found
them deeply asleep in a contented, sun-warmed bunch.

They had made an excellent fire, and had set the kettle on it at about
half-past five. So that by eight the fire had been out for some time,
the water had all boiled away, and the bottom was burned out of the
kettle. Also they had not thought of washing the crockery before they
set the table.

"But it doesn't matter--the cups and saucers, I mean," said Mother.
"Because I've found another room--I'd quite forgotten there was one. And
it's magic! And I've boiled the water for tea in a saucepan."

The forgotten room opened out of the kitchen. In the agitation and half
darkness the night before its door had been mistaken for a cupboard's.
It was a little square room, and on its table, all nicely set out, was a
joint of cold roast beef, with bread, butter, cheese, and a pie.

"Pie for breakfast!" cried Peter; "how perfectly ripping!"

"It isn't pigeon-pie," said Mother; "it's only apple. Well, this is the
supper we ought to have had last night. And there was a note from Mrs.
Viney. Her son-in-law has broken his arm, and she had to get home early.
She's coming this morning at ten."

That was a wonderful breakfast. It is unusual to begin the day with
cold apple pie, but the children all said they would rather have it than
meat.

"You see it's more like dinner than breakfast to us," said Peter,
passing his plate for more, "because we were up so early."

The day passed in helping Mother to unpack and arrange things. Six small
legs quite ached with running about while their owners carried clothes
and crockery and all sorts of things to their proper places. It was not
till quite late in the afternoon that Mother said:--

"There! That'll do for to-day. I'll lie down for an hour, so as to be as
fresh as a lark by supper-time."

Then they all looked at each other. Each of the three expressive
countenances expressed the same thought. That thought was double,
and consisted, like the bits of information in the Child's Guide to
Knowledge, of a question and an answer.

Q. Where shall we go?

A. To the railway.

So to the railway they went, and as soon as they started for the railway
they saw where the garden had hidden itself. It was right behind the
stables, and it had a high wall all round.

"Oh, never mind about the garden now!" cried Peter. "Mother told me
this morning where it was. It'll keep till to-morrow. Let's get to the
railway."

The way to the railway was all down hill over smooth, short turf with
here and there furze bushes and grey and yellow rocks sticking out like
candied peel from the top of a cake.

The way ended in a steep run and a wooden fence--and there was the
railway with the shining metals and the telegraph wires and posts and
signals.

They all climbed on to the top of the fence, and then suddenly there was
a rumbling sound that made them look along the line to the right, where
the dark mouth of a tunnel opened itself in the face of a rocky cliff;
next moment a train had rushed out of the tunnel with a shriek and
a snort, and had slid noisily past them. They felt the rush of its
passing, and the pebbles on the line jumped and rattled under it as it
went by.

"Oh!" said Roberta, drawing a long breath; "it was like a great dragon
tearing by. Did you feel it fan us with its hot wings?"

"I suppose a dragon's lair might look very like that tunnel from the
outside," said Phyllis.

But Peter said:--

"I never thought we should ever get as near to a train as this. It's the
most ripping sport!"

"Better than toy-engines, isn't it?" said Roberta.

(I am tired of calling Roberta by her name. I don't see why I should.
No one else did. Everyone else called her Bobbie, and I don't see why I
shouldn't.)

"I don't know; it's different," said Peter. "It seems so odd to see ALL
of a train. It's awfully tall, isn't it?"

"We've always seen them cut in half by platforms," said Phyllis.

"I wonder if that train was going to London," Bobbie said. "London's
where Father is."

"Let's go down to the station and find out," said Peter.

So they went.

They walked along the edge of the line, and heard the telegraph wires
humming over their heads. When you are in the train, it seems such a
little way between post and post, and one after another the posts seem
to catch up the wires almost more quickly than you can count them. But
when you have to walk, the posts seem few and far between.

But the children got to the station at last.

Never before had any of them been at a station, except for the purpose
of catching trains--or perhaps waiting for them--and always with
grown-ups in attendance, grown-ups who were not themselves interested in
stations, except as places from which they wished to get away.

Never before had they passed close enough to a signal-box to be able to
notice the wires, and to hear the mysterious 'ping, ping,' followed by
the strong, firm clicking of machinery.

The very sleepers on which the rails lay were a delightful path to
travel by--just far enough apart to serve as the stepping-stones in a
game of foaming torrents hastily organised by Bobbie.

Then to arrive at the station, not through the booking office, but in
a freebooting sort of way by the sloping end of the platform. This in
itself was joy.

Joy, too, it was to peep into the porters' room, where the lamps are,
and the Railway almanac on the wall, and one porter half asleep behind a
paper.

There were a great many crossing lines at the station; some of them just
ran into a yard and stopped short, as though they were tired of business
and meant to retire for good. Trucks stood on the rails here, and on one
side was a great heap of coal--not a loose heap, such as you see in your
coal cellar, but a sort of solid building of coals with large square
blocks of coal outside used just as though they were bricks, and built
up till the heap looked like the picture of the Cities of the Plain in
'Bible Stories for Infants.' There was a line of whitewash near the top
of the coaly wall.

When presently the Porter lounged out of his room at the twice-repeated
tingling thrill of a gong over the station door, Peter said, "How do you
do?" in his best manner, and hastened to ask what the white mark was on
the coal for.

"To mark how much coal there be," said the Porter, "so as we'll know if
anyone nicks it. So don't you go off with none in your pockets, young
gentleman!"

This seemed, at the time but a merry jest, and Peter felt at once that
the Porter was a friendly sort with no nonsense about him. But later the
words came back to Peter with a new meaning.

Have you ever gone into a farmhouse kitchen on a baking day, and seen
the great crock of dough set by the fire to rise? If you have, and if
you were at that time still young enough to be interested in everything
you saw, you will remember that you found yourself quite unable to
resist the temptation to poke your finger into the soft round of dough
that curved inside the pan like a giant mushroom. And you will remember
that your finger made a dent in the dough, and that slowly, but quite
surely, the dent disappeared, and the dough looked quite the same as it
did before you touched it. Unless, of course, your hand was extra dirty,
in which case, naturally, there would be a little black mark.

Well, it was just like that with the sorrow the children had felt at
Father's going away, and at Mother's being so unhappy. It made a deep
impression, but the impression did not last long.

They soon got used to being without Father, though they did not forget
him; and they got used to not going to school, and to seeing very little
of Mother, who was now almost all day shut up in her upstairs room
writing, writing, writing. She used to come down at tea-time and read
aloud the stories she had written. They were lovely stories.

The rocks and hills and valleys and trees, the canal, and above all, the
railway, were so new and so perfectly pleasing that the remembrance of
the old life in the villa grew to seem almost like a dream.

Mother had told them more than once that they were 'quite poor now,' but
this did not seem to be anything but a way of speaking. Grown-up people,
even Mothers, often make remarks that don't seem to mean anything in
particular, just for the sake of saying something, seemingly. There was
always enough to eat, and they wore the same kind of nice clothes they
had always worn.

But in June came three wet days; the rain came down, straight as lances,
and it was very, very cold. Nobody could go out, and everybody shivered.
They all went up to the door of Mother's room and knocked.

"Well, what is it?" asked Mother from inside.

"Mother," said Bobbie, "mayn't I light a fire? I do know how."

And Mother said: "No, my ducky-love. We mustn't have fires in June--coal
is so dear. If you're cold, go and have a good romp in the attic.
That'll warm you."

"But, Mother, it only takes such a very little coal to make a fire."

"It's more than we can afford, chickeny-love," said Mother, cheerfully.
"Now run away, there's darlings--I'm madly busy!"

"Mother's always busy now," said Phyllis, in a whisper to Peter. Peter
did not answer. He shrugged his shoulders. He was thinking.

Thought, however, could not long keep itself from the suitable
furnishing of a bandit's lair in the attic. Peter was the bandit, of
course. Bobbie was his lieutenant, his band of trusty robbers, and, in
due course, the parent of Phyllis, who was the captured maiden for whom
a magnificent ransom--in horse-beans--was unhesitatingly paid.

They all went down to tea flushed and joyous as any mountain brigands.

But when Phyllis was going to add jam to her bread and butter, Mother
said:--

"Jam OR butter, dear--not jam AND butter. We can't afford that sort of
reckless luxury nowadays."

Phyllis finished the slice of bread and butter in silence, and followed
it up by bread and jam. Peter mingled thought and weak tea.

After tea they went back to the attic and he said to his sisters:--

"I have an idea."

"What's that?" they asked politely.

"I shan't tell you," was Peter's unexpected rejoinder.

"Oh, very well," said Bobbie; and Phil said, "Don't, then."

"Girls," said Peter, "are always so hasty tempered."

"I should like to know what boys are?" said Bobbie, with fine disdain.
"I don't want to know about your silly ideas."

"You'll know some day," said Peter, keeping his own temper by what
looked exactly like a miracle; "if you hadn't been so keen on a row, I
might have told you about it being only noble-heartedness that made me
not tell you my idea. But now I shan't tell you anything at all about
it--so there!"

And it was, indeed, some time before he could be induced to say
anything, and when he did it wasn't much. He said:--

"The only reason why I won't tell you my idea that I'm going to do is
because it MAY be wrong, and I don't want to drag you into it."

"Don't you do it if it's wrong, Peter," said Bobbie; "let me do it." But
Phyllis said:--

"_I_ should like to do wrong if YOU'RE going to!"

"No," said Peter, rather touched by this devotion; "it's a forlorn hope,
and I'm going to lead it. All I ask is that if Mother asks where I am,
you won't blab."

"We haven't got anything TO blab," said Bobbie, indignantly.

"Oh, yes, you have!" said Peter, dropping horse-beans through his
fingers. "I've trusted you to the death. You know I'm going to do a lone
adventure--and some people might think it wrong--I don't. And if Mother
asks where I am, say I'm playing at mines."

"What sort of mines?"

"You just say mines."

"You might tell US, Pete."

"Well, then, COAL-mines. But don't you let the word pass your lips on
pain of torture."

"You needn't threaten," said Bobbie, "and I do think you might let us
help."

"If I find a coal-mine, you shall help cart the coal," Peter
condescended to promise.

"Keep your secret if you like," said Phyllis.

"Keep it if you CAN," said Bobbie.

"I'll keep it, right enough," said Peter.

Between tea and supper there is an interval even in the most greedily
regulated families. At this time Mother was usually writing, and Mrs.
Viney had gone home.

Two nights after the dawning of Peter's idea he beckoned the girls
mysteriously at the twilight hour.

"Come hither with me," he said, "and bring the Roman Chariot."

The Roman Chariot was a very old perambulator that had spent years of
retirement in the loft over the coach-house. The children had oiled its
works till it glided noiseless as a pneumatic bicycle, and answered to
the helm as it had probably done in its best days.

"Follow your dauntless leader," said Peter, and led the way down the
hill towards the station.

Just above the station many rocks have pushed their heads out through
the turf as though they, like the children, were interested in the
railway.

In a little hollow between three rocks lay a heap of dried brambles and
heather.

Peter halted, turned over the brushwood with a well-scarred boot, and
said:--

"Here's the first coal from the St. Peter's Mine. We'll take it home in
the chariot. Punctuality and despatch. All orders carefully attended to.
Any shaped lump cut to suit regular customers."

The chariot was packed full of coal. And when it was packed it had to
be unpacked again because it was so heavy that it couldn't be got up the
hill by the three children, not even when Peter harnessed himself to the
handle with his braces, and firmly grasping his waistband in one hand
pulled while the girls pushed behind.

Three journeys had to be made before the coal from Peter's mine was
added to the heap of Mother's coal in the cellar.

Afterwards Peter went out alone, and came back very black and
mysterious.

"I've been to my coal-mine," he said; "to-morrow evening we'll bring
home the black diamonds in the chariot."

It was a week later that Mrs. Viney remarked to Mother how well this
last lot of coal was holding out.

The children hugged themselves and each other in complicated wriggles of
silent laughter as they listened on the stairs. They had all forgotten
by now that there had ever been any doubt in Peter's mind as to whether
coal-mining was wrong.

But there came a dreadful night when the Station Master put on a pair
of old sand shoes that he had worn at the seaside in his summer holiday,
and crept out very quietly to the yard where the Sodom and Gomorrah heap
of coal was, with the whitewashed line round it. He crept out there, and
he waited like a cat by a mousehole. On the top of the heap something
small and dark was scrabbling and rattling furtively among the coal.

The Station Master concealed himself in the shadow of a brake-van that
had a little tin chimney and was labelled:--

     G. N. and S. R.
          34576
    Return at once to
  White Heather Sidings

and in this concealment he lurked till the small thing on the top of
the heap ceased to scrabble and rattle, came to the edge of the heap,
cautiously let itself down, and lifted something after it. Then the arm
of the Station Master was raised, the hand of the Station Master fell
on a collar, and there was Peter firmly held by the jacket, with an old
carpenter's bag full of coal in his trembling clutch.

"So I've caught you at last, have I, you young thief?" said the Station
Master.

"I'm not a thief," said Peter, as firmly as he could. "I'm a
coal-miner."

"Tell that to the Marines," said the Station Master.

"It would be just as true whoever I told it to," said Peter.

"You're right there," said the man, who held him. "Stow your jaw, you
young rip, and come along to the station."

"Oh, no," cried in the darkness an agonised voice that was not Peter's.

"Not the POLICE station!" said another voice from the darkness.

"Not yet," said the Station Master. "The Railway Station first. Why,
it's a regular gang. Any more of you?"

"Only us," said Bobbie and Phyllis, coming out of the shadow of another
truck labelled Staveley Colliery, and bearing on it the legend in white
chalk: 'Wanted in No. 1 Road.'

"What do you mean by spying on a fellow like this?" said Peter, angrily.

"Time someone did spy on you, _I_ think," said the Station Master. "Come
along to the station."

"Oh, DON'T!" said Bobbie. "Can't you decide NOW what you'll do to us?
It's our fault just as much as Peter's. We helped to carry the coal
away--and we knew where he got it."

"No, you didn't," said Peter.

"Yes, we did," said Bobbie. "We knew all the time. We only pretended we
didn't just to humour you."

Peter's cup was full. He had mined for coal, he had struck coal, he had
been caught, and now he learned that his sisters had 'humoured' him.

"Don't hold me!" he said. "I won't run away."

The Station Master loosed Peter's collar, struck a match and looked at
them by its flickering light.

"Why," said he, "you're the children from the Three Chimneys up yonder.
So nicely dressed, too. Tell me now, what made you do such a thing?
Haven't you ever been to church or learned your catechism or anything,
not to know it's wicked to steal?" He spoke much more gently now, and
Peter said:--

"I didn't think it was stealing. I was almost sure it wasn't. I thought
if I took it from the outside part of the heap, perhaps it would be. But
in the middle I thought I could fairly count it only mining. It'll
take thousands of years for you to burn up all that coal and get to the
middle parts."

"Not quite. But did you do it for a lark or what?"

"Not much lark carting that beastly heavy stuff up the hill," said
Peter, indignantly.

"Then why did you?" The Station Master's voice was so much kinder now
that Peter replied:--

"You know that wet day? Well, Mother said we were too poor to have a
fire. We always had fires when it was cold at our other house, and--"

"DON'T!" interrupted Bobbie, in a whisper.

"Well," said the Station Master, rubbing his chin thoughtfully, "I'll
tell you what I'll do. I'll look over it this once. But you remember,
young gentleman, stealing is stealing, and what's mine isn't yours,
whether you call it mining or whether you don't. Run along home."

"Do you mean you aren't going to do anything to us? Well, you are a
brick," said Peter, with enthusiasm.

"You're a dear," said Bobbie.

"You're a darling," said Phyllis.

"That's all right," said the Station Master.

And on this they parted.

"Don't speak to me," said Peter, as the three went up the hill. "You're
spies and traitors--that's what you are."

But the girls were too glad to have Peter between them, safe and free,
and on the way to Three Chimneys and not to the Police Station, to mind
much what he said.

"We DID say it was us as much as you," said Bobbie, gently.

"Well--and it wasn't."

"It would have come to the same thing in Courts with judges," said
Phyllis. "Don't be snarky, Peter. It isn't our fault your secrets are so
jolly easy to find out." She took his arm, and he let her.

"There's an awful lot of coal in the cellar, anyhow," he went on.

"Oh, don't!" said Bobbie. "I don't think we ought to be glad about
THAT."

"I don't know," said Peter, plucking up a spirit. "I'm not at all sure,
even now, that mining is a crime."

But the girls were quite sure. And they were also quite sure that he was
quite sure, however little he cared to own it.



Chapter III. The old gentleman.


After the adventure of Peter's Coal-mine, it seemed well to the children
to keep away from the station--but they did not, they could not, keep
away from the railway. They had lived all their lives in a street where
cabs and omnibuses rumbled by at all hours, and the carts of butchers
and bakers and candlestick makers (I never saw a candlestick-maker's
cart; did you?) might occur at any moment. Here in the deep silence of
the sleeping country the only things that went by were the trains. They
seemed to be all that was left to link the children to the old life that
had once been theirs. Straight down the hill in front of Three Chimneys
the daily passage of their six feet began to mark a path across the
crisp, short turf. They began to know the hours when certain trains
passed, and they gave names to them. The 9.15 up was called the Green
Dragon. The 10.7 down was the Worm of Wantley. The midnight town
express, whose shrieking rush they sometimes woke from their dreams
to hear, was the Fearsome Fly-by-night. Peter got up once, in chill
starshine, and, peeping at it through his curtains, named it on the
spot.

It was by the Green Dragon that the old gentleman travelled. He was a
very nice-looking old gentleman, and he looked as if he were nice,
too, which is not at all the same thing. He had a fresh-coloured,
clean-shaven face and white hair, and he wore rather odd-shaped collars
and a top-hat that wasn't exactly the same kind as other people's. Of
course the children didn't see all this at first. In fact the first
thing they noticed about the old gentleman was his hand.

It was one morning as they sat on the fence waiting for the Green
Dragon, which was three and a quarter minutes late by Peter's Waterbury
watch that he had had given him on his last birthday.

"The Green Dragon's going where Father is," said Phyllis; "if it were
a really real dragon, we could stop it and ask it to take our love to
Father."

"Dragons don't carry people's love," said Peter; "they'd be above it."

"Yes, they do, if you tame them thoroughly first. They fetch and carry
like pet spaniels," said Phyllis, "and feed out of your hand. I wonder
why Father never writes to us."

"Mother says he's been too busy," said Bobbie; "but he'll write soon,
she says."

"I say," Phyllis suggested, "let's all wave to the Green Dragon as it
goes by. If it's a magic dragon, it'll understand and take our loves to
Father. And if it isn't, three waves aren't much. We shall never miss
them."

So when the Green Dragon tore shrieking out of the mouth of its dark
lair, which was the tunnel, all three children stood on the railing and
waved their pocket-handkerchiefs without stopping to think whether they
were clean handkerchiefs or the reverse. They were, as a matter of fact,
very much the reverse.

And out of a first-class carriage a hand waved back. A quite clean hand.
It held a newspaper. It was the old gentleman's hand.

After this it became the custom for waves to be exchanged between the
children and the 9.15.

And the children, especially the girls, liked to think that perhaps the
old gentleman knew Father, and would meet him 'in business,' wherever
that shady retreat might be, and tell him how his three children stood
on a rail far away in the green country and waved their love to him
every morning, wet or fine.

For they were now able to go out in all sorts of weather such as they
would never have been allowed to go out in when they lived in their
villa house. This was Aunt Emma's doing, and the children felt more and
more that they had not been quite fair to this unattractive aunt, when
they found how useful were the long gaiters and waterproof coats that
they had laughed at her for buying for them.

Mother, all this time, was very busy with her writing. She used to send
off a good many long blue envelopes with stories in them--and large
envelopes of different sizes and colours used to come to her. Sometimes
she would sigh when she opened them and say:--

"Another story come home to roost. Oh, dear, Oh, dear!" and then the
children would be very sorry.

But sometimes she would wave the envelope in the air and say:--"Hooray,
hooray. Here's a sensible Editor. He's taken my story and this is the
proof of it."

At first the children thought 'the Proof' meant the letter the sensible
Editor had written, but they presently got to know that the proof was
long slips of paper with the story printed on them.

Whenever an Editor was sensible there were buns for tea.

One day Peter was going down to the village to get buns to celebrate
the sensibleness of the Editor of the Children's Globe, when he met the
Station Master.

Peter felt very uncomfortable, for he had now had time to think over the
affair of the coal-mine. He did not like to say "Good morning" to the
Station Master, as you usually do to anyone you meet on a lonely road,
because he had a hot feeling, which spread even to his ears, that the
Station Master might not care to speak to a person who had stolen coals.
'Stolen' is a nasty word, but Peter felt it was the right one. So he
looked down, and said Nothing.

It was the Station Master who said "Good morning" as he passed by. And
Peter answered, "Good morning." Then he thought:--

"Perhaps he doesn't know who I am by daylight, or he wouldn't be so
polite."

And he did not like the feeling which thinking this gave him. And then
before he knew what he was going to do he ran after the Station Master,
who stopped when he heard Peter's hasty boots crunching the road,
and coming up with him very breathless and with his ears now quite
magenta-coloured, he said:--

"I don't want you to be polite to me if you don't know me when you see
me."

"Eh?" said the Station Master.

"I thought perhaps you didn't know it was me that took the coals,"
Peter went on, "when you said 'Good morning.' But it was, and I'm sorry.
There."

"Why," said the Station Master, "I wasn't thinking anything at all about
the precious coals. Let bygones be bygones. And where were you off to in
such a hurry?"

"I'm going to buy buns for tea," said Peter.

"I thought you were all so poor," said the Station Master.

"So we are," said Peter, confidentially, "but we always have three
pennyworth of halfpennies for tea whenever Mother sells a story or a
poem or anything."

"Oh," said the Station Master, "so your Mother writes stories, does
she?"

"The beautifulest you ever read," said Peter.

"You ought to be very proud to have such a clever Mother."

"Yes," said Peter, "but she used to play with us more before she had to
be so clever."

"Well," said the Station Master, "I must be getting along. You give us
a look in at the Station whenever you feel so inclined. And as to coals,
it's a word that--well--oh, no, we never mention it, eh?"

"Thank you," said Peter. "I'm very glad it's all straightened out
between us." And he went on across the canal bridge to the village to
get the buns, feeling more comfortable in his mind than he had felt
since the hand of the Station Master had fastened on his collar that
night among the coals.

Next day when they had sent the threefold wave of greeting to Father by
the Green Dragon, and the old gentleman had waved back as usual, Peter
proudly led the way to the station.

"But ought we?" said Bobbie.

"After the coals, she means," Phyllis explained.

"I met the Station Master yesterday," said Peter, in an offhand way,
and he pretended not to hear what Phyllis had said; "he expresspecially
invited us to go down any time we liked."

"After the coals?" repeated Phyllis. "Stop a minute--my bootlace is
undone again."

"It always IS undone again," said Peter, "and the Station Master was
more of a gentleman than you'll ever be, Phil--throwing coal at a chap's
head like that."

Phyllis did up her bootlace and went on in silence, but her shoulders
shook, and presently a fat tear fell off her nose and splashed on the
metal of the railway line. Bobbie saw it.

"Why, what's the matter, darling?" she said, stopping short and putting
her arm round the heaving shoulders.

"He called me un-un-ungentlemanly," sobbed Phyllis. "I didn't never call
him unladylike, not even when he tied my Clorinda to the firewood bundle
and burned her at the stake for a martyr."

Peter had indeed perpetrated this outrage a year or two before.

"Well, you began, you know," said Bobbie, honestly, "about coals and all
that. Don't you think you'd better both unsay everything since the wave,
and let honour be satisfied?"

"I will if Peter will," said Phyllis, sniffling.

"All right," said Peter; "honour is satisfied. Here, use my hankie,
Phil, for goodness' sake, if you've lost yours as usual. I wonder what
you do with them."

"You had my last one," said Phyllis, indignantly, "to tie up the
rabbit-hutch door with. But you're very ungrateful. It's quite right
what it says in the poetry book about sharper than a serpent it is to
have a toothless child--but it means ungrateful when it says toothless.
Miss Lowe told me so."

"All right," said Peter, impatiently, "I'm sorry. THERE! Now will you
come on?"

They reached the station and spent a joyous two hours with the Porter.
He was a worthy man and seemed never tired of answering the questions
that begin with "Why--" which many people in higher ranks of life often
seem weary of.

He told them many things that they had not known before--as, for
instance, that the things that hook carriages together are called
couplings, and that the pipes like great serpents that hang over the
couplings are meant to stop the train with.

"If you could get a holt of one o' them when the train is going and pull
'em apart," said he, "she'd stop dead off with a jerk."

"Who's she?" said Phyllis.

"The train, of course," said the Porter. After that the train was never
again 'It' to the children.

"And you know the thing in the carriages where it says on it, 'Five
pounds' fine for improper use.' If you was to improperly use that, the
train 'ud stop."

"And if you used it properly?" said Roberta.

"It 'ud stop just the same, I suppose," said he, "but it isn't proper
use unless you're being murdered. There was an old lady once--someone
kidded her on it was a refreshment-room bell, and she used it improper,
not being in danger of her life, though hungry, and when the train
stopped and the guard came along expecting to find someone weltering in
their last moments, she says, 'Oh, please, Mister, I'll take a glass of
stout and a bath bun,' she says. And the train was seven minutes behind
her time as it was."

"What did the guard say to the old lady?"

"_I_ dunno," replied the Porter, "but I lay she didn't forget it in a
hurry, whatever it was."

In such delightful conversation the time went by all too quickly.

The Station Master came out once or twice from that sacred inner temple
behind the place where the hole is that they sell you tickets through,
and was most jolly with them all.

"Just as if coal had never been discovered," Phyllis whispered to her
sister.

He gave them each an orange, and promised to take them up into the
signal-box one of these days, when he wasn't so busy.

Several trains went through the station, and Peter noticed for the first
time that engines have numbers on them, like cabs.

"Yes," said the Porter, "I knowed a young gent as used to take down the
numbers of every single one he seed; in a green note-book with silver
corners it was, owing to his father being very well-to-do in the
wholesale stationery."

Peter felt that he could take down numbers, too, even if he was not
the son of a wholesale stationer. As he did not happen to have a green
leather note-book with silver corners, the Porter gave him a yellow
envelope and on it he noted:--

     379
     663

and felt that this was the beginning of what would be a most interesting
collection.

That night at tea he asked Mother if she had a green leather note-book
with silver corners. She had not; but when she heard what he wanted it
for she gave him a little black one.

"It has a few pages torn out," said she; "but it will hold quite a lot
of numbers, and when it's full I'll give you another. I'm so glad you
like the railway. Only, please, you mustn't walk on the line."

"Not if we face the way the train's coming?" asked Peter, after a gloomy
pause, in which glances of despair were exchanged.

"No--really not," said Mother.

Then Phyllis said, "Mother, didn't YOU ever walk on the railway lines
when you were little?"

Mother was an honest and honourable Mother, so she had to say, "Yes."

"Well, then," said Phyllis.

"But, darlings, you don't know how fond I am of you. What should I do if
you got hurt?"

"Are you fonder of us than Granny was of you when you were little?"
Phyllis asked. Bobbie made signs to her to stop, but Phyllis never did
see signs, no matter how plain they might be.

Mother did not answer for a minute. She got up to put more water in the
teapot.

"No one," she said at last, "ever loved anyone more than my mother loved
me."

Then she was quiet again, and Bobbie kicked Phyllis hard under the
table, because Bobbie understood a little bit the thoughts that were
making Mother so quiet--the thoughts of the time when Mother was a
little girl and was all the world to HER mother. It seems so easy and
natural to run to Mother when one is in trouble. Bobbie understood a
little how people do not leave off running to their mothers when they
are in trouble even when they are grown up, and she thought she knew a
little what it must be to be sad, and have no mother to run to any more.

So she kicked Phyllis, who said:--

"What are you kicking me like that for, Bob?"

And then Mother laughed a little and sighed and said:--

"Very well, then. Only let me be sure you do know which way the trains
come--and don't walk on the line near the tunnel or near corners."

"Trains keep to the left like carriages," said Peter, "so if we keep to
the right, we're bound to see them coming."

"Very well," said Mother, and I dare say you think that she ought not
to have said it. But she remembered about when she was a little girl
herself, and she did say it--and neither her own children nor you nor
any other children in the world could ever understand exactly what it
cost her to do it. Only some few of you, like Bobbie, may understand a
very little bit.

It was the very next day that Mother had to stay in bed because her head
ached so. Her hands were burning hot, and she would not eat anything,
and her throat was very sore.

"If I was you, Mum," said Mrs. Viney, "I should take and send for the
doctor. There's a lot of catchy complaints a-going about just now. My
sister's eldest--she took a chill and it went to her inside, two years
ago come Christmas, and she's never been the same gell since."

Mother wouldn't at first, but in the evening she felt so much worse that
Peter was sent to the house in the village that had three laburnum trees
by the gate, and on the gate a brass plate with W. W. Forrest, M.D., on
it.

W. W. Forrest, M.D., came at once. He talked to Peter on the way back.
He seemed a most charming and sensible man, interested in railways, and
rabbits, and really important things.

When he had seen Mother, he said it was influenza.

"Now, Lady Grave-airs," he said in the hall to Bobbie, "I suppose you'll
want to be head-nurse."

"Of course," said she.

"Well, then, I'll send down some medicine. Keep up a good fire. Have
some strong beef tea made ready to give her as soon as the fever goes
down. She can have grapes now, and beef essence--and soda-water and
milk, and you'd better get in a bottle of brandy. The best brandy. Cheap
brandy is worse than poison."

She asked him to write it all down, and he did.

When Bobbie showed Mother the list he had written, Mother laughed. It
WAS a laugh, Bobbie decided, though it was rather odd and feeble.

"Nonsense," said Mother, laying in bed with eyes as bright as beads.
"I can't afford all that rubbish. Tell Mrs. Viney to boil two pounds of
scrag-end of the neck for your dinners to-morrow, and I can have some
of the broth. Yes, I should like some more water now, love. And will you
get a basin and sponge my hands?"

Roberta obeyed. When she had done everything she could to make Mother
less uncomfortable, she went down to the others. Her cheeks were very
red, her lips set tight, and her eyes almost as bright as Mother's.

She told them what the Doctor had said, and what Mother had said.

"And now," said she, when she had told all, "there's no one but us to do
anything, and we've got to do it. I've got the shilling for the mutton."

"We can do without the beastly mutton," said Peter; "bread and butter
will support life. People have lived on less on desert islands many a
time."

"Of course," said his sister. And Mrs. Viney was sent to the village to
get as much brandy and soda-water and beef tea as she could buy for a
shilling.

"But even if we never have anything to eat at all," said Phyllis, "you
can't get all those other things with our dinner money."

"No," said Bobbie, frowning, "we must find out some other way. Now
THINK, everybody, just as hard as ever you can."

They did think. And presently they talked. And later, when Bobbie had
gone up to sit with Mother in case she wanted anything, the other two
were very busy with scissors and a white sheet, and a paint brush, and
the pot of Brunswick black that Mrs. Viney used for grates and fenders.
They did not manage to do what they wished, exactly, with the first
sheet, so they took another out of the linen cupboard. It did not occur
to them that they were spoiling good sheets which cost good money. They
only knew that they were making a good--but what they were making comes
later.

Bobbie's bed had been moved into Mother's room, and several times in
the night she got up to mend the fire, and to give her mother milk and
soda-water. Mother talked to herself a good deal, but it did not seem
to mean anything. And once she woke up suddenly and called out: "Mamma,
mamma!" and Bobbie knew she was calling for Granny, and that she had
forgotten that it was no use calling, because Granny was dead.

In the early morning Bobbie heard her name and jumped out of bed and ran
to Mother's bedside.

"Oh--ah, yes--I think I was asleep," said Mother. "My poor little duck,
how tired you'll be--I do hate to give you all this trouble."

"Trouble!" said Bobbie.

"Ah, don't cry, sweet," Mother said; "I shall be all right in a day or
two."

And Bobbie said, "Yes," and tried to smile.

When you are used to ten hours of solid sleep, to get up three or four
times in your sleep-time makes you feel as though you had been up all
night. Bobbie felt quite stupid and her eyes were sore and stiff, but
she tidied the room, and arranged everything neatly before the Doctor
came.

This was at half-past eight.

"Everything going on all right, little Nurse?" he said at the front
door. "Did you get the brandy?"

"I've got the brandy," said Bobbie, "in a little flat bottle."

"I didn't see the grapes or the beef tea, though," said he.

"No," said Bobbie, firmly, "but you will to-morrow. And there's some
beef stewing in the oven for beef tea."

"Who told you to do that?" he asked.

"I noticed what Mother did when Phil had mumps."

"Right," said the Doctor. "Now you get your old woman to sit with your
mother, and then you eat a good breakfast, and go straight to bed and
sleep till dinner-time. We can't afford to have the head-nurse ill."

He was really quite a nice doctor.

When the 9.15 came out of the tunnel that morning the old gentleman in
the first-class carriage put down his newspaper, and got ready to wave
his hand to the three children on the fence. But this morning there were
not three. There was only one. And that was Peter.

Peter was not on the railings either, as usual. He was standing in front
of them in an attitude like that of a show-man showing off the animals
in a menagerie, or of the kind clergyman when he points with a wand at
the 'Scenes from Palestine,' when there is a magic-lantern and he is
explaining it.

Peter was pointing, too. And what he was pointing at was a large white
sheet nailed against the fence. On the sheet there were thick black
letters more than a foot long.

Some of them had run a little, because of Phyllis having put the
Brunswick black on too eagerly, but the words were quite easy to read.

And this what the old gentleman and several other people in the train
read in the large black letters on the white sheet:--

     LOOK OUT AT THE STATION.

A good many people did look out at the station and were disappointed,
for they saw nothing unusual. The old gentleman looked out, too, and at
first he too saw nothing more unusual than the gravelled platform and
the sunshine and the wallflowers and forget-me-nots in the station
borders. It was only just as the train was beginning to puff and pull
itself together to start again that he saw Phyllis. She was quite out of
breath with running.

"Oh," she said, "I thought I'd missed you. My bootlaces would keep
coming down and I fell over them twice. Here, take it."

She thrust a warm, dampish letter into his hand as the train moved.

He leaned back in his corner and opened the letter. This is what he
read:--

"Dear Mr. We do not know your name.

Mother is ill and the doctor says to give her the things at the end of
the letter, but she says she can't aford it, and to get mutton for
us and she will have the broth. We do not know anybody here but you,
because Father is away and we do not know the address. Father will pay
you, or if he has lost all his money, or anything, Peter will pay you
when he is a man. We promise it on our honer. I.O.U. for all the things
Mother wants.

     "sined Peter.

"Will you give the parsel to the Station Master, because of us not
knowing what train you come down by? Say it is for Peter that was sorry
about the coals and he will know all right.

     "Roberta.
     "Phyllis.
     "Peter."

Then came the list of things the Doctor had ordered.

The old gentleman read it through once, and his eyebrows went up. He
read it twice and smiled a little. When he had read it thrice, he put it
in his pocket and went on reading The Times.

At about six that evening there was a knock at the back door. The three
children rushed to open it, and there stood the friendly Porter, who had
told them so many interesting things about railways. He dumped down a
big hamper on the kitchen flags.

"Old gent," he said; "he asked me to fetch it up straight away."

"Thank you very much," said Peter, and then, as the Porter lingered, he
added:--

"I'm most awfully sorry I haven't got twopence to give you like Father
does, but--"

"You drop it if you please," said the Porter, indignantly. "I wasn't
thinking about no tuppences. I only wanted to say I was sorry your Mamma
wasn't so well, and to ask how she finds herself this evening--and
I've fetched her along a bit of sweetbrier, very sweet to smell it is.
Twopence indeed," said he, and produced a bunch of sweetbrier from his
hat, "just like a conjurer," as Phyllis remarked afterwards.

"Thank you very much," said Peter, "and I beg your pardon about the
twopence."

"No offence," said the Porter, untruly but politely, and went.

Then the children undid the hamper. First there was straw, and then
there were fine shavings, and then came all the things they had asked
for, and plenty of them, and then a good many things they had not asked
for; among others peaches and port wine and two chickens, a cardboard
box of big red roses with long stalks, and a tall thin green bottle
of lavender water, and three smaller fatter bottles of eau-de-Cologne.
There was a letter, too.

"Dear Roberta and Phyllis and Peter," it said; "here are the things you
want. Your mother will want to know where they came from. Tell her they
were sent by a friend who heard she was ill. When she is well again you
must tell her all about it, of course. And if she says you ought not to
have asked for the things, tell her that I say you were quite right,
and that I hope she will forgive me for taking the liberty of allowing
myself a very great pleasure."

The letter was signed G. P. something that the children couldn't read.

"I think we WERE right," said Phyllis.

"Right? Of course we were right," said Bobbie.

"All the same," said Peter, with his hands in his pockets, "I don't
exactly look forward to telling Mother the whole truth about it."

"We're not to do it till she's well," said Bobbie, "and when she's well
we shall be so happy we shan't mind a little fuss like that. Oh, just
look at the roses! I must take them up to her."

"And the sweetbrier," said Phyllis, sniffing it loudly; "don't forget
the sweetbrier."

"As if I should!" said Roberta. "Mother told me the other day there was
a thick hedge of it at her mother's house when she was a little girl."



Chapter IV. The engine-burglar.


What was left of the second sheet and the Brunswick black came in very
nicely to make a banner bearing the legend

     SHE IS NEARLY WELL THANK YOU

and this was displayed to the Green Dragon about a fortnight after the
arrival of the wonderful hamper. The old gentleman saw it, and waved
a cheerful response from the train. And when this had been done the
children saw that now was the time when they must tell Mother what they
had done when she was ill. And it did not seem nearly so easy as they
had thought it would be. But it had to be done. And it was done. Mother
was extremely angry. She was seldom angry, and now she was angrier than
they had ever known her. This was horrible. But it was much worse when
she suddenly began to cry. Crying is catching, I believe, like measles
and whooping-cough. At any rate, everyone at once found itself taking
part in a crying-party.

Mother stopped first. She dried her eyes and then she said:--

"I'm sorry I was so angry, darlings, because I know you didn't
understand."

"We didn't mean to be naughty, Mammy," sobbed Bobbie, and Peter and
Phyllis sniffed.

"Now, listen," said Mother; "it's quite true that we're poor, but
we have enough to live on. You mustn't go telling everyone about our
affairs--it's not right. And you must never, never, never ask strangers
to give you things. Now always remember that--won't you?"

They all hugged her and rubbed their damp cheeks against hers and
promised that they would.

"And I'll write a letter to your old gentleman, and I shall tell him
that I didn't approve--oh, of course I shall thank him, too, for
his kindness. It's YOU I don't approve of, my darlings, not the old
gentleman. He was as kind as ever he could be. And you can give the
letter to the Station Master to give him--and we won't say any more
about it."

Afterwards, when the children were alone, Bobbie said:--

"Isn't Mother splendid? You catch any other grown-up saying they were
sorry they had been angry."

"Yes," said Peter, "she IS splendid; but it's rather awful when she's
angry."

"She's like Avenging and Bright in the song," said Phyllis. "I should
like to look at her if it wasn't so awful. She looks so beautiful when
she's really downright furious."

They took the letter down to the Station Master.

"I thought you said you hadn't got any friends except in London," said
he.

"We've made him since," said Peter.

"But he doesn't live hereabouts?"

"No--we just know him on the railway."

Then the Station Master retired to that sacred inner temple behind the
little window where the tickets are sold, and the children went down
to the Porters' room and talked to the Porter. They learned several
interesting things from him--among others that his name was Perks,
that he was married and had three children, that the lamps in front of
engines are called head-lights and the ones at the back tail-lights.

"And that just shows," whispered Phyllis, "that trains really ARE
dragons in disguise, with proper heads and tails."

It was on this day that the children first noticed that all engines are
not alike.

"Alike?" said the Porter, whose name was Perks, "lor, love you, no,
Miss. No more alike nor what you an' me are. That little 'un without
a tender as went by just now all on her own, that was a tank, that
was--she's off to do some shunting t'other side o' Maidbridge. That's as
it might be you, Miss. Then there's goods engines, great, strong things
with three wheels each side--joined with rods to strengthen 'em--as it
might be me. Then there's main-line engines as it might be this
'ere young gentleman when he grows up and wins all the races at 'is
school--so he will. The main-line engine she's built for speed as well
as power. That's one to the 9.15 up."

"The Green Dragon," said Phyllis.

"We calls her the Snail, Miss, among ourselves," said the Porter. "She's
oftener be'ind'and nor any train on the line."

"But the engine's green," said Phyllis.

"Yes, Miss," said Perks, "so's a snail some seasons o' the year."

The children agreed as they went home to dinner that the Porter was most
delightful company.

Next day was Roberta's birthday. In the afternoon she was politely but
firmly requested to get out of the way and keep there till tea-time.

"You aren't to see what we're going to do till it's done; it's a
glorious surprise," said Phyllis.

And Roberta went out into the garden all alone. She tried to be
grateful, but she felt she would much rather have helped in whatever it
was than have to spend her birthday afternoon by herself, no matter how
glorious the surprise might be.

Now that she was alone, she had time to think, and one of the things she
thought of most was what mother had said in one of those feverish nights
when her hands were so hot and her eyes so bright.

The words were: "Oh, what a doctor's bill there'll be for this!"

She walked round and round the garden among the rose-bushes that hadn't
any roses yet, only buds, and the lilac bushes and syringas and American
currants, and the more she thought of the doctor's bill, the less she
liked the thought of it.

And presently she made up her mind. She went out through the side door
of the garden and climbed up the steep field to where the road runs
along by the canal. She walked along until she came to the bridge that
crosses the canal and leads to the village, and here she waited. It was
very pleasant in the sunshine to lean one's elbows on the warm stone
of the bridge and look down at the blue water of the canal. Bobbie had
never seen any other canal, except the Regent's Canal, and the water of
that is not at all a pretty colour. And she had never seen any river at
all except the Thames, which also would be all the better if its face
was washed.

Perhaps the children would have loved the canal as much as the railway,
but for two things. One was that they had found the railway FIRST--on
that first, wonderful morning when the house and the country and the
moors and rocks and great hills were all new to them. They had not found
the canal till some days later. The other reason was that everyone on
the railway had been kind to them--the Station Master, the Porter, and
the old gentleman who waved. And the people on the canal were anything
but kind.

The people on the canal were, of course, the bargees, who steered the
slow barges up and down, or walked beside the old horses that trampled
up the mud of the towing-path, and strained at the long tow-ropes.

Peter had once asked one of the bargees the time, and had been told
to "get out of that," in a tone so fierce that he did not stop to say
anything about his having just as much right on the towing-path as the
man himself. Indeed, he did not even think of saying it till some time
later.

Then another day when the children thought they would like to fish in
the canal, a boy in a barge threw lumps of coal at them, and one of
these hit Phyllis on the back of the neck. She was just stooping down to
tie up her bootlace--and though the coal hardly hurt at all it made her
not care very much about going on fishing.

On the bridge, however, Roberta felt quite safe, because she could look
down on the canal, and if any boy showed signs of meaning to throw coal,
she could duck behind the parapet.

Presently there was a sound of wheels, which was just what she expected.

The wheels were the wheels of the Doctor's dogcart, and in the cart, of
course, was the Doctor.

He pulled up, and called out:--

"Hullo, head nurse! Want a lift?"

"I wanted to see you," said Bobbie.

"Your mother's not worse, I hope?" said the Doctor.

"No--but--"

"Well, skip in, then, and we'll go for a drive."

Roberta climbed in and the brown horse was made to turn round--which it
did not like at all, for it was looking forward to its tea--I mean its
oats.

"This IS jolly," said Bobbie, as the dogcart flew along the road by the
canal.

"We could throw a stone down any one of your three chimneys," said the
Doctor, as they passed the house.

"Yes," said Bobbie, "but you'd have to be a jolly good shot."

"How do you know I'm not?" said the Doctor. "Now, then, what's the
trouble?"

Bobbie fidgeted with the hook of the driving apron.

"Come, out with it," said the Doctor.

"It's rather hard, you see," said Bobbie, "to out with it; because of
what Mother said."

"What DID Mother say?"

"She said I wasn't to go telling everyone that we're poor. But you
aren't everyone, are you?"

"Not at all," said the Doctor, cheerfully. "Well?"

"Well, I know doctors are very extravagant--I mean expensive, and Mrs.
Viney told me that her doctoring only cost her twopence a week because
she belonged to a Club."

"Yes?"

"You see she told me what a good doctor you were, and I asked her how
she could afford you, because she's much poorer than we are. I've been
in her house and I know. And then she told me about the Club, and I
thought I'd ask you--and--oh, I don't want Mother to be worried! Can't
we be in the Club, too, the same as Mrs. Viney?"

The Doctor was silent. He was rather poor himself, and he had been
pleased at getting a new family to attend. So I think his feelings at
that minute were rather mixed.

"You aren't cross with me, are you?" said Bobbie, in a very small voice.

The Doctor roused himself.

"Cross? How could I be? You're a very sensible little woman. Now look
here, don't you worry. I'll make it all right with your Mother, even if
I have to make a special brand-new Club all for her. Look here, this is
where the Aqueduct begins."

"What's an Aque--what's its name?" asked Bobbie.

"A water bridge," said the Doctor. "Look."

The road rose to a bridge over the canal. To the left was a steep rocky
cliff with trees and shrubs growing in the cracks of the rock. And the
canal here left off running along the top of the hill and started to run
on a bridge of its own--a great bridge with tall arches that went right
across the valley.

Bobbie drew a long breath.

"It IS grand, isn't it?" she said. "It's like pictures in the History of
Rome."

"Right!" said the Doctor, "that's just exactly what it IS like.
The Romans were dead nuts on aqueducts. It's a splendid piece of
engineering."

"I thought engineering was making engines."

"Ah, there are different sorts of engineering--making road and bridges
and tunnels is one kind. And making fortifications is another. Well, we
must be turning back. And, remember, you aren't to worry about doctor's
bills or you'll be ill yourself, and then I'll send you in a bill as
long as the aqueduct."

When Bobbie had parted from the Doctor at the top of the field that ran
down from the road to Three Chimneys, she could not feel that she had
done wrong. She knew that Mother would perhaps think differently.
But Bobbie felt that for once she was the one who was right, and she
scrambled down the rocky slope with a really happy feeling.

Phyllis and Peter met her at the back door. They were unnaturally clean
and neat, and Phyllis had a red bow in her hair. There was only just
time for Bobbie to make herself tidy and tie up her hair with a blue bow
before a little bell rang.

"There!" said Phyllis, "that's to show the surprise is ready. Now
you wait till the bell rings again and then you may come into the
dining-room."

So Bobbie waited.

"Tinkle, tinkle," said the little bell, and Bobbie went into the
dining-room, feeling rather shy. Directly she opened the door she found
herself, as it seemed, in a new world of light and flowers and singing.
Mother and Peter and Phyllis were standing in a row at the end of the
table. The shutters were shut and there were twelve candles on the
table, one for each of Roberta's years. The table was covered with a
sort of pattern of flowers, and at Roberta's place was a thick wreath of
forget-me-nots and several most interesting little packages. And Mother
and Phyllis and Peter were singing--to the first part of the tune of St.
Patrick's Day. Roberta knew that Mother had written the words on purpose
for her birthday. It was a little way of Mother's on birthdays. It
had begun on Bobbie's fourth birthday when Phyllis was a baby. Bobbie
remembered learning the verses to say to Father 'for a surprise.' She
wondered if Mother had remembered, too. The four-year-old verse had
been:--

     Daddy dear, I'm only four
     And I'd rather not be more.
     Four's the nicest age to be,
     Two and two and one and three.
     What I love is two and two,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and you.
     What you love is one and three,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and me.
     Give your little girl a kiss
     Because she learned and told you this.

The song the others were singing now went like this:--

     Our darling Roberta,
     No sorrow shall hurt her
     If we can prevent it
        Her whole life long.
     Her birthday's our fete day,
     We'll make it our great day,
     And give her our presents
        And sing her our song.
     May pleasures attend her
     And may the Fates send her
     The happiest journey
        Along her life's way.
     With skies bright above her
     And dear ones to love her!
     Dear Bob!  Many happy
        Returns of the day!

When they had finished singing they cried, "Three cheers for our
Bobbie!" and gave them very loudly. Bobbie felt exactly as though she
were going to cry--you know that odd feeling in the bridge of your nose
and the pricking in your eyelids? But before she had time to begin they
were all kissing and hugging her.

"Now," said Mother, "look at your presents."

They were very nice presents. There was a green and red needle-book that
Phyllis had made herself in secret moments. There was a darling little
silver brooch of Mother's shaped like a buttercup, which Bobbie had
known and loved for years, but which she had never, never thought would
come to be her very own. There was also a pair of blue glass vases from
Mrs. Viney. Roberta had seen and admired them in the village shop. And
there were three birthday cards with pretty pictures and wishes.

Mother fitted the forget-me-not crown on Bobbie's brown head.

"And now look at the table," she said.

There was a cake on the table covered with white sugar, with 'Dear
Bobbie' on it in pink sweets, and there were buns and jam; but
the nicest thing was that the big table was almost covered with
flowers--wallflowers were laid all round the tea-tray--there was a ring
of forget-me-nots round each plate. The cake had a wreath of white lilac
round it, and in the middle was something that looked like a pattern all
done with single blooms of lilac or wallflower or laburnum.

"It's a map--a map of the railway!" cried Peter. "Look--those lilac
lines are the metals--and there's the station done in brown wallflowers.
The laburnum is the train, and there are the signal-boxes, and the road
up to here--and those fat red daisies are us three waving to the old
gentleman--that's him, the pansy in the laburnum train."

"And there's 'Three Chimneys' done in the purple primroses," said
Phyllis. "And that little tiny rose-bud is Mother looking out for us
when we're late for tea. Peter invented it all, and we got all the
flowers from the station. We thought you'd like it better."

"That's my present," said Peter, suddenly dumping down his adored
steam-engine on the table in front of her. Its tender had been lined
with fresh white paper, and was full of sweets.

"Oh, Peter!" cried Bobbie, quite overcome by this munificence, "not your
own dear little engine that you're so fond of?"

"Oh, no," said Peter, very promptly, "not the engine. Only the sweets."

Bobbie couldn't help her face changing a little--not so much because she
was disappointed at not getting the engine, as because she had thought
it so very noble of Peter, and now she felt she had been silly to think
it. Also she felt she must have seemed greedy to expect the engine as
well as the sweets. So her face changed. Peter saw it. He hesitated a
minute; then his face changed, too, and he said: "I mean not ALL the
engine. I'll let you go halves if you like."

"You're a brick," cried Bobbie; "it's a splendid present." She said no
more aloud, but to herself she said:--

"That was awfully jolly decent of Peter because I know he didn't mean
to. Well, the broken half shall be my half of the engine, and I'll get
it mended and give it back to Peter for his birthday."--"Yes, Mother
dear, I should like to cut the cake," she added, and tea began.

It was a delightful birthday. After tea Mother played games with
them--any game they liked--and of course their first choice was
blindman's-buff, in the course of which Bobbie's forget-me-not wreath
twisted itself crookedly over one of her ears and stayed there. Then,
when it was near bed-time and time to calm down, Mother had a lovely new
story to read to them.

"You won't sit up late working, will you, Mother?" Bobbie asked as they
said good night.

And Mother said no, she wouldn't--she would only just write to Father
and then go to bed.

But when Bobbie crept down later to bring up her presents--for she felt
she really could not be separated from them all night--Mother was not
writing, but leaning her head on her arms and her arms on the table. I
think it was rather good of Bobbie to slip quietly away, saying over and
over, "She doesn't want me to know she's unhappy, and I won't know; I
won't know." But it made a sad end to the birthday.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

The very next morning Bobbie began to watch her opportunity to get
Peter's engine mended secretly. And the opportunity came the very next
afternoon.

Mother went by train to the nearest town to do shopping. When she went
there, she always went to the Post-office. Perhaps to post her letters
to Father, for she never gave them to the children or Mrs. Viney to
post, and she never went to the village herself. Peter and Phyllis went
with her. Bobbie wanted an excuse not to go, but try as she would she
couldn't think of a good one. And just when she felt that all was lost,
her frock caught on a big nail by the kitchen door and there was a great
criss-cross tear all along the front of the skirt. I assure you this was
really an accident. So the others pitied her and went without her,
for there was no time for her to change, because they were rather late
already and had to hurry to the station to catch the train.

When they had gone, Bobbie put on her everyday frock, and went down to
the railway. She did not go into the station, but she went along the
line to the end of the platform where the engine is when the down train
is alongside the platform--the place where there are a water tank and
a long, limp, leather hose, like an elephant's trunk. She hid behind a
bush on the other side of the railway. She had the toy engine done up in
brown paper, and she waited patiently with it under her arm.

Then when the next train came in and stopped, Bobbie went across the
metals of the up-line and stood beside the engine. She had never been so
close to an engine before. It looked much larger and harder than she
had expected, and it made her feel very small indeed, and, somehow, very
soft--as if she could very, very easily be hurt rather badly.

"I know what silk-worms feel like now," said Bobbie to herself.

The engine-driver and fireman did not see her. They were leaning out
on the other side, telling the Porter a tale about a dog and a leg of
mutton.

"If you please," said Roberta--but the engine was blowing off steam and
no one heard her.

"If you please, Mr. Engineer," she spoke a little louder, but the Engine
happened to speak at the same moment, and of course Roberta's soft
little voice hadn't a chance.

It seemed to her that the only way would be to climb on to the engine
and pull at their coats. The step was high, but she got her knee on it,
and clambered into the cab; she stumbled and fell on hands and knees on
the base of the great heap of coals that led up to the square opening in
the tender. The engine was not above the weaknesses of its fellows; it
was making a great deal more noise than there was the slightest need
for. And just as Roberta fell on the coals, the engine-driver, who
had turned without seeing her, started the engine, and when Bobbie had
picked herself up, the train was moving--not fast, but much too fast for
her to get off.

All sorts of dreadful thoughts came to her all together in one horrible
flash. There were such things as express trains that went on, she
supposed, for hundreds of miles without stopping. Suppose this should be
one of them? How would she get home again? She had no money to pay for
the return journey.

"And I've no business here. I'm an engine-burglar--that's what I am,"
she thought. "I shouldn't wonder if they could lock me up for this." And
the train was going faster and faster.

There was something in her throat that made it impossible for her to
speak. She tried twice. The men had their backs to her. They were doing
something to things that looked like taps.

Suddenly she put out her hand and caught hold of the nearest sleeve. The
man turned with a start, and he and Roberta stood for a minute looking
at each other in silence. Then the silence was broken by them both.

The man said, "Here's a bloomin' go!" and Roberta burst into tears.

The other man said he was blooming well blest--or something like it--but
though naturally surprised they were not exactly unkind.

"You're a naughty little gell, that's what you are," said the fireman,
and the engine-driver said:--

"Daring little piece, I call her," but they made her sit down on an iron
seat in the cab and told her to stop crying and tell them what she meant
by it.

She did stop, as soon as she could. One thing that helped her was the
thought that Peter would give almost his ears to be in her place--on a
real engine--really going. The children had often wondered whether any
engine-driver could be found noble enough to take them for a ride on an
engine--and now there she was. She dried her eyes and sniffed earnestly.

"Now, then," said the fireman, "out with it. What do you mean by it,
eh?"

"Oh, please," sniffed Bobbie.

"Try again," said the engine-driver, encouragingly.

Bobbie tried again.

"Please, Mr. Engineer," she said, "I did call out to you from the
line, but you didn't hear me--and I just climbed up to touch you on the
arm--quite gently I meant to do it--and then I fell into the coals--and
I am so sorry if I frightened you. Oh, don't be cross--oh, please
don't!" She sniffed again.

"We ain't so much CROSS," said the fireman, "as interested like. It
ain't every day a little gell tumbles into our coal bunker outer the
sky, is it, Bill? What did you DO it for--eh?"

"That's the point," agreed the engine-driver; "what did you do it FOR?"

Bobbie found that she had not quite stopped crying. The engine-driver
patted her on the back and said: "Here, cheer up, Mate. It ain't so bad
as all that 'ere, I'll be bound."

"I wanted," said Bobbie, much cheered to find herself addressed as
'Mate'--"I only wanted to ask you if you'd be so kind as to mend this."
She picked up the brown-paper parcel from among the coals and undid the
string with hot, red fingers that trembled.

Her feet and legs felt the scorch of the engine fire, but her shoulders
felt the wild chill rush of the air. The engine lurched and shook and
rattled, and as they shot under a bridge the engine seemed to shout in
her ears.

The fireman shovelled on coals.

Bobbie unrolled the brown paper and disclosed the toy engine.

"I thought," she said wistfully, "that perhaps you'd mend this for
me--because you're an engineer, you know."

The engine-driver said he was blowed if he wasn't blest.

"I'm blest if I ain't blowed," remarked the fireman.

But the engine-driver took the little engine and looked at it--and the
fireman ceased for an instant to shovel coal, and looked, too.

"It's like your precious cheek," said the engine-driver--"whatever made
you think we'd be bothered tinkering penny toys?"

"I didn't mean it for precious cheek," said Bobbie; "only everybody that
has anything to do with railways is so kind and good, I didn't think
you'd mind. You don't really--do you?" she added, for she had seen a not
unkindly wink pass between the two.

"My trade's driving of an engine, not mending her, especially such a
hout-size in engines as this 'ere," said Bill. "An' 'ow are we a-goin'
to get you back to your sorrowing friends and relations, and all be
forgiven and forgotten?"

"If you'll put me down next time you stop," said Bobbie, firmly, though
her heart beat fiercely against her arm as she clasped her hands, "and
lend me the money for a third-class ticket, I'll pay you back--honour
bright. I'm not a confidence trick like in the newspapers--really, I'm
not."

"You're a little lady, every inch," said Bill, relenting suddenly
and completely. "We'll see you gets home safe. An' about this
engine--Jim--ain't you got ne'er a pal as can use a soldering iron?
Seems to me that's about all the little bounder wants doing to it."

"That's what Father said," Bobbie explained eagerly. "What's that for?"

She pointed to a little brass wheel that he had turned as he spoke.

"That's the injector."

"In--what?"

"Injector to fill up the boiler."

"Oh," said Bobbie, mentally registering the fact to tell the others;
"that IS interesting."

"This 'ere's the automatic brake," Bill went on, flattered by her
enthusiasm. "You just move this 'ere little handle--do it with one
finger, you can--and the train jolly soon stops. That's what they call
the Power of Science in the newspapers."

He showed her two little dials, like clock faces, and told her how one
showed how much steam was going, and the other showed if the brake was
working properly.

By the time she had seen him shut off steam with a big shining steel
handle, Bobbie knew more about the inside working of an engine than she
had ever thought there was to know, and Jim had promised that his second
cousin's wife's brother should solder the toy engine, or Jim would know
the reason why. Besides all the knowledge she had gained Bobbie felt
that she and Bill and Jim were now friends for life, and that they had
wholly and forever forgiven her for stumbling uninvited among the sacred
coals of their tender.

At Stacklepoole Junction she parted from them with warm expressions of
mutual regard. They handed her over to the guard of a returning train--a
friend of theirs--and she had the joy of knowing what guards do in their
secret fastnesses, and understood how, when you pull the communication
cord in railway carriages, a wheel goes round under the guard's nose and
a loud bell rings in his ears. She asked the guard why his van smelt
so fishy, and learned that he had to carry a lot of fish every day, and
that the wetness in the hollows of the corrugated floor had all drained
out of boxes full of plaice and cod and mackerel and soles and smelts.

Bobbie got home in time for tea, and she felt as though her mind would
burst with all that had been put into it since she parted from the
others. How she blessed the nail that had torn her frock!

"Where have you been?" asked the others.

"To the station, of course," said Roberta. But she would not tell a word
of her adventures till the day appointed, when she mysteriously led them
to the station at the hour of the 3.19's transit, and proudly introduced
them to her friends, Bill and Jim. Jim's second cousin's wife's brother
had not been unworthy of the sacred trust reposed in him. The toy engine
was, literally, as good as new.

"Good-bye--oh, good-bye," said Bobbie, just before the engine screamed
ITS good-bye. "I shall always, always love you--and Jim's second
cousin's wife's brother as well!"

And as the three children went home up the hill, Peter hugging the
engine, now quite its own self again, Bobbie told, with joyous leaps of
the heart, the story of how she had been an Engine-burglar.



Chapter V. Prisoners and captives.


It was one day when Mother had gone to Maidbridge. She had gone alone,
but the children were to go to the station to meet her. And, loving the
station as they did, it was only natural that they should be there a
good hour before there was any chance of Mother's train arriving, even
if the train were punctual, which was most unlikely. No doubt they would
have been just as early, even if it had been a fine day, and all the
delights of woods and fields and rocks and rivers had been open to them.
But it happened to be a very wet day and, for July, very cold. There was
a wild wind that drove flocks of dark purple clouds across the sky "like
herds of dream-elephants," as Phyllis said. And the rain stung sharply,
so that the way to the station was finished at a run. Then the rain fell
faster and harder, and beat slantwise against the windows of the booking
office and of the chill place that had General Waiting Room on its door.

"It's like being in a besieged castle," Phyllis said; "look at the
arrows of the foe striking against the battlements!"

"It's much more like a great garden-squirt," said Peter.

They decided to wait on the up side, for the down platform looked very
wet indeed, and the rain was driving right into the little bleak shelter
where down-passengers have to wait for their trains.

The hour would be full of incident and of interest, for there would be
two up trains and one down to look at before the one that should bring
Mother back.

"Perhaps it'll have stopped raining by then," said Bobbie; "anyhow, I'm
glad I brought Mother's waterproof and umbrella."

They went into the desert spot labelled General Waiting Room, and the
time passed pleasantly enough in a game of advertisements. You know the
game, of course? It is something like dumb Crambo. The players take
it in turns to go out, and then come back and look as like some
advertisement as they can, and the others have to guess what
advertisement it is meant to be. Bobbie came in and sat down under
Mother's umbrella and made a sharp face, and everyone knew she was the
fox who sits under the umbrella in the advertisement. Phyllis tried to
make a Magic Carpet of Mother's waterproof, but it would not stand out
stiff and raft-like as a Magic Carpet should, and nobody could guess
it. Everyone thought Peter was carrying things a little too far when he
blacked his face all over with coal-dust and struck a spidery attitude
and said he was the blot that advertises somebody's Blue Black Writing
Fluid.

It was Phyllis's turn again, and she was trying to look like the Sphinx
that advertises What's-his-name's Personally Conducted Tours up the Nile
when the sharp ting of the signal announced the up train. The children
rushed out to see it pass. On its engine were the particular driver
and fireman who were now numbered among the children's dearest friends.
Courtesies passed between them. Jim asked after the toy engine, and
Bobbie pressed on his acceptance a moist, greasy package of toffee that
she had made herself.

Charmed by this attention, the engine-driver consented to consider her
request that some day he would take Peter for a ride on the engine.

"Stand back, Mates," cried the engine-driver, suddenly, "and horf she
goes."

And sure enough, off the train went. The children watched the
tail-lights of the train till it disappeared round the curve of the
line, and then turned to go back to the dusty freedom of the General
Waiting Room and the joys of the advertisement game.

They expected to see just one or two people, the end of the procession
of passengers who had given up their tickets and gone away. Instead, the
platform round the door of the station had a dark blot round it, and the
dark blot was a crowd of people.

"Oh!" cried Peter, with a thrill of joyous excitement, "something's
happened! Come on!"

They ran down the platform. When they got to the crowd, they could, of
course, see nothing but the damp backs and elbows of the people on the
crowd's outside. Everybody was talking at once. It was evident that
something had happened.

"It's my belief he's nothing worse than a natural," said a
farmerish-looking person. Peter saw his red, clean-shaven face as he
spoke.

"If you ask me, I should say it was a Police Court case," said a young
man with a black bag.

"Not it; the Infirmary more like--"

Then the voice of the Station Master was heard, firm and official:--

"Now, then--move along there. I'll attend to this, if YOU please."

But the crowd did not move. And then came a voice that thrilled the
children through and through. For it spoke in a foreign language. And,
what is more, it was a language that they had never heard. They had
heard French spoken and German. Aunt Emma knew German, and used to sing
a song about bedeuten and zeiten and bin and sin. Nor was it Latin.
Peter had been in Latin for four terms.

It was some comfort, anyhow, to find that none of the crowd understood
the foreign language any better than the children did.

"What's that he's saying?" asked the farmer, heavily.

"Sounds like French to me," said the Station Master, who had once been
to Boulogne for the day.

"It isn't French!" cried Peter.

"What is it, then?" asked more than one voice. The crowd fell back a
little to see who had spoken, and Peter pressed forward, so that when
the crowd closed up again he was in the front rank.

"I don't know what it is," said Peter, "but it isn't French. I know
that." Then he saw what it was that the crowd had for its centre. It
was a man--the man, Peter did not doubt, who had spoken in that strange
tongue. A man with long hair and wild eyes, with shabby clothes of a cut
Peter had not seen before--a man whose hands and lips trembled, and who
spoke again as his eyes fell on Peter.

"No, it's not French," said Peter.

"Try him with French if you know so much about it," said the farmer-man.

"Parlay voo Frongsay?" began Peter, boldly, and the next moment the
crowd recoiled again, for the man with the wild eyes had left leaning
against the wall, and had sprung forward and caught Peter's hands,
and begun to pour forth a flood of words which, though he could not
understand a word of them, Peter knew the sound of.

"There!" said he, and turned, his hands still clasped in the hands of
the strange shabby figure, to throw a glance of triumph at the crowd;
"there; THAT'S French."

"What does he say?"

"I don't know." Peter was obliged to own it.

"Here," said the Station Master again; "you move on if you please. I'LL
deal with this case."

A few of the more timid or less inquisitive travellers moved slowly and
reluctantly away. And Phyllis and Bobbie got near to Peter. All three
had been TAUGHT French at school. How deeply they now wished that they
had LEARNED it! Peter shook his head at the stranger, but he also shook
his hands as warmly and looked at him as kindly as he could. A person
in the crowd, after some hesitation, said suddenly, "No comprenny!" and
then, blushing deeply, backed out of the press and went away.

"Take him into your room," whispered Bobbie to the Station Master.
"Mother can talk French. She'll be here by the next train from
Maidbridge."

The Station Master took the arm of the stranger, suddenly but not
unkindly. But the man wrenched his arm away, and cowered back coughing
and trembling and trying to push the Station Master away.

"Oh, don't!" said Bobbie; "don't you see how frightened he is? He thinks
you're going to shut him up. I know he does--look at his eyes!"

"They're like a fox's eyes when the beast's in a trap," said the farmer.

"Oh, let me try!" Bobbie went on; "I do really know one or two French
words if I could only think of them."

Sometimes, in moments of great need, we can do wonderful things--things
that in ordinary life we could hardly even dream of doing. Bobbie had
never been anywhere near the top of her French class, but she must have
learned something without knowing it, for now, looking at those wild,
hunted eyes, she actually remembered and, what is more, spoke, some
French words. She said:--

"Vous attendre. Ma mere parlez Francais. Nous--what's the French for
'being kind'?"

Nobody knew.

"Bong is 'good,'" said Phyllis.

"Nous etre bong pour vous."

I do not know whether the man understood her words, but he understood
the touch of the hand she thrust into his, and the kindness of the other
hand that stroked his shabby sleeve.

She pulled him gently towards the inmost sanctuary of the Station
Master. The other children followed, and the Station Master shut the
door in the face of the crowd, which stood a little while in the booking
office talking and looking at the fast closed yellow door, and then by
ones and twos went its way, grumbling.

Inside the Station Master's room Bobbie still held the stranger's hand
and stroked his sleeve.

"Here's a go," said the Station Master; "no ticket--doesn't even know
where he wants to go. I'm not sure now but what I ought to send for the
police."

"Oh, DON'T!" all the children pleaded at once. And suddenly Bobbie
got between the others and the stranger, for she had seen that he was
crying.

By a most unusual piece of good fortune she had a handkerchief in
her pocket. By a still more uncommon accident the handkerchief was
moderately clean. Standing in front of the stranger, she got out the
handkerchief and passed it to him so that the others did not see.

"Wait till Mother comes," Phyllis was saying; "she does speak French
beautifully. You'd just love to hear her."

"I'm sure he hasn't done anything like you're sent to prison for," said
Peter.

"Looks like without visible means to me," said the Station Master.
"Well, I don't mind giving him the benefit of the doubt till your Mamma
comes. I SHOULD like to know what nation's got the credit of HIM, that I
should."

Then Peter had an idea. He pulled an envelope out of his pocket, and
showed that it was half full of foreign stamps.

"Look here," he said, "let's show him these--"

Bobbie looked and saw that the stranger had dried his eyes with her
handkerchief. So she said: "All right."

They showed him an Italian stamp, and pointed from him to it and back
again, and made signs of question with their eyebrows. He shook his
head. Then they showed him a Norwegian stamp--the common blue kind it
was--and again he signed No. Then they showed him a Spanish one, and
at that he took the envelope from Peter's hand and searched among the
stamps with a hand that trembled. The hand that he reached out at last,
with a gesture as of one answering a question, contained a RUSSIAN
stamp.

"He's Russian," cried Peter, "or else he's like 'the man who was'--in
Kipling, you know."

The train from Maidbridge was signalled.

"I'll stay with him till you bring Mother in," said Bobbie.

"You're not afraid, Missie?"

"Oh, no," said Bobbie, looking at the stranger, as she might have looked
at a strange dog of doubtful temper. "You wouldn't hurt me, would you?"

She smiled at him, and he smiled back, a queer crooked smile. And then
he coughed again. And the heavy rattling swish of the incoming train
swept past, and the Station Master and Peter and Phyllis went out to
meet it. Bobbie was still holding the stranger's hand when they came
back with Mother.

The Russian rose and bowed very ceremoniously.

Then Mother spoke in French, and he replied, haltingly at first, but
presently in longer and longer sentences.

The children, watching his face and Mother's, knew that he was telling
her things that made her angry and pitying, and sorry and indignant all
at once.

"Well, Mum, what's it all about?" The Station Master could not restrain
his curiosity any longer.

"Oh," said Mother, "it's all right. He's a Russian, and he's lost his
ticket. And I'm afraid he's very ill. If you don't mind, I'll take him
home with me now. He's really quite worn out. I'll run down and tell you
all about him to-morrow."

"I hope you won't find you're taking home a frozen viper," said the
Station Master, doubtfully.

"Oh, no," Mother said brightly, and she smiled; "I'm quite sure I'm
not. Why, he's a great man in his own country, writes books--beautiful
books--I've read some of them; but I'll tell you all about it
to-morrow."

She spoke again in French to the Russian, and everyone could see the
surprise and pleasure and gratitude in his eyes. He got up and politely
bowed to the Station Master, and offered his arm most ceremoniously to
Mother. She took it, but anybody could have seen that she was helping
him along, and not he her.

"You girls run home and light a fire in the sitting-room," Mother said,
"and Peter had better go for the Doctor."

But it was Bobbie who went for the Doctor.

"I hate to tell you," she said breathlessly when she came upon him
in his shirt sleeves, weeding his pansy-bed, "but Mother's got a very
shabby Russian, and I'm sure he'll have to belong to your Club. I'm
certain he hasn't got any money. We found him at the station."

"Found him! Was he lost, then?" asked the Doctor, reaching for his coat.

"Yes," said Bobbie, unexpectedly, "that's just what he was. He's been
telling Mother the sad, sweet story of his life in French; and she said
would you be kind enough to come directly if you were at home. He has a
dreadful cough, and he's been crying."

The Doctor smiled.

"Oh, don't," said Bobbie; "please don't. You wouldn't if you'd seen him.
I never saw a man cry before. You don't know what it's like."

Dr. Forrest wished then that he hadn't smiled.

When Bobbie and the Doctor got to Three Chimneys, the Russian was
sitting in the arm-chair that had been Father's, stretching his feet
to the blaze of a bright wood fire, and sipping the tea Mother had made
him.

"The man seems worn out, mind and body," was what the Doctor said; "the
cough's bad, but there's nothing that can't be cured. He ought to go
straight to bed, though--and let him have a fire at night."

"I'll make one in my room; it's the only one with a fireplace," said
Mother. She did, and presently the Doctor helped the stranger to bed.

There was a big black trunk in Mother's room that none of the children
had ever seen unlocked. Now, when she had lighted the fire, she unlocked
it and took some clothes out--men's clothes--and set them to air by the
newly lighted fire. Bobbie, coming in with more wood for the fire, saw
the mark on the night-shirt, and looked over to the open trunk. All
the things she could see were men's clothes. And the name marked on the
shirt was Father's name. Then Father hadn't taken his clothes with him.
And that night-shirt was one of Father's new ones. Bobbie remembered its
being made, just before Peter's birthday. Why hadn't Father taken his
clothes? Bobbie slipped from the room. As she went she heard the key
turned in the lock of the trunk. Her heart was beating horribly. WHY
hadn't Father taken his clothes? When Mother came out of the room,
Bobbie flung tightly clasping arms round her waist, and whispered:--

"Mother--Daddy isn't--isn't DEAD, is he?"

"My darling, no! What made you think of anything so horrible?"

"I--I don't know," said Bobbie, angry with herself, but still clinging
to that resolution of hers, not to see anything that Mother didn't mean
her to see.

Mother gave her a hurried hug. "Daddy was quite, QUITE well when I heard
from him last," she said, "and he'll come back to us some day. Don't
fancy such horrible things, darling!"

Later on, when the Russian stranger had been made comfortable for the
night, Mother came into the girls' room. She was to sleep there in
Phyllis's bed, and Phyllis was to have a mattress on the floor, a
most amusing adventure for Phyllis. Directly Mother came in, two white
figures started up, and two eager voices called:--

"Now, Mother, tell us all about the Russian gentleman."

A white shape hopped into the room. It was Peter, dragging his quilt
behind him like the tail of a white peacock.

"We have been patient," he said, "and I had to bite my tongue not to
go to sleep, and I just nearly went to sleep and I bit too hard, and it
hurts ever so. DO tell us. Make a nice long story of it."

"I can't make a long story of it to-night," said Mother; "I'm very
tired."

Bobbie knew by her voice that Mother had been crying, but the others
didn't know.

"Well, make it as long as you can," said Phil, and Bobbie got her arms
round Mother's waist and snuggled close to her.

"Well, it's a story long enough to make a whole book of. He's a writer;
he's written beautiful books. In Russia at the time of the Czar one
dared not say anything about the rich people doing wrong, or about the
things that ought to be done to make poor people better and happier. If
one did one was sent to prison."

"But they CAN'T," said Peter; "people only go to prison when they've
done wrong."

"Or when the Judges THINK they've done wrong," said Mother. "Yes, that's
so in England. But in Russia it was different. And he wrote a beautiful
book about poor people and how to help them. I've read it. There's
nothing in it but goodness and kindness. And they sent him to prison for
it. He was three years in a horrible dungeon, with hardly any light, and
all damp and dreadful. In prison all alone for three years."

Mother's voice trembled a little and stopped suddenly.

"But, Mother," said Peter, "that can't be true NOW. It sounds like
something out of a history book--the Inquisition, or something."

"It WAS true," said Mother; "it's all horribly true. Well, then they
took him out and sent him to Siberia, a convict chained to other
convicts--wicked men who'd done all sorts of crimes--a long chain of
them, and they walked, and walked, and walked, for days and weeks, till
he thought they'd never stop walking. And overseers went behind them
with whips--yes, whips--to beat them if they got tired. And some of them
went lame, and some fell down, and when they couldn't get up and go on,
they beat them, and then left them to die. Oh, it's all too terrible!
And at last he got to the mines, and he was condemned to stay there for
life--for life, just for writing a good, noble, splendid book."

"How did he get away?"

"When the war came, some of the Russian prisoners were allowed to
volunteer as soldiers. And he volunteered. But he deserted at the first
chance he got and--"

"But that's very cowardly, isn't it"--said Peter--"to desert? Especially
when it's war."

"Do you think he owed anything to a country that had done THAT to him?
If he did, he owed more to his wife and children. He didn't know what
had become of them."

"Oh," cried Bobbie, "he had THEM to think about and be miserable about
TOO, then, all the time he was in prison?"

"Yes, he had them to think about and be miserable about all the time he
was in prison. For anything he knew they might have been sent to prison,
too. They did those things in Russia. But while he was in the mines some
friends managed to get a message to him that his wife and children had
escaped and come to England. So when he deserted he came here to look
for them."

"Had he got their address?" said practical Peter.

"No; just England. He was going to London, and he thought he had to
change at our station, and then he found he'd lost his ticket and his
purse."

"Oh, DO you think he'll find them?--I mean his wife and children, not
the ticket and things."

"I hope so. Oh, I hope and pray that he'll find his wife and children
again."

Even Phyllis now perceived that mother's voice was very unsteady.

"Why, Mother," she said, "how very sorry you seem to be for him!"

Mother didn't answer for a minute. Then she just said, "Yes," and then
she seemed to be thinking. The children were quiet.

Presently she said, "Dears, when you say your prayers, I think you might
ask God to show His pity upon all prisoners and captives."

"To show His pity," Bobbie repeated slowly, "upon all prisoners and
captives. Is that right, Mother?"

"Yes," said Mother, "upon all prisoners and captives. All prisoners and
captives."



Chapter VI. Saviours of the train.


The Russian gentleman was better the next day, and the day after that
better still, and on the third day he was well enough to come into the
garden. A basket chair was put for him and he sat there, dressed in
clothes of Father's which were too big for him. But when Mother had
hemmed up the ends of the sleeves and the trousers, the clothes did
well enough. His was a kind face now that it was no longer tired and
frightened, and he smiled at the children whenever he saw them. They
wished very much that he could speak English. Mother wrote several
letters to people she thought might know whereabouts in England a
Russian gentleman's wife and family might possibly be; not to the people
she used to know before she came to live at Three Chimneys--she never
wrote to any of them--but strange people--Members of Parliament and
Editors of papers, and Secretaries of Societies.

And she did not do much of her story-writing, only corrected proofs as
she sat in the sun near the Russian, and talked to him every now and
then.

The children wanted very much to show how kindly they felt to this man
who had been sent to prison and to Siberia just for writing a beautiful
book about poor people. They could smile at him, of course; they could
and they did. But if you smile too constantly, the smile is apt to
get fixed like the smile of the hyaena. And then it no longer looks
friendly, but simply silly. So they tried other ways, and brought him
flowers till the place where he sat was surrounded by little fading
bunches of clover and roses and Canterbury bells.

And then Phyllis had an idea. She beckoned mysteriously to the others
and drew them into the back yard, and there, in a concealed spot,
between the pump and the water-butt, she said:--

"You remember Perks promising me the very first strawberries out of his
own garden?" Perks, you will recollect, was the Porter. "Well, I should
think they're ripe now. Let's go down and see."

Mother had been down as she had promised to tell the Station Master the
story of the Russian Prisoner. But even the charms of the railway had
been unable to tear the children away from the neighbourhood of the
interesting stranger. So they had not been to the station for three
days.

They went now.

And, to their surprise and distress, were very coldly received by Perks.

"'Ighly honoured, I'm sure," he said when they peeped in at the door of
the Porters' room. And he went on reading his newspaper.

There was an uncomfortable silence.

"Oh, dear," said Bobbie, with a sigh, "I do believe you're CROSS."

"What, me? Not me!" said Perks loftily; "it ain't nothing to me."

"What AIN'T nothing to you?" said Peter, too anxious and alarmed to
change the form of words.

"Nothing ain't nothing. What 'appens either 'ere or elsewhere," said
Perks; "if you likes to 'ave your secrets, 'ave 'em and welcome. That's
what I say."

The secret-chamber of each heart was rapidly examined during the pause
that followed. Three heads were shaken.

"We haven't got any secrets from YOU," said Bobbie at last.

"Maybe you 'ave, and maybe you 'aven't," said Perks; "it ain't nothing
to me. And I wish you all a very good afternoon." He held up the paper
between him and them and went on reading.

"Oh, DON'T!" said Phyllis, in despair; "this is truly dreadful! Whatever
it is, do tell us."

"We didn't mean to do it whatever it was."

No answer. The paper was refolded and Perks began on another column.

"Look here," said Peter, suddenly, "it's not fair. Even people who do
crimes aren't punished without being told what it's for--as once they
were in Russia."

"I don't know nothing about Russia."

"Oh, yes, you do, when Mother came down on purpose to tell you and Mr.
Gills all about OUR Russian."

"Can't you fancy it?" said Perks, indignantly; "don't you see 'im
a-asking of me to step into 'is room and take a chair and listen to what
'er Ladyship 'as to say?"

"Do you mean to say you've not heard?"

"Not so much as a breath. I did go so far as to put a question. And he
shuts me up like a rat-trap. 'Affairs of State, Perks,' says he. But I
did think one o' you would 'a' nipped down to tell me--you're here sharp
enough when you want to get anything out of old Perks"--Phyllis
flushed purple as she thought of the strawberries--"information about
locomotives or signals or the likes," said Perks.

"We didn't know you didn't know."

"We thought Mother had told you."

"Wewantedtotellyouonlywethoughtitwouldbestalenews."

The three spoke all at once.

Perks said it was all very well, and still held up the paper. Then
Phyllis suddenly snatched it away, and threw her arms round his neck.

"Oh, let's kiss and be friends," she said; "we'll say we're sorry first,
if you like, but we didn't really know that you didn't know."

"We are so sorry," said the others.

And Perks at last consented to accept their apologies.

Then they got him to come out and sit in the sun on the green Railway
Bank, where the grass was quite hot to touch, and there, sometimes
speaking one at a time, and sometimes all together, they told the Porter
the story of the Russian Prisoner.

"Well, I must say," said Perks; but he did not say it--whatever it was.

"Yes, it is pretty awful, isn't it?" said Peter, "and I don't wonder you
were curious about who the Russian was."

"I wasn't curious, not so much as interested," said the Porter.

"Well, I do think Mr. Gills might have told you about it. It was horrid
of him."

"I don't keep no down on 'im for that, Missie," said the Porter; "cos
why? I see 'is reasons. 'E wouldn't want to give away 'is own side with
a tale like that 'ere. It ain't human nature. A man's got to stand
up for his own side whatever they does. That's what it means by Party
Politics. I should 'a' done the same myself if that long-'aired chap 'ad
'a' been a Jap."

"But the Japs didn't do cruel, wicked things like that," said Bobbie.

"P'r'aps not," said Perks, cautiously; "still you can't be sure with
foreigners. My own belief is they're all tarred with the same brush."

"Then why were you on the side of the Japs?" Peter asked.

"Well, you see, you must take one side or the other. Same as with
Liberals and Conservatives. The great thing is to take your side and
then stick to it, whatever happens."

A signal sounded.

"There's the 3.14 up," said Perks. "You lie low till she's through,
and then we'll go up along to my place, and see if there's any of them
strawberries ripe what I told you about."

"If there are any ripe, and you DO give them to me," said Phyllis, "you
won't mind if I give them to the poor Russian, will you?"

Perks narrowed his eyes and then raised his eyebrows.

"So it was them strawberries you come down for this afternoon, eh?" said
he.

This was an awkward moment for Phyllis. To say "yes" would seem rude and
greedy, and unkind to Perks. But she knew if she said "no," she would
not be pleased with herself afterwards. So--

"Yes," she said, "it was."

"Well done!" said the Porter; "speak the truth and shame the--"

"But we'd have come down the very next day if we'd known you hadn't
heard the story," Phyllis added hastily.

"I believe you, Missie," said Perks, and sprang across the line six feet
in front of the advancing train.

The girls hated to see him do this, but Peter liked it. It was so
exciting.

The Russian gentleman was so delighted with the strawberries that the
three racked their brains to find some other surprise for him. But all
the racking did not bring out any idea more novel than wild cherries.
And this idea occurred to them next morning. They had seen the blossom
on the trees in the spring, and they knew where to look for wild
cherries now that cherry time was here. The trees grew all up and along
the rocky face of the cliff out of which the mouth of the tunnel opened.
There were all sorts of trees there, birches and beeches and baby oaks
and hazels, and among them the cherry blossom had shone like snow and
silver.

The mouth of the tunnel was some way from Three Chimneys, so Mother let
them take their lunch with them in a basket. And the basket would do
to bring the cherries back in if they found any. She also lent them her
silver watch so that they should not be late for tea. Peter's Waterbury
had taken it into its head not to go since the day when Peter dropped it
into the water-butt. And they started. When they got to the top of the
cutting, they leaned over the fence and looked down to where the railway
lines lay at the bottom of what, as Phyllis said, was exactly like a
mountain gorge.

"If it wasn't for the railway at the bottom, it would be as though the
foot of man had never been there, wouldn't it?"

The sides of the cutting were of grey stone, very roughly hewn. Indeed,
the top part of the cutting had been a little natural glen that had been
cut deeper to bring it down to the level of the tunnel's mouth. Among
the rocks, grass and flowers grew, and seeds dropped by birds in the
crannies of the stone had taken root and grown into bushes and trees
that overhung the cutting. Near the tunnel was a flight of steps leading
down to the line--just wooden bars roughly fixed into the earth--a very
steep and narrow way, more like a ladder than a stair.

"We'd better get down," said Peter; "I'm sure the cherries would be
quite easy to get at from the side of the steps. You remember it was
there we picked the cherry blossoms that we put on the rabbit's grave."

So they went along the fence towards the little swing gate that is at
the top of these steps. And they were almost at the gate when Bobbie
said:--

"Hush. Stop! What's that?"

"That" was a very odd noise indeed--a soft noise, but quite plainly to
be heard through the sound of the wind in tree branches, and the hum
and whir of the telegraph wires. It was a sort of rustling, whispering
sound. As they listened it stopped, and then it began again.

And this time it did not stop, but it grew louder and more rustling and
rumbling.

"Look"--cried Peter, suddenly--"the tree over there!"

The tree he pointed at was one of those that have rough grey leaves and
white flowers. The berries, when they come, are bright scarlet, but if
you pick them, they disappoint you by turning black before you get them
home. And, as Peter pointed, the tree was moving--not just the way trees
ought to move when the wind blows through them, but all in one piece,
as though it were a live creature and were walking down the side of the
cutting.

"It's moving!" cried Bobbie. "Oh, look! and so are the others. It's like
the woods in Macbeth."

"It's magic," said Phyllis, breathlessly. "I always knew this railway
was enchanted."

It really did seem a little like magic. For all the trees for about
twenty yards of the opposite bank seemed to be slowly walking down
towards the railway line, the tree with the grey leaves bringing up the
rear like some old shepherd driving a flock of green sheep.

"What is it? Oh, what is it?" said Phyllis; "it's much too magic for me.
I don't like it. Let's go home."

But Bobbie and Peter clung fast to the rail and watched breathlessly.
And Phyllis made no movement towards going home by herself.

The trees moved on and on. Some stones and loose earth fell down and
rattled on the railway metals far below.

"It's ALL coming down," Peter tried to say, but he found there was
hardly any voice to say it with. And, indeed, just as he spoke, the
great rock, on the top of which the walking trees were, leaned slowly
forward. The trees, ceasing to walk, stood still and shivered. Leaning
with the rock, they seemed to hesitate a moment, and then rock and trees
and grass and bushes, with a rushing sound, slipped right away from the
face of the cutting and fell on the line with a blundering crash that
could have been heard half a mile off. A cloud of dust rose up.

"Oh," said Peter, in awestruck tones, "isn't it exactly like when coals
come in?--if there wasn't any roof to the cellar and you could see
down."

"Look what a great mound it's made!" said Bobbie.

"Yes," said Peter, slowly. He was still leaning on the fence. "Yes," he
said again, still more slowly.

Then he stood upright.

"The 11.29 down hasn't gone by yet. We must let them know at the
station, or there'll be a most frightful accident."

"Let's run," said Bobbie, and began.

But Peter cried, "Come back!" and looked at Mother's watch. He was very
prompt and businesslike, and his face looked whiter than they had ever
seen it.

"No time," he said; "it's two miles away, and it's past eleven."

"Couldn't we," suggested Phyllis, breathlessly, "couldn't we climb up a
telegraph post and do something to the wires?"

"We don't know how," said Peter.

"They do it in war," said Phyllis; "I know I've heard of it."

"They only CUT them, silly," said Peter, "and that doesn't do any good.
And we couldn't cut them even if we got up, and we couldn't get up. If
we had anything red, we could get down on the line and wave it."

"But the train wouldn't see us till it got round the corner, and then it
could see the mound just as well as us," said Phyllis; "better, because
it's much bigger than us."

"If we only had something red," Peter repeated, "we could go round the
corner and wave to the train."

"We might wave, anyway."

"They'd only think it was just US, as usual. We've waved so often
before. Anyway, let's get down."

They got down the steep stairs. Bobbie was pale and shivering. Peter's
face looked thinner than usual. Phyllis was red-faced and damp with
anxiety.

"Oh, how hot I am!" she said; "and I thought it was going to be cold; I
wish we hadn't put on our--" she stopped short, and then ended in quite
a different tone--"our flannel petticoats."

Bobbie turned at the bottom of the stairs.

"Oh, yes," she cried; "THEY'RE red! Let's take them off."

They did, and with the petticoats rolled up under their arms, ran along
the railway, skirting the newly fallen mound of stones and rock and
earth, and bent, crushed, twisted trees. They ran at their best pace.
Peter led, but the girls were not far behind. They reached the corner
that hid the mound from the straight line of railway that ran half a
mile without curve or corner.

"Now," said Peter, taking hold of the largest flannel petticoat.

"You're not"--Phyllis faltered--"you're not going to TEAR them?"

"Shut up," said Peter, with brief sternness.

"Oh, yes," said Bobbie, "tear them into little bits if you like. Don't
you see, Phil, if we can't stop the train, there'll be a real live
accident, with people KILLED. Oh, horrible! Here, Peter, you'll never
tear it through the band!"

She took the red flannel petticoat from him and tore it off an inch from
the band. Then she tore the other in the same way.

"There!" said Peter, tearing in his turn. He divided each petticoat into
three pieces. "Now, we've got six flags." He looked at the watch again.
"And we've got seven minutes. We must have flagstaffs."

The knives given to boys are, for some odd reason, seldom of the kind
of steel that keeps sharp. The young saplings had to be broken off. Two
came up by the roots. The leaves were stripped from them.

"We must cut holes in the flags, and run the sticks through the holes,"
said Peter. And the holes were cut. The knife was sharp enough to cut
flannel with. Two of the flags were set up in heaps of loose stones
between the sleepers of the down line. Then Phyllis and Roberta took
each a flag, and stood ready to wave it as soon as the train came in
sight.

"I shall have the other two myself," said Peter, "because it was my idea
to wave something red."

"They're our petticoats, though," Phyllis was beginning, but Bobbie
interrupted--

"Oh, what does it matter who waves what, if we can only save the train?"

Perhaps Peter had not rightly calculated the number of minutes it would
take the 11.29 to get from the station to the place where they were, or
perhaps the train was late. Anyway, it seemed a very long time that they
waited.

Phyllis grew impatient. "I expect the watch is wrong, and the train's
gone by," said she.

Peter relaxed the heroic attitude he had chosen to show off his two
flags. And Bobbie began to feel sick with suspense.

It seemed to her that they had been standing there for hours and hours,
holding those silly little red flannel flags that no one would ever
notice. The train wouldn't care. It would go rushing by them and tear
round the corner and go crashing into that awful mound. And everyone
would be killed. Her hands grew very cold and trembled so that she could
hardly hold the flag. And then came the distant rumble and hum of the
metals, and a puff of white steam showed far away along the stretch of
line.

"Stand firm," said Peter, "and wave like mad! When it gets to that
big furze bush step back, but go on waving! Don't stand ON the line,
Bobbie!"

The train came rattling along very, very fast.

"They don't see us! They won't see us! It's all no good!" cried Bobbie.

The two little flags on the line swayed as the nearing train shook and
loosened the heaps of loose stones that held them up. One of them slowly
leaned over and fell on the line. Bobbie jumped forward and caught it
up, and waved it; her hands did not tremble now.

It seemed that the train came on as fast as ever. It was very near now.

"Keep off the line, you silly cuckoo!" said Peter, fiercely.

"It's no good," Bobbie said again.

"Stand back!" cried Peter, suddenly, and he dragged Phyllis back by the
arm.

But Bobbie cried, "Not yet, not yet!" and waved her two flags right over
the line. The front of the engine looked black and enormous. Its voice
was loud and harsh.

"Oh, stop, stop, stop!" cried Bobbie. No one heard her. At least Peter
and Phyllis didn't, for the oncoming rush of the train covered the sound
of her voice with a mountain of sound. But afterwards she used to wonder
whether the engine itself had not heard her. It seemed almost as though
it had--for it slackened swiftly, slackened and stopped, not twenty
yards from the place where Bobbie's two flags waved over the line. She
saw the great black engine stop dead, but somehow she could not stop
waving the flags. And when the driver and the fireman had got off the
engine and Peter and Phyllis had gone to meet them and pour out their
excited tale of the awful mound just round the corner, Bobbie still
waved the flags but more and more feebly and jerkily.

When the others turned towards her she was lying across the line with
her hands flung forward and still gripping the sticks of the little red
flannel flags.

The engine-driver picked her up, carried her to the train, and laid her
on the cushions of a first-class carriage.

"Gone right off in a faint," he said, "poor little woman. And no wonder.
I'll just 'ave a look at this 'ere mound of yours, and then we'll run
you back to the station and get her seen to."

It was horrible to see Bobbie lying so white and quiet, with her lips
blue, and parted.

"I believe that's what people look like when they're dead," whispered
Phyllis.

"DON'T!" said Peter, sharply.

They sat by Bobbie on the blue cushions, and the train ran back. Before
it reached their station Bobbie had sighed and opened her eyes,
and rolled herself over and begun to cry. This cheered the others
wonderfully. They had seen her cry before, but they had never seen her
faint, nor anyone else, for the matter of that. They had not known what
to do when she was fainting, but now she was only crying they could
thump her on the back and tell her not to, just as they always did. And
presently, when she stopped crying, they were able to laugh at her for
being such a coward as to faint.

When the station was reached, the three were the heroes of an agitated
meeting on the platform.

The praises they got for their "prompt action," their "common sense,"
their "ingenuity," were enough to have turned anybody's head. Phyllis
enjoyed herself thoroughly. She had never been a real heroine before,
and the feeling was delicious. Peter's ears got very red. Yet he, too,
enjoyed himself. Only Bobbie wished they all wouldn't. She wanted to get
away.

"You'll hear from the Company about this, I expect," said the Station
Master.

Bobbie wished she might never hear of it again. She pulled at Peter's
jacket.

"Oh, come away, come away! I want to go home," she said.

So they went. And as they went Station Master and Porter and guards and
driver and fireman and passengers sent up a cheer.

"Oh, listen," cried Phyllis; "that's for US!"

"Yes," said Peter. "I say, I am glad I thought about something red, and
waving it."

"How lucky we DID put on our red flannel petticoats!" said Phyllis.

Bobbie said nothing. She was thinking of the horrible mound, and the
trustful train rushing towards it.

"And it was US that saved them," said Peter.

"How dreadful if they had all been killed!" said Phyllis; "wouldn't it,
Bobbie?"

"We never got any cherries, after all," said Bobbie.

The others thought her rather heartless.



Chapter VII. For valour.


I hope you don't mind my telling you a good deal about Roberta. The fact
is I am growing very fond of her. The more I observe her the more I love
her. And I notice all sorts of things about her that I like.

For instance, she was quite oddly anxious to make other people happy.
And she could keep a secret, a tolerably rare accomplishment. Also she
had the power of silent sympathy. That sounds rather dull, I know, but
it's not so dull as it sounds. It just means that a person is able
to know that you are unhappy, and to love you extra on that account,
without bothering you by telling you all the time how sorry she is
for you. That was what Bobbie was like. She knew that Mother was
unhappy--and that Mother had not told her the reason. So she just loved
Mother more and never said a single word that could let Mother know how
earnestly her little girl wondered what Mother was unhappy about. This
needs practice. It is not so easy as you might think.

Whatever happened--and all sorts of nice, pleasant ordinary things
happened--such as picnics, games, and buns for tea, Bobbie always had
these thoughts at the back of her mind. "Mother's unhappy. Why? I don't
know. She doesn't want me to know. I won't try to find out. But she
IS unhappy. Why? I don't know. She doesn't--" and so on, repeating and
repeating like a tune that you don't know the stopping part of.

The Russian gentleman still took up a good deal of everybody's thoughts.
All the editors and secretaries of Societies and Members of Parliament
had answered Mother's letters as politely as they knew how; but none of
them could tell where the wife and children of Mr. Szezcpansky would be
likely to be. (Did I tell you that the Russian's very Russian name was
that?)

Bobbie had another quality which you will hear differently described
by different people. Some of them call it interfering in other people's
business--and some call it "helping lame dogs over stiles," and some
call it "loving-kindness." It just means trying to help people.

She racked her brains to think of some way of helping the Russian
gentleman to find his wife and children. He had learned a few words
of English now. He could say "Good morning," and "Good night," and
"Please," and "Thank you," and "Pretty," when the children brought him
flowers, and "Ver' good," when they asked him how he had slept.

The way he smiled when he "said his English," was, Bobbie felt, "just
too sweet for anything." She used to think of his face because she
fancied it would help her to some way of helping him. But it did not.
Yet his being there cheered her because she saw that it made Mother
happier.

"She likes to have someone to be good to, even beside us," said Bobbie.
"And I know she hated to let him have Father's clothes. But I suppose it
'hurt nice,' or she wouldn't have."

For many and many a night after the day when she and Peter and Phyllis
had saved the train from wreck by waving their little red flannel flags,
Bobbie used to wake screaming and shivering, seeing again that horrible
mound, and the poor, dear trustful engine rushing on towards it--just
thinking that it was doing its swift duty, and that everything was clear
and safe. And then a warm thrill of pleasure used to run through her
at the remembrance of how she and Peter and Phyllis and the red flannel
petticoats had really saved everybody.

One morning a letter came. It was addressed to Peter and Bobbie and
Phyllis. They opened it with enthusiastic curiosity, for they did not
often get letters.

The letter said:--

"Dear Sir, and Ladies,--It is proposed to make a small presentation to
you, in commemoration of your prompt and courageous action in warning
the train on the --- inst., and thus averting what must, humanly
speaking, have been a terrible accident. The presentation will take
place at the --- Station at three o'clock on the 30th inst., if this
time and place will be convenient to you.

          "Yours faithfully,

                    "Jabez Inglewood.
"Secretary, Great Northern and Southern Railway Co."

There never had been a prouder moment in the lives of the three
children. They rushed to Mother with the letter, and she also felt proud
and said so, and this made the children happier than ever.

"But if the presentation is money, you must say, 'Thank you, but we'd
rather not take it,'" said Mother. "I'll wash your Indian muslins at
once," she added. "You must look tidy on an occasion like this."

"Phil and I can wash them," said Bobbie, "if you'll iron them, Mother."

Washing is rather fun. I wonder whether you've ever done it? This
particular washing took place in the back kitchen, which had a stone
floor and a very big stone sink under its window.

"Let's put the bath on the sink," said Phyllis; "then we can pretend
we're out-of-doors washerwomen like Mother saw in France."

"But they were washing in the cold river," said Peter, his hands in his
pockets, "not in hot water."

"This is a HOT river, then," said Phyllis; "lend a hand with the bath,
there's a dear."

"I should like to see a deer lending a hand," said Peter, but he lent
his.

"Now to rub and scrub and scrub and rub," said Phyllis, hopping joyously
about as Bobbie carefully carried the heavy kettle from the kitchen
fire.

"Oh, no!" said Bobbie, greatly shocked; "you don't rub muslin. You put
the boiled soap in the hot water and make it all frothy-lathery--and
then you shake the muslin and squeeze it, ever so gently, and all the
dirt comes out. It's only clumsy things like tablecloths and sheets that
have to be rubbed."

The lilac and the Gloire de Dijon roses outside the window swayed in the
soft breeze.

"It's a nice drying day--that's one thing," said Bobbie, feeling very
grown up. "Oh, I do wonder what wonderful feelings we shall have when we
WEAR the Indian muslin dresses!"

"Yes, so do I," said Phyllis, shaking and squeezing the muslin in quite
a professional manner.

"NOW we squeeze out the soapy water. NO--we mustn't twist them--and then
rinse them. I'll hold them while you and Peter empty the bath and get
clean water."

"A presentation! That means presents," said Peter, as his sisters,
having duly washed the pegs and wiped the line, hung up the dresses to
dry. "Whatever will it be?"

"It might be anything," said Phyllis; "what I've always wanted is a Baby
elephant--but I suppose they wouldn't know that."

"Suppose it was gold models of steam-engines?" said Bobbie.

"Or a big model of the scene of the prevented accident," suggested
Peter, "with a little model train, and dolls dressed like us and the
engine-driver and fireman and passengers."

"Do you LIKE," said Bobbie, doubtfully, drying her hands on the rough
towel that hung on a roller at the back of the scullery door, "do you
LIKE us being rewarded for saving a train?"

"Yes, I do," said Peter, downrightly; "and don't you try to come it over
us that you don't like it, too. Because I know you do."

"Yes," said Bobbie, doubtfully, "I know I do. But oughtn't we to be
satisfied with just having done it, and not ask for anything more?"

"Who did ask for anything more, silly?" said her brother; "Victoria
Cross soldiers don't ASK for it; but they're glad enough to get it all
the same. Perhaps it'll be medals. Then, when I'm very old indeed, I
shall show them to my grandchildren and say, 'We only did our duty,' and
they'll be awfully proud of me."

"You have to be married," warned Phyllis, "or you don't have any
grandchildren."

"I suppose I shall HAVE to be married some day," said Peter, "but it
will be an awful bother having her round all the time. I'd like to marry
a lady who had trances, and only woke up once or twice a year."

"Just to say you were the light of her life and then go to sleep again.
Yes. That wouldn't be bad," said Bobbie.

"When _I_ get married," said Phyllis, "I shall want him to want me to be
awake all the time, so that I can hear him say how nice I am."

"I think it would be nice," said Bobbie, "to marry someone very poor,
and then you'd do all the work and he'd love you most frightfully, and
see the blue wood smoke curling up among the trees from the domestic
hearth as he came home from work every night. I say--we've got to answer
that letter and say that the time and place WILL be convenient to us.
There's the soap, Peter. WE'RE both as clean as clean. That pink box of
writing paper you had on your birthday, Phil."

It took some time to arrange what should be said. Mother had gone back
to her writing, and several sheets of pink paper with scalloped gilt
edges and green four-leaved shamrocks in the corner were spoiled before
the three had decided what to say. Then each made a copy and signed it
with its own name.

The threefold letter ran:--

"Dear Mr. Jabez Inglewood,--Thank you very much. We did not want to be
rewarded but only to save the train, but we are glad you think so and
thank you very much. The time and place you say will be quite convenient
to us. Thank you very much.

          "Your affecate little friend,"

Then came the name, and after it:--

"P.S. Thank you very much."

"Washing is much easier than ironing," said Bobbie, taking the clean dry
dresses off the line. "I do love to see things come clean. Oh--I don't
know how we shall wait till it's time to know what presentation they're
going to present!"

When at last--it seemed a very long time after--it was THE day,
the three children went down to the station at the proper time. And
everything that happened was so odd that it seemed like a dream. The
Station Master came out to meet them--in his best clothes, as Peter
noticed at once--and led them into the waiting room where once they had
played the advertisement game. It looked quite different now. A carpet
had been put down--and there were pots of roses on the mantelpiece and
on the window ledges--green branches stuck up, like holly and laurel
are at Christmas, over the framed advertisement of Cook's Tours and the
Beauties of Devon and the Paris Lyons Railway. There were quite a
number of people there besides the Porter--two or three ladies in
smart dresses, and quite a crowd of gentlemen in high hats and frock
coats--besides everybody who belonged to the station. They recognized
several people who had been in the train on the red-flannel-petticoat
day. Best of all their own old gentleman was there, and his coat and hat
and collar seemed more than ever different from anyone else's. He shook
hands with them and then everybody sat down on chairs, and a gentleman
in spectacles--they found out afterwards that he was the District
Superintendent--began quite a long speech--very clever indeed. I am not
going to write the speech down. First, because you would think it dull;
and secondly, because it made all the children blush so, and get so hot
about the ears that I am quite anxious to get away from this part of the
subject; and thirdly, because the gentleman took so many words to say
what he had to say that I really haven't time to write them down. He
said all sorts of nice things about the children's bravery and presence
of mind, and when he had done he sat down, and everyone who was there
clapped and said, "Hear, hear."

And then the old gentleman got up and said things, too. It was very like
a prize-giving. And then he called the children one by one, by their
names, and gave each of them a beautiful gold watch and chain. And
inside the watches were engraved after the name of the watch's new
owner:--

"From the Directors of the Northern and Southern Railway in grateful
recognition of the courageous and prompt action which averted an
accident on --- 1905."

The watches were the most beautiful you can possibly imagine, and each
one had a blue leather case to live in when it was at home.

"You must make a speech now and thank everyone for their kindness,"
whispered the Station Master in Peter's ear and pushed him forward.
"Begin 'Ladies and Gentlemen,'" he added.

Each of the children had already said "Thank you," quite properly.

"Oh, dear," said Peter, but he did not resist the push.

"Ladies and Gentlemen," he said in a rather husky voice. Then there
was a pause, and he heard his heart beating in his throat. "Ladies and
Gentlemen," he went on with a rush, "it's most awfully good of you, and
we shall treasure the watches all our lives--but really we don't deserve
it because what we did wasn't anything, really. At least, I mean it
was awfully exciting, and what I mean to say--thank you all very, very
much."

The people clapped Peter more than they had done the District
Superintendent, and then everybody shook hands with them, and as soon as
politeness would let them, they got away, and tore up the hill to Three
Chimneys with their watches in their hands.

It was a wonderful day--the kind of day that very seldom happens to
anybody and to most of us not at all.

"I did want to talk to the old gentleman about something else," said
Bobbie, "but it was so public--like being in church."

"What did you want to say?" asked Phyllis.

"I'll tell you when I've thought about it more," said Bobbie.

So when she had thought a little more she wrote a letter.

"My dearest old gentleman," it said; "I want most awfully to ask you
something. If you could get out of the train and go by the next, it
would do. I do not want you to give me anything. Mother says we ought
not to. And besides, we do not want any THINGS. Only to talk to you
about a Prisoner and Captive. Your loving little friend,

          "Bobbie."

She got the Station Master to give the letter to the old gentleman, and
next day she asked Peter and Phyllis to come down to the station with
her at the time when the train that brought the old gentleman from town
would be passing through.

She explained her idea to them--and they approved thoroughly.

They had all washed their hands and faces, and brushed their hair, and
were looking as tidy as they knew how. But Phyllis, always unlucky, had
upset a jug of lemonade down the front of her dress. There was no time
to change--and the wind happening to blow from the coal yard, her frock
was soon powdered with grey, which stuck to the sticky lemonade stains
and made her look, as Peter said, "like any little gutter child."

It was decided that she should keep behind the others as much as
possible.

"Perhaps the old gentleman won't notice," said Bobbie. "The aged are
often weak in the eyes."

There was no sign of weakness, however, in the eyes, or in any other
part of the old gentleman, as he stepped from the train and looked up
and down the platform.

The three children, now that it came to the point, suddenly felt that
rush of deep shyness which makes your ears red and hot, your hands warm
and wet, and the tip of your nose pink and shiny.

"Oh," said Phyllis, "my heart's thumping like a steam-engine--right
under my sash, too."

"Nonsense," said Peter, "people's hearts aren't under their sashes."

"I don't care--mine is," said Phyllis.

"If you're going to talk like a poetry-book," said Peter, "my heart's in
my mouth."

"My heart's in my boots--if you come to that," said Roberta; "but do
come on--he'll think we're idiots."

"He won't be far wrong," said Peter, gloomily. And they went forward to
meet the old gentleman.

"Hullo," he said, shaking hands with them all in turn. "This is a very
great pleasure."

"It WAS good of you to get out," Bobbie said, perspiring and polite.

He took her arm and drew her into the waiting room where she and the
others had played the advertisement game the day they found the Russian.
Phyllis and Peter followed. "Well?" said the old gentleman, giving
Bobbie's arm a kind little shake before he let it go. "Well? What is
it?"

"Oh, please!" said Bobbie.

"Yes?" said the old gentleman.

"What I mean to say--" said Bobbie.

"Well?" said the old gentleman.

"It's all very nice and kind," said she.

"But?" he said.

"I wish I might say something," she said.

"Say it," said he.

"Well, then," said Bobbie--and out came the story of the Russian who
had written the beautiful book about poor people, and had been sent to
prison and to Siberia for just that.

"And what we want more than anything in the world is to find his wife
and children for him," said Bobbie, "but we don't know how. But you must
be most horribly clever, or you wouldn't be a Direction of the Railway.
And if YOU knew how--and would? We'd rather have that than anything else
in the world. We'd go without the watches, even, if you could sell them
and find his wife with the money."

And the others said so, too, though not with so much enthusiasm.

"Hum," said the old gentleman, pulling down the white waistcoat that
had the big gilt buttons on it, "what did you say the name
was--Fryingpansky?"

"No, no," said Bobbie earnestly. "I'll write it down for you. It doesn't
really look at all like that except when you say it. Have you a bit of
pencil and the back of an envelope?" she asked.

The old gentleman got out a gold pencil-case and a beautiful,
sweet-smelling, green Russian leather note-book and opened it at a new
page.

"Here," he said, "write here."

She wrote down "Szezcpansky," and said:--

"That's how you write it. You CALL it Shepansky."

The old gentleman took out a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles and fitted
them on his nose. When he had read the name, he looked quite different.

"THAT man? Bless my soul!" he said. "Why, I've read his book! It's
translated into every European language. A fine book--a noble book. And
so your mother took him in--like the good Samaritan. Well, well. I'll
tell you what, youngsters--your mother must be a very good woman."

"Of course she is," said Phyllis, in astonishment.

"And you're a very good man," said Bobbie, very shy, but firmly resolved
to be polite.

"You flatter me," said the old gentleman, taking off his hat with a
flourish. "And now am I to tell you what I think of you?"

"Oh, please don't," said Bobbie, hastily.

"Why?" asked the old gentleman.

"I don't exactly know," said Bobbie. "Only--if it's horrid, I don't want
you to; and if it's nice, I'd rather you didn't."

The old gentleman laughed.

"Well, then," he said, "I'll only just say that I'm very glad you came
to me about this--very glad, indeed. And I shouldn't be surprised if I
found out something very soon. I know a great many Russians in London,
and every Russian knows HIS name. Now tell me all about yourselves."

He turned to the others, but there was only one other, and that was
Peter. Phyllis had disappeared.

"Tell me all about yourself," said the old gentleman again. And, quite
naturally, Peter was stricken dumb.

"All right, we'll have an examination," said the old gentleman; "you two
sit on the table, and I'll sit on the bench and ask questions."

He did, and out came their names and ages--their Father's name and
business--how long they had lived at Three Chimneys and a great deal
more.

The questions were beginning to turn on a herring and a half for three
halfpence, and a pound of lead and a pound of feathers, when the door of
the waiting room was kicked open by a boot; as the boot entered everyone
could see that its lace was coming undone--and in came Phyllis, very
slowly and carefully.

In one hand she carried a large tin can, and in the other a thick slice
of bread and butter.

"Afternoon tea," she announced proudly, and held the can and the bread
and butter out to the old gentleman, who took them and said:--

"Bless my soul!"

"Yes," said Phyllis.

"It's very thoughtful of you," said the old gentleman, "very."

"But you might have got a cup," said Bobbie, "and a plate."

"Perks always drinks out of the can," said Phyllis, flushing red. "I
think it was very nice of him to give it me at all--let alone cups and
plates," she added.

"So do I," said the old gentleman, and he drank some of the tea and
tasted the bread and butter.

And then it was time for the next train, and he got into it with many
good-byes and kind last words.

"Well," said Peter, when they were left on the platform, and the
tail-lights of the train disappeared round the corner, "it's my belief
that we've lighted a candle to-day--like Latimer, you know, when he was
being burned--and there'll be fireworks for our Russian before long."

And so there were.

It wasn't ten days after the interview in the waiting room that the
three children were sitting on the top of the biggest rock in the field
below their house watching the 5.15 steam away from the station along
the bottom of the valley. They saw, too, the few people who had got out
at the station straggling up the road towards the village--and they saw
one person leave the road and open the gate that led across the fields
to Three Chimneys and to nowhere else.

"Who on earth!" said Peter, scrambling down.

"Let's go and see," said Phyllis.

So they did. And when they got near enough to see who the person was,
they saw it was their old gentleman himself, his brass buttons winking
in the afternoon sunshine, and his white waistcoat looking whiter than
ever against the green of the field.

"Hullo!" shouted the children, waving their hands.

"Hullo!" shouted the old gentleman, waving his hat.

Then the three started to run--and when they got to him they hardly had
breath left to say:--

"How do you do?"

"Good news," said he. "I've found your Russian friend's wife and
child--and I couldn't resist the temptation of giving myself the
pleasure of telling him."

But as he looked at Bobbie's face he felt that he COULD resist that
temptation.

"Here," he said to her, "you run on and tell him. The other two will
show me the way."

Bobbie ran. But when she had breathlessly panted out the news to the
Russian and Mother sitting in the quiet garden--when Mother's face had
lighted up so beautifully, and she had said half a dozen quick French
words to the Exile--Bobbie wished that she had NOT carried the news. For
the Russian sprang up with a cry that made Bobbie's heart leap and then
tremble--a cry of love and longing such as she had never heard. Then he
took Mother's hand and kissed it gently and reverently--and then he sank
down in his chair and covered his face with his hands and sobbed. Bobbie
crept away. She did not want to see the others just then.

But she was as gay as anybody when the endless French talking was over,
when Peter had torn down to the village for buns and cakes, and the
girls had got tea ready and taken it out into the garden.

The old gentleman was most merry and delightful. He seemed to be able
to talk in French and English almost at the same moment, and Mother did
nearly as well. It was a delightful time. Mother seemed as if she could
not make enough fuss about the old gentleman, and she said yes at once
when he asked if he might present some "goodies" to his little friends.

The word was new to the children--but they guessed that it meant sweets,
for the three large pink and green boxes, tied with green ribbon, which
he took out of his bag, held unheard-of layers of beautiful chocolates.

The Russian's few belongings were packed, and they all saw him off at
the station.

Then Mother turned to the old gentleman and said:--

"I don't know how to thank you for EVERYTHING. It has been a real
pleasure to me to see you. But we live very quietly. I am so sorry that
I can't ask you to come and see us again."

The children thought this very hard. When they HAD made a friend--and
such a friend--they would dearly have liked him to come and see them
again.

What the old gentleman thought they couldn't tell. He only said:--

"I consider myself very fortunate, Madam, to have been received once at
your house."

"Ah," said Mother, "I know I must seem surly and ungrateful--but--"

"You could never seem anything but a most charming and gracious lady,"
said the old gentleman, with another of his bows.

And as they turned to go up the hill, Bobbie saw her Mother's face.

"How tired you look, Mammy," she said; "lean on me."

"It's my place to give Mother my arm," said Peter. "I'm the head man of
the family when Father's away."

Mother took an arm of each.

"How awfully nice," said Phyllis, skipping joyfully, "to think of the
dear Russian embracing his long-lost wife. The baby must have grown a
lot since he saw it."

"Yes," said Mother.

"I wonder whether Father will think I'VE grown," Phyllis went on,
skipping still more gaily. "I have grown already, haven't I, Mother?"

"Yes," said Mother, "oh, yes," and Bobbie and Peter felt her hands
tighten on their arms.

"Poor old Mammy, you ARE tired," said Peter.

Bobbie said, "Come on, Phil; I'll race you to the gate."

And she started the race, though she hated doing it. YOU know why Bobbie
did that. Mother only thought that Bobbie was tired of walking slowly.
Even Mothers, who love you better than anyone else ever will, don't
always understand.



Chapter VIII. The amateur firemen.


"That's a likely little brooch you've got on, Miss," said Perks the
Porter; "I don't know as ever I see a thing more like a buttercup
without it WAS a buttercup."

"Yes," said Bobbie, glad and flushed by this approval. "I always thought
it was more like a buttercup almost than even a real one--and I NEVER
thought it would come to be mine, my very own--and then Mother gave it
to me for my birthday."

"Oh, have you had a birthday?" said Perks; and he seemed quite
surprised, as though a birthday were a thing only granted to a favoured
few.

"Yes," said Bobbie; "when's your birthday, Mr. Perks?" The children were
taking tea with Mr. Perks in the Porters' room among the lamps and
the railway almanacs. They had brought their own cups and some jam
turnovers. Mr. Perks made tea in a beer can, as usual, and everyone felt
very happy and confidential.

"My birthday?" said Perks, tipping some more dark brown tea out of the
can into Peter's cup. "I give up keeping of my birthday afore you was
born."

"But you must have been born SOMETIME, you know," said Phyllis,
thoughtfully, "even if it was twenty years ago--or thirty or sixty or
seventy."

"Not so long as that, Missie," Perks grinned as he answered. "If you
really want to know, it was thirty-two years ago, come the fifteenth of
this month."

"Then why don't you keep it?" asked Phyllis.

"I've got something else to keep besides birthdays," said Perks,
briefly.

"Oh! What?" asked Phyllis, eagerly. "Not secrets?"

"No," said Perks, "the kids and the Missus."

It was this talk that set the children thinking, and, presently,
talking. Perks was, on the whole, the dearest friend they had made. Not
so grand as the Station Master, but more approachable--less powerful
than the old gentleman, but more confidential.

"It seems horrid that nobody keeps his birthday," said Bobbie. "Couldn't
WE do something?"

"Let's go up to the Canal bridge and talk it over," said Peter. "I got a
new gut line from the postman this morning. He gave it me for a bunch of
roses that I gave him for his sweetheart. She's ill."

"Then I do think you might have given her the roses for nothing," said
Bobbie, indignantly.

"Nyang, nyang!" said Peter, disagreeably, and put his hands in his
pockets.

"He did, of course," said Phyllis, in haste; "directly we heard she was
ill we got the roses ready and waited by the gate. It was when you were
making the brekker-toast. And when he'd said 'Thank you' for the roses
so many times--much more than he need have--he pulled out the line and
gave it to Peter. It wasn't exchange. It was the grateful heart."

"Oh, I BEG your pardon, Peter," said Bobbie, "I AM so sorry."

"Don't mention it," said Peter, grandly, "I knew you would be."

So then they all went up to the Canal bridge. The idea was to fish from
the bridge, but the line was not quite long enough.

"Never mind," said Bobbie. "Let's just stay here and look at things.
Everything's so beautiful."

It was. The sun was setting in red splendour over the grey and purple
hills, and the canal lay smooth and shiny in the shadow--no ripple broke
its surface. It was like a grey satin ribbon between the dusky green
silk of the meadows that were on each side of its banks.

"It's all right," said Peter, "but somehow I can always see how pretty
things are much better when I've something to do. Let's get down on to
the towpath and fish from there."

Phyllis and Bobbie remembered how the boys on the canal-boats had thrown
coal at them, and they said so.

"Oh, nonsense," said Peter. "There aren't any boys here now. If there
were, I'd fight them."

Peter's sisters were kind enough not to remind him how he had NOT fought
the boys when coal had last been thrown. Instead they said, "All right,
then," and cautiously climbed down the steep bank to the towing-path.
The line was carefully baited, and for half an hour they fished
patiently and in vain. Not a single nibble came to nourish hope in their
hearts.

All eyes were intent on the sluggish waters that earnestly pretended
they had never harboured a single minnow when a loud rough shout made
them start.

"Hi!" said the shout, in most disagreeable tones, "get out of that,
can't you?"

An old white horse coming along the towing-path was within half a dozen
yards of them. They sprang to their feet and hastily climbed up the
bank.

"We'll slip down again when they've gone by," said Bobbie.

But, alas, the barge, after the manner of barges, stopped under the
bridge.

"She's going to anchor," said Peter; "just our luck!"

The barge did not anchor, because an anchor is not part of a
canal-boat's furniture, but she was moored with ropes fore and aft--and
the ropes were made fast to the palings and to crowbars driven into the
ground.

"What you staring at?" growled the Bargee, crossly.

"We weren't staring," said Bobbie; "we wouldn't be so rude."

"Rude be blessed," said the man; "get along with you!"

"Get along yourself," said Peter. He remembered what he had said about
fighting boys, and, besides, he felt safe halfway up the bank. "We've as
much right here as anyone else."

"Oh, 'AVE you, indeed!" said the man. "We'll soon see about that." And
he came across his deck and began to climb down the side of his barge.

"Oh, come away, Peter, come away!" said Bobbie and Phyllis, in agonised
unison.

"Not me," said Peter, "but YOU'D better."

The girls climbed to the top of the bank and stood ready to bolt for
home as soon as they saw their brother out of danger. The way home lay
all down hill. They knew that they all ran well. The Bargee did not look
as if HE did. He was red-faced, heavy, and beefy.

But as soon as his foot was on the towing-path the children saw that
they had misjudged him.

He made one spring up the bank and caught Peter by the leg, dragged him
down--set him on his feet with a shake--took him by the ear--and said
sternly:--

"Now, then, what do you mean by it? Don't you know these 'ere waters is
preserved? You ain't no right catching fish 'ere--not to say nothing of
your precious cheek."

Peter was always proud afterwards when he remembered that, with the
Bargee's furious fingers tightening on his ear, the Bargee's crimson
countenance close to his own, the Bargee's hot breath on his neck, he
had the courage to speak the truth.

"I WASN'T catching fish," said Peter.

"That's not YOUR fault, I'll be bound," said the man, giving Peter's ear
a twist--not a hard one--but still a twist.

Peter could not say that it was. Bobbie and Phyllis had been holding
on to the railings above and skipping with anxiety. Now suddenly Bobbie
slipped through the railings and rushed down the bank towards Peter, so
impetuously that Phyllis, following more temperately, felt certain that
her sister's descent would end in the waters of the canal. And so it
would have done if the Bargee hadn't let go of Peter's ear--and caught
her in his jerseyed arm.

"Who are you a-shoving of?" he said, setting her on her feet.

"Oh," said Bobbie, breathless, "I'm not shoving anybody. At least, not
on purpose. Please don't be cross with Peter. Of course, if it's your
canal, we're sorry and we won't any more. But we didn't know it was
yours."

"Go along with you," said the Bargee.

"Yes, we will; indeed we will," said Bobbie, earnestly; "but we do beg
your pardon--and really we haven't caught a single fish. I'd tell you
directly if we had, honour bright I would."

She held out her hands and Phyllis turned out her little empty pocket to
show that really they hadn't any fish concealed about them.

"Well," said the Bargee, more gently, "cut along, then, and don't you do
it again, that's all."

The children hurried up the bank.

"Chuck us a coat, M'ria," shouted the man. And a red-haired woman in a
green plaid shawl came out from the cabin door with a baby in her arms
and threw a coat to him. He put it on, climbed the bank, and slouched
along across the bridge towards the village.

"You'll find me up at the 'Rose and Crown' when you've got the kid to
sleep," he called to her from the bridge.

When he was out of sight the children slowly returned. Peter insisted on
this.

"The canal may belong to him," he said, "though I don't believe it
does. But the bridge is everybody's. Doctor Forrest told me it's public
property. I'm not going to be bounced off the bridge by him or anyone
else, so I tell you."

Peter's ear was still sore and so were his feelings.

The girls followed him as gallant soldiers might follow the leader of a
forlorn hope.

"I do wish you wouldn't," was all they said.

"Go home if you're afraid," said Peter; "leave me alone. I'M not
afraid."

The sound of the man's footsteps died away along the quiet road. The
peace of the evening was not broken by the notes of the sedge-warblers
or by the voice of the woman in the barge, singing her baby to sleep. It
was a sad song she sang. Something about Bill Bailey and how she wanted
him to come home.

The children stood leaning their arms on the parapet of the bridge; they
were glad to be quiet for a few minutes because all three hearts were
beating much more quickly.

"I'm not going to be driven away by any old bargeman, I'm not," said
Peter, thickly.

"Of course not," Phyllis said soothingly; "you didn't give in to him! So
now we might go home, don't you think?"

"NO," said Peter.

Nothing more was said till the woman got off the barge, climbed the
bank, and came across the bridge.

She hesitated, looking at the three backs of the children, then she
said, "Ahem."

Peter stayed as he was, but the girls looked round.

"You mustn't take no notice of my Bill," said the woman; "'is bark's
worse'n 'is bite. Some of the kids down Farley way is fair terrors. It
was them put 'is back up calling out about who ate the puppy-pie under
Marlow bridge."

"Who DID?" asked Phyllis.

"_I_ dunno," said the woman. "Nobody don't know! But somehow, and I
don't know the why nor the wherefore of it, them words is p'ison to a
barge-master. Don't you take no notice. 'E won't be back for two hours
good. You might catch a power o' fish afore that. The light's good an'
all," she added.

"Thank you," said Bobbie. "You're very kind. Where's your baby?"

"Asleep in the cabin," said the woman. "'E's all right. Never wakes
afore twelve. Reg'lar as a church clock, 'e is."

"I'm sorry," said Bobbie; "I would have liked to see him, close to."

"And a finer you never did see, Miss, though I says it." The woman's
face brightened as she spoke.

"Aren't you afraid to leave it?" said Peter.

"Lor' love you, no," said the woman; "who'd hurt a little thing like
'im? Besides, Spot's there. So long!"

The woman went away.

"Shall we go home?" said Phyllis.

"You can. I'm going to fish," said Peter briefly.

"I thought we came up here to talk about Perks's birthday," said
Phyllis.

"Perks's birthday'll keep."

So they got down on the towing-path again and Peter fished. He did not
catch anything.

It was almost quite dark, the girls were getting tired, and as Bobbie
said, it was past bedtime, when suddenly Phyllis cried, "What's that?"

And she pointed to the canal boat. Smoke was coming from the chimney of
the cabin, had indeed been curling softly into the soft evening air all
the time--but now other wreaths of smoke were rising, and these were
from the cabin door.

"It's on fire--that's all," said Peter, calmly. "Serve him right."

"Oh--how CAN you?" cried Phyllis. "Think of the poor dear dog."

"The BABY!" screamed Bobbie.

In an instant all three made for the barge.

Her mooring ropes were slack, and the little breeze, hardly strong
enough to be felt, had yet been strong enough to drift her stern against
the bank. Bobbie was first--then came Peter, and it was Peter who
slipped and fell. He went into the canal up to his neck, and his feet
could not feel the bottom, but his arm was on the edge of the barge.
Phyllis caught at his hair. It hurt, but it helped him to get out. Next
minute he had leaped on to the barge, Phyllis following.

"Not you!" he shouted to Bobbie; "ME, because I'm wet."

He caught up with Bobbie at the cabin door, and flung her aside very
roughly indeed; if they had been playing, such roughness would have made
Bobbie weep with tears of rage and pain. Now, though he flung her on
to the edge of the hold, so that her knee and her elbow were grazed and
bruised, she only cried:--

"No--not you--ME," and struggled up again. But not quickly enough.

Peter had already gone down two of the cabin steps into the cloud of
thick smoke. He stopped, remembered all he had ever heard of fires,
pulled his soaked handkerchief out of his breast pocket and tied it over
his mouth. As he pulled it out he said:--

"It's all right, hardly any fire at all."

And this, though he thought it was a lie, was rather good of Peter. It
was meant to keep Bobbie from rushing after him into danger. Of course
it didn't.

The cabin glowed red. A paraffin lamp was burning calmly in an orange
mist.

"Hi," said Peter, lifting the handkerchief from his mouth for a moment.
"Hi, Baby--where are you?" He choked.

"Oh, let ME go," cried Bobbie, close behind him. Peter pushed her back
more roughly than before, and went on.

Now what would have happened if the baby hadn't cried I don't know--but
just at that moment it DID cry. Peter felt his way through the dark
smoke, found something small and soft and warm and alive, picked it up
and backed out, nearly tumbling over Bobbie who was close behind. A dog
snapped at his leg--tried to bark, choked.

"I've got the kid," said Peter, tearing off the handkerchief and
staggering on to the deck.

Bobbie caught at the place where the bark came from, and her hands met
on the fat back of a smooth-haired dog. It turned and fastened its teeth
on her hand, but very gently, as much as to say:--

"I'm bound to bark and bite if strangers come into my master's cabin,
but I know you mean well, so I won't REALLY bite."

Bobbie dropped the dog.

"All right, old man. Good dog," said she. "Here--give me the baby,
Peter; you're so wet you'll give it cold."

Peter was only too glad to hand over the strange little bundle that
squirmed and whimpered in his arms.

"Now," said Bobbie, quickly, "you run straight to the 'Rose and Crown'
and tell them. Phil and I will stay here with the precious. Hush, then,
a dear, a duck, a darling! Go NOW, Peter! Run!"

"I can't run in these things," said Peter, firmly; "they're as heavy as
lead. I'll walk."

"Then I'LL run," said Bobbie. "Get on the bank, Phil, and I'll hand you
the dear."

The baby was carefully handed. Phyllis sat down on the bank and tried to
hush the baby. Peter wrung the water from his sleeves and knickerbocker
legs as well as he could, and it was Bobbie who ran like the wind across
the bridge and up the long white quiet twilight road towards the 'Rose
and Crown.'

There is a nice old-fashioned room at the 'Rose and Crown; where Bargees
and their wives sit of an evening drinking their supper beer, and
toasting their supper cheese at a glowing basketful of coals that
sticks out into the room under a great hooded chimney and is warmer and
prettier and more comforting than any other fireplace _I_ ever saw.

There was a pleasant party of barge people round the fire. You might
not have thought it pleasant, but they did; for they were all friends
or acquaintances, and they liked the same sort of things, and talked
the same sort of talk. This is the real secret of pleasant society. The
Bargee Bill, whom the children had found so disagreeable, was considered
excellent company by his mates. He was telling a tale of his own
wrongs--always a thrilling subject. It was his barge he was speaking
about.

"And 'e sent down word 'paint her inside hout,' not namin' no colour,
d'ye see? So I gets a lotter green paint and I paints her stem to stern,
and I tell yer she looked A1. Then 'E comes along and 'e says, 'Wot yer
paint 'er all one colour for?' 'e says. And I says, says I, 'Cause I
thought she'd look fust-rate,' says I, 'and I think so still.' An' he
says, 'DEW yer? Then ye can just pay for the bloomin' paint yerself,'
says he. An' I 'ad to, too." A murmur of sympathy ran round the
room. Breaking noisily in on it came Bobbie. She burst open the swing
door--crying breathlessly:--

"Bill! I want Bill the Bargeman."

There was a stupefied silence. Pots of beer were held in mid-air,
paralysed on their way to thirsty mouths.

"Oh," said Bobbie, seeing the bargewoman and making for her. "Your barge
cabin's on fire. Go quickly."

The woman started to her feet, and put a big red hand to her waist, on
the left side, where your heart seems to be when you are frightened or
miserable.

"Reginald Horace!" she cried in a terrible voice; "my Reginald Horace!"

"All right," said Bobbie, "if you mean the baby; got him out safe. Dog,
too." She had no breath for more, except, "Go on--it's all alight."

Then she sank on the ale-house bench and tried to get that breath of
relief after running which people call the 'second wind.' But she felt
as though she would never breathe again.

Bill the Bargee rose slowly and heavily. But his wife was a hundred
yards up the road before he had quite understood what was the matter.

Phyllis, shivering by the canal side, had hardly heard the quick
approaching feet before the woman had flung herself on the railing,
rolled down the bank, and snatched the baby from her.

"Don't," said Phyllis, reproachfully; "I'd just got him to sleep."

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Bill came up later talking in a language with which the children were
wholly unfamiliar. He leaped on to the barge and dipped up pails
of water. Peter helped him and they put out the fire. Phyllis, the
bargewoman, and the baby--and presently Bobbie, too--cuddled together in
a heap on the bank.

"Lord help me, if it was me left anything as could catch alight," said
the woman again and again.

But it wasn't she. It was Bill the Bargeman, who had knocked his pipe
out and the red ash had fallen on the hearth-rug and smouldered there
and at last broken into flame. Though a stern man he was just. He did
not blame his wife for what was his own fault, as many bargemen, and
other men, too, would have done.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

Mother was half wild with anxiety when at last the three children turned
up at Three Chimneys, all very wet by now, for Peter seemed to have come
off on the others. But when she had disentangled the truth of what had
happened from their mixed and incoherent narrative, she owned that they
had done quite right, and could not possibly have done otherwise. Nor
did she put any obstacles in the way of their accepting the cordial
invitation with which the bargeman had parted from them.

"Ye be here at seven to-morrow," he had said, "and I'll take you the
entire trip to Farley and back, so I will, and not a penny to pay.
Nineteen locks!"

They did not know what locks were; but they were at the bridge at seven,
with bread and cheese and half a soda cake, and quite a quarter of a leg
of mutton in a basket.

It was a glorious day. The old white horse strained at the ropes, the
barge glided smoothly and steadily through the still water. The sky was
blue overhead. Mr. Bill was as nice as anyone could possibly be. No one
would have thought that he could be the same man who had held Peter by
the ear. As for Mrs. Bill, she had always been nice, as Bobbie said, and
so had the baby, and even Spot, who might have bitten them quite badly
if he had liked.

"It was simply ripping, Mother," said Peter, when they reached home very
happy, very tired, and very dirty, "right over that glorious aqueduct.
And locks--you don't know what they're like. You sink into the ground
and then, when you feel you're never going to stop going down, two great
black gates open slowly, slowly--you go out, and there you are on the
canal just like you were before."

"I know," said Mother, "there are locks on the Thames. Father and I used
to go on the river at Marlow before we were married."

"And the dear, darling, ducky baby," said Bobbie; "it let me nurse it
for ages and ages--and it WAS so good. Mother, I wish we had a baby to
play with."

"And everybody was so nice to us," said Phyllis, "everybody we met. And
they say we may fish whenever we like. And Bill is going to show us the
way next time he's in these parts. He says we don't know really."

"He said YOU didn't know," said Peter; "but, Mother, he said he'd tell
all the bargees up and down the canal that we were the real, right sort,
and they were to treat us like good pals, as we were."

"So then I said," Phyllis interrupted, "we'd always each wear a red
ribbon when we went fishing by the canal, so they'd know it was US, and
we were the real, right sort, and be nice to us!"

"So you've made another lot of friends," said Mother; "first the railway
and then the canal!"

"Oh, yes," said Bobbie; "I think everyone in the world is friends if you
can only get them to see you don't want to be UN-friends."

"Perhaps you're right," said Mother; and she sighed. "Come, Chicks. It's
bedtime."

"Yes," said Phyllis. "Oh dear--and we went up there to talk about what
we'd do for Perks's birthday. And we haven't talked a single thing about
it!"

"No more we have," said Bobbie; "but Peter's saved Reginald Horace's
life. I think that's about good enough for one evening."

"Bobbie would have saved him if I hadn't knocked her down; twice I did,"
said Peter, loyally.

"So would I," said Phyllis, "if I'd known what to do."

"Yes," said Mother, "you've saved a little child's life. I do think
that's enough for one evening. Oh, my darlings, thank God YOU'RE all
safe!"



Chapter IX. The pride of Perks.


It was breakfast-time. Mother's face was very bright as she poured the
milk and ladled out the porridge.

"I've sold another story, Chickies," she said; "the one about the King
of the Mussels, so there'll be buns for tea. You can go and get them as
soon as they're baked. About eleven, isn't it?"

Peter, Phyllis, and Bobbie exchanged glances with each other, six
glances in all. Then Bobbie said:--

"Mother, would you mind if we didn't have the buns for tea to-night, but
on the fifteenth? That's next Thursday."

"_I_ don't mind when you have them, dear," said Mother, "but why?"

"Because it's Perks's birthday," said Bobbie; "he's thirty-two, and
he says he doesn't keep his birthday any more, because he's got other
things to keep--not rabbits or secrets--but the kids and the missus."

"You mean his wife and children," said Mother.

"Yes," said Phyllis; "it's the same thing, isn't it?"

"And we thought we'd make a nice birthday for him. He's been so awfully
jolly decent to us, you know, Mother," said Peter, "and we agreed that
next bun-day we'd ask you if we could."

"But suppose there hadn't been a bun-day before the fifteenth?" said
Mother.

"Oh, then, we meant to ask you to let us anti--antipate it, and go
without when the bun-day came."

"Anticipate," said Mother. "I see. Certainly. It would be nice to put
his name on the buns with pink sugar, wouldn't it?"

"Perks," said Peter, "it's not a pretty name."

"His other name's Albert," said Phyllis; "I asked him once."

"We might put A. P.," said Mother; "I'll show you how when the day
comes."

This was all very well as far as it went. But even fourteen halfpenny
buns with A. P. on them in pink sugar do not of themselves make a very
grand celebration.

"There are always flowers, of course," said Bobbie, later, when a really
earnest council was being held on the subject in the hay-loft where
the broken chaff-cutting machine was, and the row of holes to drop hay
through into the hay-racks over the mangers of the stables below.

"He's got lots of flowers of his own," said Peter.

"But it's always nice to have them given you," said Bobbie, "however
many you've got of your own. We can use flowers for trimmings to the
birthday. But there must be something to trim besides buns."

"Let's all be quiet and think," said Phyllis; "no one's to speak until
it's thought of something."

So they were all quiet and so very still that a brown rat thought that
there was no one in the loft and came out very boldly. When Bobbie
sneezed, the rat was quite shocked and hurried away, for he saw that a
hay-loft where such things could happen was no place for a respectable
middle-aged rat that liked a quiet life.

"Hooray!" cried Peter, suddenly, "I've got it." He jumped up and kicked
at the loose hay.

"What?" said the others, eagerly.

"Why, Perks is so nice to everybody. There must be lots of people in the
village who'd like to help to make him a birthday. Let's go round and
ask everybody."

"Mother said we weren't to ask people for things," said Bobbie,
doubtfully.

"For ourselves, she meant, silly, not for other people. I'll ask the old
gentleman too. You see if I don't," said Peter.

"Let's ask Mother first," said Bobbie.

"Oh, what's the use of bothering Mother about every little thing?"
said Peter, "especially when she's busy. Come on. Let's go down to the
village now and begin."

So they went. The old lady at the Post-office said she didn't see why
Perks should have a birthday any more than anyone else.

"No," said Bobbie, "I should like everyone to have one. Only we know
when his is."

"Mine's to-morrow," said the old lady, "and much notice anyone will take
of it. Go along with you."

So they went.

And some people were kind, and some were crusty. And some would give and
some would not. It is rather difficult work asking for things, even for
other people, as you have no doubt found if you have ever tried it.

When the children got home and counted up what had been given and what
had been promised, they felt that for the first day it was not so bad.
Peter wrote down the lists of the things in the little pocket-book where
he kept the numbers of his engines. These were the lists:--

     GIVEN.
     A tobacco pipe from the sweet shop.
     Half a pound of tea from the grocer's.
     A woollen scarf slightly faded from the draper's, which was the
         other side of the grocer's.
     A stuffed squirrel from the Doctor.

     PROMISED.
     A piece of meat from the butcher.
     Six fresh eggs from the woman who lived in the old turnpike cottage.
     A piece of honeycomb and six bootlaces from the cobbler, and an
         iron shovel from the blacksmith's.

Very early next morning Bobbie got up and woke Phyllis. This had been
agreed on between them. They had not told Peter because they thought he
would think it silly. But they told him afterwards, when it had turned
out all right.

They cut a big bunch of roses, and put it in a basket with the
needle-book that Phyllis had made for Bobbie on her birthday, and a very
pretty blue necktie of Phyllis's. Then they wrote on a paper: 'For Mrs.
Ransome, with our best love, because it is her birthday,' and they put
the paper in the basket, and they took it to the Post-office, and went
in and put it on the counter and ran away before the old woman at the
Post-office had time to get into her shop.

When they got home Peter had grown confidential over helping Mother to
get the breakfast and had told her their plans.

"There's no harm in it," said Mother, "but it depends HOW you do it. I
only hope he won't be offended and think it's CHARITY. Poor people are
very proud, you know."

"It isn't because he's poor," said Phyllis; "it's because we're fond of
him."

"I'll find some things that Phyllis has outgrown," said Mother, "if
you're quite sure you can give them to him without his being offended. I
should like to do some little thing for him because he's been so kind to
you. I can't do much because we're poor ourselves. What are you writing,
Bobbie?"

"Nothing particular," said Bobbie, who had suddenly begun to scribble.
"I'm sure he'd like the things, Mother."

The morning of the fifteenth was spent very happily in getting the buns
and watching Mother make A. P. on them with pink sugar. You know how
it's done, of course? You beat up whites of eggs and mix powdered sugar
with them, and put in a few drops of cochineal. And then you make a cone
of clean, white paper with a little hole at the pointed end, and put the
pink egg-sugar in at the big end. It runs slowly out at the pointed end,
and you write the letters with it just as though it were a great fat pen
full of pink sugar-ink.

The buns looked beautiful with A. P. on every one, and, when they were
put in a cool oven to set the sugar, the children went up to the village
to collect the honey and the shovel and the other promised things.

The old lady at the Post-office was standing on her doorstep. The
children said "Good morning," politely, as they passed.

"Here, stop a bit," she said.

So they stopped.

"Those roses," said she.

"Did you like them?" said Phyllis; "they were as fresh as fresh. _I_
made the needle-book, but it was Bobbie's present." She skipped joyously
as she spoke.

"Here's your basket," said the Post-office woman. She went in and
brought out the basket. It was full of fat, red gooseberries.

"I dare say Perks's children would like them," said she.

"You ARE an old dear," said Phyllis, throwing her arms around the old
lady's fat waist. "Perks WILL be pleased."

"He won't be half so pleased as I was with your needle-book and the tie
and the pretty flowers and all," said the old lady, patting Phyllis's
shoulder. "You're good little souls, that you are. Look here. I've got a
pram round the back in the wood-lodge. It was got for my Emmie's first,
that didn't live but six months, and she never had but that one. I'd
like Mrs. Perks to have it. It 'ud be a help to her with that great boy
of hers. Will you take it along?"

"OH!" said all the children together.

When Mrs. Ransome had got out the perambulator and taken off the careful
papers that covered it, and dusted it all over, she said:--

"Well, there it is. I don't know but what I'd have given it to her
before if I'd thought of it. Only I didn't quite know if she'd accept of
it from me. You tell her it was my Emmie's little one's pram--"

"Oh, ISN'T it nice to think there is going to be a real live baby in it
again!"

"Yes," said Mrs. Ransome, sighing, and then laughing; "here, I'll give
you some peppermint cushions for the little ones, and then you run along
before I give you the roof off my head and the clothes off my back."

All the things that had been collected for Perks were packed into
the perambulator, and at half-past three Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis
wheeled it down to the little yellow house where Perks lived.

The house was very tidy. On the window ledge was a jug of wild-flowers,
big daisies, and red sorrel, and feathery, flowery grasses.

There was a sound of splashing from the wash-house, and a partly washed
boy put his head round the door.

"Mother's a-changing of herself," he said.

"Down in a minute," a voice sounded down the narrow, freshly scrubbed
stairs.

The children waited. Next moment the stairs creaked and Mrs. Perks came
down, buttoning her bodice. Her hair was brushed very smooth and tight,
and her face shone with soap and water.

"I'm a bit late changing, Miss," she said to Bobbie, "owing to me having
had a extry clean-up to-day, along o' Perks happening to name its being
his birthday. I don't know what put it into his head to think of such
a thing. We keeps the children's birthdays, of course; but him and
me--we're too old for such like, as a general rule."

"We knew it was his birthday," said Peter, "and we've got some presents
for him outside in the perambulator."

As the presents were being unpacked, Mrs. Perks gasped. When they
were all unpacked, she surprised and horrified the children by sitting
suddenly down on a wooden chair and bursting into tears.

"Oh, don't!" said everybody; "oh, please don't!" And Peter added,
perhaps a little impatiently: "What on earth is the matter? You don't
mean to say you don't like it?"

Mrs. Perks only sobbed. The Perks children, now as shiny-faced as anyone
could wish, stood at the wash-house door, and scowled at the intruders.
There was a silence, an awkward silence.

"DON'T you like it?" said Peter, again, while his sisters patted Mrs.
Perks on the back.

She stopped crying as suddenly as she had begun.

"There, there, don't you mind me. I'M all right!" she said. "Like it?
Why, it's a birthday such as Perks never 'ad, not even when 'e was a boy
and stayed with his uncle, who was a corn chandler in his own account.
He failed afterwards. Like it? Oh--" and then she went on and said all
sorts of things that I won't write down, because I am sure that Peter
and Bobbie and Phyllis would not like me to. Their ears got hotter and
hotter, and their faces redder and redder, at the kind things Mrs. Perks
said. They felt they had done nothing to deserve all this praise.

At last Peter said: "Look here, we're glad you're pleased. But if you go
on saying things like that, we must go home. And we did want to stay and
see if Mr. Perks is pleased, too. But we can't stand this."

"I won't say another single word," said Mrs. Perks, with a beaming face,
"but that needn't stop me thinking, need it? For if ever--"

"Can we have a plate for the buns?" Bobbie asked abruptly. And then Mrs.
Perks hastily laid the table for tea, and the buns and the honey and
the gooseberries were displayed on plates, and the roses were put in two
glass jam jars, and the tea-table looked, as Mrs. Perks said, "fit for a
Prince."

"To think!" she said, "me getting the place tidy early, and the little
'uns getting the wild-flowers and all--when never did I think there'd be
anything more for him except the ounce of his pet particular that I
got o' Saturday and been saving up for 'im ever since. Bless us! 'e IS
early!"

Perks had indeed unlatched the latch of the little front gate.

"Oh," whispered Bobbie, "let's hide in the back kitchen, and YOU tell
him about it. But give him the tobacco first, because you got it for
him. And when you've told him, we'll all come in and shout, 'Many happy
returns!'"

It was a very nice plan, but it did not quite come off. To begin with,
there was only just time for Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis to rush into
the wash-house, pushing the young and open-mouthed Perks children in
front of them. There was not time to shut the door, so that, without at
all meaning it, they had to listen to what went on in the kitchen. The
wash-house was a tight fit for the Perks children and the Three Chimneys
children, as well as all the wash-house's proper furniture, including
the mangle and the copper.

"Hullo, old woman!" they heard Mr. Perks's voice say; "here's a pretty
set-out!"

"It's your birthday tea, Bert," said Mrs. Perks, "and here's a ounce of
your extry particular. I got it o' Saturday along o' your happening to
remember it was your birthday to-day."

"Good old girl!" said Mr. Perks, and there was a sound of a kiss.

"But what's that pram doing here? And what's all these bundles? And
where did you get the sweetstuff, and--"

The children did not hear what Mrs. Perks replied, because just then
Bobbie gave a start, put her hand in her pocket, and all her body grew
stiff with horror.

"Oh!" she whispered to the others, "whatever shall we do? I forgot to
put the labels on any of the things! He won't know what's from who.
He'll think it's all US, and that we're trying to be grand or charitable
or something horrid."

"Hush!" said Peter.

And then they heard the voice of Mr. Perks, loud and rather angry.

"I don't care," he said; "I won't stand it, and so I tell you straight."

"But," said Mrs. Perks, "it's them children you make such a fuss
about--the children from the Three Chimneys."

"I don't care," said Perks, firmly, "not if it was a angel from Heaven.
We've got on all right all these years and no favours asked. I'm not
going to begin these sort of charity goings-on at my time of life, so
don't you think it, Nell."

"Oh, hush!" said poor Mrs Perks; "Bert, shut your silly tongue, for
goodness' sake. The all three of 'ems in the wash-house a-listening to
every word you speaks."

"Then I'll give them something to listen to," said the angry Perks;
"I've spoke my mind to them afore now, and I'll do it again," he added,
and he took two strides to the wash-house door, and flung it wide
open--as wide, that is, as it would go, with the tightly packed children
behind it.

"Come out," said Perks, "come out and tell me what you mean by it. 'Ave
I ever complained to you of being short, as you comes this charity lay
over me?"

"OH!" said Phyllis, "I thought you'd be so pleased; I'll never try to be
kind to anyone else as long as I live. No, I won't, not never."

She burst into tears.

"We didn't mean any harm," said Peter.

"It ain't what you means so much as what you does," said Perks.

"Oh, DON'T!" cried Bobbie, trying hard to be braver than Phyllis, and to
find more words than Peter had done for explaining in. "We thought you'd
love it. We always have things on our birthdays."

"Oh, yes," said Perks, "your own relations; that's different."

"Oh, no," Bobbie answered. "NOT our own relations. All the servants
always gave us things at home, and us to them when it was their
birthdays. And when it was mine, and Mother gave me the brooch like a
buttercup, Mrs. Viney gave me two lovely glass pots, and nobody thought
she was coming the charity lay over us."

"If it had been glass pots here," said Perks, "I wouldn't ha' said so
much. It's there being all this heaps and heaps of things I can't stand.
No--nor won't, neither."

"But they're not all from us--" said Peter, "only we forgot to put the
labels on. They're from all sorts of people in the village."

"Who put 'em up to it, I'd like to know?" asked Perks.

"Why, we did," sniffed Phyllis.

Perks sat down heavily in the elbow-chair and looked at them with what
Bobbie afterwards described as withering glances of gloomy despair.

"So you've been round telling the neighbours we can't make both
ends meet? Well, now you've disgraced us as deep as you can in the
neighbourhood, you can just take the whole bag of tricks back w'ere it
come from. Very much obliged, I'm sure. I don't doubt but what you meant
it kind, but I'd rather not be acquainted with you any longer if it's
all the same to you." He deliberately turned the chair round so that
his back was turned to the children. The legs of the chair grated on the
brick floor, and that was the only sound that broke the silence.

Then suddenly Bobbie spoke.

"Look here," she said, "this is most awful."

"That's what I says," said Perks, not turning round.

"Look here," said Bobbie, desperately, "we'll go if you like--and you
needn't be friends with us any more if you don't want, but--"

"WE shall always be friends with YOU, however nasty you are to us,"
sniffed Phyllis, wildly.

"Be quiet," said Peter, in a fierce aside.

"But before we go," Bobbie went on desperately, "do let us show you the
labels we wrote to put on the things."

"I don't want to see no labels," said Perks, "except proper luggage ones
in my own walk of life. Do you think I've kept respectable and outer
debt on what I gets, and her having to take in washing, to be give away
for a laughing-stock to all the neighbours?"

"Laughing?" said Peter; "you don't know."

"You're a very hasty gentleman," whined Phyllis; "you know you were
wrong once before, about us not telling you the secret about the
Russian. Do let Bobbie tell you about the labels!"

"Well. Go ahead!" said Perks, grudgingly.

"Well, then," said Bobbie, fumbling miserably, yet not without hope, in
her tightly stuffed pocket, "we wrote down all the things everybody said
when they gave us the things, with the people's names, because Mother
said we ought to be careful--because--but I wrote down what she
said--and you'll see."

But Bobbie could not read the labels just at once. She had to swallow
once or twice before she could begin.

Mrs. Perks had been crying steadily ever since her husband had opened
the wash-house door. Now she caught her breath, choked, and said:--

"Don't you upset yourself, Missy. _I_ know you meant it kind if he
doesn't."

"May I read the labels?" said Bobbie, crying on to the slips as she
tried to sort them. "Mother's first. It says:--

"'Little Clothes for Mrs. Perks's children.' Mother said, 'I'll find
some of Phyllis's things that she's grown out of if you're quite sure
Mr. Perks wouldn't be offended and think it's meant for charity. I'd
like to do some little thing for him, because he's so kind to you. I
can't do much because we're poor ourselves.'"

Bobbie paused.

"That's all right," said Perks, "your Ma's a born lady. We'll keep the
little frocks, and what not, Nell."

"Then there's the perambulator and the gooseberries, and the sweets,"
said Bobbie, "they're from Mrs. Ransome. She said: 'I dare say Mr.
Perks's children would like the sweets. And the perambulator was got for
my Emmie's first--it didn't live but six months, and she's never had but
that one. I'd like Mrs. Perks to have it. It would be a help with her
fine boy. I'd have given it before if I'd been sure she'd accept of
it from me.' She told me to tell you," Bobbie added, "that it was her
Emmie's little one's pram."

"I can't send that pram back, Bert," said Mrs Perks, firmly, "and I
won't. So don't you ask me--"

"I'm not a-asking anything," said Perks, gruffly.

"Then the shovel," said Bobbie. "Mr. James made it for you himself. And
he said--where is it? Oh, yes, here! He said, 'You tell Mr. Perks it's a
pleasure to make a little trifle for a man as is so much respected,' and
then he said he wished he could shoe your children and his own children,
like they do the horses, because, well, he knew what shoe leather was."

"James is a good enough chap," said Perks.

"Then the honey," said Bobbie, in haste, "and the boot-laces. HE said
he respected a man that paid his way--and the butcher said the same. And
the old turnpike woman said many was the time you'd lent her a hand
with her garden when you were a lad--and things like that came home to
roost--I don't know what she meant. And everybody who gave anything said
they liked you, and it was a very good idea of ours; and nobody said
anything about charity or anything horrid like that. And the old
gentleman gave Peter a gold pound for you, and said you were a man who
knew your work. And I thought you'd LOVE to know how fond people are
of you, and I never was so unhappy in my life. Good-bye. I hope you'll
forgive us some day--"

She could say no more, and she turned to go.

"Stop," said Perks, still with his back to them; "I take back every word
I've said contrary to what you'd wish. Nell, set on the kettle."

"We'll take the things away if you're unhappy about them," said Peter;
"but I think everybody'll be most awfully disappointed, as well as us."

"I'm not unhappy about them," said Perks; "I don't know," he added,
suddenly wheeling the chair round and showing a very odd-looking
screwed-up face, "I don't know as ever I was better pleased. Not so much
with the presents--though they're an A1 collection--but the kind respect
of our neighbours. That's worth having, eh, Nell?"

"I think it's all worth having," said Mrs. Perks, "and you've made a
most ridiculous fuss about nothing, Bert, if you ask me."

"No, I ain't," said Perks, firmly; "if a man didn't respect hisself, no
one wouldn't do it for him."

"But everyone respects you," said Bobbie; "they all said so."

"I knew you'd like it when you really understood," said Phyllis,
brightly.

"Humph! You'll stay to tea?" said Mr. Perks.

Later on Peter proposed Mr. Perks's health. And Mr. Perks proposed a
toast, also honoured in tea, and the toast was, "May the garland of
friendship be ever green," which was much more poetical than anyone had
expected from him.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

"Jolly good little kids, those," said Mr. Perks to his wife as they went
to bed.

"Oh, they're all right, bless their hearts," said his wife; "it's you
that's the aggravatingest old thing that ever was. I was ashamed of
you--I tell you--"

"You didn't need to be, old gal. I climbed down handsome soon as I
understood it wasn't charity. But charity's what I never did abide, and
won't neither."

          *          *          *          *          *          *

All sorts of people were made happy by that birthday party. Mr. Perks
and Mrs. Perks and the little Perkses by all the nice things and by the
kind thoughts of their neighbours; the Three Chimneys children by the
success, undoubted though unexpectedly delayed, of their plan; and Mrs.
Ransome every time she saw the fat Perks baby in the perambulator.
Mrs. Perks made quite a round of visits to thank people for their kind
birthday presents, and after each visit felt that she had a better
friend than she had thought.

"Yes," said Perks, reflectively, "it's not so much what you does as what
you means; that's what I say. Now if it had been charity--"

"Oh, drat charity," said Mrs. Perks; "nobody won't offer you
charity, Bert, however much you was to want it, I lay. That was just
friendliness, that was."

When the clergyman called on Mrs. Perks, she told him all about it. "It
WAS friendliness, wasn't it, Sir?" said she.

"I think," said the clergyman, "it was what is sometimes called
loving-kindness."

So you see it was all right in the end. But if one does that sort of
thing, one has to be careful to do it in the right way. For, as Mr.
Perks said, when he had time to think it over, it's not so much what you
do, as what you mean.



Chapter X. The terrible secret.


When they first went to live at Three Chimneys, the children had talked
a great deal about their Father, and had asked a great many questions
about him, and what he was doing and where he was and when he would come
home. Mother always answered their questions as well as she could. But
as the time went on they grew to speak less of him. Bobbie had felt
almost from the first that for some strange miserable reason these
questions hurt Mother and made her sad. And little by little the others
came to have this feeling, too, though they could not have put it into
words.

One day, when Mother was working so hard that she could not leave off
even for ten minutes, Bobbie carried up her tea to the big bare room
that they called Mother's workshop. It had hardly any furniture. Just
a table and a chair and a rug. But always big pots of flowers on the
window-sills and on the mantelpiece. The children saw to that. And from
the three long uncurtained windows the beautiful stretch of meadow and
moorland, the far violet of the hills, and the unchanging changefulness
of cloud and sky.

"Here's your tea, Mother-love," said Bobbie; "do drink it while it's
hot."

Mother laid down her pen among the pages that were scattered all over
the table, pages covered with her writing, which was almost as plain
as print, and much prettier. She ran her hands into her hair, as if she
were going to pull it out by handfuls.

"Poor dear head," said Bobbie, "does it ache?"

"No--yes--not much," said Mother. "Bobbie, do you think Peter and Phil
are FORGETTING Father?"

"NO," said Bobbie, indignantly. "Why?"

"You none of you ever speak of him now."

Bobbie stood first on one leg and then on the other.

"We often talk about him when we're by ourselves," she said.

"But not to me," said Mother. "Why?"

Bobbie did not find it easy to say why.

"I--you--" she said and stopped. She went over to the window and looked
out.

"Bobbie, come here," said her Mother, and Bobbie came.

"Now," said Mother, putting her arm round Bobbie and laying her ruffled
head against Bobbie's shoulder, "try to tell me, dear."

Bobbie fidgeted.

"Tell Mother."

"Well, then," said Bobbie, "I thought you were so unhappy about Daddy
not being here, it made you worse when I talked about him. So I stopped
doing it."

"And the others?"

"I don't know about the others," said Bobbie. "I never said anything
about THAT to them. But I expect they felt the same about it as me."

"Bobbie dear," said Mother, still leaning her head against her, "I'll
tell you. Besides parting from Father, he and I have had a great
sorrow--oh, terrible--worse than anything you can think of, and at first
it did hurt to hear you all talking of him as if everything were just
the same. But it would be much more terrible if you were to forget him.
That would be worse than anything."

"The trouble," said Bobbie, in a very little voice--"I promised I
would never ask you any questions, and I never have, have I? But--the
trouble--it won't last always?"

"No," said Mother, "the worst will be over when Father comes home to
us."

"I wish I could comfort you," said Bobbie.

"Oh, my dear, do you suppose you don't? Do you think I haven't noticed
how good you've all been, not quarrelling nearly as much as you used
to--and all the little kind things you do for me--the flowers, and
cleaning my shoes, and tearing up to make my bed before I get time to do
it myself?"

Bobbie HAD sometimes wondered whether Mother noticed these things.

"That's nothing," she said, "to what--"

"I MUST get on with my work," said Mother, giving Bobbie one last
squeeze. "Don't say anything to the others."

That evening in the hour before bed-time instead of reading to the
children Mother told them stories of the games she and Father used
to have when they were children and lived near each other in the
country--tales of the adventures of Father with Mother's brothers when
they were all boys together. Very funny stories they were, and the
children laughed as they listened.

"Uncle Edward died before he was grown up, didn't he?" said Phyllis, as
Mother lighted the bedroom candles.

"Yes, dear," said Mother, "you would have loved him. He was such a
brave boy, and so adventurous. Always in mischief, and yet friends with
everybody in spite of it. And your Uncle Reggie's in Ceylon--yes, and
Father's away, too. But I think they'd all like to think we'd enjoyed
talking about the things they used to do. Don't you think so?"

"Not Uncle Edward," said Phyllis, in a shocked tone; "he's in Heaven."

"You don't suppose he's forgotten us and all the old times, because God
has taken him, any more than I forget him. Oh, no, he remembers. He's
only away for a little time. We shall see him some day."

"And Uncle Reggie--and Father, too?" said Peter.

"Yes," said Mother. "Uncle Reggie and Father, too. Good night, my
darlings."

"Good night," said everyone. Bobbie hugged her mother more closely even
than usual, and whispered in her ear, "Oh, I do love you so, Mummy--I
do--I do--"

When Bobbie came to think it all over, she tried not to wonder what
the great trouble was. But she could not always help it. Father was not
dead--like poor Uncle Edward--Mother had said so. And he was not ill, or
Mother would have been with him. Being poor wasn't the trouble. Bobbie
knew it was something nearer the heart than money could be.

"I mustn't try to think what it is," she told herself; "no, I mustn't. I
AM glad Mother noticed about us not quarrelling so much. We'll keep that
up."

And alas, that very afternoon she and Peter had what Peter called a
first-class shindy.

They had not been a week at Three Chimneys before they had asked Mother
to let them have a piece of garden each for their very own, and she had
agreed, and the south border under the peach trees had been divided into
three pieces and they were allowed to plant whatever they liked there.

Phyllis had planted mignonette and nasturtium and Virginia Stock in
hers. The seeds came up, and though they looked just like weeds, Phyllis
believed that they would bear flowers some day. The Virginia Stock
justified her faith quite soon, and her garden was gay with a band of
bright little flowers, pink and white and red and mauve.

"I can't weed for fear I pull up the wrong things," she used to say
comfortably; "it saves such a lot of work."

Peter sowed vegetable seeds in his--carrots and onions and turnips.
The seed was given to him by the farmer who lived in the nice
black-and-white, wood-and-plaster house just beyond the bridge. He
kept turkeys and guinea fowls, and was a most amiable man. But Peter's
vegetables never had much of a chance, because he liked to use the earth
of his garden for digging canals, and making forts and earthworks for
his toy soldiers. And the seeds of vegetables rarely come to much in
a soil that is constantly disturbed for the purposes of war and
irrigation.

Bobbie planted rose-bushes in her garden, but all the little new leaves
of the rose-bushes shrivelled and withered, perhaps because she moved
them from the other part of the garden in May, which is not at all the
right time of year for moving roses. But she would not own that they
were dead, and hoped on against hope, until the day when Perks came up
to see the garden, and told her quite plainly that all her roses were as
dead as doornails.

"Only good for bonfires, Miss," he said. "You just dig 'em up and burn
'em, and I'll give you some nice fresh roots outer my garden; pansies,
and stocks, and sweet willies, and forget-me-nots. I'll bring 'em along
to-morrow if you get the ground ready."

So next day she set to work, and that happened to be the day when Mother
had praised her and the others about not quarrelling. She moved the
rose-bushes and carried them to the other end of the garden, where the
rubbish heap was that they meant to make a bonfire of when Guy Fawkes'
Day came.

Meanwhile Peter had decided to flatten out all his forts and earthworks,
with a view to making a model of the railway-tunnel, cutting,
embankment, canal, aqueduct, bridges, and all.

So when Bobbie came back from her last thorny journey with the dead
rose-bushes, he had got the rake and was using it busily.

"_I_ was using the rake," said Bobbie.

"Well, I'm using it now," said Peter.

"But I had it first," said Bobbie.

"Then it's my turn now," said Peter. And that was how the quarrel began.

"You're always being disagreeable about nothing," said Peter, after some
heated argument.

"I had the rake first," said Bobbie, flushed and defiant, holding on to
its handle.

"Don't--I tell you I said this morning I meant to have it. Didn't I,
Phil?"

Phyllis said she didn't want to be mixed up in their rows. And
instantly, of course, she was.

"If you remember, you ought to say."

"Of course she doesn't remember--but she might say so."

"I wish I'd had a brother instead of two whiny little kiddy sisters,"
said Peter. This was always recognised as indicating the high-water mark
of Peter's rage.

Bobbie made the reply she always made to it.

"I can't think why little boys were ever invented," and just as she said
it she looked up, and saw the three long windows of Mother's workshop
flashing in the red rays of the sun. The sight brought back those words
of praise:--

"You don't quarrel like you used to do."

"OH!" cried Bobbie, just as if she had been hit, or had caught her
finger in a door, or had felt the hideous sharp beginnings of toothache.

"What's the matter?" said Phyllis.

Bobbie wanted to say: "Don't let's quarrel. Mother hates it so," but
though she tried hard, she couldn't. Peter was looking too disagreeable
and insulting.

"Take the horrid rake, then," was the best she could manage. And she
suddenly let go her hold on the handle. Peter had been holding on to
it too firmly and pullingly, and now that the pull the other way was
suddenly stopped, he staggered and fell over backward, the teeth of the
rake between his feet.

"Serve you right," said Bobbie, before she could stop herself.

Peter lay still for half a moment--long enough to frighten Bobbie a
little. Then he frightened her a little more, for he sat up--screamed
once--turned rather pale, and then lay back and began to shriek, faintly
but steadily. It sounded exactly like a pig being killed a quarter of a
mile off.

Mother put her head out of the window, and it wasn't half a minute after
that she was in the garden kneeling by the side of Peter, who never for
an instant ceased to squeal.

"What happened, Bobbie?" Mother asked.

"It was the rake," said Phyllis. "Peter was pulling at it, so was
Bobbie, and she let go and he went over."

"Stop that noise, Peter," said Mother. "Come. Stop at once."

Peter used up what breath he had left in a last squeal and stopped.

"Now," said Mother, "are you hurt?"

"If he was really hurt, he wouldn't make such a fuss," said Bobbie,
still trembling with fury; "he's not a coward!"

"I think my foot's broken off, that's all," said Peter, huffily, and sat
up. Then he turned quite white. Mother put her arm round him.

"He IS hurt," she said; "he's fainted. Here, Bobbie, sit down and take
his head on your lap."

Then Mother undid Peter's boots. As she took the right one off,
something dripped from his foot on to the ground. It was red blood. And
when the stocking came off there were three red wounds in Peter's foot
and ankle, where the teeth of the rake had bitten him, and his foot was
covered with red smears.

"Run for water--a basinful," said Mother, and Phyllis ran. She upset
most of the water out of the basin in her haste, and had to fetch more
in a jug.

Peter did not open his eyes again till Mother had tied her handkerchief
round his foot, and she and Bobbie had carried him in and laid him on
the brown wooden settle in the dining-room. By this time Phyllis was
halfway to the Doctor's.

Mother sat by Peter and bathed his foot and talked to him, and Bobbie
went out and got tea ready, and put on the kettle.

"It's all I can do," she told herself. "Oh, suppose Peter should die, or
be a helpless cripple for life, or have to walk with crutches, or wear a
boot with a sole like a log of wood!"

She stood by the back door reflecting on these gloomy possibilities, her
eyes fixed on the water-butt.

"I wish I'd never been born," she said, and she said it out loud.

"Why, lawk a mercy, what's that for?" asked a voice, and Perks stood
before her with a wooden trug basket full of green-leaved things and
soft, loose earth.

"Oh, it's you," she said. "Peter's hurt his foot with a rake--three
great gaping wounds, like soldiers get. And it was partly my fault."

"That it wasn't, I'll go bail," said Perks. "Doctor seen him?"

"Phyllis has gone for the Doctor."

"He'll be all right; you see if he isn't," said Perks. "Why, my father's
second cousin had a hay-fork run into him, right into his inside, and he
was right as ever in a few weeks, all except his being a bit weak in
the head afterwards, and they did say that it was along of his getting
a touch of the sun in the hay-field, and not the fork at all. I remember
him well. A kind-'earted chap, but soft, as you might say."

Bobbie tried to let herself be cheered by this heartening reminiscence.

"Well," said Perks, "you won't want to be bothered with gardening just
this minute, I dare say. You show me where your garden is, and I'll
pop the bits of stuff in for you. And I'll hang about, if I may make so
free, to see the Doctor as he comes out and hear what he says. You cheer
up, Missie. I lay a pound he ain't hurt, not to speak of."

But he was. The Doctor came and looked at the foot and bandaged it
beautifully, and said that Peter must not put it to the ground for at
least a week.

"He won't be lame, or have to wear crutches or a lump on his foot, will
he?" whispered Bobbie, breathlessly, at the door.

"My aunt! No!" said Dr. Forrest; "he'll be as nimble as ever on his pins
in a fortnight. Don't you worry, little Mother Goose."

It was when Mother had gone to the gate with the Doctor to take his last
instructions and Phyllis was filling the kettle for tea, that Peter and
Bobbie found themselves alone.

"He says you won't be lame or anything," said Bobbie.

"Oh, course I shan't, silly," said Peter, very much relieved all the
same.

"Oh, Peter, I AM so sorry," said Bobbie, after a pause.

"That's all right," said Peter, gruffly.

"It was ALL my fault," said Bobbie.

"Rot," said Peter.

"If we hadn't quarrelled, it wouldn't have happened. I knew it was wrong
to quarrel. I wanted to say so, but somehow I couldn't."

"Don't drivel," said Peter. "I shouldn't have stopped if you HAD said
it. Not likely. And besides, us rowing hadn't anything to do with it.
I might have caught my foot in the hoe, or taken off my fingers in the
chaff-cutting machine or blown my nose off with fireworks. It would have
been hurt just the same whether we'd been rowing or not."

"But I knew it was wrong to quarrel," said Bobbie, in tears, "and now
you're hurt and--"

"Now look here," said Peter, firmly, "you just dry up. If you're not
careful, you'll turn into a beastly little Sunday-school prig, so I tell
you."

"I don't mean to be a prig. But it's so hard not to be when you're
really trying to be good."

(The Gentle Reader may perhaps have suffered from this difficulty.)

"Not it," said Peter; "it's a jolly good thing it wasn't you was hurt.
I'm glad it was ME. There! If it had been you, you'd have been lying
on the sofa looking like a suffering angel and being the light of the
anxious household and all that. And I couldn't have stood it."

"No, I shouldn't," said Bobbie.

"Yes, you would," said Peter.

"I tell you I shouldn't."

"I tell you you would."

"Oh, children," said Mother's voice at the door. "Quarrelling again?
Already?"

"We aren't quarrelling--not really," said Peter. "I wish you wouldn't
think it's rows every time we don't agree!" When Mother had gone out
again, Bobbie broke out:--

"Peter, I AM sorry you're hurt. But you ARE a beast to say I'm a prig."

"Well," said Peter unexpectedly, "perhaps I am. You did say I wasn't a
coward, even when you were in such a wax. The only thing is--don't
you be a prig, that's all. You keep your eyes open and if you feel
priggishness coming on just stop in time. See?"

"Yes," said Bobbie, "I see."

"Then let's call it Pax," said Peter, magnanimously: "bury the hatchet
in the fathoms of the past. Shake hands on it. I say, Bobbie, old chap,
I am tired."

He was tired for many days after that, and the settle seemed hard and
uncomfortable in spite of all the pillows and bolsters and soft folded
rugs. It was terrible not to be able to go out. They moved the settle
to the window, and from there Peter could see the smoke of the trains
winding along the valley. But he could not see the trains.

At first Bobbie found it quite hard to be as nice to him as she wanted
to be, for fear he should think her priggish. But that soon wore off,
and both she and Phyllis were, as he observed, jolly good sorts. Mother
sat with him when his sisters were out. And the words, "he's not a
coward," made Peter determined not to make any fuss about the pain in
his foot, though it was rather bad, especially at night.

Praise helps people very much, sometimes.

There were visitors, too. Mrs. Perks came up to ask how he was, and so
did the Station Master, and several of the village people. But the time
went slowly, slowly.

"I do wish there was something to read," said Peter. "I've read all our
books fifty times over."

"I'll go to the Doctor's," said Phyllis; "he's sure to have some."

"Only about how to be ill, and about people's nasty insides, I expect,"
said Peter.

"Perks has a whole heap of Magazines that came out of trains when people
are tired of them," said Bobbie. "I'll run down and ask him."

So the girls went their two ways.

Bobbie found Perks busy cleaning lamps.

"And how's the young gent?" said he.

"Better, thanks," said Bobbie, "but he's most frightfully bored. I came
to ask if you'd got any Magazines you could lend him."

"There, now," said Perks, regretfully, rubbing his ear with a black
and oily lump of cotton waste, "why didn't I think of that, now? I was
trying to think of something as 'ud amuse him only this morning, and I
couldn't think of anything better than a guinea-pig. And a young chap I
know's going to fetch that over for him this tea-time."

"How lovely! A real live guinea! He will be pleased. But he'd like the
Magazines as well."

"That's just it," said Perks. "I've just sent the pick of 'em to
Snigson's boy--him what's just getting over the pewmonia. But I've lots
of illustrated papers left."

He turned to the pile of papers in the corner and took up a heap six
inches thick.

"There!" he said. "I'll just slip a bit of string and a bit of paper
round 'em."

He pulled an old newspaper from the pile and spread it on the table, and
made a neat parcel of it.

"There," said he, "there's lots of pictures, and if he likes to mess 'em
about with his paint-box, or coloured chalks or what not, why, let him.
_I_ don't want 'em."

"You're a dear," said Bobbie, took the parcel, and started. The papers
were heavy, and when she had to wait at the level-crossing while a train
went by, she rested the parcel on the top of the gate. And idly she
looked at the printing on the paper that the parcel was wrapped in.

Suddenly she clutched the parcel tighter and bent her head over it. It
seemed like some horrible dream. She read on--the bottom of the column
was torn off--she could read no farther.

She never remembered how she got home. But she went on tiptoe to her
room and locked the door. Then she undid the parcel and read that
printed column again, sitting on the edge of her bed, her hands and feet
icy cold and her face burning. When she had read all there was, she drew
a long, uneven breath.

"So now I know," she said.

What she had read was headed, 'End of the Trial. Verdict. Sentence.'

The name of the man who had been tried was the name of her Father.
The verdict was 'Guilty.' And the sentence was 'Five years' Penal
Servitude.'

"Oh, Daddy," she whispered, crushing the paper hard, "it's not true--I
don't believe it. You never did it! Never, never, never!"

There was a hammering on the door.

"What is it?" said Bobbie.

"It's me," said the voice of Phyllis; "tea's ready, and a boy's brought
Peter a guinea-pig. Come along down."

And Bobbie had to.



Chapter XI. The hound in the red jersey.


Bobbie knew the secret now. A sheet of old newspaper wrapped round a
parcel--just a little chance like that--had given the secret to her. And
she had to go down to tea and pretend that there was nothing the matter.
The pretence was bravely made, but it wasn't very successful.

For when she came in, everyone looked up from tea and saw her
pink-lidded eyes and her pale face with red tear-blotches on it.

"My darling," cried Mother, jumping up from the tea-tray, "whatever IS
the matter?"

"My head aches, rather," said Bobbie. And indeed it did.

"Has anything gone wrong?" Mother asked.

"I'm all right, really," said Bobbie, and she telegraphed to her Mother
from her swollen eyes this brief, imploring message--"NOT before the
others!"

Tea was not a cheerful meal. Peter was so distressed by the obvious fact
that something horrid had happened to Bobbie that he limited his speech
to repeating, "More bread and butter, please," at startlingly short
intervals. Phyllis stroked her sister's hand under the table to express
sympathy, and knocked her cup over as she did it. Fetching a cloth and
wiping up the spilt milk helped Bobbie a little. But she thought that
tea would never end. Yet at last it did end, as all things do at last,
and when Mother took out the tray, Bobbie followed her.

"She's gone to own up," said Phyllis to Peter; "I wonder what she's
done."

"Broken something, I suppose," said Peter, "but she needn't be so silly
over it. Mother never rows for accidents. Listen! Yes, they're going
upstairs. She's taking Mother up to show her--the water-jug with storks
on it, I expect it is."

Bobbie, in the kitchen, had caught hold of Mother's hand as she set down
the tea-things.

"What is it?" Mother asked.

But Bobbie only said, "Come upstairs, come up where nobody can hear us."

When she had got Mother alone in her room she locked the door and then
stood quite still, and quite without words.

All through tea she had been thinking of what to say; she had decided
that "I know all," or "All is known to me," or "The terrible secret is
a secret no longer," would be the proper thing. But now that she and
her Mother and that awful sheet of newspaper were alone in the room
together, she found that she could say nothing.

Suddenly she went to Mother and put her arms round her and began to cry
again. And still she could find no words, only, "Oh, Mammy, oh, Mammy,
oh, Mammy," over and over again.

Mother held her very close and waited.

Suddenly Bobbie broke away from her and went to her bed. From under her
mattress she pulled out the paper she had hidden there, and held it out,
pointing to her Father's name with a finger that shook.

"Oh, Bobbie," Mother cried, when one little quick look had shown her
what it was, "you don't BELIEVE it? You don't believe Daddy did it?"

"NO," Bobbie almost shouted. She had stopped crying.

"That's all right," said Mother. "It's not true. And they've shut him
up in prison, but he's done nothing wrong. He's good and noble and
honourable, and he belongs to us. We have to think of that, and be proud
of him, and wait."

Again Bobbie clung to her Mother, and again only one word came to her,
but now that word was "Daddy," and "Oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy!"
again and again.

"Why didn't you tell me, Mammy?" she asked presently.

"Are you going to tell the others?" Mother asked.

"No."

"Why?"

"Because--"

"Exactly," said Mother; "so you understand why I didn't tell you. We two
must help each other to be brave."

"Yes," said Bobbie; "Mother, will it make you more unhappy if you tell
me all about it? I want to understand."

So then, sitting cuddled up close to her Mother, Bobbie heard "all
about it." She heard how those men, who had asked to see Father on that
remembered last night when the Engine was being mended, had come
to arrest him, charging him with selling State secrets to the
Russians--with being, in fact, a spy and a traitor. She heard about the
trial, and about the evidence--letters, found in Father's desk at the
office, letters that convinced the jury that Father was guilty.

"Oh, how could they look at him and believe it!" cried Bobbie; "and how
could ANY one do such a thing!"

"SOMEONE did it," said Mother, "and all the evidence was against Father.
Those letters--"

"Yes. How did the letters get into his desk?"

"Someone put them there. And the person who put them there was the
person who was really guilty."

"HE must be feeling pretty awful all this time," said Bobbie,
thoughtfully.

"I don't believe he had any feelings," Mother said hotly; "he couldn't
have done a thing like that if he had."

"Perhaps he just shoved the letters into the desk to hide them when he
thought he was going to be found out. Why don't you tell the lawyers,
or someone, that it must have been that person? There wasn't anyone that
would have hurt Father on purpose, was there?"

"I don't know--I don't know. The man under him who got Daddy's place
when he--when the awful thing happened--he was always jealous of your
Father because Daddy was so clever and everyone thought such a lot of
him. And Daddy never quite trusted that man."

"Couldn't we explain all that to someone?"

"Nobody will listen," said Mother, very bitterly, "nobody at all. Do you
suppose I've not tried everything? No, my dearest, there's nothing to be
done. All we can do, you and I and Daddy, is to be brave, and patient,
and--" she spoke very softly--"to pray, Bobbie, dear."

"Mother, you've got very thin," said Bobbie, abruptly.

"A little, perhaps."

"And oh," said Bobbie, "I do think you're the bravest person in the
world as well as the nicest!"

"We won't talk of all this any more, will we, dear?" said Mother; "we
must bear it and be brave. And, darling, try not to think of it. Try to
be cheerful, and to amuse yourself and the others. It's much easier for
me if you can be a little bit happy and enjoy things. Wash your poor
little round face, and let's go out into the garden for a bit."

The other two were very gentle and kind to Bobbie. And they did not
ask her what was the matter. This was Peter's idea, and he had drilled
Phyllis, who would have asked a hundred questions if she had been left
to herself.

A week later Bobbie managed to get away alone. And once more she wrote a
letter. And once more it was to the old gentleman.

"My dear Friend," she said, "you see what is in this paper. It is
not true. Father never did it. Mother says someone put the papers in
Father's desk, and she says the man under him that got Father's place
afterwards was jealous of Father, and Father suspected him a long time.
But nobody listens to a word she says, but you are so good and clever,
and you found out about the Russian gentleman's wife directly. Can't you
find out who did the treason because he wasn't Father upon my honour;
he is an Englishman and uncapable to do such things, and then they would
let Father out of prison. It is dreadful, and Mother is getting so thin.
She told us once to pray for all prisoners and captives. I see now.
Oh, do help me--there is only just Mother and me know, and we can't do
anything. Peter and Phil don't know. I'll pray for you twice every day
as long as I live if you'll only try--just try to find out. Think if it
was YOUR Daddy, what you would feel. Oh, do, do, DO help me. With love

"I remain Your affectionately little friend

"Roberta.

P.S. Mother would send her kind regards if she knew I am writing--but
it is no use telling her I am, in case you can't do anything. But I know
you will. Bobbie with best love."

She cut the account of her Father's trial out of the newspaper with
Mother's big cutting-out scissors, and put it in the envelope with her
letter.

Then she took it down to the station, going out the back way and round
by the road, so that the others should not see her and offer to come
with her, and she gave the letter to the Station Master to give to the
old gentleman next morning.

"Where HAVE you been?" shouted Peter, from the top of the yard wall
where he and Phyllis were.

"To the station, of course," said Bobbie; "give us a hand, Pete."

She set her foot on the lock of the yard door. Peter reached down a
hand.

"What on earth?" she asked as she reached the wall-top--for Phyllis and
Peter were very muddy. A lump of wet clay lay between them on the wall,
they had each a slip of slate in a very dirty hand, and behind Peter,
out of the reach of accidents, were several strange rounded objects
rather like very fat sausages, hollow, but closed up at one end.

"It's nests," said Peter, "swallows' nests. We're going to dry them
in the oven and hang them up with string under the eaves of the
coach-house."

"Yes," said Phyllis; "and then we're going to save up all the wool and
hair we can get, and in the spring we'll line them, and then how pleased
the swallows will be!"

"I've often thought people don't do nearly enough for dumb animals,"
said Peter with an air of virtue. "I do think people might have thought
of making nests for poor little swallows before this."

"Oh," said Bobbie, vaguely, "if everybody thought of everything, there'd
be nothing left for anybody else to think about."

"Look at the nests--aren't they pretty?" said Phyllis, reaching across
Peter to grasp a nest.

"Look out, Phil, you goat," said her brother. But it was too late; her
strong little fingers had crushed the nest.

"There now," said Peter.

"Never mind," said Bobbie.

"It IS one of my own," said Phyllis, "so you needn't jaw, Peter. Yes,
we've put our initial names on the ones we've done, so that the swallows
will know who they've got to be so grateful to and fond of."

"Swallows can't read, silly," said Peter.

"Silly yourself," retorted Phyllis; "how do you know?"

"Who thought of making the nests, anyhow?" shouted Peter.

"I did," screamed Phyllis.

"Nya," rejoined Peter, "you only thought of making hay ones and sticking
them in the ivy for the sparrows, and they'd have been sopping LONG
before egg-laying time. It was me said clay and swallows."

"I don't care what you said."

"Look," said Bobbie, "I've made the nest all right again. Give me the
bit of stick to mark your initial name on it. But how can you? Your
letter and Peter's are the same. P. for Peter, P. for Phyllis."

"I put F. for Phyllis," said the child of that name. "That's how
it sounds. The swallows wouldn't spell Phyllis with a P., I'm
certain-sure."

"They can't spell at all," Peter was still insisting.

"Then why do you see them always on Christmas cards and valentines
with letters round their necks? How would they know where to go if they
couldn't read?"

"That's only in pictures. You never saw one really with letters round
its neck."

"Well, I have a pigeon, then; at least Daddy told me they did. Only it
was under their wings and not round their necks, but it comes to the
same thing, and--"

"I say," interrupted Bobbie, "there's to be a paperchase to-morrow."

"Who?" Peter asked.

"Grammar School. Perks thinks the hare will go along by the line at
first. We might go along the cutting. You can see a long way from
there."

The paperchase was found to be a more amusing subject of conversation
than the reading powers of swallows. Bobbie had hoped it might be. And
next morning Mother let them take their lunch and go out for the day to
see the paperchase.

"If we go to the cutting," said Peter, "we shall see the workmen, even
if we miss the paperchase."

Of course it had taken some time to get the line clear from the rocks
and earth and trees that had fallen on it when the great landslip
happened. That was the occasion, you will remember, when the three
children saved the train from being wrecked by waving six little
red-flannel-petticoat flags. It is always interesting to watch people
working, especially when they work with such interesting things as
spades and picks and shovels and planks and barrows, when they have
cindery red fires in iron pots with round holes in them, and red lamps
hanging near the works at night. Of course the children were never
out at night; but once, at dusk, when Peter had got out of his bedroom
skylight on to the roof, he had seen the red lamp shining far away at
the edge of the cutting. The children had often been down to watch the
work, and this day the interest of picks and spades, and barrows being
wheeled along planks, completely put the paperchase out of their heads,
so that they quite jumped when a voice just behind them panted, "Let me
pass, please." It was the hare--a big-boned, loose-limbed boy, with dark
hair lying flat on a very damp forehead. The bag of torn paper under
his arm was fastened across one shoulder by a strap. The children stood
back. The hare ran along the line, and the workmen leaned on their picks
to watch him. He ran on steadily and disappeared into the mouth of the
tunnel.

"That's against the by-laws," said the foreman.

"Why worry?" said the oldest workman; "live and let live's what I always
say. Ain't you never been young yourself, Mr. Bates?"

"I ought to report him," said the foreman.

"Why spoil sport's what I always say."

"Passengers are forbidden to cross the line on any pretence," murmured
the foreman, doubtfully.

"He ain't no passenger," said one of the workmen.

"Nor 'e ain't crossed the line, not where we could see 'im do it," said
another.

"Nor yet 'e ain't made no pretences," said a third.

"And," said the oldest workman, "'e's outer sight now. What the eye
don't see the 'art needn't take no notice of's what I always say."

And now, following the track of the hare by the little white blots of
scattered paper, came the hounds. There were thirty of them, and they
all came down the steep, ladder-like steps by ones and twos and threes
and sixes and sevens. Bobbie and Phyllis and Peter counted them as they
passed. The foremost ones hesitated a moment at the foot of the ladder,
then their eyes caught the gleam of scattered whiteness along the line
and they turned towards the tunnel, and, by ones and twos and threes and
sixes and sevens, disappeared in the dark mouth of it. The last one, in
a red jersey, seemed to be extinguished by the darkness like a candle
that is blown out.

"They don't know what they're in for," said the foreman; "it isn't so
easy running in the dark. The tunnel takes two or three turns."

"They'll take a long time to get through, you think?" Peter asked.

"An hour or more, I shouldn't wonder."

"Then let's cut across the top and see them come out at the other end,"
said Peter; "we shall get there long before they do."

The counsel seemed good, and they went.

They climbed the steep steps from which they had picked the wild cherry
blossom for the grave of the little wild rabbit, and reaching the top of
the cutting, set their faces towards the hill through which the tunnel
was cut. It was stiff work.

"It's like Alps," said Bobbie, breathlessly.

"Or Andes," said Peter.

"It's like Himmy what's its names?" gasped Phyllis. "Mount Everlasting.
Do let's stop."

"Stick to it," panted Peter; "you'll get your second wind in a minute."

Phyllis consented to stick to it--and on they went, running when the
turf was smooth and the slope easy, climbing over stones, helping
themselves up rocks by the branches of trees, creeping through narrow
openings between tree trunks and rocks, and so on and on, up and up,
till at last they stood on the very top of the hill where they had so
often wished to be.

"Halt!" cried Peter, and threw himself flat on the grass. For the very
top of the hill was a smooth, turfed table-land, dotted with mossy rocks
and little mountain-ash trees.

The girls also threw themselves down flat.

"Plenty of time," Peter panted; "the rest's all down hill."

When they were rested enough to sit up and look round them, Bobbie
cried:--

"Oh, look!"

"What at?" said Phyllis.

"The view," said Bobbie.

"I hate views," said Phyllis, "don't you, Peter?"

"Let's get on," said Peter.

"But this isn't like a view they take you to in carriages when you're
at the seaside, all sea and sand and bare hills. It's like the 'coloured
counties' in one of Mother's poetry books."

"It's not so dusty," said Peter; "look at the Aqueduct straddling slap
across the valley like a giant centipede, and then the towns sticking
their church spires up out of the trees like pens out of an inkstand.
_I_ think it's more like

     "There could he see the banners
      Of twelve fair cities shine."

"I love it," said Bobbie; "it's worth the climb."

"The paperchase is worth the climb," said Phyllis, "if we don't lose it.
Let's get on. It's all down hill now."

"_I_ said that ten minutes ago," said Peter.

"Well, I'VE said it now," said Phyllis; "come on."

"Loads of time," said Peter. And there was. For when they had got down
to a level with the top of the tunnel's mouth--they were a couple of
hundred yards out of their reckoning and had to creep along the face of
the hill--there was no sign of the hare or the hounds.

"They've gone long ago, of course," said Phyllis, as they leaned on the
brick parapet above the tunnel.

"I don't think so," said Bobbie, "but even if they had, it's ripping
here, and we shall see the trains come out of the tunnel like dragons
out of lairs. We've never seen that from the top side before."

"No more we have," said Phyllis, partially appeased.

It was really a most exciting place to be in. The top of the tunnel
seemed ever so much farther from the line than they had expected, and
it was like being on a bridge, but a bridge overgrown with bushes and
creepers and grass and wild-flowers.

"I KNOW the paperchase has gone long ago," said Phyllis every two
minutes, and she hardly knew whether she was pleased or disappointed
when Peter, leaning over the parapet, suddenly cried:--

"Look out. Here he comes!"

They all leaned over the sun-warmed brick wall in time to see the hare,
going very slowly, come out from the shadow of the tunnel.

"There, now," said Peter, "what did I tell you? Now for the hounds!"

Very soon came the hounds--by ones and twos and threes and sixes and
sevens--and they also were going slowly and seemed very tired. Two or
three who lagged far behind came out long after the others.

"There," said Bobbie, "that's all--now what shall we do?"

"Go along into the tulgy wood over there and have lunch," said Phyllis;
"we can see them for miles from up here."

"Not yet," said Peter. "That's not the last. There's the one in the red
jersey to come yet. Let's see the last of them come out."

But though they waited and waited and waited, the boy in the red jersey
did not appear.

"Oh, let's have lunch," said Phyllis; "I've got a pain in my front with
being so hungry. You must have missed seeing the red-jerseyed one when
he came out with the others--"

But Bobbie and Peter agreed that he had not come out with the others.

"Let's get down to the tunnel mouth," said Peter; "then perhaps we shall
see him coming along from the inside. I expect he felt spun-chuck, and
rested in one of the manholes. You stay up here and watch, Bob, and when
I signal from below, you come down. We might miss seeing him on the way
down, with all these trees."

So the others climbed down and Bobbie waited till they signalled to her
from the line below. And then she, too, scrambled down the roundabout
slippery path among roots and moss till she stepped out between two
dogwood trees and joined the others on the line. And still there was no
sign of the hound with the red jersey.

"Oh, do, DO let's have something to eat," wailed Phyllis. "I shall die
if you don't, and then you'll be sorry."

"Give her the sandwiches, for goodness' sake, and stop her silly mouth,"
said Peter, not quite unkindly. "Look here," he added, turning to
Bobbie, "perhaps we'd better have one each, too. We may need all our
strength. Not more than one, though. There's no time."

"What?" asked Bobbie, her mouth already full, for she was just as hungry
as Phyllis.

"Don't you see," replied Peter, impressively, "that red-jerseyed hound
has had an accident--that's what it is. Perhaps even as we speak he's
lying with his head on the metals, an unresisting prey to any passing
express--"

"Oh, don't try to talk like a book," cried Bobbie, bolting what was left
of her sandwich; "come on. Phil, keep close behind me, and if a train
comes, stand flat against the tunnel wall and hold your petticoats close
to you."

"Give me one more sandwich," pleaded Phyllis, "and I will."

"I'm going first," said Peter; "it was my idea," and he went.

Of course you know what going into a tunnel is like? The engine gives
a scream and then suddenly the noise of the running, rattling train
changes and grows different and much louder. Grown-up people pull up the
windows and hold them by the strap. The railway carriage suddenly grows
like night--with lamps, of course, unless you are in a slow local train,
in which case lamps are not always provided. Then by and by the darkness
outside the carriage window is touched by puffs of cloudy whiteness,
then you see a blue light on the walls of the tunnel, then the sound of
the moving train changes once more, and you are out in the good open air
again, and grown-ups let the straps go. The windows, all dim with the
yellow breath of the tunnel, rattle down into their places, and you see
once more the dip and catch of the telegraph wires beside the line, and
the straight-cut hawthorn hedges with the tiny baby trees growing up out
of them every thirty yards.

All this, of course, is what a tunnel means when you are in a train. But
everything is quite different when you walk into a tunnel on your own
feet, and tread on shifting, sliding stones and gravel on a path that
curves downwards from the shining metals to the wall. Then you see
slimy, oozy trickles of water running down the inside of the tunnel,
and you notice that the bricks are not red or brown, as they are at the
tunnel's mouth, but dull, sticky, sickly green. Your voice, when you
speak, is quite changed from what it was out in the sunshine, and it is
a long time before the tunnel is quite dark.

It was not yet quite dark in the tunnel when Phyllis caught at Bobbie's
skirt, ripping out half a yard of gathers, but no one noticed this at
the time.

"I want to go back," she said, "I don't like it. It'll be pitch dark
in a minute. I WON'T go on in the dark. I don't care what you say, I
WON'T."

"Don't be a silly cuckoo," said Peter; "I've got a candle end and
matches, and--what's that?"

"That" was a low, humming sound on the railway line, a trembling of the
wires beside it, a buzzing, humming sound that grew louder and louder as
they listened.

"It's a train," said Bobbie.

"Which line?"

"Let me go back," cried Phyllis, struggling to get away from the hand by
which Bobbie held her.

"Don't be a coward," said Bobbie; "it's quite safe. Stand back."

"Come on," shouted Peter, who was a few yards ahead. "Quick! Manhole!"

The roar of the advancing train was now louder than the noise you hear
when your head is under water in the bath and both taps are running, and
you are kicking with your heels against the bath's tin sides. But Peter
had shouted for all he was worth, and Bobbie heard him. She dragged
Phyllis along to the manhole. Phyllis, of course, stumbled over the
wires and grazed both her legs. But they dragged her in, and all three
stood in the dark, damp, arched recess while the train roared louder and
louder. It seemed as if it would deafen them. And, in the distance, they
could see its eyes of fire growing bigger and brighter every instant.

"It IS a dragon--I always knew it was--it takes its own shape in here,
in the dark," shouted Phyllis. But nobody heard her. You see the train
was shouting, too, and its voice was bigger than hers.

And now, with a rush and a roar and a rattle and a long dazzling flash
of lighted carriage windows, a smell of smoke, and blast of hot air, the
train hurtled by, clanging and jangling and echoing in the vaulted roof
of the tunnel. Phyllis and Bobbie clung to each other. Even Peter
caught hold of Bobbie's arm, "in case she should be frightened," as he
explained afterwards.

And now, slowly and gradually, the tail-lights grew smaller and smaller,
and so did the noise, till with one last WHIZ the train got itself out
of the tunnel, and silence settled again on its damp walls and dripping
roof.

"OH!" said the children, all together in a whisper.

Peter was lighting the candle end with a hand that trembled.

"Come on," he said; but he had to clear his throat before he could speak
in his natural voice.

"Oh," said Phyllis, "if the red-jerseyed one was in the way of the
train!"

"We've got to go and see," said Peter.

"Couldn't we go and send someone from the station?" said Phyllis.

"Would you rather wait here for us?" asked Bobbie, severely, and of
course that settled the question.

So the three went on into the deeper darkness of the tunnel. Peter led,
holding his candle end high to light the way. The grease ran down his
fingers, and some of it right up his sleeve. He found a long streak from
wrist to elbow when he went to bed that night.

It was not more than a hundred and fifty yards from the spot where
they had stood while the train went by that Peter stood still, shouted
"Hullo," and then went on much quicker than before. When the others
caught him up, he stopped. And he stopped within a yard of what they had
come into the tunnel to look for. Phyllis saw a gleam of red, and
shut her eyes tight. There, by the curved, pebbly down line, was the
red-jerseyed hound. His back was against the wall, his arms hung limply
by his sides, and his eyes were shut.

"Was the red, blood? Is he all killed?" asked Phyllis, screwing her
eyelids more tightly together.

"Killed? Nonsense!" said Peter. "There's nothing red about him except
his jersey. He's only fainted. What on earth are we to do?"

"Can we move him?" asked Bobbie.

"I don't know; he's a big chap."

"Suppose we bathe his forehead with water. No, I know we haven't any,
but milk's just as wet. There's a whole bottle."

"Yes," said Peter, "and they rub people's hands, I believe."

"They burn feathers, I know," said Phyllis.

"What's the good of saying that when we haven't any feathers?"

"As it happens," said Phyllis, in a tone of exasperated triumph, "I've
got a shuttlecock in my pocket. So there!"

And now Peter rubbed the hands of the red-jerseyed one. Bobbie burned
the feathers of the shuttlecock one by one under his nose, Phyllis
splashed warmish milk on his forehead, and all three kept on saying as
fast and as earnestly as they could:--

"Oh, look up, speak to me! For my sake, speak!"



Chapter XII. What Bobbie brought home.


"Oh, look up! Speak to me! For MY sake, speak!" The children said the
words over and over again to the unconscious hound in a red jersey, who
sat with closed eyes and pale face against the side of the tunnel.

"Wet his ears with milk," said Bobbie. "I know they do it to people that
faint--with eau-de-Cologne. But I expect milk's just as good."

So they wetted his ears, and some of the milk ran down his neck under
the red jersey. It was very dark in the tunnel. The candle end Peter had
carried, and which now burned on a flat stone, gave hardly any light at
all.

"Oh, DO look up," said Phyllis. "For MY sake! I believe he's dead."

"For MY sake," repeated Bobbie. "No, he isn't."

"For ANY sake," said Peter; "come out of it." And he shook the sufferer
by the arm.

And then the boy in the red jersey sighed, and opened his eyes, and shut
them again and said in a very small voice, "Chuck it."

"Oh, he's NOT dead," said Phyllis. "I KNEW he wasn't," and she began to
cry.

"What's up? I'm all right," said the boy.

"Drink this," said Peter, firmly, thrusting the nose of the milk bottle
into the boy's mouth. The boy struggled, and some of the milk was upset
before he could get his mouth free to say:--

"What is it?"

"It's milk," said Peter. "Fear not, you are in the hands of friends.
Phil, you stop bleating this minute."

"Do drink it," said Bobbie, gently; "it'll do you good."

So he drank. And the three stood by without speaking to him.

"Let him be a minute," Peter whispered; "he'll be all right as soon as
the milk begins to run like fire through his veins."

He was.

"I'm better now," he announced. "I remember all about it." He tried to
move, but the movement ended in a groan. "Bother! I believe I've broken
my leg," he said.

"Did you tumble down?" asked Phyllis, sniffing.

"Of course not--I'm not a kiddie," said the boy, indignantly; "it was
one of those beastly wires tripped me up, and when I tried to get up
again I couldn't stand, so I sat down. Gee whillikins! it does hurt,
though. How did YOU get here?"

"We saw you all go into the tunnel and then we went across the hill to
see you all come out. And the others did--all but you, and you didn't.
So we are a rescue party," said Peter, with pride.

"You've got some pluck, I will say," remarked the boy.

"Oh, that's nothing," said Peter, with modesty. "Do you think you could
walk if we helped you?"

"I could try," said the boy.

He did try. But he could only stand on one foot; the other dragged in a
very nasty way.

"Here, let me sit down. I feel like dying," said the boy. "Let go of
me--let go, quick--" He lay down and closed his eyes. The others looked
at each other by the dim light of the little candle.

"What on earth!" said Peter.

"Look here," said Bobbie, quickly, "you must go and get help. Go to the
nearest house."

"Yes, that's the only thing," said Peter. "Come on."

"If you take his feet and Phil and I take his head, we could carry him
to the manhole."

They did it. It was perhaps as well for the sufferer that he had fainted
again.

"Now," said Bobbie, "I'll stay with him. You take the longest bit of
candle, and, oh--be quick, for this bit won't burn long."

"I don't think Mother would like me leaving you," said Peter,
doubtfully. "Let me stay, and you and Phil go."

"No, no," said Bobbie, "you and Phil go--and lend me your knife. I'll
try to get his boot off before he wakes up again."

"I hope it's all right what we're doing," said Peter.

"Of course it's right," said Bobbie, impatiently. "What else WOULD you
do? Leave him here all alone because it's dark? Nonsense. Hurry up,
that's all."

So they hurried up.

Bobbie watched their dark figures and the little light of the little
candle with an odd feeling of having come to the end of everything. She
knew now, she thought, what nuns who were bricked up alive in convent
walls felt like. Suddenly she gave herself a little shake.

"Don't be a silly little girl," she said. She was always very angry when
anyone else called her a little girl, even if the adjective that went
first was not "silly" but "nice" or "good" or "clever." And it was only
when she was very angry with herself that she allowed Roberta to use
that expression to Bobbie.

She fixed the little candle end on a broken brick near the red-jerseyed
boy's feet. Then she opened Peter's knife. It was always hard to
manage--a halfpenny was generally needed to get it open at all. This
time Bobbie somehow got it open with her thumbnail. She broke the nail,
and it hurt horribly. Then she cut the boy's bootlace, and got the boot
off. She tried to pull off his stocking, but his leg was dreadfully
swollen, and it did not seem to be the proper shape. So she cut the
stocking down, very slowly and carefully. It was a brown, knitted
stocking, and she wondered who had knitted it, and whether it was the
boy's mother, and whether she was feeling anxious about him, and how she
would feel when he was brought home with his leg broken. When Bobbie had
got the stocking off and saw the poor leg, she felt as though the tunnel
was growing darker, and the ground felt unsteady, and nothing seemed
quite real.

"SILLY little girl!" said Roberta to Bobbie, and felt better.

"The poor leg," she told herself; "it ought to have a cushion--ah!"

She remembered the day when she and Phyllis had torn up their red
flannel petticoats to make danger signals to stop the train and prevent
an accident. Her flannel petticoat to-day was white, but it would be
quite as soft as a red one. She took it off.

"Oh, what useful things flannel petticoats are!" she said; "the man who
invented them ought to have a statue directed to him." And she said
it aloud, because it seemed that any voice, even her own, would be a
comfort in that darkness.

"WHAT ought to be directed? Who to?" asked the boy, suddenly and very
feebly.

"Oh," said Bobbie, "now you're better! Hold your teeth and don't let it
hurt too much. Now!"

She had folded the petticoat, and lifting his leg laid it on the cushion
of folded flannel.

"Don't faint again, PLEASE don't," said Bobbie, as he groaned. She
hastily wetted her handkerchief with milk and spread it over the poor
leg.

"Oh, that hurts," cried the boy, shrinking. "Oh--no, it doesn't--it's
nice, really."

"What's your name?" said Bobbie.

"Jim."

"Mine's Bobbie."

"But you're a girl, aren't you?"

"Yes, my long name's Roberta."

"I say--Bobbie."

"Yes?"

"Wasn't there some more of you just now?"

"Yes, Peter and Phil--that's my brother and sister. They've gone to get
someone to carry you out."

"What rum names. All boys'."

"Yes--I wish I was a boy, don't you?"

"I think you're all right as you are."

"I didn't mean that--I meant don't you wish YOU were a boy, but of
course you are without wishing."

"You're just as brave as a boy. Why didn't you go with the others?"

"Somebody had to stay with you," said Bobbie.

"Tell you what, Bobbie," said Jim, "you're a brick. Shake." He reached
out a red-jerseyed arm and Bobbie squeezed his hand.

"I won't shake it," she explained, "because it would shake YOU, and that
would shake your poor leg, and that would hurt. Have you got a hanky?"

"I don't expect I have." He felt in his pocket. "Yes, I have. What for?"

She took it and wetted it with milk and put it on his forehead.

"That's jolly," he said; "what is it?"

"Milk," said Bobbie. "We haven't any water--"

"You're a jolly good little nurse," said Jim.

"I do it for Mother sometimes," said Bobbie--"not milk, of course,
but scent, or vinegar and water. I say, I must put the candle out now,
because there mayn't be enough of the other one to get you out by."

"By George," said he, "you think of everything."

Bobbie blew. Out went the candle. You have no idea how black-velvety the
darkness was.

"I say, Bobbie," said a voice through the blackness, "aren't you afraid
of the dark?"

"Not--not very, that is--"

"Let's hold hands," said the boy, and it was really rather good of him,
because he was like most boys of his age and hated all material tokens
of affection, such as kissing and holding of hands. He called all such
things "pawings," and detested them.

The darkness was more bearable to Bobbie now that her hand was held in
the large rough hand of the red-jerseyed sufferer; and he, holding her
little smooth hot paw, was surprised to find that he did not mind it so
much as he expected. She tried to talk, to amuse him, and "take his mind
off" his sufferings, but it is very difficult to go on talking in the
dark, and presently they found themselves in a silence, only broken now
and then by a--

"You all right, Bobbie?"

or an--

"I'm afraid it's hurting you most awfully, Jim. I AM so sorry."

And it was very cold.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Peter and Phyllis tramped down the long way of the tunnel towards
daylight, the candle-grease dripping over Peter's fingers. There were no
accidents unless you count Phyllis's catching her frock on a wire, and
tearing a long, jagged slit in it, and tripping over her bootlace when
it came undone, or going down on her hands and knees, all four of which
were grazed.

"There's no end to this tunnel," said Phyllis--and indeed it did seem
very very long.

"Stick to it," said Peter; "everything has an end, and you get to it if
you only keep all on."

Which is quite true, if you come to think of it, and a useful thing
to remember in seasons of trouble--such as measles, arithmetic,
impositions, and those times when you are in disgrace, and feel as
though no one would ever love you again, and you could never--never
again--love anybody.

"Hurray," said Peter, suddenly, "there's the end of the tunnel--looks
just like a pin-hole in a bit of black paper, doesn't it?"

The pin-hole got larger--blue lights lay along the sides of the tunnel.
The children could see the gravel way that lay in front of them; the air
grew warmer and sweeter. Another twenty steps and they were out in the
good glad sunshine with the green trees on both sides.

Phyllis drew a long breath.

"I'll never go into a tunnel again as long as ever I live," said she,
"not if there are twenty hundred thousand millions hounds inside with
red jerseys and their legs broken."

"Don't be a silly cuckoo," said Peter, as usual. "You'd HAVE to."

"I think it was very brave and good of me," said Phyllis.

"Not it," said Peter; "you didn't go because you were brave, but because
Bobbie and I aren't skunks. Now where's the nearest house, I wonder? You
can't see anything here for the trees."

"There's a roof over there," said Phyllis, pointing down the line.

"That's the signal-box," said Peter, "and you know you're not allowed to
speak to signalmen on duty. It's wrong."

"I'm not near so afraid of doing wrong as I was of going into that
tunnel," said Phyllis. "Come on," and she started to run along the line.
So Peter ran, too.

It was very hot in the sunshine, and both children were hot and
breathless by the time they stopped, and bending their heads back to
look up at the open windows of the signal-box, shouted "Hi!" as loud
as their breathless state allowed. But no one answered. The signal-box
stood quiet as an empty nursery, and the handrail of its steps was hot
to the hands of the children as they climbed softly up. They peeped
in at the open door. The signalman was sitting on a chair tilted back
against the wall. His head leaned sideways, and his mouth was open. He
was fast asleep.

"My hat!" cried Peter; "wake up!" And he cried it in a terrible voice,
for he knew that if a signalman sleeps on duty, he risks losing his
situation, let alone all the other dreadful risks to trains which expect
him to tell them when it is safe for them to go their ways.

The signalman never moved. Then Peter sprang to him and shook him. And
slowly, yawning and stretching, the man awoke. But the moment he WAS
awake he leapt to his feet, put his hands to his head "like a mad
maniac," as Phyllis said afterwards, and shouted:--

"Oh, my heavens--what's o'clock?"

"Twelve thirteen," said Peter, and indeed it was by the white-faced,
round-faced clock on the wall of the signal-box.

The man looked at the clock, sprang to the levers, and wrenched them
this way and that. An electric bell tingled--the wires and cranks
creaked, and the man threw himself into a chair. He was very pale,
and the sweat stood on his forehead "like large dewdrops on a white
cabbage," as Phyllis remarked later. He was trembling, too; the children
could see his big hairy hands shake from side to side, "with quite
extra-sized trembles," to use the subsequent words of Peter. He drew
long breaths. Then suddenly he cried, "Thank God, thank God you come in
when you did--oh, thank God!" and his shoulders began to heave and his
face grew red again, and he hid it in those large hairy hands of his.

"Oh, don't cry--don't," said Phyllis, "it's all right now," and she
patted him on one big, broad shoulder, while Peter conscientiously
thumped the other.

But the signalman seemed quite broken down, and the children had to
pat him and thump him for quite a long time before he found his
handkerchief--a red one with mauve and white horseshoes on it--and
mopped his face and spoke. During this patting and thumping interval a
train thundered by.

"I'm downright shamed, that I am," were the words of the big signalman
when he had stopped crying; "snivelling like a kid." Then suddenly he
seemed to get cross. "And what was you doing up here, anyway?" he said;
"you know it ain't allowed."

"Yes," said Phyllis, "we knew it was wrong--but I wasn't afraid of doing
wrong, and so it turned out right. You aren't sorry we came."

"Lor' love you--if you hadn't 'a' come--" he stopped and then went on.
"It's a disgrace, so it is, sleeping on duty. If it was to come to be
known--even as it is, when no harm's come of it."

"It won't come to be known," said Peter; "we aren't sneaks. All the
same, you oughtn't to sleep on duty--it's dangerous."

"Tell me something I don't know," said the man, "but I can't help it.
I know'd well enough just how it 'ud be. But I couldn't get off. They
couldn't get no one to take on my duty. I tell you I ain't had ten
minutes' sleep this last five days. My little chap's ill--pewmonia, the
Doctor says--and there's no one but me and 'is little sister to do for
him. That's where it is. The gell must 'ave her sleep. Dangerous? Yes, I
believe you. Now go and split on me if you like."

"Of course we won't," said Peter, indignantly, but Phyllis ignored the
whole of the signalman's speech, except the first six words.

"You asked us," she said, "to tell you something you don't know. Well,
I will. There's a boy in the tunnel over there with a red jersey and his
leg broken."

"What did he want to go into the blooming tunnel for, then?" said the
man.

"Don't you be so cross," said Phyllis, kindly. "WE haven't done anything
wrong except coming and waking you up, and that was right, as it
happens."

Then Peter told how the boy came to be in the tunnel.

"Well," said the man, "I don't see as I can do anything. I can't leave
the box."

"You might tell us where to go after someone who isn't in a box,
though," said Phyllis.

"There's Brigden's farm over yonder--where you see the smoke a-coming
up through the trees," said the man, more and more grumpy, as Phyllis
noticed.

"Well, good-bye, then," said Peter.

But the man said, "Wait a minute." He put his hand in his pocket and
brought out some money--a lot of pennies and one or two shillings and
sixpences and half-a-crown. He picked out two shillings and held them
out.

"Here," he said. "I'll give you this to hold your tongues about what's
taken place to-day."

There was a short, unpleasant pause. Then:--

"You ARE a nasty man, though, aren't you?" said Phyllis.

Peter took a step forward and knocked the man's hand up, so that the
shillings leapt out of it and rolled on the floor.

"If anything COULD make me sneak, THAT would!" he said. "Come, Phil,"
and marched out of the signal-box with flaming cheeks.

Phyllis hesitated. Then she took the hand, still held out stupidly, that
the shillings had been in.

"I forgive you," she said, "even if Peter doesn't. You're not in your
proper senses, or you'd never have done that. I know want of sleep sends
people mad. Mother told me. I hope your little boy will soon be better,
and--"

"Come on, Phil," cried Peter, eagerly.

"I give you my sacred honour-word we'll never tell anyone. Kiss and be
friends," said Phyllis, feeling how noble it was of her to try to make
up a quarrel in which she was not to blame.

The signalman stooped and kissed her.

"I do believe I'm a bit off my head, Sissy," he said. "Now run along
home to Mother. I didn't mean to put you about--there."

So Phil left the hot signal-box and followed Peter across the fields to
the farm.

When the farm men, led by Peter and Phyllis and carrying a hurdle
covered with horse-cloths, reached the manhole in the tunnel, Bobbie
was fast asleep and so was Jim. Worn out with the pain, the Doctor said
afterwards.

"Where does he live?" the bailiff from the farm asked, when Jim had been
lifted on to the hurdle.

"In Northumberland," answered Bobbie.

"I'm at school at Maidbridge," said Jim. "I suppose I've got to get back
there, somehow."

"Seems to me the Doctor ought to have a look in first," said the
bailiff.

"Oh, bring him up to our house," said Bobbie. "It's only a little way by
the road. I'm sure Mother would say we ought to."

"Will your Ma like you bringing home strangers with broken legs?"

"She took the poor Russian home herself," said Bobbie. "I know she'd say
we ought."

"All right," said the bailiff, "you ought to know what your Ma 'ud like.
I wouldn't take it upon me to fetch him up to our place without I asked
the Missus first, and they call me the Master, too."

"Are you sure your Mother won't mind?" whispered Jim.

"Certain," said Bobbie.

"Then we're to take him up to Three Chimneys?" said the bailiff.

"Of course," said Peter.

"Then my lad shall nip up to Doctor's on his bike, and tell him to come
down there. Now, lads, lift him quiet and steady. One, two, three!"

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Thus it happened that Mother, writing away for dear life at a story
about a Duchess, a designing villain, a secret passage, and a missing
will, dropped her pen as her work-room door burst open, and turned to
see Bobbie hatless and red with running.

"Oh, Mother," she cried, "do come down. We found a hound in a red jersey
in the tunnel, and he's broken his leg and they're bringing him home."

"They ought to take him to the vet," said Mother, with a worried frown;
"I really CAN'T have a lame dog here."

"He's not a dog, really--he's a boy," said Bobbie, between laughing and
choking.

"Then he ought to be taken home to his mother."

"His mother's dead," said Bobbie, "and his father's in Northumberland.
Oh, Mother, you will be nice to him? I told him I was sure you'd want us
to bring him home. You always want to help everybody."

Mother smiled, but she sighed, too. It is nice that your children should
believe you willing to open house and heart to any and every one who
needs help. But it is rather embarrassing sometimes, too, when they act
on their belief.

"Oh, well," said Mother, "we must make the best of it."

When Jim was carried in, dreadfully white and with set lips whose red
had faded to a horrid bluey violet colour, Mother said:--

"I am glad you brought him here. Now, Jim, let's get you comfortable in
bed before the Doctor comes!"

And Jim, looking at her kind eyes, felt a little, warm, comforting flush
of new courage.

"It'll hurt rather, won't it?" he said. "I don't mean to be a coward.
You won't think I'm a coward if I faint again, will you? I really
and truly don't do it on purpose. And I do hate to give you all this
trouble."

"Don't you worry," said Mother; "it's you that have the trouble, you
poor dear--not us."

And she kissed him just as if he had been Peter. "We love to have you
here--don't we, Bobbie?"

"Yes," said Bobbie--and she saw by her Mother's face how right she had
been to bring home the wounded hound in the red jersey.



Chapter XIII. The hound's grandfather.


Mother did not get back to her writing all that day, for the
red-jerseyed hound whom the children had brought to Three Chimneys had
to be put to bed. And then the Doctor came, and hurt him most horribly.
Mother was with him all through it, and that made it a little better
than it would have been, but "bad was the best," as Mrs. Viney said.

The children sat in the parlour downstairs and heard the sound of the
Doctor's boots going backwards and forwards over the bedroom floor. And
once or twice there was a groan.

"It's horrible," said Bobbie. "Oh, I wish Dr. Forrest would make haste.
Oh, poor Jim!"

"It IS horrible," said Peter, "but it's very exciting. I wish Doctors
weren't so stuck-up about who they'll have in the room when they're
doing things. I should most awfully like to see a leg set. I believe the
bones crunch like anything."

"Don't!" said the two girls at once.

"Rubbish!" said Peter. "How are you going to be Red Cross Nurses, like
you were talking of coming home, if you can't even stand hearing me say
about bones crunching? You'd have to HEAR them crunch on the field of
battle--and be steeped in gore up to the elbows as likely as not, and--"

"Stop it!" cried Bobbie, with a white face; "you don't know how funny
you're making me feel."

"Me, too," said Phyllis, whose face was pink.

"Cowards!" said Peter.

"I'm not," said Bobbie. "I helped Mother with your rake-wounded foot,
and so did Phil--you know we did."

"Well, then!" said Peter. "Now look here. It would be a jolly good thing
for you if I were to talk to you every day for half an hour about broken
bones and people's insides, so as to get you used to it."

A chair was moved above.

"Listen," said Peter, "that's the bone crunching."

"I do wish you wouldn't," said Phyllis. "Bobbie doesn't like it."

"I'll tell you what they do," said Peter. I can't think what made him so
horrid. Perhaps it was because he had been so very nice and kind all the
earlier part of the day, and now he had to have a change. This is called
reaction. One notices it now and then in oneself. Sometimes when one has
been extra good for a longer time than usual, one is suddenly attacked
by a violent fit of not being good at all. "I'll tell you what they do,"
said Peter; "they strap the broken man down so that he can't resist or
interfere with their doctorish designs, and then someone holds his head,
and someone holds his leg--the broken one, and pulls it till the bones
fit in--with a crunch, mind you! Then they strap it up and--let's play
at bone-setting!"

"Oh, no!" said Phyllis.

But Bobbie said suddenly: "All right--LET'S! I'll be the doctor, and
Phil can be the nurse. You can be the broken boner; we can get at your
legs more easily, because you don't wear petticoats."

"I'll get the splints and bandages," said Peter; "you get the couch of
suffering ready."

The ropes that had tied up the boxes that had come from home were all
in a wooden packing-case in the cellar. When Peter brought in a trailing
tangle of them, and two boards for splints, Phyllis was excitedly
giggling.

"Now, then," he said, and lay down on the settle, groaning most
grievously.

"Not so loud!" said Bobbie, beginning to wind the rope round him and the
settle. "You pull, Phil."

"Not so tight," moaned Peter. "You'll break my other leg."

Bobbie worked on in silence, winding more and more rope round him.

"That's enough," said Peter. "I can't move at all. Oh, my poor leg!" He
groaned again.

"SURE you can't move?" asked Bobbie, in a rather strange tone.

"Quite sure," replied Peter. "Shall we play it's bleeding freely or
not?" he asked cheerfully.

"YOU can play what you like," said Bobbie, sternly, folding her arms and
looking down at him where he lay all wound round and round with cord.
"Phil and I are going away. And we shan't untie you till you promise
never, never to talk to us about blood and wounds unless we say you may.
Come, Phil!"

"You beast!" said Peter, writhing. "I'll never promise, never. I'll
yell, and Mother will come."

"Do," said Bobbie, "and tell her why we tied you up! Come on, Phil. No,
I'm not a beast, Peter. But you wouldn't stop when we asked you and--"

"Yah," said Peter, "it wasn't even your own idea. You got it out of
Stalky!"

Bobbie and Phil, retiring in silent dignity, were met at the door by the
Doctor. He came in rubbing his hands and looking pleased with himself.

"Well," he said, "THAT job's done. It's a nice clean fracture, and it'll
go on all right, I've no doubt. Plucky young chap, too--hullo! what's
all this?"

His eye had fallen on Peter who lay mousy-still in his bonds on the
settle.

"Playing at prisoners, eh?" he said; but his eyebrows had gone up a
little. Somehow he had not thought that Bobbie would be playing while in
the room above someone was having a broken bone set.

"Oh, no!" said Bobbie, "not at PRISONERS. We were playing at setting
bones. Peter's the broken boner, and I was the doctor."

The Doctor frowned.

"Then I must say," he said, and he said it rather sternly, "that's it's
a very heartless game. Haven't you enough imagination even to faintly
picture what's been going on upstairs? That poor chap, with the drops
of sweat on his forehead, and biting his lips so as not to cry out, and
every touch on his leg agony and--"

"YOU ought to be tied up," said Phyllis; "you're as bad as--"

"Hush," said Bobbie; "I'm sorry, but we weren't heartless, really."

"I was, I suppose," said Peter, crossly. "All right, Bobbie, don't you
go on being noble and screening me, because I jolly well won't have it.
It was only that I kept on talking about blood and wounds. I wanted to
train them for Red Cross Nurses. And I wouldn't stop when they asked
me."

"Well?" said Dr. Forrest, sitting down.

"Well--then I said, 'Let's play at setting bones.' It was all rot. I
knew Bobbie wouldn't. I only said it to tease her. And then when she
said 'yes,' of course I had to go through with it. And they tied me up.
They got it out of Stalky. And I think it's a beastly shame."

He managed to writhe over and hide his face against the wooden back of
the settle.

"I didn't think that anyone would know but us," said Bobbie, indignantly
answering Peter's unspoken reproach. "I never thought of your coming in.
And hearing about blood and wounds does really make me feel most awfully
funny. It was only a joke our tying him up. Let me untie you, Pete."

"I don't care if you never untie me," said Peter; "and if that's your
idea of a joke--"

"If I were you," said the Doctor, though really he did not quite know
what to say, "I should be untied before your Mother comes down. You
don't want to worry her just now, do you?"

"I don't promise anything about not saying about wounds, mind," said
Peter, in very surly tones, as Bobbie and Phyllis began to untie the
knots.

"I'm very sorry, Pete," Bobbie whispered, leaning close to him as she
fumbled with the big knot under the settle; "but if you only knew how
sick you made me feel."

"You've made ME feel pretty sick, I can tell you," Peter rejoined. Then
he shook off the loose cords, and stood up.

"I looked in," said Dr. Forrest, "to see if one of you would come along
to the surgery. There are some things that your Mother will want at
once, and I've given my man a day off to go and see the circus; will you
come, Peter?"

Peter went without a word or a look to his sisters.

The two walked in silence up to the gate that led from the Three
Chimneys field to the road. Then Peter said:--

"Let me carry your bag. I say, it is heavy--what's in it?"

"Oh, knives and lancets and different instruments for hurting people.
And the ether bottle. I had to give him ether, you know--the agony was
so intense."

Peter was silent.

"Tell me all about how you found that chap," said Dr. Forrest.

Peter told. And then Dr. Forrest told him stories of brave rescues; he
was a most interesting man to talk to, as Peter had often remarked.

Then in the surgery Peter had a better chance than he had ever had of
examining the Doctor's balance, and his microscope, and his scales and
measuring glasses. When all the things were ready that Peter was to take
back, the Doctor said suddenly:--

"You'll excuse my shoving my oar in, won't you? But I should like to say
something to you."

"Now for a rowing," thought Peter, who had been wondering how it was
that he had escaped one.

"Something scientific," added the Doctor.

"Yes," said Peter, fiddling with the fossil ammonite that the Doctor
used for a paper-weight.

"Well then, you see. Boys and girls are only little men and women. And
WE are much harder and hardier than they are--" (Peter liked the "we."
Perhaps the Doctor had known he would.)--"and much stronger, and things
that hurt THEM don't hurt US. You know you mustn't hit a girl--"

"I should think not, indeed," muttered Peter, indignantly.

"Not even if she's your own sister. That's because girls are so much
softer and weaker than we are; they have to be, you know," he added,
"because if they weren't, it wouldn't be nice for the babies. And that's
why all the animals are so good to the mother animals. They never fight
them, you know."

"I know," said Peter, interested; "two buck rabbits will fight all day
if you let them, but they won't hurt a doe."

"No; and quite wild beasts--lions and elephants--they're immensely
gentle with the female beasts. And we've got to be, too."

"I see," said Peter.

"And their hearts are soft, too," the Doctor went on, "and things that
we shouldn't think anything of hurt them dreadfully. So that a man has
to be very careful, not only of his fists, but of his words. They're
awfully brave, you know," he went on. "Think of Bobbie waiting alone in
the tunnel with that poor chap. It's an odd thing--the softer and more
easily hurt a woman is the better she can screw herself up to do what
HAS to be done. I've seen some brave women--your Mother's one," he ended
abruptly.

"Yes," said Peter.

"Well, that's all. Excuse my mentioning it. But nobody knows everything
without being told. And you see what I mean, don't you?"

"Yes," said Peter. "I'm sorry. There!"

"Of course you are! People always are--directly they understand.
Everyone ought to be taught these scientific facts. So long!"

They shook hands heartily. When Peter came home, his sisters looked at
him doubtfully.

"It's Pax," said Peter, dumping down the basket on the table. "Dr.
Forrest has been talking scientific to me. No, it's no use my telling
you what he said; you wouldn't understand. But it all comes to you girls
being poor, soft, weak, frightened things like rabbits, so us men have
just got to put up with them. He said you were female beasts. Shall I
take this up to Mother, or will you?"

"I know what BOYS are," said Phyllis, with flaming cheeks; "they're just
the nastiest, rudest--"

"They're very brave," said Bobbie, "sometimes."

"Ah, you mean the chap upstairs? I see. Go ahead, Phil--I shall put
up with you whatever you say because you're a poor, weak, frightened,
soft--"

"Not if I pull your hair you won't," said Phyllis, springing at him.

"He said 'Pax,'" said Bobbie, pulling her away. "Don't you see," she
whispered as Peter picked up the basket and stalked out with it, "he's
sorry, really, only he won't say so? Let's say we're sorry."

"It's so goody goody," said Phyllis, doubtfully; "he said we were female
beasts, and soft and frightened--"

"Then let's show him we're not frightened of him thinking us goody
goody," said Bobbie; "and we're not any more beasts than he is."

And when Peter came back, still with his chin in the air, Bobbie said:--

"We're sorry we tied you up, Pete."

"I thought you would be," said Peter, very stiff and superior.

This was hard to bear. But--

"Well, so we are," said Bobbie. "Now let honour be satisfied on both
sides."

"I did call it Pax," said Peter, in an injured tone.

"Then let it BE Pax," said Bobbie. "Come on, Phil, let's get the tea.
Pete, you might lay the cloth."

"I say," said Phyllis, when peace was really restored, which was not
till they were washing up the cups after tea, "Dr. Forrest didn't REALLY
say we were female beasts, did he?"

"Yes," said Peter, firmly, "but I think he meant we men were wild
beasts, too."

"How funny of him!" said Phyllis, breaking a cup.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

"May I come in, Mother?" Peter was at the door of Mother's writing room,
where Mother sat at her table with two candles in front of her. Their
flames looked orange and violet against the clear grey blue of the sky
where already a few stars were twinkling.

"Yes, dear," said Mother, absently, "anything wrong?" She wrote a few
more words and then laid down her pen and began to fold up what she had
written. "I was just writing to Jim's grandfather. He lives near here,
you know."

"Yes, you said so at tea. That's what I want to say. Must you write to
him, Mother? Couldn't we keep Jim, and not say anything to his people
till he's well? It would be such a surprise for them."

"Well, yes," said Mother, laughing, "I think it would."

"You see," Peter went on, "of course the girls are all right and all
that--I'm not saying anything against THEM. But I should like it if I
had another chap to talk to sometimes."

"Yes," said Mother, "I know it's dull for you, dear. But I can't
help it. Next year perhaps I can send you to school--you'd like that,
wouldn't you?"

"I do miss the other chaps, rather," Peter confessed; "but if Jim could
stay after his leg was well, we could have awful larks."

"I've no doubt of it," said Mother. "Well--perhaps he could, but you
know, dear, we're not rich. I can't afford to get him everything he'll
want. And he must have a nurse."

"Can't you nurse him, Mother? You do nurse people so beautifully."

"That's a pretty compliment, Pete--but I can't do nursing and my writing
as well. That's the worst of it."

"Then you MUST send the letter to his grandfather?"

"Of course--and to his schoolmaster, too. We telegraphed to them both,
but I must write as well. They'll be most dreadfully anxious."

"I say, Mother, why can't his grandfather pay for a nurse?" Peter
suggested. "That would be ripping. I expect the old boy's rolling in
money. Grandfathers in books always are."

"Well, this one isn't in a book," said Mother, "so we mustn't expect him
to roll much."

"I say," said Peter, musingly, "wouldn't it be jolly if we all WERE in
a book, and you were writing it? Then you could make all sorts of jolly
things happen, and make Jim's legs get well at once and be all right
to-morrow, and Father come home soon and--"

"Do you miss your Father very much?" Mother asked, rather coldly, Peter
thought.

"Awfully," said Peter, briefly.

Mother was enveloping and addressing the second letter.

"You see," Peter went on slowly, "you see, it's not only him BEING
Father, but now he's away there's no other man in the house but
me--that's why I want Jim to stay so frightfully much. Wouldn't you like
to be writing that book with us all in it, Mother, and make Daddy come
home soon?"

Peter's Mother put her arm round him suddenly, and hugged him in silence
for a minute. Then she said:--

"Don't you think it's rather nice to think that we're in a book that
God's writing? If I were writing the book, I might make mistakes. But
God knows how to make the story end just right--in the way that's best
for us."

"Do you really believe that, Mother?" Peter asked quietly.

"Yes," she said, "I do believe it--almost always--except when I'm so sad
that I can't believe anything. But even when I can't believe it, I know
it's true--and I try to believe. You don't know how I try, Peter. Now
take the letters to the post, and don't let's be sad any more. Courage,
courage! That's the finest of all the virtues! I dare say Jim will be
here for two or three weeks yet."

For what was left of the evening Peter was so angelic that Bobbie feared
he was going to be ill. She was quite relieved in the morning to find
him plaiting Phyllis's hair on to the back of her chair in quite his old
manner.

It was soon after breakfast that a knock came at the door. The children
were hard at work cleaning the brass candlesticks in honour of Jim's
visit.

"That'll be the Doctor," said Mother; "I'll go. Shut the kitchen
door--you're not fit to be seen."

But it wasn't the Doctor. They knew that by the voice and by the sound
of the boots that went upstairs. They did not recognise the sound of the
boots, but everyone was certain that they had heard the voice before.

There was a longish interval. The boots and the voice did not come down
again.

"Who can it possibly be?" they kept on asking themselves and each other.

"Perhaps," said Peter at last, "Dr. Forrest has been attacked by
highwaymen and left for dead, and this is the man he's telegraphed for
to take his place. Mrs. Viney said he had a local tenant to do his work
when he went for a holiday, didn't you, Mrs. Viney?"

"I did so, my dear," said Mrs. Viney from the back kitchen.

"He's fallen down in a fit, more likely," said Phyllis, "all human aid
despaired of. And this is his man come to break the news to Mother."

"Nonsense!" said Peter, briskly; "Mother wouldn't have taken the man
up into Jim's bedroom. Why should she? Listen--the door's opening. Now
they'll come down. I'll open the door a crack."

He did.

"It's not listening," he replied indignantly to Bobbie's scandalised
remarks; "nobody in their senses would talk secrets on the stairs. And
Mother can't have secrets to talk with Dr. Forrest's stable-man--and you
said it was him."

"Bobbie," called Mother's voice.

They opened the kitchen door, and Mother leaned over the stair railing.

"Jim's grandfather has come," she said; "wash your hands and faces and
then you can see him. He wants to see you!" The bedroom door shut again.

"There now!" said Peter; "fancy us not even thinking of that! Let's have
some hot water, Mrs. Viney. I'm as black as your hat."

The three were indeed dirty, for the stuff you clean brass candlesticks
with is very far from cleaning to the cleaner.

They were still busy with soap and flannel when they heard the boots
and the voice come down the stairs and go into the dining-room. And when
they were clean, though still damp--because it takes such a long time
to dry your hands properly, and they were very impatient to see the
grandfather--they filed into the dining-room.

Mother was sitting in the window-seat, and in the leather-covered
armchair that Father always used to sit in at the other house sat--

     THEIR OWN OLD GENTLEMAN!

"Well, I never did," said Peter, even before he said, "How do you do?"
He was, as he explained afterwards, too surprised even to remember that
there was such a thing as politeness--much less to practise it.

"It's our own old gentleman!" said Phyllis.

"Oh, it's you!" said Bobbie. And then they remembered themselves and
their manners and said, "How do you do?" very nicely.

"This is Jim's grandfather, Mr. ----" said Mother, naming the old
gentleman's name.

"How splendid!" said Peter; "that's just exactly like a book, isn't it,
Mother?"

"It is, rather," said Mother, smiling; "things do happen in real life
that are rather like books, sometimes."

"I am so awfully glad it IS you," said Phyllis; "when you think of the
tons of old gentlemen there are in the world--it might have been almost
anyone."

"I say, though," said Peter, "you're not going to take Jim away, though,
are you?"

"Not at present," said the old gentleman. "Your Mother has most kindly
consented to let him stay here. I thought of sending a nurse, but your
Mother is good enough to say that she will nurse him herself."

"But what about her writing?" said Peter, before anyone could stop him.
"There won't be anything for him to eat if Mother doesn't write."

"That's all right," said Mother, hastily.

The old gentleman looked very kindly at Mother.

"I see," he said, "you trust your children, and confide in them."

"Of course," said Mother.

"Then I may tell them of our little arrangement," he said. "Your Mother,
my dears, has consented to give up writing for a little while and to
become a Matron of my Hospital."

"Oh!" said Phyllis, blankly; "and shall we have to go away from Three
Chimneys and the Railway and everything?"

"No, no, darling," said Mother, hurriedly.

"The Hospital is called Three Chimneys Hospital," said the old
gentleman, "and my unlucky Jim's the only patient, and I hope he'll
continue to be so. Your Mother will be Matron, and there'll be a
hospital staff of a housemaid and a cook--till Jim's well."

"And then will Mother go on writing again?" asked Peter.

"We shall see," said the old gentleman, with a slight, swift glance at
Bobbie; "perhaps something nice may happen and she won't have to."

"I love my writing," said Mother, very quickly.

"I know," said the old gentleman; "don't be afraid that I'm going to try
to interfere. But one never knows. Very wonderful and beautiful things
do happen, don't they? And we live most of our lives in the hope of
them. I may come again to see the boy?"

"Surely," said Mother, "and I don't know how to thank you for making it
possible for me to nurse him. Dear boy!"

"He kept calling Mother, Mother, in the night," said Phyllis. "I woke up
twice and heard him."

"He didn't mean me," said Mother, in a low voice to the old gentleman;
"that's why I wanted so much to keep him."

The old gentleman rose.

"I'm so glad," said Peter, "that you're going to keep him, Mother."

"Take care of your Mother, my dears," said the old gentleman. "She's a
woman in a million."

"Yes, isn't she?" whispered Bobbie.

"God bless her," said the old gentleman, taking both Mother's hands,
"God bless her! Ay, and she shall be blessed. Dear me, where's my hat?
Will Bobbie come with me to the gate?"

At the gate he stopped and said:--

"You're a good child, my dear--I got your letter. But it wasn't needed.
When I read about your Father's case in the papers at the time, I had my
doubts. And ever since I've known who you were, I've been trying to find
out things. I haven't done very much yet. But I have hopes, my dear--I
have hopes."

"Oh!" said Bobbie, choking a little.

"Yes--I may say great hopes. But keep your secret a little longer.
Wouldn't do to upset your Mother with a false hope, would it?"

"Oh, but it isn't false!" said Bobbie; "I KNOW you can do it. I knew you
could when I wrote. It isn't a false hope, is it?"

"No," he said, "I don't think it's a false hope, or I wouldn't have told
you. And I think you deserve to be told that there IS a hope."

"And you don't think Father did it, do you? Oh, say you don't think he
did."

"My dear," he said, "I'm perfectly CERTAIN he didn't."

If it was a false hope, it was none the less a very radiant one that lay
warm at Bobbie's heart, and through the days that followed lighted her
little face as a Japanese lantern is lighted by the candle within.



Chapter XIV. The End.


Life at the Three Chimneys was never quite the same again after the old
gentleman came to see his grandson. Although they now knew his name,
the children never spoke of him by it--at any rate, when they were by
themselves. To them he was always the old gentleman, and I think he had
better be the old gentleman to us, too. It wouldn't make him seem any
more real to you, would it, if I were to tell you that his name was
Snooks or Jenkins (which it wasn't)?--and, after all, I must be allowed
to keep one secret. It's the only one; I have told you everything else,
except what I am going to tell you in this chapter, which is the last.
At least, of course, I haven't told you EVERYTHING. If I were to do
that, the book would never come to an end, and that would be a pity,
wouldn't it?

Well, as I was saying, life at Three Chimneys was never quite the same
again. The cook and the housemaid were very nice (I don't mind telling
you their names--they were Clara and Ethelwyn), but they told Mother
they did not seem to want Mrs. Viney, and that she was an old muddler.
So Mrs. Viney came only two days a week to do washing and ironing. Then
Clara and Ethelwyn said they could do the work all right if they weren't
interfered with, and that meant that the children no longer got the tea
and cleared it away and washed up the tea-things and dusted the rooms.

This would have left quite a blank in their lives, although they
had often pretended to themselves and to each other that they hated
housework. But now that Mother had no writing and no housework to do,
she had time for lessons. And lessons the children had to do. However
nice the person who is teaching you may be, lessons are lessons all the
world over, and at their best are worse fun than peeling potatoes or
lighting a fire.

On the other hand, if Mother now had time for lessons, she also had time
for play, and to make up little rhymes for the children as she used
to do. She had not had much time for rhymes since she came to Three
Chimneys.

There was one very odd thing about these lessons. Whatever the children
were doing, they always wanted to be doing something else. When Peter
was doing his Latin, he thought it would be nice to be learning History
like Bobbie. Bobbie would have preferred Arithmetic, which was what
Phyllis happened to be doing, and Phyllis of course thought Latin much
the most interesting kind of lesson. And so on.

So, one day, when they sat down to lessons, each of them found a little
rhyme at its place. I put the rhymes in to show you that their Mother
really did understand a little how children feel about things, and also
the kind of words they use, which is the case with very few grown-up
people. I suppose most grown-ups have very bad memories, and have
forgotten how they felt when they were little. Of course, the verses are
supposed to be spoken by the children.

               PETER

     I once thought Caesar easy pap--
       How very soft I must have been!
     When they start Caesar with a chap
       He little know what that will mean.
     Oh, verbs are silly stupid things.
     I'd rather learn the dates of kings!

               BOBBIE

     The worst of all my lesson things
       Is learning who succeeded who
     In all the rows of queens and kings,
       With dates to everything they do:
     With dates enough to make you sick;--
     I wish it was Arithmetic!

               PHYLLIS

     Such pounds and pounds of apples fill
       My slate--what is the price you'd spend?
     You scratch the figures out until
       You cry upon the dividend.
     I'd break the slate and scream for joy
     If I did Latin like a boy!

This kind of thing, of course, made lessons much jollier. It is
something to know that the person who is teaching you sees that it is
not all plain sailing for you, and does not think that it is just your
stupidness that makes you not know your lessons till you've learned
them!

Then as Jim's leg got better it was very pleasant to go up and sit with
him and hear tales about his school life and the other boys. There
was one boy, named Parr, of whom Jim seemed to have formed the lowest
possible opinion, and another boy named Wigsby Minor, for whose views
Jim had a great respect. Also there were three brothers named Paley, and
the youngest was called Paley Terts, and was much given to fighting.

Peter drank in all this with deep joy, and Mother seemed to have
listened with some interest, for one day she gave Jim a sheet of paper
on which she had written a rhyme about Parr, bringing in Paley and
Wigsby by name in a most wonderful way, as well as all the reasons Jim
had for not liking Parr, and Wigsby's wise opinion on the matter. Jim
was immensely pleased. He had never had a rhyme written expressly for
him before. He read it till he knew it by heart and then he sent it to
Wigsby, who liked it almost as much as Jim did. Perhaps you may like it,
too.

               THE NEW BOY

     His name is Parr:  he says that he
     Is given bread and milk for tea.
     He says his father killed a bear.
     He says his mother cuts his hair.

     He wears goloshes when it's wet.
     I've heard his people call him "Pet"!
     He has no proper sense of shame;
     He told the chaps his Christian name.

     He cannot wicket-keep at all,
     He's frightened of a cricket ball.
     He reads indoors for hours and hours.
     He knows the names of beastly flowers.

     He says his French just like Mossoo--
     A beastly stuck-up thing to do--
     He won't keep _cave_, shirks his turn
     And says he came to school to learn!

     He won't play football, says it hurts;
     He wouldn't fight with Paley Terts;
     He couldn't whistle if he tried,
     And when we laughed at him he cried!

     Now Wigsby Minor says that Parr
     Is only like all new boys are.
     I know when _I_ first came to school
     I wasn't such a jolly fool!

Jim could never understand how Mother could have been clever enough
to do it. To the others it seemed nice, but natural. You see they had
always been used to having a mother who could write verses just like
the way people talk, even to the shocking expression at the end of the
rhyme, which was Jim's very own.

Jim taught Peter to play chess and draughts and dominoes, and altogether
it was a nice quiet time.

Only Jim's leg got better and better, and a general feeling began to
spring up among Bobbie, Peter, and Phyllis that something ought to be
done to amuse him; not just games, but something really handsome. But it
was extraordinarily difficult to think of anything.

"It's no good," said Peter, when all of them had thought and thought
till their heads felt quite heavy and swollen; "if we can't think of
anything to amuse him, we just can't, and there's an end of it. Perhaps
something will just happen of its own accord that he'll like."

"Things DO happen by themselves sometimes, without your making them,"
said Phyllis, rather as though, usually, everything that happened in the
world was her doing.

"I wish something would happen," said Bobbie, dreamily, "something
wonderful."

And something wonderful did happen exactly four days after she had said
this. I wish I could say it was three days after, because in fairy tales
it is always three days after that things happen. But this is not a
fairy story, and besides, it really was four and not three, and I am
nothing if not strictly truthful.

They seemed to be hardly Railway children at all in those days, and as
the days went on each had an uneasy feeling about this which Phyllis
expressed one day.

"I wonder if the Railway misses us," she said, plaintively. "We never go
to see it now."

"It seems ungrateful," said Bobbie; "we loved it so when we hadn't
anyone else to play with."

"Perks is always coming up to ask after Jim," said Peter, "and the
signalman's little boy is better. He told me so."

"I didn't mean the people," explained Phyllis; "I meant the dear Railway
itself."

"The thing I don't like," said Bobbie, on this fourth day, which was a
Tuesday, "is our having stopped waving to the 9.15 and sending our love
to Father by it."

"Let's begin again," said Phyllis. And they did.

Somehow the change of everything that was made by having servants in
the house and Mother not doing any writing, made the time seem extremely
long since that strange morning at the beginning of things, when they
had got up so early and burnt the bottom out of the kettle and had apple
pie for breakfast and first seen the Railway.

It was September now, and the turf on the slope to the Railway was dry
and crisp. Little long grass spikes stood up like bits of gold wire,
frail blue harebells trembled on their tough, slender stalks, Gipsy
roses opened wide and flat their lilac-coloured discs, and the golden
stars of St. John's Wort shone at the edges of the pool that lay halfway
to the Railway. Bobbie gathered a generous handful of the flowers and
thought how pretty they would look lying on the green-and-pink blanket
of silk-waste that now covered Jim's poor broken leg.

"Hurry up," said Peter, "or we shall miss the 9.15!"

"I can't hurry more than I am doing," said Phyllis. "Oh, bother it! My
bootlace has come undone AGAIN!"

"When you're married," said Peter, "your bootlace will come undone going
up the church aisle, and your man that you're going to get married to
will tumble over it and smash his nose in on the ornamented pavement;
and then you'll say you won't marry him, and you'll have to be an old
maid."

"I shan't," said Phyllis. "I'd much rather marry a man with his nose
smashed in than not marry anybody."

"It would be horrid to marry a man with a smashed nose, all the same,"
went on Bobbie. "He wouldn't be able to smell the flowers at the
wedding. Wouldn't that be awful!"

"Bother the flowers at the wedding!" cried Peter. "Look! the signal's
down. We must run!"

They ran. And once more they waved their handkerchiefs, without at all
minding whether the handkerchiefs were clean or not, to the 9.15.

"Take our love to Father!" cried Bobbie. And the others, too, shouted:--

"Take our love to Father!"

The old gentleman waved from his first-class carriage window. Quite
violently he waved. And there was nothing odd in that, for he always
had waved. But what was really remarkable was that from every window
handkerchiefs fluttered, newspapers signalled, hands waved wildly. The
train swept by with a rustle and roar, the little pebbles jumped and
danced under it as it passed, and the children were left looking at each
other.

"Well!" said Peter.

"WELL!" said Bobbie.

"_WELL!_" said Phyllis.

"Whatever on earth does that mean?" asked Peter, but he did not expect
any answer.

"_I_ don't know," said Bobbie. "Perhaps the old gentleman told the
people at his station to look out for us and wave. He knew we should
like it!"

Now, curiously enough, this was just what had happened. The old
gentleman, who was very well known and respected at his particular
station, had got there early that morning, and he had waited at the door
where the young man stands holding the interesting machine that clips
the tickets, and he had said something to every single passenger who
passed through that door. And after nodding to what the old gentleman
had said--and the nods expressed every shade of surprise, interest,
doubt, cheerful pleasure, and grumpy agreement--each passenger had gone
on to the platform and read one certain part of his newspaper. And when
the passengers got into the train, they had told the other passengers
who were already there what the old gentleman had said, and then the
other passengers had also looked at their newspapers and seemed very
astonished and, mostly, pleased. Then, when the train passed the fence
where the three children were, newspapers and hands and handkerchiefs
were waved madly, till all that side of the train was fluttery with
white like the pictures of the King's Coronation in the biograph at
Maskelyne and Cook's. To the children it almost seemed as though the
train itself was alive, and was at last responding to the love that they
had given it so freely and so long.

"It is most extraordinarily rum!" said Peter.

"Most stronery!" echoed Phyllis.

But Bobbie said, "Don't you think the old gentleman's waves seemed more
significating than usual?"

"No," said the others.

"I do," said Bobbie. "I thought he was trying to explain something to us
with his newspaper."

"Explain what?" asked Peter, not unnaturally.

"_I_ don't know," Bobbie answered, "but I do feel most awfully funny. I
feel just exactly as if something was going to happen."

"What is going to happen," said Peter, "is that Phyllis's stocking is
going to come down."

This was but too true. The suspender had given way in the agitation of
the waves to the 9.15. Bobbie's handkerchief served as first aid to the
injured, and they all went home.

Lessons were more than usually difficult to Bobbie that day. Indeed, she
disgraced herself so deeply over a quite simple sum about the division
of 48 pounds of meat and 36 pounds of bread among 144 hungry children
that Mother looked at her anxiously.

"Don't you feel quite well, dear?" she asked.

"I don't know," was Bobbie's unexpected answer. "I don't know how
I feel. It isn't that I'm lazy. Mother, will you let me off lessons
to-day? I feel as if I wanted to be quite alone by myself."

"Yes, of course I'll let you off," said Mother; "but--"

Bobbie dropped her slate. It cracked just across the little green mark
that is so useful for drawing patterns round, and it was never the same
slate again. Without waiting to pick it up she bolted. Mother caught her
in the hall feeling blindly among the waterproofs and umbrellas for her
garden hat.

"What is it, my sweetheart?" said Mother. "You don't feel ill, do you?"

"I DON'T know," Bobbie answered, a little breathlessly, "but I want to
be by myself and see if my head really IS all silly and my inside all
squirmy-twisty."

"Hadn't you better lie down?" Mother said, stroking her hair back from
her forehead.

"I'd be more alive in the garden, I think," said Bobbie.

But she could not stay in the garden. The hollyhocks and the asters and
the late roses all seemed to be waiting for something to happen. It was
one of those still, shiny autumn days, when everything does seem to be
waiting.

Bobbie could not wait.

"I'll go down to the station," she said, "and talk to Perks and ask
about the signalman's little boy."

So she went down. On the way she passed the old lady from the
Post-office, who gave her a kiss and a hug, but, rather to Bobbie's
surprise, no words except:--

"God bless you, love--" and, after a pause, "run along--do."

The draper's boy, who had sometimes been a little less than civil and
a little more than contemptuous, now touched his cap, and uttered the
remarkable words:--

"'Morning, Miss, I'm sure--"

The blacksmith, coming along with an open newspaper in his hand, was
even more strange in his manner. He grinned broadly, though, as a rule,
he was a man not given to smiles, and waved the newspaper long before
he came up to her. And as he passed her, he said, in answer to her "Good
morning":--

"Good morning to you, Missie, and many of them! I wish you joy, that I
do!"

"Oh!" said Bobbie to herself, and her heart quickened its beats,
"something IS going to happen! I know it is--everyone is so odd, like
people are in dreams."

The Station Master wrung her hand warmly. In fact he worked it up and
down like a pump-handle. But he gave her no reason for this unusually
enthusiastic greeting. He only said:--

"The 11.54's a bit late, Miss--the extra luggage this holiday time,"
and went away very quickly into that inner Temple of his into which even
Bobbie dared not follow him.

Perks was not to be seen, and Bobbie shared the solitude of the platform
with the Station Cat. This tortoiseshell lady, usually of a retiring
disposition, came to-day to rub herself against the brown stockings of
Bobbie with arched back, waving tail, and reverberating purrs.

"Dear me!" said Bobbie, stooping to stroke her, "how very kind everybody
is to-day--even you, Pussy!"

Perks did not appear until the 11.54 was signalled, and then he, like
everybody else that morning, had a newspaper in his hand.

"Hullo!" he said, "'ere you are. Well, if THIS is the train, it'll be
smart work! Well, God bless you, my dear! I see it in the paper, and
I don't think I was ever so glad of anything in all my born days!" He
looked at Bobbie a moment, then said, "One I must have, Miss, and no
offence, I know, on a day like this 'ere!" and with that he kissed her,
first on one cheek and then on the other.

"You ain't offended, are you?" he asked anxiously. "I ain't took too
great a liberty? On a day like this, you know--"

"No, no," said Bobbie, "of course it's not a liberty, dear Mr. Perks;
we love you quite as much as if you were an uncle of ours--but--on a day
like WHAT?"

"Like this 'ere!" said Perks. "Don't I tell you I see it in the paper?"

"Saw WHAT in the paper?" asked Bobbie, but already the 11.54 was
steaming into the station and the Station Master was looking at all the
places where Perks was not and ought to have been.

Bobbie was left standing alone, the Station Cat watching her from under
the bench with friendly golden eyes.

Of course you know already exactly what was going to happen. Bobbie was
not so clever. She had the vague, confused, expectant feeling that comes
to one's heart in dreams. What her heart expected I can't tell--perhaps
the very thing that you and I know was going to happen--but her mind
expected nothing; it was almost blank, and felt nothing but tiredness
and stupidness and an empty feeling, like your body has when you have
been a long walk and it is very far indeed past your proper dinner-time.

Only three people got out of the 11.54. The first was a countryman with
two baskety boxes full of live chickens who stuck their russet heads
out anxiously through the wicker bars; the second was Miss Peckitt, the
grocer's wife's cousin, with a tin box and three brown-paper parcels;
and the third--

"Oh! my Daddy, my Daddy!" That scream went like a knife into the heart
of everyone in the train, and people put their heads out of the windows
to see a tall pale man with lips set in a thin close line, and a little
girl clinging to him with arms and legs, while his arms went tightly
round her.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

"I knew something wonderful was going to happen," said Bobbie, as they
went up the road, "but I didn't think it was going to be this. Oh, my
Daddy, my Daddy!"

"Then didn't Mother get my letter?" Father asked.

"There weren't any letters this morning. Oh! Daddy! it IS really you,
isn't it?"

The clasp of a hand she had not forgotten assured her that it was. "You
must go in by yourself, Bobbie, and tell Mother quite quietly that it's
all right. They've caught the man who did it. Everyone knows now that it
wasn't your Daddy."

"_I_ always knew it wasn't," said Bobbie. "Me and Mother and our old
gentleman."

"Yes," he said, "it's all his doing. Mother wrote and told me you had
found out. And she told me what you'd been to her. My own little girl!"
They stopped a minute then.

And now I see them crossing the field. Bobbie goes into the house,
trying to keep her eyes from speaking before her lips have found the
right words to "tell Mother quite quietly" that the sorrow and the
struggle and the parting are over and done, and that Father has come
home.

I see Father walking in the garden, waiting--waiting. He is looking at
the flowers, and each flower is a miracle to eyes that all these months
of Spring and Summer have seen only flagstones and gravel and a little
grudging grass. But his eyes keep turning towards the house. And
presently he leaves the garden and goes to stand outside the nearest
door. It is the back door, and across the yard the swallows are
circling. They are getting ready to fly away from cold winds and keen
frost to the land where it is always summer. They are the same swallows
that the children built the little clay nests for.

Now the house door opens. Bobbie's voice calls:--

"Come in, Daddy; come in!"

He goes in and the door is shut. I think we will not open the door or
follow him. I think that just now we are not wanted there. I think it
will be best for us to go quickly and quietly away. At the end of the
field, among the thin gold spikes of grass and the harebells and Gipsy
roses and St. John's Wort, we may just take one last look, over our
shoulders, at the white house where neither we nor anyone else is wanted
now.

========================================
========================================

THE RAILWAY CHILDREN

By E. Nesbit


               To my dear son Paul Bland,
               behind whose knowledge of railways
               my ignorance confidently shelters.


Contents.

     I.    The beginning of things.
     II.   Peter's coal-mine.
     III.  The old gentleman.
     IV.   The engine-burglar.
     V.    Prisoners and captives.
     VI.   Saviours of the train.
     VII.  For valour.
     VIII. The amateur fireman.
     IX.   The pride of Perks.
     X.    The terrible secret.
     XI.   The hound in the red jersey.
     XII.  What Bobbie brought home.
     XIII. The hound's grandfather.
     XIV.  The End.




Chapter I. The beginning of things.


They were not railway children to begin with. I don't suppose they had
ever thought about railways except as a means of getting to Maskelyne
and Cook's, the Pantomime, Zoological Gardens, and Madame Tussaud's.
They were just ordinary suburban children, and they lived with their
Father and Mother in an ordinary red-brick-fronted villa, with coloured
glass in the front door, a tiled passage that was called a hall, a
bath-room with hot and cold water, electric bells, French windows, and
a good deal of white paint, and 'every modern convenience', as the
house-agents say.

There were three of them. Roberta was the eldest. Of course, Mothers
never have favourites, but if their Mother HAD had a favourite, it might
have been Roberta. Next came Peter, who wished to be an Engineer when he
grew up; and the youngest was Phyllis, who meant extremely well.

Mother did not spend all her time in paying dull calls to dull ladies,
and sitting dully at home waiting for dull ladies to pay calls to her.
She was almost always there, ready to play with the children, and read
to them, and help them to do their home-lessons. Besides this she used
to write stories for them while they were at school, and read them
aloud after tea, and she always made up funny pieces of poetry for their
birthdays and for other great occasions, such as the christening of the
new kittens, or the refurnishing of the doll's house, or the time when
they were getting over the mumps.

These three lucky children always had everything they needed: pretty
clothes, good fires, a lovely nursery with heaps of toys, and a Mother
Goose wall-paper. They had a kind and merry nursemaid, and a dog who was
called James, and who was their very own. They also had a Father who was
just perfect--never cross, never unjust, and always ready for a game--at
least, if at any time he was NOT ready, he always had an excellent
reason for it, and explained the reason to the children so interestingly
and funnily that they felt sure he couldn't help himself.

You will think that they ought to have been very happy. And so they
were, but they did not know HOW happy till the pretty life in the Red
Villa was over and done with, and they had to live a very different life
indeed.

The dreadful change came quite suddenly.

Peter had a birthday--his tenth. Among his other presents was a model
engine more perfect than you could ever have dreamed of. The other
presents were full of charm, but the Engine was fuller of charm than any
of the others were.

Its charm lasted in its full perfection for exactly three days. Then,
owing either to Peter's inexperience or Phyllis's good intentions, which
had been rather pressing, or to some other cause, the Engine suddenly
went off with a bang. James was so frightened that he went out and did
not come back all day. All the Noah's Ark people who were in the tender
were broken to bits, but nothing else was hurt except the poor little
engine and the feelings of Peter. The others said he cried over it--but
of course boys of ten do not cry, however terrible the tragedies may be
which darken their lot. He said that his eyes were red because he had a
cold. This turned out to be true, though Peter did not know it was when
he said it, the next day he had to go to bed and stay there. Mother
began to be afraid that he might be sickening for measles, when suddenly
he sat up in bed and said:

"I hate gruel--I hate barley water--I hate bread and milk. I want to get
up and have something REAL to eat."

"What would you like?" Mother asked.

"A pigeon-pie," said Peter, eagerly, "a large pigeon-pie. A very large
one."

So Mother asked the Cook to make a large pigeon-pie. The pie was made.
And when the pie was made, it was cooked. And when it was cooked, Peter
ate some of it. After that his cold was better. Mother made a piece of
poetry to amuse him while the pie was being made. It began by saying
what an unfortunate but worthy boy Peter was, then it went on:

      He had an engine that he loved
        With all his heart and soul,
      And if he had a wish on earth
        It was to keep it whole.

      One day--my friends, prepare your minds;
        I'm coming to the worst--
      Quite suddenly a screw went mad,
        And then the boiler burst!

      With gloomy face he picked it up
        And took it to his Mother,
      Though even he could not suppose
        That she could make another;

      For those who perished on the line
        He did not seem to care,
      His engine being more to him
        Than all the people there.

      And now you see the reason why
        Our Peter has been ill:
      He soothes his soul with pigeon-pie
        His gnawing grief to kill.

      He wraps himself in blankets warm
        And sleeps in bed till late,
      Determined thus to overcome
        His miserable fate.

      And if his eyes are rather red,
        His cold must just excuse it:
      Offer him pie; you may be sure
        He never will refuse it.

Father had been away in the country for three or four days. All Peter's
hopes for the curing of his afflicted Engine were now fixed on his
Father, for Father was most wonderfully clever with his fingers. He
could mend all sorts of things. He had often acted as veterinary surgeon
to the wooden rocking-horse; once he had saved its life when all human
aid was despaired of, and the poor creature was given up for lost, and
even the carpenter said he didn't see his way to do anything. And it was
Father who mended the doll's cradle when no one else could; and with a
little glue and some bits of wood and a pen-knife made all the Noah's
Ark beasts as strong on their pins as ever they were, if not stronger.

Peter, with heroic unselfishness, did not say anything about his Engine
till after Father had had his dinner and his after-dinner cigar. The
unselfishness was Mother's idea--but it was Peter who carried it out.
And needed a good deal of patience, too.

At last Mother said to Father, "Now, dear, if you're quite rested, and
quite comfy, we want to tell you about the great railway accident, and
ask your advice."

"All right," said Father, "fire away!"

So then Peter told the sad tale, and fetched what was left of the
Engine.

"Hum," said Father, when he had looked the Engine over very carefully.

The children held their breaths.

"Is there NO hope?" said Peter, in a low, unsteady voice.

"Hope? Rather! Tons of it," said Father, cheerfully; "but it'll want
something besides hope--a bit of brazing say, or some solder, and a new
valve. I think we'd better keep it for a rainy day. In other words, I'll
give up Saturday afternoon to it, and you shall all help me."

"CAN girls help to mend engines?" Peter asked doubtfully.

"Of course they can. Girls are just as clever as boys, and don't you
forget it! How would you like to be an engine-driver, Phil?"

"My face would be always dirty, wouldn't it?" said Phyllis, in
unenthusiastic tones, "and I expect I should break something."

"I should just love it," said Roberta--"do you think I could when I'm
grown up, Daddy? Or even a stoker?"

"You mean a fireman," said Daddy, pulling and twisting at the engine.
"Well, if you still wish it, when you're grown up, we'll see about
making you a fire-woman. I remember when I was a boy--"

Just then there was a knock at the front door.

"Who on earth!" said Father. "An Englishman's house is his castle, of
course, but I do wish they built semi-detached villas with moats and
drawbridges."

Ruth--she was the parlour-maid and had red hair--came in and said that
two gentlemen wanted to see the master.

"I've shown them into the Library, Sir," said she.

"I expect it's the subscription to the Vicar's testimonial," said
Mother, "or else it's the choir holiday fund. Get rid of them quickly,
dear. It does break up an evening so, and it's nearly the children's
bedtime."

But Father did not seem to be able to get rid of the gentlemen at all
quickly.

"I wish we HAD got a moat and drawbridge," said Roberta; "then, when we
didn't want people, we could just pull up the drawbridge and no one else
could get in. I expect Father will have forgotten about when he was a
boy if they stay much longer."

Mother tried to make the time pass by telling them a new fairy story
about a Princess with green eyes, but it was difficult because they
could hear the voices of Father and the gentlemen in the Library, and
Father's voice sounded louder and different to the voice he generally
used to people who came about testimonials and holiday funds.

Then the Library bell rang, and everyone heaved a breath of relief.

"They're going now," said Phyllis; "he's rung to have them shown out."

But instead of showing anybody out, Ruth showed herself in, and she
looked queer, the children thought.

"Please'm," she said, "the Master wants you to just step into the study.
He looks like the dead, mum; I think he's had bad news. You'd best
prepare yourself for the worst, 'm--p'raps it's a death in the family or
a bank busted or--"

"That'll do, Ruth," said Mother gently; "you can go."

Then Mother went into the Library. There was more talking. Then the bell
rang again, and Ruth fetched a cab. The children heard boots go out and
down the steps. The cab drove away, and the front door shut. Then Mother
came in. Her dear face was as white as her lace collar, and her eyes
looked very big and shining. Her mouth looked like just a line of pale
red--her lips were thin and not their proper shape at all.

"It's bedtime," she said. "Ruth will put you to bed."

"But you promised we should sit up late tonight because Father's come
home," said Phyllis.

"Father's been called away--on business," said Mother. "Come, darlings,
go at once."

They kissed her and went. Roberta lingered to give Mother an extra hug
and to whisper:

"It wasn't bad news, Mammy, was it? Is anyone dead--or--"

"Nobody's dead--no," said Mother, and she almost seemed to push Roberta
away. "I can't tell you anything tonight, my pet. Go, dear, go NOW."

So Roberta went.

Ruth brushed the girls' hair and helped them to undress. (Mother almost
always did this herself.) When she had turned down the gas and left them
she found Peter, still dressed, waiting on the stairs.

"I say, Ruth, what's up?" he asked.

"Don't ask me no questions and I won't tell you no lies," the red-headed
Ruth replied. "You'll know soon enough."

Late that night Mother came up and kissed all three children as they
lay asleep. But Roberta was the only one whom the kiss woke, and she lay
mousey-still, and said nothing.

"If Mother doesn't want us to know she's been crying," she said to
herself as she heard through the dark the catching of her Mother's
breath, "we WON'T know it. That's all."

When they came down to breakfast the next morning, Mother had already
gone out.

"To London," Ruth said, and left them to their breakfast.

"There's something awful the matter," said Peter, breaking his egg.
"Ruth told me last night we should know soon enough."

"Did you ASK her?" said Roberta, with scorn.

"Yes, I did!" said Peter, angrily. "If you could go to bed without
caring whether Mother was worried or not, I couldn't. So there."

"I don't think we ought to ask the servants things Mother doesn't tell
us," said Roberta.

"That's right, Miss Goody-goody," said Peter, "preach away."

"I'M not goody," said Phyllis, "but I think Bobbie's right this time."

"Of course. She always is. In her own opinion," said Peter.

"Oh, DON'T!" cried Roberta, putting down her egg-spoon; "don't let's be
horrid to each other. I'm sure some dire calamity is happening. Don't
let's make it worse!"

"Who began, I should like to know?" said Peter.

Roberta made an effort, and answered:--

"I did, I suppose, but--"

"Well, then," said Peter, triumphantly. But before he went to school he
thumped his sister between the shoulders and told her to cheer up.

The children came home to one o'clock dinner, but Mother was not there.
And she was not there at tea-time.

It was nearly seven before she came in, looking so ill and tired that
the children felt they could not ask her any questions. She sank into an
arm-chair. Phyllis took the long pins out of her hat, while Roberta took
off her gloves, and Peter unfastened her walking-shoes and fetched her
soft velvety slippers for her.

When she had had a cup of tea, and Roberta had put eau-de-Cologne on her
poor head that ached, Mother said:--

"Now, my darlings, I want to tell you something. Those men last night
did bring very bad news, and Father will be away for some time. I am
very worried about it, and I want you all to help me, and not to make
things harder for me."

"As if we would!" said Roberta, holding Mother's hand against her face.

"You can help me very much," said Mother, "by being good and happy
and not quarrelling when I'm away"--Roberta and Peter exchanged guilty
glances--"for I shall have to be away a good deal."

"We won't quarrel. Indeed we won't," said everybody. And meant it, too.

"Then," Mother went on, "I want you not to ask me any questions about
this trouble; and not to ask anybody else any questions."

Peter cringed and shuffled his boots on the carpet.

"You'll promise this, too, won't you?" said Mother.

"I did ask Ruth," said Peter, suddenly. "I'm very sorry, but I did."

"And what did she say?"

"She said I should know soon enough."

"It isn't necessary for you to know anything about it," said Mother;
"it's about business, and you never do understand business, do you?"

"No," said Roberta; "is it something to do with Government?" For Father
was in a Government Office.

"Yes," said Mother. "Now it's bed-time, my darlings. And don't YOU
worry. It'll all come right in the end."

"Then don't YOU worry either, Mother," said Phyllis, "and we'll all be
as good as gold."

Mother sighed and kissed them.

"We'll begin being good the first thing tomorrow morning," said Peter,
as they went upstairs.

"Why not NOW?" said Roberta.

"There's nothing to be good ABOUT now, silly," said Peter.

"We might begin to try to FEEL good," said Phyllis, "and not call
names."

"Who's calling names?" said Peter. "Bobbie knows right enough that when
I say 'silly', it's just the same as if I said Bobbie."

"WELL," said Roberta.

"No, I don't mean what you mean. I mean it's just a--what is it Father
calls it?--a germ of endearment! Good night."

The girls folded up their clothes with more than usual neatness--which
was the only way of being good that they could think of.

"I say," said Phyllis, smoothing out her pinafore, "you used to say
it was so dull--nothing happening, like in books. Now something HAS
happened."

"I never wanted things to happen to make Mother unhappy," said Roberta.
"Everything's perfectly horrid."

Everything continued to be perfectly horrid for some weeks.

Mother was nearly always out. Meals were dull and dirty. The
between-maid was sent away, and Aunt Emma came on a visit. Aunt Emma was
much older than Mother. She was going abroad to be a governess. She
was very busy getting her clothes ready, and they were very ugly, dingy
clothes, and she had them always littering about, and the sewing-machine
seemed to whir--on and on all day and most of the night. Aunt Emma
believed in keeping children in their proper places. And they more than
returned the compliment. Their idea of Aunt Emma's proper place was
anywhere where they were not. So they saw very little of her. They
preferred the company of the servants, who were more amusing. Cook,
if in a good temper, could sing comic songs, and the housemaid, if she
happened not to be offended with you, could imitate a hen that has laid
an egg, a bottle of champagne being opened, and could mew like two cats
fighting. The servants never told the children what the bad news was
that the gentlemen had brought to Father. But they kept hinting
that they could tell a great deal if they chose--and this was not
comfortable.

One day when Peter had made a booby trap over the bath-room door, and
it had acted beautifully as Ruth passed through, that red-haired
parlour-maid caught him and boxed his ears.

"You'll come to a bad end," she said furiously, "you nasty little limb,
you! If you don't mend your ways, you'll go where your precious Father's
gone, so I tell you straight!"

Roberta repeated this to her Mother, and next day Ruth was sent away.

Then came the time when Mother came home and went to bed and stayed
there two days and the Doctor came, and the children crept wretchedly
about the house and wondered if the world was coming to an end.

Mother came down one morning to breakfast, very pale and with lines
on her face that used not to be there. And she smiled, as well as she
could, and said:--

"Now, my pets, everything is settled. We're going to leave this house,
and go and live in the country. Such a ducky dear little white house. I
know you'll love it."

A whirling week of packing followed--not just packing clothes, like when
you go to the seaside, but packing chairs and tables, covering their
tops with sacking and their legs with straw.

All sorts of things were packed that you don't pack when you go to
the seaside. Crockery, blankets, candlesticks, carpets, bedsteads,
saucepans, and even fenders and fire-irons.

The house was like a furniture warehouse. I think the children enjoyed
it very much. Mother was very busy, but not too busy now to talk to
them, and read to them, and even to make a bit of poetry for Phyllis to
cheer her up when she fell down with a screwdriver and ran it into her
hand.

"Aren't you going to pack this, Mother?" Roberta asked, pointing to the
beautiful cabinet inlaid with red turtleshell and brass.

"We can't take everything," said Mother.

"But we seem to be taking all the ugly things," said Roberta.

"We're taking the useful ones," said Mother; "we've got to play at being
Poor for a bit, my chickabiddy."

When all the ugly useful things had been packed up and taken away in a
van by men in green-baize aprons, the two girls and Mother and Aunt Emma
slept in the two spare rooms where the furniture was all pretty. All
their beds had gone. A bed was made up for Peter on the drawing-room
sofa.

"I say, this is larks," he said, wriggling joyously, as Mother tucked
him up. "I do like moving! I wish we moved once a month."

Mother laughed.

"I don't!" she said. "Good night, Peterkin."

As she turned away Roberta saw her face. She never forgot it.

"Oh, Mother," she whispered all to herself as she got into bed, "how
brave you are! How I love you! Fancy being brave enough to laugh when
you're feeling like THAT!"

Next day boxes were filled, and boxes and more boxes; and then late in
the afternoon a cab came to take them to the station.

Aunt Emma saw them off. They felt that THEY were seeing HER off, and
they were glad of it.

"But, oh, those poor little foreign children that she's going to
governess!" whispered Phyllis. "I wouldn't be them for anything!"

At first they enjoyed looking out of the window, but when it grew dusk
they grew sleepier and sleepier, and no one knew how long they had been
in the train when they were roused by Mother's shaking them gently and
saying:--

"Wake up, dears. We're there."

They woke up, cold and melancholy, and stood shivering on the draughty
platform while the baggage was taken out of the train. Then the engine,
puffing and blowing, set to work again, and dragged the train away. The
children watched the tail-lights of the guard's van disappear into the
darkness.

This was the first train the children saw on that railway which was in
time to become so very dear to them. They did not guess then how they
would grow to love the railway, and how soon it would become the centre
of their new life, nor what wonders and changes it would bring to them.
They only shivered and sneezed and hoped the walk to the new house would
not be long. Peter's nose was colder than he ever remembered it to have
been before. Roberta's hat was crooked, and the elastic seemed tighter
than usual. Phyllis's shoe-laces had come undone.

"Come," said Mother, "we've got to walk. There aren't any cabs here."

The walk was dark and muddy. The children stumbled a little on the rough
road, and once Phyllis absently fell into a puddle, and was picked up
damp and unhappy. There were no gas-lamps on the road, and the road was
uphill. The cart went at a foot's pace, and they followed the gritty
crunch of its wheels. As their eyes got used to the darkness, they could
see the mound of boxes swaying dimly in front of them.

A long gate had to be opened for the cart to pass through, and after
that the road seemed to go across fields--and now it went down hill.
Presently a great dark lumpish thing showed over to the right.

"There's the house," said Mother. "I wonder why she's shut the
shutters."

"Who's SHE?" asked Roberta.

"The woman I engaged to clean the place, and put the furniture straight
and get supper."

There was a low wall, and trees inside.

"That's the garden," said Mother.

"It looks more like a dripping-pan full of black cabbages," said Peter.

The cart went on along by the garden wall, and round to the back of the
house, and here it clattered into a cobble-stoned yard and stopped at
the back door.

There was no light in any of the windows.

Everyone hammered at the door, but no one came.

The man who drove the cart said he expected Mrs. Viney had gone home.

"You see your train was that late," said he.

"But she's got the key," said Mother. "What are we to do?"

"Oh, she'll have left that under the doorstep," said the cart man;
"folks do hereabouts." He took the lantern off his cart and stooped.

"Ay, here it is, right enough," he said.

He unlocked the door and went in and set his lantern on the table.

"Got e'er a candle?" said he.

"I don't know where anything is." Mother spoke rather less cheerfully
than usual.

He struck a match. There was a candle on the table, and he lighted it.
By its thin little glimmer the children saw a large bare kitchen with
a stone floor. There were no curtains, no hearth-rug. The kitchen
table from home stood in the middle of the room. The chairs were in one
corner, and the pots, pans, brooms, and crockery in another. There was
no fire, and the black grate showed cold, dead ashes.

As the cart man turned to go out after he had brought in the boxes,
there was a rustling, scampering sound that seemed to come from inside
the walls of the house.

"Oh, what's that?" cried the girls.

"It's only the rats," said the cart man. And he went away and shut the
door, and the sudden draught of it blew out the candle.

"Oh, dear," said Phyllis, "I wish we hadn't come!" and she knocked a
chair over.

"ONLY the rats!" said Peter, in the dark.



Chapter II. Peter's coal-mine.


"What fun!" said Mother, in the dark, feeling for the matches on the
table. "How frightened the poor mice were--I don't believe they were
rats at all."

She struck a match and relighted the candle and everyone looked at each
other by its winky, blinky light.

"Well," she said, "you've often wanted something to happen and now it
has. This is quite an adventure, isn't it? I told Mrs. Viney to get us
some bread and butter, and meat and things, and to have supper ready. I
suppose she's laid it in the dining-room. So let's go and see."

The dining-room opened out of the kitchen. It looked much darker than
the kitchen when they went in with the one candle. Because the kitchen
was whitewashed, but the dining-room was dark wood from floor to
ceiling, and across the ceiling there were heavy black beams. There was
a muddled maze of dusty furniture--the breakfast-room furniture from
the old home where they had lived all their lives. It seemed a very long
time ago, and a very long way off.

There was the table certainly, and there were chairs, but there was no
supper.

"Let's look in the other rooms," said Mother; and they looked. And in
each room was the same kind of blundering half-arrangement of furniture,
and fire-irons and crockery, and all sorts of odd things on the floor,
but there was nothing to eat; even in the pantry there were only a rusty
cake-tin and a broken plate with whitening mixed in it.

"What a horrid old woman!" said Mother; "she's just walked off with the
money and not got us anything to eat at all."

"Then shan't we have any supper at all?" asked Phyllis, dismayed,
stepping back on to a soap-dish that cracked responsively.

"Oh, yes," said Mother, "only it'll mean unpacking one of those big
cases that we put in the cellar. Phil, do mind where you're walking to,
there's a dear. Peter, hold the light."

The cellar door opened out of the kitchen. There were five wooden steps
leading down. It wasn't a proper cellar at all, the children thought,
because its ceiling went up as high as the kitchen's. A bacon-rack hung
under its ceiling. There was wood in it, and coal. Also the big cases.

Peter held the candle, all on one side, while Mother tried to open the
great packing-case. It was very securely nailed down.

"Where's the hammer?" asked Peter.

"That's just it," said Mother. "I'm afraid it's inside the box. But
there's a coal-shovel--and there's the kitchen poker."

And with these she tried to get the case open.

"Let me do it," said Peter, thinking he could do it better himself.
Everyone thinks this when he sees another person stirring a fire, or
opening a box, or untying a knot in a bit of string.

"You'll hurt your hands, Mammy," said Roberta; "let me."

"I wish Father was here," said Phyllis; "he'd get it open in two shakes.
What are you kicking me for, Bobbie?"

"I wasn't," said Roberta.

Just then the first of the long nails in the packing-case began to come
out with a scrunch. Then a lath was raised and then another, till all
four stood up with the long nails in them shining fiercely like iron
teeth in the candle-light.

"Hooray!" said Mother; "here are some candles--the very first thing! You
girls go and light them. You'll find some saucers and things. Just drop
a little candle-grease in the saucer and stick the candle upright in
it."

"How many shall we light?"

"As many as ever you like," said Mother, gaily. "The great thing is
to be cheerful. Nobody can be cheerful in the dark except owls and
dormice."

So the girls lighted candles. The head of the first match flew off and
stuck to Phyllis's finger; but, as Roberta said, it was only a little
burn, and she might have had to be a Roman martyr and be burned whole if
she had happened to live in the days when those things were fashionable.

Then, when the dining-room was lighted by fourteen candles, Roberta
fetched coal and wood and lighted a fire.

"It's very cold for May," she said, feeling what a grown-up thing it was
to say.

The fire-light and the candle-light made the dining-room look very
different, for now you could see that the dark walls were of wood,
carved here and there into little wreaths and loops.

The girls hastily 'tidied' the room, which meant putting the chairs
against the wall, and piling all the odds and ends into a corner and
partly hiding them with the big leather arm-chair that Father used to
sit in after dinner.

"Bravo!" cried Mother, coming in with a tray full of things. "This is
something like! I'll just get a tablecloth and then--"

The tablecloth was in a box with a proper lock that was opened with a
key and not with a shovel, and when the cloth was spread on the table, a
real feast was laid out on it.

Everyone was very, very tired, but everyone cheered up at the sight of
the funny and delightful supper. There were biscuits, the Marie and the
plain kind, sardines, preserved ginger, cooking raisins, and candied
peel and marmalade.

"What a good thing Aunt Emma packed up all the odds and ends out of the
Store cupboard," said Mother. "Now, Phil, DON'T put the marmalade spoon
in among the sardines."

"No, I won't, Mother," said Phyllis, and put it down among the Marie
biscuits.

"Let's drink Aunt Emma's health," said Roberta, suddenly; "what should
we have done if she hadn't packed up these things? Here's to Aunt Emma!"

And the toast was drunk in ginger wine and water, out of
willow-patterned tea-cups, because the glasses couldn't be found.

They all felt that they had been a little hard on Aunt Emma. She wasn't
a nice cuddly person like Mother, but after all it was she who had
thought of packing up the odds and ends of things to eat.

It was Aunt Emma, too, who had aired all the sheets ready; and the men
who had moved the furniture had put the bedsteads together, so the beds
were soon made.

"Good night, chickies," said Mother. "I'm sure there aren't any rats.
But I'll leave my door open, and then if a mouse comes, you need only
scream, and I'll come and tell it exactly what I think of it."

Then she went to her own room. Roberta woke to hear the little
travelling clock chime two. It sounded like a church clock ever so far
away, she always thought. And she heard, too, Mother still moving about
in her room.

Next morning Roberta woke Phyllis by pulling her hair gently, but quite
enough for her purpose.

"Wassermarrer?" asked Phyllis, still almost wholly asleep.

"Wake up! wake up!" said Roberta. "We're in the new house--don't you
remember? No servants or anything. Let's get up and begin to be useful.
We'll just creep down mouse-quietly, and have everything beautiful
before Mother gets up. I've woke Peter. He'll be dressed as soon as we
are."

So they dressed quietly and quickly. Of course, there was no water in
their room, so when they got down they washed as much as they thought
was necessary under the spout of the pump in the yard. One pumped and
the other washed. It was splashy but interesting.

"It's much more fun than basin washing," said Roberta. "How sparkly
the weeds are between the stones, and the moss on the roof--oh, and the
flowers!"

The roof of the back kitchen sloped down quite low. It was made
of thatch and it had moss on it, and house-leeks and stonecrop and
wallflowers, and even a clump of purple flag-flowers, at the far corner.

"This is far, far, far and away prettier than Edgecombe Villa," said
Phyllis. "I wonder what the garden's like."

"We mustn't think of the garden yet," said Roberta, with earnest energy.
"Let's go in and begin to work."

They lighted the fire and put the kettle on, and they arranged the
crockery for breakfast; they could not find all the right things, but
a glass ash-tray made an excellent salt-cellar, and a newish baking-tin
seemed as if it would do to put bread on, if they had any.

When there seemed to be nothing more that they could do, they went out
again into the fresh bright morning.

"We'll go into the garden now," said Peter. But somehow they couldn't
find the garden. They went round the house and round the house. The yard
occupied the back, and across it were stables and outbuildings. On the
other three sides the house stood simply in a field, without a yard
of garden to divide it from the short smooth turf. And yet they had
certainly seen the garden wall the night before.

It was a hilly country. Down below they could see the line of the
railway, and the black yawning mouth of a tunnel. The station was out of
sight. There was a great bridge with tall arches running across one end
of the valley.

"Never mind the garden," said Peter; "let's go down and look at the
railway. There might be trains passing."

"We can see them from here," said Roberta, slowly; "let's sit down a
bit."

So they all sat down on a great flat grey stone that had pushed itself
up out of the grass; it was one of many that lay about on the hillside,
and when Mother came out to look for them at eight o'clock, she found
them deeply asleep in a contented, sun-warmed bunch.

They had made an excellent fire, and had set the kettle on it at about
half-past five. So that by eight the fire had been out for some time,
the water had all boiled away, and the bottom was burned out of the
kettle. Also they had not thought of washing the crockery before they
set the table.

"But it doesn't matter--the cups and saucers, I mean," said Mother.
"Because I've found another room--I'd quite forgotten there was one. And
it's magic! And I've boiled the water for tea in a saucepan."

The forgotten room opened out of the kitchen. In the agitation and half
darkness the night before its door had been mistaken for a cupboard's.
It was a little square room, and on its table, all nicely set out, was a
joint of cold roast beef, with bread, butter, cheese, and a pie.

"Pie for breakfast!" cried Peter; "how perfectly ripping!"

"It isn't pigeon-pie," said Mother; "it's only apple. Well, this is the
supper we ought to have had last night. And there was a note from Mrs.
Viney. Her son-in-law has broken his arm, and she had to get home early.
She's coming this morning at ten."

That was a wonderful breakfast. It is unusual to begin the day with
cold apple pie, but the children all said they would rather have it than
meat.

"You see it's more like dinner than breakfast to us," said Peter,
passing his plate for more, "because we were up so early."

The day passed in helping Mother to unpack and arrange things. Six small
legs quite ached with running about while their owners carried clothes
and crockery and all sorts of things to their proper places. It was not
till quite late in the afternoon that Mother said:--

"There! That'll do for to-day. I'll lie down for an hour, so as to be as
fresh as a lark by supper-time."

Then they all looked at each other. Each of the three expressive
countenances expressed the same thought. That thought was double,
and consisted, like the bits of information in the Child's Guide to
Knowledge, of a question and an answer.

Q. Where shall we go?

A. To the railway.

So to the railway they went, and as soon as they started for the railway
they saw where the garden had hidden itself. It was right behind the
stables, and it had a high wall all round.

"Oh, never mind about the garden now!" cried Peter. "Mother told me
this morning where it was. It'll keep till to-morrow. Let's get to the
railway."

The way to the railway was all down hill over smooth, short turf with
here and there furze bushes and grey and yellow rocks sticking out like
candied peel from the top of a cake.

The way ended in a steep run and a wooden fence--and there was the
railway with the shining metals and the telegraph wires and posts and
signals.

They all climbed on to the top of the fence, and then suddenly there was
a rumbling sound that made them look along the line to the right, where
the dark mouth of a tunnel opened itself in the face of a rocky cliff;
next moment a train had rushed out of the tunnel with a shriek and
a snort, and had slid noisily past them. They felt the rush of its
passing, and the pebbles on the line jumped and rattled under it as it
went by.

"Oh!" said Roberta, drawing a long breath; "it was like a great dragon
tearing by. Did you feel it fan us with its hot wings?"

"I suppose a dragon's lair might look very like that tunnel from the
outside," said Phyllis.

But Peter said:--

"I never thought we should ever get as near to a train as this. It's the
most ripping sport!"

"Better than toy-engines, isn't it?" said Roberta.

(I am tired of calling Roberta by her name. I don't see why I should.
No one else did. Everyone else called her Bobbie, and I don't see why I
shouldn't.)

"I don't know; it's different," said Peter. "It seems so odd to see ALL
of a train. It's awfully tall, isn't it?"

"We've always seen them cut in half by platforms," said Phyllis.

"I wonder if that train was going to London," Bobbie said. "London's
where Father is."

"Let's go down to the station and find out," said Peter.

So they went.

They walked along the edge of the line, and heard the telegraph wires
humming over their heads. When you are in the train, it seems such a
little way between post and post, and one after another the posts seem
to catch up the wires almost more quickly than you can count them. But
when you have to walk, the posts seem few and far between.

But the children got to the station at last.

Never before had any of them been at a station, except for the purpose
of catching trains--or perhaps waiting for them--and always with
grown-ups in attendance, grown-ups who were not themselves interested in
stations, except as places from which they wished to get away.

Never before had they passed close enough to a signal-box to be able to
notice the wires, and to hear the mysterious 'ping, ping,' followed by
the strong, firm clicking of machinery.

The very sleepers on which the rails lay were a delightful path to
travel by--just far enough apart to serve as the stepping-stones in a
game of foaming torrents hastily organised by Bobbie.

Then to arrive at the station, not through the booking office, but in
a freebooting sort of way by the sloping end of the platform. This in
itself was joy.

Joy, too, it was to peep into the porters' room, where the lamps are,
and the Railway almanac on the wall, and one porter half asleep behind a
paper.

There were a great many crossing lines at the station; some of them just
ran into a yard and stopped short, as though they were tired of business
and meant to retire for good. Trucks stood on the rails here, and on one
side was a great heap of coal--not a loose heap, such as you see in your
coal cellar, but a sort of solid building of coals with large square
blocks of coal outside used just as though they were bricks, and built
up till the heap looked like the picture of the Cities of the Plain in
'Bible Stories for Infants.' There was a line of whitewash near the top
of the coaly wall.

When presently the Porter lounged out of his room at the twice-repeated
tingling thrill of a gong over the station door, Peter said, "How do you
do?" in his best manner, and hastened to ask what the white mark was on
the coal for.

"To mark how much coal there be," said the Porter, "so as we'll know if
anyone nicks it. So don't you go off with none in your pockets, young
gentleman!"

This seemed, at the time but a merry jest, and Peter felt at once that
the Porter was a friendly sort with no nonsense about him. But later the
words came back to Peter with a new meaning.

Have you ever gone into a farmhouse kitchen on a baking day, and seen
the great crock of dough set by the fire to rise? If you have, and if
you were at that time still young enough to be interested in everything
you saw, you will remember that you found yourself quite unable to
resist the temptation to poke your finger into the soft round of dough
that curved inside the pan like a giant mushroom. And you will remember
that your finger made a dent in the dough, and that slowly, but quite
surely, the dent disappeared, and the dough looked quite the same as it
did before you touched it. Unless, of course, your hand was extra dirty,
in which case, naturally, there would be a little black mark.

Well, it was just like that with the sorrow the children had felt at
Father's going away, and at Mother's being so unhappy. It made a deep
impression, but the impression did not last long.

They soon got used to being without Father, though they did not forget
him; and they got used to not going to school, and to seeing very little
of Mother, who was now almost all day shut up in her upstairs room
writing, writing, writing. She used to come down at tea-time and read
aloud the stories she had written. They were lovely stories.

The rocks and hills and valleys and trees, the canal, and above all, the
railway, were so new and so perfectly pleasing that the remembrance of
the old life in the villa grew to seem almost like a dream.

Mother had told them more than once that they were 'quite poor now,' but
this did not seem to be anything but a way of speaking. Grown-up people,
even Mothers, often make remarks that don't seem to mean anything in
particular, just for the sake of saying something, seemingly. There was
always enough to eat, and they wore the same kind of nice clothes they
had always worn.

But in June came three wet days; the rain came down, straight as lances,
and it was very, very cold. Nobody could go out, and everybody shivered.
They all went up to the door of Mother's room and knocked.

"Well, what is it?" asked Mother from inside.

"Mother," said Bobbie, "mayn't I light a fire? I do know how."

And Mother said: "No, my ducky-love. We mustn't have fires in June--coal
is so dear. If you're cold, go and have a good romp in the attic.
That'll warm you."

"But, Mother, it only takes such a very little coal to make a fire."

"It's more than we can afford, chickeny-love," said Mother, cheerfully.
"Now run away, there's darlings--I'm madly busy!"

"Mother's always busy now," said Phyllis, in a whisper to Peter. Peter
did not answer. He shrugged his shoulders. He was thinking.

Thought, however, could not long keep itself from the suitable
furnishing of a bandit's lair in the attic. Peter was the bandit, of
course. Bobbie was his lieutenant, his band of trusty robbers, and, in
due course, the parent of Phyllis, who was the captured maiden for whom
a magnificent ransom--in horse-beans--was unhesitatingly paid.

They all went down to tea flushed and joyous as any mountain brigands.

But when Phyllis was going to add jam to her bread and butter, Mother
said:--

"Jam OR butter, dear--not jam AND butter. We can't afford that sort of
reckless luxury nowadays."

Phyllis finished the slice of bread and butter in silence, and followed
it up by bread and jam. Peter mingled thought and weak tea.

After tea they went back to the attic and he said to his sisters:--

"I have an idea."

"What's that?" they asked politely.

"I shan't tell you," was Peter's unexpected rejoinder.

"Oh, very well," said Bobbie; and Phil said, "Don't, then."

"Girls," said Peter, "are always so hasty tempered."

"I should like to know what boys are?" said Bobbie, with fine disdain.
"I don't want to know about your silly ideas."

"You'll know some day," said Peter, keeping his own temper by what
looked exactly like a miracle; "if you hadn't been so keen on a row, I
might have told you about it being only noble-heartedness that made me
not tell you my idea. But now I shan't tell you anything at all about
it--so there!"

And it was, indeed, some time before he could be induced to say
anything, and when he did it wasn't much. He said:--

"The only reason why I won't tell you my idea that I'm going to do is
because it MAY be wrong, and I don't want to drag you into it."

"Don't you do it if it's wrong, Peter," said Bobbie; "let me do it." But
Phyllis said:--

"_I_ should like to do wrong if YOU'RE going to!"

"No," said Peter, rather touched by this devotion; "it's a forlorn hope,
and I'm going to lead it. All I ask is that if Mother asks where I am,
you won't blab."

"We haven't got anything TO blab," said Bobbie, indignantly.

"Oh, yes, you have!" said Peter, dropping horse-beans through his
fingers. "I've trusted you to the death. You know I'm going to do a lone
adventure--and some people might think it wrong--I don't. And if Mother
asks where I am, say I'm playing at mines."

"What sort of mines?"

"You just say mines."

"You might tell US, Pete."

"Well, then, COAL-mines. But don't you let the word pass your lips on
pain of torture."

"You needn't threaten," said Bobbie, "and I do think you might let us
help."

"If I find a coal-mine, you shall help cart the coal," Peter
condescended to promise.

"Keep your secret if you like," said Phyllis.

"Keep it if you CAN," said Bobbie.

"I'll keep it, right enough," said Peter.

Between tea and supper there is an interval even in the most greedily
regulated families. At this time Mother was usually writing, and Mrs.
Viney had gone home.

Two nights after the dawning of Peter's idea he beckoned the girls
mysteriously at the twilight hour.

"Come hither with me," he said, "and bring the Roman Chariot."

The Roman Chariot was a very old perambulator that had spent years of
retirement in the loft over the coach-house. The children had oiled its
works till it glided noiseless as a pneumatic bicycle, and answered to
the helm as it had probably done in its best days.

"Follow your dauntless leader," said Peter, and led the way down the
hill towards the station.

Just above the station many rocks have pushed their heads out through
the turf as though they, like the children, were interested in the
railway.

In a little hollow between three rocks lay a heap of dried brambles and
heather.

Peter halted, turned over the brushwood with a well-scarred boot, and
said:--

"Here's the first coal from the St. Peter's Mine. We'll take it home in
the chariot. Punctuality and despatch. All orders carefully attended to.
Any shaped lump cut to suit regular customers."

The chariot was packed full of coal. And when it was packed it had to
be unpacked again because it was so heavy that it couldn't be got up the
hill by the three children, not even when Peter harnessed himself to the
handle with his braces, and firmly grasping his waistband in one hand
pulled while the girls pushed behind.

Three journeys had to be made before the coal from Peter's mine was
added to the heap of Mother's coal in the cellar.

Afterwards Peter went out alone, and came back very black and
mysterious.

"I've been to my coal-mine," he said; "to-morrow evening we'll bring
home the black diamonds in the chariot."

It was a week later that Mrs. Viney remarked to Mother how well this
last lot of coal was holding out.

The children hugged themselves and each other in complicated wriggles of
silent laughter as they listened on the stairs. They had all forgotten
by now that there had ever been any doubt in Peter's mind as to whether
coal-mining was wrong.

But there came a dreadful night when the Station Master put on a pair
of old sand shoes that he had worn at the seaside in his summer holiday,
and crept out very quietly to the yard where the Sodom and Gomorrah heap
of coal was, with the whitewashed line round it. He crept out there, and
he waited like a cat by a mousehole. On the top of the heap something
small and dark was scrabbling and rattling furtively among the coal.

The Station Master concealed himself in the shadow of a brake-van that
had a little tin chimney and was labelled:--

     G. N. and S. R.
          34576
    Return at once to
  White Heather Sidings

and in this concealment he lurked till the small thing on the top of
the heap ceased to scrabble and rattle, came to the edge of the heap,
cautiously let itself down, and lifted something after it. Then the arm
of the Station Master was raised, the hand of the Station Master fell
on a collar, and there was Peter firmly held by the jacket, with an old
carpenter's bag full of coal in his trembling clutch.

"So I've caught you at last, have I, you young thief?" said the Station
Master.

"I'm not a thief," said Peter, as firmly as he could. "I'm a
coal-miner."

"Tell that to the Marines," said the Station Master.

"It would be just as true whoever I told it to," said Peter.

"You're right there," said the man, who held him. "Stow your jaw, you
young rip, and come along to the station."

"Oh, no," cried in the darkness an agonised voice that was not Peter's.

"Not the POLICE station!" said another voice from the darkness.

"Not yet," said the Station Master. "The Railway Station first. Why,
it's a regular gang. Any more of you?"

"Only us," said Bobbie and Phyllis, coming out of the shadow of another
truck labelled Staveley Colliery, and bearing on it the legend in white
chalk: 'Wanted in No. 1 Road.'

"What do you mean by spying on a fellow like this?" said Peter, angrily.

"Time someone did spy on you, _I_ think," said the Station Master. "Come
along to the station."

"Oh, DON'T!" said Bobbie. "Can't you decide NOW what you'll do to us?
It's our fault just as much as Peter's. We helped to carry the coal
away--and we knew where he got it."

"No, you didn't," said Peter.

"Yes, we did," said Bobbie. "We knew all the time. We only pretended we
didn't just to humour you."

Peter's cup was full. He had mined for coal, he had struck coal, he had
been caught, and now he learned that his sisters had 'humoured' him.

"Don't hold me!" he said. "I won't run away."

The Station Master loosed Peter's collar, struck a match and looked at
them by its flickering light.

"Why," said he, "you're the children from the Three Chimneys up yonder.
So nicely dressed, too. Tell me now, what made you do such a thing?
Haven't you ever been to church or learned your catechism or anything,
not to know it's wicked to steal?" He spoke much more gently now, and
Peter said:--

"I didn't think it was stealing. I was almost sure it wasn't. I thought
if I took it from the outside part of the heap, perhaps it would be. But
in the middle I thought I could fairly count it only mining. It'll
take thousands of years for you to burn up all that coal and get to the
middle parts."

"Not quite. But did you do it for a lark or what?"

"Not much lark carting that beastly heavy stuff up the hill," said
Peter, indignantly.

"Then why did you?" The Station Master's voice was so much kinder now
that Peter replied:--

"You know that wet day? Well, Mother said we were too poor to have a
fire. We always had fires when it was cold at our other house, and--"

"DON'T!" interrupted Bobbie, in a whisper.

"Well," said the Station Master, rubbing his chin thoughtfully, "I'll
tell you what I'll do. I'll look over it this once. But you remember,
young gentleman, stealing is stealing, and what's mine isn't yours,
whether you call it mining or whether you don't. Run along home."

"Do you mean you aren't going to do anything to us? Well, you are a
brick," said Peter, with enthusiasm.

"You're a dear," said Bobbie.

"You're a darling," said Phyllis.

"That's all right," said the Station Master.

And on this they parted.

"Don't speak to me," said Peter, as the three went up the hill. "You're
spies and traitors--that's what you are."

But the girls were too glad to have Peter between them, safe and free,
and on the way to Three Chimneys and not to the Police Station, to mind
much what he said.

"We DID say it was us as much as you," said Bobbie, gently.

"Well--and it wasn't."

"It would have come to the same thing in Courts with judges," said
Phyllis. "Don't be snarky, Peter. It isn't our fault your secrets are so
jolly easy to find out." She took his arm, and he let her.

"There's an awful lot of coal in the cellar, anyhow," he went on.

"Oh, don't!" said Bobbie. "I don't think we ought to be glad about
THAT."

"I don't know," said Peter, plucking up a spirit. "I'm not at all sure,
even now, that mining is a crime."

But the girls were quite sure. And they were also quite sure that he was
quite sure, however little he cared to own it.



Chapter III. The old gentleman.


After the adventure of Peter's Coal-mine, it seemed well to the children
to keep away from the station--but they did not, they could not, keep
away from the railway. They had lived all their lives in a street where
cabs and omnibuses rumbled by at all hours, and the carts of butchers
and bakers and candlestick makers (I never saw a candlestick-maker's
cart; did you?) might occur at any moment. Here in the deep silence of
the sleeping country the only things that went by were the trains. They
seemed to be all that was left to link the children to the old life that
had once been theirs. Straight down the hill in front of Three Chimneys
the daily passage of their six feet began to mark a path across the
crisp, short turf. They began to know the hours when certain trains
passed, and they gave names to them. The 9.15 up was called the Green
Dragon. The 10.7 down was the Worm of Wantley. The midnight town
express, whose shrieking rush they sometimes woke from their dreams
to hear, was the Fearsome Fly-by-night. Peter got up once, in chill
starshine, and, peeping at it through his curtains, named it on the
spot.

It was by the Green Dragon that the old gentleman travelled. He was a
very nice-looking old gentleman, and he looked as if he were nice,
too, which is not at all the same thing. He had a fresh-coloured,
clean-shaven face and white hair, and he wore rather odd-shaped collars
and a top-hat that wasn't exactly the same kind as other people's. Of
course the children didn't see all this at first. In fact the first
thing they noticed about the old gentleman was his hand.

It was one morning as they sat on the fence waiting for the Green
Dragon, which was three and a quarter minutes late by Peter's Waterbury
watch that he had had given him on his last birthday.

"The Green Dragon's going where Father is," said Phyllis; "if it were
a really real dragon, we could stop it and ask it to take our love to
Father."

"Dragons don't carry people's love," said Peter; "they'd be above it."

"Yes, they do, if you tame them thoroughly first. They fetch and carry
like pet spaniels," said Phyllis, "and feed out of your hand. I wonder
why Father never writes to us."

"Mother says he's been too busy," said Bobbie; "but he'll write soon,
she says."

"I say," Phyllis suggested, "let's all wave to the Green Dragon as it
goes by. If it's a magic dragon, it'll understand and take our loves to
Father. And if it isn't, three waves aren't much. We shall never miss
them."

So when the Green Dragon tore shrieking out of the mouth of its dark
lair, which was the tunnel, all three children stood on the railing and
waved their pocket-handkerchiefs without stopping to think whether they
were clean handkerchiefs or the reverse. They were, as a matter of fact,
very much the reverse.

And out of a first-class carriage a hand waved back. A quite clean hand.
It held a newspaper. It was the old gentleman's hand.

After this it became the custom for waves to be exchanged between the
children and the 9.15.

And the children, especially the girls, liked to think that perhaps the
old gentleman knew Father, and would meet him 'in business,' wherever
that shady retreat might be, and tell him how his three children stood
on a rail far away in the green country and waved their love to him
every morning, wet or fine.

For they were now able to go out in all sorts of weather such as they
would never have been allowed to go out in when they lived in their
villa house. This was Aunt Emma's doing, and the children felt more and
more that they had not been quite fair to this unattractive aunt, when
they found how useful were the long gaiters and waterproof coats that
they had laughed at her for buying for them.

Mother, all this time, was very busy with her writing. She used to send
off a good many long blue envelopes with stories in them--and large
envelopes of different sizes and colours used to come to her. Sometimes
she would sigh when she opened them and say:--

"Another story come home to roost. Oh, dear, Oh, dear!" and then the
children would be very sorry.

But sometimes she would wave the envelope in the air and say:--"Hooray,
hooray. Here's a sensible Editor. He's taken my story and this is the
proof of it."

At first the children thought 'the Proof' meant the letter the sensible
Editor had written, but they presently got to know that the proof was
long slips of paper with the story printed on them.

Whenever an Editor was sensible there were buns for tea.

One day Peter was going down to the village to get buns to celebrate
the sensibleness of the Editor of the Children's Globe, when he met the
Station Master.

Peter felt very uncomfortable, for he had now had time to think over the
affair of the coal-mine. He did not like to say "Good morning" to the
Station Master, as you usually do to anyone you meet on a lonely road,
because he had a hot feeling, which spread even to his ears, that the
Station Master might not care to speak to a person who had stolen coals.
'Stolen' is a nasty word, but Peter felt it was the right one. So he
looked down, and said Nothing.

It was the Station Master who said "Good morning" as he passed by. And
Peter answered, "Good morning." Then he thought:--

"Perhaps he doesn't know who I am by daylight, or he wouldn't be so
polite."

And he did not like the feeling which thinking this gave him. And then
before he knew what he was going to do he ran after the Station Master,
who stopped when he heard Peter's hasty boots crunching the road,
and coming up with him very breathless and with his ears now quite
magenta-coloured, he said:--

"I don't want you to be polite to me if you don't know me when you see
me."

"Eh?" said the Station Master.

"I thought perhaps you didn't know it was me that took the coals,"
Peter went on, "when you said 'Good morning.' But it was, and I'm sorry.
There."

"Why," said the Station Master, "I wasn't thinking anything at all about
the precious coals. Let bygones be bygones. And where were you off to in
such a hurry?"

"I'm going to buy buns for tea," said Peter.

"I thought you were all so poor," said the Station Master.

"So we are," said Peter, confidentially, "but we always have three
pennyworth of halfpennies for tea whenever Mother sells a story or a
poem or anything."

"Oh," said the Station Master, "so your Mother writes stories, does
she?"

"The beautifulest you ever read," said Peter.

"You ought to be very proud to have such a clever Mother."

"Yes," said Peter, "but she used to play with us more before she had to
be so clever."

"Well," said the Station Master, "I must be getting along. You give us
a look in at the Station whenever you feel so inclined. And as to coals,
it's a word that--well--oh, no, we never mention it, eh?"

"Thank you," said Peter. "I'm very glad it's all straightened out
between us." And he went on across the canal bridge to the village to
get the buns, feeling more comfortable in his mind than he had felt
since the hand of the Station Master had fastened on his collar that
night among the coals.

Next day when they had sent the threefold wave of greeting to Father by
the Green Dragon, and the old gentleman had waved back as usual, Peter
proudly led the way to the station.

"But ought we?" said Bobbie.

"After the coals, she means," Phyllis explained.

"I met the Station Master yesterday," said Peter, in an offhand way,
and he pretended not to hear what Phyllis had said; "he expresspecially
invited us to go down any time we liked."

"After the coals?" repeated Phyllis. "Stop a minute--my bootlace is
undone again."

"It always IS undone again," said Peter, "and the Station Master was
more of a gentleman than you'll ever be, Phil--throwing coal at a chap's
head like that."

Phyllis did up her bootlace and went on in silence, but her shoulders
shook, and presently a fat tear fell off her nose and splashed on the
metal of the railway line. Bobbie saw it.

"Why, what's the matter, darling?" she said, stopping short and putting
her arm round the heaving shoulders.

"He called me un-un-ungentlemanly," sobbed Phyllis. "I didn't never call
him unladylike, not even when he tied my Clorinda to the firewood bundle
and burned her at the stake for a martyr."

Peter had indeed perpetrated this outrage a year or two before.

"Well, you began, you know," said Bobbie, honestly, "about coals and all
that. Don't you think you'd better both unsay everything since the wave,
and let honour be satisfied?"

"I will if Peter will," said Phyllis, sniffling.

"All right," said Peter; "honour is satisfied. Here, use my hankie,
Phil, for goodness' sake, if you've lost yours as usual. I wonder what
you do with them."

"You had my last one," said Phyllis, indignantly, "to tie up the
rabbit-hutch door with. But you're very ungrateful. It's quite right
what it says in the poetry book about sharper than a serpent it is to
have a toothless child--but it means ungrateful when it says toothless.
Miss Lowe told me so."

"All right," said Peter, impatiently, "I'm sorry. THERE! Now will you
come on?"

They reached the station and spent a joyous two hours with the Porter.
He was a worthy man and seemed never tired of answering the questions
that begin with "Why--" which many people in higher ranks of life often
seem weary of.

He told them many things that they had not known before--as, for
instance, that the things that hook carriages together are called
couplings, and that the pipes like great serpents that hang over the
couplings are meant to stop the train with.

"If you could get a holt of one o' them when the train is going and pull
'em apart," said he, "she'd stop dead off with a jerk."

"Who's she?" said Phyllis.

"The train, of course," said the Porter. After that the train was never
again 'It' to the children.

"And you know the thing in the carriages where it says on it, 'Five
pounds' fine for improper use.' If you was to improperly use that, the
train 'ud stop."

"And if you used it properly?" said Roberta.

"It 'ud stop just the same, I suppose," said he, "but it isn't proper
use unless you're being murdered. There was an old lady once--someone
kidded her on it was a refreshment-room bell, and she used it improper,
not being in danger of her life, though hungry, and when the train
stopped and the guard came along expecting to find someone weltering in
their last moments, she says, 'Oh, please, Mister, I'll take a glass of
stout and a bath bun,' she says. And the train was seven minutes behind
her time as it was."

"What did the guard say to the old lady?"

"_I_ dunno," replied the Porter, "but I lay she didn't forget it in a
hurry, whatever it was."

In such delightful conversation the time went by all too quickly.

The Station Master came out once or twice from that sacred inner temple
behind the place where the hole is that they sell you tickets through,
and was most jolly with them all.

"Just as if coal had never been discovered," Phyllis whispered to her
sister.

He gave them each an orange, and promised to take them up into the
signal-box one of these days, when he wasn't so busy.

Several trains went through the station, and Peter noticed for the first
time that engines have numbers on them, like cabs.

"Yes," said the Porter, "I knowed a young gent as used to take down the
numbers of every single one he seed; in a green note-book with silver
corners it was, owing to his father being very well-to-do in the
wholesale stationery."

Peter felt that he could take down numbers, too, even if he was not
the son of a wholesale stationer. As he did not happen to have a green
leather note-book with silver corners, the Porter gave him a yellow
envelope and on it he noted:--

     379
     663

and felt that this was the beginning of what would be a most interesting
collection.

That night at tea he asked Mother if she had a green leather note-book
with silver corners. She had not; but when she heard what he wanted it
for she gave him a little black one.

"It has a few pages torn out," said she; "but it will hold quite a lot
of numbers, and when it's full I'll give you another. I'm so glad you
like the railway. Only, please, you mustn't walk on the line."

"Not if we face the way the train's coming?" asked Peter, after a gloomy
pause, in which glances of despair were exchanged.

"No--really not," said Mother.

Then Phyllis said, "Mother, didn't YOU ever walk on the railway lines
when you were little?"

Mother was an honest and honourable Mother, so she had to say, "Yes."

"Well, then," said Phyllis.

"But, darlings, you don't know how fond I am of you. What should I do if
you got hurt?"

"Are you fonder of us than Granny was of you when you were little?"
Phyllis asked. Bobbie made signs to her to stop, but Phyllis never did
see signs, no matter how plain they might be.

Mother did not answer for a minute. She got up to put more water in the
teapot.

"No one," she said at last, "ever loved anyone more than my mother loved
me."

Then she was quiet again, and Bobbie kicked Phyllis hard under the
table, because Bobbie understood a little bit the thoughts that were
making Mother so quiet--the thoughts of the time when Mother was a
little girl and was all the world to HER mother. It seems so easy and
natural to run to Mother when one is in trouble. Bobbie understood a
little how people do not leave off running to their mothers when they
are in trouble even when they are grown up, and she thought she knew a
little what it must be to be sad, and have no mother to run to any more.

So she kicked Phyllis, who said:--

"What are you kicking me like that for, Bob?"

And then Mother laughed a little and sighed and said:--

"Very well, then. Only let me be sure you do know which way the trains
come--and don't walk on the line near the tunnel or near corners."

"Trains keep to the left like carriages," said Peter, "so if we keep to
the right, we're bound to see them coming."

"Very well," said Mother, and I dare say you think that she ought not
to have said it. But she remembered about when she was a little girl
herself, and she did say it--and neither her own children nor you nor
any other children in the world could ever understand exactly what it
cost her to do it. Only some few of you, like Bobbie, may understand a
very little bit.

It was the very next day that Mother had to stay in bed because her head
ached so. Her hands were burning hot, and she would not eat anything,
and her throat was very sore.

"If I was you, Mum," said Mrs. Viney, "I should take and send for the
doctor. There's a lot of catchy complaints a-going about just now. My
sister's eldest--she took a chill and it went to her inside, two years
ago come Christmas, and she's never been the same gell since."

Mother wouldn't at first, but in the evening she felt so much worse that
Peter was sent to the house in the village that had three laburnum trees
by the gate, and on the gate a brass plate with W. W. Forrest, M.D., on
it.

W. W. Forrest, M.D., came at once. He talked to Peter on the way back.
He seemed a most charming and sensible man, interested in railways, and
rabbits, and really important things.

When he had seen Mother, he said it was influenza.

"Now, Lady Grave-airs," he said in the hall to Bobbie, "I suppose you'll
want to be head-nurse."

"Of course," said she.

"Well, then, I'll send down some medicine. Keep up a good fire. Have
some strong beef tea made ready to give her as soon as the fever goes
down. She can have grapes now, and beef essence--and soda-water and
milk, and you'd better get in a bottle of brandy. The best brandy. Cheap
brandy is worse than poison."

She asked him to write it all down, and he did.

When Bobbie showed Mother the list he had written, Mother laughed. It
WAS a laugh, Bobbie decided, though it was rather odd and feeble.

"Nonsense," said Mother, laying in bed with eyes as bright as beads.
"I can't afford all that rubbish. Tell Mrs. Viney to boil two pounds of
scrag-end of the neck for your dinners to-morrow, and I can have some
of the broth. Yes, I should like some more water now, love. And will you
get a basin and sponge my hands?"

Roberta obeyed. When she had done everything she could to make Mother
less uncomfortable, she went down to the others. Her cheeks were very
red, her lips set tight, and her eyes almost as bright as Mother's.

She told them what the Doctor had said, and what Mother had said.

"And now," said she, when she had told all, "there's no one but us to do
anything, and we've got to do it. I've got the shilling for the mutton."

"We can do without the beastly mutton," said Peter; "bread and butter
will support life. People have lived on less on desert islands many a
time."

"Of course," said his sister. And Mrs. Viney was sent to the village to
get as much brandy and soda-water and beef tea as she could buy for a
shilling.

"But even if we never have anything to eat at all," said Phyllis, "you
can't get all those other things with our dinner money."

"No," said Bobbie, frowning, "we must find out some other way. Now
THINK, everybody, just as hard as ever you can."

They did think. And presently they talked. And later, when Bobbie had
gone up to sit with Mother in case she wanted anything, the other two
were very busy with scissors and a white sheet, and a paint brush, and
the pot of Brunswick black that Mrs. Viney used for grates and fenders.
They did not manage to do what they wished, exactly, with the first
sheet, so they took another out of the linen cupboard. It did not occur
to them that they were spoiling good sheets which cost good money. They
only knew that they were making a good--but what they were making comes
later.

Bobbie's bed had been moved into Mother's room, and several times in
the night she got up to mend the fire, and to give her mother milk and
soda-water. Mother talked to herself a good deal, but it did not seem
to mean anything. And once she woke up suddenly and called out: "Mamma,
mamma!" and Bobbie knew she was calling for Granny, and that she had
forgotten that it was no use calling, because Granny was dead.

In the early morning Bobbie heard her name and jumped out of bed and ran
to Mother's bedside.

"Oh--ah, yes--I think I was asleep," said Mother. "My poor little duck,
how tired you'll be--I do hate to give you all this trouble."

"Trouble!" said Bobbie.

"Ah, don't cry, sweet," Mother said; "I shall be all right in a day or
two."

And Bobbie said, "Yes," and tried to smile.

When you are used to ten hours of solid sleep, to get up three or four
times in your sleep-time makes you feel as though you had been up all
night. Bobbie felt quite stupid and her eyes were sore and stiff, but
she tidied the room, and arranged everything neatly before the Doctor
came.

This was at half-past eight.

"Everything going on all right, little Nurse?" he said at the front
door. "Did you get the brandy?"

"I've got the brandy," said Bobbie, "in a little flat bottle."

"I didn't see the grapes or the beef tea, though," said he.

"No," said Bobbie, firmly, "but you will to-morrow. And there's some
beef stewing in the oven for beef tea."

"Who told you to do that?" he asked.

"I noticed what Mother did when Phil had mumps."

"Right," said the Doctor. "Now you get your old woman to sit with your
mother, and then you eat a good breakfast, and go straight to bed and
sleep till dinner-time. We can't afford to have the head-nurse ill."

He was really quite a nice doctor.

When the 9.15 came out of the tunnel that morning the old gentleman in
the first-class carriage put down his newspaper, and got ready to wave
his hand to the three children on the fence. But this morning there were
not three. There was only one. And that was Peter.

Peter was not on the railings either, as usual. He was standing in front
of them in an attitude like that of a show-man showing off the animals
in a menagerie, or of the kind clergyman when he points with a wand at
the 'Scenes from Palestine,' when there is a magic-lantern and he is
explaining it.

Peter was pointing, too. And what he was pointing at was a large white
sheet nailed against the fence. On the sheet there were thick black
letters more than a foot long.

Some of them had run a little, because of Phyllis having put the
Brunswick black on too eagerly, but the words were quite easy to read.

And this what the old gentleman and several other people in the train
read in the large black letters on the white sheet:--

     LOOK OUT AT THE STATION.

A good many people did look out at the station and were disappointed,
for they saw nothing unusual. The old gentleman looked out, too, and at
first he too saw nothing more unusual than the gravelled platform and
the sunshine and the wallflowers and forget-me-nots in the station
borders. It was only just as the train was beginning to puff and pull
itself together to start again that he saw Phyllis. She was quite out of
breath with running.

"Oh," she said, "I thought I'd missed you. My bootlaces would keep
coming down and I fell over them twice. Here, take it."

She thrust a warm, dampish letter into his hand as the train moved.

He leaned back in his corner and opened the letter. This is what he
read:--

"Dear Mr. We do not know your name.

Mother is ill and the doctor says to give her the things at the end of
the letter, but she says she can't aford it, and to get mutton for
us and she will have the broth. We do not know anybody here but you,
because Father is away and we do not know the address. Father will pay
you, or if he has lost all his money, or anything, Peter will pay you
when he is a man. We promise it on our honer. I.O.U. for all the things
Mother wants.

     "sined Peter.

"Will you give the parsel to the Station Master, because of us not
knowing what train you come down by? Say it is for Peter that was sorry
about the coals and he will know all right.

     "Roberta.
     "Phyllis.
     "Peter."

Then came the list of things the Doctor had ordered.

The old gentleman read it through once, and his eyebrows went up. He
read it twice and smiled a little. When he had read it thrice, he put it
in his pocket and went on reading The Times.

At about six that evening there was a knock at the back door. The three
children rushed to open it, and there stood the friendly Porter, who had
told them so many interesting things about railways. He dumped down a
big hamper on the kitchen flags.

"Old gent," he said; "he asked me to fetch it up straight away."

"Thank you very much," said Peter, and then, as the Porter lingered, he
added:--

"I'm most awfully sorry I haven't got twopence to give you like Father
does, but--"

"You drop it if you please," said the Porter, indignantly. "I wasn't
thinking about no tuppences. I only wanted to say I was sorry your Mamma
wasn't so well, and to ask how she finds herself this evening--and
I've fetched her along a bit of sweetbrier, very sweet to smell it is.
Twopence indeed," said he, and produced a bunch of sweetbrier from his
hat, "just like a conjurer," as Phyllis remarked afterwards.

"Thank you very much," said Peter, "and I beg your pardon about the
twopence."

"No offence," said the Porter, untruly but politely, and went.

Then the children undid the hamper. First there was straw, and then
there were fine shavings, and then came all the things they had asked
for, and plenty of them, and then a good many things they had not asked
for; among others peaches and port wine and two chickens, a cardboard
box of big red roses with long stalks, and a tall thin green bottle
of lavender water, and three smaller fatter bottles of eau-de-Cologne.
There was a letter, too.

"Dear Roberta and Phyllis and Peter," it said; "here are the things you
want. Your mother will want to know where they came from. Tell her they
were sent by a friend who heard she was ill. When she is well again you
must tell her all about it, of course. And if she says you ought not to
have asked for the things, tell her that I say you were quite right,
and that I hope she will forgive me for taking the liberty of allowing
myself a very great pleasure."

The letter was signed G. P. something that the children couldn't read.

"I think we WERE right," said Phyllis.

"Right? Of course we were right," said Bobbie.

"All the same," said Peter, with his hands in his pockets, "I don't
exactly look forward to telling Mother the whole truth about it."

"We're not to do it till she's well," said Bobbie, "and when she's well
we shall be so happy we shan't mind a little fuss like that. Oh, just
look at the roses! I must take them up to her."

"And the sweetbrier," said Phyllis, sniffing it loudly; "don't forget
the sweetbrier."

"As if I should!" said Roberta. "Mother told me the other day there was
a thick hedge of it at her mother's house when she was a little girl."



Chapter IV. The engine-burglar.


What was left of the second sheet and the Brunswick black came in very
nicely to make a banner bearing the legend

     SHE IS NEARLY WELL THANK YOU

and this was displayed to the Green Dragon about a fortnight after the
arrival of the wonderful hamper. The old gentleman saw it, and waved
a cheerful response from the train. And when this had been done the
children saw that now was the time when they must tell Mother what they
had done when she was ill. And it did not seem nearly so easy as they
had thought it would be. But it had to be done. And it was done. Mother
was extremely angry. She was seldom angry, and now she was angrier than
they had ever known her. This was horrible. But it was much worse when
she suddenly began to cry. Crying is catching, I believe, like measles
and whooping-cough. At any rate, everyone at once found itself taking
part in a crying-party.

Mother stopped first. She dried her eyes and then she said:--

"I'm sorry I was so angry, darlings, because I know you didn't
understand."

"We didn't mean to be naughty, Mammy," sobbed Bobbie, and Peter and
Phyllis sniffed.

"Now, listen," said Mother; "it's quite true that we're poor, but
we have enough to live on. You mustn't go telling everyone about our
affairs--it's not right. And you must never, never, never ask strangers
to give you things. Now always remember that--won't you?"

They all hugged her and rubbed their damp cheeks against hers and
promised that they would.

"And I'll write a letter to your old gentleman, and I shall tell him
that I didn't approve--oh, of course I shall thank him, too, for
his kindness. It's YOU I don't approve of, my darlings, not the old
gentleman. He was as kind as ever he could be. And you can give the
letter to the Station Master to give him--and we won't say any more
about it."

Afterwards, when the children were alone, Bobbie said:--

"Isn't Mother splendid? You catch any other grown-up saying they were
sorry they had been angry."

"Yes," said Peter, "she IS splendid; but it's rather awful when she's
angry."

"She's like Avenging and Bright in the song," said Phyllis. "I should
like to look at her if it wasn't so awful. She looks so beautiful when
she's really downright furious."

They took the letter down to the Station Master.

"I thought you said you hadn't got any friends except in London," said
he.

"We've made him since," said Peter.

"But he doesn't live hereabouts?"

"No--we just know him on the railway."

Then the Station Master retired to that sacred inner temple behind the
little window where the tickets are sold, and the children went down
to the Porters' room and talked to the Porter. They learned several
interesting things from him--among others that his name was Perks,
that he was married and had three children, that the lamps in front of
engines are called head-lights and the ones at the back tail-lights.

"And that just shows," whispered Phyllis, "that trains really ARE
dragons in disguise, with proper heads and tails."

It was on this day that the children first noticed that all engines are
not alike.

"Alike?" said the Porter, whose name was Perks, "lor, love you, no,
Miss. No more alike nor what you an' me are. That little 'un without
a tender as went by just now all on her own, that was a tank, that
was--she's off to do some shunting t'other side o' Maidbridge. That's as
it might be you, Miss. Then there's goods engines, great, strong things
with three wheels each side--joined with rods to strengthen 'em--as it
might be me. Then there's main-line engines as it might be this
'ere young gentleman when he grows up and wins all the races at 'is
school--so he will. The main-line engine she's built for speed as well
as power. That's one to the 9.15 up."

"The Green Dragon," said Phyllis.

"We calls her the Snail, Miss, among ourselves," said the Porter. "She's
oftener be'ind'and nor any train on the line."

"But the engine's green," said Phyllis.

"Yes, Miss," said Perks, "so's a snail some seasons o' the year."

The children agreed as they went home to dinner that the Porter was most
delightful company.

Next day was Roberta's birthday. In the afternoon she was politely but
firmly requested to get out of the way and keep there till tea-time.

"You aren't to see what we're going to do till it's done; it's a
glorious surprise," said Phyllis.

And Roberta went out into the garden all alone. She tried to be
grateful, but she felt she would much rather have helped in whatever it
was than have to spend her birthday afternoon by herself, no matter how
glorious the surprise might be.

Now that she was alone, she had time to think, and one of the things she
thought of most was what mother had said in one of those feverish nights
when her hands were so hot and her eyes so bright.

The words were: "Oh, what a doctor's bill there'll be for this!"

She walked round and round the garden among the rose-bushes that hadn't
any roses yet, only buds, and the lilac bushes and syringas and American
currants, and the more she thought of the doctor's bill, the less she
liked the thought of it.

And presently she made up her mind. She went out through the side door
of the garden and climbed up the steep field to where the road runs
along by the canal. She walked along until she came to the bridge that
crosses the canal and leads to the village, and here she waited. It was
very pleasant in the sunshine to lean one's elbows on the warm stone
of the bridge and look down at the blue water of the canal. Bobbie had
never seen any other canal, except the Regent's Canal, and the water of
that is not at all a pretty colour. And she had never seen any river at
all except the Thames, which also would be all the better if its face
was washed.

Perhaps the children would have loved the canal as much as the railway,
but for two things. One was that they had found the railway FIRST--on
that first, wonderful morning when the house and the country and the
moors and rocks and great hills were all new to them. They had not found
the canal till some days later. The other reason was that everyone on
the railway had been kind to them--the Station Master, the Porter, and
the old gentleman who waved. And the people on the canal were anything
but kind.

The people on the canal were, of course, the bargees, who steered the
slow barges up and down, or walked beside the old horses that trampled
up the mud of the towing-path, and strained at the long tow-ropes.

Peter had once asked one of the bargees the time, and had been told
to "get out of that," in a tone so fierce that he did not stop to say
anything about his having just as much right on the towing-path as the
man himself. Indeed, he did not even think of saying it till some time
later.

Then another day when the children thought they would like to fish in
the canal, a boy in a barge threw lumps of coal at them, and one of
these hit Phyllis on the back of the neck. She was just stooping down to
tie up her bootlace--and though the coal hardly hurt at all it made her
not care very much about going on fishing.

On the bridge, however, Roberta felt quite safe, because she could look
down on the canal, and if any boy showed signs of meaning to throw coal,
she could duck behind the parapet.

Presently there was a sound of wheels, which was just what she expected.

The wheels were the wheels of the Doctor's dogcart, and in the cart, of
course, was the Doctor.

He pulled up, and called out:--

"Hullo, head nurse! Want a lift?"

"I wanted to see you," said Bobbie.

"Your mother's not worse, I hope?" said the Doctor.

"No--but--"

"Well, skip in, then, and we'll go for a drive."

Roberta climbed in and the brown horse was made to turn round--which it
did not like at all, for it was looking forward to its tea--I mean its
oats.

"This IS jolly," said Bobbie, as the dogcart flew along the road by the
canal.

"We could throw a stone down any one of your three chimneys," said the
Doctor, as they passed the house.

"Yes," said Bobbie, "but you'd have to be a jolly good shot."

"How do you know I'm not?" said the Doctor. "Now, then, what's the
trouble?"

Bobbie fidgeted with the hook of the driving apron.

"Come, out with it," said the Doctor.

"It's rather hard, you see," said Bobbie, "to out with it; because of
what Mother said."

"What DID Mother say?"

"She said I wasn't to go telling everyone that we're poor. But you
aren't everyone, are you?"

"Not at all," said the Doctor, cheerfully. "Well?"

"Well, I know doctors are very extravagant--I mean expensive, and Mrs.
Viney told me that her doctoring only cost her twopence a week because
she belonged to a Club."

"Yes?"

"You see she told me what a good doctor you were, and I asked her how
she could afford you, because she's much poorer than we are. I've been
in her house and I know. And then she told me about the Club, and I
thought I'd ask you--and--oh, I don't want Mother to be worried! Can't
we be in the Club, too, the same as Mrs. Viney?"

The Doctor was silent. He was rather poor himself, and he had been
pleased at getting a new family to attend. So I think his feelings at
that minute were rather mixed.

"You aren't cross with me, are you?" said Bobbie, in a very small voice.

The Doctor roused himself.

"Cross? How could I be? You're a very sensible little woman. Now look
here, don't you worry. I'll make it all right with your Mother, even if
I have to make a special brand-new Club all for her. Look here, this is
where the Aqueduct begins."

"What's an Aque--what's its name?" asked Bobbie.

"A water bridge," said the Doctor. "Look."

The road rose to a bridge over the canal. To the left was a steep rocky
cliff with trees and shrubs growing in the cracks of the rock. And the
canal here left off running along the top of the hill and started to run
on a bridge of its own--a great bridge with tall arches that went right
across the valley.

Bobbie drew a long breath.

"It IS grand, isn't it?" she said. "It's like pictures in the History of
Rome."

"Right!" said the Doctor, "that's just exactly what it IS like.
The Romans were dead nuts on aqueducts. It's a splendid piece of
engineering."

"I thought engineering was making engines."

"Ah, there are different sorts of engineering--making road and bridges
and tunnels is one kind. And making fortifications is another. Well, we
must be turning back. And, remember, you aren't to worry about doctor's
bills or you'll be ill yourself, and then I'll send you in a bill as
long as the aqueduct."

When Bobbie had parted from the Doctor at the top of the field that ran
down from the road to Three Chimneys, she could not feel that she had
done wrong. She knew that Mother would perhaps think differently.
But Bobbie felt that for once she was the one who was right, and she
scrambled down the rocky slope with a really happy feeling.

Phyllis and Peter met her at the back door. They were unnaturally clean
and neat, and Phyllis had a red bow in her hair. There was only just
time for Bobbie to make herself tidy and tie up her hair with a blue bow
before a little bell rang.

"There!" said Phyllis, "that's to show the surprise is ready. Now
you wait till the bell rings again and then you may come into the
dining-room."

So Bobbie waited.

"Tinkle, tinkle," said the little bell, and Bobbie went into the
dining-room, feeling rather shy. Directly she opened the door she found
herself, as it seemed, in a new world of light and flowers and singing.
Mother and Peter and Phyllis were standing in a row at the end of the
table. The shutters were shut and there were twelve candles on the
table, one for each of Roberta's years. The table was covered with a
sort of pattern of flowers, and at Roberta's place was a thick wreath of
forget-me-nots and several most interesting little packages. And Mother
and Phyllis and Peter were singing--to the first part of the tune of St.
Patrick's Day. Roberta knew that Mother had written the words on purpose
for her birthday. It was a little way of Mother's on birthdays. It
had begun on Bobbie's fourth birthday when Phyllis was a baby. Bobbie
remembered learning the verses to say to Father 'for a surprise.' She
wondered if Mother had remembered, too. The four-year-old verse had
been:--

     Daddy dear, I'm only four
     And I'd rather not be more.
     Four's the nicest age to be,
     Two and two and one and three.
     What I love is two and two,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and you.
     What you love is one and three,
     Mother, Peter, Phil, and me.
     Give your little girl a kiss
     Because she learned and told you this.

The song the others were singing now went like this:--

     Our darling Roberta,
     No sorrow shall hurt her
     If we can prevent it
        Her whole life long.
     Her birthday's our fete day,
     We'll make it our great day,
     And give her our presents
        And sing her our song.
     May pleasures attend her
     And may the Fates send her
     The happiest journey
        Along her life's way.
     With skies bright above her
     And dear ones to love her!
     Dear Bob!  Many happy
        Returns of the day!

When they had finished singing they cried, "Three cheers for our
Bobbie!" and gave them very loudly. Bobbie felt exactly as though she
were going to cry--you know that odd feeling in the bridge of your nose
and the pricking in your eyelids? But before she had time to begin they
were all kissing and hugging her.

"Now," said Mother, "look at your presents."

They were very nice presents. There was a green and red needle-book that
Phyllis had made herself in secret moments. There was a darling little
silver brooch of Mother's shaped like a buttercup, which Bobbie had
known and loved for years, but which she had never, never thought would
come to be her very own. There was also a pair of blue glass vases from
Mrs. Viney. Roberta had seen and admired them in the village shop. And
there were three birthday cards with pretty pictures and wishes.

Mother fitted the forget-me-not crown on Bobbie's brown head.

"And now look at the table," she said.

There was a cake on the table covered with white sugar, with 'Dear
Bobbie' on it in pink sweets, and there were buns and jam; but
the nicest thing was that the big table was almost covered with
flowers--wallflowers were laid all round the tea-tray--there was a ring
of forget-me-nots round each plate. The cake had a wreath of white lilac
round it, and in the middle was something that looked like a pattern all
done with single blooms of lilac or wallflower or laburnum.

"It's a map--a map of the railway!" cried Peter. "Look--those lilac
lines are the metals--and there's the station done in brown wallflowers.
The laburnum is the train, and there are the signal-boxes, and the road
up to here--and those fat red daisies are us three waving to the old
gentleman--that's him, the pansy in the laburnum train."

"And there's 'Three Chimneys' done in the purple primroses," said
Phyllis. "And that little tiny rose-bud is Mother looking out for us
when we're late for tea. Peter invented it all, and we got all the
flowers from the station. We thought you'd like it better."

"That's my present," said Peter, suddenly dumping down his adored
steam-engine on the table in front of her. Its tender had been lined
with fresh white paper, and was full of sweets.

"Oh, Peter!" cried Bobbie, quite overcome by this munificence, "not your
own dear little engine that you're so fond of?"

"Oh, no," said Peter, very promptly, "not the engine. Only the sweets."

Bobbie couldn't help her face changing a little--not so much because she
was disappointed at not getting the engine, as because she had thought
it so very noble of Peter, and now she felt she had been silly to think
it. Also she felt she must have seemed greedy to expect the engine as
well as the sweets. So her face changed. Peter saw it. He hesitated a
minute; then his face changed, too, and he said: "I mean not ALL the
engine. I'll let you go halves if you like."

"You're a brick," cried Bobbie; "it's a splendid present." She said no
more aloud, but to herself she said:--

"That was awfully jolly decent of Peter because I know he didn't mean
to. Well, the broken half shall be my half of the engine, and I'll get
it mended and give it back to Peter for his birthday."--"Yes, Mother
dear, I should like to cut the cake," she added, and tea began.

It was a delightful birthday. After tea Mother played games with
them--any game they liked--and of course their first choice was
blindman's-buff, in the course of which Bobbie's forget-me-not wreath
twisted itself crookedly over one of her ears and stayed there. Then,
when it was near bed-time and time to calm down, Mother had a lovely new
story to read to them.

"You won't sit up late working, will you, Mother?" Bobbie asked as they
said good night.

And Mother said no, she wouldn't--she would only just write to Father
and then go to bed.

But when Bobbie crept down later to bring up her presents--for she felt
she really could not be separated from them all night--Mother was not
writing, but leaning her head on her arms and her arms on the table. I
think it was rather good of Bobbie to slip quietly away, saying over and
over, "She doesn't want me to know she's unhappy, and I won't know; I
won't know." But it made a sad end to the birthday.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

The very next morning Bobbie began to watch her opportunity to get
Peter's engine mended secretly. And the opportunity came the very next
afternoon.

Mother went by train to the nearest town to do shopping. When she went
there, she always went to the Post-office. Perhaps to post her letters
to Father, for she never gave them to the children or Mrs. Viney to
post, and she never went to the village herself. Peter and Phyllis went
with her. Bobbie wanted an excuse not to go, but try as she would she
couldn't think of a good one. And just when she felt that all was lost,
her frock caught on a big nail by the kitchen door and there was a great
criss-cross tear all along the front of the skirt. I assure you this was
really an accident. So the others pitied her and went without her,
for there was no time for her to change, because they were rather late
already and had to hurry to the station to catch the train.

When they had gone, Bobbie put on her everyday frock, and went down to
the railway. She did not go into the station, but she went along the
line to the end of the platform where the engine is when the down train
is alongside the platform--the place where there are a water tank and
a long, limp, leather hose, like an elephant's trunk. She hid behind a
bush on the other side of the railway. She had the toy engine done up in
brown paper, and she waited patiently with it under her arm.

Then when the next train came in and stopped, Bobbie went across the
metals of the up-line and stood beside the engine. She had never been so
close to an engine before. It looked much larger and harder than she
had expected, and it made her feel very small indeed, and, somehow, very
soft--as if she could very, very easily be hurt rather badly.

"I know what silk-worms feel like now," said Bobbie to herself.

The engine-driver and fireman did not see her. They were leaning out
on the other side, telling the Porter a tale about a dog and a leg of
mutton.

"If you please," said Roberta--but the engine was blowing off steam and
no one heard her.

"If you please, Mr. Engineer," she spoke a little louder, but the Engine
happened to speak at the same moment, and of course Roberta's soft
little voice hadn't a chance.

It seemed to her that the only way would be to climb on to the engine
and pull at their coats. The step was high, but she got her knee on it,
and clambered into the cab; she stumbled and fell on hands and knees on
the base of the great heap of coals that led up to the square opening in
the tender. The engine was not above the weaknesses of its fellows; it
was making a great deal more noise than there was the slightest need
for. And just as Roberta fell on the coals, the engine-driver, who
had turned without seeing her, started the engine, and when Bobbie had
picked herself up, the train was moving--not fast, but much too fast for
her to get off.

All sorts of dreadful thoughts came to her all together in one horrible
flash. There were such things as express trains that went on, she
supposed, for hundreds of miles without stopping. Suppose this should be
one of them? How would she get home again? She had no money to pay for
the return journey.

"And I've no business here. I'm an engine-burglar--that's what I am,"
she thought. "I shouldn't wonder if they could lock me up for this." And
the train was going faster and faster.

There was something in her throat that made it impossible for her to
speak. She tried twice. The men had their backs to her. They were doing
something to things that looked like taps.

Suddenly she put out her hand and caught hold of the nearest sleeve. The
man turned with a start, and he and Roberta stood for a minute looking
at each other in silence. Then the silence was broken by them both.

The man said, "Here's a bloomin' go!" and Roberta burst into tears.

The other man said he was blooming well blest--or something like it--but
though naturally surprised they were not exactly unkind.

"You're a naughty little gell, that's what you are," said the fireman,
and the engine-driver said:--

"Daring little piece, I call her," but they made her sit down on an iron
seat in the cab and told her to stop crying and tell them what she meant
by it.

She did stop, as soon as she could. One thing that helped her was the
thought that Peter would give almost his ears to be in her place--on a
real engine--really going. The children had often wondered whether any
engine-driver could be found noble enough to take them for a ride on an
engine--and now there she was. She dried her eyes and sniffed earnestly.

"Now, then," said the fireman, "out with it. What do you mean by it,
eh?"

"Oh, please," sniffed Bobbie.

"Try again," said the engine-driver, encouragingly.

Bobbie tried again.

"Please, Mr. Engineer," she said, "I did call out to you from the
line, but you didn't hear me--and I just climbed up to touch you on the
arm--quite gently I meant to do it--and then I fell into the coals--and
I am so sorry if I frightened you. Oh, don't be cross--oh, please
don't!" She sniffed again.

"We ain't so much CROSS," said the fireman, "as interested like. It
ain't every day a little gell tumbles into our coal bunker outer the
sky, is it, Bill? What did you DO it for--eh?"

"That's the point," agreed the engine-driver; "what did you do it FOR?"

Bobbie found that she had not quite stopped crying. The engine-driver
patted her on the back and said: "Here, cheer up, Mate. It ain't so bad
as all that 'ere, I'll be bound."

"I wanted," said Bobbie, much cheered to find herself addressed as
'Mate'--"I only wanted to ask you if you'd be so kind as to mend this."
She picked up the brown-paper parcel from among the coals and undid the
string with hot, red fingers that trembled.

Her feet and legs felt the scorch of the engine fire, but her shoulders
felt the wild chill rush of the air. The engine lurched and shook and
rattled, and as they shot under a bridge the engine seemed to shout in
her ears.

The fireman shovelled on coals.

Bobbie unrolled the brown paper and disclosed the toy engine.

"I thought," she said wistfully, "that perhaps you'd mend this for
me--because you're an engineer, you know."

The engine-driver said he was blowed if he wasn't blest.

"I'm blest if I ain't blowed," remarked the fireman.

But the engine-driver took the little engine and looked at it--and the
fireman ceased for an instant to shovel coal, and looked, too.

"It's like your precious cheek," said the engine-driver--"whatever made
you think we'd be bothered tinkering penny toys?"

"I didn't mean it for precious cheek," said Bobbie; "only everybody that
has anything to do with railways is so kind and good, I didn't think
you'd mind. You don't really--do you?" she added, for she had seen a not
unkindly wink pass between the two.

"My trade's driving of an engine, not mending her, especially such a
hout-size in engines as this 'ere," said Bill. "An' 'ow are we a-goin'
to get you back to your sorrowing friends and relations, and all be
forgiven and forgotten?"

"If you'll put me down next time you stop," said Bobbie, firmly, though
her heart beat fiercely against her arm as she clasped her hands, "and
lend me the money for a third-class ticket, I'll pay you back--honour
bright. I'm not a confidence trick like in the newspapers--really, I'm
not."

"You're a little lady, every inch," said Bill, relenting suddenly
and completely. "We'll see you gets home safe. An' about this
engine--Jim--ain't you got ne'er a pal as can use a soldering iron?
Seems to me that's about all the little bounder wants doing to it."

"That's what Father said," Bobbie explained eagerly. "What's that for?"

She pointed to a little brass wheel that he had turned as he spoke.

"That's the injector."

"In--what?"

"Injector to fill up the boiler."

"Oh," said Bobbie, mentally registering the fact to tell the others;
"that IS interesting."

"This 'ere's the automatic brake," Bill went on, flattered by her
enthusiasm. "You just move this 'ere little handle--do it with one
finger, you can--and the train jolly soon stops. That's what they call
the Power of Science in the newspapers."

He showed her two little dials, like clock faces, and told her how one
showed how much steam was going, and the other showed if the brake was
working properly.

By the time she had seen him shut off steam with a big shining steel
handle, Bobbie knew more about the inside working of an engine than she
had ever thought there was to know, and Jim had promised that his second
cousin's wife's brother should solder the toy engine, or Jim would know
the reason why. Besides all the knowledge she had gained Bobbie felt
that she and Bill and Jim were now friends for life, and that they had
wholly and forever forgiven her for stumbling uninvited among the sacred
coals of their tender.

At Stacklepoole Junction she parted from them with warm expressions of
mutual regard. They handed her over to the guard of a returning train--a
friend of theirs--and she had the joy of knowing what guards do in their
secret fastnesses, and understood how, when you pull the communication
cord in railway carriages, a wheel goes round under the guard's nose and
a loud bell rings in his ears. She asked the guard why his van smelt
so fishy, and learned that he had to carry a lot of fish every day, and
that the wetness in the hollows of the corrugated floor had all drained
out of boxes full of plaice and cod and mackerel and soles and smelts.

Bobbie got home in time for tea, and she felt as though her mind would
burst with all that had been put into it since she parted from the
others. How she blessed the nail that had torn her frock!

"Where have you been?" asked the others.

"To the station, of course," said Roberta. But she would not tell a word
of her adventures till the day appointed, when she mysteriously led them
to the station at the hour of the 3.19's transit, and proudly introduced
them to her friends, Bill and Jim. Jim's second cousin's wife's brother
had not been unworthy of the sacred trust reposed in him. The toy engine
was, literally, as good as new.

"Good-bye--oh, good-bye," said Bobbie, just before the engine screamed
ITS good-bye. "I shall always, always love you--and Jim's second
cousin's wife's brother as well!"

And as the three children went home up the hill, Peter hugging the
engine, now quite its own self again, Bobbie told, with joyous leaps of
the heart, the story of how she had been an Engine-burglar.



Chapter V. Prisoners and captives.


It was one day when Mother had gone to Maidbridge. She had gone alone,
but the children were to go to the station to meet her. And, loving the
station as they did, it was only natural that they should be there a
good hour before there was any chance of Mother's train arriving, even
if the train were punctual, which was most unlikely. No doubt they would
have been just as early, even if it had been a fine day, and all the
delights of woods and fields and rocks and rivers had been open to them.
But it happened to be a very wet day and, for July, very cold. There was
a wild wind that drove flocks of dark purple clouds across the sky "like
herds of dream-elephants," as Phyllis said. And the rain stung sharply,
so that the way to the station was finished at a run. Then the rain fell
faster and harder, and beat slantwise against the windows of the booking
office and of the chill place that had General Waiting Room on its door.

"It's like being in a besieged castle," Phyllis said; "look at the
arrows of the foe striking against the battlements!"

"It's much more like a great garden-squirt," said Peter.

They decided to wait on the up side, for the down platform looked very
wet indeed, and the rain was driving right into the little bleak shelter
where down-passengers have to wait for their trains.

The hour would be full of incident and of interest, for there would be
two up trains and one down to look at before the one that should bring
Mother back.

"Perhaps it'll have stopped raining by then," said Bobbie; "anyhow, I'm
glad I brought Mother's waterproof and umbrella."

They went into the desert spot labelled General Waiting Room, and the
time passed pleasantly enough in a game of advertisements. You know the
game, of course? It is something like dumb Crambo. The players take
it in turns to go out, and then come back and look as like some
advertisement as they can, and the others have to guess what
advertisement it is meant to be. Bobbie came in and sat down under
Mother's umbrella and made a sharp face, and everyone knew she was the
fox who sits under the umbrella in the advertisement. Phyllis tried to
make a Magic Carpet of Mother's waterproof, but it would not stand out
stiff and raft-like as a Magic Carpet should, and nobody could guess
it. Everyone thought Peter was carrying things a little too far when he
blacked his face all over with coal-dust and struck a spidery attitude
and said he was the blot that advertises somebody's Blue Black Writing
Fluid.

It was Phyllis's turn again, and she was trying to look like the Sphinx
that advertises What's-his-name's Personally Conducted Tours up the Nile
when the sharp ting of the signal announced the up train. The children
rushed out to see it pass. On its engine were the particular driver
and fireman who were now numbered among the children's dearest friends.
Courtesies passed between them. Jim asked after the toy engine, and
Bobbie pressed on his acceptance a moist, greasy package of toffee that
she had made herself.

Charmed by this attention, the engine-driver consented to consider her
request that some day he would take Peter for a ride on the engine.

"Stand back, Mates," cried the engine-driver, suddenly, "and horf she
goes."

And sure enough, off the train went. The children watched the
tail-lights of the train till it disappeared round the curve of the
line, and then turned to go back to the dusty freedom of the General
Waiting Room and the joys of the advertisement game.

They expected to see just one or two people, the end of the procession
of passengers who had given up their tickets and gone away. Instead, the
platform round the door of the station had a dark blot round it, and the
dark blot was a crowd of people.

"Oh!" cried Peter, with a thrill of joyous excitement, "something's
happened! Come on!"

They ran down the platform. When they got to the crowd, they could, of
course, see nothing but the damp backs and elbows of the people on the
crowd's outside. Everybody was talking at once. It was evident that
something had happened.

"It's my belief he's nothing worse than a natural," said a
farmerish-looking person. Peter saw his red, clean-shaven face as he
spoke.

"If you ask me, I should say it was a Police Court case," said a young
man with a black bag.

"Not it; the Infirmary more like--"

Then the voice of the Station Master was heard, firm and official:--

"Now, then--move along there. I'll attend to this, if YOU please."

But the crowd did not move. And then came a voice that thrilled the
children through and through. For it spoke in a foreign language. And,
what is more, it was a language that they had never heard. They had
heard French spoken and German. Aunt Emma knew German, and used to sing
a song about bedeuten and zeiten and bin and sin. Nor was it Latin.
Peter had been in Latin for four terms.

It was some comfort, anyhow, to find that none of the crowd understood
the foreign language any better than the children did.

"What's that he's saying?" asked the farmer, heavily.

"Sounds like French to me," said the Station Master, who had once been
to Boulogne for the day.

"It isn't French!" cried Peter.

"What is it, then?" asked more than one voice. The crowd fell back a
little to see who had spoken, and Peter pressed forward, so that when
the crowd closed up again he was in the front rank.

"I don't know what it is," said Peter, "but it isn't French. I know
that." Then he saw what it was that the crowd had for its centre. It
was a man--the man, Peter did not doubt, who had spoken in that strange
tongue. A man with long hair and wild eyes, with shabby clothes of a cut
Peter had not seen before--a man whose hands and lips trembled, and who
spoke again as his eyes fell on Peter.

"No, it's not French," said Peter.

"Try him with French if you know so much about it," said the farmer-man.

"Parlay voo Frongsay?" began Peter, boldly, and the next moment the
crowd recoiled again, for the man with the wild eyes had left leaning
against the wall, and had sprung forward and caught Peter's hands,
and begun to pour forth a flood of words which, though he could not
understand a word of them, Peter knew the sound of.

"There!" said he, and turned, his hands still clasped in the hands of
the strange shabby figure, to throw a glance of triumph at the crowd;
"there; THAT'S French."

"What does he say?"

"I don't know." Peter was obliged to own it.

"Here," said the Station Master again; "you move on if you please. I'LL
deal with this case."

A few of the more timid or less inquisitive travellers moved slowly and
reluctantly away. And Phyllis and Bobbie got near to Peter. All three
had been TAUGHT French at school. How deeply they now wished that they
had LEARNED it! Peter shook his head at the stranger, but he also shook
his hands as warmly and looked at him as kindly as he could. A person
in the crowd, after some hesitation, said suddenly, "No comprenny!" and
then, blushing deeply, backed out of the press and went away.

"Take him into your room," whispered Bobbie to the Station Master.
"Mother can talk French. She'll be here by the next train from
Maidbridge."

The Station Master took the arm of the stranger, suddenly but not
unkindly. But the man wrenched his arm away, and cowered back coughing
and trembling and trying to push the Station Master away.

"Oh, don't!" said Bobbie; "don't you see how frightened he is? He thinks
you're going to shut him up. I know he does--look at his eyes!"

"They're like a fox's eyes when the beast's in a trap," said the farmer.

"Oh, let me try!" Bobbie went on; "I do really know one or two French
words if I could only think of them."

Sometimes, in moments of great need, we can do wonderful things--things
that in ordinary life we could hardly even dream of doing. Bobbie had
never been anywhere near the top of her French class, but she must have
learned something without knowing it, for now, looking at those wild,
hunted eyes, she actually remembered and, what is more, spoke, some
French words. She said:--

"Vous attendre. Ma mere parlez Francais. Nous--what's the French for
'being kind'?"

Nobody knew.

"Bong is 'good,'" said Phyllis.

"Nous etre bong pour vous."

I do not know whether the man understood her words, but he understood
the touch of the hand she thrust into his, and the kindness of the other
hand that stroked his shabby sleeve.

She pulled him gently towards the inmost sanctuary of the Station
Master. The other children followed, and the Station Master shut the
door in the face of the crowd, which stood a little while in the booking
office talking and looking at the fast closed yellow door, and then by
ones and twos went its way, grumbling.

Inside the Station Master's room Bobbie still held the stranger's hand
and stroked his sleeve.

"Here's a go," said the Station Master; "no ticket--doesn't even know
where he wants to go. I'm not sure now but what I ought to send for the
police."

"Oh, DON'T!" all the children pleaded at once. And suddenly Bobbie
got between the others and the stranger, for she had seen that he was
crying.

By a most unusual piece of good fortune she had a handkerchief in
her pocket. By a still more uncommon accident the handkerchief was
moderately clean. Standing in front of the stranger, she got out the
handkerchief and passed it to him so that the others did not see.

"Wait till Mother comes," Phyllis was saying; "she does speak French
beautifully. You'd just love to hear her."

"I'm sure he hasn't done anything like you're sent to prison for," said
Peter.

"Looks like without visible means to me," said the Station Master.
"Well, I don't mind giving him the benefit of the doubt till your Mamma
comes. I SHOULD like to know what nation's got the credit of HIM, that I
should."

Then Peter had an idea. He pulled an envelope out of his pocket, and
showed that it was half full of foreign stamps.

"Look here," he said, "let's show him these--"

Bobbie looked and saw that the stranger had dried his eyes with her
handkerchief. So she said: "All right."

They showed him an Italian stamp, and pointed from him to it and back
again, and made signs of question with their eyebrows. He shook his
head. Then they showed him a Norwegian stamp--the common blue kind it
was--and again he signed No. Then they showed him a Spanish one, and
at that he took the envelope from Peter's hand and searched among the
stamps with a hand that trembled. The hand that he reached out at last,
with a gesture as of one answering a question, contained a RUSSIAN
stamp.

"He's Russian," cried Peter, "or else he's like 'the man who was'--in
Kipling, you know."

The train from Maidbridge was signalled.

"I'll stay with him till you bring Mother in," said Bobbie.

"You're not afraid, Missie?"

"Oh, no," said Bobbie, looking at the stranger, as she might have looked
at a strange dog of doubtful temper. "You wouldn't hurt me, would you?"

She smiled at him, and he smiled back, a queer crooked smile. And then
he coughed again. And the heavy rattling swish of the incoming train
swept past, and the Station Master and Peter and Phyllis went out to
meet it. Bobbie was still holding the stranger's hand when they came
back with Mother.

The Russian rose and bowed very ceremoniously.

Then Mother spoke in French, and he replied, haltingly at first, but
presently in longer and longer sentences.

The children, watching his face and Mother's, knew that he was telling
her things that made her angry and pitying, and sorry and indignant all
at once.

"Well, Mum, what's it all about?" The Station Master could not restrain
his curiosity any longer.

"Oh," said Mother, "it's all right. He's a Russian, and he's lost his
ticket. And I'm afraid he's very ill. If you don't mind, I'll take him
home with me now. He's really quite worn out. I'll run down and tell you
all about him to-morrow."

"I hope you won't find you're taking home a frozen viper," said the
Station Master, doubtfully.

"Oh, no," Mother said brightly, and she smiled; "I'm quite sure I'm
not. Why, he's a great man in his own country, writes books--beautiful
books--I've read some of them; but I'll tell you all about it
to-morrow."

She spoke again in French to the Russian, and everyone could see the
surprise and pleasure and gratitude in his eyes. He got up and politely
bowed to the Station Master, and offered his arm most ceremoniously to
Mother. She took it, but anybody could have seen that she was helping
him along, and not he her.

"You girls run home and light a fire in the sitting-room," Mother said,
"and Peter had better go for the Doctor."

But it was Bobbie who went for the Doctor.

"I hate to tell you," she said breathlessly when she came upon him
in his shirt sleeves, weeding his pansy-bed, "but Mother's got a very
shabby Russian, and I'm sure he'll have to belong to your Club. I'm
certain he hasn't got any money. We found him at the station."

"Found him! Was he lost, then?" asked the Doctor, reaching for his coat.

"Yes," said Bobbie, unexpectedly, "that's just what he was. He's been
telling Mother the sad, sweet story of his life in French; and she said
would you be kind enough to come directly if you were at home. He has a
dreadful cough, and he's been crying."

The Doctor smiled.

"Oh, don't," said Bobbie; "please don't. You wouldn't if you'd seen him.
I never saw a man cry before. You don't know what it's like."

Dr. Forrest wished then that he hadn't smiled.

When Bobbie and the Doctor got to Three Chimneys, the Russian was
sitting in the arm-chair that had been Father's, stretching his feet
to the blaze of a bright wood fire, and sipping the tea Mother had made
him.

"The man seems worn out, mind and body," was what the Doctor said; "the
cough's bad, but there's nothing that can't be cured. He ought to go
straight to bed, though--and let him have a fire at night."

"I'll make one in my room; it's the only one with a fireplace," said
Mother. She did, and presently the Doctor helped the stranger to bed.

There was a big black trunk in Mother's room that none of the children
had ever seen unlocked. Now, when she had lighted the fire, she unlocked
it and took some clothes out--men's clothes--and set them to air by the
newly lighted fire. Bobbie, coming in with more wood for the fire, saw
the mark on the night-shirt, and looked over to the open trunk. All
the things she could see were men's clothes. And the name marked on the
shirt was Father's name. Then Father hadn't taken his clothes with him.
And that night-shirt was one of Father's new ones. Bobbie remembered its
being made, just before Peter's birthday. Why hadn't Father taken his
clothes? Bobbie slipped from the room. As she went she heard the key
turned in the lock of the trunk. Her heart was beating horribly. WHY
hadn't Father taken his clothes? When Mother came out of the room,
Bobbie flung tightly clasping arms round her waist, and whispered:--

"Mother--Daddy isn't--isn't DEAD, is he?"

"My darling, no! What made you think of anything so horrible?"

"I--I don't know," said Bobbie, angry with herself, but still clinging
to that resolution of hers, not to see anything that Mother didn't mean
her to see.

Mother gave her a hurried hug. "Daddy was quite, QUITE well when I heard
from him last," she said, "and he'll come back to us some day. Don't
fancy such horrible things, darling!"

Later on, when the Russian stranger had been made comfortable for the
night, Mother came into the girls' room. She was to sleep there in
Phyllis's bed, and Phyllis was to have a mattress on the floor, a
most amusing adventure for Phyllis. Directly Mother came in, two white
figures started up, and two eager voices called:--

"Now, Mother, tell us all about the Russian gentleman."

A white shape hopped into the room. It was Peter, dragging his quilt
behind him like the tail of a white peacock.

"We have been patient," he said, "and I had to bite my tongue not to
go to sleep, and I just nearly went to sleep and I bit too hard, and it
hurts ever so. DO tell us. Make a nice long story of it."

"I can't make a long story of it to-night," said Mother; "I'm very
tired."

Bobbie knew by her voice that Mother had been crying, but the others
didn't know.

"Well, make it as long as you can," said Phil, and Bobbie got her arms
round Mother's waist and snuggled close to her.

"Well, it's a story long enough to make a whole book of. He's a writer;
he's written beautiful books. In Russia at the time of the Czar one
dared not say anything about the rich people doing wrong, or about the
things that ought to be done to make poor people better and happier. If
one did one was sent to prison."

"But they CAN'T," said Peter; "people only go to prison when they've
done wrong."

"Or when the Judges THINK they've done wrong," said Mother. "Yes, that's
so in England. But in Russia it was different. And he wrote a beautiful
book about poor people and how to help them. I've read it. There's
nothing in it but goodness and kindness. And they sent him to prison for
it. He was three years in a horrible dungeon, with hardly any light, and
all damp and dreadful. In prison all alone for three years."

Mother's voice trembled a little and stopped suddenly.

"But, Mother," said Peter, "that can't be true NOW. It sounds like
something out of a history book--the Inquisition, or something."

"It WAS true," said Mother; "it's all horribly true. Well, then they
took him out and sent him to Siberia, a convict chained to other
convicts--wicked men who'd done all sorts of crimes--a long chain of
them, and they walked, and walked, and walked, for days and weeks, till
he thought they'd never stop walking. And overseers went behind them
with whips--yes, whips--to beat them if they got tired. And some of them
went lame, and some fell down, and when they couldn't get up and go on,
they beat them, and then left them to die. Oh, it's all too terrible!
And at last he got to the mines, and he was condemned to stay there for
life--for life, just for writing a good, noble, splendid book."

"How did he get away?"

"When the war came, some of the Russian prisoners were allowed to
volunteer as soldiers. And he volunteered. But he deserted at the first
chance he got and--"

"But that's very cowardly, isn't it"--said Peter--"to desert? Especially
when it's war."

"Do you think he owed anything to a country that had done THAT to him?
If he did, he owed more to his wife and children. He didn't know what
had become of them."

"Oh," cried Bobbie, "he had THEM to think about and be miserable about
TOO, then, all the time he was in prison?"

"Yes, he had them to think about and be miserable about all the time he
was in prison. For anything he knew they might have been sent to prison,
too. They did those things in Russia. But while he was in the mines some
friends managed to get a message to him that his wife and children had
escaped and come to England. So when he deserted he came here to look
for them."

"Had he got their address?" said practical Peter.

"No; just England. He was going to London, and he thought he had to
change at our station, and then he found he'd lost his ticket and his
purse."

"Oh, DO you think he'll find them?--I mean his wife and children, not
the ticket and things."

"I hope so. Oh, I hope and pray that he'll find his wife and children
again."

Even Phyllis now perceived that mother's voice was very unsteady.

"Why, Mother," she said, "how very sorry you seem to be for him!"

Mother didn't answer for a minute. Then she just said, "Yes," and then
she seemed to be thinking. The children were quiet.

Presently she said, "Dears, when you say your prayers, I think you might
ask God to show His pity upon all prisoners and captives."

"To show His pity," Bobbie repeated slowly, "upon all prisoners and
captives. Is that right, Mother?"

"Yes," said Mother, "upon all prisoners and captives. All prisoners and
captives."



Chapter VI. Saviours of the train.


The Russian gentleman was better the next day, and the day after that
better still, and on the third day he was well enough to come into the
garden. A basket chair was put for him and he sat there, dressed in
clothes of Father's which were too big for him. But when Mother had
hemmed up the ends of the sleeves and the trousers, the clothes did
well enough. His was a kind face now that it was no longer tired and
frightened, and he smiled at the children whenever he saw them. They
wished very much that he could speak English. Mother wrote several
letters to people she thought might know whereabouts in England a
Russian gentleman's wife and family might possibly be; not to the people
she used to know before she came to live at Three Chimneys--she never
wrote to any of them--but strange people--Members of Parliament and
Editors of papers, and Secretaries of Societies.

And she did not do much of her story-writing, only corrected proofs as
she sat in the sun near the Russian, and talked to him every now and
then.

The children wanted very much to show how kindly they felt to this man
who had been sent to prison and to Siberia just for writing a beautiful
book about poor people. They could smile at him, of course; they could
and they did. But if you smile too constantly, the smile is apt to
get fixed like the smile of the hyaena. And then it no longer looks
friendly, but simply silly. So they tried other ways, and brought him
flowers till the place where he sat was surrounded by little fading
bunches of clover and roses and Canterbury bells.

And then Phyllis had an idea. She beckoned mysteriously to the others
and drew them into the back yard, and there, in a concealed spot,
between the pump and the water-butt, she said:--

"You remember Perks promising me the very first strawberries out of his
own garden?" Perks, you will recollect, was the Porter. "Well, I should
think they're ripe now. Let's go down and see."

Mother had been down as she had promised to tell the Station Master the
story of the Russian Prisoner. But even the charms of the railway had
been unable to tear the children away from the neighbourhood of the
interesting stranger. So they had not been to the station for three
days.

They went now.

And, to their surprise and distress, were very coldly received by Perks.

"'Ighly honoured, I'm sure," he said when they peeped in at the door of
the Porters' room. And he went on reading his newspaper.

There was an uncomfortable silence.

"Oh, dear," said Bobbie, with a sigh, "I do believe you're CROSS."

"What, me? Not me!" said Perks loftily; "it ain't nothing to me."

"What AIN'T nothing to you?" said Peter, too anxious and alarmed to
change the form of words.

"Nothing ain't nothing. What 'appens either 'ere or elsewhere," said
Perks; "if you likes to 'ave your secrets, 'ave 'em and welcome. That's
what I say."

The secret-chamber of each heart was rapidly examined during the pause
that followed. Three heads were shaken.

"We haven't got any secrets from YOU," said Bobbie at last.

"Maybe you 'ave, and maybe you 'aven't," said Perks; "it ain't nothing
to me. And I wish you all a very good afternoon." He held up the paper
between him and them and went on reading.

"Oh, DON'T!" said Phyllis, in despair; "this is truly dreadful! Whatever
it is, do tell us."

"We didn't mean to do it whatever it was."

No answer. The paper was refolded and Perks began on another column.

"Look here," said Peter, suddenly, "it's not fair. Even people who do
crimes aren't punished without being told what it's for--as once they
were in Russia."

"I don't know nothing about Russia."

"Oh, yes, you do, when Mother came down on purpose to tell you and Mr.
Gills all about OUR Russian."

"Can't you fancy it?" said Perks, indignantly; "don't you see 'im
a-asking of me to step into 'is room and take a chair and listen to what
'er Ladyship 'as to say?"

"Do you mean to say you've not heard?"

"Not so much as a breath. I did go so far as to put a question. And he
shuts me up like a rat-trap. 'Affairs of State, Perks,' says he. But I
did think one o' you would 'a' nipped down to tell me--you're here sharp
enough when you want to get anything out of old Perks"--Phyllis
flushed purple as she thought of the strawberries--"information about
locomotives or signals or the likes," said Perks.

"We didn't know you didn't know."

"We thought Mother had told you."

"Wewantedtotellyouonlywethoughtitwouldbestalenews."

The three spoke all at once.

Perks said it was all very well, and still held up the paper. Then
Phyllis suddenly snatched it away, and threw her arms round his neck.

"Oh, let's kiss and be friends," she said; "we'll say we're sorry first,
if you like, but we didn't really know that you didn't know."

"We are so sorry," said the others.

And Perks at last consented to accept their apologies.

Then they got him to come out and sit in the sun on the green Railway
Bank, where the grass was quite hot to touch, and there, sometimes
speaking one at a time, and sometimes all together, they told the Porter
the story of the Russian Prisoner.

"Well, I must say," said Perks; but he did not say it--whatever it was.

"Yes, it is pretty awful, isn't it?" said Peter, "and I don't wonder you
were curious about who the Russian was."

"I wasn't curious, not so much as interested," said the Porter.

"Well, I do think Mr. Gills might have told you about it. It was horrid
of him."

"I don't keep no down on 'im for that, Missie," said the Porter; "cos
why? I see 'is reasons. 'E wouldn't want to give away 'is own side with
a tale like that 'ere. It ain't human nature. A man's got to stand
up for his own side whatever they does. That's what it means by Party
Politics. I should 'a' done the same myself if that long-'aired chap 'ad
'a' been a Jap."

"But the Japs didn't do cruel, wicked things like that," said Bobbie.

"P'r'aps not," said Perks, cautiously; "still you can't be sure with
foreigners. My own belief is they're all tarred with the same brush."

"Then why were you on the side of the Japs?" Peter asked.

"Well, you see, you must take one side or the other. Same as with
Liberals and Conservatives. The great thing is to take your side and
then stick to it, whatever happens."

A signal sounded.

"There's the 3.14 up," said Perks. "You lie low till she's through,
and then we'll go up along to my place, and see if there's any of them
strawberries ripe what I told you about."

"If there are any ripe, and you DO give them to me," said Phyllis, "you
won't mind if I give them to the poor Russian, will you?"

Perks narrowed his eyes and then raised his eyebrows.

"So it was them strawberries you come down for this afternoon, eh?" said
he.

This was an awkward moment for Phyllis. To say "yes" would seem rude and
greedy, and unkind to Perks. But she knew if she said "no," she would
not be pleased with herself afterwards. So--

"Yes," she said, "it was."

"Well done!" said the Porter; "speak the truth and shame the--"

"But we'd have come down the very next day if we'd known you hadn't
heard the story," Phyllis added hastily.

"I believe you, Missie," said Perks, and sprang across the line six feet
in front of the advancing train.

The girls hated to see him do this, but Peter liked it. It was so
exciting.

The Russian gentleman was so delighted with the strawberries that the
three racked their brains to find some other surprise for him. But all
the racking did not bring out any idea more novel than wild cherries.
And this idea occurred to them next morning. They had seen the blossom
on the trees in the spring, and they knew where to look for wild
cherries now that cherry time was here. The trees grew all up and along
the rocky face of the cliff out of which the mouth of the tunnel opened.
There were all sorts of trees there, birches and beeches and baby oaks
and hazels, and among them the cherry blossom had shone like snow and
silver.

The mouth of the tunnel was some way from Three Chimneys, so Mother let
them take their lunch with them in a basket. And the basket would do
to bring the cherries back in if they found any. She also lent them her
silver watch so that they should not be late for tea. Peter's Waterbury
had taken it into its head not to go since the day when Peter dropped it
into the water-butt. And they started. When they got to the top of the
cutting, they leaned over the fence and looked down to where the railway
lines lay at the bottom of what, as Phyllis said, was exactly like a
mountain gorge.

"If it wasn't for the railway at the bottom, it would be as though the
foot of man had never been there, wouldn't it?"

The sides of the cutting were of grey stone, very roughly hewn. Indeed,
the top part of the cutting had been a little natural glen that had been
cut deeper to bring it down to the level of the tunnel's mouth. Among
the rocks, grass and flowers grew, and seeds dropped by birds in the
crannies of the stone had taken root and grown into bushes and trees
that overhung the cutting. Near the tunnel was a flight of steps leading
down to the line--just wooden bars roughly fixed into the earth--a very
steep and narrow way, more like a ladder than a stair.

"We'd better get down," said Peter; "I'm sure the cherries would be
quite easy to get at from the side of the steps. You remember it was
there we picked the cherry blossoms that we put on the rabbit's grave."

So they went along the fence towards the little swing gate that is at
the top of these steps. And they were almost at the gate when Bobbie
said:--

"Hush. Stop! What's that?"

"That" was a very odd noise indeed--a soft noise, but quite plainly to
be heard through the sound of the wind in tree branches, and the hum
and whir of the telegraph wires. It was a sort of rustling, whispering
sound. As they listened it stopped, and then it began again.

And this time it did not stop, but it grew louder and more rustling and
rumbling.

"Look"--cried Peter, suddenly--"the tree over there!"

The tree he pointed at was one of those that have rough grey leaves and
white flowers. The berries, when they come, are bright scarlet, but if
you pick them, they disappoint you by turning black before you get them
home. And, as Peter pointed, the tree was moving--not just the way trees
ought to move when the wind blows through them, but all in one piece,
as though it were a live creature and were walking down the side of the
cutting.

"It's moving!" cried Bobbie. "Oh, look! and so are the others. It's like
the woods in Macbeth."

"It's magic," said Phyllis, breathlessly. "I always knew this railway
was enchanted."

It really did seem a little like magic. For all the trees for about
twenty yards of the opposite bank seemed to be slowly walking down
towards the railway line, the tree with the grey leaves bringing up the
rear like some old shepherd driving a flock of green sheep.

"What is it? Oh, what is it?" said Phyllis; "it's much too magic for me.
I don't like it. Let's go home."

But Bobbie and Peter clung fast to the rail and watched breathlessly.
And Phyllis made no movement towards going home by herself.

The trees moved on and on. Some stones and loose earth fell down and
rattled on the railway metals far below.

"It's ALL coming down," Peter tried to say, but he found there was
hardly any voice to say it with. And, indeed, just as he spoke, the
great rock, on the top of which the walking trees were, leaned slowly
forward. The trees, ceasing to walk, stood still and shivered. Leaning
with the rock, they seemed to hesitate a moment, and then rock and trees
and grass and bushes, with a rushing sound, slipped right away from the
face of the cutting and fell on the line with a blundering crash that
could have been heard half a mile off. A cloud of dust rose up.

"Oh," said Peter, in awestruck tones, "isn't it exactly like when coals
come in?--if there wasn't any roof to the cellar and you could see
down."

"Look what a great mound it's made!" said Bobbie.

"Yes," said Peter, slowly. He was still leaning on the fence. "Yes," he
said again, still more slowly.

Then he stood upright.

"The 11.29 down hasn't gone by yet. We must let them know at the
station, or there'll be a most frightful accident."

"Let's run," said Bobbie, and began.

But Peter cried, "Come back!" and looked at Mother's watch. He was very
prompt and businesslike, and his face looked whiter than they had ever
seen it.

"No time," he said; "it's two miles away, and it's past eleven."

"Couldn't we," suggested Phyllis, breathlessly, "couldn't we climb up a
telegraph post and do something to the wires?"

"We don't know how," said Peter.

"They do it in war," said Phyllis; "I know I've heard of it."

"They only CUT them, silly," said Peter, "and that doesn't do any good.
And we couldn't cut them even if we got up, and we couldn't get up. If
we had anything red, we could get down on the line and wave it."

"But the train wouldn't see us till it got round the corner, and then it
could see the mound just as well as us," said Phyllis; "better, because
it's much bigger than us."

"If we only had something red," Peter repeated, "we could go round the
corner and wave to the train."

"We might wave, anyway."

"They'd only think it was just US, as usual. We've waved so often
before. Anyway, let's get down."

They got down the steep stairs. Bobbie was pale and shivering. Peter's
face looked thinner than usual. Phyllis was red-faced and damp with
anxiety.

"Oh, how hot I am!" she said; "and I thought it was going to be cold; I
wish we hadn't put on our--" she stopped short, and then ended in quite
a different tone--"our flannel petticoats."

Bobbie turned at the bottom of the stairs.

"Oh, yes," she cried; "THEY'RE red! Let's take them off."

They did, and with the petticoats rolled up under their arms, ran along
the railway, skirting the newly fallen mound of stones and rock and
earth, and bent, crushed, twisted trees. They ran at their best pace.
Peter led, but the girls were not far behind. They reached the corner
that hid the mound from the straight line of railway that ran half a
mile without curve or corner.

"Now," said Peter, taking hold of the largest flannel petticoat.

"You're not"--Phyllis faltered--"you're not going to TEAR them?"

"Shut up," said Peter, with brief sternness.

"Oh, yes," said Bobbie, "tear them into little bits if you like. Don't
you see, Phil, if we can't stop the train, there'll be a real live
accident, with people KILLED. Oh, horrible! Here, Peter, you'll never
tear it through the band!"

She took the red flannel petticoat from him and tore it off an inch from
the band. Then she tore the other in the same way.

"There!" said Peter, tearing in his turn. He divided each petticoat into
three pieces. "Now, we've got six flags." He looked at the watch again.
"And we've got seven minutes. We must have flagstaffs."

The knives given to boys are, for some odd reason, seldom of the kind
of steel that keeps sharp. The young saplings had to be broken off. Two
came up by the roots. The leaves were stripped from them.

"We must cut holes in the flags, and run the sticks through the holes,"
said Peter. And the holes were cut. The knife was sharp enough to cut
flannel with. Two of the flags were set up in heaps of loose stones
between the sleepers of the down line. Then Phyllis and Roberta took
each a flag, and stood ready to wave it as soon as the train came in
sight.

"I shall have the other two myself," said Peter, "because it was my idea
to wave something red."

"They're our petticoats, though," Phyllis was beginning, but Bobbie
interrupted--

"Oh, what does it matter who waves what, if we can only save the train?"

Perhaps Peter had not rightly calculated the number of minutes it would
take the 11.29 to get from the station to the place where they were, or
perhaps the train was late. Anyway, it seemed a very long time that they
waited.

Phyllis grew impatient. "I expect the watch is wrong, and the train's
gone by," said she.

Peter relaxed the heroic attitude he had chosen to show off his two
flags. And Bobbie began to feel sick with suspense.

It seemed to her that they had been standing there for hours and hours,
holding those silly little red flannel flags that no one would ever
notice. The train wouldn't care. It would go rushing by them and tear
round the corner and go crashing into that awful mound. And everyone
would be killed. Her hands grew very cold and trembled so that she could
hardly hold the flag. And then came the distant rumble and hum of the
metals, and a puff of white steam showed far away along the stretch of
line.

"Stand firm," said Peter, "and wave like mad! When it gets to that
big furze bush step back, but go on waving! Don't stand ON the line,
Bobbie!"

The train came rattling along very, very fast.

"They don't see us! They won't see us! It's all no good!" cried Bobbie.

The two little flags on the line swayed as the nearing train shook and
loosened the heaps of loose stones that held them up. One of them slowly
leaned over and fell on the line. Bobbie jumped forward and caught it
up, and waved it; her hands did not tremble now.

It seemed that the train came on as fast as ever. It was very near now.

"Keep off the line, you silly cuckoo!" said Peter, fiercely.

"It's no good," Bobbie said again.

"Stand back!" cried Peter, suddenly, and he dragged Phyllis back by the
arm.

But Bobbie cried, "Not yet, not yet!" and waved her two flags right over
the line. The front of the engine looked black and enormous. Its voice
was loud and harsh.

"Oh, stop, stop, stop!" cried Bobbie. No one heard her. At least Peter
and Phyllis didn't, for the oncoming rush of the train covered the sound
of her voice with a mountain of sound. But afterwards she used to wonder
whether the engine itself had not heard her. It seemed almost as though
it had--for it slackened swiftly, slackened and stopped, not twenty
yards from the place where Bobbie's two flags waved over the line. She
saw the great black engine stop dead, but somehow she could not stop
waving the flags. And when the driver and the fireman had got off the
engine and Peter and Phyllis had gone to meet them and pour out their
excited tale of the awful mound just round the corner, Bobbie still
waved the flags but more and more feebly and jerkily.

When the others turned towards her she was lying across the line with
her hands flung forward and still gripping the sticks of the little red
flannel flags.

The engine-driver picked her up, carried her to the train, and laid her
on the cushions of a first-class carriage.

"Gone right off in a faint," he said, "poor little woman. And no wonder.
I'll just 'ave a look at this 'ere mound of yours, and then we'll run
you back to the station and get her seen to."

It was horrible to see Bobbie lying so white and quiet, with her lips
blue, and parted.

"I believe that's what people look like when they're dead," whispered
Phyllis.

"DON'T!" said Peter, sharply.

They sat by Bobbie on the blue cushions, and the train ran back. Before
it reached their station Bobbie had sighed and opened her eyes,
and rolled herself over and begun to cry. This cheered the others
wonderfully. They had seen her cry before, but they had never seen her
faint, nor anyone else, for the matter of that. They had not known what
to do when she was fainting, but now she was only crying they could
thump her on the back and tell her not to, just as they always did. And
presently, when she stopped crying, they were able to laugh at her for
being such a coward as to faint.

When the station was reached, the three were the heroes of an agitated
meeting on the platform.

The praises they got for their "prompt action," their "common sense,"
their "ingenuity," were enough to have turned anybody's head. Phyllis
enjoyed herself thoroughly. She had never been a real heroine before,
and the feeling was delicious. Peter's ears got very red. Yet he, too,
enjoyed himself. Only Bobbie wished they all wouldn't. She wanted to get
away.

"You'll hear from the Company about this, I expect," said the Station
Master.

Bobbie wished she might never hear of it again. She pulled at Peter's
jacket.

"Oh, come away, come away! I want to go home," she said.

So they went. And as they went Station Master and Porter and guards and
driver and fireman and passengers sent up a cheer.

"Oh, listen," cried Phyllis; "that's for US!"

"Yes," said Peter. "I say, I am glad I thought about something red, and
waving it."

"How lucky we DID put on our red flannel petticoats!" said Phyllis.

Bobbie said nothing. She was thinking of the horrible mound, and the
trustful train rushing towards it.

"And it was US that saved them," said Peter.

"How dreadful if they had all been killed!" said Phyllis; "wouldn't it,
Bobbie?"

"We never got any cherries, after all," said Bobbie.

The others thought her rather heartless.



Chapter VII. For valour.


I hope you don't mind my telling you a good deal about Roberta. The fact
is I am growing very fond of her. The more I observe her the more I love
her. And I notice all sorts of things about her that I like.

For instance, she was quite oddly anxious to make other people happy.
And she could keep a secret, a tolerably rare accomplishment. Also she
had the power of silent sympathy. That sounds rather dull, I know, but
it's not so dull as it sounds. It just means that a person is able
to know that you are unhappy, and to love you extra on that account,
without bothering you by telling you all the time how sorry she is
for you. That was what Bobbie was like. She knew that Mother was
unhappy--and that Mother had not told her the reason. So she just loved
Mother more and never said a single word that could let Mother know how
earnestly her little girl wondered what Mother was unhappy about. This
needs practice. It is not so easy as you might think.

Whatever happened--and all sorts of nice, pleasant ordinary things
happened--such as picnics, games, and buns for tea, Bobbie always had
these thoughts at the back of her mind. "Mother's unhappy. Why? I don't
know. She doesn't want me to know. I won't try to find out. But she
IS unhappy. Why? I don't know. She doesn't--" and so on, repeating and
repeating like a tune that you don't know the stopping part of.

The Russian gentleman still took up a good deal of everybody's thoughts.
All the editors and secretaries of Societies and Members of Parliament
had answered Mother's letters as politely as they knew how; but none of
them could tell where the wife and children of Mr. Szezcpansky would be
likely to be. (Did I tell you that the Russian's very Russian name was
that?)

Bobbie had another quality which you will hear differently described
by different people. Some of them call it interfering in other people's
business--and some call it "helping lame dogs over stiles," and some
call it "loving-kindness." It just means trying to help people.

She racked her brains to think of some way of helping the Russian
gentleman to find his wife and children. He had learned a few words
of English now. He could say "Good morning," and "Good night," and
"Please," and "Thank you," and "Pretty," when the children brought him
flowers, and "Ver' good," when they asked him how he had slept.

The way he smiled when he "said his English," was, Bobbie felt, "just
too sweet for anything." She used to think of his face because she
fancied it would help her to some way of helping him. But it did not.
Yet his being there cheered her because she saw that it made Mother
happier.

"She likes to have someone to be good to, even beside us," said Bobbie.
"And I know she hated to let him have Father's clothes. But I suppose it
'hurt nice,' or she wouldn't have."

For many and many a night after the day when she and Peter and Phyllis
had saved the train from wreck by waving their little red flannel flags,
Bobbie used to wake screaming and shivering, seeing again that horrible
mound, and the poor, dear trustful engine rushing on towards it--just
thinking that it was doing its swift duty, and that everything was clear
and safe. And then a warm thrill of pleasure used to run through her
at the remembrance of how she and Peter and Phyllis and the red flannel
petticoats had really saved everybody.

One morning a letter came. It was addressed to Peter and Bobbie and
Phyllis. They opened it with enthusiastic curiosity, for they did not
often get letters.

The letter said:--

"Dear Sir, and Ladies,--It is proposed to make a small presentation to
you, in commemoration of your prompt and courageous action in warning
the train on the --- inst., and thus averting what must, humanly
speaking, have been a terrible accident. The presentation will take
place at the --- Station at three o'clock on the 30th inst., if this
time and place will be convenient to you.

          "Yours faithfully,

                    "Jabez Inglewood.
"Secretary, Great Northern and Southern Railway Co."

There never had been a prouder moment in the lives of the three
children. They rushed to Mother with the letter, and she also felt proud
and said so, and this made the children happier than ever.

"But if the presentation is money, you must say, 'Thank you, but we'd
rather not take it,'" said Mother. "I'll wash your Indian muslins at
once," she added. "You must look tidy on an occasion like this."

"Phil and I can wash them," said Bobbie, "if you'll iron them, Mother."

Washing is rather fun. I wonder whether you've ever done it? This
particular washing took place in the back kitchen, which had a stone
floor and a very big stone sink under its window.

"Let's put the bath on the sink," said Phyllis; "then we can pretend
we're out-of-doors washerwomen like Mother saw in France."

"But they were washing in the cold river," said Peter, his hands in his
pockets, "not in hot water."

"This is a HOT river, then," said Phyllis; "lend a hand with the bath,
there's a dear."

"I should like to see a deer lending a hand," said Peter, but he lent
his.

"Now to rub and scrub and scrub and rub," said Phyllis, hopping joyously
about as Bobbie carefully carried the heavy kettle from the kitchen
fire.

"Oh, no!" said Bobbie, greatly shocked; "you don't rub muslin. You put
the boiled soap in the hot water and make it all frothy-lathery--and
then you shake the muslin and squeeze it, ever so gently, and all the
dirt comes out. It's only clumsy things like tablecloths and sheets that
have to be rubbed."

The lilac and the Gloire de Dijon roses outside the window swayed in the
soft breeze.

"It's a nice drying day--that's one thing," said Bobbie, feeling very
grown up. "Oh, I do wonder what wonderful feelings we shall have when we
WEAR the Indian muslin dresses!"

"Yes, so do I," said Phyllis, shaking and squeezing the muslin in quite
a professional manner.

"NOW we squeeze out the soapy water. NO--we mustn't twist them--and then
rinse them. I'll hold them while you and Peter empty the bath and get
clean water."

"A presentation! That means presents," said Peter, as his sisters,
having duly washed the pegs and wiped the line, hung up the dresses to
dry. "Whatever will it be?"

"It might be anything," said Phyllis; "what I've always wanted is a Baby
elephant--but I suppose they wouldn't know that."

"Suppose it was gold models of steam-engines?" said Bobbie.

"Or a big model of the scene of the prevented accident," suggested
Peter, "with a little model train, and dolls dressed like us and the
engine-driver and fireman and passengers."

"Do you LIKE," said Bobbie, doubtfully, drying her hands on the rough
towel that hung on a roller at the back of the scullery door, "do you
LIKE us being rewarded for saving a train?"

"Yes, I do," said Peter, downrightly; "and don't you try to come it over
us that you don't like it, too. Because I know you do."

"Yes," said Bobbie, doubtfully, "I know I do. But oughtn't we to be
satisfied with just having done it, and not ask for anything more?"

"Who did ask for anything more, silly?" said her brother; "Victoria
Cross soldiers don't ASK for it; but they're glad enough to get it all
the same. Perhaps it'll be medals. Then, when I'm very old indeed, I
shall show them to my grandchildren and say, 'We only did our duty,' and
they'll be awfully proud of me."

"You have to be married," warned Phyllis, "or you don't have any
grandchildren."

"I suppose I shall HAVE to be married some day," said Peter, "but it
will be an awful bother having her round all the time. I'd like to marry
a lady who had trances, and only woke up once or twice a year."

"Just to say you were the light of her life and then go to sleep again.
Yes. That wouldn't be bad," said Bobbie.

"When _I_ get married," said Phyllis, "I shall want him to want me to be
awake all the time, so that I can hear him say how nice I am."

"I think it would be nice," said Bobbie, "to marry someone very poor,
and then you'd do all the work and he'd love you most frightfully, and
see the blue wood smoke curling up among the trees from the domestic
hearth as he came home from work every night. I say--we've got to answer
that letter and say that the time and place WILL be convenient to us.
There's the soap, Peter. WE'RE both as clean as clean. That pink box of
writing paper you had on your birthday, Phil."

It took some time to arrange what should be said. Mother had gone back
to her writing, and several sheets of pink paper with scalloped gilt
edges and green four-leaved shamrocks in the corner were spoiled before
the three had decided what to say. Then each made a copy and signed it
with its own name.

The threefold letter ran:--

"Dear Mr. Jabez Inglewood,--Thank you very much. We did not want to be
rewarded but only to save the train, but we are glad you think so and
thank you very much. The time and place you say will be quite convenient
to us. Thank you very much.

          "Your affecate little friend,"

Then came the name, and after it:--

"P.S. Thank you very much."

"Washing is much easier than ironing," said Bobbie, taking the clean dry
dresses off the line. "I do love to see things come clean. Oh--I don't
know how we shall wait till it's time to know what presentation they're
going to present!"

When at last--it seemed a very long time after--it was THE day,
the three children went down to the station at the proper time. And
everything that happened was so odd that it seemed like a dream. The
Station Master came out to meet them--in his best clothes, as Peter
noticed at once--and led them into the waiting room where once they had
played the advertisement game. It looked quite different now. A carpet
had been put down--and there were pots of roses on the mantelpiece and
on the window ledges--green branches stuck up, like holly and laurel
are at Christmas, over the framed advertisement of Cook's Tours and the
Beauties of Devon and the Paris Lyons Railway. There were quite a
number of people there besides the Porter--two or three ladies in
smart dresses, and quite a crowd of gentlemen in high hats and frock
coats--besides everybody who belonged to the station. They recognized
several people who had been in the train on the red-flannel-petticoat
day. Best of all their own old gentleman was there, and his coat and hat
and collar seemed more than ever different from anyone else's. He shook
hands with them and then everybody sat down on chairs, and a gentleman
in spectacles--they found out afterwards that he was the District
Superintendent--began quite a long speech--very clever indeed. I am not
going to write the speech down. First, because you would think it dull;
and secondly, because it made all the children blush so, and get so hot
about the ears that I am quite anxious to get away from this part of the
subject; and thirdly, because the gentleman took so many words to say
what he had to say that I really haven't time to write them down. He
said all sorts of nice things about the children's bravery and presence
of mind, and when he had done he sat down, and everyone who was there
clapped and said, "Hear, hear."

And then the old gentleman got up and said things, too. It was very like
a prize-giving. And then he called the children one by one, by their
names, and gave each of them a beautiful gold watch and chain. And
inside the watches were engraved after the name of the watch's new
owner:--

"From the Directors of the Northern and Southern Railway in grateful
recognition of the courageous and prompt action which averted an
accident on --- 1905."

The watches were the most beautiful you can possibly imagine, and each
one had a blue leather case to live in when it was at home.

"You must make a speech now and thank everyone for their kindness,"
whispered the Station Master in Peter's ear and pushed him forward.
"Begin 'Ladies and Gentlemen,'" he added.

Each of the children had already said "Thank you," quite properly.

"Oh, dear," said Peter, but he did not resist the push.

"Ladies and Gentlemen," he said in a rather husky voice. Then there
was a pause, and he heard his heart beating in his throat. "Ladies and
Gentlemen," he went on with a rush, "it's most awfully good of you, and
we shall treasure the watches all our lives--but really we don't deserve
it because what we did wasn't anything, really. At least, I mean it
was awfully exciting, and what I mean to say--thank you all very, very
much."

The people clapped Peter more than they had done the District
Superintendent, and then everybody shook hands with them, and as soon as
politeness would let them, they got away, and tore up the hill to Three
Chimneys with their watches in their hands.

It was a wonderful day--the kind of day that very seldom happens to
anybody and to most of us not at all.

"I did want to talk to the old gentleman about something else," said
Bobbie, "but it was so public--like being in church."

"What did you want to say?" asked Phyllis.

"I'll tell you when I've thought about it more," said Bobbie.

So when she had thought a little more she wrote a letter.

"My dearest old gentleman," it said; "I want most awfully to ask you
something. If you could get out of the train and go by the next, it
would do. I do not want you to give me anything. Mother says we ought
not to. And besides, we do not want any THINGS. Only to talk to you
about a Prisoner and Captive. Your loving little friend,

          "Bobbie."

She got the Station Master to give the letter to the old gentleman, and
next day she asked Peter and Phyllis to come down to the station with
her at the time when the train that brought the old gentleman from town
would be passing through.

She explained her idea to them--and they approved thoroughly.

They had all washed their hands and faces, and brushed their hair, and
were looking as tidy as they knew how. But Phyllis, always unlucky, had
upset a jug of lemonade down the front of her dress. There was no time
to change--and the wind happening to blow from the coal yard, her frock
was soon powdered with grey, which stuck to the sticky lemonade stains
and made her look, as Peter said, "like any little gutter child."

It was decided that she should keep behind the others as much as
possible.

"Perhaps the old gentleman won't notice," said Bobbie. "The aged are
often weak in the eyes."

There was no sign of weakness, however, in the eyes, or in any other
part of the old gentleman, as he stepped from the train and looked up
and down the platform.

The three children, now that it came to the point, suddenly felt that
rush of deep shyness which makes your ears red and hot, your hands warm
and wet, and the tip of your nose pink and shiny.

"Oh," said Phyllis, "my heart's thumping like a steam-engine--right
under my sash, too."

"Nonsense," said Peter, "people's hearts aren't under their sashes."

"I don't care--mine is," said Phyllis.

"If you're going to talk like a poetry-book," said Peter, "my heart's in
my mouth."

"My heart's in my boots--if you come to that," said Roberta; "but do
come on--he'll think we're idiots."

"He won't be far wrong," said Peter, gloomily. And they went forward to
meet the old gentleman.

"Hullo," he said, shaking hands with them all in turn. "This is a very
great pleasure."

"It WAS good of you to get out," Bobbie said, perspiring and polite.

He took her arm and drew her into the waiting room where she and the
others had played the advertisement game the day they found the Russian.
Phyllis and Peter followed. "Well?" said the old gentleman, giving
Bobbie's arm a kind little shake before he let it go. "Well? What is
it?"

"Oh, please!" said Bobbie.

"Yes?" said the old gentleman.

"What I mean to say--" said Bobbie.

"Well?" said the old gentleman.

"It's all very nice and kind," said she.

"But?" he said.

"I wish I might say something," she said.

"Say it," said he.

"Well, then," said Bobbie--and out came the story of the Russian who
had written the beautiful book about poor people, and had been sent to
prison and to Siberia for just that.

"And what we want more than anything in the world is to find his wife
and children for him," said Bobbie, "but we don't know how. But you must
be most horribly clever, or you wouldn't be a Direction of the Railway.
And if YOU knew how--and would? We'd rather have that than anything else
in the world. We'd go without the watches, even, if you could sell them
and find his wife with the money."

And the others said so, too, though not with so much enthusiasm.

"Hum," said the old gentleman, pulling down the white waistcoat that
had the big gilt buttons on it, "what did you say the name
was--Fryingpansky?"

"No, no," said Bobbie earnestly. "I'll write it down for you. It doesn't
really look at all like that except when you say it. Have you a bit of
pencil and the back of an envelope?" she asked.

The old gentleman got out a gold pencil-case and a beautiful,
sweet-smelling, green Russian leather note-book and opened it at a new
page.

"Here," he said, "write here."

She wrote down "Szezcpansky," and said:--

"That's how you write it. You CALL it Shepansky."

The old gentleman took out a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles and fitted
them on his nose. When he had read the name, he looked quite different.

"THAT man? Bless my soul!" he said. "Why, I've read his book! It's
translated into every European language. A fine book--a noble book. And
so your mother took him in--like the good Samaritan. Well, well. I'll
tell you what, youngsters--your mother must be a very good woman."

"Of course she is," said Phyllis, in astonishment.

"And you're a very good man," said Bobbie, very shy, but firmly resolved
to be polite.

"You flatter me," said the old gentleman, taking off his hat with a
flourish. "And now am I to tell you what I think of you?"

"Oh, please don't," said Bobbie, hastily.

"Why?" asked the old gentleman.

"I don't exactly know," said Bobbie. "Only--if it's horrid, I don't want
you to; and if it's nice, I'd rather you didn't."

The old gentleman laughed.

"Well, then," he said, "I'll only just say that I'm very glad you came
to me about this--very glad, indeed. And I shouldn't be surprised if I
found out something very soon. I know a great many Russians in London,
and every Russian knows HIS name. Now tell me all about yourselves."

He turned to the others, but there was only one other, and that was
Peter. Phyllis had disappeared.

"Tell me all about yourself," said the old gentleman again. And, quite
naturally, Peter was stricken dumb.

"All right, we'll have an examination," said the old gentleman; "you two
sit on the table, and I'll sit on the bench and ask questions."

He did, and out came their names and ages--their Father's name and
business--how long they had lived at Three Chimneys and a great deal
more.

The questions were beginning to turn on a herring and a half for three
halfpence, and a pound of lead and a pound of feathers, when the door of
the waiting room was kicked open by a boot; as the boot entered everyone
could see that its lace was coming undone--and in came Phyllis, very
slowly and carefully.

In one hand she carried a large tin can, and in the other a thick slice
of bread and butter.

"Afternoon tea," she announced proudly, and held the can and the bread
and butter out to the old gentleman, who took them and said:--

"Bless my soul!"

"Yes," said Phyllis.

"It's very thoughtful of you," said the old gentleman, "very."

"But you might have got a cup," said Bobbie, "and a plate."

"Perks always drinks out of the can," said Phyllis, flushing red. "I
think it was very nice of him to give it me at all--let alone cups and
plates," she added.

"So do I," said the old gentleman, and he drank some of the tea and
tasted the bread and butter.

And then it was time for the next train, and he got into it with many
good-byes and kind last words.

"Well," said Peter, when they were left on the platform, and the
tail-lights of the train disappeared round the corner, "it's my belief
that we've lighted a candle to-day--like Latimer, you know, when he was
being burned--and there'll be fireworks for our Russian before long."

And so there were.

It wasn't ten days after the interview in the waiting room that the
three children were sitting on the top of the biggest rock in the field
below their house watching the 5.15 steam away from the station along
the bottom of the valley. They saw, too, the few people who had got out
at the station straggling up the road towards the village--and they saw
one person leave the road and open the gate that led across the fields
to Three Chimneys and to nowhere else.

"Who on earth!" said Peter, scrambling down.

"Let's go and see," said Phyllis.

So they did. And when they got near enough to see who the person was,
they saw it was their old gentleman himself, his brass buttons winking
in the afternoon sunshine, and his white waistcoat looking whiter than
ever against the green of the field.

"Hullo!" shouted the children, waving their hands.

"Hullo!" shouted the old gentleman, waving his hat.

Then the three started to run--and when they got to him they hardly had
breath left to say:--

"How do you do?"

"Good news," said he. "I've found your Russian friend's wife and
child--and I couldn't resist the temptation of giving myself the
pleasure of telling him."

But as he looked at Bobbie's face he felt that he COULD resist that
temptation.

"Here," he said to her, "you run on and tell him. The other two will
show me the way."

Bobbie ran. But when she had breathlessly panted out the news to the
Russian and Mother sitting in the quiet garden--when Mother's face had
lighted up so beautifully, and she had said half a dozen quick French
words to the Exile--Bobbie wished that she had NOT carried the news. For
the Russian sprang up with a cry that made Bobbie's heart leap and then
tremble--a cry of love and longing such as she had never heard. Then he
took Mother's hand and kissed it gently and reverently--and then he sank
down in his chair and covered his face with his hands and sobbed. Bobbie
crept away. She did not want to see the others just then.

But she was as gay as anybody when the endless French talking was over,
when Peter had torn down to the village for buns and cakes, and the
girls had got tea ready and taken it out into the garden.

The old gentleman was most merry and delightful. He seemed to be able
to talk in French and English almost at the same moment, and Mother did
nearly as well. It was a delightful time. Mother seemed as if she could
not make enough fuss about the old gentleman, and she said yes at once
when he asked if he might present some "goodies" to his little friends.

The word was new to the children--but they guessed that it meant sweets,
for the three large pink and green boxes, tied with green ribbon, which
he took out of his bag, held unheard-of layers of beautiful chocolates.

The Russian's few belongings were packed, and they all saw him off at
the station.

Then Mother turned to the old gentleman and said:--

"I don't know how to thank you for EVERYTHING. It has been a real
pleasure to me to see you. But we live very quietly. I am so sorry that
I can't ask you to come and see us again."

The children thought this very hard. When they HAD made a friend--and
such a friend--they would dearly have liked him to come and see them
again.

What the old gentleman thought they couldn't tell. He only said:--

"I consider myself very fortunate, Madam, to have been received once at
your house."

"Ah," said Mother, "I know I must seem surly and ungrateful--but--"

"You could never seem anything but a most charming and gracious lady,"
said the old gentleman, with another of his bows.

And as they turned to go up the hill, Bobbie saw her Mother's face.

"How tired you look, Mammy," she said; "lean on me."

"It's my place to give Mother my arm," said Peter. "I'm the head man of
the family when Father's away."

Mother took an arm of each.

"How awfully nice," said Phyllis, skipping joyfully, "to think of the
dear Russian embracing his long-lost wife. The baby must have grown a
lot since he saw it."

"Yes," said Mother.

"I wonder whether Father will think I'VE grown," Phyllis went on,
skipping still more gaily. "I have grown already, haven't I, Mother?"

"Yes," said Mother, "oh, yes," and Bobbie and Peter felt her hands
tighten on their arms.

"Poor old Mammy, you ARE tired," said Peter.

Bobbie said, "Come on, Phil; I'll race you to the gate."

And she started the race, though she hated doing it. YOU know why Bobbie
did that. Mother only thought that Bobbie was tired of walking slowly.
Even Mothers, who love you better than anyone else ever will, don't
always understand.



Chapter VIII. The amateur firemen.


"That's a likely little brooch you've got on, Miss," said Perks the
Porter; "I don't know as ever I see a thing more like a buttercup
without it WAS a buttercup."

"Yes," said Bobbie, glad and flushed by this approval. "I always thought
it was more like a buttercup almost than even a real one--and I NEVER
thought it would come to be mine, my very own--and then Mother gave it
to me for my birthday."

"Oh, have you had a birthday?" said Perks; and he seemed quite
surprised, as though a birthday were a thing only granted to a favoured
few.

"Yes," said Bobbie; "when's your birthday, Mr. Perks?" The children were
taking tea with Mr. Perks in the Porters' room among the lamps and
the railway almanacs. They had brought their own cups and some jam
turnovers. Mr. Perks made tea in a beer can, as usual, and everyone felt
very happy and confidential.

"My birthday?" said Perks, tipping some more dark brown tea out of the
can into Peter's cup. "I give up keeping of my birthday afore you was
born."

"But you must have been born SOMETIME, you know," said Phyllis,
thoughtfully, "even if it was twenty years ago--or thirty or sixty or
seventy."

"Not so long as that, Missie," Perks grinned as he answered. "If you
really want to know, it was thirty-two years ago, come the fifteenth of
this month."

"Then why don't you keep it?" asked Phyllis.

"I've got something else to keep besides birthdays," said Perks,
briefly.

"Oh! What?" asked Phyllis, eagerly. "Not secrets?"

"No," said Perks, "the kids and the Missus."

It was this talk that set the children thinking, and, presently,
talking. Perks was, on the whole, the dearest friend they had made. Not
so grand as the Station Master, but more approachable--less powerful
than the old gentleman, but more confidential.

"It seems horrid that nobody keeps his birthday," said Bobbie. "Couldn't
WE do something?"

"Let's go up to the Canal bridge and talk it over," said Peter. "I got a
new gut line from the postman this morning. He gave it me for a bunch of
roses that I gave him for his sweetheart. She's ill."

"Then I do think you might have given her the roses for nothing," said
Bobbie, indignantly.

"Nyang, nyang!" said Peter, disagreeably, and put his hands in his
pockets.

"He did, of course," said Phyllis, in haste; "directly we heard she was
ill we got the roses ready and waited by the gate. It was when you were
making the brekker-toast. And when he'd said 'Thank you' for the roses
so many times--much more than he need have--he pulled out the line and
gave it to Peter. It wasn't exchange. It was the grateful heart."

"Oh, I BEG your pardon, Peter," said Bobbie, "I AM so sorry."

"Don't mention it," said Peter, grandly, "I knew you would be."

So then they all went up to the Canal bridge. The idea was to fish from
the bridge, but the line was not quite long enough.

"Never mind," said Bobbie. "Let's just stay here and look at things.
Everything's so beautiful."

It was. The sun was setting in red splendour over the grey and purple
hills, and the canal lay smooth and shiny in the shadow--no ripple broke
its surface. It was like a grey satin ribbon between the dusky green
silk of the meadows that were on each side of its banks.

"It's all right," said Peter, "but somehow I can always see how pretty
things are much better when I've something to do. Let's get down on to
the towpath and fish from there."

Phyllis and Bobbie remembered how the boys on the canal-boats had thrown
coal at them, and they said so.

"Oh, nonsense," said Peter. "There aren't any boys here now. If there
were, I'd fight them."

Peter's sisters were kind enough not to remind him how he had NOT fought
the boys when coal had last been thrown. Instead they said, "All right,
then," and cautiously climbed down the steep bank to the towing-path.
The line was carefully baited, and for half an hour they fished
patiently and in vain. Not a single nibble came to nourish hope in their
hearts.

All eyes were intent on the sluggish waters that earnestly pretended
they had never harboured a single minnow when a loud rough shout made
them start.

"Hi!" said the shout, in most disagreeable tones, "get out of that,
can't you?"

An old white horse coming along the towing-path was within half a dozen
yards of them. They sprang to their feet and hastily climbed up the
bank.

"We'll slip down again when they've gone by," said Bobbie.

But, alas, the barge, after the manner of barges, stopped under the
bridge.

"She's going to anchor," said Peter; "just our luck!"

The barge did not anchor, because an anchor is not part of a
canal-boat's furniture, but she was moored with ropes fore and aft--and
the ropes were made fast to the palings and to crowbars driven into the
ground.

"What you staring at?" growled the Bargee, crossly.

"We weren't staring," said Bobbie; "we wouldn't be so rude."

"Rude be blessed," said the man; "get along with you!"

"Get along yourself," said Peter. He remembered what he had said about
fighting boys, and, besides, he felt safe halfway up the bank. "We've as
much right here as anyone else."

"Oh, 'AVE you, indeed!" said the man. "We'll soon see about that." And
he came across his deck and began to climb down the side of his barge.

"Oh, come away, Peter, come away!" said Bobbie and Phyllis, in agonised
unison.

"Not me," said Peter, "but YOU'D better."

The girls climbed to the top of the bank and stood ready to bolt for
home as soon as they saw their brother out of danger. The way home lay
all down hill. They knew that they all ran well. The Bargee did not look
as if HE did. He was red-faced, heavy, and beefy.

But as soon as his foot was on the towing-path the children saw that
they had misjudged him.

He made one spring up the bank and caught Peter by the leg, dragged him
down--set him on his feet with a shake--took him by the ear--and said
sternly:--

"Now, then, what do you mean by it? Don't you know these 'ere waters is
preserved? You ain't no right catching fish 'ere--not to say nothing of
your precious cheek."

Peter was always proud afterwards when he remembered that, with the
Bargee's furious fingers tightening on his ear, the Bargee's crimson
countenance close to his own, the Bargee's hot breath on his neck, he
had the courage to speak the truth.

"I WASN'T catching fish," said Peter.

"That's not YOUR fault, I'll be bound," said the man, giving Peter's ear
a twist--not a hard one--but still a twist.

Peter could not say that it was. Bobbie and Phyllis had been holding
on to the railings above and skipping with anxiety. Now suddenly Bobbie
slipped through the railings and rushed down the bank towards Peter, so
impetuously that Phyllis, following more temperately, felt certain that
her sister's descent would end in the waters of the canal. And so it
would have done if the Bargee hadn't let go of Peter's ear--and caught
her in his jerseyed arm.

"Who are you a-shoving of?" he said, setting her on her feet.

"Oh," said Bobbie, breathless, "I'm not shoving anybody. At least, not
on purpose. Please don't be cross with Peter. Of course, if it's your
canal, we're sorry and we won't any more. But we didn't know it was
yours."

"Go along with you," said the Bargee.

"Yes, we will; indeed we will," said Bobbie, earnestly; "but we do beg
your pardon--and really we haven't caught a single fish. I'd tell you
directly if we had, honour bright I would."

She held out her hands and Phyllis turned out her little empty pocket to
show that really they hadn't any fish concealed about them.

"Well," said the Bargee, more gently, "cut along, then, and don't you do
it again, that's all."

The children hurried up the bank.

"Chuck us a coat, M'ria," shouted the man. And a red-haired woman in a
green plaid shawl came out from the cabin door with a baby in her arms
and threw a coat to him. He put it on, climbed the bank, and slouched
along across the bridge towards the village.

"You'll find me up at the 'Rose and Crown' when you've got the kid to
sleep," he called to her from the bridge.

When he was out of sight the children slowly returned. Peter insisted on
this.

"The canal may belong to him," he said, "though I don't believe it
does. But the bridge is everybody's. Doctor Forrest told me it's public
property. I'm not going to be bounced off the bridge by him or anyone
else, so I tell you."

Peter's ear was still sore and so were his feelings.

The girls followed him as gallant soldiers might follow the leader of a
forlorn hope.

"I do wish you wouldn't," was all they said.

"Go home if you're afraid," said Peter; "leave me alone. I'M not
afraid."

The sound of the man's footsteps died away along the quiet road. The
peace of the evening was not broken by the notes of the sedge-warblers
or by the voice of the woman in the barge, singing her baby to sleep. It
was a sad song she sang. Something about Bill Bailey and how she wanted
him to come home.

The children stood leaning their arms on the parapet of the bridge; they
were glad to be quiet for a few minutes because all three hearts were
beating much more quickly.

"I'm not going to be driven away by any old bargeman, I'm not," said
Peter, thickly.

"Of course not," Phyllis said soothingly; "you didn't give in to him! So
now we might go home, don't you think?"

"NO," said Peter.

Nothing more was said till the woman got off the barge, climbed the
bank, and came across the bridge.

She hesitated, looking at the three backs of the children, then she
said, "Ahem."

Peter stayed as he was, but the girls looked round.

"You mustn't take no notice of my Bill," said the woman; "'is bark's
worse'n 'is bite. Some of the kids down Farley way is fair terrors. It
was them put 'is back up calling out about who ate the puppy-pie under
Marlow bridge."

"Who DID?" asked Phyllis.

"_I_ dunno," said the woman. "Nobody don't know! But somehow, and I
don't know the why nor the wherefore of it, them words is p'ison to a
barge-master. Don't you take no notice. 'E won't be back for two hours
good. You might catch a power o' fish afore that. The light's good an'
all," she added.

"Thank you," said Bobbie. "You're very kind. Where's your baby?"

"Asleep in the cabin," said the woman. "'E's all right. Never wakes
afore twelve. Reg'lar as a church clock, 'e is."

"I'm sorry," said Bobbie; "I would have liked to see him, close to."

"And a finer you never did see, Miss, though I says it." The woman's
face brightened as she spoke.

"Aren't you afraid to leave it?" said Peter.

"Lor' love you, no," said the woman; "who'd hurt a little thing like
'im? Besides, Spot's there. So long!"

The woman went away.

"Shall we go home?" said Phyllis.

"You can. I'm going to fish," said Peter briefly.

"I thought we came up here to talk about Perks's birthday," said
Phyllis.

"Perks's birthday'll keep."

So they got down on the towing-path again and Peter fished. He did not
catch anything.

It was almost quite dark, the girls were getting tired, and as Bobbie
said, it was past bedtime, when suddenly Phyllis cried, "What's that?"

And she pointed to the canal boat. Smoke was coming from the chimney of
the cabin, had indeed been curling softly into the soft evening air all
the time--but now other wreaths of smoke were rising, and these were
from the cabin door.

"It's on fire--that's all," said Peter, calmly. "Serve him right."

"Oh--how CAN you?" cried Phyllis. "Think of the poor dear dog."

"The BABY!" screamed Bobbie.

In an instant all three made for the barge.

Her mooring ropes were slack, and the little breeze, hardly strong
enough to be felt, had yet been strong enough to drift her stern against
the bank. Bobbie was first--then came Peter, and it was Peter who
slipped and fell. He went into the canal up to his neck, and his feet
could not feel the bottom, but his arm was on the edge of the barge.
Phyllis caught at his hair. It hurt, but it helped him to get out. Next
minute he had leaped on to the barge, Phyllis following.

"Not you!" he shouted to Bobbie; "ME, because I'm wet."

He caught up with Bobbie at the cabin door, and flung her aside very
roughly indeed; if they had been playing, such roughness would have made
Bobbie weep with tears of rage and pain. Now, though he flung her on
to the edge of the hold, so that her knee and her elbow were grazed and
bruised, she only cried:--

"No--not you--ME," and struggled up again. But not quickly enough.

Peter had already gone down two of the cabin steps into the cloud of
thick smoke. He stopped, remembered all he had ever heard of fires,
pulled his soaked handkerchief out of his breast pocket and tied it over
his mouth. As he pulled it out he said:--

"It's all right, hardly any fire at all."

And this, though he thought it was a lie, was rather good of Peter. It
was meant to keep Bobbie from rushing after him into danger. Of course
it didn't.

The cabin glowed red. A paraffin lamp was burning calmly in an orange
mist.

"Hi," said Peter, lifting the handkerchief from his mouth for a moment.
"Hi, Baby--where are you?" He choked.

"Oh, let ME go," cried Bobbie, close behind him. Peter pushed her back
more roughly than before, and went on.

Now what would have happened if the baby hadn't cried I don't know--but
just at that moment it DID cry. Peter felt his way through the dark
smoke, found something small and soft and warm and alive, picked it up
and backed out, nearly tumbling over Bobbie who was close behind. A dog
snapped at his leg--tried to bark, choked.

"I've got the kid," said Peter, tearing off the handkerchief and
staggering on to the deck.

Bobbie caught at the place where the bark came from, and her hands met
on the fat back of a smooth-haired dog. It turned and fastened its teeth
on her hand, but very gently, as much as to say:--

"I'm bound to bark and bite if strangers come into my master's cabin,
but I know you mean well, so I won't REALLY bite."

Bobbie dropped the dog.

"All right, old man. Good dog," said she. "Here--give me the baby,
Peter; you're so wet you'll give it cold."

Peter was only too glad to hand over the strange little bundle that
squirmed and whimpered in his arms.

"Now," said Bobbie, quickly, "you run straight to the 'Rose and Crown'
and tell them. Phil and I will stay here with the precious. Hush, then,
a dear, a duck, a darling! Go NOW, Peter! Run!"

"I can't run in these things," said Peter, firmly; "they're as heavy as
lead. I'll walk."

"Then I'LL run," said Bobbie. "Get on the bank, Phil, and I'll hand you
the dear."

The baby was carefully handed. Phyllis sat down on the bank and tried to
hush the baby. Peter wrung the water from his sleeves and knickerbocker
legs as well as he could, and it was Bobbie who ran like the wind across
the bridge and up the long white quiet twilight road towards the 'Rose
and Crown.'

There is a nice old-fashioned room at the 'Rose and Crown; where Bargees
and their wives sit of an evening drinking their supper beer, and
toasting their supper cheese at a glowing basketful of coals that
sticks out into the room under a great hooded chimney and is warmer and
prettier and more comforting than any other fireplace _I_ ever saw.

There was a pleasant party of barge people round the fire. You might
not have thought it pleasant, but they did; for they were all friends
or acquaintances, and they liked the same sort of things, and talked
the same sort of talk. This is the real secret of pleasant society. The
Bargee Bill, whom the children had found so disagreeable, was considered
excellent company by his mates. He was telling a tale of his own
wrongs--always a thrilling subject. It was his barge he was speaking
about.

"And 'e sent down word 'paint her inside hout,' not namin' no colour,
d'ye see? So I gets a lotter green paint and I paints her stem to stern,
and I tell yer she looked A1. Then 'E comes along and 'e says, 'Wot yer
paint 'er all one colour for?' 'e says. And I says, says I, 'Cause I
thought she'd look fust-rate,' says I, 'and I think so still.' An' he
says, 'DEW yer? Then ye can just pay for the bloomin' paint yerself,'
says he. An' I 'ad to, too." A murmur of sympathy ran round the
room. Breaking noisily in on it came Bobbie. She burst open the swing
door--crying breathlessly:--

"Bill! I want Bill the Bargeman."

There was a stupefied silence. Pots of beer were held in mid-air,
paralysed on their way to thirsty mouths.

"Oh," said Bobbie, seeing the bargewoman and making for her. "Your barge
cabin's on fire. Go quickly."

The woman started to her feet, and put a big red hand to her waist, on
the left side, where your heart seems to be when you are frightened or
miserable.

"Reginald Horace!" she cried in a terrible voice; "my Reginald Horace!"

"All right," said Bobbie, "if you mean the baby; got him out safe. Dog,
too." She had no breath for more, except, "Go on--it's all alight."

Then she sank on the ale-house bench and tried to get that breath of
relief after running which people call the 'second wind.' But she felt
as though she would never breathe again.

Bill the Bargee rose slowly and heavily. But his wife was a hundred
yards up the road before he had quite understood what was the matter.

Phyllis, shivering by the canal side, had hardly heard the quick
approaching feet before the woman had flung herself on the railing,
rolled down the bank, and snatched the baby from her.

"Don't," said Phyllis, reproachfully; "I'd just got him to sleep."

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Bill came up later talking in a language with which the children were
wholly unfamiliar. He leaped on to the barge and dipped up pails
of water. Peter helped him and they put out the fire. Phyllis, the
bargewoman, and the baby--and presently Bobbie, too--cuddled together in
a heap on the bank.

"Lord help me, if it was me left anything as could catch alight," said
the woman again and again.

But it wasn't she. It was Bill the Bargeman, who had knocked his pipe
out and the red ash had fallen on the hearth-rug and smouldered there
and at last broken into flame. Though a stern man he was just. He did
not blame his wife for what was his own fault, as many bargemen, and
other men, too, would have done.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

Mother was half wild with anxiety when at last the three children turned
up at Three Chimneys, all very wet by now, for Peter seemed to have come
off on the others. But when she had disentangled the truth of what had
happened from their mixed and incoherent narrative, she owned that they
had done quite right, and could not possibly have done otherwise. Nor
did she put any obstacles in the way of their accepting the cordial
invitation with which the bargeman had parted from them.

"Ye be here at seven to-morrow," he had said, "and I'll take you the
entire trip to Farley and back, so I will, and not a penny to pay.
Nineteen locks!"

They did not know what locks were; but they were at the bridge at seven,
with bread and cheese and half a soda cake, and quite a quarter of a leg
of mutton in a basket.

It was a glorious day. The old white horse strained at the ropes, the
barge glided smoothly and steadily through the still water. The sky was
blue overhead. Mr. Bill was as nice as anyone could possibly be. No one
would have thought that he could be the same man who had held Peter by
the ear. As for Mrs. Bill, she had always been nice, as Bobbie said, and
so had the baby, and even Spot, who might have bitten them quite badly
if he had liked.

"It was simply ripping, Mother," said Peter, when they reached home very
happy, very tired, and very dirty, "right over that glorious aqueduct.
And locks--you don't know what they're like. You sink into the ground
and then, when you feel you're never going to stop going down, two great
black gates open slowly, slowly--you go out, and there you are on the
canal just like you were before."

"I know," said Mother, "there are locks on the Thames. Father and I used
to go on the river at Marlow before we were married."

"And the dear, darling, ducky baby," said Bobbie; "it let me nurse it
for ages and ages--and it WAS so good. Mother, I wish we had a baby to
play with."

"And everybody was so nice to us," said Phyllis, "everybody we met. And
they say we may fish whenever we like. And Bill is going to show us the
way next time he's in these parts. He says we don't know really."

"He said YOU didn't know," said Peter; "but, Mother, he said he'd tell
all the bargees up and down the canal that we were the real, right sort,
and they were to treat us like good pals, as we were."

"So then I said," Phyllis interrupted, "we'd always each wear a red
ribbon when we went fishing by the canal, so they'd know it was US, and
we were the real, right sort, and be nice to us!"

"So you've made another lot of friends," said Mother; "first the railway
and then the canal!"

"Oh, yes," said Bobbie; "I think everyone in the world is friends if you
can only get them to see you don't want to be UN-friends."

"Perhaps you're right," said Mother; and she sighed. "Come, Chicks. It's
bedtime."

"Yes," said Phyllis. "Oh dear--and we went up there to talk about what
we'd do for Perks's birthday. And we haven't talked a single thing about
it!"

"No more we have," said Bobbie; "but Peter's saved Reginald Horace's
life. I think that's about good enough for one evening."

"Bobbie would have saved him if I hadn't knocked her down; twice I did,"
said Peter, loyally.

"So would I," said Phyllis, "if I'd known what to do."

"Yes," said Mother, "you've saved a little child's life. I do think
that's enough for one evening. Oh, my darlings, thank God YOU'RE all
safe!"



Chapter IX. The pride of Perks.


It was breakfast-time. Mother's face was very bright as she poured the
milk and ladled out the porridge.

"I've sold another story, Chickies," she said; "the one about the King
of the Mussels, so there'll be buns for tea. You can go and get them as
soon as they're baked. About eleven, isn't it?"

Peter, Phyllis, and Bobbie exchanged glances with each other, six
glances in all. Then Bobbie said:--

"Mother, would you mind if we didn't have the buns for tea to-night, but
on the fifteenth? That's next Thursday."

"_I_ don't mind when you have them, dear," said Mother, "but why?"

"Because it's Perks's birthday," said Bobbie; "he's thirty-two, and
he says he doesn't keep his birthday any more, because he's got other
things to keep--not rabbits or secrets--but the kids and the missus."

"You mean his wife and children," said Mother.

"Yes," said Phyllis; "it's the same thing, isn't it?"

"And we thought we'd make a nice birthday for him. He's been so awfully
jolly decent to us, you know, Mother," said Peter, "and we agreed that
next bun-day we'd ask you if we could."

"But suppose there hadn't been a bun-day before the fifteenth?" said
Mother.

"Oh, then, we meant to ask you to let us anti--antipate it, and go
without when the bun-day came."

"Anticipate," said Mother. "I see. Certainly. It would be nice to put
his name on the buns with pink sugar, wouldn't it?"

"Perks," said Peter, "it's not a pretty name."

"His other name's Albert," said Phyllis; "I asked him once."

"We might put A. P.," said Mother; "I'll show you how when the day
comes."

This was all very well as far as it went. But even fourteen halfpenny
buns with A. P. on them in pink sugar do not of themselves make a very
grand celebration.

"There are always flowers, of course," said Bobbie, later, when a really
earnest council was being held on the subject in the hay-loft where
the broken chaff-cutting machine was, and the row of holes to drop hay
through into the hay-racks over the mangers of the stables below.

"He's got lots of flowers of his own," said Peter.

"But it's always nice to have them given you," said Bobbie, "however
many you've got of your own. We can use flowers for trimmings to the
birthday. But there must be something to trim besides buns."

"Let's all be quiet and think," said Phyllis; "no one's to speak until
it's thought of something."

So they were all quiet and so very still that a brown rat thought that
there was no one in the loft and came out very boldly. When Bobbie
sneezed, the rat was quite shocked and hurried away, for he saw that a
hay-loft where such things could happen was no place for a respectable
middle-aged rat that liked a quiet life.

"Hooray!" cried Peter, suddenly, "I've got it." He jumped up and kicked
at the loose hay.

"What?" said the others, eagerly.

"Why, Perks is so nice to everybody. There must be lots of people in the
village who'd like to help to make him a birthday. Let's go round and
ask everybody."

"Mother said we weren't to ask people for things," said Bobbie,
doubtfully.

"For ourselves, she meant, silly, not for other people. I'll ask the old
gentleman too. You see if I don't," said Peter.

"Let's ask Mother first," said Bobbie.

"Oh, what's the use of bothering Mother about every little thing?"
said Peter, "especially when she's busy. Come on. Let's go down to the
village now and begin."

So they went. The old lady at the Post-office said she didn't see why
Perks should have a birthday any more than anyone else.

"No," said Bobbie, "I should like everyone to have one. Only we know
when his is."

"Mine's to-morrow," said the old lady, "and much notice anyone will take
of it. Go along with you."

So they went.

And some people were kind, and some were crusty. And some would give and
some would not. It is rather difficult work asking for things, even for
other people, as you have no doubt found if you have ever tried it.

When the children got home and counted up what had been given and what
had been promised, they felt that for the first day it was not so bad.
Peter wrote down the lists of the things in the little pocket-book where
he kept the numbers of his engines. These were the lists:--

     GIVEN.
     A tobacco pipe from the sweet shop.
     Half a pound of tea from the grocer's.
     A woollen scarf slightly faded from the draper's, which was the
         other side of the grocer's.
     A stuffed squirrel from the Doctor.

     PROMISED.
     A piece of meat from the butcher.
     Six fresh eggs from the woman who lived in the old turnpike cottage.
     A piece of honeycomb and six bootlaces from the cobbler, and an
         iron shovel from the blacksmith's.

Very early next morning Bobbie got up and woke Phyllis. This had been
agreed on between them. They had not told Peter because they thought he
would think it silly. But they told him afterwards, when it had turned
out all right.

They cut a big bunch of roses, and put it in a basket with the
needle-book that Phyllis had made for Bobbie on her birthday, and a very
pretty blue necktie of Phyllis's. Then they wrote on a paper: 'For Mrs.
Ransome, with our best love, because it is her birthday,' and they put
the paper in the basket, and they took it to the Post-office, and went
in and put it on the counter and ran away before the old woman at the
Post-office had time to get into her shop.

When they got home Peter had grown confidential over helping Mother to
get the breakfast and had told her their plans.

"There's no harm in it," said Mother, "but it depends HOW you do it. I
only hope he won't be offended and think it's CHARITY. Poor people are
very proud, you know."

"It isn't because he's poor," said Phyllis; "it's because we're fond of
him."

"I'll find some things that Phyllis has outgrown," said Mother, "if
you're quite sure you can give them to him without his being offended. I
should like to do some little thing for him because he's been so kind to
you. I can't do much because we're poor ourselves. What are you writing,
Bobbie?"

"Nothing particular," said Bobbie, who had suddenly begun to scribble.
"I'm sure he'd like the things, Mother."

The morning of the fifteenth was spent very happily in getting the buns
and watching Mother make A. P. on them with pink sugar. You know how
it's done, of course? You beat up whites of eggs and mix powdered sugar
with them, and put in a few drops of cochineal. And then you make a cone
of clean, white paper with a little hole at the pointed end, and put the
pink egg-sugar in at the big end. It runs slowly out at the pointed end,
and you write the letters with it just as though it were a great fat pen
full of pink sugar-ink.

The buns looked beautiful with A. P. on every one, and, when they were
put in a cool oven to set the sugar, the children went up to the village
to collect the honey and the shovel and the other promised things.

The old lady at the Post-office was standing on her doorstep. The
children said "Good morning," politely, as they passed.

"Here, stop a bit," she said.

So they stopped.

"Those roses," said she.

"Did you like them?" said Phyllis; "they were as fresh as fresh. _I_
made the needle-book, but it was Bobbie's present." She skipped joyously
as she spoke.

"Here's your basket," said the Post-office woman. She went in and
brought out the basket. It was full of fat, red gooseberries.

"I dare say Perks's children would like them," said she.

"You ARE an old dear," said Phyllis, throwing her arms around the old
lady's fat waist. "Perks WILL be pleased."

"He won't be half so pleased as I was with your needle-book and the tie
and the pretty flowers and all," said the old lady, patting Phyllis's
shoulder. "You're good little souls, that you are. Look here. I've got a
pram round the back in the wood-lodge. It was got for my Emmie's first,
that didn't live but six months, and she never had but that one. I'd
like Mrs. Perks to have it. It 'ud be a help to her with that great boy
of hers. Will you take it along?"

"OH!" said all the children together.

When Mrs. Ransome had got out the perambulator and taken off the careful
papers that covered it, and dusted it all over, she said:--

"Well, there it is. I don't know but what I'd have given it to her
before if I'd thought of it. Only I didn't quite know if she'd accept of
it from me. You tell her it was my Emmie's little one's pram--"

"Oh, ISN'T it nice to think there is going to be a real live baby in it
again!"

"Yes," said Mrs. Ransome, sighing, and then laughing; "here, I'll give
you some peppermint cushions for the little ones, and then you run along
before I give you the roof off my head and the clothes off my back."

All the things that had been collected for Perks were packed into
the perambulator, and at half-past three Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis
wheeled it down to the little yellow house where Perks lived.

The house was very tidy. On the window ledge was a jug of wild-flowers,
big daisies, and red sorrel, and feathery, flowery grasses.

There was a sound of splashing from the wash-house, and a partly washed
boy put his head round the door.

"Mother's a-changing of herself," he said.

"Down in a minute," a voice sounded down the narrow, freshly scrubbed
stairs.

The children waited. Next moment the stairs creaked and Mrs. Perks came
down, buttoning her bodice. Her hair was brushed very smooth and tight,
and her face shone with soap and water.

"I'm a bit late changing, Miss," she said to Bobbie, "owing to me having
had a extry clean-up to-day, along o' Perks happening to name its being
his birthday. I don't know what put it into his head to think of such
a thing. We keeps the children's birthdays, of course; but him and
me--we're too old for such like, as a general rule."

"We knew it was his birthday," said Peter, "and we've got some presents
for him outside in the perambulator."

As the presents were being unpacked, Mrs. Perks gasped. When they
were all unpacked, she surprised and horrified the children by sitting
suddenly down on a wooden chair and bursting into tears.

"Oh, don't!" said everybody; "oh, please don't!" And Peter added,
perhaps a little impatiently: "What on earth is the matter? You don't
mean to say you don't like it?"

Mrs. Perks only sobbed. The Perks children, now as shiny-faced as anyone
could wish, stood at the wash-house door, and scowled at the intruders.
There was a silence, an awkward silence.

"DON'T you like it?" said Peter, again, while his sisters patted Mrs.
Perks on the back.

She stopped crying as suddenly as she had begun.

"There, there, don't you mind me. I'M all right!" she said. "Like it?
Why, it's a birthday such as Perks never 'ad, not even when 'e was a boy
and stayed with his uncle, who was a corn chandler in his own account.
He failed afterwards. Like it? Oh--" and then she went on and said all
sorts of things that I won't write down, because I am sure that Peter
and Bobbie and Phyllis would not like me to. Their ears got hotter and
hotter, and their faces redder and redder, at the kind things Mrs. Perks
said. They felt they had done nothing to deserve all this praise.

At last Peter said: "Look here, we're glad you're pleased. But if you go
on saying things like that, we must go home. And we did want to stay and
see if Mr. Perks is pleased, too. But we can't stand this."

"I won't say another single word," said Mrs. Perks, with a beaming face,
"but that needn't stop me thinking, need it? For if ever--"

"Can we have a plate for the buns?" Bobbie asked abruptly. And then Mrs.
Perks hastily laid the table for tea, and the buns and the honey and
the gooseberries were displayed on plates, and the roses were put in two
glass jam jars, and the tea-table looked, as Mrs. Perks said, "fit for a
Prince."

"To think!" she said, "me getting the place tidy early, and the little
'uns getting the wild-flowers and all--when never did I think there'd be
anything more for him except the ounce of his pet particular that I
got o' Saturday and been saving up for 'im ever since. Bless us! 'e IS
early!"

Perks had indeed unlatched the latch of the little front gate.

"Oh," whispered Bobbie, "let's hide in the back kitchen, and YOU tell
him about it. But give him the tobacco first, because you got it for
him. And when you've told him, we'll all come in and shout, 'Many happy
returns!'"

It was a very nice plan, but it did not quite come off. To begin with,
there was only just time for Peter and Bobbie and Phyllis to rush into
the wash-house, pushing the young and open-mouthed Perks children in
front of them. There was not time to shut the door, so that, without at
all meaning it, they had to listen to what went on in the kitchen. The
wash-house was a tight fit for the Perks children and the Three Chimneys
children, as well as all the wash-house's proper furniture, including
the mangle and the copper.

"Hullo, old woman!" they heard Mr. Perks's voice say; "here's a pretty
set-out!"

"It's your birthday tea, Bert," said Mrs. Perks, "and here's a ounce of
your extry particular. I got it o' Saturday along o' your happening to
remember it was your birthday to-day."

"Good old girl!" said Mr. Perks, and there was a sound of a kiss.

"But what's that pram doing here? And what's all these bundles? And
where did you get the sweetstuff, and--"

The children did not hear what Mrs. Perks replied, because just then
Bobbie gave a start, put her hand in her pocket, and all her body grew
stiff with horror.

"Oh!" she whispered to the others, "whatever shall we do? I forgot to
put the labels on any of the things! He won't know what's from who.
He'll think it's all US, and that we're trying to be grand or charitable
or something horrid."

"Hush!" said Peter.

And then they heard the voice of Mr. Perks, loud and rather angry.

"I don't care," he said; "I won't stand it, and so I tell you straight."

"But," said Mrs. Perks, "it's them children you make such a fuss
about--the children from the Three Chimneys."

"I don't care," said Perks, firmly, "not if it was a angel from Heaven.
We've got on all right all these years and no favours asked. I'm not
going to begin these sort of charity goings-on at my time of life, so
don't you think it, Nell."

"Oh, hush!" said poor Mrs Perks; "Bert, shut your silly tongue, for
goodness' sake. The all three of 'ems in the wash-house a-listening to
every word you speaks."

"Then I'll give them something to listen to," said the angry Perks;
"I've spoke my mind to them afore now, and I'll do it again," he added,
and he took two strides to the wash-house door, and flung it wide
open--as wide, that is, as it would go, with the tightly packed children
behind it.

"Come out," said Perks, "come out and tell me what you mean by it. 'Ave
I ever complained to you of being short, as you comes this charity lay
over me?"

"OH!" said Phyllis, "I thought you'd be so pleased; I'll never try to be
kind to anyone else as long as I live. No, I won't, not never."

She burst into tears.

"We didn't mean any harm," said Peter.

"It ain't what you means so much as what you does," said Perks.

"Oh, DON'T!" cried Bobbie, trying hard to be braver than Phyllis, and to
find more words than Peter had done for explaining in. "We thought you'd
love it. We always have things on our birthdays."

"Oh, yes," said Perks, "your own relations; that's different."

"Oh, no," Bobbie answered. "NOT our own relations. All the servants
always gave us things at home, and us to them when it was their
birthdays. And when it was mine, and Mother gave me the brooch like a
buttercup, Mrs. Viney gave me two lovely glass pots, and nobody thought
she was coming the charity lay over us."

"If it had been glass pots here," said Perks, "I wouldn't ha' said so
much. It's there being all this heaps and heaps of things I can't stand.
No--nor won't, neither."

"But they're not all from us--" said Peter, "only we forgot to put the
labels on. They're from all sorts of people in the village."

"Who put 'em up to it, I'd like to know?" asked Perks.

"Why, we did," sniffed Phyllis.

Perks sat down heavily in the elbow-chair and looked at them with what
Bobbie afterwards described as withering glances of gloomy despair.

"So you've been round telling the neighbours we can't make both
ends meet? Well, now you've disgraced us as deep as you can in the
neighbourhood, you can just take the whole bag of tricks back w'ere it
come from. Very much obliged, I'm sure. I don't doubt but what you meant
it kind, but I'd rather not be acquainted with you any longer if it's
all the same to you." He deliberately turned the chair round so that
his back was turned to the children. The legs of the chair grated on the
brick floor, and that was the only sound that broke the silence.

Then suddenly Bobbie spoke.

"Look here," she said, "this is most awful."

"That's what I says," said Perks, not turning round.

"Look here," said Bobbie, desperately, "we'll go if you like--and you
needn't be friends with us any more if you don't want, but--"

"WE shall always be friends with YOU, however nasty you are to us,"
sniffed Phyllis, wildly.

"Be quiet," said Peter, in a fierce aside.

"But before we go," Bobbie went on desperately, "do let us show you the
labels we wrote to put on the things."

"I don't want to see no labels," said Perks, "except proper luggage ones
in my own walk of life. Do you think I've kept respectable and outer
debt on what I gets, and her having to take in washing, to be give away
for a laughing-stock to all the neighbours?"

"Laughing?" said Peter; "you don't know."

"You're a very hasty gentleman," whined Phyllis; "you know you were
wrong once before, about us not telling you the secret about the
Russian. Do let Bobbie tell you about the labels!"

"Well. Go ahead!" said Perks, grudgingly.

"Well, then," said Bobbie, fumbling miserably, yet not without hope, in
her tightly stuffed pocket, "we wrote down all the things everybody said
when they gave us the things, with the people's names, because Mother
said we ought to be careful--because--but I wrote down what she
said--and you'll see."

But Bobbie could not read the labels just at once. She had to swallow
once or twice before she could begin.

Mrs. Perks had been crying steadily ever since her husband had opened
the wash-house door. Now she caught her breath, choked, and said:--

"Don't you upset yourself, Missy. _I_ know you meant it kind if he
doesn't."

"May I read the labels?" said Bobbie, crying on to the slips as she
tried to sort them. "Mother's first. It says:--

"'Little Clothes for Mrs. Perks's children.' Mother said, 'I'll find
some of Phyllis's things that she's grown out of if you're quite sure
Mr. Perks wouldn't be offended and think it's meant for charity. I'd
like to do some little thing for him, because he's so kind to you. I
can't do much because we're poor ourselves.'"

Bobbie paused.

"That's all right," said Perks, "your Ma's a born lady. We'll keep the
little frocks, and what not, Nell."

"Then there's the perambulator and the gooseberries, and the sweets,"
said Bobbie, "they're from Mrs. Ransome. She said: 'I dare say Mr.
Perks's children would like the sweets. And the perambulator was got for
my Emmie's first--it didn't live but six months, and she's never had but
that one. I'd like Mrs. Perks to have it. It would be a help with her
fine boy. I'd have given it before if I'd been sure she'd accept of
it from me.' She told me to tell you," Bobbie added, "that it was her
Emmie's little one's pram."

"I can't send that pram back, Bert," said Mrs Perks, firmly, "and I
won't. So don't you ask me--"

"I'm not a-asking anything," said Perks, gruffly.

"Then the shovel," said Bobbie. "Mr. James made it for you himself. And
he said--where is it? Oh, yes, here! He said, 'You tell Mr. Perks it's a
pleasure to make a little trifle for a man as is so much respected,' and
then he said he wished he could shoe your children and his own children,
like they do the horses, because, well, he knew what shoe leather was."

"James is a good enough chap," said Perks.

"Then the honey," said Bobbie, in haste, "and the boot-laces. HE said
he respected a man that paid his way--and the butcher said the same. And
the old turnpike woman said many was the time you'd lent her a hand
with her garden when you were a lad--and things like that came home to
roost--I don't know what she meant. And everybody who gave anything said
they liked you, and it was a very good idea of ours; and nobody said
anything about charity or anything horrid like that. And the old
gentleman gave Peter a gold pound for you, and said you were a man who
knew your work. And I thought you'd LOVE to know how fond people are
of you, and I never was so unhappy in my life. Good-bye. I hope you'll
forgive us some day--"

She could say no more, and she turned to go.

"Stop," said Perks, still with his back to them; "I take back every word
I've said contrary to what you'd wish. Nell, set on the kettle."

"We'll take the things away if you're unhappy about them," said Peter;
"but I think everybody'll be most awfully disappointed, as well as us."

"I'm not unhappy about them," said Perks; "I don't know," he added,
suddenly wheeling the chair round and showing a very odd-looking
screwed-up face, "I don't know as ever I was better pleased. Not so much
with the presents--though they're an A1 collection--but the kind respect
of our neighbours. That's worth having, eh, Nell?"

"I think it's all worth having," said Mrs. Perks, "and you've made a
most ridiculous fuss about nothing, Bert, if you ask me."

"No, I ain't," said Perks, firmly; "if a man didn't respect hisself, no
one wouldn't do it for him."

"But everyone respects you," said Bobbie; "they all said so."

"I knew you'd like it when you really understood," said Phyllis,
brightly.

"Humph! You'll stay to tea?" said Mr. Perks.

Later on Peter proposed Mr. Perks's health. And Mr. Perks proposed a
toast, also honoured in tea, and the toast was, "May the garland of
friendship be ever green," which was much more poetical than anyone had
expected from him.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

"Jolly good little kids, those," said Mr. Perks to his wife as they went
to bed.

"Oh, they're all right, bless their hearts," said his wife; "it's you
that's the aggravatingest old thing that ever was. I was ashamed of
you--I tell you--"

"You didn't need to be, old gal. I climbed down handsome soon as I
understood it wasn't charity. But charity's what I never did abide, and
won't neither."

          *          *          *          *          *          *

All sorts of people were made happy by that birthday party. Mr. Perks
and Mrs. Perks and the little Perkses by all the nice things and by the
kind thoughts of their neighbours; the Three Chimneys children by the
success, undoubted though unexpectedly delayed, of their plan; and Mrs.
Ransome every time she saw the fat Perks baby in the perambulator.
Mrs. Perks made quite a round of visits to thank people for their kind
birthday presents, and after each visit felt that she had a better
friend than she had thought.

"Yes," said Perks, reflectively, "it's not so much what you does as what
you means; that's what I say. Now if it had been charity--"

"Oh, drat charity," said Mrs. Perks; "nobody won't offer you
charity, Bert, however much you was to want it, I lay. That was just
friendliness, that was."

When the clergyman called on Mrs. Perks, she told him all about it. "It
WAS friendliness, wasn't it, Sir?" said she.

"I think," said the clergyman, "it was what is sometimes called
loving-kindness."

So you see it was all right in the end. But if one does that sort of
thing, one has to be careful to do it in the right way. For, as Mr.
Perks said, when he had time to think it over, it's not so much what you
do, as what you mean.



Chapter X. The terrible secret.


When they first went to live at Three Chimneys, the children had talked
a great deal about their Father, and had asked a great many questions
about him, and what he was doing and where he was and when he would come
home. Mother always answered their questions as well as she could. But
as the time went on they grew to speak less of him. Bobbie had felt
almost from the first that for some strange miserable reason these
questions hurt Mother and made her sad. And little by little the others
came to have this feeling, too, though they could not have put it into
words.

One day, when Mother was working so hard that she could not leave off
even for ten minutes, Bobbie carried up her tea to the big bare room
that they called Mother's workshop. It had hardly any furniture. Just
a table and a chair and a rug. But always big pots of flowers on the
window-sills and on the mantelpiece. The children saw to that. And from
the three long uncurtained windows the beautiful stretch of meadow and
moorland, the far violet of the hills, and the unchanging changefulness
of cloud and sky.

"Here's your tea, Mother-love," said Bobbie; "do drink it while it's
hot."

Mother laid down her pen among the pages that were scattered all over
the table, pages covered with her writing, which was almost as plain
as print, and much prettier. She ran her hands into her hair, as if she
were going to pull it out by handfuls.

"Poor dear head," said Bobbie, "does it ache?"

"No--yes--not much," said Mother. "Bobbie, do you think Peter and Phil
are FORGETTING Father?"

"NO," said Bobbie, indignantly. "Why?"

"You none of you ever speak of him now."

Bobbie stood first on one leg and then on the other.

"We often talk about him when we're by ourselves," she said.

"But not to me," said Mother. "Why?"

Bobbie did not find it easy to say why.

"I--you--" she said and stopped. She went over to the window and looked
out.

"Bobbie, come here," said her Mother, and Bobbie came.

"Now," said Mother, putting her arm round Bobbie and laying her ruffled
head against Bobbie's shoulder, "try to tell me, dear."

Bobbie fidgeted.

"Tell Mother."

"Well, then," said Bobbie, "I thought you were so unhappy about Daddy
not being here, it made you worse when I talked about him. So I stopped
doing it."

"And the others?"

"I don't know about the others," said Bobbie. "I never said anything
about THAT to them. But I expect they felt the same about it as me."

"Bobbie dear," said Mother, still leaning her head against her, "I'll
tell you. Besides parting from Father, he and I have had a great
sorrow--oh, terrible--worse than anything you can think of, and at first
it did hurt to hear you all talking of him as if everything were just
the same. But it would be much more terrible if you were to forget him.
That would be worse than anything."

"The trouble," said Bobbie, in a very little voice--"I promised I
would never ask you any questions, and I never have, have I? But--the
trouble--it won't last always?"

"No," said Mother, "the worst will be over when Father comes home to
us."

"I wish I could comfort you," said Bobbie.

"Oh, my dear, do you suppose you don't? Do you think I haven't noticed
how good you've all been, not quarrelling nearly as much as you used
to--and all the little kind things you do for me--the flowers, and
cleaning my shoes, and tearing up to make my bed before I get time to do
it myself?"

Bobbie HAD sometimes wondered whether Mother noticed these things.

"That's nothing," she said, "to what--"

"I MUST get on with my work," said Mother, giving Bobbie one last
squeeze. "Don't say anything to the others."

That evening in the hour before bed-time instead of reading to the
children Mother told them stories of the games she and Father used
to have when they were children and lived near each other in the
country--tales of the adventures of Father with Mother's brothers when
they were all boys together. Very funny stories they were, and the
children laughed as they listened.

"Uncle Edward died before he was grown up, didn't he?" said Phyllis, as
Mother lighted the bedroom candles.

"Yes, dear," said Mother, "you would have loved him. He was such a
brave boy, and so adventurous. Always in mischief, and yet friends with
everybody in spite of it. And your Uncle Reggie's in Ceylon--yes, and
Father's away, too. But I think they'd all like to think we'd enjoyed
talking about the things they used to do. Don't you think so?"

"Not Uncle Edward," said Phyllis, in a shocked tone; "he's in Heaven."

"You don't suppose he's forgotten us and all the old times, because God
has taken him, any more than I forget him. Oh, no, he remembers. He's
only away for a little time. We shall see him some day."

"And Uncle Reggie--and Father, too?" said Peter.

"Yes," said Mother. "Uncle Reggie and Father, too. Good night, my
darlings."

"Good night," said everyone. Bobbie hugged her mother more closely even
than usual, and whispered in her ear, "Oh, I do love you so, Mummy--I
do--I do--"

When Bobbie came to think it all over, she tried not to wonder what
the great trouble was. But she could not always help it. Father was not
dead--like poor Uncle Edward--Mother had said so. And he was not ill, or
Mother would have been with him. Being poor wasn't the trouble. Bobbie
knew it was something nearer the heart than money could be.

"I mustn't try to think what it is," she told herself; "no, I mustn't. I
AM glad Mother noticed about us not quarrelling so much. We'll keep that
up."

And alas, that very afternoon she and Peter had what Peter called a
first-class shindy.

They had not been a week at Three Chimneys before they had asked Mother
to let them have a piece of garden each for their very own, and she had
agreed, and the south border under the peach trees had been divided into
three pieces and they were allowed to plant whatever they liked there.

Phyllis had planted mignonette and nasturtium and Virginia Stock in
hers. The seeds came up, and though they looked just like weeds, Phyllis
believed that they would bear flowers some day. The Virginia Stock
justified her faith quite soon, and her garden was gay with a band of
bright little flowers, pink and white and red and mauve.

"I can't weed for fear I pull up the wrong things," she used to say
comfortably; "it saves such a lot of work."

Peter sowed vegetable seeds in his--carrots and onions and turnips.
The seed was given to him by the farmer who lived in the nice
black-and-white, wood-and-plaster house just beyond the bridge. He
kept turkeys and guinea fowls, and was a most amiable man. But Peter's
vegetables never had much of a chance, because he liked to use the earth
of his garden for digging canals, and making forts and earthworks for
his toy soldiers. And the seeds of vegetables rarely come to much in
a soil that is constantly disturbed for the purposes of war and
irrigation.

Bobbie planted rose-bushes in her garden, but all the little new leaves
of the rose-bushes shrivelled and withered, perhaps because she moved
them from the other part of the garden in May, which is not at all the
right time of year for moving roses. But she would not own that they
were dead, and hoped on against hope, until the day when Perks came up
to see the garden, and told her quite plainly that all her roses were as
dead as doornails.

"Only good for bonfires, Miss," he said. "You just dig 'em up and burn
'em, and I'll give you some nice fresh roots outer my garden; pansies,
and stocks, and sweet willies, and forget-me-nots. I'll bring 'em along
to-morrow if you get the ground ready."

So next day she set to work, and that happened to be the day when Mother
had praised her and the others about not quarrelling. She moved the
rose-bushes and carried them to the other end of the garden, where the
rubbish heap was that they meant to make a bonfire of when Guy Fawkes'
Day came.

Meanwhile Peter had decided to flatten out all his forts and earthworks,
with a view to making a model of the railway-tunnel, cutting,
embankment, canal, aqueduct, bridges, and all.

So when Bobbie came back from her last thorny journey with the dead
rose-bushes, he had got the rake and was using it busily.

"_I_ was using the rake," said Bobbie.

"Well, I'm using it now," said Peter.

"But I had it first," said Bobbie.

"Then it's my turn now," said Peter. And that was how the quarrel began.

"You're always being disagreeable about nothing," said Peter, after some
heated argument.

"I had the rake first," said Bobbie, flushed and defiant, holding on to
its handle.

"Don't--I tell you I said this morning I meant to have it. Didn't I,
Phil?"

Phyllis said she didn't want to be mixed up in their rows. And
instantly, of course, she was.

"If you remember, you ought to say."

"Of course she doesn't remember--but she might say so."

"I wish I'd had a brother instead of two whiny little kiddy sisters,"
said Peter. This was always recognised as indicating the high-water mark
of Peter's rage.

Bobbie made the reply she always made to it.

"I can't think why little boys were ever invented," and just as she said
it she looked up, and saw the three long windows of Mother's workshop
flashing in the red rays of the sun. The sight brought back those words
of praise:--

"You don't quarrel like you used to do."

"OH!" cried Bobbie, just as if she had been hit, or had caught her
finger in a door, or had felt the hideous sharp beginnings of toothache.

"What's the matter?" said Phyllis.

Bobbie wanted to say: "Don't let's quarrel. Mother hates it so," but
though she tried hard, she couldn't. Peter was looking too disagreeable
and insulting.

"Take the horrid rake, then," was the best she could manage. And she
suddenly let go her hold on the handle. Peter had been holding on to
it too firmly and pullingly, and now that the pull the other way was
suddenly stopped, he staggered and fell over backward, the teeth of the
rake between his feet.

"Serve you right," said Bobbie, before she could stop herself.

Peter lay still for half a moment--long enough to frighten Bobbie a
little. Then he frightened her a little more, for he sat up--screamed
once--turned rather pale, and then lay back and began to shriek, faintly
but steadily. It sounded exactly like a pig being killed a quarter of a
mile off.

Mother put her head out of the window, and it wasn't half a minute after
that she was in the garden kneeling by the side of Peter, who never for
an instant ceased to squeal.

"What happened, Bobbie?" Mother asked.

"It was the rake," said Phyllis. "Peter was pulling at it, so was
Bobbie, and she let go and he went over."

"Stop that noise, Peter," said Mother. "Come. Stop at once."

Peter used up what breath he had left in a last squeal and stopped.

"Now," said Mother, "are you hurt?"

"If he was really hurt, he wouldn't make such a fuss," said Bobbie,
still trembling with fury; "he's not a coward!"

"I think my foot's broken off, that's all," said Peter, huffily, and sat
up. Then he turned quite white. Mother put her arm round him.

"He IS hurt," she said; "he's fainted. Here, Bobbie, sit down and take
his head on your lap."

Then Mother undid Peter's boots. As she took the right one off,
something dripped from his foot on to the ground. It was red blood. And
when the stocking came off there were three red wounds in Peter's foot
and ankle, where the teeth of the rake had bitten him, and his foot was
covered with red smears.

"Run for water--a basinful," said Mother, and Phyllis ran. She upset
most of the water out of the basin in her haste, and had to fetch more
in a jug.

Peter did not open his eyes again till Mother had tied her handkerchief
round his foot, and she and Bobbie had carried him in and laid him on
the brown wooden settle in the dining-room. By this time Phyllis was
halfway to the Doctor's.

Mother sat by Peter and bathed his foot and talked to him, and Bobbie
went out and got tea ready, and put on the kettle.

"It's all I can do," she told herself. "Oh, suppose Peter should die, or
be a helpless cripple for life, or have to walk with crutches, or wear a
boot with a sole like a log of wood!"

She stood by the back door reflecting on these gloomy possibilities, her
eyes fixed on the water-butt.

"I wish I'd never been born," she said, and she said it out loud.

"Why, lawk a mercy, what's that for?" asked a voice, and Perks stood
before her with a wooden trug basket full of green-leaved things and
soft, loose earth.

"Oh, it's you," she said. "Peter's hurt his foot with a rake--three
great gaping wounds, like soldiers get. And it was partly my fault."

"That it wasn't, I'll go bail," said Perks. "Doctor seen him?"

"Phyllis has gone for the Doctor."

"He'll be all right; you see if he isn't," said Perks. "Why, my father's
second cousin had a hay-fork run into him, right into his inside, and he
was right as ever in a few weeks, all except his being a bit weak in
the head afterwards, and they did say that it was along of his getting
a touch of the sun in the hay-field, and not the fork at all. I remember
him well. A kind-'earted chap, but soft, as you might say."

Bobbie tried to let herself be cheered by this heartening reminiscence.

"Well," said Perks, "you won't want to be bothered with gardening just
this minute, I dare say. You show me where your garden is, and I'll
pop the bits of stuff in for you. And I'll hang about, if I may make so
free, to see the Doctor as he comes out and hear what he says. You cheer
up, Missie. I lay a pound he ain't hurt, not to speak of."

But he was. The Doctor came and looked at the foot and bandaged it
beautifully, and said that Peter must not put it to the ground for at
least a week.

"He won't be lame, or have to wear crutches or a lump on his foot, will
he?" whispered Bobbie, breathlessly, at the door.

"My aunt! No!" said Dr. Forrest; "he'll be as nimble as ever on his pins
in a fortnight. Don't you worry, little Mother Goose."

It was when Mother had gone to the gate with the Doctor to take his last
instructions and Phyllis was filling the kettle for tea, that Peter and
Bobbie found themselves alone.

"He says you won't be lame or anything," said Bobbie.

"Oh, course I shan't, silly," said Peter, very much relieved all the
same.

"Oh, Peter, I AM so sorry," said Bobbie, after a pause.

"That's all right," said Peter, gruffly.

"It was ALL my fault," said Bobbie.

"Rot," said Peter.

"If we hadn't quarrelled, it wouldn't have happened. I knew it was wrong
to quarrel. I wanted to say so, but somehow I couldn't."

"Don't drivel," said Peter. "I shouldn't have stopped if you HAD said
it. Not likely. And besides, us rowing hadn't anything to do with it.
I might have caught my foot in the hoe, or taken off my fingers in the
chaff-cutting machine or blown my nose off with fireworks. It would have
been hurt just the same whether we'd been rowing or not."

"But I knew it was wrong to quarrel," said Bobbie, in tears, "and now
you're hurt and--"

"Now look here," said Peter, firmly, "you just dry up. If you're not
careful, you'll turn into a beastly little Sunday-school prig, so I tell
you."

"I don't mean to be a prig. But it's so hard not to be when you're
really trying to be good."

(The Gentle Reader may perhaps have suffered from this difficulty.)

"Not it," said Peter; "it's a jolly good thing it wasn't you was hurt.
I'm glad it was ME. There! If it had been you, you'd have been lying
on the sofa looking like a suffering angel and being the light of the
anxious household and all that. And I couldn't have stood it."

"No, I shouldn't," said Bobbie.

"Yes, you would," said Peter.

"I tell you I shouldn't."

"I tell you you would."

"Oh, children," said Mother's voice at the door. "Quarrelling again?
Already?"

"We aren't quarrelling--not really," said Peter. "I wish you wouldn't
think it's rows every time we don't agree!" When Mother had gone out
again, Bobbie broke out:--

"Peter, I AM sorry you're hurt. But you ARE a beast to say I'm a prig."

"Well," said Peter unexpectedly, "perhaps I am. You did say I wasn't a
coward, even when you were in such a wax. The only thing is--don't
you be a prig, that's all. You keep your eyes open and if you feel
priggishness coming on just stop in time. See?"

"Yes," said Bobbie, "I see."

"Then let's call it Pax," said Peter, magnanimously: "bury the hatchet
in the fathoms of the past. Shake hands on it. I say, Bobbie, old chap,
I am tired."

He was tired for many days after that, and the settle seemed hard and
uncomfortable in spite of all the pillows and bolsters and soft folded
rugs. It was terrible not to be able to go out. They moved the settle
to the window, and from there Peter could see the smoke of the trains
winding along the valley. But he could not see the trains.

At first Bobbie found it quite hard to be as nice to him as she wanted
to be, for fear he should think her priggish. But that soon wore off,
and both she and Phyllis were, as he observed, jolly good sorts. Mother
sat with him when his sisters were out. And the words, "he's not a
coward," made Peter determined not to make any fuss about the pain in
his foot, though it was rather bad, especially at night.

Praise helps people very much, sometimes.

There were visitors, too. Mrs. Perks came up to ask how he was, and so
did the Station Master, and several of the village people. But the time
went slowly, slowly.

"I do wish there was something to read," said Peter. "I've read all our
books fifty times over."

"I'll go to the Doctor's," said Phyllis; "he's sure to have some."

"Only about how to be ill, and about people's nasty insides, I expect,"
said Peter.

"Perks has a whole heap of Magazines that came out of trains when people
are tired of them," said Bobbie. "I'll run down and ask him."

So the girls went their two ways.

Bobbie found Perks busy cleaning lamps.

"And how's the young gent?" said he.

"Better, thanks," said Bobbie, "but he's most frightfully bored. I came
to ask if you'd got any Magazines you could lend him."

"There, now," said Perks, regretfully, rubbing his ear with a black
and oily lump of cotton waste, "why didn't I think of that, now? I was
trying to think of something as 'ud amuse him only this morning, and I
couldn't think of anything better than a guinea-pig. And a young chap I
know's going to fetch that over for him this tea-time."

"How lovely! A real live guinea! He will be pleased. But he'd like the
Magazines as well."

"That's just it," said Perks. "I've just sent the pick of 'em to
Snigson's boy--him what's just getting over the pewmonia. But I've lots
of illustrated papers left."

He turned to the pile of papers in the corner and took up a heap six
inches thick.

"There!" he said. "I'll just slip a bit of string and a bit of paper
round 'em."

He pulled an old newspaper from the pile and spread it on the table, and
made a neat parcel of it.

"There," said he, "there's lots of pictures, and if he likes to mess 'em
about with his paint-box, or coloured chalks or what not, why, let him.
_I_ don't want 'em."

"You're a dear," said Bobbie, took the parcel, and started. The papers
were heavy, and when she had to wait at the level-crossing while a train
went by, she rested the parcel on the top of the gate. And idly she
looked at the printing on the paper that the parcel was wrapped in.

Suddenly she clutched the parcel tighter and bent her head over it. It
seemed like some horrible dream. She read on--the bottom of the column
was torn off--she could read no farther.

She never remembered how she got home. But she went on tiptoe to her
room and locked the door. Then she undid the parcel and read that
printed column again, sitting on the edge of her bed, her hands and feet
icy cold and her face burning. When she had read all there was, she drew
a long, uneven breath.

"So now I know," she said.

What she had read was headed, 'End of the Trial. Verdict. Sentence.'

The name of the man who had been tried was the name of her Father.
The verdict was 'Guilty.' And the sentence was 'Five years' Penal
Servitude.'

"Oh, Daddy," she whispered, crushing the paper hard, "it's not true--I
don't believe it. You never did it! Never, never, never!"

There was a hammering on the door.

"What is it?" said Bobbie.

"It's me," said the voice of Phyllis; "tea's ready, and a boy's brought
Peter a guinea-pig. Come along down."

And Bobbie had to.



Chapter XI. The hound in the red jersey.


Bobbie knew the secret now. A sheet of old newspaper wrapped round a
parcel--just a little chance like that--had given the secret to her. And
she had to go down to tea and pretend that there was nothing the matter.
The pretence was bravely made, but it wasn't very successful.

For when she came in, everyone looked up from tea and saw her
pink-lidded eyes and her pale face with red tear-blotches on it.

"My darling," cried Mother, jumping up from the tea-tray, "whatever IS
the matter?"

"My head aches, rather," said Bobbie. And indeed it did.

"Has anything gone wrong?" Mother asked.

"I'm all right, really," said Bobbie, and she telegraphed to her Mother
from her swollen eyes this brief, imploring message--"NOT before the
others!"

Tea was not a cheerful meal. Peter was so distressed by the obvious fact
that something horrid had happened to Bobbie that he limited his speech
to repeating, "More bread and butter, please," at startlingly short
intervals. Phyllis stroked her sister's hand under the table to express
sympathy, and knocked her cup over as she did it. Fetching a cloth and
wiping up the spilt milk helped Bobbie a little. But she thought that
tea would never end. Yet at last it did end, as all things do at last,
and when Mother took out the tray, Bobbie followed her.

"She's gone to own up," said Phyllis to Peter; "I wonder what she's
done."

"Broken something, I suppose," said Peter, "but she needn't be so silly
over it. Mother never rows for accidents. Listen! Yes, they're going
upstairs. She's taking Mother up to show her--the water-jug with storks
on it, I expect it is."

Bobbie, in the kitchen, had caught hold of Mother's hand as she set down
the tea-things.

"What is it?" Mother asked.

But Bobbie only said, "Come upstairs, come up where nobody can hear us."

When she had got Mother alone in her room she locked the door and then
stood quite still, and quite without words.

All through tea she had been thinking of what to say; she had decided
that "I know all," or "All is known to me," or "The terrible secret is
a secret no longer," would be the proper thing. But now that she and
her Mother and that awful sheet of newspaper were alone in the room
together, she found that she could say nothing.

Suddenly she went to Mother and put her arms round her and began to cry
again. And still she could find no words, only, "Oh, Mammy, oh, Mammy,
oh, Mammy," over and over again.

Mother held her very close and waited.

Suddenly Bobbie broke away from her and went to her bed. From under her
mattress she pulled out the paper she had hidden there, and held it out,
pointing to her Father's name with a finger that shook.

"Oh, Bobbie," Mother cried, when one little quick look had shown her
what it was, "you don't BELIEVE it? You don't believe Daddy did it?"

"NO," Bobbie almost shouted. She had stopped crying.

"That's all right," said Mother. "It's not true. And they've shut him
up in prison, but he's done nothing wrong. He's good and noble and
honourable, and he belongs to us. We have to think of that, and be proud
of him, and wait."

Again Bobbie clung to her Mother, and again only one word came to her,
but now that word was "Daddy," and "Oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy, oh, Daddy!"
again and again.

"Why didn't you tell me, Mammy?" she asked presently.

"Are you going to tell the others?" Mother asked.

"No."

"Why?"

"Because--"

"Exactly," said Mother; "so you understand why I didn't tell you. We two
must help each other to be brave."

"Yes," said Bobbie; "Mother, will it make you more unhappy if you tell
me all about it? I want to understand."

So then, sitting cuddled up close to her Mother, Bobbie heard "all
about it." She heard how those men, who had asked to see Father on that
remembered last night when the Engine was being mended, had come
to arrest him, charging him with selling State secrets to the
Russians--with being, in fact, a spy and a traitor. She heard about the
trial, and about the evidence--letters, found in Father's desk at the
office, letters that convinced the jury that Father was guilty.

"Oh, how could they look at him and believe it!" cried Bobbie; "and how
could ANY one do such a thing!"

"SOMEONE did it," said Mother, "and all the evidence was against Father.
Those letters--"

"Yes. How did the letters get into his desk?"

"Someone put them there. And the person who put them there was the
person who was really guilty."

"HE must be feeling pretty awful all this time," said Bobbie,
thoughtfully.

"I don't believe he had any feelings," Mother said hotly; "he couldn't
have done a thing like that if he had."

"Perhaps he just shoved the letters into the desk to hide them when he
thought he was going to be found out. Why don't you tell the lawyers,
or someone, that it must have been that person? There wasn't anyone that
would have hurt Father on purpose, was there?"

"I don't know--I don't know. The man under him who got Daddy's place
when he--when the awful thing happened--he was always jealous of your
Father because Daddy was so clever and everyone thought such a lot of
him. And Daddy never quite trusted that man."

"Couldn't we explain all that to someone?"

"Nobody will listen," said Mother, very bitterly, "nobody at all. Do you
suppose I've not tried everything? No, my dearest, there's nothing to be
done. All we can do, you and I and Daddy, is to be brave, and patient,
and--" she spoke very softly--"to pray, Bobbie, dear."

"Mother, you've got very thin," said Bobbie, abruptly.

"A little, perhaps."

"And oh," said Bobbie, "I do think you're the bravest person in the
world as well as the nicest!"

"We won't talk of all this any more, will we, dear?" said Mother; "we
must bear it and be brave. And, darling, try not to think of it. Try to
be cheerful, and to amuse yourself and the others. It's much easier for
me if you can be a little bit happy and enjoy things. Wash your poor
little round face, and let's go out into the garden for a bit."

The other two were very gentle and kind to Bobbie. And they did not
ask her what was the matter. This was Peter's idea, and he had drilled
Phyllis, who would have asked a hundred questions if she had been left
to herself.

A week later Bobbie managed to get away alone. And once more she wrote a
letter. And once more it was to the old gentleman.

"My dear Friend," she said, "you see what is in this paper. It is
not true. Father never did it. Mother says someone put the papers in
Father's desk, and she says the man under him that got Father's place
afterwards was jealous of Father, and Father suspected him a long time.
But nobody listens to a word she says, but you are so good and clever,
and you found out about the Russian gentleman's wife directly. Can't you
find out who did the treason because he wasn't Father upon my honour;
he is an Englishman and uncapable to do such things, and then they would
let Father out of prison. It is dreadful, and Mother is getting so thin.
She told us once to pray for all prisoners and captives. I see now.
Oh, do help me--there is only just Mother and me know, and we can't do
anything. Peter and Phil don't know. I'll pray for you twice every day
as long as I live if you'll only try--just try to find out. Think if it
was YOUR Daddy, what you would feel. Oh, do, do, DO help me. With love

"I remain Your affectionately little friend

"Roberta.

P.S. Mother would send her kind regards if she knew I am writing--but
it is no use telling her I am, in case you can't do anything. But I know
you will. Bobbie with best love."

She cut the account of her Father's trial out of the newspaper with
Mother's big cutting-out scissors, and put it in the envelope with her
letter.

Then she took it down to the station, going out the back way and round
by the road, so that the others should not see her and offer to come
with her, and she gave the letter to the Station Master to give to the
old gentleman next morning.

"Where HAVE you been?" shouted Peter, from the top of the yard wall
where he and Phyllis were.

"To the station, of course," said Bobbie; "give us a hand, Pete."

She set her foot on the lock of the yard door. Peter reached down a
hand.

"What on earth?" she asked as she reached the wall-top--for Phyllis and
Peter were very muddy. A lump of wet clay lay between them on the wall,
they had each a slip of slate in a very dirty hand, and behind Peter,
out of the reach of accidents, were several strange rounded objects
rather like very fat sausages, hollow, but closed up at one end.

"It's nests," said Peter, "swallows' nests. We're going to dry them
in the oven and hang them up with string under the eaves of the
coach-house."

"Yes," said Phyllis; "and then we're going to save up all the wool and
hair we can get, and in the spring we'll line them, and then how pleased
the swallows will be!"

"I've often thought people don't do nearly enough for dumb animals,"
said Peter with an air of virtue. "I do think people might have thought
of making nests for poor little swallows before this."

"Oh," said Bobbie, vaguely, "if everybody thought of everything, there'd
be nothing left for anybody else to think about."

"Look at the nests--aren't they pretty?" said Phyllis, reaching across
Peter to grasp a nest.

"Look out, Phil, you goat," said her brother. But it was too late; her
strong little fingers had crushed the nest.

"There now," said Peter.

"Never mind," said Bobbie.

"It IS one of my own," said Phyllis, "so you needn't jaw, Peter. Yes,
we've put our initial names on the ones we've done, so that the swallows
will know who they've got to be so grateful to and fond of."

"Swallows can't read, silly," said Peter.

"Silly yourself," retorted Phyllis; "how do you know?"

"Who thought of making the nests, anyhow?" shouted Peter.

"I did," screamed Phyllis.

"Nya," rejoined Peter, "you only thought of making hay ones and sticking
them in the ivy for the sparrows, and they'd have been sopping LONG
before egg-laying time. It was me said clay and swallows."

"I don't care what you said."

"Look," said Bobbie, "I've made the nest all right again. Give me the
bit of stick to mark your initial name on it. But how can you? Your
letter and Peter's are the same. P. for Peter, P. for Phyllis."

"I put F. for Phyllis," said the child of that name. "That's how
it sounds. The swallows wouldn't spell Phyllis with a P., I'm
certain-sure."

"They can't spell at all," Peter was still insisting.

"Then why do you see them always on Christmas cards and valentines
with letters round their necks? How would they know where to go if they
couldn't read?"

"That's only in pictures. You never saw one really with letters round
its neck."

"Well, I have a pigeon, then; at least Daddy told me they did. Only it
was under their wings and not round their necks, but it comes to the
same thing, and--"

"I say," interrupted Bobbie, "there's to be a paperchase to-morrow."

"Who?" Peter asked.

"Grammar School. Perks thinks the hare will go along by the line at
first. We might go along the cutting. You can see a long way from
there."

The paperchase was found to be a more amusing subject of conversation
than the reading powers of swallows. Bobbie had hoped it might be. And
next morning Mother let them take their lunch and go out for the day to
see the paperchase.

"If we go to the cutting," said Peter, "we shall see the workmen, even
if we miss the paperchase."

Of course it had taken some time to get the line clear from the rocks
and earth and trees that had fallen on it when the great landslip
happened. That was the occasion, you will remember, when the three
children saved the train from being wrecked by waving six little
red-flannel-petticoat flags. It is always interesting to watch people
working, especially when they work with such interesting things as
spades and picks and shovels and planks and barrows, when they have
cindery red fires in iron pots with round holes in them, and red lamps
hanging near the works at night. Of course the children were never
out at night; but once, at dusk, when Peter had got out of his bedroom
skylight on to the roof, he had seen the red lamp shining far away at
the edge of the cutting. The children had often been down to watch the
work, and this day the interest of picks and spades, and barrows being
wheeled along planks, completely put the paperchase out of their heads,
so that they quite jumped when a voice just behind them panted, "Let me
pass, please." It was the hare--a big-boned, loose-limbed boy, with dark
hair lying flat on a very damp forehead. The bag of torn paper under
his arm was fastened across one shoulder by a strap. The children stood
back. The hare ran along the line, and the workmen leaned on their picks
to watch him. He ran on steadily and disappeared into the mouth of the
tunnel.

"That's against the by-laws," said the foreman.

"Why worry?" said the oldest workman; "live and let live's what I always
say. Ain't you never been young yourself, Mr. Bates?"

"I ought to report him," said the foreman.

"Why spoil sport's what I always say."

"Passengers are forbidden to cross the line on any pretence," murmured
the foreman, doubtfully.

"He ain't no passenger," said one of the workmen.

"Nor 'e ain't crossed the line, not where we could see 'im do it," said
another.

"Nor yet 'e ain't made no pretences," said a third.

"And," said the oldest workman, "'e's outer sight now. What the eye
don't see the 'art needn't take no notice of's what I always say."

And now, following the track of the hare by the little white blots of
scattered paper, came the hounds. There were thirty of them, and they
all came down the steep, ladder-like steps by ones and twos and threes
and sixes and sevens. Bobbie and Phyllis and Peter counted them as they
passed. The foremost ones hesitated a moment at the foot of the ladder,
then their eyes caught the gleam of scattered whiteness along the line
and they turned towards the tunnel, and, by ones and twos and threes and
sixes and sevens, disappeared in the dark mouth of it. The last one, in
a red jersey, seemed to be extinguished by the darkness like a candle
that is blown out.

"They don't know what they're in for," said the foreman; "it isn't so
easy running in the dark. The tunnel takes two or three turns."

"They'll take a long time to get through, you think?" Peter asked.

"An hour or more, I shouldn't wonder."

"Then let's cut across the top and see them come out at the other end,"
said Peter; "we shall get there long before they do."

The counsel seemed good, and they went.

They climbed the steep steps from which they had picked the wild cherry
blossom for the grave of the little wild rabbit, and reaching the top of
the cutting, set their faces towards the hill through which the tunnel
was cut. It was stiff work.

"It's like Alps," said Bobbie, breathlessly.

"Or Andes," said Peter.

"It's like Himmy what's its names?" gasped Phyllis. "Mount Everlasting.
Do let's stop."

"Stick to it," panted Peter; "you'll get your second wind in a minute."

Phyllis consented to stick to it--and on they went, running when the
turf was smooth and the slope easy, climbing over stones, helping
themselves up rocks by the branches of trees, creeping through narrow
openings between tree trunks and rocks, and so on and on, up and up,
till at last they stood on the very top of the hill where they had so
often wished to be.

"Halt!" cried Peter, and threw himself flat on the grass. For the very
top of the hill was a smooth, turfed table-land, dotted with mossy rocks
and little mountain-ash trees.

The girls also threw themselves down flat.

"Plenty of time," Peter panted; "the rest's all down hill."

When they were rested enough to sit up and look round them, Bobbie
cried:--

"Oh, look!"

"What at?" said Phyllis.

"The view," said Bobbie.

"I hate views," said Phyllis, "don't you, Peter?"

"Let's get on," said Peter.

"But this isn't like a view they take you to in carriages when you're
at the seaside, all sea and sand and bare hills. It's like the 'coloured
counties' in one of Mother's poetry books."

"It's not so dusty," said Peter; "look at the Aqueduct straddling slap
across the valley like a giant centipede, and then the towns sticking
their church spires up out of the trees like pens out of an inkstand.
_I_ think it's more like

     "There could he see the banners
      Of twelve fair cities shine."

"I love it," said Bobbie; "it's worth the climb."

"The paperchase is worth the climb," said Phyllis, "if we don't lose it.
Let's get on. It's all down hill now."

"_I_ said that ten minutes ago," said Peter.

"Well, I'VE said it now," said Phyllis; "come on."

"Loads of time," said Peter. And there was. For when they had got down
to a level with the top of the tunnel's mouth--they were a couple of
hundred yards out of their reckoning and had to creep along the face of
the hill--there was no sign of the hare or the hounds.

"They've gone long ago, of course," said Phyllis, as they leaned on the
brick parapet above the tunnel.

"I don't think so," said Bobbie, "but even if they had, it's ripping
here, and we shall see the trains come out of the tunnel like dragons
out of lairs. We've never seen that from the top side before."

"No more we have," said Phyllis, partially appeased.

It was really a most exciting place to be in. The top of the tunnel
seemed ever so much farther from the line than they had expected, and
it was like being on a bridge, but a bridge overgrown with bushes and
creepers and grass and wild-flowers.

"I KNOW the paperchase has gone long ago," said Phyllis every two
minutes, and she hardly knew whether she was pleased or disappointed
when Peter, leaning over the parapet, suddenly cried:--

"Look out. Here he comes!"

They all leaned over the sun-warmed brick wall in time to see the hare,
going very slowly, come out from the shadow of the tunnel.

"There, now," said Peter, "what did I tell you? Now for the hounds!"

Very soon came the hounds--by ones and twos and threes and sixes and
sevens--and they also were going slowly and seemed very tired. Two or
three who lagged far behind came out long after the others.

"There," said Bobbie, "that's all--now what shall we do?"

"Go along into the tulgy wood over there and have lunch," said Phyllis;
"we can see them for miles from up here."

"Not yet," said Peter. "That's not the last. There's the one in the red
jersey to come yet. Let's see the last of them come out."

But though they waited and waited and waited, the boy in the red jersey
did not appear.

"Oh, let's have lunch," said Phyllis; "I've got a pain in my front with
being so hungry. You must have missed seeing the red-jerseyed one when
he came out with the others--"

But Bobbie and Peter agreed that he had not come out with the others.

"Let's get down to the tunnel mouth," said Peter; "then perhaps we shall
see him coming along from the inside. I expect he felt spun-chuck, and
rested in one of the manholes. You stay up here and watch, Bob, and when
I signal from below, you come down. We might miss seeing him on the way
down, with all these trees."

So the others climbed down and Bobbie waited till they signalled to her
from the line below. And then she, too, scrambled down the roundabout
slippery path among roots and moss till she stepped out between two
dogwood trees and joined the others on the line. And still there was no
sign of the hound with the red jersey.

"Oh, do, DO let's have something to eat," wailed Phyllis. "I shall die
if you don't, and then you'll be sorry."

"Give her the sandwiches, for goodness' sake, and stop her silly mouth,"
said Peter, not quite unkindly. "Look here," he added, turning to
Bobbie, "perhaps we'd better have one each, too. We may need all our
strength. Not more than one, though. There's no time."

"What?" asked Bobbie, her mouth already full, for she was just as hungry
as Phyllis.

"Don't you see," replied Peter, impressively, "that red-jerseyed hound
has had an accident--that's what it is. Perhaps even as we speak he's
lying with his head on the metals, an unresisting prey to any passing
express--"

"Oh, don't try to talk like a book," cried Bobbie, bolting what was left
of her sandwich; "come on. Phil, keep close behind me, and if a train
comes, stand flat against the tunnel wall and hold your petticoats close
to you."

"Give me one more sandwich," pleaded Phyllis, "and I will."

"I'm going first," said Peter; "it was my idea," and he went.

Of course you know what going into a tunnel is like? The engine gives
a scream and then suddenly the noise of the running, rattling train
changes and grows different and much louder. Grown-up people pull up the
windows and hold them by the strap. The railway carriage suddenly grows
like night--with lamps, of course, unless you are in a slow local train,
in which case lamps are not always provided. Then by and by the darkness
outside the carriage window is touched by puffs of cloudy whiteness,
then you see a blue light on the walls of the tunnel, then the sound of
the moving train changes once more, and you are out in the good open air
again, and grown-ups let the straps go. The windows, all dim with the
yellow breath of the tunnel, rattle down into their places, and you see
once more the dip and catch of the telegraph wires beside the line, and
the straight-cut hawthorn hedges with the tiny baby trees growing up out
of them every thirty yards.

All this, of course, is what a tunnel means when you are in a train. But
everything is quite different when you walk into a tunnel on your own
feet, and tread on shifting, sliding stones and gravel on a path that
curves downwards from the shining metals to the wall. Then you see
slimy, oozy trickles of water running down the inside of the tunnel,
and you notice that the bricks are not red or brown, as they are at the
tunnel's mouth, but dull, sticky, sickly green. Your voice, when you
speak, is quite changed from what it was out in the sunshine, and it is
a long time before the tunnel is quite dark.

It was not yet quite dark in the tunnel when Phyllis caught at Bobbie's
skirt, ripping out half a yard of gathers, but no one noticed this at
the time.

"I want to go back," she said, "I don't like it. It'll be pitch dark
in a minute. I WON'T go on in the dark. I don't care what you say, I
WON'T."

"Don't be a silly cuckoo," said Peter; "I've got a candle end and
matches, and--what's that?"

"That" was a low, humming sound on the railway line, a trembling of the
wires beside it, a buzzing, humming sound that grew louder and louder as
they listened.

"It's a train," said Bobbie.

"Which line?"

"Let me go back," cried Phyllis, struggling to get away from the hand by
which Bobbie held her.

"Don't be a coward," said Bobbie; "it's quite safe. Stand back."

"Come on," shouted Peter, who was a few yards ahead. "Quick! Manhole!"

The roar of the advancing train was now louder than the noise you hear
when your head is under water in the bath and both taps are running, and
you are kicking with your heels against the bath's tin sides. But Peter
had shouted for all he was worth, and Bobbie heard him. She dragged
Phyllis along to the manhole. Phyllis, of course, stumbled over the
wires and grazed both her legs. But they dragged her in, and all three
stood in the dark, damp, arched recess while the train roared louder and
louder. It seemed as if it would deafen them. And, in the distance, they
could see its eyes of fire growing bigger and brighter every instant.

"It IS a dragon--I always knew it was--it takes its own shape in here,
in the dark," shouted Phyllis. But nobody heard her. You see the train
was shouting, too, and its voice was bigger than hers.

And now, with a rush and a roar and a rattle and a long dazzling flash
of lighted carriage windows, a smell of smoke, and blast of hot air, the
train hurtled by, clanging and jangling and echoing in the vaulted roof
of the tunnel. Phyllis and Bobbie clung to each other. Even Peter
caught hold of Bobbie's arm, "in case she should be frightened," as he
explained afterwards.

And now, slowly and gradually, the tail-lights grew smaller and smaller,
and so did the noise, till with one last WHIZ the train got itself out
of the tunnel, and silence settled again on its damp walls and dripping
roof.

"OH!" said the children, all together in a whisper.

Peter was lighting the candle end with a hand that trembled.

"Come on," he said; but he had to clear his throat before he could speak
in his natural voice.

"Oh," said Phyllis, "if the red-jerseyed one was in the way of the
train!"

"We've got to go and see," said Peter.

"Couldn't we go and send someone from the station?" said Phyllis.

"Would you rather wait here for us?" asked Bobbie, severely, and of
course that settled the question.

So the three went on into the deeper darkness of the tunnel. Peter led,
holding his candle end high to light the way. The grease ran down his
fingers, and some of it right up his sleeve. He found a long streak from
wrist to elbow when he went to bed that night.

It was not more than a hundred and fifty yards from the spot where
they had stood while the train went by that Peter stood still, shouted
"Hullo," and then went on much quicker than before. When the others
caught him up, he stopped. And he stopped within a yard of what they had
come into the tunnel to look for. Phyllis saw a gleam of red, and
shut her eyes tight. There, by the curved, pebbly down line, was the
red-jerseyed hound. His back was against the wall, his arms hung limply
by his sides, and his eyes were shut.

"Was the red, blood? Is he all killed?" asked Phyllis, screwing her
eyelids more tightly together.

"Killed? Nonsense!" said Peter. "There's nothing red about him except
his jersey. He's only fainted. What on earth are we to do?"

"Can we move him?" asked Bobbie.

"I don't know; he's a big chap."

"Suppose we bathe his forehead with water. No, I know we haven't any,
but milk's just as wet. There's a whole bottle."

"Yes," said Peter, "and they rub people's hands, I believe."

"They burn feathers, I know," said Phyllis.

"What's the good of saying that when we haven't any feathers?"

"As it happens," said Phyllis, in a tone of exasperated triumph, "I've
got a shuttlecock in my pocket. So there!"

And now Peter rubbed the hands of the red-jerseyed one. Bobbie burned
the feathers of the shuttlecock one by one under his nose, Phyllis
splashed warmish milk on his forehead, and all three kept on saying as
fast and as earnestly as they could:--

"Oh, look up, speak to me! For my sake, speak!"



Chapter XII. What Bobbie brought home.


"Oh, look up! Speak to me! For MY sake, speak!" The children said the
words over and over again to the unconscious hound in a red jersey, who
sat with closed eyes and pale face against the side of the tunnel.

"Wet his ears with milk," said Bobbie. "I know they do it to people that
faint--with eau-de-Cologne. But I expect milk's just as good."

So they wetted his ears, and some of the milk ran down his neck under
the red jersey. It was very dark in the tunnel. The candle end Peter had
carried, and which now burned on a flat stone, gave hardly any light at
all.

"Oh, DO look up," said Phyllis. "For MY sake! I believe he's dead."

"For MY sake," repeated Bobbie. "No, he isn't."

"For ANY sake," said Peter; "come out of it." And he shook the sufferer
by the arm.

And then the boy in the red jersey sighed, and opened his eyes, and shut
them again and said in a very small voice, "Chuck it."

"Oh, he's NOT dead," said Phyllis. "I KNEW he wasn't," and she began to
cry.

"What's up? I'm all right," said the boy.

"Drink this," said Peter, firmly, thrusting the nose of the milk bottle
into the boy's mouth. The boy struggled, and some of the milk was upset
before he could get his mouth free to say:--

"What is it?"

"It's milk," said Peter. "Fear not, you are in the hands of friends.
Phil, you stop bleating this minute."

"Do drink it," said Bobbie, gently; "it'll do you good."

So he drank. And the three stood by without speaking to him.

"Let him be a minute," Peter whispered; "he'll be all right as soon as
the milk begins to run like fire through his veins."

He was.

"I'm better now," he announced. "I remember all about it." He tried to
move, but the movement ended in a groan. "Bother! I believe I've broken
my leg," he said.

"Did you tumble down?" asked Phyllis, sniffing.

"Of course not--I'm not a kiddie," said the boy, indignantly; "it was
one of those beastly wires tripped me up, and when I tried to get up
again I couldn't stand, so I sat down. Gee whillikins! it does hurt,
though. How did YOU get here?"

"We saw you all go into the tunnel and then we went across the hill to
see you all come out. And the others did--all but you, and you didn't.
So we are a rescue party," said Peter, with pride.

"You've got some pluck, I will say," remarked the boy.

"Oh, that's nothing," said Peter, with modesty. "Do you think you could
walk if we helped you?"

"I could try," said the boy.

He did try. But he could only stand on one foot; the other dragged in a
very nasty way.

"Here, let me sit down. I feel like dying," said the boy. "Let go of
me--let go, quick--" He lay down and closed his eyes. The others looked
at each other by the dim light of the little candle.

"What on earth!" said Peter.

"Look here," said Bobbie, quickly, "you must go and get help. Go to the
nearest house."

"Yes, that's the only thing," said Peter. "Come on."

"If you take his feet and Phil and I take his head, we could carry him
to the manhole."

They did it. It was perhaps as well for the sufferer that he had fainted
again.

"Now," said Bobbie, "I'll stay with him. You take the longest bit of
candle, and, oh--be quick, for this bit won't burn long."

"I don't think Mother would like me leaving you," said Peter,
doubtfully. "Let me stay, and you and Phil go."

"No, no," said Bobbie, "you and Phil go--and lend me your knife. I'll
try to get his boot off before he wakes up again."

"I hope it's all right what we're doing," said Peter.

"Of course it's right," said Bobbie, impatiently. "What else WOULD you
do? Leave him here all alone because it's dark? Nonsense. Hurry up,
that's all."

So they hurried up.

Bobbie watched their dark figures and the little light of the little
candle with an odd feeling of having come to the end of everything. She
knew now, she thought, what nuns who were bricked up alive in convent
walls felt like. Suddenly she gave herself a little shake.

"Don't be a silly little girl," she said. She was always very angry when
anyone else called her a little girl, even if the adjective that went
first was not "silly" but "nice" or "good" or "clever." And it was only
when she was very angry with herself that she allowed Roberta to use
that expression to Bobbie.

She fixed the little candle end on a broken brick near the red-jerseyed
boy's feet. Then she opened Peter's knife. It was always hard to
manage--a halfpenny was generally needed to get it open at all. This
time Bobbie somehow got it open with her thumbnail. She broke the nail,
and it hurt horribly. Then she cut the boy's bootlace, and got the boot
off. She tried to pull off his stocking, but his leg was dreadfully
swollen, and it did not seem to be the proper shape. So she cut the
stocking down, very slowly and carefully. It was a brown, knitted
stocking, and she wondered who had knitted it, and whether it was the
boy's mother, and whether she was feeling anxious about him, and how she
would feel when he was brought home with his leg broken. When Bobbie had
got the stocking off and saw the poor leg, she felt as though the tunnel
was growing darker, and the ground felt unsteady, and nothing seemed
quite real.

"SILLY little girl!" said Roberta to Bobbie, and felt better.

"The poor leg," she told herself; "it ought to have a cushion--ah!"

She remembered the day when she and Phyllis had torn up their red
flannel petticoats to make danger signals to stop the train and prevent
an accident. Her flannel petticoat to-day was white, but it would be
quite as soft as a red one. She took it off.

"Oh, what useful things flannel petticoats are!" she said; "the man who
invented them ought to have a statue directed to him." And she said
it aloud, because it seemed that any voice, even her own, would be a
comfort in that darkness.

"WHAT ought to be directed? Who to?" asked the boy, suddenly and very
feebly.

"Oh," said Bobbie, "now you're better! Hold your teeth and don't let it
hurt too much. Now!"

She had folded the petticoat, and lifting his leg laid it on the cushion
of folded flannel.

"Don't faint again, PLEASE don't," said Bobbie, as he groaned. She
hastily wetted her handkerchief with milk and spread it over the poor
leg.

"Oh, that hurts," cried the boy, shrinking. "Oh--no, it doesn't--it's
nice, really."

"What's your name?" said Bobbie.

"Jim."

"Mine's Bobbie."

"But you're a girl, aren't you?"

"Yes, my long name's Roberta."

"I say--Bobbie."

"Yes?"

"Wasn't there some more of you just now?"

"Yes, Peter and Phil--that's my brother and sister. They've gone to get
someone to carry you out."

"What rum names. All boys'."

"Yes--I wish I was a boy, don't you?"

"I think you're all right as you are."

"I didn't mean that--I meant don't you wish YOU were a boy, but of
course you are without wishing."

"You're just as brave as a boy. Why didn't you go with the others?"

"Somebody had to stay with you," said Bobbie.

"Tell you what, Bobbie," said Jim, "you're a brick. Shake." He reached
out a red-jerseyed arm and Bobbie squeezed his hand.

"I won't shake it," she explained, "because it would shake YOU, and that
would shake your poor leg, and that would hurt. Have you got a hanky?"

"I don't expect I have." He felt in his pocket. "Yes, I have. What for?"

She took it and wetted it with milk and put it on his forehead.

"That's jolly," he said; "what is it?"

"Milk," said Bobbie. "We haven't any water--"

"You're a jolly good little nurse," said Jim.

"I do it for Mother sometimes," said Bobbie--"not milk, of course,
but scent, or vinegar and water. I say, I must put the candle out now,
because there mayn't be enough of the other one to get you out by."

"By George," said he, "you think of everything."

Bobbie blew. Out went the candle. You have no idea how black-velvety the
darkness was.

"I say, Bobbie," said a voice through the blackness, "aren't you afraid
of the dark?"

"Not--not very, that is--"

"Let's hold hands," said the boy, and it was really rather good of him,
because he was like most boys of his age and hated all material tokens
of affection, such as kissing and holding of hands. He called all such
things "pawings," and detested them.

The darkness was more bearable to Bobbie now that her hand was held in
the large rough hand of the red-jerseyed sufferer; and he, holding her
little smooth hot paw, was surprised to find that he did not mind it so
much as he expected. She tried to talk, to amuse him, and "take his mind
off" his sufferings, but it is very difficult to go on talking in the
dark, and presently they found themselves in a silence, only broken now
and then by a--

"You all right, Bobbie?"

or an--

"I'm afraid it's hurting you most awfully, Jim. I AM so sorry."

And it was very cold.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Peter and Phyllis tramped down the long way of the tunnel towards
daylight, the candle-grease dripping over Peter's fingers. There were no
accidents unless you count Phyllis's catching her frock on a wire, and
tearing a long, jagged slit in it, and tripping over her bootlace when
it came undone, or going down on her hands and knees, all four of which
were grazed.

"There's no end to this tunnel," said Phyllis--and indeed it did seem
very very long.

"Stick to it," said Peter; "everything has an end, and you get to it if
you only keep all on."

Which is quite true, if you come to think of it, and a useful thing
to remember in seasons of trouble--such as measles, arithmetic,
impositions, and those times when you are in disgrace, and feel as
though no one would ever love you again, and you could never--never
again--love anybody.

"Hurray," said Peter, suddenly, "there's the end of the tunnel--looks
just like a pin-hole in a bit of black paper, doesn't it?"

The pin-hole got larger--blue lights lay along the sides of the tunnel.
The children could see the gravel way that lay in front of them; the air
grew warmer and sweeter. Another twenty steps and they were out in the
good glad sunshine with the green trees on both sides.

Phyllis drew a long breath.

"I'll never go into a tunnel again as long as ever I live," said she,
"not if there are twenty hundred thousand millions hounds inside with
red jerseys and their legs broken."

"Don't be a silly cuckoo," said Peter, as usual. "You'd HAVE to."

"I think it was very brave and good of me," said Phyllis.

"Not it," said Peter; "you didn't go because you were brave, but because
Bobbie and I aren't skunks. Now where's the nearest house, I wonder? You
can't see anything here for the trees."

"There's a roof over there," said Phyllis, pointing down the line.

"That's the signal-box," said Peter, "and you know you're not allowed to
speak to signalmen on duty. It's wrong."

"I'm not near so afraid of doing wrong as I was of going into that
tunnel," said Phyllis. "Come on," and she started to run along the line.
So Peter ran, too.

It was very hot in the sunshine, and both children were hot and
breathless by the time they stopped, and bending their heads back to
look up at the open windows of the signal-box, shouted "Hi!" as loud
as their breathless state allowed. But no one answered. The signal-box
stood quiet as an empty nursery, and the handrail of its steps was hot
to the hands of the children as they climbed softly up. They peeped
in at the open door. The signalman was sitting on a chair tilted back
against the wall. His head leaned sideways, and his mouth was open. He
was fast asleep.

"My hat!" cried Peter; "wake up!" And he cried it in a terrible voice,
for he knew that if a signalman sleeps on duty, he risks losing his
situation, let alone all the other dreadful risks to trains which expect
him to tell them when it is safe for them to go their ways.

The signalman never moved. Then Peter sprang to him and shook him. And
slowly, yawning and stretching, the man awoke. But the moment he WAS
awake he leapt to his feet, put his hands to his head "like a mad
maniac," as Phyllis said afterwards, and shouted:--

"Oh, my heavens--what's o'clock?"

"Twelve thirteen," said Peter, and indeed it was by the white-faced,
round-faced clock on the wall of the signal-box.

The man looked at the clock, sprang to the levers, and wrenched them
this way and that. An electric bell tingled--the wires and cranks
creaked, and the man threw himself into a chair. He was very pale,
and the sweat stood on his forehead "like large dewdrops on a white
cabbage," as Phyllis remarked later. He was trembling, too; the children
could see his big hairy hands shake from side to side, "with quite
extra-sized trembles," to use the subsequent words of Peter. He drew
long breaths. Then suddenly he cried, "Thank God, thank God you come in
when you did--oh, thank God!" and his shoulders began to heave and his
face grew red again, and he hid it in those large hairy hands of his.

"Oh, don't cry--don't," said Phyllis, "it's all right now," and she
patted him on one big, broad shoulder, while Peter conscientiously
thumped the other.

But the signalman seemed quite broken down, and the children had to
pat him and thump him for quite a long time before he found his
handkerchief--a red one with mauve and white horseshoes on it--and
mopped his face and spoke. During this patting and thumping interval a
train thundered by.

"I'm downright shamed, that I am," were the words of the big signalman
when he had stopped crying; "snivelling like a kid." Then suddenly he
seemed to get cross. "And what was you doing up here, anyway?" he said;
"you know it ain't allowed."

"Yes," said Phyllis, "we knew it was wrong--but I wasn't afraid of doing
wrong, and so it turned out right. You aren't sorry we came."

"Lor' love you--if you hadn't 'a' come--" he stopped and then went on.
"It's a disgrace, so it is, sleeping on duty. If it was to come to be
known--even as it is, when no harm's come of it."

"It won't come to be known," said Peter; "we aren't sneaks. All the
same, you oughtn't to sleep on duty--it's dangerous."

"Tell me something I don't know," said the man, "but I can't help it.
I know'd well enough just how it 'ud be. But I couldn't get off. They
couldn't get no one to take on my duty. I tell you I ain't had ten
minutes' sleep this last five days. My little chap's ill--pewmonia, the
Doctor says--and there's no one but me and 'is little sister to do for
him. That's where it is. The gell must 'ave her sleep. Dangerous? Yes, I
believe you. Now go and split on me if you like."

"Of course we won't," said Peter, indignantly, but Phyllis ignored the
whole of the signalman's speech, except the first six words.

"You asked us," she said, "to tell you something you don't know. Well,
I will. There's a boy in the tunnel over there with a red jersey and his
leg broken."

"What did he want to go into the blooming tunnel for, then?" said the
man.

"Don't you be so cross," said Phyllis, kindly. "WE haven't done anything
wrong except coming and waking you up, and that was right, as it
happens."

Then Peter told how the boy came to be in the tunnel.

"Well," said the man, "I don't see as I can do anything. I can't leave
the box."

"You might tell us where to go after someone who isn't in a box,
though," said Phyllis.

"There's Brigden's farm over yonder--where you see the smoke a-coming
up through the trees," said the man, more and more grumpy, as Phyllis
noticed.

"Well, good-bye, then," said Peter.

But the man said, "Wait a minute." He put his hand in his pocket and
brought out some money--a lot of pennies and one or two shillings and
sixpences and half-a-crown. He picked out two shillings and held them
out.

"Here," he said. "I'll give you this to hold your tongues about what's
taken place to-day."

There was a short, unpleasant pause. Then:--

"You ARE a nasty man, though, aren't you?" said Phyllis.

Peter took a step forward and knocked the man's hand up, so that the
shillings leapt out of it and rolled on the floor.

"If anything COULD make me sneak, THAT would!" he said. "Come, Phil,"
and marched out of the signal-box with flaming cheeks.

Phyllis hesitated. Then she took the hand, still held out stupidly, that
the shillings had been in.

"I forgive you," she said, "even if Peter doesn't. You're not in your
proper senses, or you'd never have done that. I know want of sleep sends
people mad. Mother told me. I hope your little boy will soon be better,
and--"

"Come on, Phil," cried Peter, eagerly.

"I give you my sacred honour-word we'll never tell anyone. Kiss and be
friends," said Phyllis, feeling how noble it was of her to try to make
up a quarrel in which she was not to blame.

The signalman stooped and kissed her.

"I do believe I'm a bit off my head, Sissy," he said. "Now run along
home to Mother. I didn't mean to put you about--there."

So Phil left the hot signal-box and followed Peter across the fields to
the farm.

When the farm men, led by Peter and Phyllis and carrying a hurdle
covered with horse-cloths, reached the manhole in the tunnel, Bobbie
was fast asleep and so was Jim. Worn out with the pain, the Doctor said
afterwards.

"Where does he live?" the bailiff from the farm asked, when Jim had been
lifted on to the hurdle.

"In Northumberland," answered Bobbie.

"I'm at school at Maidbridge," said Jim. "I suppose I've got to get back
there, somehow."

"Seems to me the Doctor ought to have a look in first," said the
bailiff.

"Oh, bring him up to our house," said Bobbie. "It's only a little way by
the road. I'm sure Mother would say we ought to."

"Will your Ma like you bringing home strangers with broken legs?"

"She took the poor Russian home herself," said Bobbie. "I know she'd say
we ought."

"All right," said the bailiff, "you ought to know what your Ma 'ud like.
I wouldn't take it upon me to fetch him up to our place without I asked
the Missus first, and they call me the Master, too."

"Are you sure your Mother won't mind?" whispered Jim.

"Certain," said Bobbie.

"Then we're to take him up to Three Chimneys?" said the bailiff.

"Of course," said Peter.

"Then my lad shall nip up to Doctor's on his bike, and tell him to come
down there. Now, lads, lift him quiet and steady. One, two, three!"

          *          *          *          *          *          *

Thus it happened that Mother, writing away for dear life at a story
about a Duchess, a designing villain, a secret passage, and a missing
will, dropped her pen as her work-room door burst open, and turned to
see Bobbie hatless and red with running.

"Oh, Mother," she cried, "do come down. We found a hound in a red jersey
in the tunnel, and he's broken his leg and they're bringing him home."

"They ought to take him to the vet," said Mother, with a worried frown;
"I really CAN'T have a lame dog here."

"He's not a dog, really--he's a boy," said Bobbie, between laughing and
choking.

"Then he ought to be taken home to his mother."

"His mother's dead," said Bobbie, "and his father's in Northumberland.
Oh, Mother, you will be nice to him? I told him I was sure you'd want us
to bring him home. You always want to help everybody."

Mother smiled, but she sighed, too. It is nice that your children should
believe you willing to open house and heart to any and every one who
needs help. But it is rather embarrassing sometimes, too, when they act
on their belief.

"Oh, well," said Mother, "we must make the best of it."

When Jim was carried in, dreadfully white and with set lips whose red
had faded to a horrid bluey violet colour, Mother said:--

"I am glad you brought him here. Now, Jim, let's get you comfortable in
bed before the Doctor comes!"

And Jim, looking at her kind eyes, felt a little, warm, comforting flush
of new courage.

"It'll hurt rather, won't it?" he said. "I don't mean to be a coward.
You won't think I'm a coward if I faint again, will you? I really
and truly don't do it on purpose. And I do hate to give you all this
trouble."

"Don't you worry," said Mother; "it's you that have the trouble, you
poor dear--not us."

And she kissed him just as if he had been Peter. "We love to have you
here--don't we, Bobbie?"

"Yes," said Bobbie--and she saw by her Mother's face how right she had
been to bring home the wounded hound in the red jersey.



Chapter XIII. The hound's grandfather.


Mother did not get back to her writing all that day, for the
red-jerseyed hound whom the children had brought to Three Chimneys had
to be put to bed. And then the Doctor came, and hurt him most horribly.
Mother was with him all through it, and that made it a little better
than it would have been, but "bad was the best," as Mrs. Viney said.

The children sat in the parlour downstairs and heard the sound of the
Doctor's boots going backwards and forwards over the bedroom floor. And
once or twice there was a groan.

"It's horrible," said Bobbie. "Oh, I wish Dr. Forrest would make haste.
Oh, poor Jim!"

"It IS horrible," said Peter, "but it's very exciting. I wish Doctors
weren't so stuck-up about who they'll have in the room when they're
doing things. I should most awfully like to see a leg set. I believe the
bones crunch like anything."

"Don't!" said the two girls at once.

"Rubbish!" said Peter. "How are you going to be Red Cross Nurses, like
you were talking of coming home, if you can't even stand hearing me say
about bones crunching? You'd have to HEAR them crunch on the field of
battle--and be steeped in gore up to the elbows as likely as not, and--"

"Stop it!" cried Bobbie, with a white face; "you don't know how funny
you're making me feel."

"Me, too," said Phyllis, whose face was pink.

"Cowards!" said Peter.

"I'm not," said Bobbie. "I helped Mother with your rake-wounded foot,
and so did Phil--you know we did."

"Well, then!" said Peter. "Now look here. It would be a jolly good thing
for you if I were to talk to you every day for half an hour about broken
bones and people's insides, so as to get you used to it."

A chair was moved above.

"Listen," said Peter, "that's the bone crunching."

"I do wish you wouldn't," said Phyllis. "Bobbie doesn't like it."

"I'll tell you what they do," said Peter. I can't think what made him so
horrid. Perhaps it was because he had been so very nice and kind all the
earlier part of the day, and now he had to have a change. This is called
reaction. One notices it now and then in oneself. Sometimes when one has
been extra good for a longer time than usual, one is suddenly attacked
by a violent fit of not being good at all. "I'll tell you what they do,"
said Peter; "they strap the broken man down so that he can't resist or
interfere with their doctorish designs, and then someone holds his head,
and someone holds his leg--the broken one, and pulls it till the bones
fit in--with a crunch, mind you! Then they strap it up and--let's play
at bone-setting!"

"Oh, no!" said Phyllis.

But Bobbie said suddenly: "All right--LET'S! I'll be the doctor, and
Phil can be the nurse. You can be the broken boner; we can get at your
legs more easily, because you don't wear petticoats."

"I'll get the splints and bandages," said Peter; "you get the couch of
suffering ready."

The ropes that had tied up the boxes that had come from home were all
in a wooden packing-case in the cellar. When Peter brought in a trailing
tangle of them, and two boards for splints, Phyllis was excitedly
giggling.

"Now, then," he said, and lay down on the settle, groaning most
grievously.

"Not so loud!" said Bobbie, beginning to wind the rope round him and the
settle. "You pull, Phil."

"Not so tight," moaned Peter. "You'll break my other leg."

Bobbie worked on in silence, winding more and more rope round him.

"That's enough," said Peter. "I can't move at all. Oh, my poor leg!" He
groaned again.

"SURE you can't move?" asked Bobbie, in a rather strange tone.

"Quite sure," replied Peter. "Shall we play it's bleeding freely or
not?" he asked cheerfully.

"YOU can play what you like," said Bobbie, sternly, folding her arms and
looking down at him where he lay all wound round and round with cord.
"Phil and I are going away. And we shan't untie you till you promise
never, never to talk to us about blood and wounds unless we say you may.
Come, Phil!"

"You beast!" said Peter, writhing. "I'll never promise, never. I'll
yell, and Mother will come."

"Do," said Bobbie, "and tell her why we tied you up! Come on, Phil. No,
I'm not a beast, Peter. But you wouldn't stop when we asked you and--"

"Yah," said Peter, "it wasn't even your own idea. You got it out of
Stalky!"

Bobbie and Phil, retiring in silent dignity, were met at the door by the
Doctor. He came in rubbing his hands and looking pleased with himself.

"Well," he said, "THAT job's done. It's a nice clean fracture, and it'll
go on all right, I've no doubt. Plucky young chap, too--hullo! what's
all this?"

His eye had fallen on Peter who lay mousy-still in his bonds on the
settle.

"Playing at prisoners, eh?" he said; but his eyebrows had gone up a
little. Somehow he had not thought that Bobbie would be playing while in
the room above someone was having a broken bone set.

"Oh, no!" said Bobbie, "not at PRISONERS. We were playing at setting
bones. Peter's the broken boner, and I was the doctor."

The Doctor frowned.

"Then I must say," he said, and he said it rather sternly, "that's it's
a very heartless game. Haven't you enough imagination even to faintly
picture what's been going on upstairs? That poor chap, with the drops
of sweat on his forehead, and biting his lips so as not to cry out, and
every touch on his leg agony and--"

"YOU ought to be tied up," said Phyllis; "you're as bad as--"

"Hush," said Bobbie; "I'm sorry, but we weren't heartless, really."

"I was, I suppose," said Peter, crossly. "All right, Bobbie, don't you
go on being noble and screening me, because I jolly well won't have it.
It was only that I kept on talking about blood and wounds. I wanted to
train them for Red Cross Nurses. And I wouldn't stop when they asked
me."

"Well?" said Dr. Forrest, sitting down.

"Well--then I said, 'Let's play at setting bones.' It was all rot. I
knew Bobbie wouldn't. I only said it to tease her. And then when she
said 'yes,' of course I had to go through with it. And they tied me up.
They got it out of Stalky. And I think it's a beastly shame."

He managed to writhe over and hide his face against the wooden back of
the settle.

"I didn't think that anyone would know but us," said Bobbie, indignantly
answering Peter's unspoken reproach. "I never thought of your coming in.
And hearing about blood and wounds does really make me feel most awfully
funny. It was only a joke our tying him up. Let me untie you, Pete."

"I don't care if you never untie me," said Peter; "and if that's your
idea of a joke--"

"If I were you," said the Doctor, though really he did not quite know
what to say, "I should be untied before your Mother comes down. You
don't want to worry her just now, do you?"

"I don't promise anything about not saying about wounds, mind," said
Peter, in very surly tones, as Bobbie and Phyllis began to untie the
knots.

"I'm very sorry, Pete," Bobbie whispered, leaning close to him as she
fumbled with the big knot under the settle; "but if you only knew how
sick you made me feel."

"You've made ME feel pretty sick, I can tell you," Peter rejoined. Then
he shook off the loose cords, and stood up.

"I looked in," said Dr. Forrest, "to see if one of you would come along
to the surgery. There are some things that your Mother will want at
once, and I've given my man a day off to go and see the circus; will you
come, Peter?"

Peter went without a word or a look to his sisters.

The two walked in silence up to the gate that led from the Three
Chimneys field to the road. Then Peter said:--

"Let me carry your bag. I say, it is heavy--what's in it?"

"Oh, knives and lancets and different instruments for hurting people.
And the ether bottle. I had to give him ether, you know--the agony was
so intense."

Peter was silent.

"Tell me all about how you found that chap," said Dr. Forrest.

Peter told. And then Dr. Forrest told him stories of brave rescues; he
was a most interesting man to talk to, as Peter had often remarked.

Then in the surgery Peter had a better chance than he had ever had of
examining the Doctor's balance, and his microscope, and his scales and
measuring glasses. When all the things were ready that Peter was to take
back, the Doctor said suddenly:--

"You'll excuse my shoving my oar in, won't you? But I should like to say
something to you."

"Now for a rowing," thought Peter, who had been wondering how it was
that he had escaped one.

"Something scientific," added the Doctor.

"Yes," said Peter, fiddling with the fossil ammonite that the Doctor
used for a paper-weight.

"Well then, you see. Boys and girls are only little men and women. And
WE are much harder and hardier than they are--" (Peter liked the "we."
Perhaps the Doctor had known he would.)--"and much stronger, and things
that hurt THEM don't hurt US. You know you mustn't hit a girl--"

"I should think not, indeed," muttered Peter, indignantly.

"Not even if she's your own sister. That's because girls are so much
softer and weaker than we are; they have to be, you know," he added,
"because if they weren't, it wouldn't be nice for the babies. And that's
why all the animals are so good to the mother animals. They never fight
them, you know."

"I know," said Peter, interested; "two buck rabbits will fight all day
if you let them, but they won't hurt a doe."

"No; and quite wild beasts--lions and elephants--they're immensely
gentle with the female beasts. And we've got to be, too."

"I see," said Peter.

"And their hearts are soft, too," the Doctor went on, "and things that
we shouldn't think anything of hurt them dreadfully. So that a man has
to be very careful, not only of his fists, but of his words. They're
awfully brave, you know," he went on. "Think of Bobbie waiting alone in
the tunnel with that poor chap. It's an odd thing--the softer and more
easily hurt a woman is the better she can screw herself up to do what
HAS to be done. I've seen some brave women--your Mother's one," he ended
abruptly.

"Yes," said Peter.

"Well, that's all. Excuse my mentioning it. But nobody knows everything
without being told. And you see what I mean, don't you?"

"Yes," said Peter. "I'm sorry. There!"

"Of course you are! People always are--directly they understand.
Everyone ought to be taught these scientific facts. So long!"

They shook hands heartily. When Peter came home, his sisters looked at
him doubtfully.

"It's Pax," said Peter, dumping down the basket on the table. "Dr.
Forrest has been talking scientific to me. No, it's no use my telling
you what he said; you wouldn't understand. But it all comes to you girls
being poor, soft, weak, frightened things like rabbits, so us men have
just got to put up with them. He said you were female beasts. Shall I
take this up to Mother, or will you?"

"I know what BOYS are," said Phyllis, with flaming cheeks; "they're just
the nastiest, rudest--"

"They're very brave," said Bobbie, "sometimes."

"Ah, you mean the chap upstairs? I see. Go ahead, Phil--I shall put
up with you whatever you say because you're a poor, weak, frightened,
soft--"

"Not if I pull your hair you won't," said Phyllis, springing at him.

"He said 'Pax,'" said Bobbie, pulling her away. "Don't you see," she
whispered as Peter picked up the basket and stalked out with it, "he's
sorry, really, only he won't say so? Let's say we're sorry."

"It's so goody goody," said Phyllis, doubtfully; "he said we were female
beasts, and soft and frightened--"

"Then let's show him we're not frightened of him thinking us goody
goody," said Bobbie; "and we're not any more beasts than he is."

And when Peter came back, still with his chin in the air, Bobbie said:--

"We're sorry we tied you up, Pete."

"I thought you would be," said Peter, very stiff and superior.

This was hard to bear. But--

"Well, so we are," said Bobbie. "Now let honour be satisfied on both
sides."

"I did call it Pax," said Peter, in an injured tone.

"Then let it BE Pax," said Bobbie. "Come on, Phil, let's get the tea.
Pete, you might lay the cloth."

"I say," said Phyllis, when peace was really restored, which was not
till they were washing up the cups after tea, "Dr. Forrest didn't REALLY
say we were female beasts, did he?"

"Yes," said Peter, firmly, "but I think he meant we men were wild
beasts, too."

"How funny of him!" said Phyllis, breaking a cup.

          *          *          *          *          *          *

"May I come in, Mother?" Peter was at the door of Mother's writing room,
where Mother sat at her table with two candles in front of her. Their
flames looked orange and violet against the clear grey blue of the sky
where already a few stars were twinkling.

"Yes, dear," said Mother, absently, "anything wrong?" She wrote a few
more words and then laid down her pen and began to fold up what she had
written. "I was just writing to Jim's grandfather. He lives near here,
you know."

"Yes, you said so at tea. That's what I want to say. Must you write to
him, Mother? Couldn't we keep Jim, and not say anything to his people
till he's well? It would be such a surprise for them."

"Well, yes," said Mother, laughing, "I think it would."

"You see," Peter went on, "of course the girls are all right and all
that--I'm not saying anything against THEM. But I should like it if I
had another chap to talk to sometimes."

"Yes," said Mother, "I know it's dull for you, dear. But I can't
help it. Next year perhaps I can send you to school--you'd like that,
wouldn't you?"

"I do miss the other chaps, rather," Peter confessed; "but if Jim could
stay after his leg was well, we could have awful larks."

"I've no doubt of it," said Mother. "Well--perhaps he could, but you
know, dear, we're not rich. I can't afford to get him everything he'll
want. And he must have a nurse."

"Can't you nurse him, Mother? You do nurse people so beautifully."

"That's a pretty compliment, Pete--but I can't do nursing and my writing
as well. That's the worst of it."

"Then you MUST send the letter to his grandfather?"

"Of course--and to his schoolmaster, too. We telegraphed to them both,
but I must write as well. They'll be most dreadfully anxious."

"I say, Mother, why can't his grandfather pay for a nurse?" Peter
suggested. "That would be ripping. I expect the old boy's rolling in
money. Grandfathers in books always are."

"Well, this one isn't in a book," said Mother, "so we mustn't expect him
to roll much."

"I say," said Peter, musingly, "wouldn't it be jolly if we all WERE in
a book, and you were writing it? Then you could make all sorts of jolly
things happen, and make Jim's legs get well at once and be all right
to-morrow, and Father come home soon and--"

"Do you miss your Father very much?" Mother asked, rather coldly, Peter
thought.

"Awfully," said Peter, briefly.

Mother was enveloping and addressing the second letter.

"You see," Peter went on slowly, "you see, it's not only him BEING
Father, but now he's away there's no other man in the house but
me--that's why I want Jim to stay so frightfully much. Wouldn't you like
to be writing that book with us all in it, Mother, and make Daddy come
home soon?"

Peter's Mother put her arm round him suddenly, and hugged him in silence
for a minute. Then she said:--

"Don't you think it's rather nice to think that we're in a book that
God's writing? If I were writing the book, I might make mistakes. But
God knows how to make the story end just right--in the way that's best
for us."

"Do you really believe that, Mother?" Peter asked quietly.

"Yes," she said, "I do believe it--almost always--except when I'm so sad
that I can't believe anything. But even when I can't believe it, I know
it's true--and I try to believe. You don't know how I try, Peter. Now
take the letters to the post, and don't let's be sad any more. Courage,
courage! That's the finest of all the virtues! I dare say Jim will be
here for two or three weeks yet."

For what was left of the evening Peter was so angelic that Bobbie feared
he was going to be ill. She was quite relieved in the morning to find
him plaiting Phyllis's hair on to the back of her chair in quite his old
manner.

It was soon after breakfast that a knock came at the door. The children
were hard at work cleaning the brass candlesticks in honour of Jim's
visit.

"That'll be the Doctor," said Mother; "I'll go. Shut the kitchen
door--you're not fit to be seen."

But it wasn't the Doctor. They knew that by the voice and by the sound
of the boots that went upstairs. They did not recognise the sound of the
boots, but everyone was certain that they had heard the voice before.

There was a longish interval. The boots and the voice did not come down
again.

"Who can it possibly be?" they kept on asking themselves and each other.

"Perhaps," said Peter at last, "Dr. Forrest has been attacked by
highwaymen and left for dead, and this is the man he's telegraphed for
to take his place. Mrs. Viney said he had a local tenant to do his work
when he went for a holiday, didn't you, Mrs. Viney?"

"I did so, my dear," said Mrs. Viney from the back kitchen.

"He's fallen down in a fit, more likely," said Phyllis, "all human aid
despaired of. And this is his man come to break the news to Mother."

"Nonsense!" said Peter, briskly; "Mother wouldn't have taken the man
up into Jim's bedroom. Why should she? Listen--the door's opening. Now
they'll come down. I'll open the door a crack."

He did.

"It's not listening," he replied indignantly to Bobbie's scandalised
remarks; "nobody in their senses would talk secrets on the stairs. And
Mother can't have secrets to talk with Dr. Forrest's stable-man--and you
said it was him."

"Bobbie," called Mother's voice.

They opened the kitchen door, and Mother leaned over the stair railing.

"Jim's grandfather has come," she said; "wash your hands and faces and
then you can see him. He wants to see you!" The bedroom door shut again.

"There now!" said Peter; "fancy us not even thinking of that! Let's have
some hot water, Mrs. Viney. I'm as black as your hat."

The three were indeed dirty, for the stuff you clean brass candlesticks
with is very far from cleaning to the cleaner.

They were still busy with soap and flannel when they heard the boots
and the voice come down the stairs and go into the dining-room. And when
they were clean, though still damp--because it takes such a long time
to dry your hands properly, and they were very impatient to see the
grandfather--they filed into the dining-room.

Mother was sitting in the window-seat, and in the leather-covered
armchair that Father always used to sit in at the other house sat--

     THEIR OWN OLD GENTLEMAN!

"Well, I never did," said Peter, even before he said, "How do you do?"
He was, as he explained afterwards, too surprised even to remember that
there was such a thing as politeness--much less to practise it.

"It's our own old gentleman!" said Phyllis.

"Oh, it's you!" said Bobbie. And then they remembered themselves and
their manners and said, "How do you do?" very nicely.

"This is Jim's grandfather, Mr. ----" said Mother, naming the old
gentleman's name.

"How splendid!" said Peter; "that's just exactly like a book, isn't it,
Mother?"

"It is, rather," said Mother, smiling; "things do happen in real life
that are rather like books, sometimes."

"I am so awfully glad it IS you," said Phyllis; "when you think of the
tons of old gentlemen there are in the world--it might have been almost
anyone."

"I say, though," said Peter, "you're not going to take Jim away, though,
are you?"

"Not at present," said the old gentleman. "Your Mother has most kindly
consented to let him stay here. I thought of sending a nurse, but your
Mother is good enough to say that she will nurse him herself."

"But what about her writing?" said Peter, before anyone could stop him.
"There won't be anything for him to eat if Mother doesn't write."

"That's all right," said Mother, hastily.

The old gentleman looked very kindly at Mother.

"I see," he said, "you trust your children, and confide in them."

"Of course," said Mother.

"Then I may tell them of our little arrangement," he said. "Your Mother,
my dears, has consented to give up writing for a little while and to
become a Matron of my Hospital."

"Oh!" said Phyllis, blankly; "and shall we have to go away from Three
Chimneys and the Railway and everything?"

"No, no, darling," said Mother, hurriedly.

"The Hospital is called Three Chimneys Hospital," said the old
gentleman, "and my unlucky Jim's the only patient, and I hope he'll
continue to be so. Your Mother will be Matron, and there'll be a
hospital staff of a housemaid and a cook--till Jim's well."

"And then will Mother go on writing again?" asked Peter.

"We shall see," said the old gentleman, with a slight, swift glance at
Bobbie; "perhaps something nice may happen and she won't have to."

"I love my writing," said Mother, very quickly.

"I know," said the old gentleman; "don't be afraid that I'm going to try
to interfere. But one never knows. Very wonderful and beautiful things
do happen, don't they? And we live most of our lives in the hope of
them. I may come again to see the boy?"

"Surely," said Mother, "and I don't know how to thank you for making it
possible for me to nurse him. Dear boy!"

"He kept calling Mother, Mother, in the night," said Phyllis. "I woke up
twice and heard him."

"He didn't mean me," said Mother, in a low voice to the old gentleman;
"that's why I wanted so much to keep him."

The old gentleman rose.

"I'm so glad," said Peter, "that you're going to keep him, Mother."

"Take care of your Mother, my dears," said the old gentleman. "She's a
woman in a million."

"Yes, isn't she?" whispered Bobbie.

"God bless her," said the old gentleman, taking both Mother's hands,
"God bless her! Ay, and she shall be blessed. Dear me, where's my hat?
Will Bobbie come with me to the gate?"

At the gate he stopped and said:--

"You're a good child, my dear--I got your letter. But it wasn't needed.
When I read about your Father's case in the papers at the time, I had my
doubts. And ever since I've known who you were, I've been trying to find
out things. I haven't done very much yet. But I have hopes, my dear--I
have hopes."

"Oh!" said Bobbie, choking a little.

"Yes--I may say great hopes. But keep your secret a little longer.
Wouldn't do to upset your Mother with a false hope, would it?"

"Oh, but it isn't false!" said Bobbie; "I KNOW you can do it. I knew you
could when I wrote. It isn't a false hope, is it?"

"No," he said, "I don't think it's a false hope, or I wouldn't have told
you. And I think you deserve to be told that there IS a hope."

"And you don't think Father did it, do you? Oh, say you don't think he
did."

"My dear," he said, "I'm perfectly CERTAIN he didn't."

If it was a false hope, it was none the less a very radiant one that lay
warm at Bobbie's heart, and through the days that followed lighted her
little face as a Japanese lantern is lighted by the candle within.



Chapter XIV. The End.


Life at the Three Chimneys was never quite the same again after the old
gentleman came to see his grandson. Although they now knew his name,
the children never spoke of him by it--at any rate, when they were by
themselves. To them he was always the old gentleman, and I think he had
better be the old gentleman to us, too. It wouldn't make him seem any
more real to you, would it, if I were to tell you that his name was
Snooks or Jenkins (which it wasn't)?--and, after all, I must be allowed
to keep one secret. It's the only one; I have told you everything else,
except what I am going to tell you in this chapter, which is the last.
At least, of course, I haven't told you EVERYTHING. If I were to do
that, the book would never come to an end, and that would be a pity,
wouldn't it?

Well, as I was saying, life at Three Chimneys was never quite the same
again. The cook and the housemaid were very nice (I don't mind telling
you their names--they were Clara and Ethelwyn), but they told Mother
they did not seem to want Mrs. Viney, and that she was an old muddler.
So Mrs. Viney came only two days a week to do washing and ironing. Then
Clara and Ethelwyn said they could do the work all right if they weren't
interfered with, and that meant that the children no longer got the tea
and cleared it away and washed up the tea-things and dusted the rooms.

This would have left quite a blank in their lives, although they
had often pretended to themselves and to each other that they hated
housework. But now that Mother had no writing and no housework to do,
she had time for lessons. And lessons the children had to do. However
nice the person who is teaching you may be, lessons are lessons all the
world over, and at their best are worse fun than peeling potatoes or
lighting a fire.

On the other hand, if Mother now had time for lessons, she also had time
for play, and to make up little rhymes for the children as she used
to do. She had not had much time for rhymes since she came to Three
Chimneys.

There was one very odd thing about these lessons. Whatever the children
were doing, they always wanted to be doing something else. When Peter
was doing his Latin, he thought it would be nice to be learning History
like Bobbie. Bobbie would have preferred Arithmetic, which was what
Phyllis happened to be doing, and Phyllis of course thought Latin much
the most interesting kind of lesson. And so on.

So, one day, when they sat down to lessons, each of them found a little
rhyme at its place. I put the rhymes in to show you that their Mother
really did understand a little how children feel about things, and also
the kind of words they use, which is the case with very few grown-up
people. I suppose most grown-ups have very bad memories, and have
forgotten how they felt when they were little. Of course, the verses are
supposed to be spoken by the children.

               PETER

     I once thought Caesar easy pap--
       How very soft I must have been!
     When they start Caesar with a chap
       He little know what that will mean.
     Oh, verbs are silly stupid things.
     I'd rather learn the dates of kings!

               BOBBIE

     The worst of all my lesson things
       Is learning who succeeded who
     In all the rows of queens and kings,
       With dates to everything they do:
     With dates enough to make you sick;--
     I wish it was Arithmetic!

               PHYLLIS

     Such pounds and pounds of apples fill
       My slate--what is the price you'd spend?
     You scratch the figures out until
       You cry upon the dividend.
     I'd break the slate and scream for joy
     If I did Latin like a boy!

This kind of thing, of course, made lessons much jollier. It is
something to know that the person who is teaching you sees that it is
not all plain sailing for you, and does not think that it is just your
stupidness that makes you not know your lessons till you've learned
them!

Then as Jim's leg got better it was very pleasant to go up and sit with
him and hear tales about his school life and the other boys. There
was one boy, named Parr, of whom Jim seemed to have formed the lowest
possible opinion, and another boy named Wigsby Minor, for whose views
Jim had a great respect. Also there were three brothers named Paley, and
the youngest was called Paley Terts, and was much given to fighting.

Peter drank in all this with deep joy, and Mother seemed to have
listened with some interest, for one day she gave Jim a sheet of paper
on which she had written a rhyme about Parr, bringing in Paley and
Wigsby by name in a most wonderful way, as well as all the reasons Jim
had for not liking Parr, and Wigsby's wise opinion on the matter. Jim
was immensely pleased. He had never had a rhyme written expressly for
him before. He read it till he knew it by heart and then he sent it to
Wigsby, who liked it almost as much as Jim did. Perhaps you may like it,
too.

               THE NEW BOY

     His name is Parr:  he says that he
     Is given bread and milk for tea.
     He says his father killed a bear.
     He says his mother cuts his hair.

     He wears goloshes when it's wet.
     I've heard his people call him "Pet"!
     He has no proper sense of shame;
     He told the chaps his Christian name.

     He cannot wicket-keep at all,
     He's frightened of a cricket ball.
     He reads indoors for hours and hours.
     He knows the names of beastly flowers.

     He says his French just like Mossoo--
     A beastly stuck-up thing to do--
     He won't keep _cave_, shirks his turn
     And says he came to school to learn!

     He won't play football, says it hurts;
     He wouldn't fight with Paley Terts;
     He couldn't whistle if he tried,
     And when we laughed at him he cried!

     Now Wigsby Minor says that Parr
     Is only like all new boys are.
     I know when _I_ first came to school
     I wasn't such a jolly fool!

Jim could never understand how Mother could have been clever enough
to do it. To the others it seemed nice, but natural. You see they had
always been used to having a mother who could write verses just like
the way people talk, even to the shocking expression at the end of the
rhyme, which was Jim's very own.

Jim taught Peter to play chess and draughts and dominoes, and altogether
it was a nice quiet time.

Only Jim's leg got better and better, and a general feeling began to
spring up among Bobbie, Peter, and Phyllis that something ought to be
done to amuse him; not just games, but something really handsome. But it
was extraordinarily difficult to think of anything.

"It's no good," said Peter, when all of them had thought and thought
till their heads felt quite heavy and swollen; "if we can't think of
anything to amuse him, we just can't, and there's an end of it. Perhaps
something will just happen of its own accord that he'll like."

"Things DO happen by themselves sometimes, without your making them,"
said Phyllis, rather as though, usually, everything that happened in the
world was her doing.

"I wish something would happen," said Bobbie, dreamily, "something
wonderful."

And something wonderful did happen exactly four days after she had said
this. I wish I could say it was three days after, because in fairy tales
it is always three days after that things happen. But this is not a
fairy story, and besides, it really was four and not three, and I am
nothing if not strictly truthful.

They seemed to be hardly Railway children at all in those days, and as
the days went on each had an uneasy feeling about this which Phyllis
expressed one day.

"I wonder if the Railway misses us," she said, plaintively. "We never go
to see it now."

"It seems ungrateful," said Bobbie; "we loved it so when we hadn't
anyone else to play with."

"Perks is always coming up to ask after Jim," said Peter, "and the
signalman's little boy is better. He told me so."

"I didn't mean the people," explained Phyllis; "I meant the dear Railway
itself."

"The thing I don't like," said Bobbie, on this fourth day, which was a
Tuesday, "is our having stopped waving to the 9.15 and sending our love
to Father by it."

"Let's begin again," said Phyllis. And they did.

Somehow the change of everything that was made by having servants in
the house and Mother not doing any writing, made the time seem extremely
long since that strange morning at the beginning of things, when they
had got up so early and burnt the bottom out of the kettle and had apple
pie for breakfast and first seen the Railway.

It was September now, and the turf on the slope to the Railway was dry
and crisp. Little long grass spikes stood up like bits of gold wire,
frail blue harebells trembled on their tough, slender stalks, Gipsy
roses opened wide and flat their lilac-coloured discs, and the golden
stars of St. John's Wort shone at the edges of the pool that lay halfway
to the Railway. Bobbie gathered a generous handful of the flowers and
thought how pretty they would look lying on the green-and-pink blanket
of silk-waste that now covered Jim's poor broken leg.

"Hurry up," said Peter, "or we shall miss the 9.15!"

"I can't hurry more than I am doing," said Phyllis. "Oh, bother it! My
bootlace has come undone AGAIN!"

"When you're married," said Peter, "your bootlace will come undone going
up the church aisle, and your man that you're going to get married to
will tumble over it and smash his nose in on the ornamented pavement;
and then you'll say you won't marry him, and you'll have to be an old
maid."

"I shan't," said Phyllis. "I'd much rather marry a man with his nose
smashed in than not marry anybody."

"It would be horrid to marry a man with a smashed nose, all the same,"
went on Bobbie. "He wouldn't be able to smell the flowers at the
wedding. Wouldn't that be awful!"

"Bother the flowers at the wedding!" cried Peter. "Look! the signal's
down. We must run!"

They ran. And once more they waved their handkerchiefs, without at all
minding whether the handkerchiefs were clean or not, to the 9.15.

"Take our love to Father!" cried Bobbie. And the others, too, shouted:--

"Take our love to Father!"

The old gentleman waved from his first-class carriage window. Quite
violently he waved. And there was nothing odd in that, for he always
had waved. But what was really remarkable was that from every window
handkerchiefs fluttered, newspapers signalled, hands waved wildly. The
train swept by with a rustle and roar, the little pebbles jumped and
danced under it as it passed, and the children were left looking at each
other.

"Well!" said Peter.

"WELL!" said Bobbie.

"_WELL!_" said Phyllis.

"Whatever on earth does that mean?" asked Peter, but he did not expect
any answer.

"_I_ don't know," said Bobbie. "Perhaps the old gentleman told the
people at his station to look out for us and wave. He knew we should
like it!"

Now, curiously enough, this was just what had happened. The old
gentleman, who was very well known and respected at his particular
station, had got there early that morning, and he had waited at the door
where the young man stands holding the interesting machine that clips
the tickets, and he had said something to every single passenger who
passed through that door. And after nodding to what the old gentleman
had said--and the nods expressed every shade of surprise, interest,
doubt, cheerful pleasure, and grumpy agreement--each passenger had gone
on to the platform and read one certain part of his newspaper. And when
the passengers got into the train, they had told the other passengers
who were already there what the old gentleman had said, and then the
other passengers had also looked at their newspapers and seemed very
astonished and, mostly, pleased. Then, when the train passed the fence
where the three children were, newspapers and hands and handkerchiefs
were waved madly, till all that side of the train was fluttery with
white like the pictures of the King's Coronation in the biograph at
Maskelyne and Cook's. To the children it almost seemed as though the
train itself was alive, and was at last responding to the love that they
had given it so freely and so long.

"It is most extraordinarily rum!" said Peter.

"Most stronery!" echoed Phyllis.

But Bobbie said, "Don't you think the old gentleman's waves seemed more
significating than usual?"

"No," said the others.

"I do," said Bobbie. "I thought he was trying to explain something to us
with his newspaper."

"Explain what?" asked Peter, not unnaturally.

"_I_ don't know," Bobbie answered, "but I do feel most awfully funny. I
feel just exactly as if something was going to happen."

"What is going to happen," said Peter, "is that Phyllis's stocking is
going to come down."

This was but too true. The suspender had given way in the agitation of
the waves to the 9.15. Bobbie's handkerchief served as first aid to the
injured, and they all went home.

Lessons were more than usually difficult to Bobbie that day. Indeed, she
disgraced herself so deeply over a quite simple sum about the division
of 48 pounds of meat and 36 pounds of bread among 144 hungry children
that Mother looked at her anxiously.

"Don't you feel quite well, dear?" she asked.

"I don't know," was Bobbie's unexpected answer. "I don't know how
I feel. It isn't that I'm lazy. Mother, will you let me off lessons
to-day? I feel as if I wanted to be quite alone by myself."

"Yes, of course I'll let you off," said Mother; "but--"

Bobbie dropped her slate. It cracked just across the little green mark
that is so useful for drawing patterns round, and it was never the same
slate again. Without waiting to pick it up she bolted. Mother caught her
in the hall feeling blindly among the waterproofs and umbrellas for her
garden hat.

"What is it, my sweetheart?" said Mother. "You don't feel ill, do you?"

"I DON'T know," Bobbie answered, a little breathlessly, "but I want to
be by myself and see if my head really IS all silly and my inside all
squirmy-twisty."

"Hadn't you better lie down?" Mother said, stroking her hair back from
her forehead.

"I'd be more alive in the garden, I think," said Bobbie.

But she could not stay in the garden. The hollyhocks and the asters and
the late roses all seemed to be waiting for something to happen. It was
one of those still, shiny autumn days, when everything does seem to be
waiting.

Bobbie could not wait.

"I'll go down to the station," she said, "and talk to Perks and ask
about the signalman's little boy."

So she went down. On the way she passed the old lady from the
Post-office, who gave her a kiss and a hug, but, rather to Bobbie's
surprise, no words except:--

"God bless you, love--" and, after a pause, "run along--do."

The draper's boy, who had sometimes been a little less than civil and
a little more than contemptuous, now touched his cap, and uttered the
remarkable words:--

"'Morning, Miss, I'm sure--"

The blacksmith, coming along with an open newspaper in his hand, was
even more strange in his manner. He grinned broadly, though, as a rule,
he was a man not given to smiles, and waved the newspaper long before
he came up to her. And as he passed her, he said, in answer to her "Good
morning":--

"Good morning to you, Missie, and many of them! I wish you joy, that I
do!"

"Oh!" said Bobbie to herself, and her heart quickened its beats,
"something IS going to happen! I know it is--everyone is so odd, like
people are in dreams."

The Station Master wrung her hand warmly. In fact he worked it up and
down like a pump-handle. But he gave her no reason for this unusually
enthusiastic greeting. He only said:--

"The 11.54's a bit late, Miss--the extra luggage this holiday time,"
and went away very quickly into that inner Temple of his into which even
Bobbie dared not follow him.

Perks was not to be seen, and Bobbie shared the solitude of the platform
with the Station Cat. This tortoiseshell lady, usually of a retiring
disposition, came to-day to rub herself against the brown stockings of
Bobbie with arched back, waving tail, and reverberating purrs.

"Dear me!" said Bobbie, stooping to stroke her, "how very kind everybody
is to-day--even you, Pussy!"

Perks did not appear until the 11.54 was signalled, and then he, like
everybody else that morning, had a newspaper in his hand.

"Hullo!" he said, "'ere you are. Well, if THIS is the train, it'll be
smart work! Well, God bless you, my dear! I see it in the paper, and
I don't think I was ever so glad of anything in all my born days!" He
looked at Bobbie a moment, then said, "One I must have, Miss, and no
offence, I know, on a day like this 'ere!" and with that he kissed her,
first on one cheek and then on the other.

"You ain't offended, are you?" he asked anxiously. "I ain't took too
great a liberty? On a day like this, you know--"

"No, no," said Bobbie, "of course it's not a liberty, dear Mr. Perks;
we love you quite as much as if you were an uncle of ours--but--on a day
like WHAT?"

"Like this 'ere!" said Perks. "Don't I tell you I see it in the paper?"

"Saw WHAT in the paper?" asked Bobbie, but already the 11.54 was
steaming into the station and the Station Master was looking at all the
places where Perks was not and ought to have been.

Bobbie was left standing alone, the Station Cat watching her from under
the bench with friendly golden eyes.

Of course you know already exactly what was going to happen. Bobbie was
not so clever. She had the vague, confused, expectant feeling that comes
to one's heart in dreams. What her heart expected I can't tell--perhaps
the very thing that you and I know was going to happen--but her mind
expected nothing; it was almost blank, and felt nothing but tiredness
and stupidness and an empty feeling, like your body has when you have
been a long walk and it is very far indeed past your proper dinner-time.

Only three people got out of the 11.54. The first was a countryman with
two baskety boxes full of live chickens who stuck their russet heads
out anxiously through the wicker bars; the second was Miss Peckitt, the
grocer's wife's cousin, with a tin box and three brown-paper parcels;
and the third--

"Oh! my Daddy, my Daddy!" That scream went like a knife into the heart
of everyone in the train, and people put their heads out of the windows
to see a tall pale man with lips set in a thin close line, and a little
girl clinging to him with arms and legs, while his arms went tightly
round her.

         *          *          *          *          *          *

"I knew something wonderful was going to happen," said Bobbie, as they
went up the road, "but I didn't think it was going to be this. Oh, my
Daddy, my Daddy!"

"Then didn't Mother get my letter?" Father asked.

"There weren't any letters this morning. Oh! Daddy! it IS really you,
isn't it?"

The clasp of a hand she had not forgotten assured her that it was. "You
must go in by yourself, Bobbie, and tell Mother quite quietly that it's
all right. They've caught the man who did it. Everyone knows now that it
wasn't your Daddy."

"_I_ always knew it wasn't," said Bobbie. "Me and Mother and our old
gentleman."

"Yes," he said, "it's all his doing. Mother wrote and told me you had
found out. And she told me what you'd been to her. My own little girl!"
They stopped a minute then.

And now I see them crossing the field. Bobbie goes into the house,
trying to keep her eyes from speaking before her lips have found the
right words to "tell Mother quite quietly" that the sorrow and the
struggle and the parting are over and done, and that Father has come
home.

I see Father walking in the garden, waiting--waiting. He is looking at
the flowers, and each flower is a miracle to eyes that all these months
of Spring and Summer have seen only flagstones and gravel and a little
grudging grass. But his eyes keep turning towards the house. And
presently he leaves the garden and goes to stand outside the nearest
door. It is the back door, and across the yard the swallows are
circling. They are getting ready to fly away from cold winds and keen
frost to the land where it is always summer. They are the same swallows
that the children built the little clay nests for.

Now the house door opens. Bobbie's voice calls:--

"Come in, Daddy; come in!"

He goes in and the door is shut. I think we will not open the door or
follow him. I think that just now we are not wanted there. I think it
will be best for us to go quickly and quietly away. At the end of the
field, among the thin gold spikes of grass and the harebells and Gipsy
roses and St. John's Wort, we may just take one last look, over our
shoulders, at the white house where neither we nor anyone else is wanted
now.

========================================
