========================================

PETER RUFF AND THE DOUBLE FOUR

By E. Phillips Oppenheim





CONTENTS


BOOK ONE

CHAPTER

     I        INTRODUCING MR. PETER RUFF

     II       A NEW CAREER

     III      VINCENT CAWDOR, COMMISSION AGENT

     IV       THE INDISCRETION OF LETTY SHAW

     V        DELILAH FROM STREATHAM

     VI       THE LITTLE LADY FROM SERVIA

     VII      THE DEMAND OF THE DOUBLE-FOUR

     VIII     MRS. BOGNOR'S STAR BOARDER

     IX       THE PERFIDY OF MISS BROWN

     X        WONDERFUL JOHN DORY



                 BOOK  TWO

     I        RECALLED BY THE DOUBLE-FOUR

     II       PRINCE ALBERT'S CARD DEBTS

     III      THE AMBASSADOR'S WIFE

     IV       THE  MAN  FROM  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT

     V        THE FIRST SHOT

     VI       THE SEVEN SUPPERS OF ANDREA KORUST

     VII      MAJOR KOSUTH'S MISSION

     VIII     THE MAN BEHIND THE CURTAIN

     IX       THE GHOSTS OF HAVANA HARBOR

     X        THE AFFAIR OF AN ALIEN SOCIETY

     XI       THE  THIRTEENTH  ENCOUNTER




BOOK ONE



CHAPTER I. INTRODUCING MR. PETER RUFF


There was nothing about the supper party on that particular Sunday
evening in November at Daisy Villa, Green Street, Streatham, which
seemed to indicate in any way that one of the most interesting careers
connected with the world history of crime was to owe its very existence
to the disaster which befell that little gathering. The villa was the
residence and also--to his credit--the unmortgaged property of Mr. David
Barnes, a struggling but fairly prosperous coal merchant of excellent
character, some means, and Methodist proclivities. His habit of sitting
without his coat when carving, although deprecated by his wife and
daughter on account of the genteel aspirations of the latter, was a not
unusual one in the neighbourhood; and coupled with the proximity of a
cold joint of beef, his seat at the head of the table, and a carving
knife and fork grasped in his hands, established clearly the fact of
his position in the household, which a somewhat weak physiognomy might
otherwise have led the casual observer to doubt. Opposite him, at the
other end of the table, sat his wife, Mrs. Barnes, a somewhat voluminous
lady with a high colour, a black satin frock, and many ornaments. On
her left the son of the house, eighteen years old, of moderate stature,
somewhat pimply, with the fashion of the moment reflected in his pink
tie with white spots, drawn through a gold ring, and curving outwards to
seek obscurity underneath a dazzling waistcoat. A white tube-rose in
his buttonhole might have been intended as a sort of compliment to the
occasion, or an indication of his intention to take a walk after supper
in the fashionable purlieus of the neighbourhood. Facing him sat his
sister--a fluffy-haired, blue-eyed young lady, pretty in her way, but
chiefly noticeable for a peculiar sort of self-consciousness blended
with self-satisfaction, and possessed only at a certain period in their
lives by young ladies of her age. It was almost the air of the cat in
whose interior reposes the missing canary, except that in this instance
the canary obviously existed in the person of the young man who sat at
her side, introduced formally to the household for the first time. That
young man's name was--at the moment--Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald.

It seems idle to attempt any description of a person who, in the past,
had secured a certain amount of fame under a varying personality; and
who, in the future, was to become more than ever notorious under a far
less aristocratic pseudonym than that by which he was at present known
to the inhabitants of Daisy Villa. There are photographs of him in New
York and Paris, St. Petersburg and Chicago, Vienna and Cape Town, but
there are no two pictures which present to the casual observer the
slightest likeness to one another. To allude to him by the name under
which he had won some part, at least, of the affections of Miss Maud
Barnes, Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald, as he sat there, a suitor on probation
for her hand, was a young man of modest and genteel appearance. He wore
a blue serge suit--a little underdressed for the occasion, perhaps; but
his tie and collar were neat; his gold-rimmed spectacles--if a little
disapproved of by Maud on account of the air of steadiness which they
imparted--suggested excellent son-in-lawlike qualities to Mr. and Mrs.
Barnes. He had the promise of a fair moustache, but his complexion
generally was colourless. His features, except for a certain regularity,
were undistinguished. His speech was modest and correct. His manner
varied with his company. To-night it had been pronounced, by excellent
judges--genteel.

The conversation consisted--naturally enough, under the
circumstances--of a course of subtle and judicious pumping, tactfully
prompted, for the most part, by Mrs. Barnes. Such, for instance, as the
following:

"Talking about Marie Corelli's new book reminds me, Mr. Fitzgerald--your
occupation is connected with books, is it not?" his prospective
mother-in-law enquired, artlessly.

Mr. Fitzgerald bowed assent.

"I am cashier at Howell & Wilson's in Cheapside," he said. "We sell
a great many books there--as many, I should think, as any retail
establishment in London."

"Indeed!" Mrs. Barnes purred. "Very interesting work, I am sure. So nice
and intellectual, too; for, of course, you must be looking inside them
sometimes."

"I know the place well," Mr. Adolphus Barnes, Junior, announced
condescendingly,--"pass it every day on my way to lunch."

"So much nicer," Mrs. Barnes continued, "than any of the ordinary
businesses--grocery or drapery, or anything of that sort."

Miss Maud elevated her eyebrows slightly. Was it likely that she would
have looked with eyes of favour upon a young man engaged in any of these
inferior occupations?

"There's money in books, too," Mr. Barnes declared with sudden
inspiration. His prospective son-in-law turned towards him
deferentially.

"You are right, sir," he admitted. "There is money in them. There's
money for those who write, and there's money for those who sell. My
occupation," he continued, with a modest little cough, "brings me often
into touch with publishers, travellers and clerks, so I am, as it were,
behind the scenes to some extent. I can assure you," he continued,
looking from Mr. Barnes to his wife, and finally transfixing Mr.
Adolphus--"I can assure you that the money paid by some firms of
publishers to a few well-known authors--I will mention no names--as
advances against royalties, is something stupendous!"

"Ah!" Mr. Barnes murmured, solemnly shaking his head.

"Marie Corelli, I expect, and that Hall Caine," remarked young Adolphus.

"Seems easy enough to write a book, too," Mrs. Barnes said. "Why, I
declare that some of those we get from the library--we subscribe to a
library, Mr. Fitzgerald--are just as simple and straightforward that
a child might have written them. No plot whatsoever, no murders or
mysteries or anything of that sort--just stories about people like
ourselves. I don't see how they can pay people for writing stories about
people just like those one meets every day!"

"I always say," Maud intervened, "that Spencer means to write a book
some day. He has quite the literary air, hasn't he, mother?"

"Indeed he has!" Mrs. Barnes declared, with an appreciative glance at
the gold-rimmed spectacles.

Mr. Fitzgerald modestly disclaimed any literary aspirations.

"The thing is a gift, after all," he declared, generously. "I can keep
accounts, and earn a fair salary at it, but if I attempted fiction I
should soon be up a tree."

Mr. Barnes nodded his approval of such sentiments.

"Every one to his trade, I say," he remarked. "What sort of salaries do
they pay now in the book trade?" he asked guilelessly.

"Very fair," Mr. Fitzgerald admitted candidly,--"very fair indeed."

"When I was your age," Mr. Barnes said reflectively, "I was getting--let
me see--forty-two shillings a week. Pretty good pay, too, for those
days."

Mr. Fitzgerald admitted the fact.

"Of course," he said apologetically, "salaries are a little higher now
all round. Mr. Howell has been very kind to me,--in fact I have had two
raises this year. I am getting four pounds ten now."

"Four pounds ten per week?" Mrs. Barnes exclaimed, laying down her knife
and fork.

"Certainly," Mr. Fitzgerald answered. "After Christmas, I have some
reason to believe that it may be five pounds."

Mr. Barnes whistled softly, and looked at the young man with a new
respect.

"I told you that--Mr.--that Spencer was doing pretty well, Mother," Maud
simpered, looking down at her plate.

"Any one to support?" her father asked, transferring a pickle from the
fork to his mouth.

"No one," Mr. Fitzgerald answered. "In fact, I may say that I have
some small expectations. I haven't done badly, either, out of the few
investments I have made from time to time."

"Saved a bit of money, eh?" Mr. Barnes enquired genially.

"I have a matter of four hundred pounds put by," Mr. Fitzgerald admitted
modestly, "besides a few sticks of furniture. I never cared much about
lodging-house things, so I furnished a couple of rooms myself some time
ago."

Mrs. Barnes rose slowly to her feet.

"You are quite sure you won't have a small piece more of beef?" she
enquired anxiously.

"Just a morsel?" Mr. Barnes asked, tapping the joint insinuatingly with
his carving knife.

"No, I thank you!" Mr. Fitzgerald declared firmly. "I have done
excellently."

"Then if you will put the joint on the sideboard, Adolphus," Mrs. Barnes
directed, "Maud and I will change the plates. We always let the girl go
out on Sundays, Mr. Fitzgerald," she explained, turning to their guest.
"It's very awkward, of course, but they seem to expect it."

"Quite natural, I'm sure," Mr. Fitzgerald murmured, watching Maud's
light movements with admiring eyes. "I like to see ladies interested in
domestic work."

"There's one thing I will say for Maud," her proud mother declared,
plumping down a dish of jelly upon the table, "she does know what's what
in keeping house, and even if she hasn't to scrape and save as I did
when David and I were first married, economy is a great thing when
you're young. I have always said so, and I stick to it."

"Quite right, Mother," Mr. Barnes declared.

"If instead of sitting there," Mrs. Barnes continued in high good
humour, "you were to get a bottle of that port wine out of the
cellarette, we might drink Mr. Fitzgerald's health, being as it's his
first visit."

Mr. Barnes rose to his feet with alacrity. "For a woman with sound
ideas," he declared, "commend me to your mother!"

Maud, having finished her duties, resumed her place by the side of the
guest of the evening. Their hands met under the tablecloth for a moment.
To the girl, the pleasure of such a proceeding was natural enough, but
Fitzgerald asked himself for the fiftieth time why on earth he, who,
notwithstanding his present modest exterior, was a young man of some
experience, should from such primitive love-making derive a rapture
which nothing else in life afforded him. He was, at that moment, content
with his future,--a future which he had absolutely and finally decided
upon. He was content with his father-in-law and his mother-in-law, with
Daisy Villa, and the prospect of a Daisy Villa for himself,--content,
even, with Adolphus! But for Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald, these things were
not to be! The awakening was even then at hand.

The dining room of Daisy Villa fronted the street, and was removed from
it only a few feet. Consequently, the footsteps of passers-by upon the
flagged pavement were clearly distinguishable. It was just at the moment
when Mrs. Barnes was inserting a few fresh almonds into a somewhat
precarious tipsy cake, and Mr. Barnes was engaged with the decanting of
the port, that two pairs of footsteps, considerably heavier than those
of the ordinary promenader, paused outside and finally stopped. The gate
creaked. Mr. Barnes looked up.

"Hullo!" he exclaimed. "What's that? Visitors?"

They all listened. The front-door bell rang. Adolphus, in response to a
gesture from his mother, rose sulkily to his feet.

"Job I hate!" he muttered as he left the room.

The rest of the family, full of the small curiosity of people of their
class, were intent upon listening for voices outside. The demeanour of
Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald, therefore, escaped their notice. It is doubtful,
in any case, whether their perceptions would have been sufficiently keen
to have enabled them to trace the workings of emotion in the countenance
of a person so magnificently endowed by Providence with the art of
subterfuge. Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald seemed simply to have stiffened in
acute and earnest attention. It was only for a moment that he hesitated.
His unfailing inspiration told him the truth!

His course of action was simple,--he rose to his feet and strolled to
the window.

"Some people who have lost their way in the fog, perhaps," he remarked.
"What a night!"

He laid his hand upon the sash--simultaneously there was a rush of
cold air into the room, a half-angry, half-frightened exclamation from
Adolphus in the passage, a scream from Miss Maud--and no Mr. Spencer
Fitzgerald! No one had time to be more than blankly astonished. The door
was opened, and a police inspector, in very nice dark braided uniform
and a peaked cap, stood in the doorway.

Mr. Barnes dropped the port, and Mrs. Barnes, emulating her daughter's
example, screamed. The inspector, as though conscious of the draught,
moved rapidly toward the window.

"You had a visitor here, Mr. Barnes," he said quickly--"a Mr. Spencer
Fitzgerald. Where is he?"

There was no one who could answer! Mr. Barnes was speechless between
the shock of the spilt port and the appearance of a couple of uniformed
policemen in his dining room. John Dory, the detective, he knew well
enough in his private capacity, but in his uniform, and attended by
policemen, he presented a new and startling appearance! Mrs. Barnes was
in hysterics, and Maud was gazing like a creature turned to stone at
the open window, through which little puffs of fog were already drifting
into the room. Adolphus, with an air of bewilderment, was standing with
his mouth and eyes wider open than they had ever been in his life. And
as for the honoured guest of these admirable inhabitants of Daisy Villa,
there was not the slightest doubt but that Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald had
disappeared through the window!


Fitzgerald's expedition was nearly at an end. Soon he paused, crossed
the road to a block of flats, ascended to the eighth floor by an
automatic lift, and rang the bell at a door which bore simply the number
II. A trim parlourmaid opened it after a few minutes' delay.

"Is Miss Emerson at home?" he asked.

"Miss Emerson is in," the maid admitted, with some hesitation, "but I am
not sure that she will see any one to-night."

"I have a message for her," Fitzgerald said.

"Will you give me your name, sir, please?" the maid asked.

An inner door was suddenly opened. A slim girl, looking taller than she
really was by reason of the rug upon which she stood, looked out into
the hall--a girl with masses of brown hair loosely coiled on her head,
with pale face and strange eyes. She opened her lips as though to call
to her visitor by name, and as suddenly closed them again. There was not
much expression in her face, but there was enough to show that his visit
was not unwelcome.

"You!" she exclaimed. "Come in! Please come in at once!"

Fitzgerald obeyed the invitation of the girl whom he had come to visit.
She had retreated a little into the room, but the door was no sooner
closed than she held out her hands.

"Peter!" she exclaimed. "Peter, you have come to me at last!"

Her lips were a little parted; her eyes were bright with pleasure; her
whole expression was one of absolute delight. Fitzgerald frowned, as
though he found her welcome a little too enthusiastic for his taste.

"Violet," he said, "please don't look at me as though I were a prodigal
sheep. If you do, I shall be sorry that I came."

Her hands fell to her side, the pleasure died out of her face--only her
eyes still questioned him. Fitzgerald carefully laid his hat on a vacant
chair.

"Something has happened?" she said. "Tell me that all that madness is
over--that you are yourself again!"

"So far as regards my engagement with Messrs. Howell & Wilson," he said,
despondently, "you are right. As regards--Miss Barnes, there has been
no direct misunderstanding between us, but I am afraid, for the present,
that I must consider that--well, in abeyance."

"That is something!" she exclaimed, drawing a little breath of relief.
"Sit down, Peter. Will you have something to eat? I finished dinner an
hour ago, but--"

"Thank you," Fitzgerald interrupted, "I supped--extremely well in
Streatham!"

"In Streatham!" she repeated. "Why, how did you get there? The fog is
awful."

"Fogs do not trouble me," Fitzgerald answered. "I walked. I could have
done it as well blindfold. I will take a whisky and soda, if I may."

She led him to an easy-chair.

"I will mix it myself," she said.

Without being remarkably good-looking, she was certainly a pleasant
and attractive-looking young woman. Her cheeks were a little pale; her
hair--perfectly natural--was a wonderful deep shade of soft brown. Her
eyes were long and narrow--almost Oriental in shape--and they seemed
in some queer way to match the room; he could have sworn that in the
firelight they flashed green. Her body and limbs, notwithstanding her
extreme slightness, were graceful, perhaps, but with the grace of the
tigress. She wore a green silk dressing jacket, pulled together with a
belt of lizard skin, and her neck was bare. Her skirt was of some thin
black material. She was obviously in deshabille, and yet there was
something neat and trim about the smaller details of her toilette.

"Go on, please, Peter," she begged. "You are keeping me in suspense."

"There isn't much to tell," he answered. "It's over--that's all."

She drew a sharp breath through her teeth.

"You are not going to marry that girl--that bourgeois doll in
Streatham?"

Fitzgerald sat up in his chair.

"Look here," he said, seriously, "don't you call her names. If I'm not
going to marry her, it isn't my fault. She is the only girl I have ever
wanted, and probably--most probably--she will be the only one I ever
shall want. That's honest, isn't it?"

The girl winced.

"Yes," she said, "it is honest!"

"I should have married her," the young man continued, "and I should have
been happy. I had my eye on a villa--not too near her parents--and I saw
my way to a little increase of salary. I should have taken to gardening,
to walks in the Park, with an occasional theatre, and I should
have thoroughly enjoyed a fortnight every summer at Skegness or
Sutton-on-Sea. We should have saved a little money. I should have gone
to church regularly, and if possible I should have filled some
minor public offices. You may call this bourgeois--it was my idea of
happiness."

"Was!" she murmured.

"Is still," he declared, sharply, "but I shall never attain to it.
To-night I had to leave Maud--to leave the supper table of Daisy
Villa--through the window!"

She looked at him in amazement.

"The police," he explained. "That brute Dory was at the bottom of it."

"But surely," she murmured, "you told me that you had a bona-fide
situation--"

"So I had," he declared, "and I was a fool not to be content with it.
It was my habit of taking long country walks, and their rotten auditing,
which undid me! You understand that this was all before I met Maud?
Since the day I spoke to her, I turned over a new leaf. I have left the
night work alone, and I repaid every penny of the firm's money which
they could ever have possibly found out about. There was only that one
little affair of mine down at Sudbury."

"Tell me what you are going to do?" she whispered.

"I have no alternative," he answered. "The law has kicked me out from
the respectable places. The law shall pay!"

She looked at him with glowing eyes.

"Have you any plans?" she asked, softly.

"I have," he answered. "I have considered the subject from a good many
points of view, and I have decided to start in business for myself as a
private detective."

She raised her eyebrows.

"My dear Peter!" she murmured. "Couldn't you be a little more original?"

"That is only what I am going to call myself," he answered. "I may tell
you that I am going to strike out on somewhat new lines."

"Please explain," she begged.

He recrossed his knees and made himself a little more comfortable.

"The weak part of every great robbery, however successful," he began,
"is the great wastage in value which invariably results. For jewels
which cost--say five thousand pounds, and to procure which the artist
has to risk his life as well as his liberty, he has to consider
himself lucky if he clears eight hundred. For the Hermitage rubies, for
instance, where I nearly had to shoot a man dead, I realized rather less
than four hundred pounds. It doesn't pay."

"Go on," she begged.

"I am not clear," he continued, "how far this class of business will
attract me at all, but I do not propose, in any case, to enter into any
transactions on my own account. I shall work for other people, and for
cash down. Your experience of life, Violet, has been fairly large. Have
you not sometimes come into contact with people driven into a situation
from which they would willingly commit any crime to escape if they
dared? It is not with them a question of money at all--it is simply a
matter of ignorance. They do not know how to commit a crime. They have
had no experience, and if they attempt it, they know perfectly well that
they are likely to blunder. A person thoroughly experienced in the ways
of criminals--a person of genius like myself--would have, without a
doubt, an immense clientele, if only he dared put up his signboard.
Literally, I cannot do that. Actually, I mean to do so! I shall be
willing to accept contracts either to help nervous people out of an
undesirable crisis; or, on the other hand, to measure my wits against
the wits of Scotland Yard, and to discover the criminals whom they have
failed to secure. I shall make my own bargains, and I shall be paid in
cash. I shall take on nothing that I am not certain about."

"But your clients?" she asked, curiously. "How will you come into
contact with them?"

He smiled.

"I am not afraid of business being slack," he said. "The world is full
of fools."

"You cannot live outside the law, Peter," she objected. "You are clever,
I know, but they are not all fools at Scotland Yard."

"You forget," he reminded her, "that there will be a perfectly
legitimate side to my profession. The other sort of case I shall only
accept if I can see my way clear to make a success of it. Needless to
say, I shall have to refuse the majority that are offered to me."

She came a little nearer to him.

"In any case," she said, with a little sigh, "you have given up that
foolish, bourgeois life of yours?"

He looked down into her face, and his eyes were cold.

"Violet," he said, "this is no time for misunderstandings. I should
like you to know that apart from one young lady, who possesses my whole
affection--"

"All of it?" she pleaded.

"All!" he declared emphatically. "She will doubtless be faithless to
me--under the circumstances, I cannot blame her--but so far as I am
concerned, I have no affection whatever for any one else."

She crept back to her place.

"I could be so useful to you," she murmured.

"You could and you shall, if you will be sensible," he answered.

"Tell me how?" she begged.

He was silent for a moment.

"Are you acting now?" he asked.

"I am understudying Molly," she answered, "and I have a very small part
at the Globe."

He nodded.

"There is no reason to interfere with that," he said, "in fact, I wish
you to continue your connection with the profession. It brings you into
touch with the class of people among whom I am likely to find clients."

"Go on, please," she begged.

"On two conditions--or rather one," he said, "you can, if you like,
become my secretary and partner--and find the money we shall require to
make a start."

"Conditions?" she asked.

"You must understand, once and for all," he said, "that I will not be
made love to, and that I can treat you only as a working; companion. My
name will be Peter Ruff, and yours Miss Brown. You will have to dress
like a secretary, and behave like one. Sometimes there will be plenty
of work for you, and sometimes there will be none at all. Sometimes you
will be bored to death, and sometimes there will be excitement. I do not
wish to make you vain, but I may add, especially as you are aware of my
personal feelings toward you, that you are the only person in the world
to whom I would make this offer."

She sighed gently.

"Tell me, Peter," she asked, "when do you mean to start this new
enterprise?"

"Not for six months--perhaps a year," he answered. "I must go to
Paris--perhaps Vienna. I might even have to go to New York. There
are certain associations with which I must come into touch--certain
information I must become possessed of."

"Peter," she said, "I like your scheme, but there is just one thing.
Such men as you should be the brains of great enterprises. Don't you
understand what I mean? It shouldn't be you who does the actual thing
which brings you within the power of the law. I am not over-scrupulous,
you know. I hate wrongdoing, but I have never been able to treat as
equal criminals the poor man who steals for a living, and the rich
financier who robs right and left out of sheer greed. I agree with you
that crime is not an absolute thing. The circumstances connected with
every action in life determine its morality or immorality. But, Peter,
it isn't worth while to go outside the law!"

He nodded.

"You are a sensible girl," he said, "I have always thought that. We'll
talk over my cases together, if they seem to run a little too close to
the line."

"Very well, Peter," she said, "I accept."



CHAPTER II. A NEW CAREER


About twelve months after the interrupted festivities at Daisy Villa,
that particular neighbourhood was again the scene of some rejoicing.
Standing before the residence of Mr. Barnes were three carriages, drawn
in each case by a pair of grey horses. The coachmen and their steeds
were similarly adorned with white rosettes. It would have been an insult
to the intelligence of the most youthful of the loungers-by to have
informed them that a wedding was projected.

At the neighbouring church all was ready. The clerk stood at the door,
the red drugget was down, the usual little crowd were standing all agog
upon the pavement. There was one unusual feature of the proceedings:
Instead of a solitary policeman, there were at least a dozen who kept
clear the entrance to the church. Their presence greatly puzzled a
little old gentleman who had joined the throng of sightseers. He pushed
himself to the front and touched one of them upon the shoulder.

"Mr. Policeman," he said, "will you tell me why there are so many of you
to keep such a small crowd in order?"

"Bridegroom's a member of the force, sir, for one reason," the man
answered good-humouredly.

"And the other?" the old gentleman persisted.

The policeman behaved as though he had not heard--a proceeding which his
natural stolidity rendered easy. The little old gentleman, however, was
not so easily put off. He tapped the man once more upon the shoulder.

"And the other reason, Mr. Policeman?" he asked insinuatingly.

"Not allowed to talk about that, sir," was the somewhat gruff reply.

The little old gentleman moved away, a trifle hurt. He was a very nicely
dressed old gentleman indeed, and everything about him seemed to savour
of prosperity. But he was certainly garrulous. An obviously invited
guest was standing upon the edge of the pavement stroking a pair of
lavender kid gloves. The little old gentleman sidled up to him.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said, raising his hat. "I am just back from
Australia--haven't seen a wedding in England for fifty years. Do you
think that they would let me into the church?"

The invited guest looked down at his questioner and approved of him.
Furthermore, he seemed exceedingly glad to be interrupted in his
somewhat nervous task of waiting for the wedding party.

"Certainly, sir," he replied cheerfully. "Come along in with me, and
I'll find you a seat."

Down the scarlet drugget they went--the big best man with the red hands
and the lavender kid gloves and the opulent-looking old gentleman with
the gold-rimmed spectacles and the handsome walking stick.

"Dear me, this is very interesting!" the latter remarked. "Is it
the custom, sir, always, may I ask, in this country, to have so many
policemen at a wedding?"

The big man looked downward and shook his head.

"Special reason," he said mysteriously. "Fact is, young lady was engaged
once to a very bad character--a burglar whom the police have been
wanting for years. He had to leave the country, but he has written her
once or twice since in a mysterious sort of way--wanted her to be true
to him, and all that sort of thing. Dory--that's the bridegroom--has got
a sort of an idea that he may turn up to-day."

"This is very exciting--very!" the little old gentleman remarked.
"Reminds me of our younger days out in Australia."

"You sit down here," the best man directed, ushering his companion
into an empty pew. "I must get back again outside, or I shall have the
bridegroom arriving."

"Good-day to you, sir, and many thanks!" the little old gentleman said
politely.

Soon the bridegroom arrived--a smart young officer, well thought of at
Scotland Yard, well set up, wearing a long tail coat a lilac and white
tie, and shaking in every limb. He walked up the aisle accompanied by
the best man, and the little old gentleman from Australia watched him
genially from behind those gold-rimmed glasses. And, then, scarcely was
he at the altar rails when through the open church door one heard the
sounds of horses' feet, one heard a rustle, the murmur of voices, caught
a glimpse of a waiting group arranging themselves finally in the porch
of the church. Maud, on the arm of her father, came slowly up the aisle.
The little old gentleman turned his head as though this was something
upon which he feared to look. He saw nothing of Mr. Barnes, in a new
coat, with tuberose and spray of maidenhair in his coat, and exceedingly
tight patent leather boots on his feet; he saw nothing of Mrs. Barnes,
clad in a gown of the lightest magenta, with a bonnet smothered with
violets.

It was in the vestry that the only untoward incident of that highly
successful wedding took place. The ceremony was over! Bride, bridegroom
and parents trooped in. And when the register was opened, one witness
had already signed! In the clear, precise writing his name stood out
upon the virgin page--

Spencer Fitzgerald


The bridegroom swore, the bride nearly collapsed. The clerk pressed into
the hands of the latter an envelope.

"From the little old gentleman," he announced, "who was fussing round
the church this morning."

Mrs. Dory tore it open and gave a cry of delight. A diamond cross, worth
all the rest of her presents put together, flashed soft lights from a
background of dull velvet. Her husband had looked over her shoulder, and
with a scowl seized the morocco case and threw it far from him.

It was the only disturbing incident of a highly successful function!

At precisely the same moment when the wedding guests were seated
around the hospitable board of Daisy Villa, a celebration of a somewhat
different nature was taking place in the more aristocratic neighbourhood
of Curzon Street. Here, however, the little party was a much smaller
one, and the innocent gaiety of the gathering at Daisy Villa was
entirely lacking. The luncheon table around which the four men were
seated presented all the unlovely signs of a meal where self-restraint
had been abandoned--where conviviality has passed the bounds of licence.
Edibles were represented only by a single dish of fruit; the tablecloth,
stained with wine and cigar ash, seemed crowded with every sort of
bottle and every sort of glass. A magnum of champagne, empty, another
half full, stood in the middle of the table; whisky, brandy, liqueurs of
various sorts were all represented; glasses--some full, some empty, some
filled with cigar ash and cigarette stumps--an ugly sight!

The guest in chief arose. Short, thick-set, red-faced, with bulbous
eyes, and veins about his temples which just now were unpleasantly
prominent, he seemed, indeed, a very fitting person to have been the
recipient of such hospitality. He stood clutching a little at the
tablecloth and swaying upon his feet. He spoke as a drunken man, but
such words as he pronounced clearly showed him to be possessed of a
voice naturally thick and raspy. It was obvious that he was a person of
entirely different class from his three companions.

"G--gentlemen," he said, "I must be off. I thank you very much for
this--hospitality. Honoured, I'm sure, to have sat down in such--such
company. Good afternoon, all!"

He lurched a little toward the door, but his neighbour at the table--who
was also his host--caught hold of his coat tail and pulled him back into
his chair.

"No hurry, Masters," he said. "One more liqueur, eh? It's a raw
afternoon."

"N--not another drop, Sir Richard!" the man declared. "Not another drop
to drink. I am very much obliged to you all, but I must be off. Must be
off," he repeated, making another effort to rise.

His host held him by the arm. The man resented it--he showed signs of
anger.

"D--n it all! I--I'm not a prisoner, am I?" he exclaimed angrily. "Tell
you I've got--appointment--club. Can't you see it's past five o'clock?"

"That's all right, Masters," the man whom he had addressed as Sir
Richard declared soothingly. "We want just a word with you on business
first, before you go--Colonel Dickinson, Lord Merries and myself."

Masters shook his head.

"See you to-morrow," he declared. "No time to talk business now. Let me
go!"

He made another attempt to rise, which his host also prevented.

"Masters, don't be a fool!" the latter said firmly. "You've got to hear
what we want to say to you. Sit down and listen."

Masters relapsed sullenly into his chair. His little eyes seemed to
creep closer to one another. So they wanted to talk business! Perhaps
it was for that reason that they had bidden him sit at their table--had
entertained him so well! The very thought cleared his brain.

"Go on," he said shortly.

Sir Richard lit a cigarette and leaned further back in his chair. He was
a man apparently about fifty years of age--tall, well dressed, with good
features, save for his mouth, which resembled more than anything a
rat trap. He was perfectly bald, and he had the air of a man who was a
careful liver. His eyes were bright, almost beadlike; his fingers long
and a trifle over-manicured. One would have judged him to be what he
was--a man of fashion and a patron of the turf.

"Masters," he said, "we are all old friends here. We want to speak to
you plainly. We three have had a try, as you know--Merries, Dickinson
and myself--to make the coup of our lives. We failed, and we're up
against it hard."

"Very hard, indeed," Lord Merries murmured softly.

"Deuced hard!" Colonel Dickinson echoed.

Masters was sitting tight, breathing a little hard, looking fixedly at
his host.

"Take my own case first," the latter continued. "I am Sir Richard Dyson,
ninth baronet, with estates in Wiltshire and Scotland, and a town
house in Cleveland Place. I belong to the proper clubs for a man in my
position, and, somehow or other--we won't say how--I have managed to pay
my way. There isn't an acre of my property that isn't mortgaged for more
than its value. My town house--well, it doesn't belong to me at all! I
have twenty-six thousand pounds to pay you on Monday. To save my life, I
could not raise twenty-six thousand farthings! So much for me."

The man Masters ground his teeth.

"So much for you!" he muttered.

"Take the case next," Sir Richard continued, "of my friend Merries
here. Merries is an Earl, it is true, but he never had a penny to bless
himself with. He's tried acting, reporting, marrying--anything to make
an honest living. So far, I am afraid we must consider Lord Merries as
something of a failure, eh?"

"A rotten failure, I should say," that young nobleman declared gloomily.

"Lord Merries is, to put it briefly, financially unsound," Sir Richard
declared.

"What is the amount of your debt to Mr. Masters, Jim?"

"Eleven thousand two hundred pounds," Lord Merries answered.

"And we may take it, I presume, for granted that you have not that sum,
nor anything like it, at your disposal?" Sir Richard asked.

"Not a fiver!" Lord Merries declared with emphasis.

"We come now, Mr. Masters, to our friend Colonel Dickinson," Sir
Richard continued. "Colonel Dickinson is, perhaps, in a more favourable
situation than any of us. He has a small but regular income, and he has
expectations which it is not possible to mortgage fully. At the same
time, it will be many years before they can--er--fructify. He is,
therefore, with us in this somewhat unpleasant predicament in which we
find ourselves."

"Cut it short," Masters growled. "I'm sick of so much talk. What's it
all mean?"

"It means simply this, Mr. Masters," Sir Richard said, "we want you to
take six months' bills for our indebtedness to you."

Masters rose to his feet. His thick lips were drawn a little apart. He
had the appearance of a savage and discontented animal.

"So that's why I've been asked here and fed up with wine and stuff, eh?"
he exclaimed thickly. "Well, my answer to you is soon given. NO! I'll
take bills from no man! My terms are cash on settling day--cash to pay
or cash to receive. I'll have no other!"

Sir Richard rose also to his feet.

"Mr. Masters, I beg of you to be reasonable," he said. "You will do
yourself no good by adopting this attitude. Facts are facts. We haven't
got a thousand pounds between us."

"I've heard that sort of a tale before," Masters answered, with a sneer.
"Job Masters is too old a bird to be caught by such chaff. I'll take my
risks, gentlemen. I'll take my risks."

He moved toward the door. No one spoke a word. The silence as he crossed
the room seemed a little ominous. He looked over his shoulder. They were
all three standing in their places, looking at him. A vague sense of
uneasiness disturbed his equanimity.

"No offence, gents," he said, "and good afternoon!"

Still no reply. He reached the door and turned the handle. The door
was fast. He shook it--gently at first, and then violently. Suddenly he
realized that it was locked. He turned sharply around.

"What game's this?" he exclaimed, fiercely. "Let me out!"

They stood in their places without movement. There was something a
little ominous in their silence. Masters was fast becoming a sober man.

"Let me out of here," he exclaimed, "or I'll break the door down!"

Sir Richard Dyson came slowly towards him. There was something in his
appearance which terrified Masters. He raised his fist to strike the
door. He was a fighting man, but he felt a sudden sense of impotence.

"Mr. Masters," Sir Richard said suavely, "the truth is that we cannot
afford to let you go--unless you agree to do what we have asked. You
see we really have not the money or any way of raising it--and the
inconvenience of being posted you have yourself very ably pointed out.
Change your mind, Mr. Masters. Take those bills. We'll do our best to
meet them."

"I'll do nothing of the sort," Masters answered, striking the door
fiercely with his clenched fist. "I'll have cash--nothing but the cash!"

There was a dull, sickening thud, and the bookmaker went over like a
shot rabbit. His legs twitched for a moment--a little moan that was
scarcely audible broke from his lips. Then he lay quite still. Sir
Richard bent over him with the life preserver still in his hand.

"I've done it!" he muttered, hoarsely. "One blow! Thank Heaven, he
didn't want another! His skull was as soft as pudding! Ugh!"

He turned away. The man who lay stretched upon the floor was an ugly
sight. His two companions, cowering over the table, were not much
better. Dyson's trembling fingers went out for the brandy decanter. Half
of what he poured out was spilled upon the tablecloth. The rest he drank
from a tumbler, neat.

"It's nervous work, this, you fellows," he said, hoarsely.

"It's hellish!" Dickinson answered. "Let's have some air in the room. By
God, it's close!"

He sank back into his chair, white to the lips. Dyson looked at him
sharply.

"Look here," he exclaimed, "I hold you both to our bargain! I was to be
the one he attacked and who struck the blow--in self-defence! Remember
that--it was in self-defence! I've done it! I've done my share! I hope
to God I'll forget it some day. Andrew, you know your task. Be a man,
and get to work!"

Dickinson rose to his feet unsteadily. "Yes!" he said. "What was it? I
have forgotten, for the moment, but I am ready."

"You must get his betting book from his pocket," Sir Richard directed.
"Then you must help Merries downstairs with him, and into the car.
Merries is--to get rid of him."

Merries shivered. His hand, too, went out for the brandy.

"To get rid of him," he muttered. "It sounds easy!"

"It is easy," Sir Richard declared. "You have only to keep your nerve,
and the thing is done. No one will see him inside the car, in that
motoring coat and glasses. You can drive somewhere out into the country
and leave him."

"Leave him!" Merries repeated, trembling. "Leave him--yes!"

Neither of the two men moved.

"I must do more than my share, I suppose," Sir Richard declared
contemptuously. "Come!"

They dragged the man's body on to a chair, wrapped a huge coat around
him, tied a motoring cap under his chin, fixed goggles over his eyes.
Sir Richard strolled into the hall and opened the front door. He stood
there for a moment, looking up and down the street. When he gave
the signal they dragged him out, supported between them, across the
pavement, into the car. Ugh! His attitude was so natural as to be
absolutely ghastly. Merries started the car and sprang into the driver's
seat. There were people in the Square now, but the figure reclining in
the dark, cushioned interior looked perfectly natural.

"So long, Jimmy," Sir Richard called out. "See you this evening."

"Right O!" Merries replied, with a brave effort.


Peter Ruff, summoned by telephone from his sitting room, slipped down
the stairs like a cat--noiseless, swift. The voice which had
summoned him had been the voice of his secretary--a voice almost
unrecognisable--a voice shaken with fear. Fear? No, it had been terror!

On the landing below, exactly underneath the room from which he had
descended, there was a door upon which his name was written upon a small
brass plate--Mr. Peter Ruff. He opened and closed it behind him with
a swift movement which he had practised in his idle moments. He found
himself looking in upon a curious scene.

Miss Brown, with the radiance of her hair effectually concealed, in
plain black skirt and simple blouse--the ideal secretary--had risen from
the seat in front of her typewriter, and was standing facing the door
through which he had entered, with a small revolver--which he had
given her for a birthday present only the day before--clasped in her
outstretched hand. The object of her solicitude was, it seemed to Peter
Ruff, the most pitiful-looking object upon which he had ever looked. The
hours had dwelt with Merries as the years with some people, and worse.
He had lost his cap; his hair hung over his forehead in wild confusion;
his eyes were red, bloodshot, and absolutely aflame with the terrors
through which he had lived--underneath them the black marks might have
been traced with a charcoal pencil. His cheeks were livid save for one
burning spot. His clothes, too, were in disorder--the starch had gone
from his collar, his tie hung loosely outside his waistcoat. He was
cowering back against the wall. And between him and the girl, stretched
upon the floor, was the body of a man in a huge motor coat, a limp,
inert mass which neither moved nor seemed to have any sign of life. No
wonder that Peter Ruff looked around his office, whose serenity had been
so tragically disturbed, with an air of mild surprise.

"Dear me," he exclaimed, "something seems to have happened! My dear
Violet, you can put that revolver away. I have secured the door."

Her hand fell to her side. She gave a little shiver of relief. Peter
Ruff nodded.

"That is more comfortable," he declared. "Now, perhaps, you will
explain--"

"That young man," she interrupted, "or lunatic--whatever he calls
himself--burst in here a few minutes ago, dragging--that!" She pointed
to the motionless figure upon the floor. "If I had not stopped him, he
would have bolted off without a word of explanation."

Peter Ruff, with his back against the door, shook his head gravely.

"My dear Lord Merries," he said, "my office is not a mortuary."

Merries gasped.

"You know me, then?" he muttered, hoarsely.

"Of course," Ruff answered. "It is my profession to know everybody. Go
and sit down upon that easy-chair, and drink the brandy and soda which
Miss Brown is about to mix for you. That's right."

Merries staggered across the room and half fell into an easy-chair. He
leaned over the side with his face buried in his hands, unable still
to face the horror which lay upon the floor. A few seconds later, the
tumbler of brandy and soda was in his hands. He drank it like a man who
drains fresh life into his veins.

"Perhaps now," Peter Ruff suggested, pointing to the motionless figure,
"you can give me some explanation as to this!"

Merries looked away from him all the time he was speaking. His voice was
thick and nervous.

"There were three of us lunching together," he began--"four in all.
There was a dispute, and this man threatened us. Afterwards there was a
fight. It fell to my lot to take him away, and I can't get rid of him!
I can't get rid of him!" he repeated, with something that sounded like a
sob.

"I still do not see," Peter Ruff argued, "why you should have brought
him here and deposited him upon my perfectly new carpet."

"You are Peter Ruff," Merries declared. "'Crime Investigator and Private
Detective,' you call yourself. You are used to this sort of thing. You
will know what to do with it. It is part of your business."

"I can assure you," Peter Ruff answered, "that you are under a delusion
as to the details of my profession. I am Peter Ruff," he admitted, "and
I call myself a crime investigator--in fact, I am the only one worth
speaking of in the world. But I certainly deny that I am used to
having dead bodies deposited upon my carpet, and that I make a habit of
disposing of them--especially gratis."

Merries tore open his coat.

"Listen," he said, his voice shaking hysterically, "I must get rid of
it or go mad. For two hours I have been driving about in a motor car
with--it for a passenger. I drove to a quiet spot and I tried to lift
it out--a policeman rode up! I tried again, a man rushed by on a motor
cycle, and turned to look at me! I tried a few minutes later--the
policeman came back! It was always the same. The night seemed to have
eyes. I was watched everywhere. The--the face began to mock me. I'll
swear that I heard it chuckle once!"

Peter Ruff moved a little further away.

"I don't think I'll have anything to do with it," he declared. "I don't
like your description at all."

"It'll be all right with you," Merries declared eagerly. "It's my
nerves, that's all. You see, I was there--when the accident happened.
See here," he added, tearing a pocketbook from his coat, "I have three
hundred and seventy pounds saved up in case I had to bolt. I'll keep
seventy--three hundred for you--to dispose of it!"

Ruff leaned over the motionless body, looked into its face, and nodded.

"Masters, the bookmaker," he remarked. "H'm! I did hear that he had a
lot of money coming to him over the Cambridgeshire."

Merries shuddered.

"May I go?" he pleaded. "There's the three hundred on the table. For
God's sake, let me go!"

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I wish you'd saved a little more," he said. "However--"

He turned the lock and Merries rushed out of the room. Ruff looked
across the room towards his secretary.

"Ring up 1535 Central," he ordered, sharply.



Peter Ruff had descended from his apartments on the top floor of the
building, in a new brown suit with which he was violently displeased, to
meet a caller.

"I am sorry to intrude--Mr. Ruff, I believe it is?" Sir Richard Dyson
said, a little irritably--"but I have not a great deal of time to
spare--"

"Most natural!" Peter Ruff declared. "Pray take a chair, Sir Richard.
You want to know, of course, about Lord Merries and poor Masters."

Sir Richard stared at his questioner, for a moment, without speech. Once
more the fear which he had succeeded in banishing for a while, shone in
his eyes--revealed itself in his white face.

"Try the easy-chair, Sir Richard," Ruff continued, pleasantly. "Leave
your hat and cane on the table there, and make yourself comfortable. I
should like to understand exactly what you have come to me for."

Sir Richard moved his head toward Miss Brown.

"My business with you," he said, "is more than ordinarily private. I
have the honour of knowing Miss--"

"Miss Brown," Peter interrupted quickly. "In these offices, this young
lady's name is Miss Violet Brown."

Sir Richard shrugged his shoulders.

"It is of no importance," he said, "only, as you may understand, my
business with you scarcely requires the presence of a third party, even
one with the discretion which I am sure Miss--Brown possesses."

"In these matters," Ruff answered, "my secretary does not exist apart
from myself. Her presence is necessary. She takes down in shorthand
notes of our conversation. I have a shocking memory, and there are
always points which I forget. At the conclusion of our business,
whatever it may be, these notes are destroyed. I could not work without
them, however."

Sir Richard glanced a little doubtfully at the long, slim back of the
girl who sat with her face turned away from him. "Of course," he began,
"if you make yourself personally responsible for her discretion--"

"I am willing to do so," Ruff interrupted, brusquely. "I guarantee it.
Go on, please."

"I do not know, of course, where you got your information from," Sir
Richard began, "but it is perfectly true that I have come here to
consult you upon a matter in which the two people whose names you have
mentioned are concerned. The disappearance of Job Masters is, of course,
common talk; but I cannot tell what has led you to associate with it the
temporary absence of Lord Merries from this country."

"Let me ask you this question," Ruff said. "How are you affected by the
disappearance of Masters?"

"Indirectly, it has caused me a great deal of inconvenience," Sir
Richard declared.

"Facts, please," murmured Peter.

"It has been rumoured," Sir Richard admitted, "that I owed Masters a
large sum of money which I could not pay."

"Anything else?"

"It has also been rumoured," Sir Richard continued, "that he was seen
to enter my house that day, and that he remained there until late in the
afternoon."

"Did he?" asked Ruff.

"Certainly not," Sir Richard answered.

Peter Ruff yawned for a moment, but covered the indiscretion with his
hand.

"Respecting this inconvenience," he said, "which you admit that the
disappearance of Job Masters has caused you, what is its tangible side?"

Sir Richard drew his chair a little nearer to the table where Ruff was
sitting. His voice dropped almost to a whisper.

"It seems absurd," he said, "and yet, what I tell you is the truth. I
have been followed about--shadowed, in fact--for several days. Men, even
in my own social circle, seem to hold aloof from me. It is as though,"
he continued slowly, "people were beginning to suspect me of being
connected in some way with the man's disappearance."

Ruff, who had been making figures with a pencil on the edge of his
blotting paper, suddenly turned round. His eyes flashed with a new light
as they became fixed upon his companion's.

"And are you not?" he asked, calmly. Sir Richard bore himself well. For
a moment he had shrunk back. Then he half rose to his feet.

"Mr. Ruff!" he said. "I must protest--"

"Stop!"

Peter Ruff used no violent gesture. Only his forefinger tapped the desk
in front of him. His voice was as smooth as velvet.

"Tell me as much or as little as you please, Sir Richard," he said, "but
let that little or that much be the truth! On those terms only I may
be able to help you. You do not go to your physician and expect him to
prescribe to you while you conceal your symptoms, or to your lawyer for
advice and tell him half the truth. I am not asking for your confidence.
I simply tell you that you are wasting your time and mine if you choose
to withhold it."

Sir Richard was silent. He recognized a new quality in the man--but the
truth was an awful thing to tell! He considered--then told.

Ruff briskly asked two questions. "In alluding to your heavy settlement
with Masters, you said just now that you could not have paid him--then."

"Quite so," Sir Richard admitted. "That is the rotten part of the whole
affair. Four days later a wonderful double came off--one in which we
were all interested, and one which not one of us expected. We've drawn a
considerable amount already from one or two bookies, and I believe even
Masters owes us a bit now."

"Thank you," Ruff said. "I think that I know everything now. My fee is
five hundred guineas."

Sir Richard looked at him.

"What?" he exclaimed.

"Five hundred guineas," Ruff repeated.

"For a consultation?" Sir Richard asked.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"More than that," he said. "You are a brave man in your way, Sir Richard
Dyson, but you are going about now shivering under a load of fear. It
sits like a devil incarnate upon your shoulders. It poisons the air
wherever you go. Write your cheque, Sir Richard, and you can leave
that little black devil in my wastebasket. You are under my protection.
Nothing will happen to you."

Sir Richard sat like a man mesmerised. The little man with the amiable
expression and the badly fitting suit was leaning back in his chair, his
finger tips pressed together, waiting.

"Nothing will happen!" Sir Richard repeated, incredulously.

"Certainly not. I guarantee you against any inconvenience which might
arise to you from this recent unfortunate affair. Isn't that all you
want?"

"It's all I want, certainly," Sir Richard declared, "but I must
understand a little how you propose to secure my immunity."

Ruff shook his head.

"I have my own methods," he said. "I can help only those who trust me."

Sir Richard drew a cheque book from his pocket. "I don't know why I
should believe in you," he said, as he wrote the cheque.

"But you do," Peter Ruff said, smiling. "Fortunately for you, you do!"



It was not so easy to impart a similar confidence into the breast of
Colonel Dickinson, with whom Sir Richard dined that night tete-a-tete.
Dickinson was inclined to think that Sir Richard ad been "had."

"You've paid a ridiculous fee," he argued, "and all that you have in
return is the fellow's promise to see you through. It isn't like you to
part with money so easily, Richard. Did he hypnotise you?"

"I don't think so," Sir Richard answered. "I wasn't conscious of it."

"What sort of a fellow is he?" Dickinson asked.

Sir Richard looked reflectively into his glass.

"He's a vulgar sort of little Johnny," he said. "Looks as though he were
always dressed in new clothes and couldn't get used to them."

Three men entered the room. Two remained in the background. John Dory
came forward towards the table.

"Sir Richard Dyson," he said, gravely, "I have come upon an unpleasant
errand."

"Go on," Sir Richard said, fingering something hard inside pocket of his
coat.

"I have a warrant for your arrest," Dory continued, "in connection with
the disappearance of Job Masters on Saturday, the 10th of November last.
I will read the terms of the warrant, if you choose. It is my duty to
warn you that anything you may now say can be used in evidence against
you. This gentleman, I believe, is Colonel Dickinson?"

"That is my name, sir," Dickinson answered, with unexpected fortitude.

"I regret to say," the detective continued, "that I have also a warrant
for your arrest in connection with the same matter."

Sir Richard had hold of the butt end of his revolver then. Like grisly
phantoms, the thoughts chased one another through his brain. Should he
shoot and end it--pass into black nothingness--escape disgrace, but die
like a rat in a corner? His finger was upon the trigger. Then suddenly
his heart gave a great leap. He raised his head as though listening.
Something flashed in his eyes--something that was almost like hope.
There was no mistaking that voice which he had heard in the hall! He
made a great rally.

"I can only conclude," he said, turning to the detective, "that you have
made some absurd blunder. If you really possess the warrants you speak
of, however, Colonel Dickinson and I will accompany you wherever you
choose."

Then the door opened and Peter Ruff walked in, followed by Job Masters,
whose head was still bandaged, and who seemed to have lost a little
flesh and a lot of colour. Peter Ruff looked round apologetically. He
seemed surprised not to find Sir Richard Dyson and Colonel Dickinson
alone. He seemed more than ever surprised to recognize Dory.

"I trust," he said smoothly, "that our visit is not inopportune. Sir
Richard Dyson, I believe?" he continued, bowing--"my friend, Mr. Masters
here, has consulted me as to the loss of a betting book, and we ventured
to call to ask you, sir, if by any chance on his recent visit to your
house--"

"God in Heaven, it's Masters!" Dyson exclaimed. "It's Job Masters!"

"That's me, sir," Masters admitted. "Mr. Ruff thought you might be able
to help me find that book."

Sir Richard swayed upon his feet. Then the blood rushed once more
through his veins.

"Your book's here in my cabinet, safe enough," he said. "You left it
here after our luncheon that day. Where on earth have you been to, man?"
he continued. "We want some money from you over Myopia."

"I'll pay all right, sir," Masters answered. "Fact is, after our
luncheon party I'm afraid I got a bit fuddled. I don't seem to remember
much."

He sat down a little heavily. Peter Ruff hastened to the table and took
up a glass.

"You will excuse me if I give him a little brandy, won't you, sir?"
he said. "He's really not quite fit for getting about yet, but he was
worrying about his book."

"Give him all the brandy he can drink," Sir Richard answered.

The detective's face had been a study. He knew Masters well enough by
sight--there was no doubt about his identity! His teeth came together
with an angry little click. He had made a mistake! It was a thing which
would be remembered against him forever! It was as bad as his failure to
arrest that young man at Daisy Villa.

"Your visit, Masters," Sir Richard said, with a curious smile at the
corners of his lips, "is, in some respects, a little opportune. About
that little matter we were speaking of," he continued, turning towards
the detective.

"We have only to offer you our apologies, Sir Richard," Dory answered.

Then he crossed the room and confronted Peter Ruff.

"Do I understand, sir, that your name is Ruff--Peter Ruff?" he asked.

"That is my name, sir," Peter Ruff admitted, pleasantly "Yours I
believe, is Dory. We are likely to come across one another now and then,
I suppose. Glad to know you."

The detective stood quite still, and there was no geniality in his face.

"I wonder--have we ever met before?" he asked, without removing his eyes
from the other's face. Peter Ruff smiled.

"Not professionally, at any rate," he answered. "I know that Scotland
Yard you don't think much of us small fry, but we find out things
sometimes!"

"Why didn't you contradict all those rumours as to his disappearance?"
the detective asked, pointing to where Job Masters was contentedly
sipping his brandy and water.

"I was acting for my client, and in my own interests," replied Peter.
"It was surely no part of my duty to save you gentlemen at Scotland Yard
from hunting up mare's nests!"

John Dory went out, followed by his men. Sir Richard took Peter Ruff by
the arm, and, leading him to the sideboard, mixed him a drink.

"Peter Ruff," he said, "you're a clever scoundrel, but you've earned
your five hundred guineas. Hang it, you're welcome to them! Is there
anything else I can do for you?"

Peter Ruff raised his glass and set it down again. Once more he eyed
with admiration his client's well-turned out figure.

"You might give me a letter to your tailors, Sir Richard," he begged.

Sir Richard laughed outright--it was some time since he had laughed!

"You shall have it, Peter Ruff," he declared, raising his glass--"and
here's to you!"



CHAPTER III. VINCENT CAWDOR, COMMISSION AGENT


For the second time since their new association, Peter Ruff had
surprised that look upon his secretary's face. This time he wheeled
around in his chair and addressed her.

"My dear Violet," he said, "be frank with me. What is wrong?"

Miss Brown turned to face her employer. Save for a greater demureness
of expression and the extreme simplicity of her attire, she had changed
very little since she had given up her life of comparative luxury to
become Peter Ruff's secretary. There was a sort of personal elegance
which clung to her, notwithstanding her strenuous attempts to dress for
her part, except for which she looked precisely as a private secretary
and typist should look. She even wore a black bow at the back of her
hair.

"I have not complained, have I?" she asked.

"Do not waste time," Peter Ruff said, coldly. "Proceed."

"I have not enough to do," she said. "I do not understand why you refuse
so many cases."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I did not bring my talents into this business," he said, "to watch
flirting wives, to ascertain the haunts of gay husbands, or to detect
the pilferings of servants."

"Anything is better than sitting still," she protested.

"I do not agree with you," Peter Ruff said. "I like sitting still very
much indeed--one has time to think. Is there anything else?"

"Shall I really go on?" she asked.

"By all means," he answered.

"I have idea," she continued, "that you are subordinating your general
interests to your secret enmity--to one man. You are waiting until you
can find another case in which you are pitted against him."

"Sometimes," Peter Ruff said, "your intelligence surprises me!"

"I came to you," she continued, looking at him earnestly, "for two
reasons. The personal one I will not touch upon. The other was my love
of excitement. I have tried many things in life, as you know, Peter,
but I have seemed to carry always with me the heritage of weariness. I
thought that my position here would help me to fight against it."

"You have seen me bring a corpse to life," Peter Ruff reminded her, a
little aggrieved.

She smiled.

"It was a month ago," she reminded him.

"I can't do that sort of thing every day," he declared.

"Naturally," she answered; "but you have refused four cases within the
last five days."

Peter Ruff whistled softly to himself for several moments.

"Seen anything of our new neighbour in the flat above?" he asked, with
apparent irrelevance.

Miss Brown looked across at him with upraised eyebrows.

"I have been in the lift with him twice," she answered.

"Fancy his appearance?" Ruff asked, casually.

"Not in the least!" Violet answered. "I thought him a vulgar, offensive
person!"

Peter Ruff chuckled. He seemed immensely delighted.

"Mr. Vincent Cawdor he calls himself, I believe," he remarked.

"I have no idea," Miss Brown declared. The subject did not appeal to
her.

"His name is on a small copper plate just over the letter-box," Ruff
said. "Rather neat idea, by the bye. He calls himself a commission
agent, I believe."

Violet was suddenly interested. She realized, after all, that Mr.
Vincent Cawdor might be a person of some importance.

"What is a commission agent?" she asked.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"It might mean anything," he declared. "Never trust any one who is not
a little more explicit as to his profession. I am afraid that this Mr.
Vincent Cawdor, for instance, is a bad lot."

"I am sure he is," Miss Brown declared.

"Looks after a pretty girl, coughs in the lift--all that sort of thing,
eh?" Peter Ruff asked.

She nodded.

"Disgusting!" she exclaimed, with emphasis.

Peter Ruff sighed, and glanced at the clock. The existence of Mr.
Vincent Cawdor seemed to pass out of his mind.

"It is nearly one o'clock," he said. "Where do you usually lunch,
Violet?"

"It depends upon my appetite," she answered, carelessly. "Most often at
an A B C."

"To-day," Peter Ruff said, "you will be extravagant--at my expense."

"I had a poor breakfast," Miss Brown remarked, complacently.

"You will leave at once," Peter Ruff said, "and you will go to the
French Cafe at the Milan. Get a table facing the courtyard, and towards
the hotel side of the room. Keep your eyes open and tell me exactly what
you see."

She looked at him with parted lips. Her eyes were full of eager
questioning.

"Mere skirmishing," Peter Ruff continued, "but I think--yes, I think
that it may lead to something."

"Whom am I to watch?" she asked.

"Any one who looks interesting," Peter Ruff answered. "For instance, if
this person Vincent Cawdor should be about."

"He would recognize me!" she declared.

Peter Ruff shrugged his shoulders.

"One must hold the candle," he remarked.

"I decline to flirt with him," she declared. "Nothing would induce me to
be pleasant to such an odious creature."

"He will be too busy to attempt anything of the sort. Of course he may
not be there. It may be the merest fancy on my part. At any rate, you
may rely upon it that he will not make any overtures in a public place
like the Milan. Mr. Vincent Cawdor may be a curious sort of person, but
I do not fancy that he is a fool!"

"Very well," Miss Brown said, "I will go."

"Be back soon after three," Peter Ruff said. "I am going up to my room
to do my exercises."

"And afterwards?" she asked.

"I shall have my lunch sent in," he answered. "Don't hurry back, though.
I shall not expect you till a quarter past three."

It was a few minutes past that time when Miss Brown returned. Peter Ruff
was sitting at his desk, looking as though he had never moved. He was
absorbed by a book of patterns sent in by his new tailor, and he only
glanced up when she entered the room.

"Violet," he said, earnestly, "come in and sit down. I want to consult
you. There is a new material here--a sort of mouse-coloured cheviot. I
wonder whether it would suit me?"

Violet was looking very handsome and a little flushed. She raised her
veil and came over to his side.

"Put that stupid book away, Peter," she said. "I want to tell you about
the Milan."

He leaned back in his chair.

"Ah!" he said. "I had forgotten! Was Mr. Vincent Cawdor there?"

"Yes!" she answered, still a little breathless. "There was some one else
there, too, in whom you are still more interested."

He nodded.

"Go on," he said.

"Mr. Vincent Cawdor," she continued, "came in alone. He looked just as
objectionable as ever, and he stared at me till I nearly threw my wine
glass at him."

"He did not speak to you?" Peter Ruff asked.

"I was afraid that he was going to," Miss Brown said, "but fortunately
he met a friend who came to his table and lunched with him."

"A friend," Ruff remarked. "Good! What was he like?"

"Fair, slight, Teutonic," Miss Brown answered. "He wore thick
spectacles, and his moustache was positively yellow."

Ruff nodded.

"Go on," he said.

"Towards the end of luncheon," she continued, "an American came up to
them."

"An American?" Peter Ruff interrupted. "How do you know that?"

Miss Brown smiled.

"He was clean-shaven and he wore neat clothes," she said. "He talked
with an accent you could have cut with a knife and he had a Baedeker
sticking out of his pocket. After luncheon, they all three went away to
the smoking room."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"Anything else?" he asked.

The girl smiled triumphantly.

"Yes!" she declared. "There was something else--something which I
think you will find interesting. At the next table to me there was a
man--alone. Can you guess who he was?"

"John Dory," Ruff said, calmly.

The girl was disappointed.

"You knew!" she exclaimed.

"My dear Violet," he said, "I did not send you there on a fool's
errand."

"There is something doing, then?" she exclaimed.

"There is likely," he answered, grimly, "to be a great deal doing!"



The two men who stood upon the hill, and Peter Ruff, who lay upon his
stomach behind a huge boulder, looked upon a new thing.

Far down in the valley from out of a black shed--the only sign of man's
handiwork for many miles--it came--something grey at first, moving
slowly as though being pushed down a slight incline, then afloat in the
air, gathering speed--something between a torpedo with wings and a
great prehistoric insect. Now and then it described strange circles, but
mostly it came towards them as swift and as true as an arrow shot from a
bow. The two men looked at one another--the shorter, to whose cheeks the
Cumberland winds had brought no trace of colour, gave vent to a hoarse
exclamation.

"He's done it!" he growled.

"Wait!" the other answered.

Over their heads the thing wheeled, and seemed to stand still in the
air. The beating of the engine was so faint that Peter Ruff from behind
the boulder, could hear all that was said. A man leaned out from his
seat--a man with wan cheeks but blazing eyes.

"Listen," he said. "Take your glasses. There--due north--can you see a
steeple?"

The men turned their field glasses in the direction toward which the
other pointed. "Yes!" they answered. "It is sixteen miles, as the crow
flies, to Barnham Church--thirty-two miles there and back. Wait!"

He swung round, dived till he seemed about to touch the hillside, then
soared upwards and straight away. Peter Ruff took out his watch. The
other two men gazed with fascinated eyes after the disappearing speck.

"If he does it--" the shorter one muttered.

"He will do it!" the other answered.

He was back again before their eyes were weary of watching. Peter Ruff,
from behind the boulder, closed his watch. Thirty-two miles in less than
half an hour! The youth leaned from his seat.

"Is it enough?" he asked, hoarsely.

"It is enough!" the two men answered together. "We will come down."

The youth touched a lever and the machine glided down towards the
valley, falling all the while with the effortless grace a parachute. The
shed from which his machine had issued was midway down a slope, with
a short length of rails which ran, apparently, through it. The machine
seemed to hover for several moments above the building, then descended
slowly on to the rails and disappeared in the shed. The two men were
already half-way down the hill. Peter Ruff rose from behind the boulder,
stretched himself with a sense of immense relief, and lit a pipe. As
yet he dared not descend. He simply changed his hiding place for a spot
which enabled him to command a view of the handful of cottages at the
back of the hill. He had plenty to think about. It was a wonderful
thing--this--which he had seen!

The youth, meanwhile, was drinking deep of the poisonous cup. He walked
between the two men--his cheeks were flushed, his eyes on fire.

"If all the world to-day had seen what we have seen," the older man was
saying, "there would be no more talk of Wilbur Wrights or Farmans. Those
men are babies, playing with their toys."

"Mine is the ideal principle," the youth declared. "No one else has
thought of it, no one else has made use of it. Yet all the time I am
afraid--it is so simple."

"Sell quick, then," the fair-headed man advised. "By to-morrow night I
can promise you fifty thousand pounds."

The youth stopped. He drew a deep breath.

"I shall sell," he declared. "I need money. I want to live. Fifty
thousand pounds is enough. Eleven weary months I have slept and toiled
there in the shed."

"It is finished," the older man declared. "To-night you shall come with
us to London. To-morrow night your pockets shall be full of gold. It
will be a change for you."

The youth sobbed.

"God knows it will," he muttered. "I haven't two shillings in the world,
and I owe for my last petrol."

The two men laughed heartily. The elder took a little bundle of notes
from his pocket and handed them to the boy.

"Come," he said, "not for another moment shall you feel as poor as
that. Money will have no value for you in the future. The fifty thousand
pounds will only be a start. After that, you will get royalties. If I
had it, I would give you a quarter of a million now for your plans; I
know that I can get you more."

The youth laughed hysterically. They entered the tiny inn and drank
home-made wine--the best they could get. Then a great car drew up
outside, and the older--the clean-shaven man, who looked like an
American--hurried out, and dragging a hamper from beneath the seat
returned with a gold-foiled bottle in his hand.

"Come," he said, "a toast! We have one bottle left--one bottle of the
best!"

"Champagne!" the youth cried eagerly, holding out his hand.

"The only wine for the conquerors," the other declared, pouring it out
into the thick tumblers. "Drink, all of you, to the Franklin Flying
Machine, to the millions she will earn--to to-morrow night!"

The youth drained his glass, watched it replenished, and drained it
again. Then they went out to the car.

"There is one thing yet to be done," he said. "Wait here for me."

They waited whilst he climbed up toward the shed. The two men watched
him. A little group of rustics stood open-mouthed around the great car.
Then there was a little shout. From above their heads came the sound of
a great explosion--red flames were leaping up from that black barn to
the sky. The two men looked at one another. They rushed to the hill and
met the youth descending.

"What the--"

He stopped them.

"I dared not leave it here," he explained. "It would have been madness.
I am perfectly certain that I have been watched during the last few
days. I can build another in a week. I have the plans in my pocket for
every part."

The older man wiped the perspiration from his forehead.

"You are sure--that you have the plans?" he asked.

The youth struck himself on the chest.

"They are here," he answered, "every one of them!"

"Perhaps you are right, then," the other man answered. "It gave me a
turn, though. You are sure that you can make it again in the time you
say?"

"Of course!" the youth answered, impatiently. "Besides, the thing is so
simple. It speaks for itself."

They climbed into the car, and in a few minutes were rushing away
southwards.

"To-morrow night--to-morrow night it all begins!" the youth continued.
"I must start with ready-made clothes. I'll get the best I can, eat the
best I can, drink wine, go to the music halls. To-morrow night."

His speech ended in a wail--a strange, half-stifled cry which rang out
with a chill, ghostly sound upon the black silence. His face was covered
with a wet towel, a ghastly odor was in his nostrils, his lips refused
to utter any further sound. He lay back among the cushions, senseless.
The car slowed down.

"Get the papers, quick!" the elder man muttered, opening the youth's
coat. "Here they are! Catch hold, Dick! My God! What's that?"

He shook from head to foot. The little fair man looked at him with
contempt.

"A sheep bell on the moor," he said. "Are you sure you have everything?"

"Yes!" the other muttered.

They both stood up and raised the prostrate form between them. Below
them were the black waters of the lake.

"Over with him!" the younger said. "Quick!"

Once more his companion shrank away.

"Listen!" he muttered, hoarsely.

They both held their breaths. From somewhere along the road behind came
a faint sound like the beating of an engine.

"It's a car!" the elder man exclaimed. "Quick! Over with him!"

They lifted the body of the boy, whose lips were white and speechless
now, and threw him into the water. With a great splash he disappeared.
They watched for a moment. Only the ripples flowed away from the place
where he had sunk. They jumped back to their seats.

"There's something close behind," the older man muttered. "Get on! Fast!
Fast!"

The younger man hesitated.

"Perhaps," he said slowly, "it would be better to wait and see who it is
coming up behind. Our young friend there is safe. The current has him,
and the tarn is bottomless."

There was a moment's indecision--a moment which was to count for much
in the lives of three men. Then the elder one's counsels prevailed. They
crept away down the hill, smoothly and noiselessly. Behind them, the
faint throbbing grew less and less distinct. Soon they heard it no more.
They drove into the dawn and through the long day.



Side by side on one of the big leather couches in the small smoking room
of the Milan Hotel, Mr. James P. Rounceby and his friend Mr. Richard
Marnstam sat whispering together. It was nearly two o clock, and they
were alone in the room. Some of the lights had been turned out. The roar
of life in the streets without had ceased. It was an uneasy hour for
those whose consciences were not wholly at rest!

The two men were in evening dress--Rounceby in dinner coat and black
tie, as befitted his role of travelling American. The glasses in front
of them were only half-filled, and had remained so for the last hour.
Their conversation had been nervous and spasmodic. It was obvious that
they were waiting for some one.

Three o'clock struck by the little timepiece on the mantel shelf. A
little exclamation of a profane nature broke from Rounceby's lips. He
leaned toward his companion.

"Say," he muttered, in a rather thick undertone, "how about this fellow
Vincent Cawdor? You haven't any doubts about him, I suppose? He's on the
square, all right, eh?"

Marnstam wet his lips nervously.

"Cawdor's all right," he said. "I had it direct from headquarters at
Paris. What are you uneasy about, eh?"

Rounceby pointed towards the clock.

"Do you see the time?" he asked.

"He said he'd be late," Marnstam answered.

Rounceby put his hand to his forehead and found it moist.

"It's been a silly game, all along," he muttered. "We'd better have
brought the young ass up here and jostled him!"

"Not so easy," Marnstam answered. "These young fools have a way of
turning obstinate. He'd have chucked us, sure. Anyhow, he's safer where
he is."

They relapsed once more into silence. A storm of rain beat upon the
window. Rounceby glanced up. It was as black out there as were the
waters of that silent tarn! The man shivered as the thought struck
him. Marnstam, who had no nerves, twirled his moustache and watched his
companion with wonder.

"You look as though you saw a ghost," he remarked.

"Perhaps I do!" Rounceby growled.

"You had better finish your drink, my dear fellow," Marnstam advised.
"Afterwards--"

Suddenly he stiffened into attention. He laid his hand upon his
companion's knee.

"Listen!" he said. "There is some one coming."

They leaned a little forward. The swing doors were opened. A girl's
musical laugh rang out from the corridor. Tall and elegant, with her
black lace skirt trailing upon the floor, her left hand resting upon the
shoulder of the man into whose ear she was whispering, and whom she led
straight to one of the writing tables, Miss Violet Brown swept into the
room. On her right, and nearest to the two men, was Mr. Vincent Cawdor.

"Now you can go and talk to your friends!" she exclaimed, lightly. "I am
going to make Victor listen to me."

Cawdor left his two companions and sank on to the couch by Rounceby's
side. The young man, with his opera hat still on his head, and the light
overcoat which he had been carrying on the floor by his side, was seated
before the writing table with his back to them. Miss Brown was leaning
over him, with her hand upon the back of his chair. They were out of
hearing of the other three men.

"Well, Rounceby, my friend," Mr. Vincent Cawdor remarked, cheerfully,
"you're having a late sitting, eh?"

"We've been waiting for you, you fool!" Rounceby answered. "What on
earth are you thinking about, bringing a crowd like this about with you,
eh?"

Cawdor smiled, reassuringly.

"Don't you worry," he said, in a lower tone. "I know my way in and out
of the ropes here better than you can teach me. A big hotel like this
is the safest and the most dangerous place in the world--just how you
choose to make it. You've got to bluff 'em all the time. That's why I
brought the young lady--particular friend of mine--real nice girl, too!"

"And the young man?" Rounceby asked, suspiciously.

Cawdor grew more serious.

"That's Captain Lowther," he said softly--"private secretary to Colonel
Dean, who's the chief of the aeronaut department at Aldershot. He has
a draft in his pocket for twenty thousand pounds. It is yours if he is
satisfied with the plans."

"Twenty thousand pounds!" Marnstam said, thoughtfully. "It is very
little--very little indeed for the risks which we have run!"

Cawdor moved his place and sat between the men. He laid a hand upon
Marnstam's shoulder--another on Rounceby's knee.

"My dear friends," he said, impressively, "if you could have built a
model, or conducted these negotiations in the usual way, you might have
asked a million. As it is, I think I am the only man in England who
could have dealt with this matter--so satisfactorily."

Rounceby glanced suspiciously at the young man to whom Miss Brown was
still devoting the whole of her attention.

"Why don't he come out and talk like a man?" he asked. "What's the idea
of his sitting over there with his back to us?"

"I want him never to see your faces--to deal only with me," Cawdor
explained. "Remember that he is in an official position. The money he is
going to part with is secret service money."

The two men were beginning to be more reassured. Rounceby slowly
produced a roll of oilskin from his pocket.

"He'll look at them as he sits there," he insisted. "There must be no
copying or making notes, mind."

Cawdor smiled in a superior fashion.

"My dear fellow," he said, "you are dealing with the emissary of a
government--not one of your own sort."

Rounceby glanced at his companion, who nodded. Then he handed over the
plans.

"Tell him to look sharp," he said. "It's not so late but that there may
be people in here yet."

Cawdor crossed the room with the plans, and laid them down before the
writing table. Rounceby rose to his feet and lit a cigar. Marnstam
walked to the further window and back again. They stood side by side.
Rounceby's whole frame seemed to have stiffened with some new emotion.

"There's something wrong, Jim," Marnstam whispered softly in his ear.
"You've got the old lady in your pocket?"

"Yes!" Rounceby answered thickly, "and, by Heavens, I'm going to use
it!"

"Don't shoot unless it's the worst," Marnstam counselled. "I shall go
out of that window, into the tree, and run for the river. But bluff
first, Jim--bluff for your life!"

There were swinging doors leading into the room from the hotel side, and
a small door exactly opposite which led to the residential part of the
place. Both of these doors were opened at precisely the same moment.
Through the former stepped two strong looking men in long overcoats, and
with the unmistakable appearance of policemen in plain clothes. Through
the latter came John Dory! He walked straight up to the two men.
It spoke volumes for his courage that, knowing their characters and
believing them to be in desperate straits, he came unarmed.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I hold warrants for your arrest. I will not
trouble you with your aliases. You are known to-day, I believe, as James
Rounceby and Richard Marnstam. Will you come quietly?"

Marnstam's expression was one of bland and beautiful surprise.

"My dear sir," he said, edging, however, a little toward the
window--"you must be joking! What is the charge?"

"You are charged with the wilful murder of a young man named Victor
Franklin," answered Dory. "His body was recovered from Longthorp Tarn
this afternoon. You had better say nothing. Also with the theft of
certain papers known to have been in his possession."

Now it is possible that at this precise moment Marnstam would have made
his spring for the window and Rounceby his running fight for liberty.
The hands of both men were upon their revolvers, and John Dory's life
was a thing of no account. But at this juncture a thing happened. There
were in the room the two policemen guarding the swing doors, and behind
them the pale faces of a couple of night porters looking anxiously in.
Vincent Cawdor and Miss Brown were standing side by side, a little in
the background, and the young man who had been their companion had risen
also to his feet. As though with some intention of intervening, he moved
a step forward, almost in line with Dory. Rounceby saw him, and a new
fear gripped him by the heart. He shrank back, his fingers relaxed
their hold of his weapon, the sweat was hot upon his forehead. Marnstam,
though he seemed for a moment stupefied, realised the miracle which had
happened and struck boldly for his own.

"If this is a joke," he said, "it strikes me as being a particularly bad
one. I should like to know, sir, how you dare to come into this room
and charge me and my friend--Mr. Rounceby--with being concerned in the
murder of a young man who is even now actually standing by your side."

John Dory started back. He looked with something like apprehension at
the youth to whom Marnstam pointed.

"My name is Victor Franklin," that young man declared. "What's all this
about?"

Dory felt the ground give beneath his feet. Nevertheless, he set his
teeth and fought for his hand.

"You say that your name is Victor Franklin?" he asked.

"Certainly!"

"You are the inventor of a flying machine?"

"I am."

"You were in Westmoreland with these two men a few days go?"

"I was," the young man admitted.

"You left the village of Scawton in a motor car with them?"

"Yes! We quarrelled on the way, and parted."

"You were robbed of nothing?"

Victor Franklin smiled.

"Certainly not," he answered. "I had nothing worth stealing except my
plans, and they are in my pocket now."

There was a few moments' intense silence. Dory wheeled suddenly round,
and looked to where Mr. Vincent Cawdor had been standing.

"Where is Mr. Cawdor?" he asked, sharply.

"The gentleman with the grey moustache left a few seconds ago," one of
the men at the door said. Dory was very pale.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I have to offer you my apologies. I have
apparently been deceived by some false information. The charge is
withdrawn."

He turned on his heel and left the room. The two policemen followed him.

"Keep them under observation," Dory ordered shortly, "but I am afraid
this fellow Cawdor has sold me."

He found a hansom outside, and sprang into it.

"Number 27, Southampton Row," he ordered.

Rounceby and his partner were alone in the little smoking room. The
former was almost inarticulate. The night porter brought them brandy,
and both men drank.

"We've got to get to the bottom of this, Marnstam," Mr. Rounceby
muttered.

Mr. Marnstam was thinking.

"Do you remember that sound through the darkness," he said--"the beating
of an engine way back on the road?"

"What of it?" Rounceby demanded.

"It was a motor bicycle," Marnstam said quietly. "I thought so at the
time."

"Supposing some one followed us and pulled him out," Rounceby said,
hoarsely, "why are we treated like this? I tell you we've been made
fools of! We've been treated like children--not even to be punished!
We'll have the truth somehow out of that devil Cawdor! Come!"

They made their way to the courtyard and found a cab.

"Number 27, Southampton Row!" they ordered.

They reached their destination some time before Dory, whose horse fell
down in the Strand, and who had to walk. They ascended to the fourth
floor of the building and rang the bell of Vincent Cawdor's room--no
answer. They plied the knocker--no result. Rounceby peered through the
keyhole.

"He hasn't come home yet," he remarked. "There is no light anywhere in
the place."

The door of a flat across the passage was quietly opened. Mr. Peter
Ruff, in a neat black smoking suit and slippers, and holding a pipe in
his hand, looked out.

"Excuse me, gentlemen," he said, "but I do not think that Mr. Cawdor is
in. He went out early this evening, and I have not heard him return."

The two men turned away.

"We are much obliged to you, sir," Mr. Marnstam said.

"Can I give him any message?" Peter Ruff asked, politely. "We generally
see something of one another in the morning."

"You can tell him--" Rounceby began.

"No message, thanks!" Marnstam interrupted. "We shall probably run
across him ourselves to-morrow."

John Dory was nearly a quarter of an hour late. After his third useless
summons, Mr. Peter Ruff presented himself again.

"I am afraid," he said, "you will not find my neighbour at home.
There have been several people enquiring for him to-night, without any
result."

John Dory came slowly across the landing.

"Good evening, Mr. Ruff!" he said.

"Why, it's Mr. Dory!" Peter Ruff declared. "Come in, do, and have a
drink."

John Dory accepted the invitation, and his eyes were busy in that little
sitting room during the few minutes which it took his host to mix that
whisky and soda.

"Nothing wrong with our friend opposite, I hope?" Peter Ruff asked,
jerking his head across the landing.

"I hope not, Mr. Ruff," John Dory said. "No doubt in the morning he will
be able to explain everything. I must say that I should like to see him
to-night, though."

"He may turn up yet," Peter Ruff remarked, cheerfully. "He's like
myself--a late bird."

"I fear not," Dory answered, drily. "Nice rooms you have here, sir. Just
a sitting room and bedroom, eh?"

Peter Ruff stood up and threw open the door of the inner apartment.

"That's so," he answered. "Care to have a look round?"

The detective did look round, and pretty thoroughly. As soon as he was
sure that there was no one concealed upon the premises, he drank his
whisky and soda and went.

"I'll look in again to see Cawdor," he remarked--"to-morrow, perhaps, or
the next day."

"I'll let him know if I see him about," Peter Ruff declared. "Sorry the
lift's stopped. Three steps to the left and straight on. Good-night!"



Miss Brown arrived early the following morning, and was disposed to be
inquisitive.

"I should like to know," she said, "exactly what has become of Mr.
Vincent Cawdor."

Peter Ruff took her upstairs. There was a little mound of ashes in the
grate.

She nodded.

"I imagined that," she said. "But why did you send me out to watch
yourself?"

"My dear Violet," Peter Ruff answered, "there is no man in the world
to-day who is my equal in the art of disguising himself. At the same
time, I wanted to know whether I could deceive you. I wanted to be quite
sure that my study of Mr. Vincent Cawdor was a safe one. I took those
rooms in his name and in his own person. I do not think that it occurred
even to our friend John Dory to connect us in his mind."

"Very well," she went on. "Now tell me, please, what took you up to
Westmoreland?"

"I followed Rounceby and Marnstam," he answered, "I knew them when I was
abroad, studying crime--I could tell you a good deal about both those
men if it were worth while--and I knew, when they hired a big motor car
and engaged a crook to drive it, that they were worth following. I saw
the trial of the flying machine, and when they started off with young
Franklin, I followed on a motor bicycle. I fished him out of the tarn
where they left him for dead, brought him on to London, and made my own
terms with him."

"What about the body which was found in the Longthorp Tarn?" she asked.

"I had that telegram sent myself," Peter Ruff answered.

She looked at him severely.

"You went out of your way to make a fool of John Dory!" she said,
frowning at him.

"That I admit," he answered.

"It seems to me," she continued, "that that, after all, has been the
chief object of the whole affair. I do not see that we--that is the
firm--profit in the least."

Peter Ruff chuckled.

"We've got a fourth share in the Franklin Flying Machine," he answered,
"and I'm hanged if I'd sell it for a hundred thousand pounds."

"You've taken advantage of that young man's gratitude," she declared.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"I earned the money," he answered.



CHAPTER IV. THE INDISCRETION OF LETTY SHAW


Amidst a storm of whispered criticisms, the general opinion was that
Letty Shaw was a silly little fool who ought to have known better. When
she had entered the restaurant a few minutes before midnight, followed
by Austen Abbott, every one looked to see a third person following them.
No third person, however, appeared. Gustav himself conducted them to a
small table laid for two, covered with pink roses, and handed his fair
client the menu of a specially ordered supper. There was no gainsaying
the fact that Letty and her escort proposed supping alone!

The Cafe at the Milan was, without doubt, the fashionable rendezvous of
the moment for those ladies connected with the stage who, after
their performance, had not the time or the inclination to make the
conventional toilet demanded by the larger restaurants. Letty Shaw,
being one of the principal ornaments of the musical comedy stage, was
well known to every one in the room. There was scarcely a person
there who within the last fortnight had not found an opportunity of
congratulating her upon her engagement to Captain the Honourable Brian
Sotherst. Sotherst was rich, and one of the most popular young men about
town. Letty Shaw, although she had had one or two harmless flirtations,
was well known as a self-respecting and hard-working young actress who
loved her work, and against whom no one had ever had a word to say.
Consequently, the shock was all the greater when, within a fortnight of
her engagement, she was thus to be seen openly supping alone with the
most notorious woman hunter about town--a man of bad reputation, a man,
too, towards whom Sotherst was known to have a special aversion. Nothing
but a break with Sotherst or a fit of temporary insanity seemed to
explain, even inadequately, the situation.

Her best friend--the friend who knew her and believed in her--rose to
her feet and came sailing down the room. She nodded gaily to Abbott,
whom she hated, and whom she had not recognized for years, and laid her
hand upon Letty's arm.

"Where's Brian?" she asked.

Letty shrugged her shoulders--it was not altogether a natural gesture.

"On duty to-night," she answered.

Her best friend paused for a moment.

"Come over and join our party, both of you," she said. "Dicky Pennell's
here and Gracie Marsh--just landed. They'd love to meet you."

Letty shook her head slowly. There was a look in her face which even her
best friend did not understand.

"I'm afraid that we can't do that," she said. "I am Mr. Abbott's guest."

"And to-night," Austen Abbott intervened, looking up at the woman who
stood between them, "I am not disposed to share Miss Shaw with anybody."

Her best friend could do no more than shake her head and go away. The
two were left alone for the rest of the evening. When they departed
together, people who knew felt that a whiff of tragedy had passed
through the room. Nobody understood--or pretended to understand. Even
before her engagement, Letty had never been known to sup alone with
a man. That she should do so now, and with this particular man, was
preposterous!

"Something will come of it," her best friend murmured, sadly, as she
watched Austen Abbott help his companion on with her cloak.

Something did!


Peter Ruff rose at his accustomed time the following morning, and
attired himself, if possible, with more than his usual care. He wore
the grey suit which he had carefully put out the night before, but he
hesitated long between the rival appeals of a red tie with white spots
and a plain mauve one. He finally chose the latter, finding that it
harmonised more satisfactorily with his socks, and after a final survey
of himself in the looking-glass, he entered the next room, where his
coffee was set out upon a small round table near the fire, together with
his letters and newspapers.

Peter Ruff was, after all, like the rest of us, a creature of habit.
He made an invariable rule of glancing through the newspapers before he
paid any regard at all to his letters or his breakfast. In the absence
of anything of a particularly sensational character, he then opened his
letters in leisurely fashion, and went back afterwards to the newspaper
as he finished his meal. This morning, however, both his breakfast and
letters remained for some time untouched. The first paragraph which
caught his eye as he shook open the Daily Telegraph was sufficiently
absorbing. There it was in great black type:


      TERRIBLE TRAGEDY IN THE FLAT OF A WELL-KNOWN ACTRESS!
                   AUSTEN ABBOTT SHOT DEAD!
                  ARREST OF CAPTAIN SOTHERST

Beyond the inevitable shock which is always associated with the taking
of life, and the unusual position of the people concerned in it,
there was little in the brief account of the incident to excite the
imagination. A policeman on the pavement outside the flat in which Miss
Shaw and her mother lived fancied that he heard, about two o'clock
in the morning, the report of a revolver shot. As nothing further
transpired, and as the sound was very indistinct, he did not at once
enter the building, but kept it, so far as possible, under observation.
About twenty minutes later, a young gentleman in evening dress came out
into the street, and the policeman noticed at once that he was carrying
a small revolver, which he attempted to conceal. The constable thereupon
whistled for his sergeant, and accompanied by the young gentleman--who
made no effort to escape--ascended to Miss Shaw's rooms, where the body
of Austen Abbott was discovered lying upon the threshold of the sitting
room with a small bullet mark through the forehead. The inmates of
the house were aroused and a doctor sent for. The deceased man was
identified as Austen Abbott--a well-known actor--and the man under
arrest gave his name at once as Captain the Honourable Brian Sotherst.
Peter Ruff sighed as he laid down the paper. The case seemed to him
perfectly clear, and his sympathies were altogether with the young
officer who had taken the law into his own hands. He knew nothing of
Miss Letty Shaw, and, consequently, did her, perhaps, less than justice
in his thoughts. Of Austen Abbott, on the other hand, he knew a great
deal--and nothing of good. It was absurd, after all, that any one should
be punished for killing such a brute!

He descended, a few minutes later, to his office, and found Miss Brown
busy arranging a bowl of violets upon his desk.

"Isn't it horrible?" she cried, as he entered, carrying a bundle of
papers under his arm. "I never have had such a shock!"

"Do you know any of them, then?" Peter Ruff asked, straightening his tie
in the mirror.

"Of course!" she answered. "Why, I was in the same company as Letty Shaw
for a year. I was at the Milan, too, last night. Letty was there having
supper alone with Austen Abbott. We all said that there'd be trouble,
but of course we never dreamed of this! Isn't there any chance for him,
Peter? Can't he get off?"

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"I'm afraid not," he answered. "They may be able to bring evidence of
a quarrel and reduce it to manslaughter, but what you've just told me
about this supper party makes it all the worse. It will come out in the
evidence, of course."

"Captain Sotherst is such a dear," Miss Brown declared, "and so
good-looking! And as for that brute Austen Abbott, he ought to have been
shot long ago!"

Peter Ruff seated himself before his desk and hitched up his trousers at
the knees.

"No doubt you are right, Violet," he said, "but people go about these
things so foolishly. To me it is simply exasperating to reflect how
little use is made of persons such as myself, whose profession in
life it is to arrange these little matters. Take the present case, for
example. Captain Sotherst had only to lay these facts before me, and
Austen Abbott was a ruined man. I could have arranged the affair for
him in half-a-dozen different ways. Whereas now it must be a life for
a life--the life of an honest young English gentleman for that of a
creature who should have been kicked out of the world as vermin!... I
have some letters give you, Violet, if you please."

She swung round in her chair reluctantly.

"I can't help thinking of that poor young fellow," she said, with a
sigh.

"Sentiment after office hours, if you please!" said Peter.

Then there came a knock at the door.


His visitor lifted her veil, and Peter Ruff recognized her immediately.

"What can I do for you, Lady Mary?" he asked.

She saw the recognition in his eyes even before he spoke, and wondered
at it.

"You know me?" she exclaimed.

"I know most people," he answered, drily; "it is part of my profession."

"Tell me--you are Mr. Peter Ruff," she said, "the famous specialist in
the detection of crime? You know that Brian Sotherst is my brother?"

"Yes," he said, "I know it! I am sorry--very sorry, indeed."

He handed her a chair. She seated herself with a little tightening of
the lips.

"I want more than sympathy from you, Mr. Ruff," she warned him. "I want
your help."

"It is my profession," he admitted, "but your brother's case makes
intervention difficult, does it not?"

"You mean--" she began.

"Your brother himself does not deny his guilt, I understand."

"He has not denied it," she answered--"very likely he will not do so
before the magistrate--but neither has he admitted it. Mr. Ruff, you are
such a clever man. Can't you see the truth?"

Peter Ruff looked at her steadily for several moments.

"Lady Mary," he said, "I can see what you are going to suggest. You are
going on the assumption that Austen Abbott was shot by Letty Shaw and
that your brother is taking the thing on his shoulders."

"I am sure of it!" she declared. "The girl did it herself, beyond a
doubt. Brian would never have shot any one. He might have horsewhipped
him, perhaps--even beaten him to death--but shot him in cold
blood--never!"

"The provocation--" Ruff began.

"There was no provocation," she interrupted. "He was engaged to the
girl, and of course we hated it, but she was an honest little thing, and
devoted to him."

"Doubtless," Ruff admitted. "But all the same, as you will hear before
the magistrates, or at the inquest, she was having supper alone with
Austen Abbott that night at the Milan."

Lady Mary's eyes flashed.

"I don't believe it!" she declared.

"It is nevertheless true," Peter Ruff assured her. "There is no shadow
of doubt about it."

Lady Mary was staggered. For a few moment she seemed struggling to
rearrange her thoughts.

"You see," Ruff continued, "the fact that Miss Shaw was willing to
sup with Austen Abbott tete-a-tete renders it more improbable that she
should shoot him in her sitting room, an hour or so later, and then go
calmly up to her mother's room as though nothing had happened."

Lady Mary had lost some of her confidence, but she was not daunted.

"Even if we have been deceived in the girl," she said,
thoughtfully--"even if she were disposed to flirt with other men--even
then there might be a stronger motive than ever for her wishing to get
rid of Abbott. He may have become jealous, and threatened her."

"It is, of course, possible," Ruff assented, politely. "Your theory
would, at any rate, account for your brother's present attitude."

She looked at him steadfastly.

"You believe, then," she said, "that my brother shot Austen Abbott?"

"I do," he admitted frankly. "So does every man or woman of common sense
in London. On the facts as they are stated in the newspapers, with the
addition of which I have told you, no other conclusion is possible."

Lady Mary rose.

"Then I may as well go," she said tearfully.

"Not at all," Peter Ruff declared. "Listen. This is a matter of business
with me. I say that on the facts as they are known, your brother's guilt
appears indubitable. I do not say that there may not be other facts
in the background which alter the state of affairs. If you wish me to
search for them, engage me, and I will do my best."

"Isn't that what I am here for?" the girl exclaimed.

"Very well," Peter Ruff said. "My services are at your disposal."

"You will do your best--more than your best, won't you?" she begged.
"Remember that he is my brother--my favourite brother!"

"I will do what can be done," Peter Ruff promised. "Please sit down at
that desk and write me two letters of introduction."

She drew off her gloves and prepared to obey him.

"To whom?" she asked.

"To the solicitors who are defending your brother," he said, "and to
Miss Letty Shaw."

"You mean to go and see her?" Lady Mary asked, doubtfully.

"Naturally," Peter Ruff answered. "If your supposition is correct, she
might easily give herself away under a little subtle cross-examination.
It is my business to know how to ask people questions in such a way that
if they do not speak the truth their words give some indication of it.
If she is innocent I shall know that I have to make my effort in another
direction."

"What other direction can there be?" Lady Mary asked dismally.

Peter Ruff said nothing. He was too kind-hearted to kindle false hopes.

"It's a hopeless case, of course," Miss Brown remarked, after Lady Mary
had departed.

"I'm afraid so," Peter Ruff answered. "Still I must earn my money.
Please get some one to take you to supper to-night at the Milan, and see
if you can pick up any scandal."

"About Letty?" she asked.

"About either of them," he answered. "Particularly I should like to
know if any explanation has cropped up of her supping alone with Austen
Abbott."

"I don't see why you can't take me yourself," she remarked. "You are on
the side of the law this time, at any rate."

"I will," he answered, after a moment's hesitation. "I will call for you
at eleven o'clock to-night."

He rose and closed his desk emphatically.

"You are going out?" she asked.

"I am going to see Miss Letty Shaw," he answered.

He took a taxicab to the flats, and found a handful of curious people
still gazing up at the third floor. The parlourmaid who answered his
summons was absolutely certain that Miss Shaw would not see him. He
persuaded her, after some difficulty, to take in his letter while he
waited in the hall. When she returned, she showed him into a small
sitting room and pulled down the blinds.

"Miss Shaw will see you, sir, for a few minutes," she announced, in
a subdued tone. "Poor dear young lady," she continued, "she has been
crying her eyes out all the morning."

"No wonder," Peter Ruff said, sympathetically. "It's a terrible
business, this!"

"One of the nicest young men as ever walked," the girl declared, firmly.
"As for that brute, he deserved all he's got, and more!"

Peter Ruff was left alone for nearly a quarter of an hour. Then the door
was softly opened and Letty Shaw entered. There was no doubt whatever
about her suffering. Ruff, who had seen her only lately at the theatre,
was shocked. Under her eyes were blacker lines than her pencil had
ever traced. Not only was she ghastly pale, but her face seemed wan and
shrunken. She spoke to him the moment she entered, leaning with on hand
upon the sideboard.

"Lady Mary writes that you want to help us," she said. "How can you? How
is it possible?"

Even her voice had gone. She spoke hoarsely, and as though short of
breath. Her eyes searched his face feverishly. It seemed cruelty not to
answer her at once, and Peter Ruff was not a cruel man. Nevertheless, he
remained silent, and it seemed to her that his eyes were like points of
fire upon her face.

"What is the matter?" she cried, with breaking voice. "What have you
come for? Why don't you speak to me?"

"Madam," Peter Ruff said, "I should like to help you, and I will do what
I can. But in order that I may do so, it is necessary that you should
answer me two questions--truthfully!"

Her eyes grew wider. It was the face of a terrified child.

"Why not?" she exclaimed. "What have I to conceal?"

Peter Ruff's expression never changed. There was nothing about him,
as he stood there with his hands behind him, his head thrown a little
forward, in the least inspiring--nothing calculated to terrify the most
timid person. Yet the girl looked at him with the eyes of a frightened
bird.

"Remember, then," he continued, smoothly, "that what you say to me is
sacred. You and I are alone without witnesses or eavesdroppers. Was it
Brian Sotherst who shot Abbott--or was it you?"

She gave a little cry. Her hands clasped the sides of her head in
horror.

"I!" she exclaimed, "I! God help me!"

He waited. In a moment she looked up.

"You cannot believe that," she said, with a calmness for which he was
scarcely prepared. "It is absurd. I left the room by the inner door as
he took up his hat to step out into the hall."

"Incidentally," he asked--"this is not my other question, mind--why did
you not let him out yourself?"

"We had disagreed," she answered, curtly.

Peter Ruff bent his head in assent.

"I see," he remarked. "You had disagreed. Abbott probably hoped that you
would relent, so he waited for a few minutes. Brian Sotherst, who had
escaped from his engagement in time, he thought, to come and wish you
good night, must have walked in and found him there. By the bye, how
would Captain Sotherst get in?"

"He had a key," the girl answered. "My mother lives here with me, and
we have only one maid. It was more convenient. I gave him one washed in
gold for a birthday present only a few days ago."

"Thank you," Peter Ruff said. "The revolver, I understand, was your
property?"

She nodded.

"It was a present from Brian," she said. "He gave it to me in a joke,
and I had it on the table with some other curiosities."

"The first question," Peter Ruff said, "is disposed of. May I proceed to
the second?"

The girl moistened her lips.

"Yes!" she answered.

"Why did you sup alone with Austen Abbott last night?"

She shrank a little away.

"Why should I not?" she asked.

"You have been on the stage, my dear Miss Shaw," Peter Ruff continued,
"for between four and five years. During the whole of that time, it has
been your very wise habit to join supper parties, of course, when the
company was agreeable to you, but to sup alone with no man! Am I not
right?"

"You seem to know a great deal about me," she faltered.

"Am I not right?" he repeated.

"Yes!"

"You break your rule for the first time," Peter Ruff continued, "in
favour of a man of notoriously bad character, a few weeks after
the announcement of your engagement to an honourable young English
gentleman. You know very well the construction likely to be put
upon your behaviour--you, of all people, would be the most likely to
appreciate the risk you ran. Why did you run it? In other words, I
repeat my question. Why did you sup alone with Austen Abbott last
night?"

All this time she had been standing. She came a little forward now, and
threw herself into an easy-chair.

"It doesn't help!" she exclaimed. "All this doesn't help!"

"Nor can I help you, then," Peter Ruff said, stretching out his hand for
his hat.

She waved to him to put it down.

"I will tell you," she said. "It has nothing to do with the case,
but since you ask, you shall know. There is a dear little girl in our
company--Fluffy Dean we all call her--only eighteen years old. We all
love her, she is so sweet, and just like I was when I first went on the
stage, only much nicer. She is very pretty, she has no money, and she is
such an affectionate little dear that although she is as good as gold,
we are all terrified for her sake whenever she makes acquaintances.
Several of us who are most interested made a sort of covenant. We all
took it in turns to look after her, and try to see that she did not meet
any one she shouldn't. Yet, for all our precautions, Austen Abbott
got hold of her and turned her silly little head. He was a man of
experience, and she was only a child. She wouldn't listen to us--she
wouldn't hear a word against him. I took what seemed to me to be the
only chance. I went to him myself--I begged for mercy, I begged him
to spare the child. I swore that if--anything happened to her, I would
start a crusade against him, I would pledge my word that he should be
cut by every decent man and woman on the stage! He listened to what I
had to say and at first he only smiled. When I had finished, he made me
an offer. He said that if I would sup with him alone at the Milan, and
permit him to escort me home afterwards, he would spare the child. One
further condition he made--that I was to tell no one why I did it. It
was the man's brutal vanity! I made the promise, but I break it now.
You have asked me and I have told you. I went through with the supper,
although I hated it. I let him come in for a drink as though he had been
a friend. Then he tried to make love to me. I took the opportunity of
telling him exactly what I thought of him. Then I showed him the door,
and left him. Afterwards--afterwards--Brian came in! They must have met
upon the very threshold!"

Peter Ruff took up his hat.

"Thank you!" he said.

"You see," she continued, drearily, "that it all has very little to do
with the case. I meant to keep it to myself, because, of course, apart
from anything else, apart from Brian's meeting him coming out of my
rooms, it supplies an additional cause for anger on Brian's part."

"I see," he answered. "I am much obliged to you, Miss Shaw. Believe me
that you have my sincere sympathy!"

Peter Ruff's farewell words were unheard. Letty had fallen forward in
her chair, her head buried in her hands.

Peter Ruff went to Berkeley Square and found Lady Mary waiting for
him. Sir William Trencham, the great solicitor, was with her. Lady Mary
introduced the two men. All the time she was anxiously watching Ruff's
face.

"Mr. Ruff has been to see Miss Shaw," she explained to Sir William. "Mr.
Ruff, tell me quickly," she continued, with her hand upon his shoulder,
"did she say anything? Did you find anything out?"

He shook his head.

"No!" he said. "I found nothing out!"

"You don't think, then," Lady Mary gasped, "that there is any chance--of
getting her to confess--that she did it herself?"

"Why should she have done it herself?" Peter Ruff asked. "She admits
that the man tried to make love to her. She simply left him. She was
in her own home, with her mother and servant within call. There was no
struggle in the room--we know that. There was no necessity for any."

"Have you made any other enquiries?" Lady Mary asked.

"The few which I have made," Peter Ruff answered gravely, "point all in
the same direction. I ascertained at the Milan that your brother called
there late last night, and that he heard Miss Shaw had been supping
alone with Austen Abbott. He followed them home. I have ascertained,
too, that he had a key to Miss Shaw's flat. He apparently met Austen
Abbott upon the threshold."

Lady Mary covered her face with her hands. She seemed to read in
Ruff's words the verdict of the two men--the verdict of common sense.
Nevertheless, he made one more request before leaving.

"I should like to see Captain Sotherst, if you can get me an order," he
said to Sir William.

"You can go with me to-morrow morning," the lawyer answered. "The
proceedings this morning, of course, were simply formal. Until after the
inquest it will be easy to arrange an interview."

Lady Mary looked up quickly.

"There is still something in your mind, then?" she asked. "You think
that there is a bare chance?"

"There is always the hundredth chance!" Peter Ruff replied.

Peter Ruff and Miss Brown supped at the Milan that night as they had
arranged, but it was not a cheerful evening. Brian Sotherst had been
very popular among Letty Shaw's little circle of friends, and the
general feeling was one of horror and consternation at this thing which
had befallen him. Austen Abbot, too, was known to all of them, and
although a good many of the men--and even the women--were outspoken
enough to declare at once that it served him right, nevertheless, the
shock of death--death without a second's warning--had a paralysing
effect even upon those who were his severest critics. Violet Brown
spoke to a few of her friends--introduced Peter Ruff here and there--but
nothing was said which could throw in any way even the glimmerings of
a new light upon the tragedy. It all seemed too hopelessly and fatally
obvious.

About twenty minutes before closing time, the habitues of the place were
provided with something in the nature of a sensation. A little party
entered who seemed altogether free from the general air of gloom.
Foremost among them was a very young and exceedingly pretty girl, with
light golden hair waved in front of her forehead, deep blue eyes, and
the slight, airy figure of a child. She was accompanied by another young
woman, whose appearance was a little too obvious to be prepossessing,
and three or four young men--dark, clean-shaven, dressed with the
irritating exactness of their class--young stockbrokers or boys about
town. Miss Brown's eyes grew very wide open.

"What a little beast!" she exclaimed.

"Who?" Peter Ruff asked.

"That pretty girl there," she answered--"Fluffy Dean her name is. She is
Letty Shaw's protege, and she wouldn't have dreamed of allowing her to
come out with a crowd like that. Tonight, of all nights," she continued,
indignantly, "when Letty is away!"

Peter Ruff was interested.

"So that is Miss Fluffy Dean," he remarked, looking at her curiously.
"She seems a little excited."

"She's a horrid little wretch!" Miss Brown declared. "I hope that some
one will tell Letty, and that she will drop her now. A girl who would
do such a thing as that when Letty is in such trouble isn't worth taking
care of! Just listen to them all!"

They were certainly becoming a little boisterous. A magnum of champagne
was being opened. Fluffy Dean's cheeks were already flushed, and her
eyes glittering. Every one at the table was talking a great deal and
drinking toasts.

"This is the end of Fluffy Dean," Violet Brown said, severely. "I hate
to be uncharitable, but it serves her right."

Peter Ruff paid his bill.

"Let us go," he said.

In the taxicab, on their way back to Miss Brown's rooms, Ruff was
unusually silent, but just before he said good night to her--on the
pavement, in fact, outside her front door--he asked a question.

"Violet," he said, "would you like to play detective for an hour or
two?"

She looked at him in some surprise.

"You know I always like to help in anything that's going," she said.

"Letty Shaw was an Australian, wasn't she?" he asked.

"Yes."

"She was born there, and lived there till she was nearly eighteen--is
that true?" he asked again.

"Quite true," Miss Brown answered.

"You know the offices of the P.& O. line of steamers in Pall Mall?" he
asked.

She nodded.

"Well?"

"Get a sailing list to Australia--there should be a boat going Thursday.
Present yourself as a prospective passenger. See how many young women
alone there are going out, and ask their names. Incidentally put in a
little spare time watching the office."

She looked at him with parted lips and wide-open eyes.

"Do you think--" she began.

He shook her hand warmly and stepped back into the taxicab.

"Good night!" he said. "No questions, please. I sha'n't expect you at
the office at the usual time to-morrow, at any rate. Telephone or run
around if you've anything to tell me."

The taxicab disappeared round the corner of the street. Miss Brown was
standing still upon the pavement with the latchkey in her hand.


*****


It was afternoon before the inquest on the body of Austen Abbott, and
there was gathered together in Letty Shaw's parlor a curiously assorted
little group of people. There was Miss Shaw herself--or rather what
seemed to be the ghost of herself--and her mother; Lady Mary and Sir
William Trencham; Peter Ruff and Violet Brown--and Mr. John Dory. The
eyes of all of them were fixed upon Peter Ruff, who was the latest
arrival. He stood in the middle of the room, calmly taking off his
gloves, and glancing complacently down at his well-creased trousers.

"Lady Mary," he said, "and Miss Shaw, I know that you are both anxious
for me to explain why I ask you to meet me here this afternoon, and why
I also requested my friend Mr. Dory from Scotland Yard, who has charge
of the case against Captain Sotherst, to be present. I will tell you."

Mr. Dory nodded, a little impatiently.

"Unless you have something very definite to say," he remarked, "I think
it would be as well to postpone any general discussion of this matter
until after the inquest. I must warn you that so far as I, personally,
am concerned, I must absolutely decline to allude to the subject at all.
It would be most unprofessional."

"I have something definite to say," Peter Ruff declared, mildly.

Lady Mary's eyes flashed with hope--Letty Shaw leaned forward in her
chair with white, drawn face.

"Let it be understood," Peter Ruff said, with a slight note of gravity
creeping into his tone, "that I am here solely as the agent of Lady
Mary Sotherst. I am paid and employed by her. My sole object is on
her behalf, therefore, to discover proof of the innocence of Captain
Sotherst. I take it, however," he added, turning towards the drooping
figure in the easy-chair, "that Miss Shaw is as anxious to have the
truth known."

"Of course! Of course!" she murmured.

"In France," Peter Ruff continued, "there is a somewhat curious custom,
which, despite a certain theatricality, yet has its points. The scene of
a crime is visited, and its events, so far as may be, reconstructed. Let
us suppose for a moment that we are now engaged upon something of the
sort."

Letty Shaw shrank back in her chair. Her thin white fingers were
gripping its sides. Her eyes seemed to look upon terrible things.

"It is too--awful!" she faltered.

"Madam," Peter Ruff said, firmly, "we seek the truth. Be so good as to
humour me in this. Dory, will you go to the front door, stand upon the
mat--so? You are Captain Sotherst--you have just entered. I am Austen
Abbott. You, Miss Shaw, have just ordered me from the room. You see,
I move toward the door. I open it--so. Miss Shaw," he added, turning
swiftly towards her, "once more will you assure me that every one who
was in the flat that night, with the exception of your domestic servant,
is present now?"

"Yes," she murmured.

"Good! Then who," he asked, suddenly pointing to a door on the
left--"who is in that room?"

They had all crowded after him to the threshold--thronging around him as
he stood face to face with John Dory. His finger never wavered--it
was pointing steadily towards that closed door a few feet to the left.
Suddenly Letty Shaw rushed past them with a loud shriek.

"You shall not go in!" she cried. "What business is it of his?"

She stood with her back to the door, her arms outstretched like a cross.
Her cheeks were livid. Her eyes seemed starting from her head.

Peter Ruff and John Dory laid their hands upon the girl's wrists. She
clung to her place frantically. She was dragged from it, screaming.
Peter Ruff, as was his right, entered first. Almost immediately he
turned round, and his face was very grave.

"Something has happened in here, I am afraid," he said. "Please come in
quietly."

On the bed lay Fluffy Dean, fully dressed--motionless. One hand hung
down toward the floor--from the lifeless fingers a little phial had
slipped. The room was full of trunks addressed to--

                           MISS SMITH,
                      Passenger to Melborne.
                         S.S. Caroline.

Peter Ruff moved over toward the bed and took up a piece of paper, upon
which were scribbled a few lines in pencil.

"I think," he said, "that I must read these aloud. You all have a right
to hear them."

No one spoke. He continued:


Forgive me, Letty, but I cannot go to Australia. They would only bring
me back. When I remember that awful moment, my brain burns--I feel that
I am going mad! Some day I should do this--better now. Give my love to
the girls.

FLUFFY.


They sent for a doctor, and John Dory rang up Scotland Yard. Letty Shaw
had fainted, and had been carried to her room. While they waited about
in strange, half-benumbed excitement, Peter Ruff once more spoke to
them.

"The reconstruction is easy enough now," he remarked. "The partition
between this sitting room and that little bedroom is only an artificial
one--something almost as flimsy as a screen. You see," he continued,
tapping with his knuckles, "you can almost put your hand through it.
If you look a little lower down, you will see where an opening has been
made. Fluffy Dean was being taken care of by Miss Shaw--staying with her
here, even. Miss Dean hears her lover's voice in this room--hears him
pleading with Miss Shaw on he night of the murder. She has been sent
home early from the theatre, and it is just possible that she saw or had
been told that Austen Abbott had fetched Miss Shaw after the performance
and had taken her to supper. She was mad with anger and jealousy. The
revolver was there upon the table, with a silver box of cartridges. She
possessed herself of it and waited in her room. What she heard proved,
at least, her lover's infidelity. She stood there at her door, waiting.
When Austen Abbott comes out, she shoots, throws the revolver at
him, closes her door, and goes off into a faint. Perhaps she hears
footsteps--a key in the door. At any rate, Captain Sotherst arrives a
few minutes later. He finds, half in the hall, half on the threshold of
the sitting room, Austen Abbott dead, and Miss Shaw's revolver by the
side of him. If he had been a wise young man, he would have aroused the
household. Why he did not do so, we can perhaps guess. He put two and
two together a little too quickly. It is certain that he believed that
the dead man had been shot by his fiancee. His first thought was to get
rid of the revolver. At any rate, he walked down to the street with it
in his hand, and was promptly arrested by the policeman who had heard
the shot. Naturally he refused to plead, because he believed that
Miss Shaw had killed the man, probably in self-defence. She, at first,
believed her lover guilty, and when afterwards Fluffy Dean confessed,
she, with feminine lack of common sense, was trying to get the girl out
of the country before telling the truth. A visit of hers to the office
of the steamship company gave me the clue I required."

Lady Mary grasped both his hands.

"And Scotland Yard," she exclaimed, with a withering glance at Dory,
"have done their best to hang my brother!"

Peter Ruff raised his eyebrows.

"Dear Lady Mary," he said, "remember that it is the business of Scotland
Yard to find a man guilty. It is mine, when I am employed for that
purpose, to find him innocent. You must not be too hard upon my friend
Mr. Dory. He and I seem to come up against each other a little too
often, as it is."

"A little too often!" John Dory repeated, softly. "But one cannot tell.
Don't believe, Lady Mary," he added, "that we ever want to kill an
innocent man."

"It is your profession, though," she answered, "to find criminals--and
his," she added, touching Peter Ruff on the shoulder, "to look for the
truth."

Peter Ruff bowed low--the compliment pleased him.



CHAPTER V. DELILAH FROM STREATHAM


It was a favourite theory with Peter Ruff that the morning papers
received very insufficient consideration from the majority of the
British public. A glance at the headlines and a few of the spiciest
paragraphs, a vague look at the leading article, and the sheets were
thrown away to make room for more interesting literature. It was not
so with Peter Ruff. Novels he very seldom read--he did not, in fact,
appreciate the necessity for their existence. The whole epitome of
modern life was, he argued, to be found among the columns of the daily
press. The police news, perhaps, was his favourite study, but he did
not neglect the advertisements. It followed, therefore, as a matter of
course, that the appeal of "M" in the personal column of the Daily Mail
was read by him on the morning of its appearance--read not once only nor
twice--it was a paragraph which had its own peculiar interest for him.

Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald, if still in England, is requested to communicate
with "M," at Vagali's Library, Cook's Alley, Ledham Street, Soho.



Peter Ruff laid the paper down upon his desk and looked steadily at a
box of India-rubber bands. Almost his fingers, as he parted with the
newspaper, had seemed to be shaking. His eyes were certainly set in
an unusually retrospective stare. Who was this who sought to probe his
past, to renew an acquaintance with a dead personality? "M" could be but
one person! What did she want of him? Was it possible that, after all,
a little flame of sentiment had been kept alight in her bosom, too--that
in the quiet moments her thoughts had turned towards him as his had
so often done to her? Then a sudden idea--an ugly thought--drove the
tenderness from his face. She was no longer Maud Barnes--she was Mrs.
John Dory, and John Dory was his enemy! Could there be treachery lurking
beneath those simple lines? Things had not gone well with John Dory
lately. Somehow or other, his cases seemed to have crumpled into dust.
He was no longer held in the same esteem at headquarters. Yet could even
John Dory stoop to such means as these?

He turned in his chair.

"Miss Brown," he said, "please take your pencil."

"I am quite ready, sir," she answered.

He marked the advertisement with a ring and passed it to her.

"Reply to that as follows," he said:

DEAR SIR:

I notice in the Daily Mail of this morning that you are enquiring
through the "personal" column for the whereabouts of Mr. Spencer
Fitzgerald. That gentleman has been a client of mine, and I have been in
occasional communication with him. If you will inform me of the nature
of your business, I may, perhaps, be able to put you in touch with Mr.
Fitzgerald. You will understand, however, that, under the circumstances,
I shall require proofs of your good faith.

Truly yours,

PETER RUFF.

Miss Brown glanced through the advertisement and closed her notebook
with a little snap.

"Did you say--'Dear Sir'?" she asked.

"Certainly!" Peter Ruff answered.

"And you really mean," she continued, with obvious disapproval, "that I
am to send this?"

"I do not usually waste my time," Peter Ruff reminded her, mildly, "by
giving you down communications destined for the waste-paper basket."

She turned unwillingly to her machine.

"Mr. Fitzgerald is very much better where he is," she remarked.

"That depends," he answered.

She adjusted a sheet of paper into her typewriter.

"Who do you suppose 'M' is?" she asked.

"With your assistance," Peter Ruff remarked, a little
sarcastically--"with your very kind assistance--I propose to find out!"

Miss Brown sniffed, and banged at the keys of her typewriter.

"That coal-dealer's girl from Streatham!" she murmured to herself....



A few politely worded letters were exchanged. "M" declined to reveal her
identity, but made an appointment to visit Mr. Ruff at his office. The
morning she was expected, he wore an entirely new suit of clothes and
was palpably nervous. Miss Brown, who had arrived a little late, sat
with her back turned upon him, and ignored even his usual morning
greeting. The atmosphere of the office was decidedly chilly!
Fortunately, the expected visitor arrived early.

Peter Ruff rose to receive his former sweetheart with an agitation
perforce concealed, yet to him poignant indeed. For it was indeed
Maud who entered the room and came towards him with carefully studied
embarrassment and half doubtfully extended hand. He did not see the
cheap millinery, the slightly more developed figure, the passing of
that insipid prettiness which had once charmed him into the bloom of an
over-early maturity. His eyes were blinded with that sort of masculine
chivalry--the heritage only of fools and very clever men--which takes no
note of such things. It was Miss Brown who, from her place in a corner
of the room, ran over the cheap attractions of this unwelcome visitor
with an expression of scornful wonder--who understood the tinsel of her
jewellery, the cheap shoddiness of her ready-made gown; who appreciated,
with merciless judgment, her mincing speech, her cheap, flirtatious
method.

Maud, with a diffidence not altogether assumed, had accepted the chair
which Peter Ruff had placed for her, and sat fidgeting, for a moment,
with the imitation gold purse which she was carrying.

"I am sure, Mr. Ruff," she said, looking demurely into her lap, "I
ought not to have come here. I feel terribly guilty. It's such an
uncomfortable sort of position, too, isn't it?"

"I am sorry that you find it so," Peter Ruff said. "If there is anything
I can do--"

"You are very kind," she murmured, half raising her eyes to his and
dropping them again, "but, you see, we are perfect strangers to one
another. You don't know me at all, do you? And I have only heard of you
through the newspapers. You might think all sorts of things about my
coming here to make enquiries about a gentleman."

"I can assure you," Peter Ruff said, sincerely, "that you need have no
fears--no fears at all. Just speak to me quite frankly. Mr. Fitzgerald
was a friend of yours, was he not?"

Maud simpered.

"He was more than that," she answered, looking down. "We were engaged to
be married."

Peter Ruff sighed.

"I knew all about it," he declared. "Fitzgerald used to tell me
everything."

"You were his friend?" she asked, looking him in the face.

"I was," Peter Ruff answered fervently, "his best friend! No one was
more grieved than I about that--little mistake."

She sighed.

"In some ways," she remarked softly, "you remind me of him."

"You could scarcely say anything," Peter Ruff murmured "which would give
me more pleasure. I am flattered."

She shook her head.

"It isn't flattery," she said, "it's the truth. You may be a few years
older, and Spencer had a very nice moustache, which you haven't, but you
are really not unlike. Mr. Ruff, do tell me where he is!"

Peter Ruff coughed.

"You must remember," he said, "that Mr. Fitzgerald's absence was caused
by events of a somewhat unfortunate character."

"I know all about it," she answered, with a little sigh.

"You can appreciate the fact, therefore," Peter Ruff continued, "that
as his friend and well-wisher I can scarcely disclose his whereabouts
without his permission. Will you tell me exactly why you want to meet
him again?"

She blushed--looked down and up again--betrayed, in fact, all the signs
of confusion which might have been expected from her.

"Must I tell you that?" she asked.

"You are married, are you not?" Peter Ruff asked, looking down at her
wedding ring.

She bit her lip with vexation. What a fool she had been not to take it
off!

"Yes! Well, no--that is to say--"

"Never mind," Peter Ruff interrupted. "Please don't think that I want to
cross-examine you. I only asked these questions because I have a sincere
regard for Fitzgerald. I know how fond he was of you, and I cannot see
what there is to be gained, from his point of view, by reopening old
wounds."

"I suppose, then," she remarked, looking at him in such a manner
that Miss Brown had to cover her mouth with her hands to prevent her
screaming out--"I suppose you are one of those who think it a crime for
a woman who is married even to want to see, for a few moments, an old
sweetheart?"

"On the contrary," Peter Ruff answered, "as a bachelor, I have no
convictions of any sort upon the subject."

She sighed.

"I am glad of that," she said.

"I am to understand, then," Peter Ruff remarked, "that your reason for
wishing to meet Mr. Fitzgerald again is purely a sentimental one?"

"I am afraid it is," she murmured; "I have thought of him so often
lately. He was such a dear!" she declared, with enthusiasm.

"I have never been sufficiently thankful," she continued, "that he got
away that night. At the time, I was very angry, but often since then I
have wished that I could have passed out with him into the fog and been
lost--but I mustn't talk like this! Please don't misunderstand me, Mr.
Ruff. I am happily married--quite happily married!"

Peter Ruff sighed.

"My friend Fitzgerald," he remarked, "will be glad to hear that."

Maud fidgeted. It was not quite the effect she had intended to produce!

"Of course," she remarked, looking away with a pensive air, "one has
regrets."

"Regrets!" Peter Ruff murmured.

"Mr. Dory is not well off," she continued, "and I am afraid that I
am very fond of life and going about, and everything is so expensive
nowadays. Then I don't like his profession. I think it is hateful to
be always trying to catch people and put them in prison--don't you, Mr.
Ruff?"

Peter Ruff smiled.

"Naturally," he answered. "Your husband and I work from the opposite
poles of life. He is always seeking to make criminals of the people whom
I am always trying to prove worthy members of society."

"How noble!" Maud exclaimed, clasping her hands and looking up at him.
"So much more remunerative, too, I should think," she added, after a
moment's pause.

"Naturally," Peter Ruff admitted. "A private individual will pay more
to escape from the clutches of the law than the law will to secure
its victims. Scotland Yard expects them to come into its arms
automatically--regards them as a perquisite of its existence."

"I wish my husband were in your profession, Mr. Ruff," Maud said, with a
sidelong glance of her blue eyes which she had always found so effective
upon her various admirers. "I am sure that I should be a great deal
fonder of him."

Peter Ruff leaned forward in his chair. He, too, had expressive eyes at
times.

"Madam," he said--and stopped. But Maud blushed, all the same.

She looked down into her lap.

"We are forgetting Mr. Fitzgerald," she murmured.

Peter Ruff glanced up at the clock.

"It is a long story," he said. "Are you in a hurry, Mrs. Dory?

"Not at all," she assured him, "unless you want to close you office, or
anything. It must be nearly one o'clock."

"I wonder," he asked, "if you would do me the honour of lunching with
me? We might go to the Prince's or the Carlton--whichever you prefer. I
will promise to talk about Mr. Fitzgerald all the time."

"Oh, I couldn't!" Maud declared, with a little gasp. "At least--well,
I'm sure I don't know!"

"You have no engagement for luncheon?" Peter Ruff asked quietly.

"Oh, no!" she answered; "but, you see, we live so quietly. I have
never been to one of those places. I'd love to go--but if we were seen!
Wouldn't people talk?"

Peter Ruff smiled. Just the same dear, modest little thing!

"I can assure you," he said, "that nothing whatever could be said
against our lunching together. People are not so strict nowadays, you
know, and a married lady has always a great deal of latitude."

She looked up at him with a dazzling smile.

"I'd simply love to go to Prince's!" she declared.

"Cat!" Miss Brown murmured, as Peter Ruff and his client left the room
together.

Peter Ruff returned from his luncheon in no very jubilant state of mind.
For some time he sat in his easy-chair, with his legs crossed and
his finger tips pressed close together, looking steadily into space.
Contrary to his usual custom, he did not smoke. Miss Brown watched him
from behind her machine.

"Disenchanted?" she asked calmly.

Peter Ruff did not reply for several moments.

"I am afraid," he admitted, hesitatingly, "that marriage with John Dory
has--well, not had a beneficial effect. She allowed me, for instance, to
hold her hand in the cab! Maud would never have permitted a stranger to
take such a liberty in the old days."

Miss Brown smiled curiously.

"Is that all?" she asked.

Peter Ruff felt that he was in the confessional.

"She certainly did seem," he admitted, "to enjoy her champagne a great
deal, and she talked about her dull life at home a little more, perhaps,
than was discreet to one who was presumably a stranger. She was curious,
too, about dining out. Poor little girl, though. Just fancy, John Dory
has never taken her anywhere but to Lyons' or an A B C, and the pit of a
theatre!"

"Which evening is it to be?" Miss Brown asked.

"Something was said about Thursday," Peter Ruff admitted.

"And her husband?" Miss Brown enquired.

"He happens to be in Glasgow for a few days," Peter Ruff answered.

Miss Brown looked at her employer steadily. She addressed him by his
Christian name, which was a thing she very seldom did in office hours.

"Peter," she said, "are you going to let that woman make a fool of you?"

He raised his eyebrows.

"Go on," he said; "say anything you want to--only, if you please, don't
speak disrespectfully of Maud."

"Hasn't it ever occurred to you at all," Miss Brown continued, rising
to her feet, "that this Maud, or whatever you want to call her, may be
playing a low-down game of her husband's? He hates you, and he has
vague suspicions. Can't you see that he is probably making use of your
infatuation for his common, middle-class little wife, to try and get
you to give yourself away? Can't you see it, Peter? You are not going to
tell me that you are so blind as all that!"

"I must admit," he answered with a sigh, "that, although I think you go
altogether too far, some suspicion of the sort has interfered with my
perfect enjoyment of the morning."

Miss Brown drew a little breath of relief. After all, then, his folly
was not so consummate as it had seemed!

"What are you going to do about it, then?" she asked.

Peter Ruff coughed--he seemed in an unusually amenable frame of mind,
and submitted to cross-examination without murmur.

"The subject of Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald," he remarked, "seemed, somehow
or other, to drop into the background during our luncheon. I propose,
therefore, to continue to offer to Mrs. John Dory my most respectful
admiration. If she accepts my friendship, and is satisfied with it,
so much the better. I must admit that it would give me a great deal of
pleasure to be her occasional companion--at such times when her husband
happens to be in Glasgow!"

"And supposing," Miss Brown asked, "that this is not all she
wants--supposing, for instance, that she persists in her desire for
information concerning Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald?"

"Then," Peter Ruff admitted, "I'm afraid that I must conclude that her
unchivalrous clod of a husband has indeed stooped to make a fool of
her."

"And in that case," Miss Brown demanded, "what shall you do?"

"I was just thinking that out," Peter Ruff said mildly, "when you
spoke...."

The friendship of Peter Ruff with the wife of his enemy certainly
appeared to progress in most satisfactory fashion. The dinner and visit
to the theatre duly took place. Mr. Ruff was afterwards permitted to
offer a slight supper and to accompany his fair companion a portion of
the way home in a taxicab. She made several half-hearted attempts to
return to the subject of Spencer Fitzgerald, but her companion had been
able on each occasion to avoid the subject. Whether or not she was the
victim of her husband's guile, there was no question about the reality
of her enjoyment during the evening. Ruff, when he remembered the flash
of her eyes across the table, the touch of her fingers in the taxi, was
almost content to believe her false to her truant lover. If only she had
not been married to John Dory, he realised, with a little sigh, that he
might have taught her to forget that such a person existed as Spencer
Fitzgerald, might have induced her to become Mrs. Peter Ruff!

On their next meeting, however, Peter Ruff was forced to realise that
his secretary's instinct had not misled her. It was, alas, no personal
and sentimental regrets for her former lover which had brought the fair
Maud to his office. The pleasures of her evening--they dined at Romano's
and had a box at the Empire--were insufficient this time to keep her
from recurring continually to the subject of her vanished lover. He
tried strategy--jealousy amongst other things.

"Supposing," he said, as they sat quite close to one another in the box
during the interval, "supposing I were to induce our friend to come to
London--I imagine he would be fairly safe now if he kept out of your
husband's way--what would happen to me?"

"You!" she murmured, glancing at him from behind her fan and then
dropping her eyes.

"Certainly--me!" he continued. "Don't you think that I should be doing
myself a very ill turn if I brought you two together? I have very few
friends, and I cannot afford to lose one. I am quite sure that you still
care for him."

She shook her head.

"Not a scrap!" she declared.

"Then why did you put that advertisement in the paper?" Ruff asked, with
smooth but swift directness.

She was not quick enough to parry his question. He read the truth in her
disconcerted face. Knowing it now for a certainty, he hastened to her
aid.

"Forgive me," he said, looking away. "I should not have asked that
question--it is not my business. I will write to Fitzgerald. I will tell
him that you want to see him, and that I think it would be safe for him
to come to London."

Maud recovered herself quickly. She thanked him with her eyes as well as
her words.

"And you needn't be jealous, really," she whispered behind her fan. "I
only want to see him once for a few minutes--to ask a question. After
that, I don't care what becomes of him."

A poor sort of Delilah, really, with her flushed face, her too
elaborately coiffured hair with its ugly ornament, her ready-made
evening dress with its cheap attempts at smartness, her cleaned gloves,
indifferent shoes. But Peter Ruff thought otherwise.

"You mean that, after I have found him for you, you will still come out
with me again sometimes?" he asked wistfully.

"Of course!" she answered. "Whenever I can without John knowing," she
added, with an unpleasant little laugh. "If you only knew how I loved
the music and the theatres, and this sort of life! What a good time your
wife would have, Mr. Ruff!" she added archly.

It was no joking matter with him. He had to remember that he was, in
effect, her tool, that she was making use of him, willing to betray her
former lover at her husband's bidding. It was enough to make him, on
his side, burn for revenge! Yet he put the thought away from him with
a shiver. She was still the woman he had loved--she was still sacred to
him! That night he pleaded an engagement, and sent her home in a taxicab
alone.

John Dory, waiting patiently at home for his wife's return, felt a
certain uneasiness when she swept into their little sitting room in all
her cheap splendour, with flushed cheeks--an obvious air of satisfaction
with herself and disdain for her immediate surroundings. John Dory was
a commonplace looking man--the absence of his collar, and his somewhat
shabby carpet slippers, did not improve his appearance. He had
neglected to shave, and he was drinking beer. At headquarters he was not
considered quite the smart young officer which he had once shown signs
of becoming. He looked at his wife with darkening face, and his wife, on
her part, thought of Peter Ruff in his immaculate evening clothes.

"Well," he remarked, grumblingly, "you seem to find a good deal of
pleasure in this gadding about!"

She threw her soiled fan on the table.

"If I do," she answered, "you are not the one to sit there and reproach
me with it, are you?"

"It's gone far enough, anyway," John Dory said. "It's gone further than
I meant it to go. Understand me, Maud--it's finished! I'll find your old
sweetheart for myself."

She laughed heartily.

"You needn't trouble," she answered, with a little toss of the head.
"I am not such a fool as you seem to think me. Mr. Ruff has made an
appointment with him."

There was a change in John Dory's face. The man's eyes were bright--they
almost glittered.

"You mean that your friend Mr. Ruff is going to produce Spencer
Fitzgerald?" he exclaimed.

"He has promised to," she answered. "John," she declared, throwing
herself into an easy-chair, "I feel horrid about it. I wonder what Mr.
Ruff will think when he knows!"

"You can feel how you like," John Dory answered bluntly, "so long as I
get the handcuffs on Spencer Fitzgerald's wrists!"

She shuddered. She looked at her husband with distaste.

"Don't talk about it!" she begged sharply. "It makes me feel the meanest
creature that ever crawled. I can't help feeling, too, that Mr. Ruff
will think me a wretch--quite the gentleman he's been all the time! I
never knew any one half so nice!"

John Dory set down his empty glass.

"I wonder," he said, looking at her thoughtfully, "what made him take
such a fancy to you! Rather sudden, wasn't it, eh?"

Maud tossed her head.

"I don't see anything so wonderful about that," she declared.

"Listen to me, Maud," her husband said, rising to his feet. "You
aren't a fool--not quite. You've spent some time with Peter Ruff.
How much--think carefully--how much does he remind you of Spencer
Fitzgerald?"

"Not at all," she answered promptly. "Why, he is years older, and though
Spencer was quite the gentleman, there's something about Mr. Ruff, and
the way he dresses and knows his way about--well, you can tell he's been
a gentleman all his life."

John Dory's face fell.

"Think again," he said.

She shook her head.

"Can't see any likeness," she declared. "He did remind me a little of
him just at first, though," she added, reflectively--"little things he
said, and sort of mannerisms. I've sort of lost sight of them the last
few times, though."

"When is this meeting with Fitzgerald to come off?" John Dory asked
abruptly.

She did not answer him at once. A low, triumphant smile had parted her
lips.

"To-morrow night," she said; "he is to meet me in Mr. Ruff's office."

"At what time?" John Dory asked.

"At eight o'clock," she answered. "Mr. Ruff is keeping his office open
late on purpose. Spencer thinks that afterwards he is going to take me
out to dinner."

"You are sure of this?" John Dory asked eagerly. "You are sure that the
man Ruff does not suspect you? You believe he means that you shall meet
Fitzgerald?"

"I am sure of it," she answered. "He is even a little jealous," she
continued, with an affected laugh. "He told me--well, never mind!"

"He told you what?" John Dory asked.

She laughed.

"Never you mind," she said. "I have done what you asked me anyway.
If Mr. Ruff had not found me an agreeable companion he would not have
bothered about getting Spencer to meet me. And now he's done it," she
added, "I do believe he's a little jealous."

John Dory glared, but he said nothing. It seemed to him that his hour of
revenge was close at hand!

It was the first occasion upon which words of this sort had passed
between Peter Ruff and his secretary. There was no denying the fact
that Miss Violet Brown was in a passion. It was an hour past the time
at which she usually left the office. For an hour she had pleaded, and
Peter Ruff remained unmoved.

"You are a fool!" she cried to him at last. "I am a fool, too, that I
have ever wasted my thoughts and time upon you. Why can't I make you
see? In every other way, heaven knows, you are clever enough! And yet
there comes this vulgar, commonplace, tawdry little woman from heaven
knows where, and makes such a fool of you that you are willing to fling
away your career--to hold your wrists out for John Dory's handcuffs!"

"My dear Violet," Peter Ruff answered deprecatingly, "you really worry
me--you do indeed!"

"Not half so much as you worry me," she declared. "Look at the time.
It's already past seven. At eight o'clock Mrs. Dory--your Maud--is
coming in here hoping to find her old sweetheart."

"Why not?" he murmured.

"Why not, indeed?" Miss Brown answered angrily. "Don't you know--can't
you believe--that close on her heels will come her husband--that Mr.
Spencer Fitzgerald, if ever he comes to life in this room, will leave it
between two policemen?"

Peter Ruff sighed.

"What a pessimist you are, my dear Violet!" he said.

She came up to him and laid her hands upon his shoulders.

"Peter," she said, "I will tell you something--I must! I am fond of you,
Peter. I always have been. Don't make me miserable if there is no need
for it. Tell me honestly--do you really believe in this woman?"

He removed her hands gently, and raised them to his lips.

"My dear girl," he said, "I believe in every one until I find them
out. I look upon suspicion as a vice. But, at the same time," he added,
"there are always certain precautions which one takes."

"What precautions can you take?" she cried. "Can you sit there and make
yourself invisible? John Dory is not a fool. The moment he is in this
room with the door closed behind him, it is the end."

"We must hope not," Peter Ruff said cheerfully. "There are other things
which may happen, you know."

She turned away from him a little drearily.

"You do not mind if I stay?" she said. "I am not working to-night.
Perhaps, later on, I may be of use!"

"As you will," he answered. "You will excuse me for a little time, won't
you? I have some preparations to make."

She turned her head away from him. He left the room and ascended the
stairs to his own apartments.

Eight o'clock was striking from St. Martin's Church when the door of
Peter Ruff's office was softly opened and closed again. A man in a
slouch hat and overcoat entered, and after feeling along the wall for a
moment, turned up the electric light. Violet Brown rose from her place
with a little sob. She stretched out her hand to him.

"Peter!" she cried. "Peter!"

"My name," the newcomer said calmly, "is Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald."

"Oh, listen to me!" she begged. "There is still time, if you hurry.
Think how many clever men before you have been deceived by the woman
in whom they trusted. Please, please go! Hurry upstairs and put those
things away."

"Madam," the newcomer said, "I am much obliged to you for your interest,
but I think that you are making a mistake. I have come here to meet--"

He stopped short. There was a soft knocking at the door. A stifled
scream broke from Violet Brown's lips.

"It is too late!" she cried. "Peter! Peter!"

She sank into her chair and covered her face with her hands. The door
was opened and Maud came in. When she saw who it was who sat in Peter
Ruff's place, she gave a little cry. Perhaps after all, she had not
believed that this thing would happen.

"Spencer!" she cried, "Spencer! Have you really come back?"

He held out his hands.

"You are glad to see me?" he asked.

She came slowly forward. The man rose from his place and came towards
her with outstretched hands. Then through the door came John Dory, and
one caught a glimpse of others behind him.

"If my wife is not glad to see you, Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald," he aid, in
a tone from which he vainly tried to keep the note of triumph, "I can
assure you that I am. You slipped away from me cleverly at Daisy Villa,
but this time I think you will not find it so easy."

Maud shrank back, and her husband took her place. But Mr. Spencer
Fitzgerald looked upon them both as one who looks upon figures in a
dream. Miss Brown rose hurriedly from her seat. She came over to him and
thrust her arm through his.

"Peter," she said, taking his hand in hers, "don't shoot. It isn't worth
while. You should have listened to me."

The little man in the gold-rimmed spectacles looked at her, looked at
Mr. John Dory, looked at the woman who was shrinking back now against
the wall.

"Really," he said, "this is the most extraordinary situation in which I
ever found myself!"

"We will help you to realise it," John Dory cried, and the triumph in
his tone had swelled into a deeper note. "I came here to arrest Mr.
Fitzgerald, but I hear this young lady call you 'Peter.' Perhaps this
may be the solution--"

The little man struck the table with the flat of his hand.

"Come," he said, "this is getting a bit too thick. First of all--you,"
he said, turning to Miss Brown--"my name is not Peter, and I have no
idea of shooting anybody. As for that lady against the wall, I don't
know her--never saw her before in my life. As for you," he added,
turning to John Dory, "you talk about arresting me--what for?"

Mr. John Dory smiled.

"There is an old warrant," he said, "which I have in my pocket, but I
fancy that there are a few little things since then which we may have to
enquire into."

"This beats me!" the little man declared. "Who do you think I am?"

"Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald, to start with," John Dory said. "It seems to me
not impossible that we may find another pseudonym for you."

"You can find as many as you like," the little man answered testily,
"but my name is James Fitzgerald, and I am an actor employed at the
Shaftesbury Theatre, as I can prove with the utmost ease. I never called
myself Spencer; nor, to my knowledge, was I ever called by such a name.
Nor, as I remarked before, have I ever seen any one of you three people
before with the exception of Miss Brown here, whom I have seen on the
stage."

John Dory grunted.

"It was Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald," he said, "a clerk in Howell & Wilson's
bookshop, who leapt out of the window of Daisy Villa two years ago. It
may be Mr. James Fitzgerald now. Gentlemen of your profession have a
knack of changing their names."

"My profession's as good as yours, anyway!" the little man exclaimed.
"We aren't all fools in it! My friend Mr. Peter Ruff said to me that
there was a young lady whom I used to know who was anxious to meet me
again, and would I step around here about eight o'clock. Here I am, and
all I can say is, if that's the young lady, I never saw her before in my
life."

There was a moment's breathless silence. Then the door was softly
opened. Violet Brown went staggering back like a woman who sees a
ghost. She bit her lips till the blood came. It was Peter Ruff who stood
looking in upon them--Peter Ruff, carefully dressed in evening clothes,
his silk hat at exactly the correct angle, his coat and white kid gloves
upon his arm.

"Dear me," he said, "you don't seem to be getting on very well! Mr.
Dory," he added, with a note of surprise in his tone, "this is indeed an
unexpected pleasure!"

The man who stood by the desk turned to him. The others were stricken
dumb.

"Look here," he said, "there's some mistake. You told me to come here
at eight o'clock to meet a young lady whom I used to know. Well, I never
saw her before in my life," he added, pointing to Maud. "There's a
man there who wants to arrest me--Lord knows what for! And here's Miss
Brown, whom I have seen at the theatre several times but who never
condescended to speak to me before, telling me not to shoot! What's it
all about, Ruff? Is it a practical joke?"

Peter Ruff laid down his coat and hat, and sat upon the table with his
hands in his pockets.

"Is it possible," he said, "that I have made a mistake? Isn't your
second name Spencer?"

The man shook his head.

"My name is James Fitzgerald," he said. "I haven't missed a day at the
Shaftesbury Theatre for three years, as you can find out by going
round the corner. I never called myself Spencer, I was never clerk in a
bookshop, and I never saw that lady before in my life."

Maud came out from her place against the wall, and leaned eagerly
forward. John Dory turned his head slowly towards his wife. A sickening
fear had arisen in his heart--gripped him by the throat. Fooled once
more, and by Peter Ruff!

"It isn't Spencer!" Maud said huskily. "Mr. Ruff," she added, turning
to him, "you know very well that this is not the Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald
whom you promised to bring here to-night--Mr. Spencer Fitzgerald to whom
I was once engaged."

Peter Ruff pointed to the figure of her husband.

"Madam," he said, "my invitation did not include your husband."

John Dory took a step forward, and laid his hands upon the shoulders of
the man who called himself Mr. James Fitzgerald. He looked into his face
long and carefully. Then he turned away, and, gripping his wife by the
arm, he passed out of the room. The door slammed behind him. The sound
of heavy footsteps was heard descending to the floor below.

Violet Brown crossed the room to where Peter Ruff was still sitting with
a queer look upon his face, and, gripping him by the shoulders, shook
him.

"How dare you!" she exclaimed. "How dare you! Do you know that I have
nearly cried my eyes out?"

Peter Ruff came back from the world into which, for the moment, his
thoughts had taken him.

"Violet," he said, "you have known me for some years. You have been my
secretary for some months. If you choose still to take me for a fool, I
cannot help it."

"But," she exclaimed, pointing to Mr. James Fitzgerald--

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I have been practising on him for some time," he said, with an air of
self-satisfaction.

"A thin, mobile face, you see, and plenty of experience in the art of
making up. It is astonishing what one can do if one tries."

Mr. James Fitzgerald picked up his hat and coat.

"It was worth more than five quid," he growled; "when I saw the
handcuffs in that fellow's hand, I felt a cold shiver go down my spine."

Peter Ruff counted out two banknotes and passed them to his confederate.

"You have earned the money," he said. "Go and spend it. Perhaps,
Violet," he added, turning towards her, "I have been a little
inconsiderate. Come and have dinner with me, and forget it."

She drew a little sigh.

"You are sure," she murmured, "that you wouldn't rather take Maud?"



CHAPTER VI. THE LITTLE LADY FROM SERVIA


Westward sped the little electric brougham, driven without regard to
police regulations or any rule of the road: silent and swift, wholly
regardless of other vehicles--as though, indeed, its occupants were
assuming to themselves the rights of Royalty. Inside, Peter Ruff, a
little breathless, was leaning forward, tying his white cravat with the
aid of the little polished mirror set in the middle of the dark green
cushions. At his right hand was Lady Mary, watching his proceedings with
an air of agonised impatience.

"Let me tell you--" she begged.

"Kindly wait till I have tied this and put my studs in," Peter Ruff
interrupted. "It is impossible for me to arrive at a ball in this
condition, and I cannot give my whole attention to more than one thing
at a time."

"We shall be there in five minutes!" she exclaimed. "What is the good,
unless you understand, of your coming at all?"

Peter Ruff surveyed his tie critically. Fortunately, it pleased him.
He began to press the studs into their places with firm fingers. Around
them surged the traffic of Piccadilly; in front, the gleaming arc of
lights around Hyde Park Corner. They had several narrow escapes. Once
the brougham swayed dangerously as they cut in on the wrong side of an
island lamp-post. A policeman shouted after them, another held up his
hand--the driver of the brougham took no notice.

"I am ready," Peter Ruff said, quietly.

"My younger brother--Maurice," she began, breathlessly--"you've never
met him, I know, but you've heard me speak of him. He is private
secretary to Sir James Wentley--"

"Minister for Foreign Affairs?" Ruff asked, swiftly.

"Yes! Maurice wants to go in for the Diplomatic Service. He is a dear,
and so clever!"

"Is it Maurice who is in trouble?" Peter Ruff asked. "Why didn't he come
himself?"

"I am trying to explain," Lady Mary protested. "This afternoon he had an
important paper to turn into cipher and hand over to the Prime Minister
at the Duchess of Montford's dance to-night. The Prime Minister will
arrive in a motor car from the country at about two o'clock, and the
first thing he will ask for will be that paper. It has been stolen!"

"At what time did your brother finish copying it, and when did he
discover its loss?" Ruff asked, with a slight air of weariness. These
preliminary enquiries always bored him.

"He finished it in his own rooms at half-past seven," Lady Mary
answered. "He discovered its loss at eleven o'clock--directly he had
arrived at the ball."

"Why didn't he come to me himself?" Peter Ruff asked. "I like to have
these particulars at first hand."

"He is in attendance upon Sir James at the ball," Lady Mary answered.
"There is trouble in the East, as you know, and Sir James is expecting
dispatches to-night. Maurice is not allowed to leave."

"Has he told Sir James yet?"

"He had not when I left," Lady Mary answered. "If he is forced to do so,
it will be ruin! Mr. Ruff, you must help us Maurice is such a dear,
but a mistake like this, at the very beginning of his career, would be
fatal. Here we are. That is my brother waiting just inside the hall."

A young man came up to them in the vestibule. He was somewhat pale, but
otherwise perfectly self-possessed. From the shine of his glossy black
hair to the tips of his patent boots he was, in appearance, everything
that a young Englishman of birth and athletic tastes could hope to be.
Peter Ruff liked the look of him. He waited for no introduction, but
laid his hand at once upon the young man's shoulder.

"Between seven-thirty and arriving here," he said, drawing him on one
side--"quick! Tell me, whom did you see? What opportunities were there
of stealing the paper, and by whom?"

"I finished it at five and twenty past seven," the young man said,
"sealed it in an official envelope, and stood it up on my desk by the
side of my coat and hat and muffler, which my servant had laid there,
ready for me to put on. My bedroom opens out from my sitting room. While
I was dressing, two men called for me--Paul Jermyn and Count von Hern.
They walked through to my bedroom first, and then sat together in the
sitting room until I came out. The door was wide open, and we talked all
the time."

"They called accidentally?" Peter Ruff asked.

"No--by appointment," the young man replied. "We were all coming on here
to the dance, and we had agreed to dine together first at the Savoy."

"You say that you left the paper on your desk with your coat and hat?"
Peter Ruff asked. "Was it there when you came out?"

"Apparently so," the young man answered. "It seemed to be standing in
exactly the same place as where I had left it. I put it into my breast
pocket, and it was only when I arrived here that I fancied the envelope
seemed lighter. I went off by myself and tore it open. There was nothing
inside but half a newspaper!"

"What about the envelope?" Peter Ruff asked. "That must have been the
same sort of one as you had used or you would have noticed it?"

"It was," the Honorable Maurice answered.

"It was a sort which you kept in your room?"

"Yes!" the young man admitted.

"The packet was changed, then, by some one in your room, or some one who
had access to it," Peter Ruff said. "How about your servant?"

"It was his evening off. I let him put out my things and go at seven
o'clock."

"You must tell me the nature of the contents of the packet," Peter Ruff
declared. "Don't hesitate. You must do it. Remember the alternative."

The young man did hesitate for several moments, but a glance into his
sister's appealing face decided him.

"It was our official reply to a secret communication from Russia
respecting--a certain matter in the Balkans."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"Where is Count von Hern?" he asked abruptly.

"Inside, dancing."

"I must use a telephone at once," Peter Ruff said. "Ask one of the
servants here where I can find one."

Peter Ruff was conducted to a gloomy waiting room, on the table of
which stood a small telephone instrument. He closed the door, but he
was absent for only a few minutes. When he rejoined Lady Mary and her
brother they were talking together in agitated whispers. The latter
turned towards him at once.

"Do you mean that you suspect Count von Hern?" he asked, doubtfully. "He
is a friend of the Danish Minister's, and every one says that he's
such a good chap. He doesn't seem to take the slightest interest in
politics--spends nearly all his time hunting or playing polo."

"I don't suspect any one," Peter Ruff answered. "I only know that Count
von Hern is an Austrian spy, and that he took your paper! Has he been
out of your sight at all since you rejoined him in the sitting room? I
mean to say--had he any opportunity of leaving you during the time you
were dining together, or did he make any calls en route, either on the
way to the Savoy or from the Savoy here?"

The young man shook his head.

"He has not been out of my sight for a second."

"Who is the other man--Jermyn?" Peter Ruff asked. "I never heard of
him."

"An American--cousin of the Duchess. He could not have had the slightest
interest in the affair."

"Please take me into the ballroom," Peter Ruff said to Lady Mary. "Your
brother had better not come with us. I want to be as near the Count von
Hern as possible."

They passed into the crowded rooms, unnoticed, purposely avoiding the
little space where the Duchess was still receiving the late comers among
her guests. They found progress difficult, and Lady Mary felt her heart
sink as she glanced at the little jewelled watch which hung from her
wrist. Suddenly Peter Ruff came to a standstill.

"Don't look for a moment," he said, "but tell me as soon as you can--who
is that tall young man, like a Goliath, talking to the little dark
woman? You see whom I mean?"

Lady Mary nodded, and they passed on. In a moment or two she answered
him.

"How strange that you should ask!" she whispered in his ear. "That is
Mr. Jermyn."

They were on the outskirts now of the ballroom itself. One of Lady
Mary's partners came up with an open programme and a face full of
reproach.

"Do please forgive me, Captain Henderson," Lady Mary begged. "I have
hurt my foot, and I am not dancing any more."

"But surely I was to take you in to supper?" the young officer
protested, good-humouredly. "Don't tell me that you are going to cut
that?"

"I am going to cut everything to-night with everybody," Lady Mary said.
"Please forgive me. Come to tea to-morrow and I'll explain."

The young man bowed, and, with a curious glance at Ruff, accepted his
dismissal. Another partner was simply waved away.

"Please turn round and come back," Peter Ruff said. "I want to see those
two again."

"But we haven't found Count von Hern yet," she protested. "Surely that
is more important, is it not? I believe that I saw him dancing just
now--there, with the tall girl in yellow."

"Never mind about him, for the moment," Ruff answered. "Walk down this
corridor with me. Do you mind talking all the time, please? It will
sound more natural, and I want to listen."

The young American and his partner had found a more retired seat now,
about three quarters of the way down the pillared vestibule which
bordered the ballroom. He was bending over his companion with an air of
unmistakable devotion, but it was she who talked. She seemed, indeed,
to have a good deal to say to him. The slim white fingers of one hand
played all the time with a string of magnificent pearls. Her dark, soft
eyes--black as aloes and absolutely un-English--flashed into his. A
delightful smile hovered at the corners of her lips. All the time she
was talking and he was listening. Lady Mary and her partner passed by
unnoticed. At the end of the vestibule they turned and retraced their
steps. Peter Ruff was very quiet--he had caught a few of those rapid
words. But the woman's foreign accent had troubled him.

"If only she would speak in her own language!" he muttered.

Lady Mary's hand suddenly tightened upon his arm.

"Look!" she exclaimed. "That is Count von Hern!"

A tall, fair young man, very exact in his dress, very stiff in his
carriage, with a not unpleasant face, was standing talking to Jermyn and
his companion. Jermyn, who apparently found the intrusion an annoyance,
was listening to the conversation between the two, with a frown upon his
face and a general attitude of irritation. As Lady Mary and her
escort drew near, the reason for the young American's annoyance
became clearer--his two companions were talking softly, but with great
animation, in a foreign language, which it was obvious that he did not
understand. Peter Ruff's elbow pressed against his partner's arm, and
their pace slackened. He ventured, even, to pause for a moment, looking
into the ballroom as though in search of some one, and he had by no
means the appearance of a man likely to understand Hungarian. Then, to
Lady Mary's surprise, he touched the Count von Hern on the shoulder and
addressed him.

"I beg your pardon, sir," he said, "but I fancy that we accidentally
exchanged programmes, a few minutes ago, at the buffet. I have lost mine
and picked up one which does not belong to me. As we were standing side
by side, it is possibly yours."

"I believe not, sir," he answered, with that pleasant smile which had
gone such a long way toward winning him the reputation of being "a good
fellow" amongst a fairly large circle of friends. "I believe at any
rate," he added, glancing at his programme, "that this is my own. You
mistake me, probably, for some one else."

Peter Ruff, without saying a word, was actor enough to suggest that he
was unconvinced. The Count good-humouredly held out his programme.

"You shall see for yourself," he remarked. "That is not yours, is it?
Besides, I have not been to the buffet at all this evening."

Peter Ruff cast a swift glance down the programme which the Count had
handed him. Then he apologised profusely.

"I was mistaken," he admitted. "I am very sorry."

The Count bowed.

"It is of no consequence, sir," he said, and resumed his conversation.

Peter Ruff passed on with Lady Mary. At a safe distance, she glanced at
him enquiringly.

"It was his programme I wanted to see," Peter Ruff explained. "It is as
I thought. He has had four dances with the Countess--"

"Who is she?" Lady Mary asked, quickly.

"The little dark lady with whom he is talking now," Peter Ruff
continued. "He seems, too, to be going early. He has no dances reserved
after the twelfth. We will go downstairs at once, if you please. I must
speak to your brother."

"Have you been able to think of anything?" she asked, anxiously. "Is
there any chance at all, do you think?"

"I believe so," Peter Ruff answered. "It is most interesting. Don't
be too sanguine, though. The odds are against us, and the time is very
short. Is the driver of your electric brougham to be trusted?"

"Absolutely," she assured him. "He is an old servant."

"Will you lend him to me?" Peter Ruff asked, "and tell him that he is to
obey my instructions absolutely?"

"Of course," she answered. "You are going away, then?"

Peter Ruff nodded. He was a little sparing of words just then. The
thoughts were chasing one another through his brain. He was listening,
too, for the sweep of a dress behind.

"Is there nothing I can do?" Lady Mary begged, eagerly.

Peter Ruff shook his head. In the distance he saw the Honourable Maurice
come quickly toward them. With a firm but imperceptible gesture he waved
him away.

"Don't let your brother speak to me," he said. "We can't tell who is
behind. What time did you say the Prime Minister was expected?"

"At two o'clock," Lady Mary said, anxiously.

Peter Ruff glanced at his watch. It was already half an hour past
midnight.

"Very well," he said, "I will do what I can. If my theory is wrong, it
will be nothing. If I am right--well, there is a chance, anyhow. In the
meantime--"

"In the meantime?" she repeated, breathlessly.

"Take your brother back to the ballroom," Peter Ruff directed. "Make him
dance--dance yourself. Don't give yourselves away by looking anxious.
When the time is short--say at a quarter to two--he can come down here
and wait for me."

"If you don't come!" she exclaimed.

"Then we shall have lost," Peter Ruff said, calmly. "If you don't see
me again to-night, you had better read the newspapers carefully for the
next few days."

"You are going to do something dangerous!" she protested.

"There is danger in interfering at all in such a matter as this," he
answered, "but you must remember that it is not only my profession--it
is my hobby. Remember, too," he added, with a smile, "that I do not
often lose!"

For twenty minutes Peter Ruff sat in the remote corner of Lady Mary's
electric brougham, drawn up at the other side of the Square, and waited.
At last he pressed a button. They glided off. Before them was a large,
closed motor car. They started in discreet chase.

Fortunately, however, the chase was not a long one. The car which Peter
Ruff had been following was drawn up before a plain, solid-looking
house, unlit and of gloomy appearance. The little lady with the
wonderful eyes was already halfway up the flagged steps. Hastily lifting
the flap and looking behind as they passed, her pursuer saw her open the
door with a latchkey, and disappear. Peter Ruff pulled the check-string
and descended. For several moments he stood and observed the house
into which the lady whom he had been following had disappeared. Then he
turned to the driver.

"I want you to watch that house," he said, "never to take your eyes off
it. When I reappear from it, if I do at all, I shall probably be in a
hurry. Directly you see me be on your box ready to start. A good deal
may depend upon our getting away quickly."

"Very good, sir," the man answered. "How long am I to wait here for
you?"

Peter Ruff's lips twisted into a curious little smile.

"Until two o'clock," he answered. "If I am not out by then, you needn't
bother any more about me. You can return and tell your mistress exactly
what has happened."

"Hadn't I better come and try and get you out, sir?" the man asked.
"Begging your pardon, but her Ladyship told me that there might be queer
doings. I'm a bit useful in a scrap, sir," he added. "I do a bit of
sparring regularly."

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"If there's any scrap at all," he said, "you had better be out of it. Do
as I have said."

The motor car had turned round and disappeared now, and in a few moments
Peter Ruff stood before the door of the house into which the little lady
had disappeared. The problem of entrance was already solved for him. The
door had been left unlatched; only a footstool had been placed against
it inside. Peter Ruff, without hesitation, pushed the door softly open
and entered, replaced the footstool in its former position, and stood
with his back to the wall, in the darkest corner of the hall, looking
around him--listening intently. Nearly opposite the door of a room stood
ajar. It was apparently lit up, but there was no sound of any one moving
inside. Upstairs, in one of the rooms on the first floor, he could hear
light footsteps--a woman's voice humming a song. He listened to the
first few bars, and understanding became easier. Those first few bars
were the opening ones of the Servian national anthem!

With an effort, Peter Ruff concentrated his thoughts upon the immediate
present. The little lady was upstairs. The servants had apparently
retired for the night. He crept up to the half-open door and peered in.
The room, as he had hoped to find it, was empty, but Madame's easy-chair
was drawn up to the fire, and some coffee stood upon the hob. Stealthily
Peter Ruff crept in and glanced around, seeking for a hiding place. A
movement upstairs hastened his decision. He pushed aside the massive
curtains which separated this from a connecting room. He had scarcely
done so when light footsteps were heard descending the stairs.

Peter Ruff found his hiding place all that could have been desired. This
secondary room itself was almost in darkness, but he was just able to
appreciate the comforting fact that it possessed a separate exit into
the hall. Through the folds of the curtain he had a complete view of the
further apartment. The little lady had changed her gown of stiff white
satin for one of flimsier material, and, seated in the easy-chair, she
was busy pouring herself out some coffee. She took a cigarette from a
silver box, and lighting it, curled herself up in the chair and composed
herself as though to listen. To her as well as to Peter Ruff, as he
crouched in his hiding place, the moments seemed to pass slowly enough.
Yet, as he realised afterward, it could not have been ten minutes before
she sat upright in a listening attitude. There was some one coming!
Peter Ruff, too, heard a man's firm footsteps come up the flagged
stones.

The little lady sprang to her feet.

"Paul!" she exclaimed.

Paul Jermyn came slowly to meet her. He seemed a little out of breath.
His tie was all disarranged and his collar unfastened.

The little lady, however, noticed none of these things. She looked only
into his face.

"Have you got it?" she asked, eagerly.

He thrust his hand into his breast-coat pocket, and held an envelope out
toward her.

"Sure!" he answered. "I promised!"

She gave a little sob, and with the packet in her hand came running
straight toward the spot where Peter Ruff was hiding.

He shrank back as far as possible. She stopped just short of the
curtain, opened the drawer of a table which stood there, and slipped
the packet in. Then she came back once more to where Paul Jermyn was
standing.

"My friend!" she cried, holding out her hands--"my dear, dear friend!
Shall I ever be able to thank you enough?"

"Why, if you try," he answered, smiling, "I think that you could!"

She laid her hand upon his arm--a little caressing, foreign gesture.

"Tell me," she said, "how did you manage it?"

"We left the dance together," Jermyn said. "I could see that he wanted
to get rid of me, but I offered to take him in my motor car. I told the
man to choose some back streets, and while we were passing through one
of them, I took Von Hern by the throat. We had a struggle, of course,
but I got the paper."

"What did you do with Von Hern?" she asked.

"I left him on his doorstep," the young American answered. "He wasn't
really hurt, but he was only half conscious. I don't think he'll bother
any one to-night."

"You dear, brave man!" she murmured. "Paul, what am I to say to you?"

He laughed.

"That's what I'm here to ask," he declared. "You wouldn't give me my
answer at the ball. Perhaps you'll give it me now?"

They sprang apart. Ruff felt his nerves stiffen--felt himself
constrained to hold even his breath as he widened a little the crack
in the curtains. This was no stealthy entrance. The door had been flung
open. Von Hern, his dress in wild disorder, pale as a ghost, and with a
great bloodstain upon his cheek, stood confronting them.

"When you have done with your love-making," he called out, "I'll trouble
you to restore my property!"

The electric light gleamed upon a small revolver which flashed out
toward the young American. Paul Jermyn never hesitated for a moment. He
seized the chair by his side and flung it at Von Hern. There was a shot,
the crash of the falling chair, a cry from Jermyn, who never hesitated,
however, in his rush. The two men closed. A second shot went harmlessly
to the ceiling. The little lady stole away--stole softly across the room
toward the table. She opened the drawer. Suddenly the blood in her veins
was frozen into fear. From nowhere, it seemed to her, came a hand which
held her wrists like iron!

"Madam," Peter Ruff whispered from behind the curtain, "I am sorry to
deprive you of it, but this is stolen property."

Her screams rang through the room. Even the two men released one
another.

"It is gone! It is gone!" she cried. "Some one was hiding in the room!
Quick!"

She sprang into the hall. The two men followed her. The front door was
slammed. They heard flying footsteps outside. Von Hern was out first,
clearing the little flight of steps in one bound. Across the road he
saw a flying figure. A level stream of fire poured from his hand--twice,
three times. But Peter Ruff never faltered. Round the corner he tore.
The man had kept his word--the brougham was already moving slowly.

"Jump in, sir," the man cried. "Throw yourself in. Never mind about the
door."

They heard the shouts behind. Peter Ruff did as he was bid, and sat upon
the floor, raising himself gradually to the seat when they had turned
another corner. Then he put his head out of the window.

"Back to the Duchess of Montford's!" he ordered.

The latest of the guests had ceased to arrive--a few were already
departing. It was an idle time, however, with the servants who loitered
in the vestibules of Montford House, and they looked with curiosity upon
this strange guest who arrived at five minutes to two, limping a little,
and holding his left arm in his right hand. One footman on the threshold
nearly addressed him, but the words were taken out of his mouth when he
saw Lady Mary and her brother--the Honorable Maurice Sotherst--hasten
forward to greet him.

Peter Ruff smiled upon them benignly.

"You can take the paper out of my breast-coat pocket," he said.

The young man's fingers gripped it. Through Lady Mary's great
thankfulness, however, the sudden fear came shivering.

"You are hurt!" she whispered. "There is blood on your sleeve."

"Just a graze," Peter Ruff answered. "Von Hern wasn't much good at a
running target. Back to the ballroom, young man," he added. "Don't you
see who's coming?"

The Prime Minister came up the tented way into Montford House. He, too,
wondered a little at the man whom he met on his way out, holding his
left arm, and looking more as though he had emerged from a street fight
than from the Duchess of Montford's ball. Peter Ruff went home smiling.



CHAPTER VII. THE DEMAND OF THE DOUBLE-FOUR


It was about this time that Peter Ruff found among his letters
one morning a highly-scented little missive, addressed to him in a
handwriting with which he had once been familiar. He looked at it for
several moments before opening it. Even as the paper cutter slid through
the top of the envelope, he felt that he had already divined the nature
of its contents.


FRIVOLITY THEATRE

March 10th

MY DEAR Mr. RUFF: I expect that you will be surprised to hear from me
again, but I do hope that you will not be annoyed. I know that I behaved
very horridly a little time ago, but it was not altogether my fault, and
I have been more sorry for it than I can tell you--in fact, John and I
have never been the same since, and for the present, at any rate, I have
left him and gone on the stage. A lady whom I knew got me a place in the
chorus here, and so far I like it immensely.

Won't you come and meet me after the show to-morrow night, and I will
tell you all about it? I should like so much to see you again.

MAUD.


Peter Ruff placed this letter in his breast-coat pocket, and withheld it
from his secretary's notice. He felt, however, very little pleasure at
the invitation it conveyed. He hesitated for some time, in fact, whether
to accept it or not. Finally, after his modest dinner that evening, he
bought a stall for the Frivolity and watched the piece. The girl he had
come to see was there in the second row of the chorus, but she certainly
did not look her best in the somewhat scant costume required by the
part. She showed no signs whatever of any special ability--neither her
dancing nor her singing seemed to entitle her to any consideration. She
carried herself with a certain amount of self-consciousness, and her
eyes seemed perpetually fixed upon the occupants of the stalls. Peter
Ruff laid down his glasses with something between a sigh and a groan.
There was something to him inexpressibly sad in the sight of his old
sweetheart so transformed, so utterly changed from the prim, somewhat
genteel young person who had accepted his modest advances with such
ladylike diffidence. She seemed, indeed, to have lost those very gifts
which had first attracted him. Nevertheless, he kept his appointment at
the stage-door.

She was among the first to come out, and she greeted him warmly--almost
noisily. With her new profession, she seemed to have adopted a different
and certainly more flamboyant deportment.

"I thought you'd come to-night," she declared, with an arch look.
"I felt certain I saw you in the stalls. You are going to take me to
supper, aren't you? Shall we go to the Milan?"

Peter Ruff assented without enthusiasm, handed her into a hansom, and
took his place beside her. She wore a very large hat, untidily put on;
some of the paint seemed still to be upon her face; her voice, too,
seemed to have become louder, and her manner more assertive. There were
obvious indications that she no longer considered brandy and soda an
unladylike beverage. Peter Ruff was not pleased with himself or proud of
his companion.

"You'll take some wine?" he suggested, after he had ordered, with a few
hints from her, a somewhat extensive supper.

"Champagne," she answered, decidedly. "I've got quite used to it,
nowadays," she went on. "I could laugh to think how strange it tasted
when you first took me out."

"Tell me," Peter Ruff said, "why you have left your husband?"

She laughed.

"Because he was dull and because he was cross," she answered, "and
because the life down at Streatham was simply intolerable. I think it
was a little your fault, too," she said, making eyes; at him across the
table. "You gave me a taste of what life was like outside Streatham, and
I never forgot it."

Peter Ruff did not respond--he led the conversation, indeed, into other
channels. On the whole, the supper was scarcely a success. Maud, who was
growing to consider herself something of a Bohemian, and who certainly
looked for some touch of sentiment on the part of her old admirer, was
annoyed by the quiet deference with which he treated her. She reproached
him with it once, bluntly.

"Say," she exclaimed, "you don't seem to want to be so friendly as you
did! You haven't forgiven me yet, I suppose?"

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"It is not that," he said, "but I think that you have scarcely done a
wise thing in leaving your husband. I cannot think that this life on the
stage is good for you."

She laughed, scornfully.

"Well," she said, "I never thought to have you preaching at me!"

They finished their supper. Maud accepted a cigarette and did her
best to change her companion's mood. She only alluded once more to her
husband.

"I don't see how I could have stayed with him, anyhow," she said. "You
know, he's been put back--he only gets two pounds fifteen a week now. He
couldn't expect me to live upon that."

"Put back?" Peter Ruff repeated.

She nodded.

"He seemed to have a lot of bad luck this last year," she said. "All his
cases went wrong, and they don't think so much of him at Scotland Yard
as they did. I am not sure that he hasn't begun to drink a little."

"I am sorry to hear it," Peter Ruff said, gravely.

"I don't see why you should be," she answered, bluntly. "He was no
friend of yours, nor isn't now. He may not be so dangerous as he was,
but if ever you come across him, you take my tip and be careful. He
means to do you a mischief some day, if he can. I am not sure," she
added, "that he doesn't believe that it was partly your fault about my
leaving home."

"I should be sorry for him to think that," Peter Ruff answered. "While
we are upon the subject, can't you tell me exactly why your husband
dislikes me so?"

"For one thing, because you have been up against him in several of his
cases, and have always won."

"And for the other?"

"Well," she said, doubtfully, "he seems to connect you in his
mind, somehow, with a boy who was in love with me once--Mr. Spencer
Fitzgerald--you know who I mean."

Ruff nodded.

"He still has that in his mind, has he?" he remarked.

"Oh, he's mad!" she declared. "However, don't let us talk about him any
more."

The lights were being put out. Peter Ruff paid his bill and they rose
together.

"Come down to the fiat for an hour or so," she begged, taking his arm.
"I have a dear little place with another girl--Carrie Pearce. I'll sing
to you, if you like. Come down and have one drink, anyhow."

Peter Ruff shook his head firmly.

"I am sorry," he said, "but you must excuse me. In some ways, I am very
old-fashioned," he added. "I never sit up late, and I hate music."

"Just drive as far as the door with me, then," she begged.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"You must excuse me," he said, handing her into the hansom. "And, Maud,"
he added--"if I may call you so--take my advice: give it up--go back to
your husband and stick to him--you'll be better off in the long run."

She would have answered him scornfully, but there was something
impressive in the crisp, clear words--in his expression, too, as he
looked into her eyes. She threw herself back in a corner of the cab with
an affected little laugh, and turned her head away from him.

Peter Ruff walked back into the cloak-room for his coat and hat, and
sighed softly to himself. It was the end of the one sentimental episode
of his life!

It had been the study of Peter Ruff's life, so far as possible, to
maintain under all circumstances an equable temperament, to refuse to
recognize the meaning of the word "nerves," and to be guided in all
his actions by that profound common sense which was one of his natural
gifts. Yet there were times when, like any other ordinary person, he
suffered acutely from presentiments. He left his rooms, for instance, at
five o'clock on the afternoon of the day following his supper with Maud,
suffering from a sense of depression for which he found it altogether
impossible to account. It was true that the letter which he had in his
pocket, the appointment which he was on his way to keep, were both of
them probable sources of embarrassment and annoyance, if not of danger.
He was being invited, without the option of refusal, to enter upon some
risky undertaking which would yield him neither fee nor reward. Yet his
common sense told him that it was part of the game. In Paris, he had
looked upon his admittance into the order of the "Double-Four" as one of
the stepping-stones to success in his career. Through them he had gained
knowledge which he could have acquired in no other way. Through them,
for instance, he had acquired the information that Madame la Comtesse de
Pilitz was a Servian patriot and a friend of the Crown Prince; and that
the Count von Hern, posing in England as a sportsman and an idler, was a
highly paid and dangerous Austrian spy. There had been other occasions,
too, upon which they had come to his aid. Now they had made an appeal
to him--an appeal which must be obeyed. His time--perhaps, even, his
safety--must be placed entirely at their disposal. It was only an
ordinary return a thing expected of him--a thing which he dared not
refuse. Yet he knew very well what he could not explain to them--that
the whole success of his life depended so absolutely upon his remaining
free from any suspicion of wrong-doing, that he had received his summons
with something like dismay, and proceeded to obey it with unaccustomed
reluctance.

He drove to Cirey's cafe in Regent Street, where he dismissed the driver
of his hansom and strolled in with the air of an habitue. He selected a
corner table, ordered some refreshment, and asked for a box of dominoes.
The place was fairly well filled. A few women were sitting about; a
sprinkling of Frenchmen were taking their aperitif; here and there a
man of affairs, on his way from the city, had called in for a glass
of vermouth. Peter Ruff looked them over, recognizing the
type--recognizing, even, some of their faces. Apparently, the person
whom he was to meet had not yet arrived.

He lit a cigarette and smoked slowly. Presently the door opened and a
woman entered in a long fur coat, a large hat, and a thick veil. She
raised it to glance around, disclosing the unnaturally pale face and
dark, swollen eyes of a certain type of Frenchwoman. She seemed to
notice no one in particular. Her eyes traveled over Peter Ruff without
any sign of interest. Nevertheless, she took a seat somewhere near his
and ordered some vermouth from the waiter, whom she addressed by
name. When she had been served and the waiter had departed, she looked
curiously at the dominoes which stood before her neighbor.

"Monsieur plays dominoes, perhaps?" she remarked, taking one of them
into her fingers and examining it. "A very interesting game!"

Peter Ruff showed her a domino which he had been covering with his
hand--it was a double four. She nodded, and moved from her seat to one
immediately next him.

"I had not imagined," Peter Ruff said, "that it was a lady whom I was to
meet."

"Monsieur is not disappointed, I trust?" she said, smiling. "If I talk
banalities, Monsieur must pardon it. Both the waiters here are spies,
and there are always people who watch. Monsieur is ready to do us a
service?"

"To the limits of my ability," Peter Ruff answered. "Madame will
remember that we are not in Paris; that our police system, if not so
wonderful as yours, is still a closer and a more present thing. They
have not the brains at Scotland Yard, but they are persistent--hard to
escape."

"Do I not know it?" the woman said. "It is through them that we send for
you. One of us is in danger."

"Do I know him?" Peter Ruff asked.

"It is doubtful," she answered. "Monsieur's stay in Paris was so brief.
If Monsieur will recognize his name--it is Jean Lemaitre himself."

Peter Ruff started slightly.

"I thought," he said, with some hesitation, "that Lemaitre did not visit
this country."

"He came well disguised," the woman answered. "It was thought to be
safe. Nevertheless, it was a foolish thing. They have tracked him
down from hotel to apartments, till he lives now in the back room of
a wretched little cafe in Soho. Even from there we cannot get him
away--the whole district is watched by spies. We need help."

"For a genius like Lemaitre," Peter Ruff said, thoughtfully, "to have
even thought of Soho, was foolish. He should have gone to Hampstead
or Balham. It is easy to fool our police if you know how. On the other
hand, they hang on to the scent like leeches when once they are on the
trail. How many warrants are there out against Jean in this country?"

"Better not ask that," the woman said, grimly. "You remember the raid on
a private house in the Holloway Road, two years ago, when two policemen
were shot and a spy was stabbed? Jean was in that--it is sufficient!"

"Are any plans made at all?" Peter Ruff asked.

"But naturally," the woman answered. "There is a motor car, even now, of
sixty-horse-power, stands ready at a garage in Putney. If Jean can once
reach it, he can reach the coast. At a certain spot near Southampton
there is a small steamer waiting. After that, everything is easy."

"My task, then," Peter Ruff said, thoughtfully, "is to take Jean
Lemaitre from this cafe in Soho, as far as Putney, and get him a fair
start?"

"It is enough," she answered. "There is a cordon of spies around the
district. Every day they seem to chose in upon us. They search the
houses, one by one. Only last night, the Hotel de Netherlands--a
miserable little place on the other side of the street--was suddenly
surrounded by policemen and every room ransacked. It may be our turn
to-night."

"In one hour's time," Peter Ruff said, glancing at his watch, "I shall
present myself as a doctor at the cafe. Tell me the address. Tell me
what to say which will insure my admission to Jean Lemaitre!"

"The cafe," she answered, "is called the Hotel de Flandres. You enter
the restaurant and you walk to the desk. There you find always Monsieur
Antoine. You say to him simply--'The Double-Four!' He will answer that
he understands, and he will conduct you at once to Lemaitre."

Ruff nodded.

"In the meantime," he said, "let it be understood in the cafe--if there
is any one who is not in the secret--that one of the waiters is sick. I
shall come to attend him."

She nodded thoughtfully.

"As well that way as any other," she answered. "Monsieur is very kind. A
bientot!"

She shook hands and they parted. Peter Ruff drove back to his rooms,
rang up an adjoining garage for a small covered car such as are usually
let out to medical men, and commenced to pack a small black bag with the
outfit necessary for his purpose. Now that he was actually immersed in
his work, the sense of depression had passed away. The keen stimulus of
danger had quickened his blood. He knew very well that the woman had not
exaggerated. There was no man more wanted by the French or the English
police than the man who had sought his aid, and the district in which he
had taken shelter was, in some respects, the very worst for his purpose.
Nevertheless, Peter Ruff, who believed, at the bottom of his heart, in
his star, went on with his preparations feeling morally certain that
Jean Lemaitre would sleep on the following night in his native land.

At precisely the hour agreed upon, a small motor brougham pulled
up outside the door of the Hotel de Flandres and its occupant--whom
ninety-nine men out of a hundred would at once, unhesitatingly, have
declared to be a doctor in moderate practice--pushed open the swing
doors of the restaurant and made his way to the desk. He was of medium
height; he wore a frock-coat--a little frayed; gray trousers which had
not been recently pressed; and thick boots.

"I understand that one of your waiters requires my attendance," he
said, in a tone not unduly raised but still fairly audible. "I am Dr.
Gilette."

"Dr. Gilette," Antoine repeated, slowly.


"And number Double-Four," the doctor murmured.

Antoine descended from his desk.

"But certainly, Monsieur!" he said. "The poor fellow declares that he
suffers. If he is really ill, he must go. It sounds brutal, but what can
one do? We have so few rooms here, and so much business. Monsieur will
come this way?"

Antoine led the way from the cafe into a very smelly region of narrow
passages and steep stairs.

"It is to be arranged?" Antoine whispered, as they ascended.

"Without a doubt," the doctor answered. "Were there spies in the cafe?"

"Two," Antoine answered.

The doctor nodded, and said no more. He mounted to the third story.
Antoine led him through a small sitting-room and knocked four times
upon the door of an inner room. It suddenly was opened. A man--unshaven,
terrified, with that nameless fear in his face which one sees reflected
in the expression of some trapped animal--stood there looking out at
them.

"'Double-Four'!" the doctor said, softly. "Go back into the room,
please. Antoine will kindly leave us."

"Who are you?" the man gasped.

"'Double-Four'!" the doctor answered. "Obey me, and be quick for your
life! Strip!"

The man obeyed.

Barely twenty minutes later, the doctor--still carrying his
bag--descended the stairs. He entered the cafe from a somewhat remote
door. Antoine hurried to meet him, and walked by his side through the
place. He asked many questions, but the doctor contented himself with
shaking his head. Almost in silence he left Antoine, who conducted him
even to the door of his motor. The proprietor of the cafe watched the
brougham disappear, and then returned to his desk, sighing heavily.

A man who had been sipping a liqueur dose at hand, laid down his paper.

"One of your waiters ill, did I understand?" he asked. Monsieur Antoine
was at once eloquent. It was the ill-fortune which had dogged him
for the last four months! The man had been taken ill there in the
restaurant. He was a Gascon--spoke no English--and had just arrived.
It was not possible for him to be removed at the moment, so he had been
carried to an empty bedroom. Then had come the doctor and forbidden
his removal. Now for a week he had lain there and several of his other
voyageurs had departed. One did not know how these things got about, but
they spoke of infection. The doctor, who had just left--Dr. Gilette of
Russell Square, a most famous physician--had assured him that there was
no infection--no fear of any. But what did it matter--that? People were
so hard to convince. Monsieur would like a cigar? But certainly! There
were here some of the best.

Antoine undid the cabinet and opened a box of Havanas. John Dory
selected one and called for another liqueur.

"You have trouble often with your waiters, I dare say," he remarked.
"They tell me that all Frenchmen who break the law in their own country,
find their way, sooner or later, to these parts. You have to take them
without characters, I suppose?"

Antoine lifted his shoulders.

"But what could one do?" he exclaimed. "Characters, they were easy
enough to write--but were they worth the paper they were written on?
Indeed no!"

"Not only your waiters," Dory continued, "but those who stay in the
hotels round here have sometimes an evil name."

Antoine shrugged his shoulders.

"For myself," he said, "I am particular. We have but a few rooms, but we
are careful to whom we let them."

"Do you keep a visitors' book?"

"But no, Monsieur!" Antoine protested. "For why the necessity? There are
so few who come to stay for more than the night--just now scarcely any
one at all."

There entered, at that moment, a tall, thin man dressed in dark clothes,
who walked with his hands in his overcoat pockets, as though it were a
habit. He came straight to Dory and handed him a piece of paper.

John Dory glanced it through and rose to his feet. A gleam of
satisfaction lit his eyes.

"Monsieur Antoine," he said, "I am sorry to cause you any inconvenience,
but here is my card. I am a detective officer from Scotland Yard, and
I have received information which compels me with your permission, to
examine at once the sleeping apartments in your hotel."

Antoine was fiercely indignant.

"But, Monsieur!" he exclaimed. "I do not understand! Examine my rooms?
But it is impossible! Who dares to say that I harbor criminals?"

"I have information upon which I can rely," John Dory answered, firmly.
"This comes from a man who is no friend of mine, but he is well-known.
You can read for yourself what he says."

Monsieur Antoine, with trembling fingers, took the piece of paper from
John Dory's hands. It was addressed to--


Mr. JOHN DORY, DETECTIVE:

If you wish to find Jean Lemaitre, search in the upper rooms of the
Hotel de Flandres. I have certain information that he is to be found
there.

PETER RUFF.


"Never," Antoine declared, "will I suffer such an indignity!"

Dory raised a police whistle to his lips.

"You are foolish," he said. "Already there is a cordon of men about the
place. If you refuse to conduct me upstairs I shall at once place you
under arrest."

Antoine, white with fear, poured himself out a liqueur of brandy.

"Well, well," he said, "what must be done, then! Come!"

He led the way out into that smelly network of passages, up the stairs
to the first floor. Room after room he threw open and begged Dory to
examine. Some of them were garishly furnished with gilt mirrors, cheap
lace curtains tied back with blue ribbons. Others were dark, miserable
holes, into which the fresh air seemed never to have penetrated. On the
third floor they reached the little sitting-room, which bore more traces
of occupation than some of the rooms below. Antoine would have passed
on, but Dory stopped him.

"There is a door there," he said. "We will try that."

"It is the sick waiter who lies within," Antoine protested. "Monsieur
can hear him groan."

There was, indeed, something which sounded like a groan to be heard, but
Dory was obstinate.

"If he is so ill," he demanded, "how is he able to lock the door on the
inside? Monsieur Antoine, that door must be opened."

Antoine knocked at it softly.

"Francois," he said, "there is another doctor here who would see you.
Let us in."

There was no answer, Antoine turned to his companion with a little shrug
of the shoulders, as one who would say--"I have done my best. What would
you have?"

Dory put his shoulder to the door.

"Listen," he shouted through the keyhole, "Mr. Sick Waiter, or whoever
you are, if you do not unlock this door, I am coming in!"

"I have no key," said a faint voice. "I am locked in. Please break open
the door."

"But that is not the Voice of Francois!" Antoine exclaimed, in
amazement.

"We'll soon see who it is," Dory answered.

He charged at the door fiercely. At the third assault it gave way. They
found themselves in a small back bedroom, and stretched on the floor,
very pale, and apparently only half-conscious, lay Peter Ruff. There was
a strong smell of chloroform about. John Dory threw open the window. His
fingers trembled a little. It was like Fate--this! At the end of every
unsuccessful effort there was this man--Peter Ruff!

"What the devil are you doing here?" he asked.

Peter Ruff groaned.

"Help me up," he begged, "and give me a little brandy."

Antoine set him in an easy-chair and rang the bell furiously.

"It will come directly!" he exclaimed. "But who are you?"

Peter Ruff waited for the brandy. When he had sipped it, he drew a
little breath as though of relief.

"I heard," he said, speaking still with an evident effort, "that
Lemaitre was here. I had secret information. I thought at first that I
would let you know--I sent you a note early this morning. Afterwards, I
discovered that there was a reward, and I determined to track him down
myself. He was in here hiding as a sick waiter. I do not think," Peter
Ruff added, "that Monsieur Antoine had any idea. I presented myself as
representing a charitable society, and I was shown here to visit him. He
was too clever, though, was Jean Lemaitre--too quick for me."

"You were a fool to come alone!" John Dory said. "Don't you know the
man's record? How long ago did he leave?"

"About ten minutes," Peter Ruff answered. "You must have missed him
somewhere as you came up. I crawled to the window and I watched him go.
He left the restaurant by the side entrance, and took a taxicab at the
corner there. It went northward toward New Oxford Street."

Dory turned on his heel--they heard him descending the stairs. Peter
Ruff rose to his feet.

"I am afraid," he said, as he plunged his head into a basin of water,
and came into the middle of the room rubbing it vigorously with a small
towel, "I am afraid that our friend John Dory will get to dislike me
soon! He passed out unnoticed, eh, Antoine?"

Antoine's face wore a look of great relief.

"There was not a soul who looked," he said. "We passed under the nose of
the gentleman from Scotland Yard. He sat there reading his paper; and he
had no idea. I watched Jean step into the motor. Even by now he is well
on his way southwards. Twice he changes from motor to train, and back.
They will never trace him."

Peter Ruff, who was looking amazingly better, sipped a further glass of
liqueur. Together he and Antoine descended to the street.

"Mind," Peter Ruff whispered, "I consider that accounts are squared
between me and 'Double-Four' now. Let them know that. This sort of thing
isn't in my line."

"For an amateur," Antoine said, bowing low, "Monsieur commands my
heartfelt congratulations!"



CHAPTER VIII. Mrs. BOGNOR'S STAR BOARDER

In these days, the duties of Miss Brown as Peter Ruff's secretary had
become multifarious. Together with the transcribing of a vast number of
notes concerning cases, some of which he undertook and some of which he
refused, she had also to keep his cash book, a note of his investments
and a record of his social engagements. Notwithstanding all these
demands upon her time, however, there were occasions when she found
herself, of necessity, idle. In one of these she broached the subject
which had often been in her mind. They were alone, and not expecting
callers. Consequently, she sat upon the hearthrug and addressed her
employer by his Christian name.

"Peter," she said softly, "do you remember the night when you came
through the fog and burst into my little flat?"

"Quite well," he answered, "but it is a subject to which I prefer that
you do not allude."

"I will be careful," she answered. "I only spoke of it for this reason.
Before you left, when we were sitting together, you sketched out the
career which you proposed for yourself. In many respects, I suppose, you
have been highly successful, but I wonder if it has ever occurred to
you that your work has not proceeded upon the lines which you first
indicated?"

He nodded.

"I think I know what you mean," he said. "Go on."

"That night," she murmured softly, "you spoke as a hunted man; you
spoke as one at war with Society; you spoke as one who proposes almost
a campaign against it. When you took your rooms here and called yourself
Peter Ruff, it was rather in your mind to aid the criminal than to
detect the crime. Fate seems to have decreed otherwise. Why, I wonder?"

"Things have gone that way," Peter Ruff remarked.

"I will tell you why," she continued. "It is because, at the bottom
of your heart, there lurks a strong and unconquerable desire for
respectability. In your heart you are on the side of the law and
established things. You do not like crime; you do not like criminals.
You do not like the idea of associating with them. You prefer the
company of law-abiding people, even though their ways be narrow. It
was part of that sentiment, Peter, which led you to fall in love with a
coal-merchant's daughter. I can see that you will end your days in the
halo of respectability."

Peter Ruff was a little thoughtful. He scratched his chin and
contemplated the tip of his faultless patent boot. Self-analysis
interested him, and he recognized the truth of the girl's words.

"You know, I am rather like that," he admitted. "When I see a family
party, I envy them. When I hear of a man who has brothers and sisters
and aunts and cousins, and gives family dinner-parties to family
friends, I envy him. I do not care about the loose ends of life. I do
not care about restaurant life, and ladies who transfer their regards
with the same facility that they change their toilettes. You have very
admirable powers of observation, Violet. You see me, I believe, as I
really am."

"That being so," she remarked, "what are you going to say to Sir Richard
Dyson?"

Peter Ruff was frank.

"Upon my soul," he answered, "I don't know!"

"You'll have to make up your mind very soon," she reminded him. "He is
coming here at twelve o'clock."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I shall wait until I hear what he has to say," he remarked.

"His letter gave you a pretty clear hint," Violet said, "that it was
something outside the law."

"The law has many outposts," Peter Ruff said. "One can thread one's
way in and out, if one knows the ropes. I don't like the man, but he
introduced me to his tailor. I have never had any clothes like those he
has made me."

She sighed.

"You are a vain little person," she said.

"You are an impertinent young woman!" he answered. "Get back to your
work. Don't you hear the lift stop?"

She rose reluctantly, and resumed her place in front of her desk.

"If it's risky," she whispered, leaning round towards him, "don't you
take it on. I've heard one or two things about Sir Richard lately."

Peter Ruff nodded. He, too, quitted his easy-chair, and took up a bundle
of papers which lay upon his desk. There was a sharp tap at the door.

"Come in!" he said.

Sir Richard Dyson entered. He was dressed quietly, but with the perfect
taste which was obviously an instinct with him, and he wore a big bunch
of violets in his buttonhole. Nevertheless, the spring sunshine seemed
to find out the lines in his face. His eyes were baggy--he had aged even
within the last few months.

"Well, Mr. Ruff," he said, shaking hands, "how goes it?"

"I am very well, Sir Richard," Peter Ruff answered. "Please take a
chair."

Sir Richard took the easy-chair, and discovering a box of cigarettes
upon the table, helped himself. Then his eyes fell upon Miss Brown.

"Can't do without your secretary?" he remarked.

"Impossible!" Peter Ruff answered. "As I told you before, I am her
guarantee that what you say to me, or before her, is spoken as though to
the dead."

Sir Richard nodded.

"Just as well," he remarked, "for I am going to talk about a man who I
wish were dead!"

"There are few of us," Peter Ruff said, "who have not our enemies."

"Have you any experience of blackmailers?" Sir Richard asked.

"In my profession," Peter Ruff answered, "I have come across such
persons."

"I have come to see you about one," Sir Richard proceeded. "Many years
ago, there was a fellow in my regiment who went to the bad--never mind
his name. He passes to-day as Ted Jones--that name will do as well as
another. I am not," Sir Richard continued, "a good-natured man, but some
devilish impulse prompted me to help that fellow. I gave him money three
or four times. Somehow, I don't think it's a very good thing to give a
man money. He doesn't value it--it comes too easily. He spends it and
wants more."

"There's a good deal of truth in what you say, Sir Richard," Peter Ruff
admitted.

"Our friend, for instance, wanted more," Sir Richard continued. "He came
to me for it almost as a matter of course. I refused. He came again; I
lost my temper and punched his head. Then his little game began."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"He had something to work upon, I suppose?" he remarked.

"Most certainly he had," Sir Richard admitted. "If ever I achieved
sufficient distinction in any branch of life to make it necessary that
my biography should be written, I promise you that you would find it in
many places a little highly colored. In other words, Mr. Ruff, I have
not always adhered to the paths of righteousness."

A faint smile flickered across Peter Ruff's face.

"Sir Richard," he said, "your candor is admirable."

"There was one time," Sir Richard continued, "when I was really on my
last legs. It was just before I came into the baronetcy. I had borrowed
every penny I could borrow. I was even hard put to it for a meal. I went
to Paris, and I called myself by another man's name. I got introduced to
a somewhat exclusive club there. My assumed name was a good one--it
was the name, in fact, of a relative whom I somewhat resembled. I was
accepted without question. I played cards, and I lost somewhere about
eighteen thousand francs."

"A sum," Peter Ruff remarked, "which you probably found it inconvenient
to pay."

"There was only one course," Sir Richard continued, "and I took it.
I went back the next night and gave checks for the amount of my
indebtedness--checks which had no more chance of being met than if I
were to draw to-night upon the Bank of England for a million pounds.
I went back, however, with another resolve. I was considered to have
discharged my liabilities, and we played again. I rose a winner of
something like sixty thousand francs. But I played to win, Mr. Ruff! Do
you know what that means?"

"You cheated!" Peter Ruff said, in an undertone.

"Quite true," Sir Richard admitted. "I cheated! There was a scandal, and
I disappeared. I had the money, and though my checks for the eighteen
thousand francs were met, there was a considerable balance in my
pocket when I escaped out of France. There was enough to take me out to
America--big game shooting in the far West. No one ever associated me
with the impostor who had robbed these young French noblemen--no one,
that is to say, except the person who passes by the name of Teddy
Jones."

"How did he get to know?" Peter Ruff asked.

"The story wouldn't interest you," Sir Richard answered. "He was in
Paris at the time--we came across one another twice. He heard the
scandal, and put two and two together. I shipped him off to Australia
when I came into the title. He has come back. Lately, I can tell you,
he has pretty well drained me dry. He has become a regular parasite a
cold-blooded leech. He doesn't get drunk now. He looks after his health.
I believe he even saves his, money. There's scarcely a week I don't hear
from him. He keeps me a pauper. He has brought me at last to that state
when I feel that there must be an ending!"

"You have come to seek my help," Peter Ruff said, slowly. "From what you
say about this man, I presume that he is not to be frightened?"

"Not for a single moment," Sir Richard answered. "The law has no terrors
for him. He is as slippery as an eel. He has his story pat. He even has
his witnesses ready. I can assure you that Mr. Teddy Jones isn't by any
means an ordinary sort of person."

"He is not to be bluffed," Peter Ruff said, slowly; "he is not to be
bribed. What remains?"

"I have come here," Sir Richard said, "for your advice, Mr. Ruff."

"The blackmailer," Peter Ruff said, "is a criminal."

"He is a scoundrel!" Sir Richard assented.

"He is not fit to live," Peter Ruff repeated.

"He contaminates the world with every breath he draws!" Sir Richard
assented.

"Perhaps," Peter Ruff said, "you had better give me his address, and the
name he goes under."

"He lives at a boarding-house in Russell Street, Bloomsbury," Sir
Richard said. "It is Mrs. Bognor's boarding-house. She calls it, I
believe, the 'American Home from Home.' The number is 17."

"A boarding-house," Peter Ruff repeated, thoughtfully. "Makes it a
little hard to get at him privately, doesn't it?"

"Fling him a bait and he will come to you," Sir Richard answered. "He is
an adventurer pure and simple, though perhaps you wouldn't believe it to
look at him now. He has grown fat on the money he has wrung from me."

"You had better leave the matter in my hands for a few days," Peter
Ruff said. "I will have a talk with this gentleman and see whether he is
really so unmanageable. If he is, there is, of course, only one way, and
for that way, Sir Richard, you would have to pay a little high."

"If I were to hear to-morrow," Sir Richard said quietly, "that Teddy
Jones was dead, I would give five thousand pounds to the man who brought
me the information!"

Peter Ruff nodded.

"It would be worth that," he said--"quite! I will drop you a line in the
course of the next few days."

Sir Richard took up his hat, lit another of Peter Ruff's cigarettes, and
departed. They heard the rattle of the lift as it descended. Then Miss
Brown turned round in her chair.

"Don't you do it, Peter!" she said solemnly. "The time has gone by for
that sort of thing. The man may be unfit to live, but you don't need to
risk as much as that for a matter of five thousand pounds."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"Quite right," he said; "quite right, Violet. At the same time, five
thousand pounds is an excellent sum. We must see what can be done."

Peter Ruff's method of seeing what could be done was at first the very
obvious one of seeking to discover any incidents in the past of the
person known as Teddy Jones likely to reflect present discredit upon him
if brought to light. From the first, it was quite clear that the career
of this gentleman had been far from immaculate. His researches proved,
beyond a doubt, that the gentleman in question had resorted, during
the last ten or fifteen years, to many and very questionable methods of
obtaining a living. At the same time, there was nothing which Peter
Ruff felt that the man might not brazen out. His present mode of life
seemed--on the surface, at any rate--to be beyond reproach. There was
only one association which was distinctly questionable, and it was in
this one direction, therefore, that Peter Ruff concentrated himself. The
case, for some reason, interested him so much that he took a close and
personal interest in it, and he was rewarded one day by discovering this
enemy of Sir Richard's sitting, toward five o'clock in the afternoon,
in a cafe in Regent Street, engrossed in conversation with a person
whom Peter Ruff knew to be a very black sheep indeed--a man who had been
tried for murder, and concerning whom there were still many unpleasant
rumors. From behind his paper in a corner of the cafe, Peter Ruff
watched these two men. Teddy Jones--or Major Edward Jones, as it seemed
he was now called--was a person whose appearance no longer suggested the
poverty against which he had been struggling most of his life. He was
well dressed and tolerably well turned out. His face was a little puffy,
and he had put on flesh during these days of his ease. His eyes, too,
had a somewhat furtive expression, although his general deportment was
one of braggadocio. Peter Ruff, quick always in his likes or dislikes,
found the man repulsive from the start. He felt that he would have a
genuine pleasure, apart from the matter of the five thousand pounds, in
accelerating Major Jones's departure from a world which he certainly did
not adorn.

The two men conducted their conversation in a subdued tone, which made
it quite impossible for Peter Ruff, in his somewhat distant corner, to
overhear a single word of it. It was obvious, however, that they were
not on the best of terms. Major Jones's companion was protesting, and
apparently without success, against some course of action or speech of
his companions. The conversation, on the other hand, never reached a
quarrel, and the two men left the place together apparently on ordinary
terms of friendliness. Peter Ruff at once quitted his seat and crossed
the room toward the spot where they had been sitting. He dived under the
table and picked up a newspaper--it was the only clue left to him as to
the nature of their conversation. More than once, Major Jones who had,
soon after their arrival, sent a waiter for it, had pointed to a certain
paragraph as though to give weight to his statements. Peter Ruff had
noticed the exact position of that paragraph. He smoothed out the paper
and found it at once. It was an account of the murder of a wealthy old
woman, living on the outskirts of a country village not far from London.
Peter Ruff's face did not change as he called for another vermouth and
read the description, slowly. Yet he was aware that he had possibly
stumbled across the very thing for which he had searched so urgently!
The particulars of the murder he already knew well, as at one time
he had felt inclined to aid the police in their so far fruitless
investigations. He therefore skipped the description of the tragedy,
and devoted his attention to the last paragraph, toward which he fancied
that the finger of Major Jones had been chiefly directed. It was a list
of the stolen property, which consisted of jewelry, gold and notes to a
very considerable amount. With the waiter's permission, he annexed the
paper, cut out the list of articles with a sharp penknife, and placed it
in his pocketbook before he left the cafe.

In the course of some of the smaller cases with which Peter Ruff had
been from time to time connected, he had more than once come into
contact with the authorities at Scotland Yard, and he had several
acquaintances there--not including Mr. John Dory--to whom, at times, he
had given valuable information. For the first time, he now sought some
return for his many courtesies. He drove straight from the cafe to
the office of the Chief of the Criminal Investigation Department. The
questions he asked there were only two, but they were promptly and
courteously answered. Peter Ruff left the building and drove back to
his rooms in a somewhat congratulatory frame of mind. After all, it was
chance which was the chief factor in the solution of so many of these
cases! Often he had won less success after months of untiring effort
than he had gained during that few minutes in the cafe in Regent Street.

Peter Ruff became an inmate of that very select boarding-house carried
on by Mrs. Bognor at number 17 Russell Street, Bloomsbury. He arrived
with a steamer trunk, an elaborate traveling-bag and a dressing-case;
took the best vacant room in the house, and dressed for dinner. Mrs.
Bognor looked upon him as a valuable addition to her clientele, and
introduced him freely to her other guests. Among these was Major Edward
Jones. Major Jones sat at Mrs. Bognor's right hand, and was evidently
the show guest of the boarding-house. Peter Ruff, without the least
desire to attack his position, sat upon her left and monopolized the
conversation. On the third night it turned, by chance, upon precious
stones. Peter Ruff drew a little chamois leather bag from his pocket.

"I am afraid," he said, "that my tastes are peculiar. I have been in the
East, and I have seen very many precious stones in their uncut state. To
my mind, there is nothing to be compared with opals. These are a few I
brought home from India. Perhaps you would like to look at them, Mrs.
Bognor."

They were passed round, amidst a little chorus of admiration.

"The large one with the blue fire," Peter Ruff remarked, "is, I think,
remarkably beautiful. I have never seen a stone quite like it."

"It is wonderful!" murmured the young lady who was sitting at Major
Jones's right hand. "What a fortunate man you are, Mr. Ruff, to have
such a collection of treasures!"

Peter Ruff bowed across the table. Major Jones, who was beginning to
feel that his position as show guest was in danger, thrust his hand
into his waistcoat pocket and produced a lady's ring, in which was set a
single opal.

"Very pretty stones," he remarked carelessly, "but I can't say I am very
fond of them. Here's one that belonged to my sister, and my grandmother
before her. I have it in my pocket because I was thinking of having the
stone reset and making a present of it to a friend of mine."

Peter Ruff's popularity waned--he had said nothing about making a
present to any one of even the most insignificant of his opals! And
the one which Major Jones now handed round was certainly a magnificent
stone. Peter Ruff examined it with the rest, and under the pretext
of studying the setting, gazed steadfastly at the inside through his
eyeglass. Major Jones, from the other side of the table, frowned, and
held out his hand for the ring.

"A very beautiful stone indeed!" Peter Ruff declared, passing it across
the tablecloth. "Really, I do not think that there is one in my little
collection to be compared with it. Have you many treasures like this,
Major Jones?"

"Oh, a few!" the Major answered carelessly, "family heirlooms, most of
them."

"You will have to give me the ring, Major Jones," the young lady on his
right remarked archly. "It's bad luck, you know, to give it to any one
who is not born in October, and my birthday is on the twelfth."

"My dear Miss Levey," Major Jones answered, whispering in her ear, "more
unlikely things have happened than that I should beg your acceptance of
this little trifle."

"Sooner or later," Peter Ruff said genially, "I should like to have a
little conversation with you, Major. I fancy that we ought to be able to
find plenty of subjects of common interest."

"Delighted, I'm sure!" the latter answered, utterly unsuspicious. "Shall
we go into the smoking-room now, or would you rather play a rubber
first?"

"If it is all the same to you," Peter Ruff said, "I think we will have a
cigar first. There will be plenty of time for bridge afterwards."

"May I offer you a cigar, sir?" Major Jones inquired, passing across a
well-filled case.

Peter Ruff sighed.

"I am afraid, Major," he said, "that there is scarcely time. You see, I
have a warrant in my pocket for your arrest, and I am afraid that by the
time we got to the station--"

Major Jones leaned forward in his chair. He gripped the sides tightly
with both hands. His eyes seemed to be protruding from his head.

"For my what?" he exclaimed, in a tone of horror.

"For your arrest," Peter Ruff explained calmly. "Surely you must have
been expecting it! During all these years you must have grown used to
expecting it at every moment!"

Major Jones collapsed. He looked at Ruff as one might look at a man who
has taken leave of his senses. Yet underneath it all was the coward's
fear!

"What are you talking about, man?" he exclaimed. "What do you mean?
Lower your voice, for heaven's sake! Consider my position here! Some
one might overhear! If this is a joke, let me tell you that it's a
d----d foolish one!"

Peter Ruff raised his eyebrows.

"I do not wish," he said, "to create a disturbance--my manner of coming
here should have assured you of that. At the same time, business is
business. I hold a warrant for your arrest, and I am forced to execute
it."

"Do you mean that you are a detective, then?" Major Jones demanded.

He was a big man, but his voice seemed to have grown very small indeed.

"Naturally," Peter Ruff answered. "I should not come here without
authority."

"What is the charge?" the other man faltered.

"Blackmail," Peter Ruff said slowly. "The information against you is
lodged by Sir Richard Dyson."

It seemed to Peter Ruff, who was watching his companion closely, that a
wave of relief passed over the face of the man who sat cowering in his
chair. He certainly drew a little gasp--stretched out his hands, as
though to thrust the shadow of some fear from him. His voice, when he
spoke, was stronger. Some faint show of courage was returning to him.

"There is some ridiculous mistake," he declared. "Let us talk this over
like sensible men, Mr. Ruff. If you will wait until I have spoken to Sir
Richard, I can promise you that the warrant shall be withdrawn, and that
you shall not be the loser."

"I am afraid it is too late for anything of that sort," Peter Ruff said.
"Sir Richard's patience has been completely exhausted by your repeated
demands."

"He never told me so," Major Jones whined. "I quite thought that he was
always glad to help an old friend. As a matter of fact, I had not meant
to ask him for anything else. The last few hundreds I had from him was
to have closed the thing up. It was the end."

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"No," he said, "it was not the end! It never would have been the end!
Sir Richard sought my advice, and I gave it him without hesitation.
Sooner or later, I told him, he would have to adopt different measures.
I convinced him. I represent those measures!"

"But the matter can be arranged," Major Jones insisted, with a little
shudder, "I am perfectly certain it can be arranged. Mr. Ruff, you are
not an ordinary police officer--I am sure of that. Give me a chance of
having an interview with Sir Richard before anything more is done.
I will satisfy him, I promise you that. Why, if we leave the place
together like this, every one here will get to know about it!"

"Be reasonable," Peter Ruff answered. "Of course everyone will get to
know about it! Blackmailing cases always excite a considerable amount of
interest. Your photograph will probably be in the Daily Mirror tomorrow
or the next day. In the meantime, I must trouble you to pay your
respects to Mrs. Bognor and to come with me."

"To Sir Richard's house?" Major Jones asked, eagerly.

"To the police-stations," Peter Ruff answered.

Major Jones did not rise. He sat for a few moments with his head buried
in his hands.

"Mr. Ruff," he said hoarsely, "listen to me. I have been fortunate
lately in some investments. I am not so poor as I was. I have my
check-book in my pocket, and a larger balance in the bank now than I
have ever had before. If I write you a check for, say, a hundred--no,
two!--five!" he cried, desperately, watching Peter Ruff's unchanging
face--"five hundred pounds, will you come round with me to Sir Richard's
house in a hansom at once?"

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"Five thousand pounds would not buy your liberty from me, Major Jones,"
he said.

The man became abject.

"Have pity, then," he pleaded. "My health is not good--I couldn't stand
imprisonment. Think of what it means to a man of my age suddenly to
leave everything worth having in life just because he may have imposed
a little on the generosity of a friend! Think how you would feel, and be
merciful!"

Peter Ruff shook his head slowly. His face was immovable, but there was
a look in his eyes from which the other man shrank.

"Major Jones," he said, "you ask me be merciful. You appeal to my pity.
For such as you I have no pity, nor have I ever shown any mercy. You
know very well, and I know, that when once the hand of the law touches
your shoulder, it will not be only a charge o' blackmail which the
police will bring against you!"

"There is nothing else--nothing else!" he cried. "Take half my fortune,
Mr. Ruff. Let me get away. Give me a chance--just a sporting chance!"

"I wonder," Peter Ruff said, "what chance that poor old lady in Weston
had? No, I am not saying you murdered her. You never had the pluck. Your
confederate did that, and you handled the booty. What were the initials
inside that ring you showed us to-night, Major Jones?"

"Let me go to my bedroom," he said, in a strange, far-away tone. "You
can come with me and stand outside."

Peter Ruff assented.

"To save scandal," he said, "yes!"

Three flights of stairs they climbed. When at last they reached the
door, the trembling man made one last appeal.

"Mr. Ruff," he said, "have a little mercy. Give me an hour's start--just
a chance for my life!"

Peter Ruff pushed him in the door.

"I am not a hard man," he said, "but I keep my mercy for men!"

He took the key from the inside of the door, locked it, and with the key
in his pocket descended to the drawing-room. The young lady who had sat
on Major Jones's right was singing a ballad. Suddenly she paused in the
middle of her song. The four people who were playing bridge looked up.
Mrs. Bognor screamed.

"What was that?" she asked quickly.

"It sounded," Peter Ruff said, "very much like revolver shot."

"I see," Sir Richard remarked, with a queer look in his eyes, as he
handed over a roll of notes to Peter Ruff, "the jury brought it in
'Suicide'! What I can't understand is--"

"Don't try," Peter Ruff interrupted briskly. "It isn't in the bond that
you should understand."

Sir Richard helped himself to a drink. A great burden had passed from
his shoulders, but he was not feeling at his best that morning. He could
scarcely keep his eyes from Peter Ruff.

"Ruff," he said, "I have known you some time, and I have known you to be
a square man. I have known you to do good-natured actions. I came to you
in desperation but I scarcely expected this!"

Peter Ruff emptied his own tumbler and took up his hat.

"Sir Richard," he said, "you are like a good many other people. Now that
the thing is done, you shrink from the thought of it. You even wonder
how I could have planned to bring about the death of this man. Listen,
Sir Richard. Pity for the deserving, or for those who have in them one
single quality, one single grain, of good, is a sentiment which deserves
respect. Pity for vermin, who crawl about the world leaving a poisonous
trail upon everything they touch, is a false and unnatural sentiment.
For every hopelessly corrupt man who is induced to quit this life there
is a more deserving one, somewhere or other, for whom the world is a
better place."

"So that, after all, you are a philanthropist, Mr. Ruff," Sir Richard
said, with a forced smile.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"A philosopher," he answered, buttoning up his notes.



CHAPTER IX. THE PERFIDY OF MISS BROWN


Peter Ruff came down to his office with a single letter in his hand,
bearing a French postmark. He returned his secretary's morning greeting
a little absently, and seated himself at his desk.

"Violet," he asked, "have you ever been to Paris?"

She looked at him compassionately.

"More times than you, I think, Peter," she answered.

He nodded.

"That," he exclaimed, "is very possible! Could you get ready to leave by
the two-twenty this afternoon?"

"What, alone?" she exclaimed.

"No--with me," he answered.

She shut down her desk with a bang.

"Of course I can!" she exclaimed. "What a spree!"

Then she caught sight of a certain expression on Peter Ruff's face, and
she looked at him wonderingly.

"Is anything wrong, Peter?" she asked.

"No," he answered, "I cannot say that anything is wrong. I have had an
invitation to present myself before a certain society in Paris of which
you have some indirect knowledge. What the summons means I cannot say."

"Yet you go?" she exclaimed.

"I go," he answered. "I have no choice. If I waited here twenty-four
hours, I should hear of it."

"They can have nothing against you," she said. "On the contrary, the
only time they have appealed for your aid, you gave it--very valuable
aid it must have been, too."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I cannot see," he admitted, "what they can have against me. And yet,
somehow, the wording of my invitation seemed to me a little ominous.
Perhaps," he added, walking to the window and standing looking out for a
moment, "I have a liver this morning. I am depressed. Violet, what does
it mean when you are depressed?"

"Shall you wear your gray clothes for traveling?" she asked, a little
irrelevantly.

"I have not made up my mind," Peter Ruff answered. "I thought of wearing
my brown, with a brown overcoat. What do you suggest?"

"I like you in brown," she answered, simply. "I should change, if I were
you."

He smiled faintly.

"I believe," he said, "that you have a sort of superstition that as I
change my clothes I change my humors."

"Should I be so very far wrong?" she asked. "Don't think that I am
laughing at you, Peter. The greatest men in the world have had their
foibles."

Peter Ruff frowned.

"We shall be away for several days," he said. "Be sure that you take
some wraps. It will be cold, crossing."

"Are you going to close the office altogether?" she asked.

Peter Ruff nodded.

"Put up a notice," he said--"'Back on Friday.' Pack up your books and
take them round to the Bank before you leave. The lift man will call you
a taxi-cab."

He watched her preparations with a sort of gloomy calm.

"I wish you'd tell me what is the matter with you?" she asked, as she
turned to follow her belongings.

"I do not know," Peter Ruff said. "I, suppose I am suffering from what
you would call presentiments. Be at Charing-Cross punctually."

"Why do you go at all?" she asked. "These people are of no further use
to you. Only the other day, you were saying that you should not accept
any more outside cases."

"I must go," Peter Ruff answered. "I am not afraid of many things, but I
should be afraid of disobeying this letter."

They had a comfortable journey down, a cool, bright crossing, and found
their places duly reserved for them in the French train. Miss Brown, in
her neat traveling clothes and furs, was conscious of looking her best,
and she did all that was possible to entertain her traveling companion.
But Peter Ruff seemed like a man who labors under some sense of
apprehension. He had faced death more than once during the last few
years--faced it without flinching, and with a certain cool disregard
which can only come from the highest sort of courage. Yet he knew, when
he read over again in the train that brief summons which he was on
his way to obey, that he had passed under the shadow of some new and
indefinable fear. He was perfectly well aware, too, that both on the
steamer and on the French train he was carefully shadowed. This fact,
however, did not surprise him. He even went out of his way to enter into
conversation with one of the two men whose furtive glances into their
compartment and whose constant proximity had first attracted his
attention. The man was civil but vague. Nevertheless, when they took
their places in the dining-car, they found the two men at the next
table. Peter Ruff pointed them out to his companion.

"'Double-Fours'!" he whispered. "Don't you feel like a criminal?"

She laughed, and they took no more notice of the men. But as the
train drew near Paris, he felt some return of the depression which had
troubled him during the earlier part of the day. He felt a sense of
comfort in his companion's presence which was a thing utterly strange to
him. On the other hand, he was conscious of a certain regret that he had
brought her with him into an adventure of which he could not foresee the
end.

The lights of Paris flashed around them--the train was gradually
slackening speed. Peter Ruff, with a sigh, began to collect their
belongings.

"Violet," he said, "I ought not to have brought you." Something in his
voice puzzled her. There had been every few times, during all the years
she had known him, when she had been able to detect anything approaching
sentiment in his tone--and those few times had been when he had spoken
of another woman.

"Why not?" she asked, eagerly.

Peter Ruff looked out into the blackness, through the glittering arc
of lights, and perhaps for once he suffered his fancy to build for
him visions of things that were not of earth. If so, however, it was a
moment which swiftly passed. His reply was in a tone as matter of fact
as his usual speech.

"Because," he said, "I do not exactly see the end of my present
expedition--I do not understand its object."

"You have some apprehension?" she asked.

"None at all," he answered. "Why should I? There is an unwritten
bargain," he added, a little more slowly, "to which I subscribed with
our friends here, and I have certainly kept it. In fact, the balance is
on my side. There is nothing for me to fear."

The train crept into the Gare du Nord, and they passed through the usual
routine of the Customs House. Then, in an omnibus, they rumbled slowly
over the cobblestones, through the region of barely lit streets and
untidy cafes, down the Rue Lafayette, across the famous Square and into
the Rue de Rivoli.

"Our movements," Peter Ruff remarked dryly, "are too well known for
us to attempt to conceal them. We may as well stop at one of the large
hotels. It will be more cheerful for you while I am away."

They engaged rooms at the Continental. Miss Brown, whose apartments were
in the wing of the hotel overlooking the gardens, ascended at once to
her room. Peter Ruff, who had chosen a small suite on the other side,
went into the bar for a whiskey and soda. A man touched him on the
elbow.

"For Monsieur," he murmured, and vanished.

Peter Ruff turned and opened the note. It bore a faint perfume, it had a
coronet upon the flap of the envelope, and it was written in a delicate
feminine handwriting.

DEAR Mr. RUFF:

If you are not too tired with your journey, will you call soon after one
o'clock to meet some old friends?

BLANCHE DE MAUPASSIM.


Peter Ruff drank his whiskey and soda, went up to his rooms, and made a
careful toilet. Then he sent a page up for Violet, who came down within
a few minutes. She was dressed with apparent simplicity in a high-necked
gown, a large hat, and a single rope of pearls. In place of the
usual gold purse, she carried a small white satin bag, exquisitely
hand-painted. Everything about her bespoke that elegant restraint so
much a feature of the Parisian woman of fashion herself. Peter Ruff,
who had told her to prepare for supping out, was at first struck by
the simplicity of her attire. Afterwards, he came to appreciate its
perfection.

They went to the Cafe de Paris, where they were the first arrivals.
People, however, began to stream in before they had finished their
meal, and Peter Ruff, comparing his companion's appearance with the more
flamboyant charms of these ladies from the Opera and the theatres,
began to understand the numerous glances of admiration which the
impressionable Frenchmen so often turned in their direction. There
was between them, toward the end of the meal, something which amounted
almost to nervousness.

"You are going to keep your appointment to-night, Peter?" his companion
asked.

Peter Ruff nodded.

"As soon as I have taken you home," he said. "I shall probably return
late, so we will breakfast here to-morrow morning, if you like, at
half-past twelve. I will send a note to your room when I am ready."

She looked him in the eyes.

"Peter," she said, "supposing that note doesn't come!"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"My dear Violet," he said, "you and I--or rather I, for you are not
concerned in this--live a life which is a little different from the
lives of most of the people around us. The million pay their taxes, and
they expect police protection in times of danger. For me there is
no such resource. My life has its own splendid compensations. I have
weapons with which to fight any ordinary danger. What I want to explain
to you is this--that if you hear no more of me, you can do nothing. If
that note does not come to you in the morning, you can do nothing. Wait
here for three days, and after that go back to England. You will find a
letter on your desk, telling you there exactly what to do."

"You have something in your mind," she said, "of which you have not told
me."

"I have nothing," he answered, firmly. "Upon my honor, I know of no
possible cause of offense which our friends could have against me. Their
summons is, I will admit, somewhat extraordinary, but I go to obey
it absolutely without fear. You can sleep well, Violet. We lunch here
to-morrow, without a doubt."

They drove back to the hotel almost in silence. Violet was looking
fixedly out of the window of the taxicab, as though interested in
watching the crowds upon the street. Peter Ruff appeared to be absorbed
in his own thoughts. Yet perhaps they were both of them nearer to
one another than either surmised. Their parting in the hall of the
Continental Hotel was unemotional enough. For a moment Peter Ruff had
hesitated while her hand had lain in his. He had opened his lips as
though he had something to say. Her eyes grew suddenly softer--seemed to
seek his as though begging for those unspoken words. But Peter Ruff did
not say them then.

"I shall be back all right," he said. "Good night, Violet! Sleep well!"

He turned back towards the waiting taxicab.

"Number 16, Rue de St. Quintaine," he told the man. It was not a long
ride. In less than a quarter of an hour, Peter Ruff presented himself
before a handsome white house in a quiet, aristocratic-looking street.
At his summons, the postern door flew open, and a man-servant in plain
livery stood at the second entrance.

"Madame la Marquise?" Peter Ruff asked.

The man bowed in silence, and took the visitor's hat and overcoat. He
passed along a spacious hall and into a delightfully furnished reception
room, where an old lady with gray hair sat in the midst of a little
circle of men. Peter Ruff stood, for a moment, upon the threshold,
looking around him. She held out her hands.

"It is Monsieur Peter Ruff, is it not? At last, then, I am gratified. I
have wished for so long to see one who has become so famous."

Peter Ruff took her hands in his and raised them gallantly to his lips.

"Madame," he said, "this is a pleasure indeed. At my last visit here,
you were in Italy."

"I grow old," she answered. "I leave Paris but little now. Where one has
lived, one should at least be content to die."

"Madame speaks a philosophy," Peter Ruff answered, "which as yet she has
no need to learn."

The old lady turned to a man who stood upon her right:

"And this from an Englishman!" she exclaimed.

There were others who took Peter Ruff by the hand then. The servants
were handing round coffee in little Sevres cups. On the sideboard was
a choice of liqueurs and bottles of wine. Peter Ruff found himself
hospitably entertained with both small talk and refreshments. But every
now and then his eyes wandered back to where Madame sat in her chair,
her hair as white as snow--beautiful still, in spite of the cruel mouth
and the narrow eyes.

"She is wonderful!" he murmured to a man who stood by his side.

"She is eighty-six," was the answer in a whisper, "and she knows
everything."

As the clock struck two, a tall footman entered the room and wheeled
Madame's chair away. Several of the guests left at the same time. Ruff,
when the door was closed, counted those who remained. As he had imagined
would be the case, he found that there were eight.

A tall, gray-bearded man, who from the first had attached himself to
Ruff, and who seemed to act as a sort of master of ceremonies, now
approached him once more and laid his hand upon his shoulder.

"Mon ami," he said, "we will now discuss, if it pleases you, the little
matter concerning which we took the liberty of asking you to favor us
with a visit."

"What, here?" Peter Ruff asked, in some surprise.

His friend, who had introduced himself as Monsieur de Founcelles,
smiled.

"But why not?" he asked. "Ah, but I think I understand!" he added,
almost immediately. "You are English, Monsieur Peter Ruff, and in some
respects you have not moved with the times. Confess, now, that your idea
of a secret society is a collection of strangely attired men who meet in
a cellar, and build subterranean passages in case of surprise. In Paris,
I think, we have gone beyond that sort of thing. We of the 'Double-Four'
have no headquarters save the drawing-room of Madame; no hiding-places
whatsoever; no meeting-places save the fashionable cafes or our own
reception rooms. The police follow us--what can they discover?--nothing!
What is there to discover?--nothing! Our lives are lived before the eyes
of all Paris. There is never any suspicion of mystery about any of our
movements. We have our hobbies, and we indulge in them. Monsieur the
Marquis de Sogrange here is a great sportsman. Monsieur le Comte
owns many racehorses. I myself am an authority on pictures, and own a
collection which I have bequeathed to the State. Paris knows us well as
men of fashion and mark--Paris does not guess that we have perfected
an organization so wonderful that the whole criminal world pays toll to
us."

"Dear me," Peter Ruff said, "this is very interesting!"

"We have a trained army at our disposal," Monsieur de Founcelles
continued, "who numerically, as well as in intelligence, outnumber the
whole force of gendarmes in Paris. No criminal from any other country
can settle down here and hope for success, unless he joins us. An
exploit which is inspired by us cannot fail. Our agents may count on our
protection, and receive it without question."

"I am bewildered," Peter Ruff said, frankly. "I do not understand how
you gentlemen--whom one knows by name so well as patrons of sport and
society, can spare the time for affairs of such importance."

Monsieur de Founcelles nodded.

"We have very valuable aid," he said. "There is below us--the
'Double-Four'--the eight gentlemen now present, an executive council
composed of five of the shrewdest men in France. They take their orders
from us. We plan, and they obey. We have imagination, and special
sources of knowledge. They have the most perfect machinery for carrying
out our schemes that it is possible to imagine. I do not wish to boast,
Mr. Ruff, but if I take a directory of Paris and place after any man's
name, whatever his standing or estate, a black cross, that man dies
before seven days have passed. You buy your evening paper--a man
has committed suicide! You read of a letter found by his side: an
unfortunate love affair--a tale of jealousy or reckless speculation. Mr.
Ruff, the majority of these explanations are false. They are invented
and arranged for by us. This year alone, five men in Paris, of position,
have been found dead, and accounted, for excellent reasons, suicides.
In each one of these cases, Monsieur Ruff, although not a soul has
a suspicion of it, the removal of these men was arranged for by the'
Double-Four.'"

"I trust," Peter Ruff said, "that it may never be my ill-fortune to
incur the displeasure of so marvelous an association."

"On the contrary, Monsieur Ruff," the other answered, "the attention
of the association has been directed towards certain incidents of your
career in a most favorable manner. We have spoken of you often lately,
Mr. Ruff, between ourselves. We arrive now at the object for which we
begged the honor of your visit. It is to offer you the Presidency of our
Executive Council."

Peter Ruff had thought of many things, but he had not thought of this!
He gasped, recovered himself, and realized at once the dangers of the
position in which he stood.

"The Council of Five!" he said thoughtfully.

"Precisely," Monsieur de Founcelles replied. "The salary--forgive me
for giving such prominence to a matter which you doubtless consider of
secondary importance--is ten thousand pounds a year, with a residence
here and in London--also servants."

"It is princely!" Peter Ruff declared. "I cannot imagine, Monsieur, how
you could have believed me capable of filling such a position."

"There is not much about you, Mr. Ruff, which we do not know," Monsieur
de Founcelles answered. "There are points about your career which
we have marked with admiration. Your work over here was rapid and
comprehensive. We know all about your checkmating the Count von Hern and
the Comtesse de Pilitz. We have appealed to you for aid once only--your
response was prompt and brilliant. You have all the qualifications we
desire. You are still young, physically you are sound, you speak all
languages, and you are unmarried."

"I am what?" Peter Ruff asked, with a start.

"A bachelor," Monsieur de Founcelles answered. "We who have made
crime and its detection a life-long study, have reduced many matters
concerning it to almost mathematical exactitude. Of one thing we have
become absolutely convinced--it is that the great majority of cases in
which the police triumph are due to the treachery of women. The criminal
who steers clear of the other sex escapes a greater danger than the
detectives who dog his heels. It is for that reason that we choose only
unmarried men for our executive council."

Peter Ruff made a gesture of despair. "And I am to be married in a
month!" he exclaimed.

There was a murmur of dismay. If those other seven men had not once
intervened, it was because the conduct of the affair had been voted into
the hands of Monsieur de Founcelles, and there was little which he had
left unsaid. Nevertheless, they had formed a little circle around the
two men. Every word passing between them had been listened to eagerly.
Gestures and murmured exclamations had been frequent enough. There
arose now a chorus of voices which their leader had some difficulty in
silencing.

"It must be arranged!"

"But it is impossible--this!"

"Monsieur Ruff amuses himself with us!"

"Gentlemen," Peter Ruff said, "I can assure you that I do nothing of
the sort. The affair was arranged some months ago, and the young lady is
even now in Paris, purchasing her trousseau."

Monsieur de Founcelles, with a wave of the hand, commanded silence.
There was probably a way out. In any case, one must be found.

"Monsieur Ruff," he said, "putting aside, for one moment, your sense of
honor, which of course forbids you even to consider the possibility
of breaking your word--supposing that the young lady herself should
withdraw--"

"You don't know Miss Brown!" Peter Ruff interrupted. "It is a pleasure
to which I hope to attain," Monsieur de Founcelles declared, smoothly.
"Let us consider once more my proposition. I take it for granted that,
apart from this threatened complication, you find it agreeable?"

"I am deeply honored by it," Peter Ruff declared.

"Well, that being so," Monsieur de Founcelles said, more cheerfully,
"we must see whether we cannot help you. Tell me, who is this fortunate
young lady--this Miss Brown?"

"She is a young person of good birth and some means," Peter Ruff
declared. "She is, in a small way, an actress; she has also been my
secretary from the first." Monsieur de Founcelles nodded his head
thoughtfully.

"Ah!" he said. "She knows your secrets, then, I presume?"

"She does," Peter Ruff assented. "She knows a great deal!"

"A young person to be conciliated by all means," Monsieur de Founcelles
declared. "Well, we must see. When, Monsieur Ruff, may I have the
opportunity of making the acquaintance of this young lady?"

"To-morrow morning, or rather this morning, if you will," Peter Ruff
answered. "We are taking breakfast together at the cafe de Paris. It
will give me great pleasure if you will join us."

"On the contrary," Monsieur de Founcelles declared, "I must beg of you
slightly to alter your plans. I will ask you and Mademoiselle to do me
the honor of breakfasting at the Ritz with the Marquis de Sogrange and
myself, at the same hour. We shall find there more opportunity for a
short discussion."

"I am entirely at your service," Peter Ruff answered. There were signs
now of a breaking-up of the little party.

"We must all regret, dear Monsieur Ruff," Monsieur de Founcelles said,
as he made his adieux, "this temporary obstruction to the consummation
of our hopes. Let us pray that Mademoiselle will not be unreasonable."

"You are very kind," Peter Ruff murmured.

Peter Ruff drove through the gray dawn to his hotel, in the splendid
automobile of Monsieur de Founcelles, whose homeward route lay in
that direction. It was four o'clock when he accepted his key from a
sleepy-looking clerk, and turned towards the staircase. The hotel was
wrapped in semi-gloom. Sweepers and cleaners were at work. The palms had
been turned out into the courtyard. Dust sheets lay over the furniture.
One person only, save himself and the untidy-looking servants, was
astir. From a distant corner which commanded the entrance, he saw Violet
stealing away to the corridor which led to her part of the hotel. She
had sat there all through the night to see him come in--to be assured of
his safety! Peter Ruff stared after her disappearing figure as one might
have watched a ghost.

The luncheon-party was a great success. Peter Ruff was human enough to
be proud of his companion--proud of her smartness, which was indubitable
even here, surrounded as they were by Frenchwomen of the best class;
proud of her accent, of the admiration which she obviously excited
in the two Frenchmen. His earlier enjoyment of the meal was a little
clouded from the fact that he felt himself utterly outshone in the
matter of general appearance. No tailor had ever suggested to him a coat
so daring and yet so perfect as that which adorned the person of the
Marquis de Sogrange. The deep violet of his tie was a shade unknown
in Bond Street--inimitable--a true education in color. They had the
bearing, too, these Frenchmen! He watched Monsieur de Founcelles bending
over Violet, and he was suddenly conscious of a wholly new sensation. He
did not recognize--could not even classify it. He only knew that it was
not altogether pleasant, and that it set the warm blood tingling through
his veins.

It was not until they were sitting out in the winter garden, taking
their coffee and liqueurs, that the object of their meeting was referred
to. Then Monsieur de Founcelles drew Violet a little away from the
others, and the Marquis, with a meaning smile, took Peter Ruff's arm and
led him on one side. Monsieur de Founcelles wasted no words at all.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "Monsieur Ruff has doubtless told you that last
night I made him the offer of a great position among us."

She looked at him with twinkling eyes.

"Go on, please," she said.

"I offered him a position of great dignity--of great responsibility,"
Monsieur de Founcelles continued. "I cannot explain to you its exact
nature, but it is in connection with the most wonderful organization of
its sort which the world has ever known."

"The 'Double-Four,'" she murmured.

"Attached to the post is a princely salary and but one condition,"
Monsieur de Founcelles said, watching the girl's face. "The condition is
that Mr. Ruff remains a bachelor."

Violet nodded.

"Peter's told me all this," she remarked. "He wants me to give him up."

Monsieur de Founcelles drew a little closer to his companion. There was
a peculiar smile upon his lips.

"My dear young lady," he said softly, "forgive me if I point out to you
that with your appearance and gifts a marriage with our excellent friend
is surely not the summit of your ambitions! Here in Paris, I promise
you, here--we can do much better than that for you. You have not,
perhaps, a dot? Good! That is our affair. Give up our friend here, and
we deposit in any bank you like to name the sum of two hundred and fifty
thousand francs."

"Two hundred and fifty thousand francs!" Violet repeated, slowly.

Monsieur de Founcelles nodded.

"It is enough?" he asked.

She shook her head.

"It is not enough," she answered.

Monsieur de Founcelles raised his eyebrows.

"We do not bargain," he said coldly, "and money is not the chief thing
in the world. It is for you, then, to name a sum."

"Monsieur de Founcelles," she said, "can you tell me the amount of the
national debt of France?"

"Somewhere about nine hundred million francs, I believe," he answered.

She nodded.

"That is exactly my price," she declared.

"For giving up Peter Ruff?" he gasped.

She looked at her employer thoughtfully.

"He doesn't look worth it, does he?" she said, with a queer little
smile. "I happen to care for him, though--that's all."

Monsieur de Founcelles shrugged his shoulders. He knew men and women,
and for the present he accepted defeat. He sighed heavily.

"I congratulate our friend, and I envy him," he said. "If ever you
should change your mind, Mademoiselle--"

"It is our privilege, isn't it?" she remarked, with a brilliant smile.
"If I do, I shall certainly let you know."

On the way home, Peter Ruff was genial--Miss Brown silent. He had
escaped from a difficult position, and his sense of gratitude toward his
companion was strong. He showed her many little attentions on the
voyage which sometimes escaped him. From Dover, they had a carriage to
themselves.

"Peter," Miss Brown said, after he had made her comfortable, "when is it
to be?"

"When is what to be?" he asked, puzzled.

"Our marriage," she answered, looking at him for a moment in most
bewildering fashion and then suddenly dropping her eyes.

Peter Ruff returned her gaze in blank amazement.

"What do you mean, Violet?" he exclaimed.

"Just what I say," she answered, composedly. "When are we going to be
married?"

Peter Ruff frowned.

"What nonsense!" he said. "We are not going to be married. You know that
quite well."

"Oh, no, I don't!" she declared, smiling at him in a heavenly fashion.
"At your request I have told Monsieur de Founcelles that we were
engaged. Incidentally, I have refused two hundred and fifty thousand
francs and, I believe, an admirer, for your sake. I declared that I was
going to marry you, and I must keep my word."

Peter Ruff began to feel giddy.

"Look here, Violet," he said, "you know very well that we arranged all
that between ourselves."

"Arranged all that?" she repeated, with a little laugh. "Perhaps we did.
You asked me to marry you, and you posed as my fiancee. You kept it up
just as long as you--it suits me to keep it up a little longer."

"Do you mean to say--do you seriously mean that you expect me to marry
you?" he asked, aghast.

"I do," she admitted. "I have meant you to for some time, Peter!"

She was very alluring, and Peter Ruff hesitated. She held out her hands
and leaned towards him. Her muff fell to the floor. She had raised her
veil, and a faint perfume of violets stole into the carriage. Her lips
were a little parted, her eyes were saying unutterable things.

"You don't want me to sue you, do you, Peter?" she murmured.

Peter Ruff sighed--and yielded.



CHAPTER X. WONDERFUL JOHN DORY


The woman who had been Peter Ruff's first love had fallen upon evil
days. Her prettiness was on the wane--powder and rouge, late hours,
and excesses of many kinds, had played havoc with it, even in these few
months. Her clothes were showy but cheap. Her boots themselves, unclean
and down at heel, told the story. She stood upon the threshold of Peter
Ruff's office, and looked half defiantly, half doubtfully at Violet, who
was its sole occupant.

"Can I do anything for you?" the latter asked, noticing the woman's
hesitation.

"I want to see Mr. Ruff," the visitor said.

"Mr. Ruff is out at present," Violet answered.

"When will he be in?"

"I cannot tell you," Violet said. "Perhaps you had better leave a
message. Or will you call again? Mr. Ruff is very uncertain in his
movements."

Maud sank into a chair.

"I'll wait," she declared.

"I am not sure," Violet remarked, raising her eyebrows, "whether that
will be convenient. There may be other clients in. Mr. Ruff himself may
not be back for several hours."

"Are you his secretary?" Maud asked, without moving.

"I am his secretary and also his wife," Violet declared. The woman
raised herself a little in her chair.

"Some people have all the luck," she muttered. "It's only a few months
ago that Mr. Ruff was glad enough to take me out. You remember when I
used to come here?"

"I remember," Violet assented.

"I was all right then," the woman continued, "and now--now I'm down and
out," she added, with a little sob. "You see what I am like. You look as
though you didn't care to have me in the office, and I don't wonder
at it. You look as though you were afraid I'd come to beg, and you are
right--I have come to beg."

"I am sure Mr. Ruff will do what he can for you," Violet said,
"although--"

"I see you know all about it," Maud interrupted, with a hard little
laugh. "I came once to wheedle information out of him. I came to try
and betray the only man who ever really cared for me. Mr. Ruff was too
clever, and I am thankful for it. I have been as big a fool as a woman
can be, but I am paying--oh, I am paying for it right enough!"

She swayed in her chair, and Violet was only just in time to catch her.
She led the fainting woman to an inner room, made her comfortable upon
a sofa, and sent out for some food and a bottle of wine. Down in the
street below, John Dory, who had tracked his wife to the building, was
walking away with face as black as night. He knew that Maud had lost her
position, that she was in need of money--almost penniless. He had
waited to see to whom she would turn, hoping--poor fool as he called
himself--that she would come back to him. And it was his enemy to whom
she had gone! He had seen her enter the building; he knew that she had
not left it. In the morning they brought him another report--she was
still within. It was the end, this, he told himself! There must be a
settlement between him and Peter Ruff!

Mr. John Dory, who had arrived at Clenarvon Court in a four-wheel cab
from the nearest railway station, was ushered by the butler to the
door of one of the rooms on the ground floor, overlooking the Park. A
policeman was there on guard--a policeman by his attitude and salute,
although he was in plain clothes. John Dory nodded, and turned to the
butler.

"You see, the man knows me," he said. "Here is my card. I am John Dory
from Scotland Yard. I want to have a few words with the sergeant."

The butler hesitated.

"Our orders are very strict, sir," he said. "I am afraid that I cannot
allow you to enter the room without a special permit from his lordship.
You see, we have had no advice of your coming."

John Dory nodded.

"Quite right," he answered. "If every one were to obey his orders as
literally, there would be fewer robberies. However, you see that this
man recognizes me."

The butler turned toward an elderly gentleman in a pink coat and
riding-breeches, who had just descended into the hall.

"His lordship is here," he said. "He will give you permission, without
a doubt. There is a gentleman from Scotland Yard, your lordship," he
explained, "who wishes to enter the morning-room to speak with the
sergeant."

"Inspector John Dory, at your lordship's service," saluting. "I have
been sent down from town to help in this little business."

Lord Clenarvon smiled.

"I should have thought that, under the circumstances," he said, "two of
you would have been enough. Still, it is not for me to complain. Pray go
in and speak to the sergeant. You will find him inside. Rather dull work
for him, I'm afraid, and quite unnecessary."

"I am not so sure, your lordship," Dory answered. "The Clenarvon
diamonds are known all over the world, and I suppose there isn't a
thieves' den in Europe that does not know that they will remain here
exposed with your daughter's other wedding presents."

Lord Clenarvon smiled once more and shrugged his shoulders. He was a man
who had unbounded faith in his fellow-creatures.

"I suppose," he said, "it is the penalty one has to pay for historical
possessions. Go in and talk to the sergeant, by all means, Mr. Dory. I
hope that Graves will succeed in making you comfortable during your stay
here."

John Dory was accordingly admitted into the room which was so jealously
guarded. At first sight, it possessed a somewhat singular appearance.
The windows had every one of them been boarded up, and the electric
lights consequently fully turned on. A long table stood in the middle of
the apartment, serving as support for a long glass showcase, open at the
top. Within this, from end to end, stretched the presents which a large
circle of acquaintances were presenting to one of the most popular young
women in society, on the occasion of her approaching marriage to the
Duke of Rochester. In the middle, the wonderful Clenarvon diamonds, set
in the form of a tiara, flashed strange lights into the somberly lit
apartment. At the end of the table a police sergeant was sitting, with
a little pile of newspapers and illustrated journals before him. He rose
to his feet with alacrity at his superior's entrance.

"Good morning, Saunders," John Dory said. "I see you've got it pretty
snug in here."

"Pretty well, thank you, sir," Saunders answered. "Is there anything
stirring?"

John Dory looked behind to be sure that the door was closed. Then he
stopped for a moment to gaze at the wonderful diamonds, and finally sat
on the table by his subordinate's side.

"Not exactly that, Saunders," he said. "To tell you the truth, I came
down here because of that list of guests you sent me up."

Saunders smiled.

"I think I can guess the name you singled out, sir," he said.

"It was Peter Ruff, of course," Dory said. "What is he doing here in the
house, under his own name, and as a guest?"

"I have asked no questions, sir," Saunders answered. "I underlined the
name in case it might seem worth your while to make inquiries."

John Dory nodded.

"Nothing has happened, of course?" he asked.

"Nothing," Saunders answered. "You see, with the windows all boarded up,
there is practically only the ordinary door to guard, so we feel fairly
secure."

"No one hanging about?" the detective asked. "Mr. Ruff himself, for
instance, hasn't been trying to make your acquaintance?"

"No sign of it, sir," the man answered. "I saw him pass through the hall
yesterday afternoon, as I went off duty, and he was in riding clothes
all splashed with mud. I think he has been hunting every day."

John Dory muttered something between his lips, and turned on his heel.

"How many men have you here, Saunders?" he asked.

"Only two, sir, beside myself," the man replied.

The detective went round the boarded windows, examining the work
carefully until he reached the door.

"I am going to see if I can have a word with his lordship," he said.

He caught Lord Clenarvon in the act of mounting his horse in the great
courtyard.

"What is it, Mr. Dory?" the Earl asked, stooping down.

"There is one name, your lordship, among your list of guests, concerning
which I wish to have a word with you," the detective said--"the name of
Mr. Peter Ruff."

"Don't know anything about him," Lord Clenarvon answered, cheerfully.
"You must see my daughter, Lady Mary. It was she who sent him his
invitation. Seems a decent little fellow, and rides as well as the best.
You'll find Lady Mary about somewhere, if you'd like to ask her."

Lord Clenarvon hurried off, with a little farewell wave of his crop,
and John Dory returned into the house to make inquiries respecting Lady
Mary. In a very few minutes he was shown into her presence. She smiled
at him cheerfully.

"Another detective!" she exclaimed. "I am sure I ought to feel quite
safe now. What can I do for you, Mr. Dory?"

"I have had a list of the guests sent to me," Dory answered, "in which I
notice the name of Mr. Peter Ruff."

Lady Mary nodded.

"Well?" she asked.

"I have just spoken to his lordship," the detective continued, "and he
referred me to you."

"Do you want to know all about Mr. Ruff?" Lady Mary asked, smiling.

"If your ladyship will pardon my saying so, I think that neither you
nor any one else could tell me that. What I wished to say was that I
understood that we at Scotland Yard were placed in charge of your jewels
until after the wedding. Mr. Peter Ruff is, as you may be aware, a
private detective himself."

"I understand perfectly," Lady Mary said. "I can assure you, Mr. Dory,
that Mr. Ruff is here entirely as a personal and very valued friend
of my own. On two occasions he has rendered very signal service to my
family--services which I am quite unable to requite."

"In that case, your ladyship, there is nothing more to be said. I
conceive it, however, to be my duty to tell you that in our opinion--the
opinion of Scotland Yard--there are things about the career of Mr.
Peter Ruff which need explanation. He is a person whom we seldom let
altogether out of our sight."

Lady Mary laughed frankly.

"My dear Mr. Dory," she said, "this is one of the cases, then, in which
I can assure you that I know more than Scotland Yard. There is no person
in the world in whom I have more confidence, and with more reason, than
Mr. Peter Ruff."

John Dory bowed.

"I thank your ladyship," he said. "I trust that your confidence will
never be misplaced. May I ask one more question?"

"Certainly," Lady Mary replied, "so long as you make no insinuations
whatever against my friend."

"I should be very sorry to do so," John Dory declared. "I simply wish
to know whether Mr. Ruff has any instructions from you with reference to
the care of your jewels?"

"Certainly not," Lady Mary replied, decidedly. "Mr. Ruff is here
entirely as my guest. He has been in the room with the rest of us, to
look at them, and it was he, by the bye, who discovered a much more
satisfactory way of boarding the windows. Anything else, Mr. Dory?"

"I thank your ladyship, nothing!" the detective answered. "With your
permission, I propose to remain here until after the ceremony."

"Just as you like, of course," Lady Mary said. "I hope you will be
comfortable."

John Dory bowed, and returned to confer with his sergeant. Afterwards,
finding the morning still fine, he took his hat and went for a walk in
the park.

As a matter of fact, this, in some respects the most remarkable of
the adventures which had ever befallen Mr. Peter Ruff, came to him by
accident. Lady Mary had read the announcement of his marriage in the
paper, had driven at once to his office with a magnificent present, and
insisted upon his coming with his wife to the party which was assembling
at Clenarvon Court in honor of her own approaching wedding. Peter
Ruff had taken few holidays of late years, and for several days had
thoroughly enjoyed himself. The matter of the Clenarvon jewels he
considered, perhaps, with a slight professional interest; but so far as
he could see, the precautions for guarding them were so adequate that
the subject did not remain in his memory. He had, however, a very
distinct and disagreeable shock when, on the night of John Dory's
appearance, he recognized among a few newly-arrived guests the
Marquis de Sogrange. He took the opportunity, as soon as possible,
of withdrawing his wife from a little circle among whom they had been
talking, to a more retired corner of the room. She saw at once that
something had happened to disturb him.

"Violet," he said, "don't look behind now--"

"I recognized him at once," she interrupted. "It is the Marquis de
Sogrange."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"It will be best for you," he said, "not to notice him. Of course, his
presence here may be accidental. He has a perfect right to enter any
society he chooses. At the same time, I am uneasy."'

She understood in a moment.

"The Clenarvon diamonds!" she whispered. He nodded.

"It is just the sort of affair which would appeal to the 'Double-Four,'"
he said. "They are worth anything up to a quarter of a million, and it
is an enterprise which could scarcely be attempted except by some one in
a peculiar position. Violet, if I were not sure that he had seen me, I
should leave the house this minute."

"Why?" she asked, wonderingly.

"Don't you understand," Peter Ruff continued, softly, "that I myself am
still what they call a corresponding member of the 'Double-Four,' and
they have a right to appeal to me for help in this country, as I have a
right to appeal to them for help or information in France? We have both
made use of one another, to some extent. No doubt, if the Marquis has
any scheme in his mind, he would look upon me as a valuable ally."

She turned slowly pale.

"Peter," she said, "you wouldn't dream--you wouldn't dare to be so
foolish?"

He shook his head firmly.

"My dear girl," he said, "we talked that all out long ago. A few years
since, I felt that I had been treated badly, that I was an alien, and
that the hand of the law was against me. I talked wildly then, perhaps.
When I put up my sign and sat down for clients, I meant to cheat the
law, if I could. Things have changed, Violet. I want nothing of that
sort. I have kept my hands clean and I mean to do so. Why, years ago,"
he continued, "when I was feeling at my wildest, these very jewels were
within my grasp one foggy night, and I never touched them."

"What would happen if you refused to help?"

"I do not know," Peter Ruff answered. "The conditions are a little
severe. But, after all, there are no hard and fast rules. It rests with
the Marquis himself to shrug his shoulders and appreciate my position.
Perhaps he may not even exchange a word with me. Here is Lord Sotherst
coming to talk to you, and Captain Hamilton is waiting for me to tell
him an address. Remember, don't recognize Sogrange."

Dinner that night was an unusually cheerful meal. Peter Ruff, who was
an excellent raconteur, told many stories. The Marquis de Sogrange was
perhaps the next successful in his efforts to entertain his neighbors.
Violet found him upon her left hand, and although he showed not the
slightest signs of having ever seen her before, they were very soon
excellent friends. After dinner, Sogrange and Peter Ruff drifted
together on their way to the billiard-room. Sogrange, however, continued
to talk courteously of trifles until, having decided to watch the first
game, they found themselves alone on the leather divan surrounding the
room.

"This is an unexpected pleasure, my friend," Sogrange said, watching the
ash of his cigar. "Professional?"

Peter Ruff shook his head. "Not in the least," he answered. "I have
had the good fortune to render Lady Mary and her brother, at different
times, services which they are pleased to value highly. We are here as
ordinary guests--my wife and I." The Marquis sighed.

"Ah, that wife of yours, Ruff," he said. "She is charming, I admit, and
you are a lucky man; but it was a price--a very great price to pay."

"You, perhaps, are ambitious, Marquis," Peter Ruff answered. "I have not
done so badly. A little contents me."

Sogrange looked at him as though he were some strange creature.

"I see!" he murmured. "I see! With you, of course, the commercial side
comes uppermost. Mr. Ruff, what do you suppose the income from my estate
amounts to?" Peter Ruff shook his head. He did not even know that the
Marquis was possessed of estates!

"Somewhere about seven millions of francs," Sogrange declared. "There
are few men in Paris more extravagant than I, and I think that we
Frenchmen know what extravagance means. But I cannot spend my income.
Do you think that it is for the sake of gain that I have come across the
Channel to add the Clenarvon diamonds to our coffers?"

Peter Ruff sat very still.

"You mean that?" he said.

"Of course!" Sogrange answered. "Didn't you realize it directly you
saw me? What is there, do you think, in a dull English house-party to
attract a man like myself? Don't you understand that it is the gambler's
instinct--the restless desire to be playing pitch-and-toss with fate,
with honor, with life and death, if you will--that brings such as myself
into the ranks of the 'Double-Four'? It is the weariness which kills,
Peter Ruff. One must needs keep it from one's bones."

"Marquis," Peter Ruff answered, "I do not profess to understand you.
I am not weary of life, in fact I love it. I am looking forward to the
years when I have enough money--and it seems as though that time is not
far off--when I can buy a little place in the country, and hunt a
little and shoot a little, and live a simple out-of-door life. You see,
Marquis, we are as far removed as the poles."

"Obviously!" Sogrange answered.

"Your confidence," Peter Ruff continued, "the confidence with which you
have honored me, inspires me to make you one request. I am here, indeed,
as a friend of the family. You will not ask me to help in any designs
you may have against the Clenarvon jewels?"

Sogrange leaned back in his chair and laughed softly. His lips, when
they parted from his white teeth, resolved themselves into lines
which at that moment seemed to Peter Ruff more menacing than mirthful.
Sogrange was, in many ways, a man of remarkable appearance.

"Oh, Peter Ruff," he said, "you are a bourgeois little person! You
should have been the burgomaster in a little German town, or a French
mayor with a chain about your neck. We will see. I make no promises.
All that I insist upon, for the present, is that you do not leave this
house-party without advising me--that is to say, if you are really
looking forward to that pleasant life in the country, where you will
hunt a little and shoot a little, and grow into the likeness of a
vegetable. You, with your charming wife! Peter Ruff, you should be
ashamed to talk like that! Come, I must play bridge with the Countess. I
am engaged for a table."

The two men parted. Peter Ruff was uneasy. On his way from the room,
Lord Sotherst insisted upon his joining a pool.

"Charming fellow, Sogrange," the latter remarked, as he chalked his cue.
"He has been a great friend of the governor's--he and his father before
him. Our families have intermarried once or twice."

"He seems very agreeable," Peter Ruff answered, devoting himself to the
game.

The following night, being the last but one before the wedding itself,
a large dinner-party had been arranged for, and the resources of even so
princely a mansion as Clenarvon Court were strained to their utmost
by the entertainment of something like one hundred guests in the great
banqueting-hall. The meal was about half-way through when those who were
not too entirely engrossed in conversation were startled by hearing a
dull, rumbling sound, like the moving of a number of pieces of heavy
furniture. People looked doubtfully at one another. Peter Ruff and the
Marquis de Sogrange were among the first to spring to their feet.

"It's an explosion somewhere," the latter cried. "Sounds close at hand,
too."

They made their way out into the hall. Exactly opposite now was the
room in which the wedding presents had been placed, and where for days
nothing had been seen but a closed door and a man on duty outside. The
door now stood wide open, and in place of the single electric light
which was left burning through the evening, the place seemed almost
aflame.

Ruff, Sogrange and Lord Sotherst were the first three to cross the
threshold. They were met by a rush of cold wind. Opposite to them, two
of the windows, with their boardings, had been blown away. Sergeant
Saunders was still sitting in his usual place at the end of the table,
his head bent upon his folded arms. The man who had been on duty outside
was standing over him, white with horror. Far away in the distance, down
the park, one could faintly hear the throbbing of an engine, and Peter
Ruff, through the chasm, saw the lights of a great motor-car flashing in
and out amongst the trees. The room itself--the whole glittering
array of presents--seemed untouched. Only the great center-piece--the
Clenarvon diamonds--had gone. Even as they stood there, the rest of the
guests crowding into the open door, John Dory tore through, his face
white with excitement. Peter Ruff's calm voice penetrated the din of
tongues.

"Lord Sotherst," he said, "you have telephones in the keepers' lodges.
There is a motor-car being driven southwards at full speed. Telephone
down, and have your gates secured. Dory, I should keep every one out of
the room. Some one must telephone for a doctor. I suppose your man has
been hurt."

The guests were wild with curiosity, but Lord Clenarvon, with an
insistent gesture, led the way back to the diningroom.

"Whatever has happened," he said, "the people who are in charge there
know best how to deal with the situation. There is a detective from
Scotland Yard and his subordinates, and a gentleman in whom I also have
most implicit confidence. We will resume our dinner, if you please,
ladies and gentlemen."

Unwillingly, the people were led away. John Dory was already in his
great-coat, ready to spring into the powerful motor-car which had been
ordered out from the garage. A doctor, who had been among the guests,
was examining the man Saunders, who sat in that still, unnatural
position at the head of the table.

"The poor fellow has been shot in the back of the head with some
peculiar implement," he said. "The bullet is very long--almost like a
needle--and it seems to have penetrated very nearly to the base of the
brain."

"Is he dead?" Peter Ruff asked.

The doctor shook his head.

"No!" he answered. "An inch higher up and he must have died at once.
I want some of the men-servants to help me carry him to a bedroom, and
plenty of hot water. Some one else must go for my instrument case."

Lord Sotherst took these things in charge, and John Dory turned to the
man whom they had found standing over him.

"Tell us exactly what happened," he said, briefly.

"I was standing outside the door," the man answered. "I heard no sound
inside--there was nothing to excite suspicion in any way. Suddenly there
was this explosion. It took me, perhaps, thirty or forty seconds to get
the key out of my pocket and unlock the door. When I entered, the side
of the room was blown in like that, the diamonds were gone, Saunders
was leaning forward just in the position he is in now, and there wasn't
another soul in sight. Then you and the others came."

John Dory rushed from the room; they had brought him word that the car
was waiting. At such a moment, he was ready even to forget his ancient
enmity. He turned towards Peter Ruff, whose calm bearing somehow or
other impressed even the detective with a sense of power.

"Will you come along?" he asked.

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"Thank you, Dory, no!" he said. "I am glad you have asked me, but I
think you had better go alone."

A few seconds later, the pursuit was started. Saunders was carried out
of the room, followed by the doctor. There remained only Peter Ruff and
the man who had been on duty outside. Peter Ruff seated himself where
Saunders had been sitting, and seemed to be closely examining the table
all round for some moments. Once he took up something from between the
pages of the book which the Sergeant had apparently been reading, and
put it carefully into his own pocketbook. Then he leaned back in the
chair, with his hands clasped behind his head and his eyes fixed upon
the ceiling, as though thinking intently.

"Hastings," he said to the policeman, who all the time was pursuing a
stream of garrulous, inconsequent remarks, "I wonder whether you'd step
outside and see Mr. Richards, the butler. Ask him if he would be so good
as to spare me a moment."

"I'll do it, sir," the man answered, with one more glance through the
open space. "Lord!" he added, "they must have been in through there and
out again like cats!"

"It was quick work, certainly," Peter Ruff answered, genially, "but
then, an enterprise like this would, of course, only be attempted by
experts."

Peter Ruff was not left alone long. Mr. Richards came hurrying in.

"This is a terrible business, sir!" he said. "His lordship has excused
me from superintending the service of the dinner. Anything that I can do
for you I am to give my whole attention to. These were my orders."

"Very good of you, Richards," Peter Ruff answered, "very thoughtful of
his lordship. In the first place, then, I think, we will have the rest
of this jewelry packed in cases at once. Not that anything further is
likely to happen," he continued, "but still, it would be just as well
out of the way. I will remain here and superintend this, if you will
send a couple of careful servants. In the meantime, I want you to do
something else for me."

"Certainly, sir," the man answered.

"I want a plan of the house," Peter Ruff said, "with the names of the
guests who occupy this wing."

The butler nodded gravely.

"I can supply you with it very shortly, sir," he said. "There is no
difficulty at all about the plan, as I have several in my room; but it
will take me some minutes to pencil in the names."

Peter Ruff nodded.

"I will superintend things here until you return," he said.

"It is to be hoped, sir," the man said, as he retreated, "that the
gentleman from Scotland Yard will catch the thieves. After all, they
hadn't more than ten minutes' start, and our Daimler is a flyer."

"I'm sure I hope so," Peter Ruff answered, heartily.

But, alas! no such fortune was in store for Mr. John Dory. At daybreak
he returned in a borrowed trap from a neighboring railway station.

"Our tires had been cut," he said, in reply to a storm of questions.
"They began to go, one after the other, as soon as we had any speed on.
We traced the car to Salisbury, and there isn't a village within forty
miles that isn't looking out for it."

Peter Ruff, who had just returned from an early morning walk, nodded
sympathetically.

"Shall you be here all day, Mr. Dory?" he asked. "There's just a word or
two I should like to have with you."

Dory turned away. He had forced himself, in the excitement of the
moment, to speak to his ancient enemy, but in this hour of his humility
the man's presence was distasteful to him.

"I am not sure," he said, shortly. "It depends on how things may turn
out."

The daily life at Clenarvon Court proceeded exactly as usual. Breakfast
was served early, as there was to be big day's shoot. The Marquis de
Sogrange and Peter Ruff smoked their cigarettes together afterwards in
the great hall. Then it was that Peter Ruff took the plunge.

"Marquis," he said, "I should like to know exactly how I stand with
you--the 'Double-Four,' that is to say--supposing I range myself for an
hour or so on the side of the law?"

Sogrange smiled.

"You amuse yourself, Mr. Ruff," he remarked genially.

"Not in the least," Peter Ruff answered. "I am serious."

Sogrange watched the blue cigarette smoke come down his nose.

"My dear friend," he said, "I am no amateur at this game. When I choose
to play it, I am not afraid of Scotland Yard. I am not afraid," he
concluded, with a little bow, "even of you!"

"Do you ever bet, Marquis?" Peter Ruff asked.

"Twenty-five thousand francs," Sogrange said, smiling, "that your
efforts to aid Mr. John Dory are unavailing."

Peter Ruff entered the amount in his pocketbook. "It is a bargain," he
declared. "Our bet, I presume, carries immunity for me?"

"By all means," Sogrange answered, with a little bow.

The Marquis beckoned to Lord Sotherst, who was crossing the hall.

"My dear fellow," he said, "do tell me the name of your hatter in
London. Delions failed me at the last moment, and I have not a hat fit
for the ceremony to-morrow."

"I'll lend you half-a-dozen, if you can wear them," Lord Sotherst
answered, smiling. "The governor's sure to have plenty, too."

Sogrange touched his head with a smile.

"Alas!" he said. "My head is small, even for a Frenchman's. Imagine
me--otherwise, I trust, suitably attired--walking to the church
to-morrow in a hat which came to my ears!"

Lord Sotherst laughed.

"Scotts will do you all right," he said. "You can telephone."

"I shall send my man up," Sogrange determined. "He can bring me back a
selection. Tell me, at what hour is the first drive this morning, and
are the places drawn yet?"

"Come into the gun-room and we'll see," Lord Sotherst answered.

Peter Ruff made his way to the back quarters of the house. In a little
sitting-room he found the man he sought, sitting alone. Peter Ruff
closed the door behind him.

"John Dory," he said, "I have come to have a few words with you."

The detective rose to his feet. He was in no pleasant mood. Though
the telephone wires had been flashing their news every few minutes, it
seemed, indeed, as though the car which they had chased had vanished
into space.

"What do you want to say to me?" he asked gruffly.

"I want, if I can," Peter Ruff said earnestly, "to do you a service."

Dory's eyes glittered.

"I think," he said, "that I can do without your services."

"Don't be foolish," Peter Ruff said. "You are harboring a grievance
against me which is purely an imaginary one. Now listen to the facts.
You employ your wife--which after all, Dory, I think, was not quite
the straight thing--to try and track down a young man named Spencer
Fitzgerald, who was formerly, in a small way, a client of mine. I find
your wife an agreeable companion--we become friends. Then I discover her
object, and know that I am being fooled. The end of that little episode
you remember. But tell me why should you bear me ill-will for defending
my friend and myself?"

The detective came slowly up to Peter Ruff. He took hold of the lapel
of the other's coat with his left hand, and his right hand was clenched.
But Peter Ruff did not falter.

"Listen to me," said Dory. "I will tell you what grudge I bear against
you. It was your entertainment of my wife which gave her the taste
for luxury and for gadding about. Mind, I don't blame you for that
altogether, but there the fact remains. She left me. She went on the
stage."

"Stop!" Peter Ruff said. "You must still hold me blameless. She wrote to
me. I went out with her once. The only advice I gave her was to return
to you. So far as I am concerned, I have treated her with the respect
that I would have shown my own sister."

"You lie!" Dory cried, fiercely. "A month ago, I saw her come to your
fiat. I watched for hours. She did not leave it--she did not leave it
all that night!"

"If you object to her visit," Peter Ruff said quietly, "it is my wife
whom you must blame."

John Dory relaxed his hand and took a quick step backwards.

"Your wife?" he muttered.

"Exactly!" Peter Ruff answered. "Maud--Mrs. Dory--called to see me; she
was ill--she had lost her situation--she was even, I believe, faint and
hungry. I was not present. My wife talked to her and was sorry for her.
While the two women were there together, your wife fainted. She was put
to bed in our one spare room, and she has been shown every attention and
care. Tell me, how long is it since you were at home?"

"Not for ten days," Dory answered, bitterly. "Why?"

"Because when you go back, you will find your wife there," Peter Ruff
answered. "She has given up the stage. Her one desire is to settle down
and repay you for the trouble she has caused you. You needn't believe me
unless you like. Ask my wife. She is here. She will tell you."

Dory was overcome. He went back to his seat by the window, and he buried
his face for a moment in his hands.

"Ruff," he said, "I don't deserve this. I've had bad times lately,
though. Everything has gone against me. I think I have been a bit
careless, with the troubles at home and that."

"Stop!" Peter Ruff insisted. "Now I come to the immediate object of my
visit to you. You have had some bad luck at headquarters. I know of it.
I am going to help you to reinstate yourself brilliantly. With that, let
us shake hands and bury all the soreness that there may be between us."

John Dory stared at his visitor.

"Do you mean this?" he asked.

"I do," answered Peter. "Please do not think that I mean to make any
reflection upon your skill. It is just a chance that I was able to see
what you were not able to see. In an hour's time, you shall restore the
Clenarvon diamonds to Lord Clenarvon. You shall take the reward which
he has just offered, of a thousand pounds. And I promise you that the
manner in which you shall recover the jewels shall be such that you will
be famous for a long time to come."

"You are a wonderful man!" said Dory, hoarsely. "Do you mean, then, that
the jewels were not with those men in the motor-car?"

"Of course not!" Peter Ruff answered. "But come along. The story will
develop."

At half-past ten that morning, a motor-car turned out from the garage
at Clenarvon Court, and made its way down the avenue. In it was a single
passenger--the dark-faced Parisian valet of the Marquis de Sogrange. As
the car left the avenue and struck into the main road, it was hailed by
Peter Ruff and John Dory, who were walking together along the lane.

"Say, my man," Peter Ruff said, addressing the chauffeur, "are you going
to the station?"

"Yes, sir!" the man answered. "I am taking down the Marquis de
Sogrange's servant to catch the eleven o'clock train to town."

"You don't mind giving us a lift?" Peter Ruff asked, already opening the
door.

"Certainly not, sir," the man answered, touching his hat.

Peter Ruff and John Dory stepped into the tonneau of the car. The man
civilly lifted the hatbox from the seat, and made room for his enforced
companions. Nevertheless, it was easy to see that he was not pleased.

"There's plenty of room here for three," Peter Ruff said, cheerfully, as
they sat on either side of him. "Drive slowly, please, chauffeur. Now,
Mr. Lemprise," Peter Ruff added, "we will trouble you to change places."

"What do you mean?" the man called out, suddenly pale as death.

He was held as though in a vice. John Dory's arm was through his on one
side, and Peter Ruff's on the other. Apart from that, the muzzle of a
revolver was pressed to his forehead.

"On second thoughts," Peter Ruff said, "I think we will keep you like
this. Driver," he called out, "please return to the Court at once."

The man hesitated.

"You recognize the gentleman who is with me?" Peter Ruff said. "He
is the detective from Scotland Yard. I have full authority from Lord
Clenarvon over all his servants. Please do as I say."

The man hesitated no more. The car was backed and turned, the Frenchman
struggling all the way like a wild cat. Once he tried to kick the hatbox
into the road, but John Dory was too quick for him. So they drove up to
the front door of the Court, to be welcomed with cries of astonishment
from the whole of the shooting party, who were just starting. Foremost
among them was Sogrange. They crowded around the car. Peter Ruff touched
the hatbox with his foot.

"If we could trouble your Lordship," he said, "to open that hatbox,
you will find something that will interest you. Mr. Dory has planned a
little surprise for you, in which I have been permitted to help."

The women, who gathered that something was happening, came hastening out
from the hall. They all crowded round Lord Clenarvon, who was cutting
through the leather strap of the hatbox. Inside the silk hat which
reposed there, were the Clenarvon diamonds. Monsieur le Marquis de
Sogrange was one of the foremost to give vent to an exclamation of
delight.

"Monsieur le Marquis," Peter Ruff said, "this should be a lesson to you,
I hope, to have the characters of your servants more rigidly verified.
Mr. Dory tells me that this man came into your employ at the last moment
with a forged recommendation. He is, in effect, a dangerous thief."

"You amaze me!" Sogrange exclaimed.

"We are all interested in this affair," Peter Ruff said, "and my friend
John Dory here is, perhaps, too modest properly to explain the matter.
If you care to come with me, we can reconstruct, in a minute, the
theft."

John Dory and Peter Ruff first of all handed over their captive, who was
now calm and apparently resigned, to the two policemen who were still on
duty in the Court. Afterwards, Peter Ruff led the way up one flight of
stairs, and turned the handle of the door of an apartment exactly over
the morning-room. It was the bedroom of the Marquis de Sogrange.

"Mr. Dory's chase in the motor-car," he said, "was, as you have
doubtless gathered now, merely a blind. It was obvious to his
intelligence that the blowing away of the window was merely a ruse to
cover the real method of the theft. If you will allow me, I will show
you how it was done."

The floor was of hardwood, covered with rugs. One of these, near the
fireplace, Peter Ruff brushed aside. The seventh square of hardwood
from the mantelpiece had evidently been tampered with. With very little
difficulty, he removed it.

"You see," he explained, "the ceiling of the room below is also of
paneled wood. Having removed this, it is easy to lift the second one,
especially as light screws have been driven in and string threaded about
them. There is now a hole through which you can see into the room below.
Has Dory returned? Ah, here he is!"

The detective came hurrying into the room, bearing in his hand a
peculiar-shaped weapon, a handful of little darts like those which had
been found in the wounded man's head, and an ordinary fishing-rod in a
linen case.

"There is the weapon," Peter Ruff said, "which it was easy enough to
fire from here upon the man who was leaning forward exactly below. Then
here, you will see, is a somewhat peculiar instrument, which shows a
great deal of ingenuity in its details."

He opened the linen case, which was, by the bye, secured by a padlock,
and drew out what was, to all appearance, an ordinary fishing-rod,
fitted at the end with something that looked like an iron hand. Peter
Ruff dropped it through the hole until it reached the table, moved it
backwards and forwards, and turned round with a smile.

"You see," he said, "the theft, after all, was very simple. Personally,
I must admit that it took me a great deal by surprise, but my friend Mr.
Dory has been on the right track from the first. I congratulate him most
heartily."

Dory was a little overcome. Lady Mary shook him heartily by the hand,
but as they trooped downstairs she stooped and whispered in Peter Ruff's
ear.

"I wonder how much of this was John Dory," she said, smiling.

Peter Ruff said nothing. The detective was already on the telephone,
wiring his report to London. Every one was standing about in little
knots, discussing this wonderful event. Sogrange sought Lord Clenarvon,
and walked with him, arm in arm, down the stairs.

"I cannot tell you, Clenarvon," he said, "how sorry I am that I should
have been the means of introducing a person like this to the house. I
had the most excellent references from the Prince of Strelitz. No doubt
they were forged. My own man was taken ill just before I left, and I had
to bring some one."

"My dear Sogrange," Lord Clenarvon said, "don't think of it. What we
must be thankful for is that we had so brilliant a detective in the
house."

"As John Dory?" Sogrange remarked, with a smile. Lord Clenarvon nodded.

"Come," he said, "I don't see why we should lose a day's sport because
the diamonds have been recovered. I always felt that they would turn up
again some day or other. You are keen, I know, Sogrange."

"Rather!" the Marquis answered. "But excuse me for one moment. There is
Mrs. Ruff looking charming there in the corner. I must have just a word
with her."

He crossed the room and bowed before Violet.

"My dear lady," he said, "I have come to congratulate you. You have a
clever husband--a little cleverer, even, than I thought. I have just had
the misfortune to lose to him a bet of twenty-five thousand francs."

Violet smiled, a little uneasily.

"Peter doesn't gamble as a rule," she remarked.

Sogrange sighed.

"This, alas, was no gamble!" he said. "He was betting upon certainties,
but he won. Will you tell him from me, when you see him, that although
I have not the money in my pocket at the moment, I shall pay my debts.
Tell him that we are as careful to do that in France as we are to keep
our word!"

He bowed, and passed out with the shooting-party on to the terrace.
Peter Ruff came up, a few minutes later, and his wife gave him the
message.

"I did that man an injustice," Peter Ruff said with a sigh of relief. "I
can't explain now, dear. I'll tell you all about it later in the day."

"There's nothing wrong, is there?" she asked him, pleadingly.

"On the contrary," Peter Ruff declared, "everything is right. I have
made friends with Dory, and I have won a thousand pounds. When we leave
here, I am going to look out for that little estate in the country.
If you come out with the lunch, dear, I want you to watch that man
Hamilton's coat. It's exactly what I should like to wear myself at my
own shooting parties. See if you can make a sketch of it when he isn't
looking."

Violet laughed.

"I'll try," she promised.





BOOK TWO



CHAPTER I. RECALLED BY THE DOUBLE-FOUR


It is the desire of Madame that you should join our circle here on
Thursday evening next at ten o'clock.

The man looked up from the sheet of note-paper which he held in his
hand, and gazed through the open French-windows before which he was
standing. It was a very pleasant and very peaceful prospect. There
was his croquet lawn, smooth-shaven, the hoops neatly arranged, the
chalk-mark firm and distinct upon the boundary. Beyond, the tennis
court, the flower gardens, and, to the left, the walled fruit garden.
A little farther away was the paddock and orchard, and a little farther
still, the farm, which for the last four years had been the joy of his
life. His meadows were yellow with buttercups; a thin line of willows
showed where the brook wound its lazy way through the bottom fields. It
was a home, this, in which a man could well lead a peaceful life, could
dream away his days to the music of the west wind, the gurgling stream,
the song of birds, and the low murmuring of insects. Peter Ruff stood
like a man turned to stone, for, even as he looked, these things passed
away from before his eyes, the roar of the world beat in his ears--the
world of intrigue, of crime, the world where the strong man hewed his
way to power, and the weaklings fell like corn before the sickle.

"It is the desire of Madame!"

Peter Ruff clenched his fists as he stood there. It was a message from
a world every memory of which had been deliberately crushed, a world,
indeed, in which he had seemed no longer to hold any place. Scarcely yet
of middle age, well-preserved, upright, with neat figure dressed in the
conventional tweeds and gaiters of an English country gentleman, he
not only had loved his life, but he looked the part. He was Peter Ruff,
Esquire, of Aynesford Manor, in the county of Somerset. It could not be
for him, this strange summons.

The rustle of a woman's soft draperies broke in upon his reverie. He
turned around with his usual morning greeting upon his lips. If country
life had agreed with Peter Ruff, it had transformed his wife. Her cheeks
were no longer pale; the extreme slimness of her figure was no longer
apparent. She was just a little more matronly, perhaps, but without
doubt a most beautiful woman. She came smiling across the room--a dream
of white muslin and pink ribbons.

"Another forage bill, my dear Peter?" she demanded, passing her arm
through his. "Put it away and admire my new morning gown. It came
straight from Paris, and you will have to pay a great deal of money for
it."

He pulled himself together--he had no secrets from his wife.

"Listen," he said, and read aloud:


RUE DE ST. QUINTAINE.

PARIS.

DEAR Mr. RUFF, It is a long time since we had the pleasure of a visit
from you. It is the desire of Madame that you should join our circle
here on Thursday evening next at ten o'clock.

SOGRANGE.


Violet was a little perplexed. She failed, somehow, to recognize the
sinister note underlying those few sentences, "It sounds friendly
enough," she remarked. "You are not obliged to go, of course."

Peter Ruff smiled grimly.

"Yes, it sounds all right," he admitted.

"They won't expect you to take any notice of it, surely?" she continued.
"When you bought this place, Peter, and left your London offices, you
gave them definitely to understand that you had retired into private
life, that all these things were finished with you."

"There are some things," Peter Ruff said, slowly, "which are never
finished."

"But you resigned," she reminded him. "I remember your letter
distinctly."

"From the Double-Four," he answered, "no resignation is recognized save
death. I did what I could and they accepted my explanations, gracefully
and without comment. Now that the time has come, however, when they
think they need my help, you see they do not hesitate to claim it."

"You will not go, Peter? You will not think of going?" she begged.

He twisted the letter between his fingers and sat down to his breakfast.

"No," he said, "I shall not go."

That morning Peter Ruff spent upon his farm, looking over his stock,
examining some new machinery, and talking crops with his bailiff. In the
afternoon he played his customary round of golf. It was the sort of
day which, as a rule, he found completely satisfactory, yet, somehow or
other, a certain sense of weariness crept in upon him toward its close.

Two days later he received another letter. This time it was couched in
different terms. On a square card, at the top of which was stamped a
small coronet, he read as follows:

Madame de Maupassim at home, Saturday evening, May 2nd, at ten o'clock.

In small letters at the bottom left-hand corner were added the words:

To meet friends.

Peter Ruff put the card upon the fire and went out for a morning's
rabbit shooting with his keeper. When he returned luncheon was ready,
but Violet was absent. He rang the bell.

"Where is your mistress, Jane?" he asked the parlor-maid.

The girl had no idea. Mrs. Ruff had left for the village several hours
before; since then she had not been seen. Peter Ruff ate his luncheon
alone, and understood. The afternoon wore on, and at night he traveled
up to London. He knew better than to waste time by purposeless
inquiries. Instead he took the nine o'clock train the next morning to
Paris.

It was a chamber of death into which he was ushered, dismal--yet, of its
sort, unique, marvelous. The room itself might have been the sleeping
apartment of an empress--lofty, with white paneled walls, adorned simply
with gilded lines; with high windows, closely curtained now, so that
neither sound nor the light of day might penetrate into the room. In the
middle of the apartment upon a canopy bedside, which had once adorned
a king's palace, lay Madame de Maupassim. Her face was already touched
with the finger of death, yet her eyes were undimmed and her lips
unquivering. Her hands, covered with rings, lay out before her upon
the lace coverlid. Supported by many pillows, she was issuing her last
instructions with the cold precision of the man of affairs who makes the
necessary arrangements for a few days, absence from his business.

Peter Ruff, who had not even been allowed sufficient time to change his
traveling clothes, was brought without hesitation to her bedside. She
looked at him in silence for a moment, with a cold glitter in her eyes.

"You are four days late, Monsieur Peter Ruff," she remarked. "Why did
you not obey your first summons?

"Madame," he answered, "I thought there must be a misunderstanding. Four
years ago, I gave notice to the council that I had married and retired
into private life. A country farmer is of no further use to the world."

The woman's thin lip curled.

"From death and the Double Four," she said, "there is no resignation
which counts. You are as much our creature to-day, as I am the creature
of the disease which is carrying me across the threshold of death."

Peter Ruff remained silent. The woman's words seemed full of dread
significance. Besides, how was it possible to contradict the dying?

"It is upon the unwilling of the world," she continued, speaking slowly,
yet with extraordinary distinctness, "that its greatest honors are often
conferred. The name of my successor has been balloted for, secretly. It
is you, Peter Ruff, who have been chosen."

This time he was silent because he was literally bereft of words. This
woman was dying and fancying strange things! He looked from one to the
other of the stern, pale faces of those who were gathered around her
bedside. Seven of them there were--the same seven. At that moment their
eyes were all focused upon him. Peter Ruff shrank back.

"Madame," he murmured, "this cannot be."

Her lips twitched as though she would have smiled. "What we have
decided," she said, "we have decided. Nothing can alter that, not even
the will of Mr. Peter Ruff."

"I have been out of the world for four years," Peter Ruff protested. "I
have no longer ambitions, no longer any desire--"

"You lie!" the woman interrupted. "You lie or you do yourself an
injustice. We gave you four years, and looking into your face, I think
that it has been enough. I think that the weariness is there already. In
any case, the charge which I lay upon you in these my last moments, is
one which you can escape by death only."

A low murmur of voices from those others repeated her words.

"By death only!"

Peter Ruff opened his lips, but closed them again without speech. A
wave of emotion seemed passing through the room. Something strange was
happening. It was Death itself, which had come among them.

A morning journalist wrote of the death of Madame eloquently, and with
feeling. She had been a broad-minded aristocrat, a woman of brilliant
intellect and great friendships, a woman of whose inner life during the
last ten or fifteen years little was known, yet who, in happier times,
might well have played a great part in the history of her country.

Peter Ruff drove back from the cemetery with the Marquis de Sogrange,
and, for the first time since the death of Madame, serious subjects were
spoken of.

"I have waited here patiently," he declared, "but there are limits. I
want my wife."

Sogrange took him by the arm and led him into the library of the house
in the Rue de St. Quintaine. The six men who were already there waiting
rose to their feet.

"Gentlemen," the Marquis said, "is it your will that I should be
spokesman?"

There was a murmur of assent. Then Sogrange turned toward his companion,
and something new seemed to have crept into his manner--a solemn, almost
a threatening note.

"Peter Ruff," he continued, "you have trifled with the one organization
in this world which has never allowed liberties to be taken with it. Men
who have done greater service than you have died, for the disobedience
of a day. You have been treated leniently, according to the will of
Madame. According to her will, and in deference to the position which
you must now take up among us, we will treat you as no other has ever
been treated by us. The Double-Four admits your leadership and claims
you for its own."

"I am not prepared to discuss anything of the sort," Peter Ruff
declared, doggedly, "until my wife is restored to me."

The Marquis smiled.

"The traditions of your race, Mr. Ruff," he said, "are easily manifest
in you. Now hear our decision. Your wife shall be restored to you on the
day when you take up this position to which you have become entitled.
Sit down and listen."

Peter Ruff was a rebel at heart, but he felt the grip of iron.

"During these four years when you, my friend, have been growing turnips
and shooting your game, events in the great world have marched, new
powers have come into being, a new page of history has been opened. As
everything which has good at the heart evolves toward the good, so we
of the Double-Four have lifted our great enterprise onto a higher plane.
The world of criminals is still at our beck and call, we still claim
the right to draw the line between moral theft and immoral honesty, but
to-day the Double-Four is concerned with greater things. Within the
four walls of this room, within the hearing of these my brothers, whose
fidelity is as sure as the stones of Paris, I tell you a great secret.
The government of our country has craved for our aid and the aid of our
organization. It is no longer the wealth of the world alone, which we
may control, but the actual destinies of nations."

"What I suppose you mean to say is," Peter Ruff remarked, "that you've
been going in for politics?"

"You put it crudely, my English bull-dog," Sogrange answered, "but you
are right. We are occupied now by affairs of international importance.
More than once, during the last few month, ours has been the hand which
has changed the policy of an empire."

"Most interesting," Peter Ruff declared, "but so far as I, personally,
am concerned--"

"Listen," interrupted the Marquis. "Not a hundred yards from the French
Embassy, in London, there is waiting for you a house and servants no
less magnificent than the Embassy itself. You will become the ambassador
in London of the Double-Four, titular head of our association, a
personage whose power is second to none in your great city. I do not
address words of caution to you, my friend, because we have satisfied
ourselves as to your character and capacity before we consented that you
should occupy your present position. But I ask you to remember this. The
will of Madame lives even beyond the grave. The spirit which animated
her when alive breathes still in all of us. In London you will wield
a great power. Use it for the common good. And, remember this--the
Double-Four has never failed, the Double-Four never can fail."

"I am glad to hear you are so confident," Peter Ruff said. "Of course,
if I have to take this thing on, I shall do my best, but if I might
venture to allude, for a moment, to anything so trifling as my own
domestic affairs, I am very anxious to know about my wife."

Sogrange smiled.

"You will find Mrs. Ruff awaiting you in London," he announced. "Your
address is Porchester House, Porchester Square."

"When do I go there?" Peter Ruff asked.

"To-night," was the answer.

"And what do I do when I get there?" he persisted.

"For three days," the Marquis told him, "you will remain indoors, and
give audience to whoever may come to you. At the end of that time, you
will understand a little more of our purpose and our objects--perhaps,
even, of our power."

"I see difficulties," Peter Ruff remarked. "There will be a good many
people who will remember me when I had offices in Southampton Row. My
name, you see, is uncommon."

Sogrange drew a document from the breast pocket of his coat.

"When you leave this house to-night," he proclaimed, "we bid good-by
forever to Mr. Peter Ruff. You will find in this envelope the title
deeds of a small property which is our gift to you. Henceforth you will
be known by the name and title of your estates."

"Title!" Peter Ruff gasped.

"You will reappear in London," Sogrange continued, "as the Baron de
Grost."

Peter Ruff shook his head.

"It won't do," he declared, "people will find me out."

"There is nothing to be found out," the Marquis went on, a little
wearily. "Your country life has dulled your wits, Baron. The title and
the name are justly yours--they go with the property. For the rest, the
history of your family, and of your career up to the moment when you
enter Porchester House to-night, will be inside this packet. You can
peruse it upon the journey, and remember that we can, at all times,
bring a hundred witnesses, if necessary, to prove that you are who you
declare yourself to be. When you get to Charing-Cross, do not forget
that it will be the carriage and servants of the Baron de Grost which
await you."

Peter Ruff shrugged his shoulders.

"Well," he said, thoughtfully, "I suppose I shall get used to it."

"Naturally," Sogrange answered. "For the moment, we are passing through
a quiet time, necessitated by the mortal illness of Madame. You will be
able to spend the next few weeks in getting used to your new position.
You will have a great many callers, inspired by us, who will see that
you make the right acquaintances and that you join the right clubs.
At the same time, let me warn you always to be ready. There is trouble
brewing just now all over Europe. In one way or another, we may become
involved at any moment. The whole machinery of our society will be
explained to you by your secretary. You will find him already installed
at Porchester House. A glass of wine, Baron, before you leave."

Peter Ruff glanced at the clock.

"There are my things to pack," he began--

Sogrange smiled.

"Your valet is already on the front seat of the automobile which is
waiting," he remarked. "You will find him attentive and trustworthy.
The clothes which you brought with you we have taken the liberty of
dispensing with. You will find others in your trunk, and at Porchester
House you can send for any tailor you choose. One toast, Baron. We drink
to the Double-Four--to the great cause!"

There was a murmur of voices. Sogrange lifted once more his glass.

"May Peter Ruff rest in peace!" he said. "We drink to his ashes. We
drink long life and prosperity to the Baron de Grost!"



CHAPTER II. PRINCE ALBERT'S CARD DEBTS


It was half past twelve, and every table at the Berkeley Bridge Club
was occupied. On the threshold of the principal room a visitor, who was
being shown around, was asking questions of the secretary.

"Is there any gambling here?" he inquired.

The secretary shrugged his shoulders.

"I am afraid that some of them go a little beyond the club points,"
he answered. "You see that table against the wall? They are playing
shilling auction there."

The table near the wall was, perhaps, the most silent. The visitor
looked at it last and most curiously.

"Who is the dissipated-looking boy playing there?" he asked.

"Prince Albert of Trent," the secretary answered.

"And who is the little man, rather like Napoleon, who sits in the
easy-chair and watches?"

"The Baron de Grost."

"Never heard of him," the visitor declared.

"He is a very rich financier who has recently blossomed out in London,"
the secretary said. "One sees him everywhere. He has a good-looking
wife, who is playing in the other room."

"A good-looking wife," the visitor remarked, thoughtfully. "But, yes! I
thank you very much, Mr. Courtledge for showing me round. I will find my
friends now."

He turned away, leaving Courtledge alone, for a minute or two, on the
threshold of the card room. The secretary's attention was riveted upon
the table near the wall, and the frown on his face deepened. Just as he
was moving off, the Baron de Grost rose and joined him.

"They are playing a little high in here this evening," the latter
remarked quietly.

Courtledge frowned.

"I wish I had been in the club when they started," he said, gloomily.
"My task is all the more difficult now."

The Baron de Grost looked pensively, for a moment, at the cigarette
which he was carrying.

"By the bye, Mr. Courtledge," he asked, with apparent irrelevance, "what
was the name of the tall man with whom you were talking just now?"

"Count von Hern. He was brought in by one of the attaches at the German
Embassy."

Baron de Grost passed his arm through the secretary's and led him a
little way through the corridor.

"I thought I recognized our friend," he remarked. "His presence here
this evening is quite interesting."

"Why this evening?"

Baron de Grost avoided the question.

"Mr. Courtledge," he said, "I think that you will allow me to ask you
something without thinking me impertinent. You know that my wife and I
have taken some interest in Prince Albert. It is on his account, is it
not, that you look so gloomy to-night, as though you had an execution in
front of you?"

Courtledge nodded.

"I am afraid," he announced, "that we have come to the end of our tether
with that young man. It's a pity, too, for he isn't a bad sort, and it
will do the club no good if it gets about. But he hasn't settled up for
a fortnight, and the matter came before the committee this afternoon. He
owes one man over seven hundred pounds."

The Baron de Grost listened gravely.

"Are you going to speak to him to-night?" he asked.

"I must. I am instructed by the committee to ask him not to come to the
club again until he has discharged his obligations."

De Grost smoked thoughtfully for a few moments.

"Well," he said, "I suppose there is no getting out of it. Don't rub it
in too thick, though. I mean to have a talk with the boy afterwards, and
if I am satisfied with what he says, the money will be all right."

Courtledge raised his eyebrows.

"You know, of course, that he has a very small income and no
expectations?"

"I know that," Baron de Grost answered. "At the same time, it is hard
to forget that he really is a member of the royal house, even though the
kingdom is a small one."

"Not only is the kingdom a small one," Courtledge remarked, "but there
are something like five lives between him and the succession. However,
it's very good-natured of you, Baron, to think of lending him a hand.
I'll let him down as lightly as I can. You know him better than any one;
I wonder if you could make an excuse to send him out of the room? I'd
rather no one saw me talking to him."

"Quite easy," said the Baron. "I'll manage it."

The rubber was just finishing as De Grost re-entered the room. He
touched the young man, who had been the subject of their conversation,
upon the shoulder.

"My wife would like to speak to you for a moment," he said. "She is in
the other room."

Prince Albert rose to his feet. He was looking very pale, and the
ash-tray in front of him was littered with cigarette ends.

"I will go and pay my respects to the Baroness," he declared. "It will
change my luck, perhaps. Au revoir!"

He passed out of the room and all eyes followed him.

"Has the Prince been losing again to-night?" the Baron asked.

One of the three men at the table shrugged his shoulders.

"He owes me about five hundred pounds," he said, "and to tell you the
truth, I'd really rather not play any more. I don't mind high points,
but his doubles are absurd."

"Why not break up the table?" the Baron suggested. "The boy can scarcely
afford such stakes."

He strolled out of the room in time to meet the Prince, who was standing
in the corridor. A glance at his face was sufficient--the secretary had
spoken. He would have hurried off, but the Baron intercepted him.

"You are leaving, Prince?" he asked.

"Yes!" was the somewhat curt reply.

"I will walk a little way with you, if I may," De Grost continued.
"My wife brought Lady Brownloe, and the brougham only holds two
comfortably."

Prince Albert made no reply. He seemed just then scarcely capable of
speech. When they had reached the pavement, however, the Baron took his
arm.

"My young friend," he inquired, "how much does it all amount to?"

The Prince turned towards him with darkening face.

"You knew, then," he demanded, "that Mr. Courtledge was going to speak
to me of my debts?"

"I was sorry to hear that it had become necessary," the Baron answered.
"You must not take it too seriously. You know very well that at a club
like the Berkeley, which has such a varied membership, card debts must
be settled on the spot."

"Mine will be settled before mid-day to-morrow," the young man declared,
sullenly. "I am not sure that it may not be to-night."

De Grost was silent for a moment. They had turned into Piccadilly. He
summoned a taxicab.

"Do you mind coming round to my house and talking to me, for a few
minutes?" he asked.

The young man hesitated.

"I'll come round later on," he suggested. "I have a call to make first."

De Grost held open the door of the taxicab.

"I want a talk with you," he said, "before you make that call."

"You speak as though you knew where I was going," the Prince remarked.

His companion made no reply, but the door of the taxicab was still open
and his hand had fallen ever so slightly upon the other's shoulder. The
Prince yielded to the stronger will. He stepped inside.

They drove in silence to Porchester Square. The Baron led the way
through into his own private sanctum, and closed the door carefully.
Cigars, cigarettes, whiskey and soda, and liqueurs were upon the
sideboard.

"Help yourself, Prince," he begged, "and then, if you don't mind, I am
going to ask you a somewhat impertinent question."

The Prince drank the greater part of a whiskey and soda and lit a
cigarette. Then he set his tumbler down and frowned.

"Baron de Grost," he said, "you have been very kind to me since I have
had the pleasure of your acquaintance. I hope you will not ask me any
question that I cannot answer."

"On the contrary," his host declared, "the question which I shall ask
will be one which it will be very much to your advantage to answer.
I will put it as plainly as possible. You are going, as you admit
yourself, to pay your card debts to-night or to-morrow morning, and you
are certainly not going to pay them out of your income. Where is the
money coming from?"

Albert of Trent seemed suddenly to remember that after all he was of
royal descent. He drew himself up and bore himself, for a moment, as a
Prince should.

"Baron de Grost," he said, "you pass the limits of friendship when you
ask such a question. I take the liberty of wishing you good-night."

He moved towards the door. The Baron, however, was in the way--a strong,
motionless figure, and his tone, when he spoke again, was convincing.

"Prince," he declared, "I speak in your own interests. You have not
chosen to answer my question. Let me answer it for you. The money to
pay your debts, and I know not how much besides, was to come from the
Government of a country with whom none of your name or nationality
should willingly have dealings."

The Prince started violently. The shock caused him to forget his
new-found dignity.

"How, in the devil's name, do you know that?" he demanded.

"I know more," the Baron continued. "I know the consideration which you
were to give for this money."

Then the Prince began plainly to show the terror which had crept into
his heart--the terror and the shame. He looked at his host like a man
dazed with hearing strange things.

"It comes to nothing," he said, in a hard, unnatural tone. "It is a
foolish bargain, indeed. Between me and the throne are four lives.
My promise is not worth the paper it is written upon. I shall never
succeed."

"That, Prince, is probably where you are misinformed," the Baron
replied. "You are just now in disgrace with your family, and you hear
from them only what the newspapers choose to tell."

"Has anything been kept back from me?" the Prince asked.

"Tell me this first," De Grost insisted. "Am I not right in assuming
that you have signed a solemn undertaking that, in the event of your
succeeding to the throne of your country, you will use the whole of your
influence towards concluding a treaty with a certain Power, one of the
provisions of which is that that Power shall have free access to any one
of your ports in the event of war with England?"

There was a moment's silence. The Prince clutched the back of the chair
against which he was leaning.

"Supposing it were true?" he muttered. "It is, after all, an idle
promise."

The Baron shook his head slowly.

"Prince," he said, "it is no such idle promise as it seems. The man who
is seeking to trade upon your poverty knew more than he would tell you.
You may have read in the newspapers that your two cousins are confined
to the palace with slight colds. The truth has been kept quiet, but it
is none the less known to a few of us. The so-called cold is really a
virulent attack of diphtheria, and, according to to-night's reports,
neither Prince Cyril nor Prince Henry are expected to live."

"Is this true?" the Prince gasped.

"It is true," his host declared. "My information can be relied upon."

The Prince sat down suddenly. He was looking whiter than ever, and very
scared.

"Even then," he murmured, "there is John."

"You have been out of touch with your family for some months," De
Grost reminded his visitor. "One or two of us, however, know what you,
probably, will soon hear. Prince John has taken the vows and solemnly
resigned, before the Archbishop, his heirship. He will be admitted into
the Roman Catholic Church in a week or two, and will go straight to a
monastery."

"It's likely enough," the Prince gasped. "He always wanted to be a
monk."

"You see now," the Baron continued, "that your friend's generosity was
not so wonderful a thing. Count von Hern was watching you to-night at
the Bridge Club. He has gone home; he is waiting now to receive you.
Apart from that, the man Nisch, with whom you have played so much, is a
confederate of his, a political tout, not to say a spy."

"The brute!" Prince Albert muttered. "I am obliged to you, Baron, for
having warned me," he added, rising slowly to his feet. "I shall sign
nothing. There is another way."

De Grost shook his head.

"My young friend," he said, "there is another way, indeed, but not the
way you have in your mind at this moment. I offer you an alternative.
I will give you notes for the full amount you owe to-night, so that
you can, if you will, go back to the club direct from here and pay
everything--on one condition."

"Condition!"

"You must promise to put your hand to no document which the Count von
Hern may place before you, and pledge your word that you have no further
dealings with him."

"But why should you do this for me?" the Prince exclaimed. "I do not
know that I shall ever be able to pay you."

"If you succeed to the throne, you will pay me," the Baron de Grost
said. "If you do not succeed, remember that I am a rich man, and that I
shall miss this money no more than the sixpence which you might throw to
a crossing-sweeper."

The Prince was silent. His host unlocked a small cabinet and took from
it a bundle of notes.

"Tell me the whole amount you owe," he insisted, "every penny, mind."

"Sixteen hundred pounds," was the broken reply.

De Grost counted a little roll and laid it upon the table.

"There are two thousand pounds," he said. "Listen, Prince. A name such
as you bear carries with it certain obligations. Remember that, and try
and shape your life accordingly. Take my advice--go back to your own
country and find some useful occupation there, even if you only rejoin
your regiment and wear its uniform. The time may come when your country
will require you, for her work comes sooner or later to every man. You
are leading a rotten life over here, a life which might have led to
disaster and dishonor, a life, as you know, which might have ended in
your rooms to-night with a small bullet hole in your forehead. Brave men
do not die like that. Take up the money, please."

The Baron de Grost sent a cipher dispatch to Paris that night, and
received an answer which pleased him.

"It is a small thing," he read, "but it is well done. Particulars of a
matter of grave importance will reach you to-morrow." letter.



CHAPTER III. THE AMBASSADOR'S WIFE


Alone in his study, with fast-locked door, Peter, Baron de Grost, sat
reading, word by word, with zealous care the despatch from Paris which
had just been delivered into his hands. From the splendid suite of
reception rooms which occupied the whole of the left-hand side of the
hall came the faint sound of music. The street outside was filled
with automobiles and carriages setting down their guests. Madame was
receiving to-night a gathering of very distinguished men and women, and
it was only for a few moments, and on very urgent business indeed, that
her husband had dared to leave her side.

The room in which he sat was in darkness except for the single heavily
shaded electric lamp which stood by his elbow. Nevertheless, there was
sufficient illumination to show that Peter had achieved one, at least,
of his ambitions. He was wearing court dress, with immaculate black silk
stockings and diamond buckles upon his shoes. A red ribbon was in
his buttonhole and a French order hung from his neck. His passion for
clothes was certainly amply ministered to by the exigencies of his new
position. Once more he read those last few words of this unexpectedly
received despatch, read them with a frown upon his forehead and the
light of trouble in his eyes. For three months he had done nothing but
live the life of an ordinary man of fashion and wealth. His first task,
for which, to tell the truth, he had been anxiously waiting, was here
before him, and he found it little to his liking. Again, he read slowly
to himself the last paragraph of Sogrange's.

As ever, dear friend, one of the greatest sayings which the men of my
race have ever perpetrated once more justifies itself--"Cherchez la
femme!" Of Monsieur we have no manner of doubt. We have tested him in
every way. And to all appearance Madame should also be above suspicion.
Yet those things of which I have spoken have happened. For two hours
this morning I was closeted with Picon here. Very reluctantly he has
placed the matter in my hands. I pass it on to you. It is your first
undertaking, cher Baron, and I wish you bon fortune. A man of gallantry,
as I know you are, you may regret that it should be a woman, and a
beautiful woman, too, against whom the finger must be pointed. Yet,
after all, the fates are strong and the task is yours.

SOGRANGE.


The music from the reception rooms grew louder and more insistent.
Peter rose to his feet, and moving to the fireplace, struck a match
and carefully destroyed the letter which he had been reading. Then he
straightened himself, glanced for a moment at the mirror, and left the
room to join his guests.


"Monsieur le Baron jests," the lady murmured.

The Baron de Grost shook his head.

"Indeed, no, Madame!" he answered earnestly. "France has offered us
nothing more delightful in the whole history of our entente than the
loan of yourself and your brilliant husband. Monsieur de Lamborne makes
history among us politically, while Madame--"

The Baron sighed, and his companion leaned a little towards him; her
dark eyes were full of sentimental regard.

"Yes?" she murmured. "Continue. It is my wish."

"I am the good friend of Monsieur de Lamborne," the Baron said, and in
his tone there seemed to lurk some far-away touch of regret, "yet Madame
knows that her conquests here have been many."

The Ambassador's wife fanned herself and remained silent for a moment,
a faint smile playing at the corners of her full, curving lips. She
was, indeed, a very beautiful woman--elegant, a Parisienne to the
finger-tips, with pale cheeks, but eyes dark and soft, eyes trained to
her service, whose flash was an inspiration, whose very droop had set
beating the hearts of men less susceptible than the Baron de Grost. Her
gown was magnificent, of amber satin, a color daring, but splendid; the
outline of her figure, as she leaned slightly back in her seat, might
indeed have been traced by the inspired finger of some great sculptor.
De Grost, whose reputation as a man of gallantry was well established,
felt the whole charm of her presence--felt, too, the subtle indications
of preference which she seemed inclined to accord to him. There was
nothing which eyes could say which hers were not saying during those few
minutes. The Baron, indeed, glanced around a little nervously. His wife
had still her moments of unreasonableness; it was just as well that
she was engaged with some of her guests at the farther end of the
apartments.

"You are trying to turn my head," his beautiful companion whispered.
"You flatter me."

"It is not possible," he answered.

Again the fan fluttered for a moment before her face. She sighed.

"Ah. Monsieur!" she continued, dropping her voice until it scarcely
rose above a whisper, "there are not many men like you. You speak of my
husband and his political gifts. Yet what, after all, do they amount to?
What is his position, indeed, if one glanced behind the scenes, compared
with yours?"

The face of the Baron de Grost became like a mask. It was as though
suddenly he had felt the thrill of danger close at hand, danger even in
that scented atmosphere wherein he sat.

"Alas, Madame!" he answered, "it is you, now, who are pleased to jest.
Your husband is a great and powerful ambassador. I, unfortunately, have
no career, no place in life save the place which the possession of a few
millions gives to a successful financier."

She laughed very softly, and again her eyes spoke to him. "Monsieur,"
she murmured, "you and I together could make a great alliance, is it not
so?"

"Madame," he faltered, doubtfully, "if one dared hope--"

Once more the fire of her eyes, this time not only voluptuous. Was the
man stupid, she wondered, or only cautious?

"If that alliance were once concluded," she said, softly, "one might
hope for everything."

"If it rests only with me," he began, seriously, "oh, Madame!"

He seemed overcome. Madame was gracious, but was he really stupid or
only very much in earnest?

"To be one of the world's money kings," she whispered, "it is
wonderful--that. It is power--supreme, absolute power. There is nothing
beyond, there is nothing greater."

Then the Baron, who was watching her closely, caught another gleam in
her eyes, and he began to understand. He had seen it before among a
certain type of her countrywomen--the greed of money. He looked at
her jewels and he remembered that, for an ambassador, her husband was
reputed to be a poor man. The cloud of misgiving passed away from him;
he settled down to the game.

"If money could only buy the desire of one's heart," he murmured.
"Alas!"

His eyes seemed to seek out Monsieur de Lamborne among the moving
throngs. She laughed softly, and her hand brushed his.

"Money and one other thing, Monsieur le Baron," she whispered in his
ear, "can buy the jewels from a crown--can buy, even, the heart of a
woman--"

A movement of approaching guests caught them up, and parted them for a
time. The Baroness de Grost was at home from ten till one, and her rooms
were crowded. The Baron found himself drawn on one side, a few minutes
later, by Monsieur de Lamborne himself.

"I have been looking for you, De Grost," the latter declared. "Where can
we talk for a moment?"

His host took the ambassador by the arm and led him into a retired
corner. Monsieur de Lamborne was a tall, slight man, somewhat cadaverous
looking, with large features, hollow eyes, thin but carefully arranged
gray hair, and a pointed gray beard. He wore a frilled shirt, and an
eye-glass suspended by a broad black ribbon hung down upon his chest.
His face, as a rule, was imperturbable enough, but he had the air, just
now, of a man greatly disturbed.

"We cannot be overheard here," De Grost remarked. "It must be an affair
of a few words only, though."

Monsieur de Lamborne wasted no time in preliminaries. "This afternoon,"
he said, "I received from my Government papers of immense importance,
which I am to hand over to your Foreign Minister at eleven o'clock
to-morrow morning."

The Baron nodded.

"Well?"

De Lamborne's thin fingers trembled as they played nervously with the
ribbon of his eye-glass.

"Listen," he continued, dropping his voice a little. "Bernadine has
undertaken to send a copy of their contents to Berlin by to-morrow
night's mail."

"How do you know that?"

The ambassador hesitated.

"We, too, have spies at work," he remarked, grimly. "Bernadine wrote and
sent a messenger with the letter to Berlin. The man's body is drifting
down the Channel, but the letter is in my pocket."

"The letter from Bernadine?"

"Yes."

"What does he say?"

"Simply that a verbatim copy of the document in question will be
despatched to Berlin to-morrow evening, without fail."

"There are no secrets between us," De Grost declared, smoothly. "What is
the special importance of this document?"

De Lamborne shrugged his shoulders.

"Since you ask," he said, "I will tell you. You know of the slight
coolness which there has been between our respective Governments. Our
people have felt that the policy of your ministers in expending all
their energies and resources in the building of a great fleet to the
utter neglect of your army is a wholly one-sided arrangement, so far as
we are concerned. In the event of a simultaneous attack by Germany upon
France and England, you would be utterly powerless to render us any
measure of assistance. If Germany should attack England alone, it is
the wish of your Government that we should be pledged to occupy
Alsace-Lorraine. You, on the other hand, could do nothing for us, if
Germany's first move were made against France."

The Baron was deeply interested, although the matter was no new one to
him.

"Go on," he directed. "I am waiting for you to tell me the specific
contents of this document."

"The English Government has asked us two questions: first, how many
complete army corps we consider she ought to place at our disposal in
this eventuality; and, secondly, at what point should we expect them
to be concentrated. The despatch which I received to-night contains the
reply to these questions."

"Which Bernadine has promised to forward to Berlin to-morrow night," the
Baron remarked, softly.

De Lamborne nodded.

"You perceive," he said, "the immense importance of the affair. The very
existence of that document is almost a casus belli."

"At what time did the despatch arrive," the Baron asked, "and what has
been its history since?"

"It arrived at six o'clock, and went straight into the inner pocket of
my coat; it has not been out of my possession for a single second. Even
while I talk to you I can feel it."

"And your plans? How are you intending to dispose of it to-night?"

"On my return to the Embassy I shall place it in the safe, lock it up,
and remain watching it until morning."

"There doesn't seem to be much chance for Bernadine," the Baron
remarked, thoughtfully.

"But there must be no chance--no chance at all," Monsieur de Lamborne
asserted, with a note of passion in his thin voice. "It is incredible,
preposterous, that he should even make the attempt. I want you to
come home with me and share my vigil. You shall be my witness in case
anything happens. We will watch together."

De Grost reflected for a moment.

"Bernadine makes few mistakes," he said, thoughtfully. Monsieur de
Lamborne passed his hand across his forehead.

"Do I not know it?" he muttered. "In this instance, though, it seems
impossible for him to succeed. The time is so short and the conditions
so difficult. I may count upon your assistance, Baron?"

The Baron drew from his pocket a crumpled piece of paper.

"I received a telegram from headquarters this after noon," he said,
"with instructions to place myself entirely at your disposal."

"You will return with me, then, to the Embassy?" Monsieur de Lamborne
asked, eagerly.

The Baron de Grost did not at once reply. He was standing in one of
his characteristic attitudes, his hands clasped behind him, his head
a little thrust forward, watching with every appearance of courteous
interest the roomful of guests, stationary just now, listening to the
performance of a famous violinist. It was, perhaps, by accident that
his eyes met those of Madame de Lamborne, but she smiled at him subtly,
more, perhaps, with her wonderful eyes than her lips themselves. She
was the centre of a very brilliant group, a most beautiful woman holding
court, as was only right and proper, among her admirers. The Baron
sighed.

"No," he said, "I shall not return with you, De Lamborne. I want you to
follow my suggestions, if you will."

"But, assuredly!"

"Leave here early and go to your club. Remain there until one, then come
to the Embassy. I shall be there awaiting your arrival."

"You mean that you will go there alone? I do not understand," the
ambassador protested. "Why should I go to my club? I do not at all
understand."

"Nevertheless, do as I say," De Grost insisted. "For the present, excuse
me. I must look after my guests."

The music had ceased, there was a movement toward the supper-room. The
Baron offered his arm to Madame de Lamborne, who welcomed him with a
brilliant smile. Her husband, although, for a Frenchman, he was by no
means of a jealous disposition, was conscious of a vague feeling of
uneasiness as he watched them pass out of the room together. A few
minutes later he made his excuses to his wife and with a reluctance for
which he could scarcely account left the house. There was something
in the air, he felt, which he did not understand. He would not have
admitted it to himself, but he more than half divined the truth. The
vacant seat in his wife's carriage was filled that night by the Baron de
Grost.

At one o'clock precisely Monsieur de Lamborne returned to his house
and heard with well-simulated interest that Monsieur le Baron de Grost
awaited his arrival in the library. He found De Grost gazing with
obvious respect at the ponderous safe let into the wall.

"A very fine affair--this," he remarked, motioning with his head toward
it.

"The best of its kind," Monsieur de Lamborne admitted. "No burglar yet
has ever succeeded in opening one of its type. Here is the packet," he
added, drawing the document from his pocket. "You shall see me place it
in safety myself."

The Baron stretched out his hand and examined the sealed envelope for a
moment closely. Then he moved to the writing-table, and, placing it upon
the letter scales, made a note of its exact weight. Finally, he watched
it deposited in the ponderous safe, suggested the word to which the
lock was set, and closed the door. Monsieur de Lamborne heaved a sigh of
relief.

"I fancy this time," he said, "that our friends at Berlin will be
disappointed. Couch or easy-chair, Baron?"

"The couch, if you please," De Grost replied, "a strong cigar, and a
long whiskey and soda. So! Now, for our vigil."

The hours crawled away. Once De Grost sat up and listened.

"Any rats about?" he inquired.

The ambassador was indignant.

"I have never heard one in my life," he answered. "This is quite a
modern house."

De Grost dropped his match-box and stooped to pick it up.

"Any lights on anywhere, except in this room?" he asked.

"Certainly not," Monsieur de Lamborne answered. "It is past three
o'clock, and every one has gone to bed."

The Baron rose and softly unbolted the door. The passage outside was in
darkness. He listened intently, for a moment, and returned, yawning.

"One fancies things," he murmured, apologetically.

"For example?" De Lamborne demanded.

The Baron shook his head.

"One mistakes," he declared. "The nerves become over sensitive."

The dawn broke and the awakening hum of the city grew louder and louder.
De Grost rose and stretched himself.

"Your servants are moving about in the house," he remarked. "I think
that we might consider our vigil at an end."

Monsieur de Lamborne rose with alacrity.

"My friend," he said, "I feel that I have made false pretenses to you.
With the day I have no fear. A thousand pardons for your sleepless
night."

"My sleepless night counts for nothing," the Baron assured him, "but,
before I go, would it not be as well that we glance together inside the
safe?"

De Lamborne shook out his keys.

"I was about to suggest it," he replied.

The ambassador arranged the combination and pressed the lever. Slowly
the great door swung back. The two men peered in.

"Untouched!" De Lamborne exclaimed, a little note of triumph in his
tone.

De Grost said nothing, but held out his hand.

"Permit me," he interposed.

De Lamborne was conscious of a faint sense of uneasiness. His companion
walked across the room and carefully weighed the packet.

"Well?" De Lamborne cried. "Why do you do that? What is wrong?"

The Baron turned and faced him.

"My friend," he said, "this is not the same packet." The ambassador
stared at him incredulously.

"You are jesting!" he exclaimed. "Miracles do not happen. The thing is
impossible."

"It is the impossible, then, which has happened," De Grost replied,
swiftly. "This packet can scarcely have gained two ounces in the night.
Besides, the seal is fuller. I have an eye for these details."

De Lamborne leaned against the back of the table. His eyes were a little
wild, but he laughed hoarsely.

"We fight, then, against the creatures of another world," he declared.
"No human being could have opened that safe last night."

The Baron hesitated.

"Monsieur de Lamborne," he said, "the room adjoining is your wife's."

"It is the salon of Madame," the ambassador admitted.

"What are the electrical appliances doing there?" the Baron demanded.
"Don't look at me like that, De Lamborne. Remember that I was here
before you arrived."

"My wife takes an electric massage every day," Monsieur de Lamborne
answered, in a hard, unnatural voice. "In what way is Monsieur le Baron
concerned in my wife's doings?"

"I think that there need be no answer to that question," De Grost said,
quietly. "It is a greater tragedy which we have to face."

Quick as lightning, the Frenchman's hand shot out. De Grost barely
avoided the blow.

"You shall answer to me for this, sir," De Lamborne cried. "It is the
honor of my wife which you assail."

"I maintain only," the Baron answered, "that your safe was entered from
that room. A search will prove it."

"There will be no search there," De Lamborne declared, fiercely. "I am
the Ambassador of France, and my power under this roof is absolute. I
say that you shall not cross that threshold."

De Grost's expression did not change. Only his hands were suddenly
outstretched with a curious gesture--the four fingers were raised, the
thumbs depressed. Monsieur De Lamborne collapsed.

"I submit," he muttered. "It is you who are the master. Search where you
will."


"Monsieur has arrived?" the woman demanded, breathlessly.

The proprietor of the restaurant himself bowed a reply. His client was
evidently well-known to him. He answered her in French--French, with a
very guttural accent.

"Monsieur has ascended some few minutes ago. Myself, I have not had the
pleasure of wishing him bon aperitif, but Fritz announced his coming."

The woman drew a little sigh of relief. A vague misgiving had troubled
her during the last few hours. She raised her veil as she mounted the
narrow staircase which led to the one private room at the Hotel de
Lorraine. She entered, without tapping, the room at the head of the
stairs, pushing open the ill-varnished door with its white-curtained
top. At first she thought that the little apartment was empty.

"Are you there?" she exclaimed, advancing a few steps.

The figure of a man glided from behind the worn screen close by her
side, and stood between her and the door.

"Madame!" De Grost said, bowing low.

Even then she scarcely realized that she was trapped. "You?" she cried.
"You, Baron? But I do not understand. You have followed me here?"

"On the contrary, Madame," he answered. "I have preceded you."

Her colossal vanity triumphed over her natural astuteness. The man had
employed spies to watch her! He had lost his head. It was an awkward
matter, this, but it was to be arranged. She held out her hands.

"Monsieur," she said, "let me beg you now to go away. If you care to,
come and see me this evening. I will explain everything. It is a little
family affair which brings me here."

"A family affair, Madame, with Bernadine, the enemy of France," De Grost
declared, gravely.

She collapsed miserably, her fingers grasping at the air, the cry which
broke from her lips harsh and unnatural. Before he could tell what was
happening, she was on her knees before him.

"Spare me," she begged, trying to seize his hands.

"Madame," De Grost answered, "I am not your judge. You will kindly hand
over to me the document which you are carrying."

She took it from the bosom of her dress. De Grost glanced at it, and
placed it in his breast-pocket.

"And now?" she faltered.

De Grost sighed--she was a very beautiful woman.

"Madame," he said, "the career of a spy is, as you have doubtless
sometimes realized, a dangerous one."

"It is finished," she assured him, breathlessly. "Monsieur le Baron, you
will keep my secret? Never again, I swear it, will I sin like this. You,
yourself, shall be the trustee of my honor."

Her eyes and arms besought him, but it was surely a changed man--this.
There was none of the suaveness, the delicate responsiveness of her
late host at Porchester House. The man who faced her now possessed the
features of a sphinx. There was not even pity in his face.

"You will not tell my husband?" she gasped.

"Your husband already knows, Madame," was the quiet reply. "Only a few
hours ago I proved to him whence had come the leakage of so many of our
secrets lately."

She swayed upon her feet.

"He will never forgive me," she cried.

"There are others," De Grost declared, "who forgive more rarely, even,
than husbands."

A sudden illuminating flash of horror told her the truth. She closed her
eyes and tried to run from the room.

"I will not be told," she screamed. "I will not hear. I do not know who
you are. I will live a little longer."

"Madame," De Grost said, "the Double-Four wages no war with women, save
with spies only. The spy has no sex. For the sake of your family, permit
me to send you back to your husband's house."

That night, two receptions and a dinner party were postponed. All London
was sympathizing with Monsieur de Lamborne, and a great many women swore
never again to take a sleeping draught. Madame de Lamborne lay dead
behind the shelter of those drawn blinds, and by her side an empty
phial.



CHAPTER IV. THE MAN PROM THE OLD TESTAMENT


Bernadine, sometimes called the Count von Hern, was lunching at
the Savoy with the pretty wife of a Cabinet Minister, who was just
sufficiently conscious of the impropriety of her action to render the
situation interesting.

"I wish you would tell me, Count von Hern," she said, soon after they
had settled down in their places, "why my husband seems to object to
you so much. I simply dared not tell him that we were going to lunch
together, and as a rule he doesn't mind what I do in that way."

Bernadine smiled slowly.

"Ah, well," he remarked, "your husband is a politician and a very
cautious man. I dare say he is like some of those others, who believe
that, because I am a foreigner and live in London, therefore I am a
spy."

"You a spy," she laughed. "What nonsense!"

"Why nonsense?"

She shrugged her shoulders. She was certainly a very pretty woman, and
her black gown set off to fullest advantage her deep red hair and fair
complexion.

"I suppose because I can't imagine you anything of the sort," she
declared. "You see, you hunt and play polo, and do everything which the
ordinary Englishmen do. Then one meets you everywhere. I think, Count
von Hern, that you are much too spoilt, for one thing, to take life
seriously."

"You do me an injustice," he murmured.

"Of course," she chattered on, "I don't really know what spies do. One
reads about them in these silly stories, but I have never felt sure that
as live people they exist at all. Tell me, Count, what could a foreign
spy do in England?"

Bernadine twirled his fair moustache and shrugged his shoulders.

"Indeed, my dear lady," he admitted, "I scarcely know what a spy could
do nowadays. A few years ago, you English people were all so trusting.
Your fortifications, your battleships, not to speak of your country
itself, were wholly at the disposal of the enterprising foreigner who
desired to acquire information. The party who governed Great Britain
then seemed to have some strange idea that these things made for peace.
To-day, however, all that is changed."

"You seem to know something about it," she remarked.

"I am afraid that mine is really only the superficial point of view," he
answered, "but I do know that there is a good deal of information,
which seems absolutely insignificant in itself, for which some foreign
countries are willing to pay. For instance, there was a Cabinet Council
yesterday, I believe, and some one was going to suggest that a secret,
but official, visit be paid to your new harbor works up at Rosyth. An
announcement will probably be made in the papers during the next few
days as to whether the visit is to be undertaken or not. Yet there are
countries who are willing to pay for knowing even such an insignificant
item of news as that, a few hours before the rest of the world."

Lady Maxwell laughed.

"Well, I could earn that little sum of money," she declared gayly, "for
my husband has just made me cancel a dinner-party for next Thursday,
because he has to go up to the stupid place."

Bernadine smiled. It was really a very unimportant matter, but he loved
to feel, even in his idle moments, that he was not altogether wasting
his time.

"I am sorry," he said, "that I am not myself acquainted with one of
these mythical personages that I might return you the value of your
marvelous information. If I dared think, however, that it would be in
any way acceptable, I could offer you the diversion of a restaurant
dinner-party for that night. The Duchess of Castleford has kindly
offered to act as hostess for me and we are all going on to the Gaiety
afterwards."

"Delightful!" Lady Maxwell exclaimed. "I should love to come."

Bernadine bowed.

"You have, then, dear lady, fulfilled your destiny," he said. "You have
given secret information to a foreign person of mysterious identity, and
accepted payment."

Now, Bernadine was a man of easy manners and unruffled composure. To the
natural insouciance of his aristocratic bringing up, he had added the
steely reserve of a man moving in the large world, engaged more often
than not in some hazardous enterprise. Yet, for once in his life, and
in the midst of the idlest of conversations, he gave himself away so
utterly that even this woman with whom he was lunching--a very butterfly
lady, indeed could not fail to perceive it. She looked at him in
something like astonishment. Without the slightest warning his face had
become set in a rigid stare, his eyes were filled with the expression
of a man who sees into another world. The healthy color faded from his
cheeks, he was white even to the parted lips, the wine dripped from his
raised glass onto the tablecloth.

"Why, whatever is the matter with you?" she demanded. "Is it a ghost
that you see?"

Bernadine's effort was superb, but he was too clever to deny the shock.

"A ghost, indeed," he answered, "the ghost of a man whom every newspaper
in Europe has declared to be dead."

Her eyes followed his. The two people who were being ushered to a
seat in their immediate vicinity were certainly of somewhat unusual
appearance. The man was tall, and thin as a lath, and he wore the
clothes of the fashionable world without awkwardness, yet with the
air of one who was wholly unaccustomed to them. His cheek-bones were
remarkably high, and receded so quickly towards his pointed chin that
his cheeks were little more than hollows. His eyes were dry and burning,
flashing here and there as though the man himself were continually
oppressed by some furtive fear. His thick black hair was short cropped,
his forehead high and intellectual. He was a strange figure, indeed,
in such a gathering, and his companion only served to accentuate the
anachronisms of his appearance. She was, above all things, a woman of
the moment--fair, almost florid, a little thick-set, with tightly-laced,
yet passable figure. Her eyes were blue, her hair light-colored. She
wore magnificent furs, and, as she threw aside her boa, she disclosed a
mass of jewelry around her neck and upon her bosom, almost barbaric in
its profusion and setting.

"What an extraordinary couple!" Lady Maxwell whispered.

Bernadine smiled.

"The man looks as though he had stepped out of the Old Testament," he
murmured.

Lady Maxwell's interest was purely feminine, and was riveted now upon
the jewelry worn by the woman. Bernadine, under the mask of his habitual
indifference, which had easily reassumed, seemed to be looking away out
of the restaurant into the great square of a half-savage city, looking
at that marvelous crowd, numbered by their thousands, even by their
hundreds of thousands, of men and women whose arms flashed out toward
the snow-hung heavens, whose lips were parted in one chorus of rapturous
acclamation; looking beyond them to the tall, emaciated form of the
bare-headed priest in his long robes, his wind-tossed hair and wild
eyes, standing alone before that multitude, in danger of death, or
worse, at any moment--their idol, their hero. And again, as the memories
came flooding into his brain, the scene passed away, and he saw the
bare room with its whitewashed walls and blocked-up windows; he felt
the darkness, lit only by those flickering candles. He saw the white,
passion-wrung faces of the men who clustered together around the rude
table, waiting; he heard their murmurs, he saw the fear born in their
eyes. It was the night when their leader did not come.

Bernadine poured himself out a glass of wine and drank it slowly. The
mists were clearing away now. He was in London, at the Savoy Restaurant,
and within a few yards of him sat the man with whose name all Europe
once had rung--the man hailed by some as martyr, and loathed by others
as the most fiendish Judas who ever drew breath. Bernadine was not
concerned with the moral side of this strange encounter. How best to use
his knowledge of this man's identity was the question which beat upon
his brain. What use could be made of him, what profit for his country
and himself? And then a fear--a sudden, startling fear. Little profit,
perhaps, to be made, but the danger--the danger of this man alive with
such secrets locked in his bosom! The thought itself was terrifying, and
even as he realized it a significant thing happened--he caught the eye
of the Baron de Grost, lunching alone at a small table just inside the
restaurant.

"You are not at all amusing," his guest declared. "It is nearly five
minutes since you have spoken."

"You, too, have been absorbed," he reminded her.

"It is that woman's jewels," she admitted. "I never saw anything more
wonderful. The people are not English, of course. I wonder where they
come from."

"One of the Eastern countries, without a doubt," he replied, carelessly.

Lady Maxwell sighed.

"He is a peculiar-looking man," she said, "but one could put up with
a good deal for jewels like that. What are you doing this
afternoon--picture-galleries or your club?"

"Neither, unfortunately," Bernadine answered. "I have promised to go
with a friend to look at some polo ponies."

"Do you know," she remarked, "that we have never been to see those
Japanese prints yet?"

"The gallery is closed until Monday," he assured her, falsely. "If you
will honor me then, I shall be delighted."

She shrugged her shoulders but said nothing. She had an idea that she
was being dismissed, but Bernadine, without the least appearance of
hurry, gave her no opportunity for any further suggestions. He handed
her into the automobile, and returned at once into the restaurant. He
touched Baron de Grost upon the shoulder.

"My friend, the enemy!" he exclaimed, smiling.

"At your service in either capacity," the Baron replied. Bernadine made
a grimace and accepted the chair which De Grost had indicated.

"If I may, I will take my coffee with you," he said. "I am growing old.
It does not amuse me so much to lunch with a pretty woman. One has to
entertain, and one forgets the serious business of lunching. I will take
my coffee and cigarettes in peace."

De Grost gave an order to the waiter and leaned back in his chair.

"Now," he suggested, "tell me exactly what it is that has brought you
back into the restaurant?"

Bernadine shrugged his shoulders.

"Why not the pleasure of this few minutes' conversation with you?" he
asked.

The Baron carefully selected a cigar, and lit it.

"That," he said, "goes well, but there are other things."

"As, for instance?"

De Grost leaned back in his chair, and watched the smoke of his cigar
curl upwards.

"One talks too much," he remarked. "Before the cards are upon the table,
it is not wise."

They chatted upon various matters. De Grost himself seemed in no hurry
to depart, nor did his companion show any signs of impatience. It was
not until the two people whose entrance had had such a remarkable effect
upon Bernadine, rose to leave, that the mask was, for a moment, lifted.
De Grost had called for his bill and paid it. The two men strolled out
together.

"Baron," Bernadine said, suavely, linking his arm through the other
man's as they passed into the foyer, "there are times when candor even
among enemies becomes an admirable quality."

"Those times, I imagine," De Grost answered, grimly, "are rare. Besides,
who is to tell the real thing from the false?"

"You do less than justice to your perceptions, my friend," Bernadine
declared, smiling.

De Grost merely shrugged his shoulders. Bernadine persisted.

"Come," he continued, "since you doubt me, let me be the first to give
you a proof that on this occasion, at any rate, I am candor itself.
You had a purpose in lunching at the Savoy to-day. That purpose I have
discovered by accident. We are both interested in those people." The
Baron de Grost shook his head slowly.

"Really," he began--

"Let me finish," Bernadine insisted. "Perhaps when you have heard all
that I have to say, you may change your attitude. We are interested in
the same people, but in different ways. If we both move from opposite
directions, our friend will vanish--he is clever enough at disappearing,
as he has proved before. We do not want the same thing from him, I am
convinced of that. Let us move together and made sure that he does not
evade us."

"Is it an alliance which you are proposing?" De Grost asked, with a
quiet smile.

"Why not? Enemies have united before to-day against a common foe."

De Grost looked across the palm court to where the two people who formed
the subject of their discussion were sitting in a corner, both smoking,
both sipping some red-colored liqueur.

"My dear Bernadine," he said, "I am much too afraid of you to listen any
more. You fancy because this man's presence here was an entire surprise
to you, and because you find me already on his track, that I know more
than you do and that an alliance with me would be to your advantage.
You would try to persuade me that your object with him would not be
my object. Listen. I am afraid of you--you are too clever for me. I am
going to leave you in sole possession."

De Grost's tone was final and his bow valedictory. Bernadine watched him
stroll in a leisurely way through the foyer, exchanging greetings here
and there with friends, watched him enter the cloakroom, from which he
emerged with his hat and overcoat, watched him step into his automobile
and leave the restaurant. He turned back with a clouded face, and threw
himself into an easy chair.

Ten minutes passed uneventfully. People were passing backwards and
forwards all the time, but Bernadine, through his half-closed eyes, did
little save watch the couple in whom he was so deeply interested. At
last the man rose, and, with a word of farewell to his companion, came
out from the lounge, and made his way up the foyer, turning toward the
hotel. He walked with quick, nervous strides, glancing now and then
restlessly about him. In his eyes, to those who understood, there was
the furtive gleam of the hunted man. It was the passing of one who was
afraid.

The woman, left to herself, began to look around her with some
curiosity. Bernadine, to whom a new idea had occurred, moved his chair
nearer to hers, and was rewarded by a glance which certainly betrayed
some interest. A swift and unerring judge in such matters, he came
to the instant conclusion that she was not unapproachable. He acted
immediately and upon impulse. Rising to his feet, he approached her, and
bowed easily but respectfully.

"Madame," he said, "it is impossible that I am mistaken. I have had the
pleasure, have I not, of meeting you in St. Petersburg?"

Her first reception of his coming was reassuring enough. At his mention
of St. Petersburg, however, she frowned.

"I do not think so," she answered, in French. "You are mistaken. I do
not know St. Petersburg."

"Then it was in Paris," Bernadine continued, with conviction. "Madame is
Parisian, without a doubt."

She shook her head, smiling.

"I do not think that I remember meeting you, Monsieur," she replied,
doubtfully, "but perhaps--"

She looked up, and her eyes dropped before his. He was certainly a very
personable looking man, and she had spoken to no one for so many months.

"Believe me, Madame, I could not possibly be mistaken," Bernadine
assured her, smoothly. "You are staying here for long?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"Heaven knows!" she declared. "My husband he has, I think, what you call
the wander fever. For myself, I am tired of it. In Rome we settle down,
we stay five days, all seems pleasant, and suddenly my husband's whim
carries us away without an hour's notice. The same thing at Monte Carlo,
the same in Paris. Who can tell what will happen here? To tell you the
truth, Monsieur," she added, a little archly, "I think that if he were
to come back at this moment, we should probably leave England to-night."

"Your husband is very jealous?" Bernadine whispered, softly.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"Partly jealous, and partly, he has the most terrible distaste for
acquaintances. He will not speak to strangers himself, or suffer me to
do so. It is sometimes--oh! it is sometimes very triste."

"Madame has my sympathy," Bernadine assured her. "It is an impossible
life--this. No husband should be so exacting."

She looked at him with her round, blue eyes, a touch of added color in
her cheeks.

"If one could but cure him!" she murmured.

"I would ask your permission to sit down," Bernadine remarked, "but I
fear to intrude. You are afraid, perhaps, that your husband may return."

She shook her head.

"It will be better that you do not stay," she declared. "For a moment or
two he is engaged. He has an appointment in his room with a gentleman,
but one never knows how long he may be."

"You have friends in London, then," Bernadine remarked, thoughtfully.

"Of my husband's affairs," the woman said, "there is no one so ignorant
as I. Yet since we left our own country, this is the first time I have
known him willingly speak to a soul."

"Your own country," Bernadine repeated, softly. "That was Russia, of
course. Your husband's nationality is very apparent."

The woman looked a little annoyed with herself. She remained silent.

"May I not hope," Bernadine begged, "that you will give me the pleasure
of meeting you again?"

She hesitated for a moment.

"He does not leave me," she replied. "I am not alone for five minutes
during the day."

Bernadine scribbled the name by which he was known in that locality, on
a card, and passed it to her.

"I have rooms in St. James's Street, quite close to here," he said. "If
you could come and have tea with me to-day or to-morrow, it would give
me the utmost pleasure."

She took the card, and crumpled it in her hand. All the time, though,
she shook her head.

"Monsieur is very kind," she answered. "I am afraid--I do not think that
it would be possible. And now, if you please, you must go away. I am
terrified lest my husband should return."

Bernadine bent low in a parting salute.

"Madame," he pleaded, "you will come?"

Bernadine was a handsome man, and he knew well enough how to use
his soft and extraordinarily musical voice. He knew very well, as he
retired, that somehow or other she would accept his invitation. Even
then, he felt dissatisfied and ill at ease, as he left the place. He had
made a little progress, but, after all, was it worth while? Supposing
that the man with whom her husband was even at this moment closeted, was
the Baron de Grost! He called a taxicab and drove at once to the Embassy
of his country.

Even at that moment, De Grost and the Russian--Paul Hagon he called
himself--were standing face to face in the latter's sitting-room. No
conventional greetings of any sort had been exchanged. De Grost
had scarcely closed the door behind him before Hagon addressed him
breathlessly, almost fiercely.

"Who are you, sir," he demanded, "and what do you want with me?"

"You had my letter?" De Grost inquired.

"I had your letter," the other admitted. "It told me nothing. You speak
of business. What business have I with any here?"

"My business is soon told," De Grost replied, "but in the first place,
I beg that you will not unnecessarily alarm yourself. There is,
believe me, no need for it, no need whatever, although, to prevent
misunderstandings, I may as well tell you at once that I am perfectly
well aware who it is that I am addressing."

Hagon collapsed into a chair. He buried his face in his hands and
groaned.

"I am not here necessarily as an enemy," De Grost continued. "You have
very excellent reasons, I make no doubt, for remaining unknown in
this city, or wherever you may be. As yet, let me assure you that your
identity is not even suspected, except by myself and one other. Those
few who believe you alive, believe that you are in America. There is no
need for any one to know that Father--"

"Stop!" the man begged, piteously. "Stop!"

De Grost bowed.

"I beg your pardon," he said.

"Now tell me," the man demanded, "what is your price? I have had money.
There is not much left. Sophia is extravagant and traveling costs a
great deal. But why do I weary you with these things?" he added. "Let me
know what I have to pay for your silence."

"I am not a blackmailer," De Grost answered, sternly. "I am myself a
wealthy man. I ask from you nothing in money--I ask you nothing in that
way at all. A few words of information, and a certain paper, which I
believe you have in your possession, is all that I require."

"Information," Hagon repeated, shivering.

"What I ask," De Grost declared, "is really a matter of justice. At the
time when you were the idol of all Russia and the leader of the great
revolutionary party, you received funds from abroad."

"I accounted for them," Hagon muttered. "Up to a certain point I
accounted for everything."

"You received funds from the Government of a European power," De Grost
continued, "funds to be applied towards developing the revolution. I
want the name of that Power, and proof of what I say."

Hagon remained motionless for a moment. He had seated himself at the
table, his head resting upon his hand and his face turned away from De
Grost.

"You are a politician, then?" he asked, slowly.

"I am a politician," De Grost admitted. "I represent a great secret
power which has sprung into existence during the last few years. Our
aim, at present, is to bring closer together your country and Great
Britain. Russia hesitates because an actual rapprochement with us is
equivalent to a permanent estrangement with Germany."

Hagon nodded.

"I understand," he said, in a low tone. "I have finished with politics.
I have nothing to say to you."

"I trust," De Grost persisted, suavely, "that you will be better
advised."

Hagon turned round and faced him.

"Sir," he demanded, "do you believe that I am afraid of death?"

De Grost looked at him steadfastly.

"No," he answered, "you have proved the contrary."

"If my identity is discovered," Hagon continued, "I have the means of
instant death at hand. I do not use it because of my love for the one
person who links me to this world. For her sake I live, and for her
sake I bear always the memory of the shameful past. Publish my name and
whereabouts, if you will. I promise you that I will make the tragedy
complete. But for the rest, I refuse to pay your price. A great power
trusted me, and whatever its motives may have been, its money came very
near indeed to freeing my people. I have nothing more to say to you,
sir."

The Baron de Grost was taken aback. He had scarcely contemplated
refusal.

"You must understand," he explained, "that this is not a personal
matter. Even if I myself would spare you, those who are more powerful
than I will strike. The society to which I belong does not tolerate
failure. I am empowered even to offer you its protection, if you will
give me the information for which I ask."

Hagon rose to his feet, and, before De Grost could foresee his purpose,
had rung the bell.

"My decision is unchanging," he said. "You can pull down the roof upon
my head, but I carry next my heart an instant and unfailing means of
escape."

A waiter stood in the doorway.

"You will take this gentleman to the lift," Hagon directed.

There was once more a touch in his manner of that half divine authority
which had thrilled the great multitude of his believers. De Grost was
forced to admit defeat.

"Not defeat," he said to himself, as he followed the man to the lift,
"only a check."

Nevertheless, it was a serious check. He could not, for the moment, see
his way further. Arrived at his house, he followed his usual custom
and made his way at once to his wife's rooms. Violet was resting upon a
sofa, but laid down her book at his entrance.

"Violet," he declared, "I have come for your advice."

"He refuses, then?" she asked, eagerly.

"Absolutely. What am I to do? Bernadine is already upon the scent. He
saw him at the Savoy to-day, and recognized him."

"Has Bernadine approached him yet?" Violet inquired.

"Not yet. He is half afraid to move. I think he realizes, or will very
soon, how serious this man's existence may be for Germany."

Violet was thoughtful for several moments, then she looked up quickly.

"Bernadine will try the woman," she asserted. "You say that Hagon is
infatuated?"

"Blindly," De Grost replied. "He scarcely lets her out of his sight."

"Your people watch Bernadine?"

"Always."

"Very well, then," Violet went on, "you will find that he will attempt
an intrigue with the woman. The rest should be easy for you."

De Grost sighed as he bent over his wife.

"My dear," he said, "there is no subtlety like the subtlety of a woman."

Bernadine's instinct had not deceived him, and the following afternoon
his servant, who had already received orders, silently ushered Madame
Hagon into his apartments. She was wrapped in magnificent sables and
heavily veiled. Bernadine saw at once that she was very nervous and
wholly terrified. He welcomed her in as matter-of-fact a manner as
possible.

"Madame," he declared, "this is quite charming of you. You must sit in
my easy-chair here, and my man shall bring us some tea. I drink mine
always after the fashion of your country, with lemon, but I doubt
whether we make it so well. Won't you unfasten your jacket? I am afraid
that my rooms are rather warm."

Madame had collected herself, but it was quite obvious that she was
unused to adventures of this sort. Her hand, when he took it, trembled,
and more than once she glanced furtively toward the door.

"Yes, I have come," she murmured. "I do not know why. It is not right
for me to come. Yet there are times when I am weary, times when Paul
seems fierce and when I am terrified. Sometimes I even wish that I were
back--"

"Your husband seems very highly strung," Bernadine remarked. "He has
doubtless led an exciting life."

"As to that," she replied, gazing around her now and gradually becoming
more at her ease, "I know but little. He was a student professor
at Moschaume, when I met him. I think that he was at one of the
universities in St. Petersburg."

Bernadine glanced at her covertly. It came to him as an inspiration that
the woman did not know the truth.

"You are from Russia, then, after all," he said, smiling. "I felt sure
of it."

"Yes," reluctantly. "Paul is so queer in these things. He will not let
me talk of it. He prefers that we are taken for French people. Indeed,
it is not I who desire to think too much of Russia. It is not a year
since my father was killed in the riots, and two of my brothers were
sent to Siberia."

Bernadine was deeply interested.

"They were among the revolutionaries?" he asked.

She nodded.

"Yes," she answered.

"And your husband?"

"He, too, was with them in sympathy. Secretly, too, I believe that he
worked among them. Only he had to be careful. You see, his position at
the college made it difficult."

Bernadine looked into the woman's eyes and he knew then that she was
speaking the truth. This man was, indeed, a great master; he had kept
her in ignorance!

"Always," Bernadine said, a few minutes later, as he passed her tea, "I
read with the deepest interest of the people's movement in Russia. Tell
me, what became eventually of their great leader--the wonderful Father
Paul?"

She set down her cup untasted, and her blue eyes flashed with a fire
which turned them almost to the color of steel.

"Wonderful indeed!" she exclaimed "Wonderful Judas! It was he who
wrecked the cause. It was he who sold the lives and liberty of all of us
for gold."

"I heard a rumor of that," Bernadine remarked, "but I never believed
it."

"It was true," she declared passionately.

"And where is he now?" Bernadine asked.

"Dead!" she answered fiercely. "Torn to pieces, we believe, one night in
a house near Moscow. May it be so!"

She was silent for a moment, as though engaged in prayer. Bernadine
spoke no more of these things. He talked to her kindly, keeping up
always his role of respectful but hopeful admirer.

"You will come again soon?" he begged, when, at last, she insisted upon
going.

She hesitated.

"It is so difficult," she murmured. "If my husband knew--"

Bernadine laughed, and touched her fingers caressingly.

"Need one tell him?" he whispered. "You see, I trust you. I pray that
you will come-"

Bernadine was a man rarely moved towards emotion of any sort. Yet even
he was conscious of a certain sense of excitement, as he stood looking
out upon the Embankment from the windows of Paul Hagon's sitting-room,
a few days later. Madame was sitting on the sofa, close at hand. It was
for her answer to a certain question that he waited.

"Monsieur," she said at last, turning slowly towards him, "it must
be no. Indeed, I am sorry, for you have been very charming to me, and
without you I should have been dull. But to come to your rooms and dine
alone to-night, it is impossible."

"Your husband cannot return before the morning, Bernadine reminded her.

"It makes no difference," she answered. "Paul is sometimes fierce and
rough, but he is generous, and all his life he has worshiped me. He
behaves strangely at times, but I know that he cares--all the time more,
perhaps, than I deserve."

"And there is no one else," Bernadine asked softly, "who can claim even
the smallest place in your heart?"

"Monsieur," the woman begged, "you must not ask me that. I think that
you had better go away."

Bernadine stood quite still for several moments. It was the climax
towards which he had steadfastly guided the course of this mild
intrigue.

"Madame," he declared, "you must not send me away. You shall not."

She held out her hand.

"Then you must not ask impossible things," she answered.

Then Bernadine took the plunge. He became suddenly very grave.

"Sophia," he said, "I am keeping a great secret from you and I can do it
no longer. When you speak to me of your husband you drive me mad. If
I believed that you really loved him, I would go away and leave it to
chance whether or not you ever discovered the truth. As it is--"

"Well?" she interposed breathlessly.

"As it is," he continued, "I am going to tell you now. Your husband has
deceived you--he is deceiving you every moment."

She looked at him incredulously.

"You mean that there is another woman?"

Bernadine shook his head.

"Worse than that," he answered. "Your husband stole even your love under
false pretenses. You think that his life is a strange one, that
his nerves have broken down, that he flies from place to place for
distraction, for change of scene. It is not so. He left Rome, he left
Nice, he left Paris, for one and the same reason. He left because he was
in peril of his life. I know little of your history, but I know as
much as this. If ever a man deserved the fate from which he flees, your
husband deserves it."

"You are mad," she faltered.

"No, I am sane," he went on. "It is you who are mad, not to have
understood. Your husband goes ever in fear of his life. His real name
is one branded with ignominy throughout the world. The man whom you have
married, to whom you are so scrupulously faithful, is the man who sent
your father to death and your brothers to Siberia."

"Father Paul!" she screamed.

"You have lived with him, you are his wife," Bernadine declared.

The color had left her cheeks; her eyes, with their penciled brows, were
fixed in an almost ghastly stare; her breath was coming in uneven gasps.
She looked at him in silent terror.

"It is not true," she cried at last; "it cannot be true."

"Sophia," he said, "you can prove it for yourself. I know a little of
your husband and his doings. Does he not carry always with him a black
box which he will not allow out of his sight?"

"Always," she assented. "How did you know? By night his hand rests upon
it. By day, if he goes out, it is in my charge."

"Fetch it now," Bernadine directed, "and I will prove my words."

She did not hesitate for a moment. She disappeared into the inner room;
and came back, only a few moments absent, carrying in her hand a black
leather despatch-box.

"You have the key?" he asked.

"Yes," she answered, looking at him and trembling, "but I dare not--oh,
I dare not open it!"

"Sophia," he said, "if my words are not true, I will pass out of your
life for always. I challenge you. If you open that box you will know
that your husband is, indeed, the greatest scoundrel in Europe."

She drew a key from a gold chain around her neck.

"There are two locks," she told him. "The other is a combination, but I
know the word. Who's that?"

She started suddenly. There was a loud tapping at the door. Bernadine
threw an antimacassar half over the box, but he was too late. De Grost
and Hagon had crossed the threshold. The woman stood like some dumb
creature. Hagon, transfixed, stood with his eyes riveted upon Bernadine.
His face was distorted with passion, he seemed like a man beside himself
with fury. De Grost came slowly forward into the middle of the room.

"Count von Hern," he said, "I think that you had better leave."

The woman found words.

"Not yet," she cried, "not yet! Paul, listen to me. This man has told me
a terrible thing."

The breath seemed to come through Hagon's teeth like a hiss.

"He has told you!"

"Listen to me," she continued. "It is the truth which you must tell now.
He says that you--you are Father Paul."

Hagon did not hesitate for a second.

"It is true," he admitted.

Then there was a silence--short, but tragical. Hagon seemed suddenly to
have collapsed. He was like a man who has just had a stroke. He stood
muttering to himself.

"It is the end--this--the end!" he said, in a low tone. "Sophia!"

She shrank away from him. He drew himself up. Once more the great light
flashed in his face.

"It was for your sake," he said simply, "for your sake, Sophia. I came
to you poor and you would have nothing to say to me. My love for you
burned in my veins like fever. It was for you I did it--for your sake I
sold my honor, the love of my country, the freedom of my brothers. For
your sake I risked an awful death. For your sake I have lived like a
hunted man, with the cry of the wolves always in my ears, and the fear
of death and of eternal torture with me day by day. No other man since
the world was made has done more. Have pity on me!"

She was unmoved; her face had lost all expression. No one noticed in
that rapt moment that Bernadine had crept from the room.

"It was you," she cried, "who killed my father, and sent my brothers
into exile."

"God help me!" he moaned.

She turned to De Grost.

"Take him away with you, please," she said. "I have finished with him."

"Sophia!" he pleaded.

She leaned across the table and struck him heavily upon the cheek.

"If you stay here," she muttered, "I shall kill you myself...."

That night, the body of an unknown foreigner was found in the attic of a
cheap lodging-house in Soho. The discovery itself and the verdict at the
inquest occupied only a few lines in the morning newspapers. Those few
lines were the epitaph of one who was very nearly a Rienzi. The greater
part of his papers De Grost mercifully destroyed, but one in particular
he preserved. Within a week the much delayed treaty was signed at Paris,
London and St. Petersburg.



CHAPTER V. THE FIRST SHOT


De Grost and his wife were dining together at the corner table in a
fashionable but somewhat Bohemian restaurant. Both had been in the humor
for reminiscences, and they had outstayed most of their neighbors.

"I wonder what people really think of us," Violet remarked pensively. "I
told Lady Amershal, when she asked us to go there this evening, that we
always dined together alone somewhere once a week, and she absolutely
refused to believe me. 'With your own husband, my dear?' She kept on
repeating."

"Her Ladyship's tastes are more catholic," the Baron declared dryly.
"Yet, after all, Violet, the real philosophy of married life demands
something of this sort."

Violet smiled and fingered her pearls for a minute.

"What the real philosophy of married life may be I do not know," she
said, "but I am perfectly content with our rendering of it. What a
fortunate thing, Peter, with your intensely practical turn of mind, that
nature endowed you with so much sentiment."

De Grost gazed reflectively at the cigarette which he had just selected
from his case.

"Well," he remarked, "there have been times when I have cursed myself
for a fool, but, on the whole, sentiment keeps many fires burning."

She leaned towards him and dropped her voice a little. "Tell me,"
she begged, "do you ever think of the years we spent together in the
country? Do you ever regret?"

He smiled thoughtfully.

"It is a hard question, that," he admitted. "There were days there which
I loved, but there were days, too, when the restlessness came, days when
I longed to hear the hum of the city and to hear men speak whose words
were of life and death and the great passions. I am not sure, Violet,
whether, after all, it is well for one who has lived to withdraw
absolutely from the thrill of life."

She laughed, Softly but gayly.

"I am with you," she declared, "absolutely. I think that the fairies
must have poured into my blood the joy of living for its own sake. I
should be an ungrateful woman indeed, if I found anything to complain
of, nowadays. Yet there is one thing that troubles me," she went on,
after a moment's pause.

"And that?" he asked.

"The danger," she said, slowly. "I do not want to lose you, Peter. There
are times when I am afraid."

De Grost flicked the ash from his cigarette.

"The days are passing," he remarked, "when men point revolvers at one
another, and hire assassins to gain their ends. Now, it is more a battle
of wits. We play chess on the board of Life still, but we play with
ivory pieces instead of steel and poison. Our brains direct and not our
muscles."

She sighed.

"It is only the one man of whom I am afraid. You have outwitted him so
often and he does not forgive."

De Grost smiled. It was an immense compliment--this.

"Bernadine," he murmured, softly, "otherwise, our friend the Count von
Hern."

"Bernadine!" she repeated. "All that you say is true, but when one fails
with modern weapons, one changes the form of attack. Bernadine at heart
is a savage."

"The hate of such a man," De Grost remarked complacently, "is worth
having. He has had his own way over here for years. He seems to
have found the knack of living in a maze of intrigue and remaining
untouchable. There were a dozen things before I came upon the scene
which ought to have ruined him. Yet there never appeared to be anything
to take hold of. Even the Criminal Department once thought they had a
chance. I remember John Dory telling me in disgust that Bernadine was
like one of those marvelous criminals one only reads about in fiction,
who seem, when they pass along the dangerous places, to walk upon the
air, and, leave no trace behind."

"Before you came," she said, "he had never known a failure. Do you think
that he is a man likely to forgive?"

"I do not," De Grost answered grimly. "It is a battle, of course, a
battle all the time. Yet, Violet, between you and me, if Bernadine were
to go, half the savor of life for me would depart with him."

Then there came a curious and wholly unexpected interruption. A man in
dark, plain clothes, still wearing his overcoat, and carrying a bowler
hat, had been standing in the entrance of the restaurant for a moment or
two, looking around the room as though in search of some one. At last he
caught the eye of the Baron de Grost and came quickly toward him.

"Charles," the Baron remarked, raising his eyebrows. "I wonder what he
wants."

A sudden cloud had fallen upon their little feast. Violet watched the
coming of her husband's servant, and the reading of the note which he
presented to his master, with an anxiety which she could not wholly
conceal. The Baron read the note twice, scrutinizing a certain part of
it closely with the aid of the monocle which he seldom used. Then he
folded it up and placed it in the breast pocket of his coat.

"At what hour did you receive this, Charles?" he asked.

"A messenger brought it in a taxicab about ten minutes ago, sir," the
man replied. "He said that it was of the utmost importance, and that I
had better try and find you."

"A district messenger?"

"A man in ordinary clothes," Charles answered. "He looked like a porter
in a warehouse, or something of that sort. I forgot to say that you were
rung up on the telephone three times previously by Mr. Greening."

The Baron nodded.

"You can go," he said. "There is no reply."

The man bowed and retired. De Grost called for his bill.

"Is it anything serious?" Violet inquired.

"No, not exactly serious," he answered. "I do not understand what has
happened, but they have sent for me to go--well, where it was agreed
that I should not go except as a matter of urgent necessity."

Violet knew better than to show any signs of disquietude.

"It is in London?" she asked.

"Certainly," her husband replied. "I shall take a taxicab from here. I
am sorry, dear, to have one of our evenings disturbed in this manner. I
have always done my best to avoid it, but this summons is urgent."

She rose and he wrapped her cloak around her.

"You will drive straight home, won't you?" he begged. "I dare say that I
may be back within an hour myself."

"And if not?" she asked, in a low tone.

"If not, there is nothing to be done."

Violet bit her lip, but, as he handed her into the small electric
brougham which was waiting, she smiled into his face.

"You will come back, and soon, Peter," she declared, confidently.
"Wherever you go I am sure of that. You see, I have faith in my star
which watches over you."

He kissed her fingers and turned away. The commissionaire had already
called him a taxicab.

"To London Bridge," he ordered, after a moment's hesitation, and drove
off.

The traffic citywards had long since finished for the day, and he
reached his destination within ten minutes of leaving the restaurant.
Here he paid the man, and, entering the station, turned to the
refreshment room and ordered a liqueur brandy. While he sipped it, he
smoked a cigarette and carefully reread in a strong light the note which
he had received. The signature especially he pored over for some time.
At last, however, he replaced it in his pocket, paid his bill, and,
stepping out once more on to the platform, entered a telephone booth. A
few minutes later he left the station, and, turning to the right, walked
slowly as far as Tooley Street. He kept on the right-hand side until he
arrived at the spot where the great arches, with their scanty lights,
make a gloomy thoroughfare into Bermondsey. In the shadow of the first
of these he paused, and looked steadfastly across the street. There were
few people passing and practically no traffic. In front of him was a row
of warehouses, all save one of which was wrapped in complete darkness.
It was the one where some lights were still burning which De Grost stood
and watched.

The lights, such as they were, seemed to illuminate the ground
floor only. From his hidden post he could see the shoulders of a man
apparently bending over a ledger, diligently writing. At the next window
a youth, seated upon a tall stool, was engaged in presumably the same
occupation. There was nothing about the place in the least mysterious
or out of the way. Even the blinds of the offices had been left undrawn.
The man and the boy, who were alone visible, seemed, in a sense, to be
working under protest. Every now and then the former stopped to yawn,
and the latter performed a difficult balancing feat upon his stool. De
Grost, having satisfied his curiosity, came presently from his shelter,
almost running into the arms of a policeman, who looked at him closely.
The Baron, who had an unlighted cigarette in his mouth, stopped to ask
for a light, and his appearance at once set at rest any suspicions the
policeman might have had.

"I have a warehouse myself down in these parts," he remarked, as he
struck the match, "but I don't allow my people to work as late as that."

He pointed across the way, and the policeman smiled.

"They are very often late there, sir," he said. "It's a Continental wine
business, and there's always one or two of them over time."

"It's bad business, all the same," De Grost declared pleasantly. "Good
night, policeman!"

"Good night, sir!"

De Grost crossed the road diagonally, as though about to take the short
cut across London Bridge, but as soon as the policeman was out of sight
he retraced his steps to the building which they had been discussing,
and turning the battered brass handle of the door, walked calmly in. On
his right and left were counting houses framed with glass; in front,
the cavernous and ugly depths of a gloomy warehouse. He knocked upon the
window-pane on the right and passed forward a step or two, as though
to enter the office. The boy, who had been engaged in the left-hand
counting house, came gliding from his place, passed silently behind the
visitor and turned the key of the outer door. What followed seemed to
happen as though by some mysteriously directed force. The figures of men
came stealing out from the hidden places. The clerk who had been working
so hard at his desk calmly divested himself of a false mustache and
wig, and, assuming a more familiar appearance, strolled out into
the warehouse. De Grost looked around him with absolutely unruffled
composure. He was the centre of a little circle of men, respectably
dressed, but every one of them hard-featured, with something in
their faces which suggested not the ordinary toiler, but the fighting
animal--the man who lives by his wits and knows something of danger. On
the outskirts of the circle stood Bernadine.

"Really," De Grost declared, "this is most unexpected. In the matter of
dramatic surprises, my friend Bernadine, you are certainly in a class by
yourself."

Bernadine smiled.

"You will understand, of course," he said, "that this little
entertainment is entirely for your amusement--well stage-managed,
perhaps, but my supers are not to be taken seriously. Since you are
here, Baron, might I ask you to precede me a few steps to the tasting
office?

"By all means," De Grost answered cheerfully. "It is this way, I
believe."

He walked with unconcerned footsteps down the warehouse, on either side
of which were great bins and a wilderness of racking, until he came to
a small, glass-enclosed office, built out from the wall. Without
hesitation he entered it, and removing his hat, selected the more
comfortable of the two chairs. Bernadine alone of the others followed
him inside, closing the door behind. De Grost, who appeared exceedingly
comfortable, stretched out his hand and took a small black bottle from a
tiny mahogany racking fixed against the wall by his side.

"You will excuse me, my dear Bernadine," he said, "but I see my friend
Greening has been tasting a few wines. The 'XX' upon the label here
signifies approval. With your permission."

He half filled a glass and pushed the bottle toward Bernadine.

"Greening's taste is unimpeachable," De Grost declared, setting down
his glass empty. "No use being a director of a city business, you know,
unless one interests oneself personally in it. Greening's judgment is
simply marvelous. I have never tasted a more beautiful wine. If the
boom in sherry does come," he continued complacently, "we shall be in an
excellent position to deal with it."

Bernadine laughed softly.

"Oh, my friend--Peter Ruff, or Baron de Grost, or whatever you may
choose to call yourself," he said, "I am indeed wise to have come to the
conclusion that you and I are too big to occupy the same little spot on
earth!"

De Grost nodded approvingly.

"I was beginning to wonder," he remarked, "whether you would not soon
arrive at that decision."

"Having arrived at it," Bernadine continued, looking intently at his
companion, "the logical sequence naturally occurs to you."

"Precisely, my dear Bernadine," De Grost asserted. "You say to yourself,
no doubt, 'One of us two must go!' Being yourself, you would naturally
conclude that it must be I. To tell you the truth, I have been expecting
some sort of enterprise of this description for a considerable time."

Bernadine shrugged his shoulders.

"Your expectations," he said, "seem scarcely to have provided you with a
safe conduct."

De Grost gazed reflectively into his empty glass.

"You see," he explained, "I am such a lucky person. Your arrangements
to-night, however, are, I perceive, unusually complete."

"I am glad you appreciate them," Bernadine remarked dryly.

"I would not for a moment," De Grost continued, "ask an impertinent or
an unnecessary question, but I must confess that I am rather concerned
to know the fate of my manager--the gentleman whom you yourself with the
aid, I presume, of Mr. Clarkson, so ably represented."

Bernadine sighed.

"Alas!" he said, "your manager was a very obstinate person."

"And my clerk?"

"Incorruptible, absolutely incorruptible. I congratulate you, De Grost.
Your society is one of the most wonderful upon the face of this earth. I
know little about it, but my admiration is very sincere. Their attention
to details, and the personnel of their staff, is almost perfect. I may
tell you at once that no sum that could be offered, tempted either of
these men."

"I am delighted to hear it," De Grost replied, "but I must plead guilty
to a little temporary anxiety as to their present whereabouts."

"At this moment," Bernadine remarked, "they are within a few feet of
us, but, as you are doubtless aware, access to your delightful river is
obtainable from these premises. To be frank with you, my dear Baron, we
are waiting for the tide to rise."

"So thoughtful about these trifles," De Grost murmured. "But their
present position? They are, I trust, not uncomfortable?"

Bernadine stood up and moved to the further end of the office. He
beckoned his companion to his side and, drawing an electric torch from
his pocket, flashed the light into a dark corner behind an immense
bin. The forms of a man and a youth, bound with ropes and gagged, lay
stretched upon the floor. De Grost sighed.

"I am afraid," he said, "that Mr. Greening, at any rate, is most
uncomfortable."

Bernadine turned off the light.

"At least, Baron," he declared, "if such extreme measures should become
necessary, I can promise you one thing--you shall have a quicker passage
into Eternity than they."

De Grost resumed his seat.

"Has it really come to that?" he asked. "Will nothing but so crude a
proceeding as my absolute removal satisfy you?"

"Nothing else is, I fear, practicable," Bernadine replied, "unless you
decide to listen to reason. Believe me, my dear friend, I shall miss you
and our small encounters exceedingly, but, unfortunately, you stand in
the way of my career. You are the only man who has persistently balked
me. You have driven me to use against you means which I had grown to
look upon as absolutely extinct in the upper circles of our profession."

De Grost peered through the glass walls of the office.

"Eight men, not counting yourself," he remarked, "and my poor manager
and his faithful clerk lying bound and helpless. It is heavy odds,
Bernadine."

"There is no question of odds, I think," Bernadine answered smoothly.
"You are much too clever a person to refuse to admit that you are
entirely in my power."

"And as regards terms? I really don't feel in the least anxious to make
my final bow with so little notice," De Grost said. "To tell you the
truth, I have been finding life quite interesting lately."

Bernadine eyed his prisoner keenly. Such absolute composure was in
itself disturbing. He was, for the moment, aware of a slight sensation
of uneasiness, which his common sense, however, speedily disposed of.

"There are two ways," he announced, "of dealing with an opponent.
There is the old-fashioned one--crude, but in a sense eminently
satisfactory--which sends him finally to adorn some other sphere."

"I don't like that one," De Grost interrupted. "Get on with the
alternative."

"The alternative," Bernadine declared, "is when his capacity for harm
can be destroyed."

"That needs a little explanation," De Grost murmured.

"Precisely. For instance, if you were to become absolutely discredited,
I think that you would be effectually out of my way. Your people do not
forgive."

"Then discredit me, by all means," De Grost begged. "It sounds
unpleasant, but I do not like your callous reference to the river."

Bernadine gazed at his ancient opponent for several moments. After
all, what was this but the splendid bravado of a beaten man, who is too
clever not to recognize defeat?

"I shall require," he said, "your code, the keys of your safe, which
contains a great many documents of interest to me, and a free entry into
your house."

De Grost drew a bunch of keys reluctantly from his pocket and laid them
upon the desk.

"You will find the code bound in green morocco leather," he announced,
"on the left-hand side, underneath the duplicate of a proposed Treaty
between Italy and some other Power. Between ourselves, Bernadine, I
really expect that that is what you are after."

Bernadine's eyes glistened.

"What about the safe conduct into your house?" he asked.

De Grost drew his case from his pocket and wrote few lines on the back
of one of his cards.

"This will insure you entrance there," he said, "and access to my study.
If you see my wife, please reassure her as to my absence."

"I shall certainly do so," Bernadine agreed, with a faint smile.

"If I may be pardoned for alluding to a purely personal matter," De
Grost continued, "what is to become of me?"

"You will be bound and gagged in the same manner as your manager and his
clerk," Bernadine replied, smoothly. "I regret the necessity, but you
see, I can afford to run no risks. At four o'clock in the morning, you
will be released. It must be part of our agreement that you allow the
man who stays behind the others for the purpose of setting you free, to
depart unmolested. I think I know you better than to imagine you would
be guilty of such gaucherie as an appeal to the police."

"That, unfortunately," De Grost declared, with a little sigh, "is,
as you well know, out of the question. You are too clever for me,
Bernadine. After all, I shall have to go back to my farm."

Bernadine opened the door and called softly to one of his men. In less
than five minutes De Grost was bound hand and foot. Bernadine stepped
back and eyed his adversary with an air of ill-disguised triumph.

"I trust, Baron," he said, "that you will be as comfortable as possible,
under the circumstances."

De Grost lay quite still. He was powerless to move or speak.

"Immediately," Bernadine continued, "I have presented myself at your
house, verified your safe conduct, and helped myself to certain
papers which I am exceedingly anxious to obtain," he went on, "I shall
telephone here to the man whom I leave in charge and you will be set at
liberty in due course. If, for any reason, I meet with treachery and I
do not telephone, you will join Mr. Greening and his young companion
in a little--shall we call it aquatic recreation? I wish you a pleasant
hour and success in the future, Baron--as a farmer."

Bernadine withdrew and whispered his orders to his men. Soon the
electric light was turned out and the place was in darkness. The front
door was opened and closed; the group of confederates upon the pavement
lit cigarettes and wished one another good night with the brisk air
of tired employees, released at last from long labors. Then there was
silence.

It was barely eleven when Bernadine reached the west end of London. His
clothes had become a trifle disarranged and he called for a few minutes
at his rooms in St. James's Street. Afterwards, he walked to Porchester
House and rang the bell. To the servant who answered it, he handed his
master's card.

"Will you show me the way to the library?" he asked. "I have some papers
to collect for the Baron de Grost."

The man hesitated. Even with the card in his hand, it seemed a somewhat
unusual proceeding.

"Will you step inside, sir?" he begged. "I should like to show this
to the Baroness. The master is exceedingly particular about any one
entering his study."

"Do what you like so long as you do not keep me waiting," Bernadine
replied. "Your master's instructions are clear enough."

Violet came down the great staircase a few moments later, still in her
dinner gown, her face a little pale, her eyes luminous. Bernadine smiled
as he accepted her eagerly offered hand. She was evidently anxious. A
thrill of triumph warmed his blood. Once she had been less kind to him
than she seemed now.

"My husband gave you this!" she exclaimed.

"A few minutes ago," Bernadine answered. "He tried to make his
instructions as clear as possible. We are jointly interested in a small
matter which needs immediate action."

She led the way to the study.

"It seems strange," she remarked, "that you and he should be working
together. I always thought that you were on opposite sides."

"It is a matter of chance," Bernadine told her. "Your husband is a wise
man, Baroness. He knows when to listen to reason."

She threw open the door of the study, which was in darkness.

"'If you will wait a moment," she said, closing the door, "I will turn
on the electric light."

She touched the knobs in the wall and the room was suddenly flooded with
illumination. At the further end of the apartment was the great safe.
Close to it, in an easy chair, his evening coat changed for a smoking
jacket, with a neatly tied black tie replacing his crumpled white
cravat, the Baron de Grost sat awaiting his guest. A fierce oath broke
from Bernadine's lips. He turned toward the door only in time to hear
the key turn. Violet tossed it lightly in the air across to her husband.

"My dear Bernadine," the latter remarked, "on the whole, I do not think
that this has been one of your successes. My keys, if you please."

Bernadine stood for a moment, his face dark with passion. He bit his
lip till the blood came, and the veins at the back of his clenched hands
were swollen and thick. Nevertheless, when he spoke he had recovered in
great measure his self-control.

"Your keys are here, Baron de Grost," he said, placing them upon the
table. "If a bungling amateur may make such a request of a professor,
may I inquire how you escaped from your bonds, passed through the door
of a locked warehouse and reached here before me?"

The Baron de Grost smiled as he pushed the cigarettes across to his
visitor.

"Really," he said, "you have only to think for yourself for a moment, my
dear Bernadine, and you will understand. In the first place, the letter
you sent me signed 'Greening' was clearly a forgery. There was no one
else anxious to get me into their power, hence I associated it at once
with you. Naturally, I telephoned to the chief of my staff--I, too,
am obliged to employ some of these un-uniformed policemen, my dear
Bernadine, as you may be aware. It may interest you to know, further,
that there are seven entrances to the warehouse in Tooley Street.
Through one of these something like twenty of my men passed and were
already concealed in the place when I entered. At another of the doors a
motor-car waited for me. If I had chosen to lift my finger at any time,
your men would have been overpowered and I might have had the pleasure
of dictating terms to you in my own office. Such a course did not appeal
to me. You and I, as you know, dear Count von Hern, conduct our peculiar
business under very delicate conditions, and the least thing we either
of us desire is notoriety. I managed things, as I thought, for the best.
The moment you left the place my men swarmed in. We kindly, but gently,
ejected your guard, released Greening and my clerk, and I passed you
myself in Fleet Street, a little more comfortable, I think, in my
forty-horsepower motor-car than you in that very disreputable hansom.
As to my presence here, I have an entrance from the street there which
makes me independent of my servants. The other details are too absurdly
simple; one need not enlarge upon them."

Bernadine turned slowly to Violet.

"You knew?" he muttered. "You knew when you brought me here?"

"Naturally," she answered. "We have telephones in every room in the
house."

"I am at your service," Bernadine declared, calmly.

De Grost laughed.

"My dear fellow," he said, "need I say that you are free to come or go,
to take a whiskey and soda with me, or to depart at once, exactly as
you feel inclined? The door was locked only until you restored to me my
keys."

He crossed the room, fitted the key in the lock and turned it.

"We do not make war as those others," he remarked, smiling.

Bernadine drew himself up.

"I will not drink with you," he said, "I will not smoke with you. But
some day this reckoning shall come."

He turned to the door. De Grost laid his finger upon the bell.

"Show Count von Hern out," he directed the astonished servant who
appeared a moment or two later.



CHAPTER VI. THE SEVEN SUPPERS OF ANDREA KORUST


Peter, Baron de Grost, was enjoying what he had confidently looked
forward to as an evening's relaxation, pure and simple. He sat in one of
the front rows of the stalls of the Alhambra, his wife by his side
and an excellent cigar in his mouth. An hour or so ago he had been in
telephonic communication with Paris, had spoken with Sogrange himself,
and received his assurance of a calm in political and criminal affairs
amounting almost to stagnation. It was out of season, and, though his
popularity was as great as ever, neither he nor his wife had any social
engagements; hence this evening at a music hall, which Peter, for his
part, was finding thoroughly amusing.

The place was packed--some said owing to the engagement of Andrea Korust
and his brother, others to the presence of Mademoiselle Sophie Celaire
in her wonderful danse des apaches. The violinist that night had a great
reception. Three times he was called before the curtain; three times
he was obliged to reiterate his grateful but immutable resolve never to
yield to the nightly storm which demanded more from a man who has given
of his best. Slim, with the worn face and hollow eyes of a genius, he
stood and bowed his thanks, but when he thought the time had arrived, he
disappeared, and though the house shook for minutes afterwards, nothing
could persuade him to reappear.

Afterwards came the turn which, notwithstanding the furore caused by
Andrea Korust's appearance, was generally considered to be equally
responsible for the packed house--the apache dance of Mademoiselle
Sophie Celaire. Peter sat slightly forward in his chair as the curtain
went up. For a time he seemed utterly absorbed by the performance.
Violet glanced at him once or twice curiously. It began to occur to her
that it was not so much the dance as the dancer in whom her husband was
interested.

"You have seen her before--this Mademoiselle Celaire?" she whispered.

"Yes," said Peter, nodding, "I have seen her before."

The dance proceeded. It was like many others of its sort, only a little
more daring, a little more finished. Mademoiselle Celaire, in her
tight-fitting, shabby black frock, with her wild mass of hair, her
flashing eyes, her seductive gestures, was, without doubt, a marvelous
person. Peter, Baron de Grost, watched her every movement with absorbed
attention. When the curtain went down he forgot to clap. His eyes
followed her off the stage. Violet shrugged her shoulders. She was
looking very handsome herself in a black velvet dinner gown, and a hat
so exceedingly Parisian that no one had had the heart to ask her to
remove it.

"My dear Peter," she remarked, reprovingly, "a moderate amount of
admiration for that very agile young lady I might, perhaps, be inclined
to tolerate; but, having watched you for the last quarter of an hour, I
am bound to confess that I am becoming jealous."

"Of Mademoiselle Celaire?" he asked.

"Of Mademoiselle Sophie Celaire."

He leaned a little towards her. His lips were parted; he was about to
make a statement or a confession. Just then a tall commissionaire leaned
over from behind and touched him on the shoulder.

"For Monsieur le Baron de Grost," he announced, handing Peter a note.

Peter glanced towards his wife.

"You permit me?" he murmured, breaking the seal.

Violet shrugged her shoulders, ever so slightly. Her husband was already
absorbed in the few lines hastily scrawled across the sheet of notepaper
which he held in his hand.

                    MONSIEUR LE BARON DE GHOST.
                    Dear Monsieur le Baron,
             4  Come to my dressing-room, without  4
                fail, as soon as you receive this.
                              SOPHIE CELAIRE.


Violet looked over his shoulder.

"The hussy!" she exclaimed, indignantly. Her husband raised his
eyebrows. With his forefinger he merely tapped the two numerals.

"The Double-Four!" she gasped.

He looked around and nodded. The commissionaire was waiting. Peter took
up his silk hat from under the seat.

"If I am detained, dear," he whispered, "you'll make the best of it,
won't you? The car will be here and Frederick will be looking out for
you."

"Of course," she answered, cheerfully. "I shall be quite all right."

She nodded brightly and Peter took his departure. He passed through a
door on which was painted "Private," and through a maze of scenery and
stage hands and ballet ladies by a devious route to the region of the
dressing-rooms. His guide conducted him to the door of one of these and
knocked.

"Entrez, monsieur," a shrill feminine voice replied.

Peter entered and closed the door behind him. The commissionaire
remained outside. Mademoiselle Celaire turned to greet her visitor.

"It is a few words I desire with you as quickly as possible, if you
please, Monsieur le Baron," she said, advancing towards him. "Listen."

She had brushed out her hair and it hung from her head straight and a
little stiff, almost like the hair of an Indian woman. She had washed
her face, too, free of all cosmetics and her pallor was almost waxen.
She wore a dressing gown of green silk. Her discarded black frock lay
upon the floor.

"I am entirely at your service, mademoiselle," Peter answered, bowing.
"Continue, if you please."

"You sup with me to-night--you are my guest."

He hesitated.

"I am very much honored," he murmured. "It is an affair of urgency,
then? Mademoiselle will remember that I am not alone here."

She threw out her hands scornfully.

"They told me in Paris that you were a genius!" she exclaimed. "Cannot
you feel, then, when a thing is urgent? Do you not know it without
being told? You must meet me with a carriage at the stage door in forty
minutes. We sup in Hamilton Place with Andrea Korust and his brother."

"With whom?" Peter asked, surprised.

"With the Korust Brothers," she repeated. "I have just been talking to
Andrea. He calls himself a Hungarian. Bah! They are as much Hungarian,
those young men, as I am!"

Peter leaned slightly against the table and looked thoughtfully at his
companion. He was trying to remember whether he had ever heard anything
of these young men.

"Mademoiselle," he said, "the prospect of partaking of any meal in your
company is in itself enchanting, but I do not know your friends, the
Korust Brothers. Apart from their wonderful music, I do not recollect
ever having heard of them before in my life. What excuse have I, then,
for accepting their hospitality? Pardon me, too, if I add that you have
not as yet spoken as to the urgency of this affair."

She turned from him impatiently and, throwing herself back into the
chair from which she had risen at his entrance, she began to exchange
the thick woolen stockings which she had been wearing upon the stage for
others of fine silk.

"Oh, la, la!" she exclaimed. "You are very slow, Monsieur le Baron. It
is, perhaps, my stage name which has misled you. I am Marie Lapouse.
Does that convey anything to you?"

"A great deal," Peter admitted, quickly. "You stand very high upon the
list of my agents whom I may trust."

"Then stay here no longer," she begged, "for my maid waits outside and I
need her services. Go back and make your excuses to your wife. In forty
minutes I shall expect you at the stage door."

"An affair of diplomacy, this, or brute force?" he inquired.

"Heaven knows what may happen!" she replied. "To tell you the truth, I
do not know myself. Be prepared for anything, but, for Heaven's sake, go
now! I can dress no further without my maid, and Andrea Korust may come
in at any moment. I do not wish him to find you here."

Peter made his way thoughtfully back to his seat. He explained the
situation to his wife so far as he could, and sent her home. Then he
waited about until the car returned, smoking a cigarette and trying once
more to remember if he had ever heard anything from Sogrange of Andrea
Korust or his brother. Punctually at the time stated he was outside
the stage door of the music-hall, and a few minutes later Mademoiselle
Celaire appeared, a dazzling vision of fur and smiles and jewelry
imperfectly concealed. A small crowd pressed around to see the famous
Frenchwoman. Peter handed her gravely across the pavement into his
waiting car. One or two of the loungers gave vent to a groan of envy at
the sight of the diamonds which blazed from her neck and bosom. Peter
smiled as he gave the address to his servant and took his place by the
side of his companion.

"They see only the externals, this mob," he remarked. "They picture to
themselves, perhaps, a little supper for two. Alas!"

Mademoiselle Celaire laughed at him softly.

"You need not trouble to assume that most disconsolate of expressions,
my dear Baron," she assured him. "Your reputation as a man of gallantry
is beyond question; but remember that I know you also for the most
devoted and loyal of husbands. We waste no time in folly, you and I. It
is the business of the Double-Four."

Peter was relieved, but his innate politeness forbade his showing it.

"Proceed," he said.

"The Brothers Korust," she went on, leaning towards him, "have a week's
engagement at the Alhambra. Their salary is six hundred pounds. They
play very beautifully, of course, but I think that it is as much as they
are worth."

Peter agreed with her fervently. He had no soul for music.

"They have taken the furnished house belonging to one of your dukes, in
Hamilton Place, for which we are now bound; taken it, too, at a fabulous
rent," Mademoiselle Celaire continued. "They, have installed there a
chef and a whole retinue of servants. They are here for seven nights;
they have issued invitations for seven supper parties."

"Hospitable young men they seem to be," Peter murmured. "I read in one
of the stage papers that Andrea is a Count in his own country, and that
they perform in public only for the love of their music and for the sake
of the excitement and travel."

"A paragraph wholly inspired and utterly false," Mademoiselle Celaire
declared, firmly, sitting a little forward in the car, and laying her
hand, ablaze with jewels, upon his coat sleeve. "Listen. They call
themselves Hungarians. Bah! I know that they are in touch with a great
European court, both of them, the court of the country to which they
belong. They have plans, plans and schemes connected with their visit
here, which I do not understand. I have done my best with Andrea Korust,
but he is not a man to be trusted. I know that there is something more
in these seven supper parties than idle hospitality. I and others like
me, artistes and musicians, are invited, to give the assembly a properly
Bohemian tone; but there are to be other guests, attracted there, no
doubt, because the papers have spoken of these gatherings."

"You have some idea of what it all means, in your mind?" Peter
suggested.

"It is too vague to put into words," she declared, shaking her head. "We
must both watch. Afterwards, we will, if you like, compare notes."

The car drew up before the doors of a handsome house in Hamilton Place.
A footman received Peter and relieved him of his hat and overcoat. A
trim maid performed the same office for Mademoiselle Celaire. They met,
a moment or two later, and were ushered into a large drawing-room in
which a dozen or two of men and women were already assembled, and from
which came a pleasant murmur of voices and laughter. The apartment
was hung with pale green satin; the furniture was mostly Chippendale,
upholstered in the same shade. A magnificent grand piano stood open in a
smaller room, just visible beyond. Only one thing seemed strange to the
two newly arrived guests. The room was entirely lit with shaded candles,
giving a certain mysterious but not unpleasant air of obscurity to the
whole suite of apartments. Through the gloom, the jewels and eyes of the
women seemed to shine with a new brilliance. Slight eccentricities of
toilette, for a part of the gathering was distinctly Bohemian, were
softened and subdued. The whole effect was somewhat weird, but also
picturesque.

Andrea Korust advanced from a little group to meet his guests. Off the
stage he seemed at first sight frailer and slighter than ever. His dress
coat had been exchanged for a velvet dinner jacket, and his white tie
for a drooping black bow. He had a habit of blinking nearly all the
time, as though his large brown eyes, which he seldom wholly opened,
were weaker than they appeared to be. Nevertheless, when he came to
within a few paces of his newly arrived visitors, they shone with plenty
of expression. Without any change of countenance, however, he held out
his hand.

"Dear Andrea," Mademoiselle Celaire exclaimed, "you permit me that I
present to you my dear friend, well known in Paris--alas! many years
ago--Monsieur le Baron de Grost. Monsieur le Baron was kind enough to
pay his respects to me this evening, and I have induced him to become my
escort here."

"It was my good fortune," Peter remarked, smiling, "that I saw
Mademoiselle Celaire's name upon the bills this evening--my good
fortune, since it has procured for me the honor of an acquaintance with
a musician so distinguished."

"You are very kind, Monsieur le Baron," Korust replied.

"You stay here, I regret to hear, a very short time?"

"Alas!" Andrea Korust admitted, "it is so. For myself I would that it
were longer. I find your London so attractive, the people so friendly.
They fall in with my whims so charmingly. I have a hatred, you know, of
solitude. I like to make acquaintances wherever I go, to have delightful
women and interesting men around, to forget that life is not always gay.
If I am too much alone, I am miserable, and when I am miserable I am in
a very bad way indeed. I cannot then make music."

Peter smiled gravely and sympathetically.

"And your brother? Does he, too, share your gregarious instincts?"

Korust paused for a moment before replying. His eyes were quite wide
open now. If one could judge from his expression, one would certainly
have said that the Baron de Grost's attempts to ingratiate himself with
his host were distinctly unsuccessful.

"My brother has exactly opposite instincts," he said slowly. "He finds
no pleasure in society. At the sound of a woman's voice, he hides."

"He is not here, then?" Peter asked, glancing around.

Andrea Korust shook his head.

"It is doubtful whether he joins us this evening at all," he declared.
"My sister, however, is wholly of my disposition. Monsieur le Baron will
permit that I present him."

Peter bowed low before a very handsome young woman with flashing
black eyes, and a type of features undoubtedly belonging to one of the
countries of eastern Europe. She was picturesquely dressed in a gown
of flaming red silk, made as though in one piece, without trimming or
flounces, and she seemed inclined to bestow upon her new acquaintance
all the attention that he might desire. She took him at once into a
corner and seated herself by his side. It was impossible for Peter not
to associate the empressement of her manner with the few words which
Andrea Korust had whispered into her ear at the moment of their
introduction.

"So you," she murmured, "are the wonderful Baron de Grost. I have heard
of you so often."

"Wonderful!" Peter repeated, with twinkling eyes. "I have never
been called that before. I feel that I have no claims whatever to
distinction, especially in a gathering like this."

She shrugged her shoulders and glanced carelessly across the room.

"They are well enough," she admitted, "but one wearies of genius on
every side of one. Genius is not the best thing in the world to live
with, you know. It has whims and fancies. For instance, look at these
rooms--the gloom, the obscurity--and I love so much the light."

Peter smiled.

"It is the privilege of genius," he remarked, "to have whims and to
indulge in them."

She sighed.

"To do Andrea justice," she said, "it is, perhaps, scarcely a whim that
he chooses to receive his guests in semi-darkness. He has weak eyes
and he is much too vain to wear spectacles. Tell me, you know every one
here?"

"No one," Peter declared. "Please enlighten me, if you think it
necessary. For myself," he added, dropping his voice a little, "I feel
that the happiness of my evening is assured, without making any further
acquaintances."

"But you came as the guest of Mademoiselle Celaire," she reminded him,
doubtfully, with a faint regretful sigh and a provocative gleam in her
eyes.

"I saw Mademoiselle Celaire to-night for the first time for years,"
Peter replied. "I called to see her in her dressing-room and she claimed
me for an escort this evening. I am, alas! a very occasional wanderer in
the pleasant paths of Bohemia."

"If that is really true," she murmured, "I suppose I must tell you
something about the people, or you will feel that you have wasted your
opportunity."

"Mademoiselle," Peter whispered.

She held out her hand and laughed into his face.

"No!" she interrupted. "I shall do my duty. Opposite you is Mademoiselle
Trezani, the famous singer at Covent Garden. Do I need to tell you that,
I wonder? Rudolf Maesterling, the dramatist, stands behind her there
in the corner. He is talking to the wonderful Cleo, whom all the world
knows. Monsieur Guyer there, he is manager, I believe, of the Alhambra;
and talking to him is Marborg, the great pianist. One of the ladies
talking to my brother is Esther Braithwaite, whom, of course, you know
by sight; she is leading lady, is she not, at the Hilarity? The other
is Miss Ransome; they tell me that she is your only really great English
actress."

Peter nodded appreciatively.

"It is all most interesting," he declared. "Now tell me, please, who
is the military person with the stiff figure and sallow complexion,
standing by the door? He seems quite alone."

The girl made a little grimace.

"I suppose I ought to be looking after him," she admitted, rising
reluctantly to her feet. "He is a soldier just back from India--a
General Noseworthy, with all sorts of letters after his name. If
Mademoiselle Celaire is generous, perhaps we may have a few minutes'
conversation later on," she added, with a parting smile.

"Say, rather, if Mademoiselle Korust is kind," De Grost replied, bowing.
"It depends upon that only."

He strolled across the room and rejoined Mademoiselle Celaire a few
moments later. They stood apart in a corner.

"I should like my supper," Peter declared.

"They wait for one more guest," Mademoiselle Celaire announced.

"One more guest! Do you know who it is?"

"No idea," she answered. "One would imagine that it was some one of
importance. Are you any wiser than when you came, dear master?" she
added, under her breath.

"Not a whit," he replied, promptly.

She took out her fan and waved it slowly in front of her face.

"Yet you must discover what it all means to-night or not at all," she
whispered. "The dear Andrea has intimated to me most delicately that
another escort would be more acceptable if I should honor him again."

"That helps," he murmured. "See, our last guest arrives."

A tall,--spare-looking man was just being announced. They heard his name
as Andrea presented him to a companion--

"Colonel Mayson!"

Mademoiselle Celaire saw a gleam in her companion's eyes.

"It is coming--the idea?" she whispered.

"Very vaguely," he admitted.

"Who is this Colonel Mayson?"

"Our only military aeronaut," Peter replied.

She raised her eyebrows.

"Aeronaut!" she repeated, doubtfully. "I see nothing in that. Both my
own country and Germany are years ahead of poor England in the air. Is
it not so?"

Peter smiled and held out his arm.

"See," he said, "supper has been announced. Afterwards, Andrea Korust
will play to us, and I think that Colonel Mayson and his distinguished
brother officer from India will talk. We shall see."

They passed into a room whose existence had suddenly been revealed
by the drawing back of some beautiful brocaded curtains. Supper was a
delightful meal, charmingly served. Peter, putting everything else out
of his head for the moment, thoroughly enjoyed himself, and, remembering
his duty as a guest, contributed in no small degree towards the success
of the entertainment. He sat between Mademoiselle Celaire and his
hostess, both of whom demanded much from him in the way of attention.
But he still found time to tell stories which were listened to by every
one, and exchanged sallies with the gayest. Only Andrea Korust, from his
place at the head of the table, glanced occasionally towards his popular
guest with a curious, half-hidden expression of distaste and suspicion.

The more the Baron de Grost shone, the more uneasy he became. The signal
to rise from the meal was given almost abruptly. Mademoiselle Korust
hung on to Peter's arm. Her own wishes and her brother's orders seemed
absolutely to coincide. She led him towards a retiring corner of the
music room. On the way, however, Peter overheard the introduction which
he had expected.

"General Noseworthy is just returned from India, Colonel Mayson,"
Korust said, in his usual quiet, tired tone. "You will, perhaps, find it
interesting to talk together a little. As for me, I play because all
are polite enough to wish it, but conversation disturbs me not in the
least."

Peter passed, smiling, on to the corner pointed out by his companion,
which was the darkest and most secluded in the room. He took her fan and
gloves, lit her cigarette, and leaned back by her side.

"How does your brother, a stranger to London, find time to make the
acquaintance of so many interesting people?" he asked.

"He brought many letters," she replied. "He has friends everywhere."

"I have an idea," Peter remarked, "that an acquaintance of my own, the
Count von Hern, spoke to me once about him."

She took her cigarette from her lips and turned her head slightly.
Peter's expression was one of amiable reminiscence. His cheeks were a
trifle flushed, his appearance was entirely reassuring. She laughed at
her brother's caution. She found her companion delightful.

"Yes, the Count von Hern is a friend of my brother's," she admitted,
carelessly.

"And of yours?" he whispered, his arm slightly pressed against hers.

She laughed at him silently and their eyes met. Decidedly Peter, Baron
de Grost, found it hard to break away from his old weakness! Andrea
Korust, from his place near the piano, breathed a sigh of relief as he
watched. A moment or two later, however, Mademoiselle Korust was obliged
to leave her companion to receive a late but unimportant guest, and
almost simultaneously Colonel Mayson passed by on his way to the farther
end of the apartment. Andrea Korust was bending over the piano to give
some instructions to his accompanist. Peter leaned forward and his face
and tone were strangely altered.

"You will find General Noseworthy of the Indian Army a little
inquisitive, Colonel," he remarked.

The latter turned sharply round. There was meaning in those few words,
without doubt! There was meaning, too, in the still, cold face which
seemed to repel his question. He passed on thoughtfully. Mademoiselle
Korust, with a gesture of relief, came back and threw herself once more
upon the couch.

"We must talk in whispers," she said, gayly. "Andrea always declares
that he does not mind conversation, but too much noise is, of course,
impossible. Besides, Mademoiselle Celaire will not spare you to me for
long."

"There is a whole language," he replied, "which was made for whispers.
And as for Mademoiselle Celaire--"

"Well?"

He laughed softly.

"Mademoiselle Celaire is, I think, more your brother's friend than
mine," he murmured. "At least, I will be generous. He has given me a
delightful evening. I resign my claims upon Mademoiselle Celaire."

"It would break your heart," she declared.

His voice sank even below a whisper. Decidedly, Peter, Baron de Grost,
did not improve!

He rose to leave precisely at the right time, neither too early nor too
late. He had spent altogether a most amusing evening. There were one or
two little comedies which had diverted him extremely. At the moment of
parting, the beautiful eyes of Mademoiselle Korust had been raised to
his very earnestly.

"You will come again very soon--to-morrow night?" she had whispered. "Is
it necessary that you bring Mademoiselle Celaire?"

"It is altogether unnecessary," Peter replied.

"Let me try and entertain you instead, then!"

It was precisely at that instant that Andrea had sent for his sister.
Peter watched their brief conversation with much interest and intense
amusement. She was being told not to invite him there again and she was
rebelling! Without a doubt, he had made a conquest! She returned to him
flushed and with a dangerous glitter in her eyes.

"Monsieur le Baron," she said, leading him on one side, "I am ashamed
and angry."

"Your brother is annoyed because you have asked me here to-morrow
night?" he asked, quickly.

"It is so," she confessed. "Indeed, I thank you that you have spared me
the task of putting my brother's discourtesy into words. Andrea takes
violent fancies like that sometimes. I am ashamed, but what can I do?"

"Nothing, mademoiselle," he admitted, with a sigh. "I obey, of course.
Did your brother mention the source of his aversion to me?"

"He is too absurd sometimes," she declared. "One must treat him like a
great baby."

"Nevertheless, there must be a reason," Peter persisted, gently.

"He has heard some foolish thing from Count von Hern," she admitted,
reluctantly. "Do not let us think anything more about it. In a few days
it will have passed. And meanwhile--"

She paused. He leaned a little towards her. She was looking intently at
a ring upon her finger.

"If you would really like to see me," she whispered, "and if you are
sure that Mademoiselle Celaire would not object, could you not ask me to
tea to-morrow--or the next day?"

"To-morrow," Peter insisted, with a becoming show of eagerness. "Shall
we say at the Canton at five?"

She hesitated.

"Isn't that rather a public place?" she objected.

"Anywhere else you like."

She was silent for a moment. She seemed to be waiting for some
suggestion from him. None came, however.

"The Carlton at five," she murmured. "I am angry with Andrea. I feel,
even, that I could break his wonderful violin in two!"

Peter sighed once more.

"I should like to twist von Hern's neck," he declared. "Lucky for him
that he's in St. Petersburg! Let us forget this unpleasant matter,
mademoiselle. The evening has been too delightful for such memories."

Mademoiselle Celaire turned to her escort eagerly as soon as they were
alone together in the car.

"As an escort, let me tell you, my dear Baron," she exclaimed, with some
pique, "that you are a miserable failure! For the rest--"

"For the rest, I will admit that I am puzzled," Peter said. "I need to
think. I have the glimmerings of an idea--no more."

"You will act? It is an affair for us--for the Double-Four?"

"Without a doubt--an affair and a serious one," Peter assured her. "I
shall act; exactly how I cannot say until after to-morrow."

"To-morrow?" she repeated, inquiringly.

"Mademoiselle Korust takes tea with me," he explained.

In a quiet sort of way, the series of supper parties given by Andrea
Korust became the talk of London. The most famous dancer in the world
broke through her unvarying rule and night after night thrilled the
distinguished little gathering. An opera singer, the "star" of the
season, sang, a great genius recited, and Andrea himself gave always of
his best. Apart from this wonderful outpouring of talent, Andrea Korust
himself seemed to possess the peculiar art of bringing into touch with
one another people naturally interested in the same subjects. On the
night after the visit of Peter, Baron de Grost, His Grace the Duke of
Rosshire was present, the man in whose hands lay the destinies of the
British Navy; and, curiously enough, on the same night, a great French
writer on naval subjects was present, whom the Duke had never met,
and with whom he was delighted to talk for some time apart. On another
occasion, the Military Secretary to the French Embassy was able to have
a long and instructive chat with a distinguished English general on
the subject of the recent maneuvers, and the latter received, in the
strictest confidence, some very interesting information concerning the
new type of French guns. On the following evening, the greatest of our
Colonial statesmen, a red-hot Imperialist, was able to chat about the
resources of the Empire with an English politician of similar views
whom he chanced never to have previously met. Altogether, these parties
seemed to be the means of bringing together a series of most interesting
people, interesting not only in themselves, but in their relations to
one another. It was noticeable, however, that from this side of his
little gatherings Andrea Korust remained wholly apart. He frankly
admitted that music and cheerful companionship were the only two things
in life he cared for. Politics or matters of world import seemed to
leave him unmoved. If a serious subject of conversation were started at
supper time, he was frankly bored, and took no particular pains to hide
the fact. It is certain that whatever interesting topics were alluded to
in his presence, he remained entirely outside any understanding of them.
Mademoiselle Celaire, who was present most evenings, although with other
escorts, was entirely puzzled. She could see nothing whatever to account
for the warning which she had received, and which she had passed on, as
was her duty, to the Baron de Grost. She failed, also, to understand
the faint but perceptible enlightenment to which Peter himself had
admittedly attained after that first evening. Take that important
conversation, for instance, between the French military attach, and the
English general. Without a doubt it was of interest, and especially so
to the country which she was sure claimed his allegiance, but it was
equally without doubt that Andrea Korust neither overheard a word of
that conversation nor betrayed the slightest curiosity concerning
it. Mademoiselle Celaire was a clever woman and she had never felt so
hopelessly at fault....

The seventh and last of these famous supper parties was in full swing.
Notwithstanding the shaded candles, which left the faces of the guests
a little indistinct, the scene was a brilliant one. Mademoiselle Celaire
was wearing her famous diamonds, which shone through the gloom like
pin-pricks of fire. Garda Desmaines, the wonderful Garda, sat next to
her host, her bosom and hair on fire with jewels, yet with the most
wonderful light of all glowing in her eyes. A famous actor, who had
thrown his proverbial reticence to the winds, kept his immediate
neighbors in a state of semi-hysterical mirth. The clink of wine
glasses, the laughter of beautiful women, the murmur of cultivated
voices, rising and swelling through the faint, mysterious gloom, made a
picturesque, a wonderful scene. Pale as a marble statue, with the covert
smile of the gracious host, Andrea Korust sat at the head of his table,
well pleased with his company, as indeed he had the right to be. By his
side was a great American statesman, who was traveling around the world
and yet had refused all other invitations of this sort. He had come for
the pleasure of meeting the famous Dutch writer and politician, Mr. Van
Jool. The two were already talking intimately. It was at this point that
tragedy, or something like it, intervened. A impatient voice was
heard in the hall outside, a voice which grew louder and louder, more
impatient, finally more passionate. People raised their heads to listen.
The American statesman, who was, perhaps, the only one to realize
exactly what was coming, slipped his hand into his pocket and gripped
something cold and hard. Then the door was flung open. An apologetic
and much disturbed butler made the announcement which had evidently been
demanded of him.

"Mr. Von Tassen!"

A silence followed--breathless--the silence before the bursting of the
storm. Mr. Von Tassen was the name of the American statesman, and the
man who rose slowly from his place by his host's side was the exact
double of the man who stood now upon the threshold, gazing in upon the
room. The expression of the two alone was different. The newcomer was
furiously angry, and looked it. The sham Mr. Von Tassen was very much at
his ease. It was he who broke the silence, and his voice was curiously
free from all trace of emotion. He was looking his double over with an
air of professional interest.

"On the whole," he said, calmly, "very good. A little stouter, I
perceive, and the eyebrows a trifle too regular. Of course, when you
make faces at me like that, it is hard to judge of the expression. I can
only say that I did the best I could."

"Who the devil are you, masquerading in my name?" the newcomer demanded,
with emphasis. "This man is an impostor!" he added, turning to Andrea
Korust. "What is he doing at your table?"

Andrea leaned forward and his face was an evil thing to look upon.

"Who are you?" he hissed out.

The sham Mr. Von Tassen turned away for a moment and stooped down. The
trick has been done often enough upon the stage, often in less time, but
seldom with more effect. The wonderful wig disappeared, the spectacles,
the lines in the face, the make-up of diabolical cleverness. With his
back to the wall and his fingers playing with something in his pocket,
Peter, Baron de Grost, smiled upon his host.

"Since you insist upon knowing--the Baron de Grost, at your service!" he
announced.

Andrea Korust was, for the moment, speechless. One of the women
shrieked. The real Mr. Von Tassen looked around him helplessly.

"Will some one be good enough to enlighten me as to the meaning of
this?" he begged. "Is it a roast? If so, I only want to catch on. Let me
get to the joke, if there is one. If not, I should like a few words of
explanation from you, sir," he added, addressing Peter.

"Presently," the latter replied. "In the meantime, let me persuade you
that I am not the only impostor here."

He seized a glass of water and dashed it in the face of Mr. Van Jool.
There was a moment's scuffle, and no more of Mr. Van Jool. What emerged
was a good deal like the shy Maurice Korust, who accompanied his brother
at the music hall, but whose distaste for these gatherings had been
Andrea's continual lament. The Baron de Grost stepped back once more
against the wall. His host was certainly looking dangerous. Mademoiselle
Celaire was leaning forward, staring through the gloom with distended
eyes. Around the table every head was turned towards the centre of the
disturbance. It was Peter again who spoke.

"Let me suggest, Andrea Korust," he said, "that you send your
guests--those who are not immediately interested in this affair--into
the next room. I will offer Mr. Von Tassen then the explanation to which
he is entitled."

Andrea Korust staggered to his feet. The nerve had failed. He was
shaking all over. He pointed to the music room.

"If you would be so good, ladies and gentlemen?" he begged. "We will
follow you immediately."

They went with obvious reluctance. All their eyes seemed focussed upon
Peter. He bore their scrutiny with calm cheerfulness. For a moment he
had feared Korust, but that moment had passed. A servant, obeying his
master's gesture, pulled back the curtains after the departing crowd.
The four men were alone.

"Mr. Von Tassen," Peter said, easily, "you are a man who loves
adventures. To-night you experience a new sort of one. Over in your
great country, such methods are laughed at as the cheap device of
sensation mongers. Nevertheless, they exist. To-night is a proof that
they exist."

"Get on to facts, sir," the American admonished. "You've got to explain
to me what you mean by passing yourself off as Thomas Von Tassen, before
you leave this room."

Peter bowed.

"With much pleasure, Mr. Von Tassen," he declared. "For your
information, I might tell you that you are not the only person in whose
guise I have figured. In fact, I have had quite a busy week. I have
been--let me see--I have been Monsieur le Marquis de Beau Kunel on
the night when our shy friend, Maurice Korust, was playing the part of
General Henderson. I have also been His Grace the Duke of Rosshire when
my friend Maurice here was introduced to me as Francois Defayal, known
by name to me as one of the greatest writers on naval matters. A little
awkward about the figure I found His Grace, but otherwise I think that
I should have passed muster wherever he was known. I have also passed as
Sir William Laureston, on the evening when my rival artist here sang the
praises of Imperial England."

Andrea Korust leaned forward with venomous eyes.

"You mean that it was you who was here last night in Sir William
Laureston's place?" he almost shrieked.

"Most certainly," Peter admitted, "but you must remember that, after
all, my performances have been no more difficult than those of your
shy but accomplished brother. Whenever I took to myself a strange
personality I found him there, equally good as to detail, and with his
subject always at his finger tips. We settled that little matter of the
canal, didn't we?" Peter remarked, cheerfully, laying his hand upon the
shoulder of the young man.

They stared at him, those two white-faced brothers, like tiger-cats
about to spring. Mr. Von Tassen was getting impatient.

"Look here," he protested, "you may be clearing matters up so far as
regards Mr. Andrea Korust and his brother, but I'm as much in the fog as
ever. Where do I come in?"

"Your pardon, sir," Peter replied. "I am getting nearer things now.
These two young men--we will not call them hard names--are suffering
from an excess of patriotic zeal. They didn't come and sit down on
a camp stool and sketch obsolete forts, as those others of their
countrymen do when they want to pose as the bland and really exceedingly
ignorant foreigner. They went about the matter with some skill. It
occurred to them that it might be interesting to their country to know
what Sir William Laureston thought about the strength of the Imperial
Navy, and to what extent his country was willing to go in maintaining
their allegiance to Great Britain. Then there was the Duke of Rosshire.
They thought they'd like to know his views as to the development of the
Navy during the next ten years. There was that little matter, too, of
the French guns. It would certainly be interesting to them to know what
Monsieur le Marquis de Beau Kunel had to say about them. These people
were all invited to sit at the hospitable board of our host here. I,
however, had an inkling on the first night of what was going on, and
I was easily able to persuade those in authority to let me play their
several parts. You, sir," Peter added, turning to Mr. Von Tassen, "you,
sir, floored me. You were not an Englishman, and there was no appeal
which I could make. I simply had to risk you. I counted upon your not
turning up. Unfortunately, you did. Fortunately, you are the last guest.
This is the seventh supper."

Mr. Von Tassen glanced around at the three men and made up his mind.

"What do you call yourself?" he asked Peter.

"The Baron de Grost," Peter replied.

"Then, my friend the Baron de Grost," Von Tassen said, "I think that you
and I had better get out of this. So I was to talk about Germany with
Mr. Van Jool, eh?"

"I have already explained your views," Peter declared, with twinkling
eyes. "Mr. Van Jool was delighted."

Mr. Von Tassen shook with laughter.

"Say," he exclaimed, "this is a great story! If you're ready, Baron de
Grost, lead the way to where we can get a whiskey and soda and a chat."

Mademoiselle Celaire came gliding out to them.

"I am not going to be left here," she whispered, taking Peter's arm.

Peter looked back from the door.

"At any rate, Mr. Andrea Korust," he said, "your first supper was a
success. Colonel Mayson was genuine. Our real English military aeronaut
was here, and he has disclosed to you, Maurice Korust, all that he ever
knew. Henceforth, I presume your great country will dispute with us for
the mastery of the air.

"Queer country, this!" Mr. Von Tassen remarked, pausing on the step to
light a cigar. "Seems kind of humdrum after New York, but there's no use
talking. Things do happen over here, anyway!"



CHAPTER VII. MAJOR KOSUTH'S MISSION


His host, very fussy as he always was on the morning of his big shoot,
came bustling towards Peter, Baron de Grost, with a piece of paper in
his hand. The party of men had just descended from a large brake and
were standing about on the edge of the common, examining cartridges,
smoking a last cigarette before the business of the morning, and
chatting together over the prospects of the day's sport. In the
distance, a cloud of dust indicated the approach of a fast traveling
motor-car.

"My dear Baron," Sir William Bounderby said, "I want you to change your
stand to-day. I must have a good man at the far corner as the birds
go off my hand from there, and Addington was missing them shockingly
yesterday. Besides, there is a new man coming on your left and I know
nothing of his shooting--nothing at all!"

Peter smiled.

"Anywhere you choose to put me, Sir William," he assented. "They came
badly for Addington yesterday, and well for me. However, I'll do my
best."

"I wish people wouldn't bring strangers, especially to the one
shoot where I'm keen about the bag. I told Portal he could bring his
brother-in-law, and he's bringing this foreign fellow instead. Don't
suppose he can shoot for nuts! Did you ever hear of him, I wonder? The
Count von Hern, he calls himself."

The motor-car had come to a standstill by this time. From it descended
Mr. Portal himself, a large neighboring land owner, a man of culture
and travel. With him was Bernadine, in a very correct shooting suit and
Tyrolese hat. On the other side of Mr. Portal was a short, thick
set man, with olive complexion, keen black eyes, black mustache and
imperial, who was dressed in city clothes. Sir William's eyebrows were
slightly raised as he advanced to greet the party. Peter was at once
profoundly interested.

Mr. Portal introduced his guests.

"You will forgive me, I am sure, for bringing a spectator, Bounderby,"
he said. "Major Kosuth, whom I have the honor to present--Major Kosuth,
Sir William Bounderby--is high up in the diplomatic service of a country
with whom we must feel every sympathy--the young Turks. The Count von
Hern, who takes my brother-in-law's place, is probably known to you by
name."

Sir William welcomed his visitors cordially.

"You do not shoot, Major Kosuth?" he asked.

"Very seldom," the Turk answered. "I come to-day with my good friend,
Count von Hern, as a spectator, if you permit."

"Delighted," Sir William replied. "We will find you a safe place near
your friend."

The little party began to move toward the wood. It was just at this
moment that Bernadine felt a touch upon his shoulder, and, turning
around, found Peter by his side.

"An unexpected pleasure, my dear Count," the latter declared, suavely.
"I had no idea that you took interest in such simple sports."

The manners of Count von Hern were universally quoted as being almost
too perfect. It is a regrettable fact, however, that at that moment he
swore--softly, perhaps, but with distinct vehemence. A moment later he
was exchanging the most cordial of greetings with his old friend.

"You have the knack, my dear De Grost," he remarked, "of turning up in
the most surprising places. I certainly did not know that among your
many accomplishments was included a love for field sports."

Peter smiled quietly. He was a very fine shot, and knew it.

"One must amuse oneself these days," he said. "There is little else to
do."

Bernadine bit his lip.

"My absence from this country, I fear, has robbed you of an occupation."

"It has certainly deprived life of some of its savor," Peter admitted,
blandly. "By the bye, will you not present me to your friend? I have
the utmost sympathy with the intrepid political party of which he is a
member."

Von Hern performed the introduction with a reluctance which he wholly
failed to conceal. The Turk, however, had been walking on his other
side, and his hat was already lifted. Peter had purposely raised his
voice.

"It gives me the greatest pleasure, Major Kosuth," Peter said, "to
welcome you to this country. In common, I believe, with the majority
of my country people, I have the utmost respect and admiration for the
movement which you represent."

Major Kosuth smiled slowly. His features were heavy and unexpressive.
There was something of gloom, however, in the manner of his response.

"You are very kind, Baron," he replied, "and I welcome very much this
expression of your interest in my party. I believe that the hearts of
your country people are turned towards us in the same manner. I could
wish that your country's political sympathies were as easily aroused."

Bernadine intervened promptly.

"Major Kosuth has been here only one day," he remarked, lightly. "I tell
him that he is a little too impatient. See, we are approaching the wood.
It is as well here to refrain from conversation."

"We will resume it later," Peter said, softly. "I have interests in
Turkey, and it would give me great pleasure to have a talk with Major
Kosuth."

"Financial interests?" the latter inquired, with some eagerness.

Peter nodded.

"I will explain after the first drive," he said, turning away.

Peter walked rather quickly until he reached a bend in the wood, and
overtaking his host, paused for a moment.

"Lend me a loader for half an hour, Sir William," he begged. "I have to
send my servant to the village with a telegram."

"With pleasure!" Sir William answered. "There are several to spare.
I'll send one to your stand. There's Von Hern going the wrong way!" he
exclaimed, in a tone of annoyance.

Peter was just in time to stop the whistle from going to his mouth.

"Do me another favor, Sir William," he pleaded. "Give me time to send
off my telegram before the Count sees what I'm doing. He's such an
inquisitive person," he went on, noticing his host's look of blank
surprise. "Thank you ever so much."

Peter hurried on to his place. It was round the corner of the wood and
for the moment out of sight of the rest of the party. He tore a
sheet from his pocket-book and scribbled out a telegram. His man had
disappeared and a substitute taken his place by the time von Hern
arrived. The latter was now all amiability. It was hard to believe, from
his smiling salutation, that he and the man to whom he waved his hand in
so airy a fashion had ever declared war to the death!

The shooting began a few minutes later. Major Kosuth, from a campstool a
few yards behind his friend, watched with somewhat languid interest. He
gave one, indeed, the impression that his thoughts were far removed from
this simple country party, the main object of whose existence for the
present seemed to be the slaying of a certain number of inoffensive
birds. He watched the indifferent performance of his friend and the
remarkably fine shooting of his neighbor on the left, with the same
lack-luster eye and want of enthusiasm. The beat was scarcely over
before Peter, resigning his smoking guns, lit a cigarette and strolled
across to the next stand. He plunged at once into a conversation with
Kosuth, notwithstanding Bernadine's ill-concealed annoyance.

"Major Kosuth," he began, "I sympathize with you. It is a hard task for
a man whose mind is centered upon great events, to sit still and watch
a performance of this sort. Be kind to us all and remember that this
represents to us merely a few hours of relaxation. We, too, have our
more serious moments."

"You read my thoughts well," Major Kosuth declared. "I do not seek to
excuse them. For half a life-time we Turks have toiled and striven,
always in danger of our lives, to help forward those things which
have now come to pass. I think that our lives have become tinged with
somberness and apprehension. Now that the first step is achieved, we go
forward, still with trepidation. We need friends, Baron de Grost."

"You cannot seriously doubt but that you will find them in this
country," Peter remarked. "There has never been a time when the English
nation has not sympathized with the cause of liberty."

"It is not the hearts of your people," Major Kosuth said, "which I fear.
It is the antics of your politicians. Sympathy is a great thing, and
good to have, but Turkey to-day needs more. The heart of a nation is
big, but the number of those in whose hands it remains to give practical
expression to its promptings, is few."

Bernadine, who had stood as much as he could, seized forcibly upon his
friend.

"You must remember our bargain, Kosuth," he insisted, "no politics
to-day. Until to-morrow evening we rest. Now I want to introduce you to
a very old friend of mine--the Lord-Lieutenant of the county."

No man was better informed in current political affairs, but Peter,
instead of joining the cheerful afternoon tea party at the close of
the day, raked out a file of the Times from the library, and studied it
carefully in his room. There were one or two items of news concerning
which he made pencil notes. He had scarcely finished his task before
a servant brought in a dispatch. He opened it with interest and drew
pencil and paper towards him. It was from Paris, and in the code which
he had learned by heart, no written key of which existed. Carefully he
transposed it on to paper and read it through. It was dated from Paris a
few hours back.

Kosuth left for England yesterday. Envoy from new Turkish Government.
Requiring loan one million pounds. Asked for guarantee that it was
not for warlike movement against Bulgaria, declined to give same.
Communicated with English Ambassador and informed Kosuth yesterday that
neither government would sanction loan unless undertaking were given
that the same was not to be applied for war against Bulgaria. Turkey
is under covenant to enter into no financial obligations with any other
Power while the interest of former loans remains in abeyance. Kosuth
has made two efforts to obtain loan privately, from prominent English
financier and French Syndicate. Both have declined to treat on
representations from government. Kosuth was expected return direct to
Turkey. If, as you say, he is in England with Bernadine, we commend the
affair to your utmost vigilance. Germany exceedingly anxious enter into
close relations with new government of Turkey. Fear Kosuth's association
with Bernadine proof of bad faith. Have had interview with Minister for
foreign affairs, who relies upon our help. French Secret Service at your
disposal, if necessary.

Peter read the message three times with the greatest care. He was on the
point of destroying it when Violet came into the room. She was wearing
a long tea jacket of sheeny silk. Her beautiful hair was most becomingly
arranged, her figure as light and girlish as ever. She came into the
room humming gayly and swinging a gold purse upon her finger.

"Won three rubbers out of four, Peter," she declared, "and a compliment
from the Duchess. Am I a pupil to be proud of?"

She stopped short. Her lips formed themselves into the shape of a
whistle. She knew very well the signs. Her husband's eyes were kindling,
there was a firm set about his lips, the palm of his hand lay flat upon
that sheet of paper.

"It was true?" she murmured. "It was Bernadine who was shooting to-day?"

Peter nodded.

"He was on the next stand," he replied.

"Then there is something doing, of course," Violet continued. "My dear
Peter, you may be an enigma to other people. To me you have the most
expressive countenance I ever saw. You have had a cable which you have
just transcribed. If I had been a few minutes later, I think you would
have torn up the result. As it is, I think I have come just in time to
hear all about it."

Peter smiled, grimly but fondly. He uncovered the sheet of paper and
placed it in her hands.

"So far," he said, "there isn't much to tell you. Von Hern turned up
this morning with a Major Kosuth, who was one of the leaders of the
revolution in Turkey. I wired Paris and this is the reply."

She read the message through thoughtfully and handed it back. Peter lit
a match, and standing over the fireplace calmly destroyed it.

"A million pounds is not a great sum of money," Violet remarked. "Why
could not Kosuth borrow it for his country from a private individual?"

"A million pounds is not a large sum to talk about," Peter replied, "but
it is an exceedingly large sum for any one, even a multi-millionaire,
to handle in cash. And Turkey, I gather, wants it at once. Besides,
considerations which might be a security from a government, are no
security at all as applied to a private individual."

She nodded.

"Do you think that Kosuth means to go behind the existing treaty and
borrow from Germany?"

Peter shook his head.

"I can't quite believe that," he said. "It would mean the straining of
diplomatic relations with both countries. It is out of the question."

"Then where does Bernadine come in?"

"I do not know," Peter answered.

Violet laughed.

"What is it that you are going to try and find out?" she asked.

"I am trying to discover who it is that Bernadine and Kosuth are waiting
to see," Peter replied. "The worst of it is, I daren't leave here. I
shall have to trust to the others."

She glanced at the clock.

"Well, go and dress," she said. "I'm afraid I've a little of your blood
in me, after all. Life seems more stirring when Bernadine is on the
scene."


The shooting party broke up two days later and Peter and his wife
returned at once to town. The former found the reports which were
awaiting his arrival disappointing. Bernadine and his guest were not in
London, or if they were they had carefully avoided all the usual haunts.
Peter read his reports over again, smoked a very long cigar alone in
his study, and finally drove down to the city and called upon his
stockbroker, who was also a personal friend. Things were flat in the
city, and the latter was glad enough to welcome an important client. He
began talking the usual market shop until his visitor stopped him.

"I have come to you, Edwardes, more for information than anything,"
Peter declared, "although it may mean that I shall need to sell a lot of
stock. Can you tell me of any private financier who could raise a loan
of a million pounds in cash within the course of a week?"

The stockbroker looked dubious.

"In cash," he repeated. "Money isn't raised that way, you know. I doubt
whether there are many men in the whole city of London who could put up
such an amount with only a week's notice."

"But there must be some one," Peter persisted. "Think! It would probably
be a firm or a man not obtrusively English. I don't think the Jews would
touch it, and a German citizen would be impossible."

"Semi-political, eh?"

Peter nodded.

"It is rather that way," he admitted.

"Would your friend Count von Hern be likely to be concerned in it?"

"Why?" Peter asked, with immovable face.

"Nothing, only I saw him coming out of Heseltine-Wrigge's office the
other day," the stockbroker remarked, carelessly.

"And who is Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge?"

"A very wealthy American financier," the stockbroker replied, "not at
all an unlikely person for a loan of the sort you mention."

"American citizen?" Peter inquired.

"Without a doubt. Of German descent, I should say, but nothing much left
of it in his appearance. He settled over here in a huff because New York
society wouldn't receive his wife."

"I remember all about it," Peter declared. "She was a chorus girl,
wasn't she? Nothing particular against her, but the fellow had no tact.
Do you know him, Edwardes?"

"Slightly," the stockbroker answered.

"Give me a letter to him," Peter said. "Give my credit as good a leg as
you can. I shall probably go as a borrower."

Mr. Edwardes wrote a few lines and handed them to his client.

"Office is nearly opposite," he remarked. "Wish you luck, whatever your
scheme is."

Peter crossed the street and entered the building which his friend had
pointed out. He ascended in the lift to the third floor, knocked at the
door which bore Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge's name, and almost ran into the
arms of a charmingly dressed little lady, who was being shown out by a
broad-shouldered, typical American. Peter hastened to apologize.

"I beg your pardon," he said, raising his hat. "I was rather in a hurry
and I quite thought I heard some one say 'Come in.'"

The lady replied pleasantly. Her companion, who was carrying his hat in
his hand, paused reluctantly.

"Did you want to see me?" he asked.

"If you are Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge, I did," Peter admitted. "I am the
Baron de Grost, and I have a letter of introduction to you from Mr.
Edwardes."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge tore open the envelope and glanced through the
contents of the note. Peter, meanwhile, looked at his wife with genuine
but respectfully cloaked admiration. The lady obviously returned his
interest.

"Why, if you're the Baron de Grost," she exclaimed, "didn't you marry Vi
Brown? She used to be at the Gaiety with me, years ago."

"I certainly did marry Violet Brown," Peter confessed, "and, if you will
allow me to say so, Mrs. Heseltine-Wrigge, I should have recognized you
anywhere from your photographs."

"Say, isn't that queer?" the little lady remarked, turning to her
husband. "I should love to see Vi again."

"If you will give me your address," Peter declared, promptly, "my wife
will be delighted to call upon you."

The man looked up from the note.

"Do you want to talk business with me, Baron?" he asked.

"For a few moments only," Peter answered. "I am afraid I am a great
nuisance, and if you wish it I will come down to the city again."

"That's all right," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge replied. "Myra won't mind
waiting a minute or two. Come through here."

He turned and led the way into a quiet-looking suite of offices, where
one or two clerks were engaged writing at open desks. They all three
passed into an inner room.

"Any objections to my wife coming in?" Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge asked.
"there's scarcely any place for her out there."

"Delighted," Peter answered.

She glanced at the clock.

"Remember we have to meet the Count von Hern at half past one at
Prince's, Charles," she reminded him.

Her husband nodded. There was nothing in Peter's expression to denote
that he had already achieved the first object of his visit!

"I shall not detain you," he said. "Your name has been mentioned to me,
Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge, as a financier likely to have a large sum of
money at his disposal. I have a scheme which needs money. Providing the
security is unexceptionable, are you in a position to do a deal?"

"How much do you want?" Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge asked.

"A million to a million and a half," Peter answered.

"Dollars?

"Pounds."

It was not Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge's pose to appear surprised.
Nevertheless, his eyebrows were slightly raised.

"Say, what is this scheme?" he inquired.

"First of all," Peter replied, "I should like to know whether there's
any chance of business if I disclose it."

"Not an atom," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge declared. "I have just committed
myself to the biggest financial transaction of my life and it will clean
me out."

"Then I won't waste your time," Peter announced, rising.

"Sit down for a moment," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge invited, biting the end
off a cigar and passing the box toward Peter. "That's all right. My
wife doesn't mind. Say, it strikes me as rather a curious thing that
you should come in here and talk about a million and a half, when that's
just the amount concerned in my other little deal."

Peter smiled.

"As a matter of fact, it isn't at all queer," he answered. "I don't want
the money. I came to see whether you were really interested in the other
affair--the Turkish loan, you know."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge withdrew his cigar from his mouth and looked
steadily at his visitor.

"Say, Baron," he declared, "you've got a nerve!"

"Not at all," Peter replied. "I'm here as much in your interests as my
own."

"Whom do you represent, anyway?" Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge inquired.

"A company you have never heard of," Peter replied. "Our offices are in
the underground places of the world, and we don't run to brass plates. I
am here because I am curious about that loan. Turkey hasn't a shadow of
security to offer you. Everything which she can pledge is pledged, to
guarantee the interest on existing loans to France and England. She
is prevented by treaty from borrowing in Germany. If you make a loan
without security, Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge, I suppose you understand your
position. The loan may be repudiated at any moment."

"Kind of a philanthropist, aren't you, Baron?" Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge
remarked quietly.

"Not in the least," Peter assured him. "I know there is some tricky work
going on and I haven't brains enough to get to the bottom of it. That's
why I've come blundering in to you, and why I suppose you'll be telling
the whole story to the Count von Hern at luncheon in an hour's time."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge smoked in silence for a moment or two.

"This transaction of mine," he said at last, "Isn't one I can talk
about. I guess I'm on to what you want to know, but I simply can't tell
you. The security is unusual, but it's good enough for me."

"It seems so to you, beyond a doubt," Peter replied. "Still, you have
to do with a remarkably clever young man in the Count von Hern. I don't
want to ask you any questions you feel I ought not to, but I do wish
you'd tell me one thing."

"Go right ahead," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge invited. "Don't be shy."

"What day are you concluding this affair?"

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge scratched his chin for a moment thoughtfully and
glanced at his diary. "Well, I'll risk that," he decided. "A week to-day
I hand over the coin."

Peter drew a little breath of relief. A week was an immense time! He
rose to his feet.

"That ends our business, then, for the present," he said. "Now I am
going to ask both of you a favor. Perhaps I have no right to, but as a
man of honor, Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge, you can take it from me that I ask
it in your interests as well as my own. Don't tell the Count von Hern of
my visit to you."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge held out his hand.

"That's all right," he declared. "You hear, Myra?"

"I'll be dumb, Baron," she promised. "Say, when do you think Vi can come
and see me?"

Peter was guilty of snobbery. He considered it quite a justifiable
weapon.

"She is at Windsor this afternoon," he remarked.

"What, at the Garden-Party?" Mrs. Heseltine-Wrigge almost shrieked.

Peter nodded.

"I believe there's some fete or other to-morrow," he said, "but we're
alone this evening. Why won't you dine with us, say at the Carlton?"

"We'd love to," the lady assented, promptly.

"At eight o'clock," Peter said, taking his leave.

The dinner party was a great success. Mrs. Heseltine-Wrigge found
herself among the class of people with whom it was her earnest desire
to become acquainted, and her husband was well satisfied to see her keen
longing for society likely to be gratified. The subject of Peter's call
at the office in the city was studiously ignored. It was not until the
very end of the evening, indeed, that the host of this very agreeable
party was rewarded by a single hint. It all came about in the most
natural manner. They were speaking of foreign capitals.

"I love Paris," Mrs. Heseltine-Wrigge told her host. "Just adore it.
Charles is often there on business and I always go along."

Peter smiled. There was just a chance here.

"Your husband does not often have to leave London though," he remarked,
carelessly.

She nodded.

"Not often enough," she declared. "I just love getting about. Last week
we had a perfectly horrible trip, though. We started off for Belfast
quite unexpectedly, and I hated every minute of it."

Peter smiled inwardly, but he said never a word. His companion was
already chattering on about something else. Peter crossed the hall a few
minutes later, to speak to an acquaintance, slipped out to the telephone
booth and spoke to his servant.

"A bag and a change," he ordered, "at Euston Station at twelve o'clock,
in time for the Irish mail. Your mistress will be home as usual."

An hour later the dinner party broke up. Early the next morning, Peter
crossed the Irish Channel. He returned the following day and crossed
again within a few hours. In five days the affair was finished, except
for the denouement.

Peter ascended in the lift to Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge's office the
following Thursday, calm and unruffled as usual, but nevertheless a
little exultant. It was barely half an hour since he had become finally
prepared for this interview. He was looking forward to it now with
feelings of undiluted satisfaction. Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge was in, he was
told, and he was at once admitted to his presence. The financier greeted
him with a somewhat curious smile.

"Say, this is very nice of you to look me up again!" he exclaimed.
"Still worrying about that loan, eh?"

Peter shook his head.

"No, I'm not worrying about that any more," he answered, accepting one
of his host's cigars. "The fact of it is that if it were not for me, you
would be the one who would have to do the worrying."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge stopped short in the act of lighting his cigar.

"I'm not quite on," he remarked. "What's the trouble?"

"There is no trouble, fortunately," Peter replied. "Only a little
disappointment for our friends the Count von Hern and Major Kosuth. I
have brought you some information which I think will put an end to that
affair of the loan."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge sat quite still for a moment. He brows were
knitted, he showed no signs of nervousness.

"Go right on," he said.

"The security upon which you were going to advance a million and a
half to the Turkish Government," Peter continued, "consisted of two
Dreadnoughts and a cruiser, being built to the order of that country by
Messrs. Shepherd & Hargreaves at Belfast."

"Quite right," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge admitted, quietly. "I have been up
and seen the boats. I have seen the shipbuilders, too."

"Did you happen to mention to the latter," Peter inquired, "that you
were advancing money upon those vessels?"

"Certainly not," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge replied. "Kosuth wouldn't hear of
such a thing. If the papers got wind of it, there'd be the devil to pay.
All the same, I have got an assignment from the Turkish Government."

"Not worth the paper it's written on," Peter declared, blandly.

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge rose unsteadily to his feet. He was a strong,
silent man, but there was a queer look about his mouth.

"What the devil do you mean?" he demanded.

"Briefly, this," Peter explained. "The first payment, when these ships
were laid down, was made not by Turkey but by an emissary of the German
Government, who arranged the whole affair in Constantinople. The second
payment was due ten months ago, and not a penny has been paid. Notice
was given to the late government twice and absolutely ignored. According
to the charter, therefore, these ships reverted to the shipbuilding
companies who retained possession of the first payment as indemnity
against loss. The Count von Hern's position was this. He represents the
German Government. You were to find a million and a half of money with
the ships as security. You also have a contract from the Count von Hern
to take those ships off your hands provided the interest on the loan
became overdue, a state of affairs which I can assure you would have
happened within the next twelve months. Practically, therefore, you were
made use of as an independent financier to provide the money with
which the Turkish Government, broadly speaking, have sold the ships to
Germany. You see, according to the charter of the shipbuilding company,
these vessels cannot be sold to any foreign government without the
consent of Downing Street. That is the reason why the affair had to be
conducted in such a roundabout manner."

"All this is beyond me," Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge said, hoarsely. "I don't
care a d-n who has the ships in the end so long as I get my money!"

"But you would not get your money," Peter pointed out, "because there
will be no ships. I have had the shrewdest lawyers in the world at
work upon the charter, and there is not the slightest doubt that these
vessels are, or rather were, the entire property of Messrs. Shepherd &
Hargreaves. To-day they belong to me. I have bought them and paid two
hundred thousand pounds deposit. I can show you the receipt and all the
papers."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge, said only one word, but that word was profane.

"I am sorry, of course, that you have lost the business," Peter
concluded, "but surely it's better than losing your money?"

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge struck the table fiercely with his fist. There was
a gray and unfamiliar look about his face.

"D-n it, the money's gone!" he declared, hoarsely. "They changed the
day. Kosuth had to go back. I paid it twenty-four hours ago."

Peter whistled softly.

"If only you had trusted me a little more!" he murmured. "I tried to
warn you."

Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge snatched up his hat.

"They don't leave till the two-twenty," he shouted. "We'll catch them at
the Milan. If we don't, I'm ruined! By God, I'm ruined!"

They found Major Kosuth in the hall of the hotel. He was wearing a fur
coat and was otherwise attired for traveling. His luggage was already
being piled upon a cab. Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge wasted no words upon him.

"You and I have got to have a talk, right here and now," he declared.
"Where's the Count?"

Major Kosuth frowned gloomily.

"I do not understand you," he said, shortly. "Our business is concluded
and I am leaving by the two-twenty train."

"You are doing nothing of the sort," the American answered, standing
before him, grim and threatening.

The Turk showed no sign of terror. He gripped his silver-headed cane
firmly.

"I think," he said, "that there is no one here who will prevent me."

Peter, who saw a fracas imminent, hastily intervened. "If you will
permit me for a moment," he said, "there is a little explanation I
should perhaps make to Major Kosuth."

The Turk took a step towards the door.

"I have no time to listen to explanations from you or any one," he
replied. "My cab is waiting. I depart. If Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge is not
satisfied with our transaction, I am sorry, but it is too late to alter
anything."

For a moment it seemed as though a struggle between the two men was
inevitable. Already people were glancing at them curiously, for Mr.
Heseltine-Wrigge came of a primitive school, and he had no intention
whatever of letting his man escape. Fortunately, at that moment Count
von Hern came up and Peter at once appealed to him.

"Count," he said, "may I beg for your good offices? My friend, Mr.
Heseltine-Wrigge here, is determined to have a few words with Major
Kosuth before he leaves. Surely this is not an unreasonable request
when you consider the magnitude of the transaction which has taken place
between them! Let me beg of you to persuade Major Kosuth to give us
ten minutes. There is plenty of time for the train, and this is not the
place for a brawl."

"It will not take us long, Kosuth, to hear what our friend has to say,"
he remarked. "We shall be quite quiet in the smoking-room. Let us go in
there and dispose of the affair."

The Turk turned unwillingly in the direction indicated. All four
men passed through the cafe, up some stairs, and into the small
smoking-room. The room was deserted. Peter led the way to the far
corner, and standing with his elbow leaning upon the mantelpiece,
addressed them.

"The position is this," he said. "Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge has parted with
a million and a half of his own money, a loan to the Turkish Government,
on security which is not worth a snap of the fingers."

"It is a lie!" Major Kosuth exclaimed.

"My dear Baron, you are woefully misinformed," the Count declared.

Peter shook his head slowly.

"No," he said, "I am not misinformed. My friend here has parted with the
money on the security of two battleships and a cruiser, now building in
Shepherd & Hargreaves' yard at Belfast. The two battleships and cruiser
in question belong to me. I have paid two hundred thousand pounds on
account of them, and hold the shipbuilder's receipt."

"You are mad!" Bernadine cried, contemptuously.

Peter shook his head and continued.

"The battleships were laid down for the Turkish Government, and the
money with which to start them was supplied by the Secret Service of
Germany. The second installment was due ten months ago and has not been
paid. The time of grace provided for has expired. The shipbuilders, in
accordance with their charter, were consequently at liberty to dispose
of the vessels as they thought fit. On the statement of the whole of the
facts to the head of the firm, he has parted with these ships to me. I
need not say that I have a purchaser within a mile from here. It is a
fancy of mine, Count von Hern, that those ships will sail better under
the British flag."

There was a moment's tense silence. The face of the Turk was black with
anger. Bernadine was trembling with rage.

"This is a tissue of lies!" he exclaimed.

Peter shrugged his shoulders.

"The facts are easy enough for you to prove," he said, "and I have
here," he added, producing a roll of papers, "copies of the various
documents for your inspection. Your scheme, of course, was simple
enough. It fell through for this one reason only. A final notice,
pressing for the second installment and stating the days of grace,
was forwarded to Constantinople about the time of the recent political
troubles. The late government ignored it. In fairness to Major Kosuth,
we will believe that the present government was ignorant of it. But the
fact remains that Messrs. Shepherd & Hargreaves became at liberty to
sell those vessels, and that I have bought them. You will have to give
up that money, Major Kosuth."

"By God, he shall!" the American muttered.

Bernadine leaned a little towards his enemy.

"You must give us a minute or two," he insisted. "We shall not go away,
I promise you. Within five minutes you shall hear our decision."

Peter sat down at the writing-table and commenced a letter. Mr.
Heseltine-Wrigge mounted guard over the door and stood there, a grim
figure of impatience. Before the five minutes was up, Bernadine crossed
the room.

"I congratulate you, Baron," he said, dryly. "You are either an
exceedingly lucky person or you are more of a genius than I believe.
Kosuth is even now returning his letters of credit to your friend. You
are quite right. The loan cannot stand."

"I was sure," Peter answered, "that you would see the matter correctly."

"You and I," Bernadine continued, "know very well that I don't care a
fig about Turkey, new or old. The ships I will admit that I intended to
have for my own country. As it is, I wish you joy of them. Before they
are completed, we may be fighting in the air."

Peter smiled, and, side by side with Bernadine, strolled across to
Heseltine-Wrigge, who was buttoning up a pocket-book with trembling
fingers.

"Personally," Peter said, "I believe that the days of wars are over."

"That may or may not be," Bernadine answered. "One thing is very
certain. Even if the nations remain at peace, there are enmities which
strike only deeper as the years pass. I am going to take a drink now
with my disappointed friend Kosuth. If I raise my glass 'To the Day!'
you will understand."

Peter smiled.

"My friend Mr. Heseltine-Wrigge and I are for the same destination,"
he replied, pushing open the swing door which led to the bar. "I return
your good wishes, Count. I, too, drink 'To the Day!'"

Bernadine and Kosuth left, a few minutes afterwards. Mr.
Heseltine-Wrigge, who was feeling himself again, watched them depart
with ill-concealed triumph.

"Say, you had those fellows on toast, Baron," he declared, admiringly.
"I couldn't follow the whole affair, but I can see that you're in for
big things sometimes. Remember this. If money counts at any time, I'm
with you."

Peter clasped his hand.

"Money always counts," he said, "and friends!"



CHAPTER VIII. THE MAN BEHIND THE CURTAIN


Peter, Baron de Grost, glanced at the card which his butler had brought
in to him, carelessly at first, afterwards with that curious rigidity of
attention which usually denotes the setting free of a flood of memories.

"The gentleman would like to see you, sir," the man announced.

"You can show him in at once," Peter replied. The servant withdrew.
Peter, during those few minutes of waiting, stood with his back to
the room and his face to the window, looking out across the square, in
reality seeing nothing, completely immersed in this strange flood of
memories. John Dory--Sir John Dory now--his quondam enemy, and he, had
met but seldom during these years of their prosperity. The figure of
this man, who had once loomed so largely in his life, had gradually
shrunk away into the background. Their avoidance of each other arose,
perhaps, from a sort of instinct which was certainly no matter of
ill-will. Still, the fact remained that they had scarcely exchanged a
word for years, and Peter turned to receive his unexpected guest with a
curiosity which he did not trouble wholly to conceal.

Sir John Dory--Chief Commissioner now of Scotland Yard, a person of
weight and importance--had changed a great deal during the last few
years. His hair had become gray, his walk more dignified. There was the
briskness, however, of his best days in his carriage and in the flash of
his brown eyes. He held out his hand to his ancient foe with a smile.

"My dear Baron," he said, "I hope you are going to say that you are glad
to see me."

"Unless," Peter replied, with a good-humored grimace, "your visit is
official, I am more than glad--I am charmed. Sit down. I was just going
to take my morning cigar. You will join me? Good! Now I am ready for the
worst that can happen."

The two men seated themselves. John Dory pulled at his cigar
appreciatively, sniffed its flavor for a moment, and then leaned forward
in his chair.

"My visit, Baron," he announced, "is semi-official. I am here to ask you
a favor."

"An official favor?" Peter demanded quickly.

His visitor hesitated as though he found the question hard to answer.

"To tell you the truth," he declared, "this call of mine is wholly an
inspiration. It does not in any way concern you personally, or your
position in this country. What that may be I do not know, except that I
am sure it is above any suspicion."

"Quite so," Peter murmured. "How diplomatic you have become, my dear
friend!"

John Dory smiled.

"Perhaps I am fencing about too much," he said. "I know, of course, that
you are a member of a very powerful and wealthy French Society, whose
object and aims, so far as I know, are entirely harmless."

"I am delighted to be assured that you recognize that fact," Peter
admitted.

"I might add," John Dory continued, "that this harmlessness--is of
recent date."

"Really, you do seem to know a good deal," Peter confessed.

"I find myself still fencing," Dory declared. "A matter of habit, I
suppose. I didn't mean to when I came. I made up my mind to tell you
simply that Guillot was in London, and to ask you if you could help me
to get rid of him."

Peter looked thoughtfully into his companion's face, but he did not
speak. He understood at such moments the value of silence.

"We speak together," Dory continued softly, "as men who understand one
another. Guillot is the one criminal in Europe whom we all fear; not I
alone, mind you--it is the same in Berlin, in Petersburg, in Vienna.
He has never been caught. It is my honest belief that he never will be
caught. At the same time, wherever he arrives the thunder-clouds gather.
He leaves behind him always a trail of evil deeds."

"Very well put," Peter murmured. "Quite picturesque."

"Can you help me to get rid of him?" Dory inquired. "I have my hands
full just now, as you can imagine, what with the political crisis and
these constant mass meetings. I want Guillot out of the country. If you
can manage this for me, I shall be your eternal debtor."

"Why do you imagine," Peter asked, "that I can help you in this matter?"

There was a brief silence. John Dory knocked the ash from his cigar.

"Times have changed," he said. "The harmlessness of your great Society,
my dear Baron, is at present admitted. But there were days--"

"Exactly," Peter interrupted. "As shrewd as ever, I perceive. Do you
know anything of the object of his coming?"

"Nothing."

"Anything of his plans?"

"Nothing."

"You know where he is staying?"

"Naturally," Dory answered. "He has taken a second-floor flat in
Crayshaw Mansions, Shaftesbury Avenue. As usual, he is above all petty
artifices. He has taken it under the name of Monsieur Guillot."

"I really don't know whether there is anything I can do," Peter decided,
"but I will look into the matter for you, with pleasure. Perhaps I may
be able to bring a little influence to bear--indirectly, of course. If
so, it is at your service. Lady Dory is well, I trust?"

"In the best of health," Sir John replied, accepting the hint and rising
to his feet. "I shall hear from you soon?"

"Without a doubt," Peter answered. "I must certainly call upon Monsieur
Guillot."

Peter certainly wasted no time in paying his promised visit. That same
afternoon he rang the bell at the flat in Crayshaw Mansions. A typical
French butler showed him into the room where the great man sat. Monsieur
Guillot, slight, elegant, pre-eminently a dandy, was lounging upon a
sofa, being manicured by a young lady. He threw down his Petit Journal
and rose to his feet, however, at his visitor's entrance.

"My dear Baron," he exclaimed, "but this is charming of you!
Mademoiselle," he added, turning to the manicurist, "you will do me the
favor of retiring for a short time. Permit me."

He opened the door and showed her out. Then he came back to Peter.

"A visit of courtesy, Monsieur le Baron?" he asked.

"Without a doubt," Peter replied.

"It is beyond all measure charming of you," Guillot declared, "but let
me ask you a little question. Is it peace or war?"

"It is what you choose to make it," Peter answered.

The man threw out his hands. There was the shadow of a frown upon his
pale forehead. It was a matter for protest, this.

"Why do you come?" he demanded. "What have we in common? The Society
has expelled me. Very well, I go my own way. Why not? I am free of your
control to-day. You have no more right to interfere with my schemes than
I with yours."

"We have the ancient right of power," Peter said, grimly. "You were once
a prominent member of our organization, the spoilt protege of Madame,
a splendid maker, if you will, of criminal history. Those days have
passed. We offered you a pension which you have refused. It is now our
turn to speak. We require you to leave this city in twenty-four hours."

The face was livid with anger. He was of the fair type of Frenchman,
with deep-set eyes, and a straight, cruel mouth only partly concealed
by his golden mustache. Just now, notwithstanding the veneer of his too
perfect clothes and civilized air, the beast had leaped out. His face
was like the face of a snarling animal.

"I refuse!" he cried. "It is I who refuse! I am here on my own affairs.
What they may be is no business of yours or of any one else's. That is
my answer to you, Baron de Grost, whether you come to me for yourself
or on behalf of the Society to which I no longer belong. That is my
answer--that and the door," he added, pressing the bell. "If you will,
we fight. If you are wise, forget this visit as quickly as you can."

Peter took up his hat. The man-servant was already in the room.

"We shall probably meet again before your return, Monsieur Guillot," he
remarked.

Guillot had recovered himself. His smile was wicked, but his bow
perfection.

"To the fortunate hour, Monsieur le Baron!" he replied.

Peter drove hack to Berkeley Square, and without a moment's hesitation
pressed the levers which set to work the whole underground machinery of
the great power which he controlled. Thenceforward, Monsieur Guillot was
surrounded with a vague army of silent watchers. They passed in and out
of his fiat, their motor cars were as fast as his in the streets, their
fancy in restaurants identical with his. Guillot moved through it all
like a man wholly unconscious of espionage, showing nothing of the
murderous anger which burned in his blood. The reports came to Peter
every hour, although there was, indeed, nothing worth chronicling.
Monsieur Guillot's visit to London would seem, indeed, to be a visit
of gallantry. He spent most of his time with Mademoiselle Louise, the
famous dancer. He was prominent at the Empire, to watch her nightly
performance, they were a noticeable couple supping together at the Milan
afterwards. Monsieur Guillot was indeed a man of gallantry, but he had
the reputation of using these affairs to cloak his real purposes. Those
who watched him, watched only the more closely. Monsieur Guillot, who
stood it very well at first, unfortunately lost his temper. He drove
in the great motor car which he had brought with him from Paris, to
Berkeley Square, and confronted Peter.

"My friend," he exclaimed, though indeed the glitter in his eyes knew
nothing of friendship, "it is intolerable, this! Do you think that I
do not see through these dummy waiters, these obsequious shopmen, these
ladies who drop their eyes when I pass, these commissionaires,
these would-be acquaintances? I tell you that they irritate me, this
incompetent, futile crowd. You pit them against me! Bah! You should know
better. When I choose to disappear, I shall disappear, and no one will
follow me. When I strike, I shall strike, and no one will discover what
my will may be. You are out of date, dear Baron, with your third-rate
army of stupid spies. You succeed in one thing only--you succeed in
making me angry."

"It is at least an achievement, that," Peter declared.

"Perhaps," Monsieur Guillot admitted, fiercely. "Yet mark now the
result. I defy you, you and all of them. Look at your clock. It is five
minutes to seven. It goes well, that clock, eh?"

"It is the correct time," Peter said.

"Then by midnight," Guillot continued, shaking his fist in the other's
face, "I shall have done that thing which brought me to England and I
shall have disappeared. I shall have done it in spite of your watchers,
in spite of your spies, in spite, even, of you, Monsieur le Baron de
Grost. There is my challenge. Voila. Take it up if you will. At midnight
you shall hear me laugh. I have the honor to wish you good-night!"

Peter opened the door with his own hands.

"This is excellent," he declared. "You are now, indeed, the Monsieur
Guillot of old. Almost you persuade me to take up your challenge."

Guillot laughed derisively.

"As you please!" he exclaimed. "By midnight tonight!"

The challenge of Monsieur Guillot was issued precisely at four minutes
before seven. On his departure, Peter spent the next half-hour studying
certain notes and sending various telephone messages. Afterwards, he
changed his clothes at the usual time and sat down to a tete-a-tete
dinner with his wife. Three times during the course of the meal he
was summoned to the telephone, and from each call he returned more
perplexed. Finally, when the servants had left the room, he took his
chair around to his wife's side.

"Violet," he said, "you were asking me just now about the telephone.
You were quite right. These were not ordinary messages which I have
been receiving. I am engaged in a little matter which, I must confess,
perplexes me. I want your advice, perhaps your help."

"I am quite ready," she answered, smiling. "It is a long time since you
gave me anything to do."

"You have heard of Guillot?"

She reflected for a moment.

"You mean the wonderful Frenchman," she asked, "the head of the criminal
department of the Double-Four?"

"The man who was at its head when it existed. The criminal department,
as you know, has all been done away with. The Double-Four has now no
more concern with those who break the law, save in those few instances
where great issues demand it."

"But Monsieur Guillot still exists?"

"He not only exists," answered Peter, "but he is here in London, a rebel
and a defiant one. Do you know who came to see me the other morning?"

She shook her head.

"Sir John Dory," Peter continued. "He came here with a request. He
begged for my help. Guillot is here, committed to some enterprise which
no one can wholly fathom. Dory has enough to do with other things, as
you can imagine, just now. Besides, I think he recognizes that Monsieur
Guillot is rather a hard nut for the ordinary English detective to
crack."

"And you?" she demanded, breathlessly.

"I join forces with Dory," Peter admitted. "Sogrange agrees with me.
Guillot was associated with the Double-Four too long for us to have him
make scandalous history either here or in Paris."

"You have seen him?"

"I have not only seen him, but declared war against him."

"And he?"

"Guillot is defiant," Peter replied. "He has been here only this
evening. He mocks at me. He swears that he will bring off this
enterprise, whatever it may be, before midnight to-night, and he has
defied me to stop him."

"But you will," she murmured, softly.

Peter smiled. The conviction in his wife's tone was a subtle compliment
which he did not fail to appreciate.

"I have hopes," he confessed, "and yet, let me tell you this, Violet.
I have never been more puzzled. Ask yourself, now. What enterprise is
there worthy of a man like Guillot, in which he could engage himself
here in London between now and midnight? Any ordinary theft is beneath
him. The purloining of the crown jewels, perhaps, he might consider, but
I don't think that anything less in the way of robbery would bring him
here. He has his code and he is as vain as a peacock. Yet money is at
the root of everything he does."

"How does he spend his time here?" Violet asked.

"He has a handsome flat in Shaftesbury Avenue," Peter answered, "where
he lives, to all appearance, the life of an idle man of fashion. The
whole of his spare time is spent with Mademoiselle Louise, the danseuse
at the Empire. You see, it is half-past eight now. I have eleven men
altogether at work, and according to my last report he was dining with
her in the grill-room at the Milan. They have just ordered their coffee
ten minutes ago, and the car is waiting outside to take Mademoiselle to
the Empire. Guillot's box is engaged there, as usual. If he proposes to
occupy it, he is leaving himself a very narrow margin of time to carry
out any enterprise worth speaking of."

Violet was thoughtful for several moments. Then she crossed the room,
took up a copy of an illustrated paper, and brought it across to Peter.
He smiled as he glanced at the picture to which she pointed, and the few
lines underneath.

"It has struck you, too, then!" he exclaimed. "Good! You have answered
me exactly as I hoped. Somehow, I scarcely trusted myself. I have both
cars waiting outside. We may need them. You won't mind coming to the
Empire with me?"

"Mind!" she laughed. "I only hope I may be in at the finish."

"If the finish," Peter remarked, "is of the nature which I anticipate, I
shall take particularly good care that you are not."

The curtain was rising upon the first act of the ballet as they entered
the most popular music-hall in London and were shown to the box which
Peter had engaged. The house was full--crowded, in fact, almost to
excess. They had scarcely taken their seats when a roar of applause
announced the coming of Mademoiselle Louise. She stood for a moment to
receive her nightly ovation, a slim, beautiful creature, looking out
upon the great house with that faint, bewitching smile at the corners of
her lips, which every photographer in Europe had striven to
reproduce. Then she moved away to the music, an exquisite figure, the
personification of all that was alluring in her sex. Violet leaned
forward to watch her movements as she plunged into the first dance.
Peter was occupied looking around the house. Monsieur Guillot was there,
sitting insolently forward in his box, sleek and immaculate. He even
waved his hand and bowed as he met Peter's eye. Somehow or other, his
confidence had its effect. Peter began to feel vaguely troubled. After
all, his plans were built upon a surmise. It was so easy for him to be
wrong. No man would show his hand so openly, unless he were sure of the
game. Then his face cleared a little. In the box adjoining Guillot's,
the figure of a solitary man was just visible, a man who had leaned over
to applaud Louise, but who was now sitting back in the shadows. Peter
recognized him at once, notwithstanding the obscurity. This was so much
to the good, at any rate. He took up his hat.

"For a quarter of an hour you will excuse me, Violet," he said. "Watch
Guillot. If he leaves his place, knock at the door of your own box, and
one of my men, who is outside, will come to you at once. He will know
where to find me."

Peter hurried away, pausing for a moment in the promenade, to scribble a
line or two at the back of one of his own cards. Presently he knocked
at the door of the box adjoining Guillot's and was instantly admitted.
Violet continued her watch. She remained alone until the curtain fell
upon the first act of the ballet. A few minutes later, Peter returned.
She knew at once that things were going well. He sank into a chair by
her side.

"I have messages every five minutes," he whispered in her ear, "and I am
venturing upon a bold stroke. There is still something about the affair,
though, which I cannot understand. You are absolutely sure that Guillot
has not moved?"

Violet pointed with her program across the house. "There he sits," she
remarked. "He left his chair as the curtain went down, but he could
scarcely have gone out of the box, for he was back within ten seconds."

Peter looked steadily across at the opposite box. Guillot was sitting
a little further back now, as though he no longer courted observation.
Something about his attitude puzzled the man who watched him. With a
sudden quick movement he caught up the glasses which stood by his wife's
side. The curtain was going up for the second act, and Guillot had
turned his head. Peter held the glasses only for a moment to his eyes,
and then glanced down at the stage.

"My God!" he muttered. "The man's a genius! Violet, the small motor is
coming for you."

He was out of the box in a single step. Violet looked after him,
looked down upon the stage and across at Guillot's box. It was hard to
understand.

The curtain had scarcely rung up upon the second act of the ballet when
a young lady who met from all the loungers, and even from the doorkeeper
himself, the most respectful attention, issued from the stage-door at
the Empire and stepped into the large motor car which was waiting, drawn
up against the curb. The door was opened from inside and closed at once.
She held out her hands, as yet ungloved, to the man who sat back in the
corner.

"At last!" she murmured. "And I thought, indeed, that you had forsaken
me."

He took her hands and held them tightly, but he answered only in a
whisper. He wore a sombre black cloak and a broad-brimmed black hat. A
muffler concealed the lower part of his face. She put her finger upon
the electric light, but he stopped her.

"I must not be recognized," he said thickly. "Forgive me, Louise, if I
seem strange at first, but there is more in it than I can tell you. No
one must know that I am in London to-night. When we reach this place to
which you are taking me, and we are really alone, then we can talk. I
have so much to say."

She looked at him doubtfully. It was indeed a moment of indecision with
her. Then she began to laugh softly.

"Dear one, but you have changed!" she exclaimed, compassionately. "After
all, why not? I must not forget that things have gone so hardly with
you. It seems odd, indeed, to see you sitting there, muffled up like
an old man, afraid to show yourself. You know how foolish you are? With
your black cape and that queer hat, you are so different from all the
others. If you seek to remain unrecognized, why do you not dress as all
the men do? Any one who was suspicious would recognize you from your
clothes."

"It is true," he muttered. "I did not think of it."

She leaned towards him.

"You will not even kiss me?" she murmured.

"Not yet," he answered.

She made a little grimace.

"But you are cold!"

"You do not understand," he answered. "They are watching me--even
to-night they are watching me. Oh, if you only knew, Louise, how I have
longed for this hour that is to come!"

Her vanity was assuaged. She patted his hand but came no nearer.

"You are a foolish man," she said, "very foolish."

"It is not for you to say that," he replied. "If I have been foolish,
were not you often the cause of my folly?" Again she laughed.

"Oh, la, la! It is always the same! It is always you men who accuse! For
that presently I shall reprove you. But now--as for now, behold, we have
arrived!"

"It is a crowded thoroughfare," the man remarked, nervously, looking up
and down Shaftesbury Avenue.

"Stupid!" she cried, stepping out. "I do not recognize you to-night,
little one. Even your voice is different. Follow me quickly across the
pavement and up the stairs. There is only one flight. The flat I have
borrowed is on the second floor. I do not care very much that people
should recognize me either, under the circumstances. There is nothing
they love so much," she added, with a toss of the head, "as finding an
excuse to have my picture in the paper."

He followed her down the dim hall and up the broad, flat stairs, keeping
always some distance behind. On the first landing she drew a key from
her pocket and opened a door. It was the door of Monsieur Guillot's
sitting-room. A round table in the middle was laid for supper. One light
alone, and that heavily shaded, was burning.

"Oh, la, la!" she exclaimed. "How I hate this darkness! Wait till I can
turn on the lights, dear friend, and then you must embrace me. It is
from outside, I believe. No, do not follow. I can find the switch for
myself. Remain where you are. I return instantly."

She left him alone in the room, closing the door softly. In the passage
she reeled for a moment and caught at her side. She was very pale.
Guillot, coming swiftly up the steps, frowned as he saw her.

"He is there?" he demanded, harshly.

"He is there," Louise replied, "but, indeed, I am angry with myself.
See, I am faint. It is a terrible thing, this, which I have done. He
did me no harm, that young man, except that he was stupid and heavy, and
that I never loved him. Who could love him, indeed! But, Guillot--"

He passed on, scarcely heeding her words, but she clung to his arm.

"Dear one," she begged, "promise that you will not really hurt him.
Promise me that, or I will shriek out and call the people from the
streets here. You would not make an assassin of me? Promise!"

Guillot turned suddenly towards her and there were strange things in his
face. He pointed down the stairs.

"Go back, Louise," he ordered, "back to your rooms, for your own
sake. Remember that you have left the theatre too ill to finish your
performance. You have had plenty of time already to get home. Quick!
Leave me to deal with this young man. I tell you to go."

She retreated down the stairs, dumb, her knees shaking with fear.
Guillot entered the room, closing the door behind him. Even as he bowed
to that dark figure standing in the corner, his left hand shot forward
the bolt.

"Monsieur," he said--

"What is the meaning of this?" the visitor interrupted, haughtily. "I am
expecting Mademoiselle Louise. I did not understand that strangers had
the right of entry into this room."

Guillot bowed low.

"Monsieur," he said once more, "it is a matter for my eternal regret
that I am forced to intrude even for a moment upon an assignation so
romantic. But there is a little matter which must first be settled. I
have some friends here who have a thing to say to you."

He walked softly, with catlike tread, along by the wall to where the
thick curtains shut out the inner apartment. He caught at the thick
velvet, dragged it back, and the two rooms were suddenly flooded with
light. In the recently discovered one, two stalwart-looking men in plain
clothes, but of very unmistakable appearance, were standing waiting.
Guillot staggered back. They were strangers to him. He was like a man
who looks upon a nightmare. His eyes protruded. The words which he
tried to utter, failed him. Then, with a swift, nervous presentiment,
he turned quickly around towards the man who had been standing in the
shadows. Here, too, the unexpected had happened. It was Peter, Baron de
Grost, who threw his muffler and broad-brimmed hat upon the table.

"Five minutes to eleven, I believe, Monsieur Guillot," Peter declared.
"I win by an hour and five minutes."

Guillot said nothing for several seconds. After all, though, he had
great gifts. He recovered alike his power of speech and his composure.

"These gentlemen," he said, pointing with his left hand towards the
inner room--"I do not understand their presence in my apartments."

Peter shrugged his shoulders.

"They represent, I am afraid, the obvious end of things," he explained.
"You have given me a run for my money, I confess. A Monsieur Guillot
who is remarkably like you, still occupies your box at the Empire, and
Mademoiselle Jeanne Lemere, the accomplished understudy of the lady
who has just left us, is sufficiently like the incomparable Louise to
escape, perhaps, detection for the first few minutes. But you gave the
game away a little, my dear Guillot, when you allowed your quarry to
come and gaze even from the shadows of his box at the woman he adored."

"Where is--he?" Guillot faltered.

"He is on his way back to his country home," Peter replied. "I think
that he will be cured of his infatuation for Mademoiselle. The assassins
whom you planted in that room are by this time in Bow Street. The price
which others beside you knew, my dear Guillot, was placed upon that
unfortunate young head, will not pass this time into your pocket. For
the rest--"

"The rest is of no consequence," Guillot interrupted, bowing. "I admit
that I am vanquished. As for those gentlemen there," he added, waving
his hand towards the two men who had taken a step forward, "I have a
little oath which is sacred to me concerning them. I take the liberty,
therefore, to admit myself defeated, Monsieur le Baron, and to take my
leave."

No one was quick enough to interfere. They had only a glimpse of him as
he stood there with the revolver pressed to his temple, an impression of
a sharp report, of Guillot staggering back as the revolver slipped
from his fingers on to the floor. Even his death cry was stifled. They
carried him away without any fuss, and Peter was just in time, after
all, to see the finish of the second act of the ballet. The sham
Monsieur Guillot still smirked at the sham Louise, but the box by his
side was empty.

"It is over?" Violet asked, breathlessly.

"It is over," Peter answered.

It was, after all, an unrecorded tragedy. In an obscure corner of
the morning papers one learned the next day that a Frenchman, who had
apparently come to the end of his means, had committed suicide in a
furnished flat of Shaftesbury Avenue. Two foreigners were deported
without having been brought up for trial, for being suspected persons.
A little languid interest was aroused at the inquest when one of
the witnesses deposed to the deceased's having been a famous French
criminal. Nothing further transpired, however, and the readers of the
halfpenny press for once were deprived of their sensation. For the rest,
Peter received, with much satisfaction, a remarkably handsome signet
ring, bearing some famous arms, and a telegram from Sogrange: "Well
done, Baron! May the successful termination of your enterprise nerve you
for the greater undertaking which is close at hand. I leave for London
by the night train. Sogrange."



CHAPTER IX. THE GHOSTS OF HAVANA HARBOR


"We may now," Sogrange remarked, buttoning up his ulster, and stretching
himself out to the full extent of his steamer chair, "consider ourselves
at sea. I trust, my friend, that you are feeling quite comfortable."

Peter, lying at his ease upon a neighboring chair, with a pillow behind
his head, a huge fur coat around his body, and a rug over his feet, had
all the appearance of being very comfortable indeed. His reply, however,
was a little short--almost peevish.

"I am comfortable enough for the present, thank you. Heaven knows how
long it will last!"

Sogrange waved his arms towards the great uneasy plain of blue sea, the
showers of foam leaping into the sunlight, away beyond the disappearing
coast of France.

"Last!" he repeated. "For eight days, I hope. Consider, my dear Baron!
What could be more refreshing, more stimulating to our jaded nerves than
this? Think of the December fogs you have left behind, the cold, driving
rain, the puddles in the street, the gray skies--London, in short, at
her ugliest and worst."

"That is all very well," Peter protested, "but I have left several other
things behind, too."

"As, for instance?" Sogrange inquired, genially.

"My wife," Peter informed him. "Violet objects very much to these abrupt
separations. This week, too, I was shooting at Saxthorpe, and I had also
several other engagements of a pleasant nature. Besides, I have reached
that age when I find it disconcerting to be called out of bed in the
middle of the night to answer a long distance telephone call, and
told to embark on a White Star liner leaving Liverpool early the next
morning. It may be your idea of a pleasure trip. It isn't mine."

Sogrange was amused. His smile, however, was hidden. Only the tip of his
cigarette was visible.

"Anything else?"

"Nothing much, except that I am always seasick," Peter replied
deliberately. "I can feel it coming on now. I wish that fellow would
keep away with his beastly mutton broth. The whole ship seems to smell
of it."

Sogrange laughed, softly but without disguise.

"Who said anything about a pleasure trip?" he demanded.

Peter turned his head.

"You did. You told me when you came on at Cherbourg that you had to go
to New York to look after some property there, that things were very
quiet in London, and that you hated traveling alone. Therefore, you sent
for me at a few hours' notice."

"Is that what I told you?" Sogrange murmured.

"Yes! Wasn't it true?" Peter asked, suddenly alert.

"Not a word of it," Sogrange admitted. "It is quite amazing that you
should have believed it for a moment."

"I was a fool," Peter confessed. "You see, I was tired and a little
cross. Besides, somehow or other, I never associated a trip to America
with--"

Sogrange interrupted him quietly, but ruthlessly.

"Lift up the label attached to the chair next to yours. Read it out to
me."

Peter took it into his hand and turned it over. A quick exclamation
escaped him.

"Great Heavens! The Count von Hern--Bernadine!"

"Just so," Sogrange assented. "Nice clear writing, isn't it?"

Peter sat bolt upright in his chair.

"Do you mean to say that Bernadine is on board?" Sogrange shook his
head.

"By the exercise, my dear Baron," he said, "of a superlative amount of
ingenuity, I was able to prevent that misfortune. Now lean over and read
the label on the next chair."

Peter obeyed. His manner had acquired a new briskness. "La Duchesse
della Nermino," he announced.

Sogrange nodded.

"Everything just as it should be," he declared. "Change those labels, my
friend, as quickly as you can."

Peter's fingers were nimble and the thing was done in a few seconds.

"So I am to sit next the Spanish lady," he remarked, feeling for his
tie.

"Not only that, but you are to make friends with her," Sogrange replied.
"You are to be your captivating self, Baron. The Duchesse is to forget
her weakness for hot rooms. She is to develop a taste for sea air and
your society."

"Is she," Peter asked, anxiously, "old or young?"

Sogrange showed a disposition to fence with the question. "Not old," he
answered; "certainly not old. Fifteen years ago she was considered to be
one of the most beautiful women in the world."

"The ladies of Spain," Peter remarked, with a sigh, "are inclined to
mature early."

"In some cases," Sogrange assured him, "there are no women in the world
who preserve their good looks longer. You shall judge, my friend. Madame
comes! How about that sea-sickness now?"

"Gone," Peter declared, briskly. "Absolutely a fancy of mine. Never felt
better in my life."

An imposing little procession approached along the deck. There was
the deck steward leading the way; a very smart French maid carrying
a wonderful collection of wraps, cushions and books; a black-browed,
pallid man-servant, holding a hot water bottle in his hand, and leading
a tiny Pekinese spaniel, wrapped in a sealskin coat; and finally Madame
la Duchesse. It was so obviously a procession intended to impress,
that neither Peter nor Sogrange thought it worth while to conceal their
interest.

The Duchesse, save that she was tall and wrapped in magnificent furs,
presented a somewhat mysterious appearance. Her features were entirely
obscured by an unusually thick veil of black lace, and the voluminous
nature of her outer garments only permitted a suspicion as to her
figure, which was, at that time, at once the despair and the triumph
of her corsetiere. With both hands she was holding her fur-lined skirts
from contact with the deck, disclosing at the same time remarkably
shapely feet encased in trim patent shoes with plain silver buckles, and
a little more black silk stocking than seemed absolutely necessary. The
deck steward, after a half-puzzled scrutiny of the labels, let down the
chair next to the two men. The Duchesse contemplated her prospective
neighbors with some curiosity, mingled with a certain amount of
hesitation. It was at that moment that Sogrange, shaking away his rug,
rose to his feet.

"Madame la Duchesse permits me to remind her of my existence?" he said,
bowing low. "It is some years since we met, but I had the honor of a
dance at the Palace in Madrid."

She held out her hand at once, yet somehow Peter felt sure that she was
thankful for her veil. Her voice was pleasant, and her air the air of a
great lady. She spoke French with the soft, sibilant intonation of the
Spaniard.

"I remember the occasion perfectly, Marquis," she admitted. "Your sister
and I once shared a villa in Mentone."

"I am flattered by your recollection, Duchesse," Sogrange murmured.

"It is a great surprise to meet with you here, though," she continued.
"I did not see you at Cherbourg or on the train."

"I motored from Paris," Sogrange explained, "and arrived, contrary to my
custom, I must confess, somewhat early. Will you permit that I
introduce an acquaintance, whom I have been fortunate enough to find on
board--Monsieur le Baron de Grost--Madame la Duchesse della Nermino."

Peter was graciously received and the conversation dealt, for a few
moments, with the usual banalities of the voyage. Then followed the
business of settling the Duchesse in her place. When she was really
installed, and surrounded with all the paraphernalia of a great and
fanciful lady, including a handful of long cigarettes, she raised
for the first time her veil. Peter, who was at the moment engaged in
conversation with her, was a little shocked by the result. Her features
were worn, her face dead-white, with many signs of the ravages wrought
by the constant use of cosmetics. Only her eyes had retained something
of their former splendor. These latter were almost violet in color,
deep-set, with dark rims, and were sufficient almost in themselves
to make one forget for a moment the less prepossessing details of her
appearance. A small library of books was by her side, but after a
while she no longer pretended any interest in them. She was a born
conversationalist, a creature of her country entirely and absolutely
feminine, to whom the subtle and flattering deference of the other sex
was the breath of life itself. Peter burned his homage upon her altar
with a craft which amounted to genius. In less than half an hour,
Madame la Duchesse was looking many years younger. The vague look
of apprehension had passed from her face. Their voices had sunk to a
confidential undertone, punctuated often by the music of her laughter.
Sogrange, with a murmured word of apology, had slipped away long ago.
Decidedly, for an Englishman, Peter was something of a marvel!

Madame la Duchesse moved her head towards the empty chair.

"He is a great friend of yours--the Marquis de Sogrange?" she asked,
with a certain inflection in her tone which Peter was not slow to
notice.

"Indeed no!" he answered. "A few years ago I was frequently in Paris. I
made his acquaintance then, but we have met very seldom since."

"You are not traveling together, then?"

"By no means. I recognized him only as he boarded the steamer at
Cherbourg."

"He is not a popular man in our world," she remarked. "One speaks of him
as a schemer."

"Is there anything left to scheme for in France?" Peter asked,
carelessly. "He is, perhaps, a monarchist?"

"His ancestry alone would compel a devoted allegiance to royalism," the
Duchesse declared, "but I do not think that he is interested in any of
these futile plots to reinstate the House of Orleans. I, Monsieur le
Baron, am Spanish."

"I have scarcely lived so far out of the world as to have heard nothing
of the Duchesse della Nermino," Peter replied with empressement. "The
last time I saw you, Duchesse, you were in the suite of the Infanta."

"Like all Englishmen, I see you possess a memory," she said, smiling.

"Duchesse," Peter answered, lowering his voice, "without the memories
which one is fortunate enough to collect as one passes along, life would
be a dreary place. The most beautiful things in the world cannot
remain always with us. It is well, then, that the shadow of them can be
recalled to us in the shape of dreams."

Her eyes rewarded him for his gallantry. Peter felt that he was doing
very well indeed. He indulged himself in a brief silence. Presently she
returned to the subject of Sogrange.

"I think," she remarked, "that of all the men in the world I expected
least to see the Marquis de Sogrange on board a steamer bound for New
York. What can a man of his type find to amuse him in the New World?"

"One wonders, indeed," Peter assented. "As a matter of fact, I did read
in a newspaper a few days ago that he was going to Mexico in connection
with some excavations there. He spoke to me of it just now. They seem to
have discovered a ruined temple of the Incas, or something of the sort."

The Duchesse breathed what sounded very much like a sigh of relief.

"I had forgotten," she admitted, "that New York itself need not
necessarily be his destination."

"For my own part," Peter continued, "it is quite amazing, the interest
which the evening papers always take in the movements of one connected
ever so slightly with their world. I think that a dozen newspapers
have told their readers the exact amount of money I am going to lend or
borrow in New York, the stocks I am going to bull or bear, the mines I
am going to purchase. My presence on an American steamer is accounted
for by the journalists a dozen times over. Yours, Duchesse, if one might
say so without appearing over curious, seems the most inexplicable. What
attraction can America possibly have for you?"

She glanced at him covertly from under her sleepy eyelids. Peter's face
was like the face of a child.

"You do not, perhaps, know," she said, "that I was born in Cuba. I lived
there, in fact, for many years. I still have estates in the country."

"Indeed?" he answered. "Are you interested, then, in this reported
salvage of the Maine?"

There was a short silence. Peter, who had not been looking at her when
he had asked his question, turned his head, surprised at her lack
of response. His heart gave a little jump. The Duchesse had all the
appearance of a woman on the point of fainting. One hand was holding
a scent bottle to her nose; the other, thin and white, ablaze with
emeralds and diamonds, was gripping the side of her chair. Her
expression was one of blank terror. Peter felt a shiver chill his
own blood at the things he saw in her face. He himself was confused,
apologetic, yet absolutely without understanding. His thoughts reverted
at first to his own commonplace malady.

"You are ill, Duchesse!" he exclaimed. "You will allow me to call the
deck steward? Or perhaps you would prefer your own maid? I have some
brandy in this flask."

He had thrown off his rug, but her imperious gesture kept him seated.
She was looking at him with an intentness which was almost tragical.

"What made you ask me that question?" she demanded.

His innocence was entirely apparent. Not even Peter could have
dissembled so naturally.

"That question?" he repeated, vaguely. "You mean about the Maine? It was
the idlest chance, Duchesse, I assure you. I saw something about it
in the paper yesterday and it seemed interesting. But if I had had the
slightest idea that the subject was distasteful to you, I would not have
dreamed of mentioning it. Even now--I do not understand--"

She interrupted him. All the time he had been speaking she had shown
signs of recovery. She was smiling now, faintly and with obvious effort,
but still smiling.

"It is altogether my own fault, Baron," she admitted, graciously.
"Please forgive my little fit of emotion. The subject is a very sore one
among my countrypeople, and your sudden mention of it upset me. It was
very foolish."

"Duchesse, I was a clumsy idiot!" Peter declared, penitently. "I deserve
that you should be unkind to me for the rest of the voyage."

"I could not afford that," she answered, forcing another smile. "I am
relying too much upon you for companionship. Ah! could I trouble you?"
she added. "For the moment I need my maid. She passes there."

Peter sprang up and called the young woman, who was slowly pacing the
deck. He himself did not at once return to his place. He went instead in
search of Sogrange, and found him in his stateroom. Sogrange was lying
upon a couch, in a silk smoking suit, with a French novel in his hand
and an air of contentment which was almost fatuous. He laid down the
volume at Peter's entrance.

"Dear Baron," he murmured, "why this haste! No one is ever in a hurry
upon a steamer. Remember that we can't possibly get anywhere in less
than eight days, and there is no task in the world, nowadays, which
cannot be accomplished in that time. To hurry is a needless waste
of tissue, and, to a person of my nervous temperament, exceedingly
unpleasant."

Peter sat down on the edge of the bunk.

"I presume you have quite finished?" he said. "If so, listen to me. I
am moving in the dark. Is it my fault that I blunder? By the merest
accident I have already committed a hideous faux pas. You ought to have
warned me."

"What do you mean?"

"I have spoken to the Duchesse of the Maine disaster."

The eyes of Sogrange gleamed for a moment, but he lay perfectly still.

"Why not?" he asked. "A good many people are talking about it. It is one
of the strangest things I have ever heard of, that after all these years
they should be trying to salve the wreck."

"It seems worse than strange," Peter declared. "What can be the use of
trying to stir up bitter feelings between two nations who have fought
their battles and buried the hatchet? I call it an act of insanity."

A bugle rang. Sogrange yawned and sat up.

"Would you mind touching the bell for my servant, Baron," he asked.
"Dinner will be served in half an hour. Afterwards, we will talk, you
and I."

Peter turned away, not wholly pleased.

"The sooner, the better," he grumbled, "or I shall be putting my foot
into it again."...

After dinner, the two men walked on deck together. The night was dark
but fine, with a strong wind blowing from the northwest. The deck
steward called their attention to a long line of lights, stealing up
from the horizon on their starboard side.

"That's the Lusitania, sir. She'll be up to us in half an hour."

They leaned over the rail. Soon the blue fires began to play about their
mast head. Sogrange watched them thoughtfully.

"If one could only read those messages," he remarked, with a sigh, "it
might help us."

Peter knocked the ash from his cigar and was silent for a time. He was
beginning to understand the situation.

"My friend," he said at last, "I have been doing you an injustice. I
have come to the conclusion that you are not keeping me in ignorance of
the vital facts connected with our visit to America, willfully. At the
present moment you know just a little more, but a very little more than
I do."

"What perception!" Sogrange murmured. "My dear Baron, sometimes
you amaze me. You are absolutely right. I have some pieces and I am
convinced that they would form a puzzle the solution of which would be
interesting to us, but how or where they fit in, I frankly don't know.
You have the facts so far."

"Certainly," Peter replied.

"You have heard of Sirdeller?"

"You mean the Sirdeller?" Peter asked.

"Naturally. I mean the man whose very movements sway the money markets
of the world, the man who could, if he chose, ruin any nation, make war
impossible; who could if he had ten more years of life and was allowed
to live, draw to himself and his own following the entire wealth of the
universe."

"Very eloquent," Peter remarked. "We'll take the rest for granted."

"Then," Sogrange continued, "you have probably also heard of Don Pedro,
Prince of Marsine, one time Pretender to the Throne of Spain?"

"Quite a striking figure in European politics," Peter assented, quickly.
"He is suspected of radical proclivities, and is still, it is rumored,
an active plotter against the existing monarchy."

"Very well," Sogrange said. "Now listen carefully. Four months ago,
Sirdeller was living at the Golden Villa, near Nice. He was visited more
than once by Marsine, introduced by the Count von Hern. The result
of those visits was a long series of cablegrams to certain great
engineering firms in America. Almost immediately, the salvage of the
Maine was started. It is a matter of common report that the entire cost
of these works is being undertaken by Sirdeller."

"Now," Peter murmured, "you are really beginning to interest me."

"This week," Sogrange went on, "it is expected that the result of the
salvage works will be made known. That is to say, it is highly possible
that the question of whether the Maine was blown up from outside or
inside, will be settled once and for all. This week, mind, Baron. Now
see what happens. Sirdeller returns to America. The Count von Hern and
Prince Marsine come to America. The Duchesse della Nermino comes to
America. The Duchesse, Sirdeller and Marsine are upon this steamer. The
Count von Hern travels by the Lusitania only because it was reported
that Sirdeller at the last minute changed his mind and was traveling by
that boat. Mix these things up in your brain--the conjurer's hat, let
us call it," Sogrange concluded, laying his hand upon Peter's arm,
"Sirdeller, the Duchesse, Von Hern, Marsine, the raising of the
Maine--mix them up and what sort of an omelette appears?"

Peter whistled softly.

"No wonder," he said, "that you couldn't make the pieces of the puzzle
fit. Tell me more about the Duchesse?"

Sogrange considered for a moment.

"The principal thing about her which links her with the present
situation," he explained, "is that she was living in Cuba at the time of
the Maine disaster, married to a rich Cuban."

The affair was suddenly illuminated by the searchlight of romance.
Peter, for the first time, saw not the light, but the possibility of it.

"Marsine has been living in Germany, has he not?" he asked.

"He is a personal friend of the Kaiser," Sogrange replied.

They both looked up and listened to the crackling of the electricity
above their heads.

"I expect Bernadine is a little annoyed," Peter remarked.

"It isn't pleasant to be out of the party," Sogrange agreed. "Nearly
everybody, however, believed at the last moment that Sirdeller had
transferred his passage to the Lusitania."

"It's going to cost him an awful lot in marconigrams," Peter said.
"By the bye, wouldn't it have been better for us to have traveled
separately, and incognito?"

Sogrange shrugged his shoulders slightly.

"Von Hern has at least one man on board," he replied. "I do not think
that we could possibly have escaped observation. Besides, I rather
imagine that any move we are able to make in this matter must come
before we reach Fire Island."

"Have you any theory at all?" Peter asked.

"Not the ghost of a one," Sogrange admitted. "One more fact, though,
I forgot to mention. You may find it important. The Duchesse comes
entirely against Von Hern's wishes. They have been on intimate terms for
years, but for some reason or other he was exceedingly anxious that she
should not take this voyage. She, on the other hand, seemed to have
some equally strong reason for coming. The most useful piece of advice I
could give you would be to cultivate her acquaintance."

"The Duchesse--"

Peter never finished his sentence. His companion drew him suddenly back
into the shadow of a lifeboat.

"Look!"

A door had opened from lower down the deck, and a curious little
procession was coming towards them. A man, burly and broad-shouldered,
who had the air of a professional bully, walked by himself ahead. Two
others of similar build walked a few steps behind. And between them a
thin, insignificant figure, wrapped in an immense fur coat and using
a strong walking stick, came slowly along the deck. It was like
a procession of prison warders guarding a murderer, or perhaps a
nerve-racked royal personage moving the end of his days in the midst of
enemies. With halting steps the little old man came shambling along. He
looked neither to the left nor to the right. His eyes were fixed and yet
unseeing, his features were pale and bony. There was no gleam of life,
not even in the stone-cold eyes. Like some machine-made man of a new
and physically degenerate age, he took his exercise under the eye of his
doctor, a strange and miserable-looking object.

"There goes Sirdeller," Sogrange whispered. "Look at him--the man whose
might is greater than any emperor's. There is no haven in the universe
to which he does not hold the key. Look at him--master of the world!"

Peter shivered. There was something depressing in the sight of that
mournful procession.

"He neither smokes nor drinks," Sogrange continued. "Women, as a sex, do
not exist for him. His religion is a doubting Calvinism. He has a doctor
and a clergyman always by his side to inject life and hope if they can.
Look at him well, my friend. He represents a great moral lesson."

"Thanks!" Peter replied. "I am going to take the taste of him out of my
mouth with a whiskey and soda. Afterwards, I'm for the Duchesse."

But the Duchesse, apparently, was not for Peter. He found her in the
music-room with several of the little Marconi missives spread out before
her, and she cut him dead. Peter, however, was a brave man, and skilled
at the game of bluff. So he stopped by her side and without any preamble
addressed her.

"Duchesse," he said, "you are a woman of perceptions. Which do you
believe, then, in your heart to be the more trustworthy--the Count von
Hern or I?"

She simply stared at him. He continued promptly.

"You have received your warning, I see."

"From whom?"

"From the Count von Hern. Why believe what he says? He may be a friend
of yours--he may be a dear friend--but in your heart you know that he is
both unscrupulous and selfish. Why accept his word and distrust me? I,
at least, am honest."

She raised her eyebrows.

"Honest?" she repeated. "Whose word have I for that save your own? And
what concern is it of mine if you possess every one of the bourgeois
qualities in the world? You are presuming, sir."

"My friend Sogrange will tell you that I am to be trusted," Peter
persisted.

"I see no reason why I should trouble myself about your personal
characteristics," she replied, coldly. "They do not interest me."

"On the contrary, Duchesse," Peter continued, fencing wildly, "you have
never in your life been more in need of any one's services than you are
of mine."

The conflict was uneven. The Duchesse was a nervous, highly strung
woman. The calm assurance of Peter's manner oppressed her with a sense
of his mastery. She sank back upon the couch from which she had arisen.

"I wish you would tell me what you mean," she said. "You have no right
to talk to me in this fashion. What have you to do with my affairs?"

"I have as much to do with them as the Count von Hem," Peter insisted,
boldly.

"I have known the Count von Hern," she answered, "for very many years.
You have been a shipboard acquaintance of mine for a few hours."

"If you have known the Count von Hern for many years," Peter asserted,
"you have found out by this time that he is an absolutely untrustworthy
person."

"Supposing he is," she said, "will you tell me what concern it is of
yours? Do you suppose for one moment that I am likely to discuss my
private affairs with a perfect stranger?"

"You have no private affairs," Peter declared, sternly. "They are the
affairs of a nation."

She glanced at him with a little shiver.

From that moment he felt that he was gaining ground. She looked around
the room. It was still filled, but in their corner they were almost
unobserved.

"How much do you know?" she asked in a low tone which shook with
passion.

Peter smiled enigmatically.

"Perhaps more, even, than you, Duchesse," he replied. "I should like to
be your friend. You need one--you know that."

She rose abruptly to her feet.

"For to-night it is enough," she declared, wrapping her fur cloak around
her. "You may talk to me to-morrow, Baron. I must think. If you desire
really to be my friend, there is, perhaps, one service which I may
require of you. But to-night, no!"

Peter stood aside and allowed her to step past him. He was perfectly
content with the progress he had made. Her farewell salute was by no
means ungracious. As soon as she was out of sight, he returned to the
couch where she had been sitting. She had taken away the marconigrams,
but she had left upon the floor several copies of the New York Herald.
He took them up and read them carefully through. The last one he found
particularly interesting, so much so that he folded it up, placed it
in his coat pocket, and went off to look for Sogrange, whom he found at
last in the saloon, watching a noisy game of "Up Jenkins!" Peter sank
upon the cushioned seat by his side.

"You were right," he remarked. "Bernadine has been busy."

Sogrange smiled.

"I trust," he said, "that the Duchesse is not proving faithless?"

"So far," Peter replied, "I have kept my end up. Tomorrow will be the
test. Bernadine had filled her with caution. She thinks that I know
everything--whatever everything may be. Unless I can discover a little
more than I do now, to-morrow is going to be an exceedingly awkward day
for me."

"There is every prospect of your acquiring a great deal of valuable
information before then," Sogrange declared. "Sit tight, my friend.
Something is going to happen."

On the threshold of the saloon, ushered in by one of the stewards, a
tall, powerful-looking man, with a square, well-trimmed black beard,
was standing looking around as though in search of some one. The steward
pointed out, with an unmistakable movement of his head, Peter and
Sogrange. The man approached and took the next table.

"Steward," he directed, "bring me a glass of Vermouth and some
dominoes."

Peter's eyes were suddenly bright. Sogrange touched his foot under the
table and whispered a word of warning. The dominoes were brought. The
newcomer arranged them as though for a game. Then he calmly withdrew the
double-four and laid it before Sogrange.

"It has been my misfortune, Marquis," he said, "never to have made your
acquaintance, although our mutual friends are many, and I think I may
say that I have the right to claim a certain amount of consideration
from you and your associates. You know me?"

"Certainly, Prince," Sogrange replied. "I am charmed. Permit me to
present my friend, the Baron de Grost."

The newcomer bowed and glanced a little nervously around.

"You will permit me," he begged. "I travel incognito. I have lived so
long in England that I have permitted myself the name of an Englishman.
I am traveling under the name of Mr. James Fanshawe."

"Mr. Fanshawe, by all means," Sogrange agreed. "In the meantime--"

"I claim my rights as a corresponding member of the Double-Four," the
newcomer declared. "My friend the Count von Hern finds menace to certain
plans of ours in your presence upon this steamer. Unknown to him, I come
to you openly. I claim your aid, not your enmity."

"Let us understand one another clearly," Sogrange said. "You claim our
aid in what?"

Mr. Fanshawe glanced around the saloon and lowered his voice.

"I claim your aid towards the overthrowing of the usurping House of
Brangaza and the restoration to power in Spain of my own line."

Sogrange was silent for several moments. Peter was leaning forward
in his place, deeply interested. Decidedly, this American trip seemed
destined to lead towards events!

"Our active aid towards such an end," Sogrange said at last, "is
impossible. The Society of the Double-Four does not interfere in the
domestic policy of other nations for the sake of individual members."

"Then let me ask you why I find you upon this steamer?" Mr. Fanshawe
demanded, in a tone of suppressed excitement. "Is it for the sea voyage
that you and your friend the Baron de Grost cross the Atlantic this
particular week, on the same steamer as myself, as Mr. Sirdeller,
and--and the Duchesse? One does not believe in such coincidences! One is
driven to conclude that it is your intention to interfere."

"The affair almost demands our interference," Sogrange replied,
smoothly. "With every due respect to you, Prince, there are great
interests involved in this move of yours."

The Prince was a big man, but for all his large features and bearded
face his expression was the expression of a peevish and passionate
child. He controlled himself with an effort.

"Marquis," he said, "this is necessary--I say that it is necessary that
we conclude an alliance."

Sogrange nodded approvingly.

"It is well spoken," he said, "but remember--the Baron de Grost
represents England and the English interests of our Society."

The Prince of Marsine's face was not pleasant to look upon.

"Forgive me if you are an Englishman by birth, Baron," he said, turning
towards him, "but a more interfering nation in other people's affairs
than England has never existed in the pages of history. She must have a
finger in every pie. Bah!"

Peter leaned over from his place.

"What about Germany--Mr. Fanshawe?" he asked, with emphasis.

The Prince tugged at his beard. He was a little nonplussed.

"The Count von Hern," he confessed, "has been a good friend to me. The
rulers of his country have always been hospitable and favorably inclined
towards my family. The whole affair is of his design. I myself could
scarcely have moved in it alone. One must reward one's helpers. There
is no reason, however," he added, with a meaning glance at Peter, "why
other helpers should not be admitted."

"The reward which you offer to the Count von Hern," Peter remarked, "is
of itself absolutely inimical to the interests of my country."

"Listen!" the Prince demanded, tapping the table before him. "It is true
that within a year I am pledged to reward the Count von Hern in certain
fashion. It is not possible that you know the terms of our compact, but
from your words it is possible that you have guessed. Very well. Accept
this from me. Remain neutral now, allow this matter to proceed to its
natural conclusion, let your government address representations to me
when the time comes, adopting a bold front, and I promise that I will
obey them. It will not be my fault that I am compelled to disappoint
the Count von Hern. My seaboard would be at the mercy of your fleet.
Superior force must be obeyed."

"It is a matter, this," Sogrange said, "for discussion between my
friend and me. I think that you will find that we are neither of us
unreasonable. In short, Prince, I see no insuperable reason why we
should not come to terms."

"You encourage me," the Prince declared, in a gratified tone. "Do not
believe, Marquis, that I am actuated in this matter wholly by motives of
personal ambition. No, it is not so. A great desire has burned always in
my heart, but it is not that alone which moves me. I assure you that
of my certain knowledge Spain is honeycombed--is rotten with treason. A
revolution is a certainty. How much better that that revolution should
be conducted in a dignified manner; that I, with my reputation for
democracy which I have carefully kept before the eyes of my people,
should be elected President of the new Spanish Republic, even if it is
the gold of the American which places me there. In a year or two, what
may happen who can say? This craving for a republic is but a passing
dream. Spain, at heart, is monarchial. She will be led back to the
light. It is but a short step from the president's chair to the throne."

Sogrange and his companion sat quite still. They avoided looking at each
other.

"There is one thing more," the Prince continued, dropping his voice, as
if, even at that distance, he feared the man of whom he spoke. "I shall
not inform the Count von Hern of our conversation. It is not necessary,
and, between ourselves, the Count is jealous. He sends me message after
message that I remain in my stateroom, that I seek no interview with
Sirdeller, that I watch only. He is too much of the spy--the Count von
Hern. He does not understand that code of honor, relying upon which I
open my heart to you."

"You have done your cause no harm," Sogrange assured him, with subtle
sarcasm. "We come now to the Duchesse."

The Prince leaned towards him. It was just at this moment that a steward
entered with a marconigram, which he presented to the Prince. The latter
tore it open, glanced it through, and gave vent to a little exclamation.
The fingers which held the missive trembled. His eyes blazed with
excitement. He was absolutely unable to control his feelings.

"My two friends," he cried, in a tone broken with emotion, "it is you
first who shall hear the news! This message has just arrived. Sirdeller
will have received its duplicate. The final report of the works
in Havana Harbor will await us on our arrival in New York, but the
substance of it is this. The Maine was sunk by a torpedo, discharged at
close quarters underneath her magazine. Gentlemen, the House of Brangaza
is ruined!"

There was a breathless silence.

"Your information is genuine?" Sogrange asked, softly.

"Without a doubt," the Prince replied. "I have been expecting this
message. I shall cable to Von Hern. We are still in communication. He
may not have heard."

"We were about to speak of the Duchesse," Peter reminded him.

The Prince shook his head.

"Another time," he declared. "Another time."

He hurried away. It was already half past ten and the saloon was almost
empty. The steward came up to them.

"The saloon is being closed for the night, sir," he announced.

"Let us go on deck," Peter suggested.

They found their way up on to the windward side of the promenade,
which was absolutely deserted. Far away in front of them now were the
disappearing lights of the Lusitania. The wind roared by as the great
steamer rose and fell on the black stretch of waters. Peter stood very
near to his companion.

"Listen, Sogrange," he said, "the affair is clear now save for one
thing."

"You mean Sirdeller's motives?"

"Not at all," Peter answered. "An hour ago, I came across the
explanation of these. The one thing I will tell you afterwards. Now
listen. Sirdeller came abroad last year for twelve months' travel. He
took a great house in San Sebastian."

"Where did you hear this?" Sogrange asked.

"I read the story in the New York Herald," Peter continued. "It is
grossly exaggerated, of course, but this is the substance of it.
Sirdeller and his suite were stopped upon the Spanish frontier and
treated in an abominable fashion by the customs officers. He was forced
to pay a very large sum, unjustly I should think. He paid under protest,
appealed to the authorities, with no result. At San Sebastian he was
robbed right and left, his privacy intruded upon. In short, he took a
violent dislike and hatred to the country and every one concerned in it.
He moved with his entire suite to Nice, to the Golden Villa. There he
expressed himself freely concerning Spain and her Government. Count von
Hern heard of it and presented Marsine. The plot was, without doubt,
Bernadine's. Can't you imagine how he would put it? 'A revolution,' he
would tell Sirdeller, 'is imminent in Spain. Here is the new President
of the Republic. Money is no more to you than water. You are a patriotic
American. Have you forgotten that a warship of your country with six
hundred of her devoted citizens was sent to the bottom by the treachery
of one of this effete race? The war was an inefficient revenge. The
country still flourishes. It is for you to avenge America. With money
Marsine can establish a republic in Spain within twenty-four hours.'
Sirdeller hesitates. He would point out that it had never been proved
that the destruction of the Maine was really due to Spanish treachery.
It is the idea of a business man which followed. He, at his own expense,
would raise the Maine. If it were true that the explosion occurred from
outside, he would find the money. You see, the message has arrived.
After all these years the sea has given up its secret. Marsine will
return to Spain with an unlimited credit behind him. The House of
Brangaza will crumble up like a pack of cards."

Sogrange looked out into the darkness. Perhaps he saw in that great
black gulf the pictures of these happenings which his companion had
prophesied. Perhaps, for a moment, he saw the panorama of a city in
flames, the passing of a great country under the thrall of these new
ideas. At any rate, he turned abruptly away from the side of the vessel,
and taking Peter's arm, walked slowly down the deck.

"You have solved the puzzle, Baron," he said, gravely. "Now tell me the
one thing. Your story seems to dovetail everywhere."

"The one thing," Peter said, "is connected with the Duchesse. It was
she, of her own will, who decided to come to America. I believe that,
but for her coming, Bernadine and the Prince would have waited in their
own country. Money can flash from America to England over the wires. It
does not need to be fetched. They have still one fear. It is connected
with the Duchesse. Let me think."

They walked up and down the deck. The lights were extinguished one by
one, except in the smoking-room. A strange breed of sailors from the
lower deck came up with mops and buckets. The wind changed its quarter
and the great ship began to roll. Peter stopped abruptly.

"I find this motion most unpleasant," he said. "I am going to bed.
To-night I cannot think. To-morrow, I promise you, we will solve this.
Hush!"

He held out his hand and drew his companion back into the shadow of
a lifeboat. A tall figure was approaching them along the deck. As he
passed the little ray of light thrown out from the smoking-room, the
man's features were clearly visible. It was the Prince. He was walking
like one absorbed in thought. His eyes were set like a sleep-walker's.
With one hand he gesticulated. The fingers of the other were twitching
all the time. His head was lifted to the skies. There was something in
his face which redeemed it from its disfiguring petulance.

"It is the man who dreams of power," Peter whispered. "It is one of his
best moments, this. He forgets the vulgar means by which he intends to
rise. He thinks only of himself, the dictator, king, perhaps emperor. He
is of the breed of egoists."

Again and again the Prince passed, manifestly unconscious even of his
whereabouts. Peter and Sogrange crept away unseen to their staterooms.

In many respects the room resembled a miniature court of justice. The
principal sitting-room of the royal suite, which was the chief glory
of the Adriatic, had been stripped of every superfluous article of
furniture or embellishment. Curtains had been removed, all evidences of
luxury disposed of. Temporarily the apartment had been transformed into
a bare, cheerless place. Seated on a high chair, with his back to the
wall, was Sirdeller. At his right hand was a small table, on which stood
a glass of milk, a phial, a stethoscope. Behind his doctor. At his left
hand a smooth-faced, silent young man--his secretary. Before him stood
the Duchesse, Peter and Sogrange. Guarding the door was one of the
watchmen, who, from his great physique, might well have been a policeman
out of livery. Sirdeller himself, in the clear light which streamed
through the large window, seemed more aged and shrunken than ever. His
eyes were deep set. No tinge of color was visible in his cheeks. His
chin protruded, his shaggy gray eyebrows gave him an unkempt appearance.
He wore a black velvet gown, a strangely cut black morning coat and
trousers, felt slippers, and his hands were clasped upon a stout ash
walking-stick. He eyed the newcomers keenly but without expression.

"The lady may sit," he said.

He spoke almost in an undertone, as though anxious to avoid the fatigue
of words. The guardian of the door placed a chair, into which the
Duchesse subsided. Sirdeller held his right hand towards his doctor, who
felt his pulse. All the time Sirdeller watched him, his lips a little
parted, a world of hungry excitement in his eyes. The doctor closed his
watch with a snap and whispered something in Sirdeller's ear, apparently
reassuring.

"I will hear this story," Sirdeller announced. "In two minutes every one
must leave. If it takes longer, it must remain unfinished."

Peter spoke up briskly.

"The story is this," he began. "You have promised to assist the Prince
of Marsine to transform Spain into a republic, providing the salvage
operations on the Maine prove that that ship was destroyed from outside.
The salvage operations have been conducted at your expense and finished.
It has been proved that the Maine was destroyed by a mine or torpedo
from the outside. Therefore, on the assumption that it was the
treacherous deed of a Spaniard or Cuban imagining himself to be a
patriot, you are prepared to carry out your undertaking and supply the
Prince of Marsine with means to overthrow the Kingdom of Spain."

Peter paused. The figure on the chair remained motionless. No flicker
of intelligence or interest disturbed the calm of his features. It was
a silence almost unnatural. "I have brought the Duchesse here," Peter
continued, "to tell you the truth as to the Maine disaster."

Not even then was there the slightest alteration in those ashen gray
features. The Duchesse looked up. She had the air of one only too eager
to speak and finish.

"In those days," she said, "I was the wife of a rich Cuban gentleman,
whose name I withhold. The American officers on board the Maine used to
visit at our house. My husband was jealous; perhaps he had cause."

The Duchesse paused. Even though the light of tragedy and romance side
by side seemed suddenly to creep into the room, Sirdeller listened as
one come back from a dead world.

"One night," the Duchesse went on, "my husband's suspicions were changed
into knowledge. He came home unexpectedly. The American--the officer--I
loved him--he was there on the balcony with me. My husband said nothing.
The officer returned to the ship. That night my husband came into my
room. He bent over my bed. 'It is not you,' he whispered, 'whom I shall
destroy, for the pain of death is short. Anguish of mind may live.
To-night six hundred ghosts may hang about your pillow!'"

Her voice broke. There was something grim and unnatural in that curious
stillness. Even the secretary was at last breathing a little faster.
The watchman at the door was leaning forward. Sirdeller simply moved his
hand to the doctor, who held up his finger while he felt the pulse. The
beat of his watch seemed to sound through the unnatural silence. In a
minute he spoke.

"The lady may proceed," he announced.

"My husband," the Duchesse continued, "was an officer in charge of the
Mines and Ordnance Department. He went out that night in a small boat,
after a visit to the strong house. No soul has ever seen or heard of him
since, or his boat. It is only I who know!"

Her voice died away. Sirdeller stretched out his hand and very
deliberately drank a tablespoonful or two of his milk.

"I believe the lady's story," he declared. "The Marsine affair is
finished. Let no one be admitted to have speech with me again upon this
subject."

He had half turned towards his secretary. The young man bowed. The
doctor pointed towards the door. The Duchesse, Peter and Sogrange filed
slowly out. In the bright sunlight the Duchesse burst into a peal of
hysterical laughter. Even Peter felt, for a moment, unnerved. Suddenly
he, too, laughed.

"I think," he said, "that you and I had better get out of the way,
Sogrange, when the Count von Hern meets us at New York!"



CHAPTER X. THE AFFAIR or AN ALIEN SOCIETY


Sogrange and Peter, Baron de Grost, standing upon the threshold of their
hotel, gazed out upon New York and liked the look of it. They had landed
from the steamer a few hours before, had already enjoyed the luxury of a
bath, a visit to an American barber's, and a genuine cocktail.

"I see no reason," Sogrange declared, "why we should not take a week's
holiday."

Peter, glancing up into the blue sky and down into the faces of the
well-dressed and beautiful women who were streaming up Fifth Avenue, was
wholly of the same mind.

"If we return by this afternoon's steamer," he remarked, "we shall have
Bernadine for a fellow passenger. Bernadine is annoyed with us just now.
I must confess that I should feel more at my ease with a few thousand
miles of the Atlantic between us."

"Let it be so," Sogrange assented. "We will explore this marvelous city.
Never," he added, taking his companion's arm, "did I expect to see
such women save in my own, the mistress of all cities. So chic, my dear
Baron, and such a carriage! We will lunch at one of the fashionable
restaurants and drive in the Park afterwards. First of all, however, we
must take a stroll along this wonderful Fifth Avenue."

The two men spent a morning after their own hearts. They lunched
astonishingly well at Sherry's and drove afterwards in Central Park.
When they returned to the hotel, Sogrange was in excellent spirits.

"I feel, my friend," he announced, "that we are going to have a very
pleasant and, in some respects, a unique week. To meet friends and
acquaintances, everywhere, as one must do in every capital in Europe,
is, of course, pleasant, but there is a monotony about it from which
one is glad sometimes to escape. We lunch here and we promenade in the
places frequented by those of a similar station to our own, and behold!
we know no one. We are lookers on. Perhaps for a long time it might
gall. For a brief period there is a restfulness about it which pleases
me."

"I should have liked," Peter murmured, "an introduction to the lady in
the blue hat."

"You are a gregarious animal," Sogrange declared. "You do not understand
the pleasures of a little comparative isolation with an intellectual
companion such as myself... What the devil is the meaning of this!"

They had reached their sitting-room and upon a small round table stood
a great collection of cards and notes. Sogrange took them up helplessly,
one after the other, reading the names aloud and letting them fall
through his fingers. Some were known to him, some were not. He began to
open the notes. In effect they were all the same--what evening would the
Marquis de Sogrange and his distinguished friend care to dine, lunch,
yacht, golf, shoot, go to the opera, join a theatre party? Of what clubs
would they care to become members? What kind of hospitality would be
most acceptable?

Sogrange sank into a chair.

"My friend," he exclaimed, "they all have to be answered--that
collection there! The visits have to be returned. It is magnificent,
this hospitality, but what can one do?"

Peter looked at the pile of correspondence upon which Sogrange's inroad,
indeed, seemed to have had but little effect.

"One could engage a secretary, of course," he suggested, doubtfully.
"But the visits! Our week's holiday is gone."

"Not at all," Sogrange replied. "I have an idea."

The telephone bell rang. Peter took up the receiver and listened for a
moment. He turned to Sogrange, still holding it in his hand.

"You will be pleased, also, to hear," he announced, "that there are half
a dozen reporters downstairs waiting to interview [Transcriber's note:
word missing]."

Sogrange received the information with interest.

"Have them sent up at once," he directed, "every one of them."

"What, all at the same time?" Peter asked.

"All at the same time it must be," Sogrange answered. "Give them to
understand that it is an affair of five minutes only."

They came trooping in. Sogrange welcomed them cordially.

"My friend, the Baron de Grost," he explained, indicating Peter. "I am
the Marquis de Sogrange. Let us know what we can do to serve you."

One of the men stepped forward.

"Very glad to meet you, Marquis, and you, Baron," he said. "I won't
bother you with any introductions, but I and the company here represent
the Press of New York. We should like some information for our papers as
to the object of your visit here and the probable length of your stay."

Sogrange extended his hands.

"My dear friend," he exclaimed, "the object of our visit was, I thought,
already well known. We are on our way to Mexico. We leave to-night. My
friend the Baron is, as you know, a financier. I, too, have a little
money to invest. We are going out to meet some business acquaintances
with a view to inspecting some mining properties. That is absolutely all
I can tell you. You can understand, of course, that fuller information
would be impossible."

"Why, that's quite natural, Marquis," the spokesman of the reporters
replied. "We don't like the idea of your hustling out of New York like
this, though?"

Sogrange glanced at the clock.

"It is unavoidable," he declared. "We are relying upon you, gentlemen,
to publish the fact, because you will see," he added, pointing to the
table, "that we have been the recipients of a great many civilities,
which it is impossible for us to acknowledge properly. If it will give
you any pleasure to see us upon our return, you will be very welcome. In
the meantime, you will understand our haste."

There were a few more civilities and the representatives of the Press
took their departure. Peter looked at his companion doubtfully, as
Sogrange returned from showing them out.

"I suppose this means that we have to catch to-day's steamer, after
all?" he remarked.

"Not necessarily," Sogrange answered. "I have a plan. We will leave for
the Southern depot, wherever it may be. Afterwards, you shall use that
wonderful skill of yours, of which I have heard so much, to effect some
slight change in our appearance. We will then go to another hotel, in
another quarter of New York, and take our week's holiday incognito. What
do you think of that for an idea?"

"Not much," Peter replied. "It isn't so easy to dodge the newspapers and
the Press in this country. Besides, although I could manage myself very
well, you would be an exceedingly awkward subject. Your tall and elegant
figure, your aquiline nose, the shapeliness of your hands and feet, give
you a distinction which I should find it hard to conceal."

Sogrange smiled.

"You are a remarkably observant fellow, Baron. I quite appreciate your
difficulty. Still, with a club foot, eh, and spectacles instead of my
eyeglass--"

"Oh, no doubt, something could be managed," Peter interrupted. "You're
really in earnest about this, are you?"

"Absolutely," Sogrange declared. "Come here!"

He drew Peter to the window. They were on the twelfth story, and to
a European there was something magnificent in that tangled mass of
buildings threaded by the elevated railway, with its screaming trains,
the clearness of the atmosphere, and in the white streets below, like
polished belts through which the swarms of people streamed like insects.

"Imagine it all lit up!" Sogrange exclaimed. "The sky-signs all ablaze,
the flashing of fire from those cable wires, the lights glittering from
those tall buildings! This is a wonderful place, Baron. We must see it.
Ring for the bill. Order one of those magnificent omnibuses. Press the
button, too, for the personage whom they call the valet. Perhaps, with a
little gentle persuasion, he could be induced to pack our clothes."

With his finger upon the hell, Peter hesitated. He, too, loved
adventures, but the gloom of a presentiment had momentarily depressed
him.

"We are marked men, remember, Sogrange," he said. "An escapade of this
sort means a certain amount of risk, even in New York."

Sogrange laughed.

"Bernadine caught the midday steamer! We have no enemies here that I
know of."

Peter pressed the button. An hour or so later, the Marquis de Sogrange
and Peter, Baron de Grost, took their leave of New York.

They chose a hotel on Broadway, within a stone's throw of Rector's.
Peter, with whitened hair, gold-rimmed spectacles, a slouch hat and
a fur coat, passed easily enough for an English maker of electrical
instruments; while Sogrange, shabbier, and in ready-made American
clothes, was transformed into a Canadian having some connection with the
theatrical business. They plunged into the heart of New York life, and
found the whole thing like a tonic. The intense vitality of the people,
the pandemonium of Broadway at midnight, with its flaming illuminations,
its eager crowd, its inimitable restlessness, fascinated them both.
Sogrange, indeed, remembering the decadent languor of the crowds of
pleasure seekers thronging his own boulevards, was never weary of
watching these men and women. They passed from the streets to the
restaurants, from the restaurants to the theatre, out into the streets
again, back to the restaurants, and once more into the streets. Sogrange
was like a glutton. The mention of bed was hateful to him. For three
days they existed without a moment's boredom.

On the fourth evening, Peter found Sogrange deep in conversation with
the head porter. In a few minutes he led Peter away to one of the bars
where they usually took their cocktail.

"My friend," he announced, "to-night I have a treat for you. So far we
have looked on at the external night life of New York. Wonderful and
thrilling it has been, too. But there is the underneath, also. Why not?
There is a vast polyglot population here, full of energy said life. A
criminal class exists as a matter of course. To-night we make our bow to
it."

"And by what means?" Peter inquired.

"Our friend the hall-porter," Sogrange continued, "has given me the card
of an ex-detective who will be our escort. He calls for us to-night,
or rather to-morrow morning, at one o'clock. Then behold! the wand is
waved, the land of adventures opens before us."

Peter grunted.

"I don't want to damp your enthusiasm, my Canadian friend," he said,
"but the sort of adventures you may meet with to-night are scarcely
likely to fire your romantic nature. I know a little about what they
call this underneath world in New York. It will probably resolve itself
into a visit to Chinatown, where we shall find the usual dummies taking
opium and quite prepared to talk about it for the usual tip. After that
we shall visit a few low dancing halls, be shown the scene of several
murders, and the thing is done."

"You are a cynic," Sogrange declared. "You would throw cold water upon
any enterprise. Anyway, our detective is coming. We must make use of
him, for I have engaged to pay him twenty-five dollars."

"We'll go where you like," Peter assented, "so long as we dine on a
roof garden. This beastly fur coat keeps me in a state of chronic
perspiration."

"Never mind," Sogrange said, consolingly, "it's most effective. A roof
garden, by all means."

"And recollect," Peter insisted, "I bar Chinatown. We've both of us seen
the real thing, and there's nothing real about what they show you here."

"Chinatown is erased from our program," Sogrange agreed. "We go now to
dine. Remind me, Baron, that I inquire for those strange dishes of
which one hears Terrapin, Canvas-backed Duck, Green Corn, Strawberry
Shortcake."

Peter smiled grimly.

"How like a Frenchman," he exclaimed, "to take no account of seasons!
Never mind, Marquis, you shall give your order and I will sketch the
waiter's face. By the bye, if you're in earnest about this expedition
to-night, put your revolver into your pocket."

"But we 're going with an ex-detective," Sogrange replied.

"One never knows," Peter said, carelessly.

They dined close to the stone palisading of one of New York's most
famous roof gardens. Sogrange ordered an immense dinner but spent most
of his time gazing downwards. They were higher up than at the hotel
and they could see across the tangled maze of lights even to the river,
across which the great ferry-boats were speeding all the while--huge
creatures of streaming fire and whistling sirens. The air where they
sat was pure and crisp. There was no fog, no smoke, to cloud the almost
crystalline clearness of the night.

"Baron," Sogrange declared, "if I had lived in this city I should have
been a different man. No wonder the people are all conquering."

"Too much electricity in the air for me," Peter answered. "I like a
little repose. I can't think where these people find it."

"One hopes," Sogrange murmured, "that before they progress any further
in utilitarianism, they will find some artist, one of themselves, to
express all this."

"In the meantime," Peter interrupted, "the waiter would like to know
what we are going to drink. I've eaten such a confounded jumble of
things of your ordering that I should like some champagne."

"Who shall say that I am not generous!" Sogrange replied, taking up the
wine carte. "Champagne it shall be. We need something to nerve us for
our adventures."

Peter leaned across the table.

"Sogrange," he whispered, "for the last twenty-four hours I have had
some doubts as to the success of our little enterprise. It has occurred
to me more than once that we are being shadowed."

Sogrange frowned.

"I sometimes wonder," he remarked, "how a man of your suspicious nature
ever acquired the reputation you undoubtedly enjoy."

"Perhaps it is because of my suspicious nature," Peter said. "There is a
man staying in our hotel whom we are beginning to see quite a great
deal of. He was talking to the head porter a few minutes before you this
afternoon. He supped at the same restaurant last night. He is dining
now three places behind you to the right, with a young lady who has been
making flagrant attempts at flirtation with me, notwithstanding my gray
hairs."

"Your reputation, my dear Peter," Sogrange murmured--

"As a decoy," Peter interrupted, "the young lady's methods are too
vigorous. She pretends to be terribly afraid of her companion, but it is
entirely obvious that she is acting on his instructions. Of course, this
may be a ruse of the reporters. On the other hand, I think it would be
wise to abandon our little expedition to-night."

Sogrange shook his head.

"So far as I am concerned," he said, "I am committed to it."

"In which case," Peter replied, "I am certainly committed to being your
companion. The only question is whether one shall fall to the decoy
and suffer oneself to be led in the direction her companion desires, or
whether we shall go blundering into trouble on our own account with your
friend the ex-detective."

Sogrange glanced over his shoulder, leaned back in his chair for a
moment, as though to look at the stars, and finally lit a cigarette.

"There is a lack of subtlety about that young person, Baron," he
declared, "which stifles one's suspicions. I suspect her to be merely
one more victim to your undoubted charms. In the interests of Madame
your wife, I shall take you away. The decoy shall weave her spells in
vain."

They paid their bill and departed a few minutes later. The man and the
girl were also in the act of leaving. The former seemed to be having
some dispute about the bill. The girl, standing with her back to him,
scribbled a line upon a piece of paper, and, as Peter went by, pushed it
into his hand with a little warning gesture. In the lift he opened it.
The few penciled words contained nothing but an address: Number 15,
100th Street, East.

"Lucky man!" Sogrange sighed.

Peter made no remark, but he was thoughtful for the next hour or so.

The ex-detective proved to be an individual of fairly obvious
appearance, whose complexion and thirst indicated a very possible reason
for his life of leisure. He heard with surprise that his patrons were
not inclined to visit Chinatown, but he showed a laudable desire to fall
in with their schemes, provided always that they included a reasonable
number of visits to places where refreshment could be obtained. From
first to last, the expedition was a disappointment. They visited various
smoke-hung dancing halls, decorated for the most part with oleographs
and cracked mirrors, in which sickly-Looking young men of unwholesome
aspect were dancing with their feminine counterparts. The attitude of
their guide was alone amusing.

"Say, you want to be careful in here!" he would declare, in an awed
tone, on entering one of these tawdry palaces. "Guess this is one of
the toughest spots in New York City. You stick close to me and I'll make
things all right."

His method of making things all right was the same in every case. He
would form a circle of disreputable-looking youths, for whose drinks
Sogrange was called upon to pay. The attitude of these young men was
more dejected than positively vicious. They showed not the slightest
signs of any desire to make themselves unpleasant. Only once, when
Sogrange incautiously displayed a gold watch, did the eyes of one or
two of their number glisten. The ex-detective changed his place and
whispered hoarsely in his patron's ear.

"Say, don't you flash anything of that sort about here! That young cove
right opposite to you is one of the best known sneak-thieves in the
city. You're asking for trouble that way."

"If he or any other of them want my watch," Sogrange answered calmly,
"let them come and fetch it. However," he added, buttoning up his coat,
"no doubt you are right. Is there anywhere else to take us?"

The man hesitated.

"There ain't much that you haven't seen," he remarked.

Sogrange laughed softly as he rose to his feet.

"A sell, my dear friend," he said to Peter. "This terrible city keeps
its real criminal class somewhere else rather than in the show places."

A man who had been standing in the doorway, looking in for several
moments, strolled up to them. Peter recognized him at once and touched
Sogrange on the arm. The newcomer accosted them pleasantly.

"Say, you'll excuse my butting in," he began, "but I can see you're kind
of disappointed. These suckers"--indicating the ex-detective--"talk a
lot about what they're going to show you, and when they get you round it
all amounts to nothing. This is the sort of thing they bring you to, as
representing the wickedness of New York! That's so, Rastall, isn't it?"

The ex-detective looked a little sheepish.

"Yes, there ain't much more to be seen," he admitted. "Perhaps you'll
take the job on if you think there is."

"Well, I'd show the gentlemen something of a sight more interesting that
this," the newcomer continued. "They don't want to sit down and drink
with the scum of the earth."

"Perhaps," Sogrange suggested, "this gentleman has something in his mind
which he thinks would appeal to us. We have a motor car outside and we
are out for adventures."

"What sort of adventures?" the newcomer asked, bluntly.

Sogrange shrugged his shoulders lightly.

"We are lookers-on merely," he explained. "My friend and I have traveled
a good deal. We have seen something of criminal life in Paris and
London, Vienna and Budapest. I shall not break any confidence if I tell
you that my friend is a writer, and material such as this is useful."

The newcomer smiled.

"Well," he exclaimed, "in a way, it's fortunate for you that I happened
along! You come right with me and I'll show you something that very few
other people in this city know of. Guess you'd better pay this fellow
off," he added, indicating the ex-detective. "He's no more use to you."

Sogrange and Peter exchanged questioning glances.

"It is very kind of you, sir," Peter decided, "but for my part I have
had enough for one evening."

"Just as you like, of course," the other remarked, with studied
unconcern.

"What sort of place would it be?" Sogrange asked.

The newcomer drew them on one side, although, as a matter of fact, every
one else had already melted away.

"Have you ever heard of the Secret Societies of New York?" he inquired.
"Well, I guess you haven't, any way--not to know anything about them.
Well, then, listen. There's a Society meets within a few steps of here,
which has more to do with regulating the criminal classes of the city
than any police establishment. There'll be a man there within an hour or
so, who, to my knowledge, has committed seven murders. The police can't
get him. They never will. He's under our protection."

"May we visit such a place as you describe without danger?" Peter asked,
calmly.

"No!" the man answered. "There's danger in going anywhere, it seems to
me, if it's worth while. So long as you keep a still tongue in your head
and don't look about you too much, there's nothing will happen to you.
If you get gassing a lot, you might tumble in for almost anything. Don't
come unless you like. It's a chance for your friend, as he's a writer,
but you'd best keep out of it if you're in any way nervous."

"You said it was quite close?" Sogrange inquired.

"Within a yard or two," the man replied. "It's right this way."

They left the hall with their new escort. When they looked for their
motor car, they found it had gone.

"It don't do to keep them things waiting about round here," their new
friend remarked, carelessly. "I guess I'll send you back to your hotel
all right. Step this way."

"By the bye, what street is this we are in?" Peter asked.

"100th Street," the man answered.

Peter shook his head.

"I'm a little superstitious about that number," he declared. "Is that an
elevated railway there? I think we've had enough, Sogrange."

Sogrange hesitated. They were standing now in front of a tall gloomy
house, unkempt, with broken gate--a large but miserable-looking abode.
The passers-by in the street were few. The whole character of the
surroundings was squalid. The man pushed open the broken gate.

"You cross the street right there to the elevated," he directed. "If you
ain't coming, I'll bid you good-night."

Once more they hesitated. Peter, perhaps, saw more than his companion.
He saw the dark shapes lurking under the railway arch. He knew
instinctively that they were in some sort of danger. And yet the love of
adventure was on fire in his blood. His belief in himself was immense.
He whispered to Sogrange.

"I do not trust our guide," he said. "If you care to risk it, I am with
you."

"Mind the broken pavement," the man called out. "This ain't exactly an
abode of luxury."

They climbed some broken steps. Their guide opened a door with a
Yale key. The door swung to, after them, and they found themselves in
darkness. There had been no light in the windows; there was no light,
apparently, in the house. Their companion produced an electric torch
from his pocket.

"You had best follow me," he advised. "Our quarters face out the other
way. We keep this end looking a little deserted."

They passed through a swing door and everything was at once changed. A
multitude of lamps hung from the ceiling, the floor was carpeted, the
walls clean.

"We don't go in for electric light," their guide explained, "as we try
not to give the place away. We manage to keep it fairly comfortable,
though."

He pushed open the door and entered a somewhat gorgeously furnished
salon. There were signs here of feminine occupation, an open piano, and
the smell of cigarettes. Once more Peter hesitated.

"Your friends seem to be in hiding," he remarked. "Personally, I am
losing my curiosity."

"Guess you won't have to wait very long," the man replied, with meaning.

The room was suddenly invaded on all sides. Four doors, which were quite
hidden by the pattern of the wall, had opened almost simultaneously, and
at least a dozen men had entered. This time both Sogrange and Peter knew
that they were face to face with the real thing. These were men who came
silently in, no cigarette-stunted youths. Two of them were in evening
dress; three or four had the appearance of prize fighters. In their
countenances was one expression common to all--an air of quiet and
conscious strength.

A fair-headed man, in dinner jacket and black tie, became at once their
spokesman. He was possessed of a very slight American accent, and he
beamed at them through a pair of gold-rimmed spectacles.

"Gentlemen," he said, "I am glad to meet you both."

"Very kind of you, I'm sure," Sogrange answered. "Our friend here," he
added, indicating their guide, "found us trying to gain a little insight
into the more interesting part of New York life. He was kind enough to
express a wish to introduce us to you."

The man smiled. He looked very much like some studious clerk, except
that his voice seemed to ring with some latent power.

"I am afraid," he said, "that your friend's interest in you was not
entirely unselfish. For three days he has carried in his pocket an order
instructing him to produce you here."

"I knew it!" Peter whispered, under his breath.

"You interest me," Sogrange replied. "May I know whom I have the honor
of addressing?"

"You can call me Burr," the man announced, "Philip Burr. Your names it
is not our wish to know."

"I am afraid I do not quite understand," Sogrange said.

"It was scarcely to be expected that you should," Mr. Philip Burr
admitted. "All I can tell you is that, in cases like yours, I really
prefer not to know with whom I have to deal."

"You speak as though you had business with us," Peter remarked.

"Without doubt, I have," the other replied, grimly. "It is my business
to see that you do not leave these premises alive."

Sogrange drew up a chair against which he had been leaning, and sat
down.

"Really," he said, "that would be most inconvenient." Peter, too, shook
his head, sitting upon the end of a sofa and folding his arms. Something
told him that the moment for fighting was not yet.

"Inconvenient or not," Mr. Philip Burr continued, "I have orders to
carry out which I can assure you have never yet been disobeyed since the
formation of our Society. From what I can see of you, you appear to
be very amiable gentlemen, and if it would interest you to choose the
method--say, of your release--why, I can assure you we'll do all we can
to meet your views."

"I am beginning," Sogrange remarked, "to feel quite at home."

"You see, we've been through this sort of thing before," Peter added,
blandly.

Mr. Philip Burr took a cigar from his case and lit it. At a motion of
his hand, one of the company passed the box to his two guests.

"You're not counting upon a visit from the police, or anything of that
sort, I hope?" Mr. Philip Burr asked.

Sogrange shook his head.

"Certainly not," he replied. "I may say that much of the earlier portion
of my life was spent in frustrating the well-meant but impossible
schemes of that body of men."

"If only we had a little more time," Mr. Burr declared, "it seems to me
I should like to make the acquaintance of you two gentlemen."

"The matter is entirely in your own hands," Peter reminded him. "We are
in no hurry."

Mr. Burr smiled genially.

"You make me think better of humanity," he confessed. "A month ago we
had a man here--got him along somehow or another--and I had to tell him
that he was up against it like you two are. My! the fuss he made! Kind
of saddened me to think a man should be such a coward."

"Some people like that," Sogrange remarked. "By the bye, Mr. Burr,
you'll pardon my curiosity. Whom have we to thank for our introduction
here to-night?"

"I don't know as there's any particular harm in telling you," Mr. Burr
replied--

"Nor any particular good," a man who was standing by his side
interrupted. "Say, Phil, you drag these things out too much. Are there
any questions you've got to ask 'em, or any property to collect?"

"Nothing of the sort," Mr. Burr admitted.

"Then let the gang get to work," the other declared.

The two men were suddenly conscious that they were being surrounded.
Peter's hand stole on to the butt of his revolver. Sogrange rose slowly
to his feet. His hands were thrust out in front of him with the thumbs
turned down. The four fingers of each hand flashed for a minute through
the air. Mr. Philip Burr lost all his self-control.

"Say, where the devil did you learn that trick?" he cried.

Sogrange laughed scornfully.

"Trick!" he exclaimed. "Philip Burr, you are unworthy of your position.
I am the Marquis de Sogrange, and my friend here is the Baron de Grost."

Mr. Philip Burr had no words. His cigar had dropped on to the carpet. He
was simply staring.

"If you need proof," Sogrange continued, "further than any I have given
you, I have in my pocket, at the present moment, a letter, signed by
you yourself, pleading for formal reinstatement. This is how you would
qualify for it! You make use of your power to run a common decoy house,
to do away with men for money. What fool gave you our names, pray?"

Mr. Philip Burr was only the wreck of a man. He could not even control
his voice.

"It was some German or Belgian nobleman," he faltered. "He brought us
excellent letters, and he made a large contribution. It was the Count
von Hern."

The anger of Sogrange seemed suddenly to fade away. He threw himself
into a chair by the side of his companion.

"My dear Baron," he exclaimed, "Bernadine has scored, indeed! Your
friend has a sense of humor which overwhelms me. Imagine it. He has
delivered the two heads of our great Society into the hands of one of
its cast-off branches! Bernadine is a genius, indeed!"

Mr. Philip Burr began slowly to recover himself. He waved his hand. Nine
out of the twelve men left the room.

"Marquis," he said, "for ten years there has been no one whom I have
desired to meet so much as you. I came to Europe but you declined to
receive me. I know very well we can't keep our end up like you over
there, because we haven't politics and that sort of things to play
with, but we've done our best. We've encouraged only criminology of the
highest order. We've tried all we can to keep the profession select. The
jail-bird, pure and simple, we have cast out. The men who have suffered
at our hands have been men who have met with their deserts."

"What about us?" Peter demanded. "It seems to me that you had most
unpleasant plans for our future."

Philip Burr held up his hands.

"As I live," he declared, "this is the first time that any money
consideration has induced me to break away from our principles. That
Count von Hern, he had powerful friends who were our friends, and he
gave me the word, straight, that you two had an appointment down below
which was considerably overdue. I don't know, even now, why I consented.
I guess it isn't much use apologizing."

Sogrange rose to his feet.

"Well," he said, "I am not inclined to bear malice, but you must
understand this from me, Philip Burr. As a Society, I dissolve you.
I deprive you of your title and of your signs. Call yourself what you
will, but never again mention the name of the 'Double-Four.' With us in
Europe, another era has dawned. We are on the side of law and order. We
protect only criminals of a certain class, in whose operations we have
faith. There is no future for such a society in this country. Therefore,
as I say, I dissolve it. Now, if you are ready, perhaps you will be so
good as to provide us with the means of reaching our hotel."

Philip Burr led them into a back street, where his own handsome
automobile was placed at their service.

"This kind of breaks me all up," he declared, as he gave the
instructions to the chauffeur. "If there were two men on the face of
this earth whom I'd have been proud to meet in a friendly sort of way,
it's you two."

"We bear no malice, Mr. Burr," Sogrange assured him. "You can, if
you will do us the honor, lunch with us to-morrow at one o'clock at
Rector's. My friend here is quite interested in the Count von Hern, and
he would probably like to hear exactly how this affair was arranged."

"I'll be there, sure," Philip Burr promised, with a farewell wave of the
hand.

Sogrange and Peter drove back towards their hotel in silence. It was
only when they emerged into the civilized part of the city that Sogrange
began to laugh softly.

"My friend," he murmured, "you bluffed fairly well, but you were afraid.
Oh, how I smiled to see your fingers close round the butt of that
revolver!"

"What about you?" Peter asked, gruffly. "You don't suppose you took me
in, do you?"

Sogrange smiled.

"I had two reasons for coming to New York," he said. "One we
accomplished upon the steamer. The other was--"

"Well?"

"To reply personally to this letter of Mr. Philip Burr," Sogrange
replied, "which letter, by the bye, was dated from 15, 100th Street, New
York. An ordinary visit there would have been useless to me. Something
of this sort was necessary."

"Then you knew!" Peter gasped. "Notwithstanding all your bravado, you
knew!"

"I had a very fair idea," Sogrange admitted. "Don't be annoyed with me,
my friend. You have had a little experience. It is all useful. It isn't
the first time you've looked death in the face. Adventures come to some
men unasked. You, I think, were born with the habit of them."

Peter smiled. They had reached the hotel courtyard and he raised himself
stiffly.

"There's a little fable about the pitcher that went once too often
to the well," he remarked. "I have had my share of luck--more than my
share. The end must come sometime, you know."

"Is this superstition?" Sogrange asked.

"Superstition, pure and simple," Peter confessed, taking his key from
the office. "It doesn't alter anything. I am fatalist enough to shrug
my shoulders and move on. But I tell you, Sogrange," he added, after a
moment's pause, "I wouldn't admit it to any one else in the world, but
I am afraid of Bernadine. I have had the best of it so often. It
can't last. In all we've had twelve encounters. The next will be the
thirteenth."

Sogrange shrugged his shoulders slightly as he rang for the lift.

"I'd propose you for the Thirteen Club, only there's some uncomfortable
clause about yearly suicides which might not suit you," he remarked.
"Good-night, and don't dream of Bernadine and your thirteenth
encounter."

"I only hope," Peter murmured, "that I may be in a position to dream
after it."



CHAPTER XI. THE THIRTEENTH ENCOUNTER


The Marquis de Sogrange arrived in Berkeley Square with the gray dawn of
an October morning, showing in his appearance and dress few enough signs
of his night journey. Yet he had traveled without stopping from Paris,
by fast motor car and the mail boat.

"They telephoned me from Charing Cross," Peter said, "that you could not
possibly arrive until midday. The clerk assured me that no train had yet
reached Calais."

"They had reason in what they told you," Sogrange remarked, as he leaned
back in a chair and sipped the coffee which had been waiting for him in
the Baron de Grost's study. "The train itself never got more than a mile
away from the Gare du Nord. The engine-driver was shot through the head
and the metals were torn from the way. Paris is within a year now of a
second and more terrible revolution."

"You really believe this?" Peter asked, gravely.

"It is a certainty," Sogrange replied. "Not I alone but many others can
see this clearly. Everywhere the Socialists have wormed themselves into
places of trust. They are to be met with in every rank of life, under
every form of disguise. The post-office strike has already shown us what
deplorable disasters even a skirmish can bring about. To-day the railway
strike has paralyzed France. To-day our country lies absolutely at the
mercy of any invader. As it happens, none is, for the moment, prepared.
Who can tell how it may be next time?"

"This is had news," Peter declared. "If this is really the position of
affairs, the matter is much more serious than the newspapers would have
us believe."

"The newspapers," Sogrange muttered, "ignore what lies behind. Some of
them, I think, are paid to do it. As for the rest, our Press had always
an ostrich-like tendency. The Frenchman of the cafe does not buy his
journal to be made sad."

"You believe, then," Peter asked, "that these strikes have some definite
tendency?"

Sogrange set down his cup and smiled bitterly. In the early sunlight,
still a little cold and unloving, Peter could see that there was a
change in the man. He was no longer the debonair aristocrat of the
race-courses and the boulevards. The shadows under his eyes were deeper,
his cheeks more sunken. He had lost something of the sprightliness of
his bearing. His attitude, indeed, was almost dejected. He was like
a man who sees into the future and finds there strange and gruesome
things.

"I do more than believe that," he declared. "I know it. It has fallen
to my lot to make a very definite discovery concerning them. Listen,
my friend. For more than six months the government has been trying to
discover the source of this stream of vile socialistic literature which
has contaminated the French working classes. The pamphlets have been
distributed with devilish ingenuity among all national operatives,
the army and the navy. The government has failed. The Double-Four has
succeeded."

"You have really discovered their source?" Peter exclaimed.

"Without a doubt," Sogrange assented. "The government appealed to
us first some months ago when I was in America. For a time we had no
success. Then a clue, and the rest was easy. The navy, the army, the
post-office employees, the telegraph and telephone operators and the
railway men, have been the chief recipients of this incessant stream
of foul literature. To-day one cannot tell how much mischief has been
actually done. The strikes which have already occurred are only the
mutterings of the coming storm. But mark you, wherever those pamphlets
have gone, trouble has followed. What men may do the government is
doing, but all the time the poison is at work, the seed has been sown.
Two millions of money have been spent to corrupt that very class which
should be the backbone of France. Through the fingers of one man has
come this shower of gold, one man alone has stood at the head of the
great organization which has disseminated this loathsome disease. Behind
him--well, we know."

"The man?"

"It is fitting that you should ask that question," Sogrange replied.
"The name of that man is Bernadine, Count von Hern."

Peter remained speechless. There was something almost terrible in the
slow preciseness with which Sogrange had uttered the name of his enemy,
something unspeakably threatening in the cold glitter of his angry eyes.

"Up to the present," Sogrange continued, "I have
watched--sympathetically, of course, but with a certain amount of
amusement--the duel between you and Bernadine. It has been against your
country and your country's welfare that most of his efforts have been
directed, which perhaps accounts for the equanimity with which I have
been contented to remain a looker-on. It is apparent, my dear Baron,
that in most of your encounters the honors have remained with you.
Yet, as it has chanced, never once has Bernadine been struck a real and
crushing blow. The time has come when this and more must happen. It is
no longer a matter of polite exchanges. It is a duel a outrance."

"You mean," Peter began--

"I mean that Bernadine must die," Sogrange declared.

There was a brief silence. Outside, the early morning street noises were
increasing in volume as the great army of workers, streaming towards the
heart of the city from a hundred suburbs, passed on to their tasks.
A streak of sunshine had found its way into the room, lay across the
carpet and touched Sogrange's still, waxen features. Peter glanced
half fearfully at his friend and visitor. He himself was no coward, no
shrinker from the great issues. He, too, had dealt in life and death.
Yet there was something in the deliberate preciseness of Sogrange's
words, as he sat there only a few feet away, unspeakably thrilling.
It was like a death sentence pronounced in all solemnity upon some
shivering criminal. There was something inevitable and tragical about
the whole affair. A pronouncement had been made from which there was no
appeal--Bernadine was to die!

"Isn't this a little exceeding the usual exercise of our powers?" Peter
asked, slowly.

"No such occasion as this has ever yet arisen," Sogrange reminded him.
"Bernadine has fled to this country with barely an hour to spare. His
offense is extraditable by a law of the last century which has never
been repealed. He is guilty of treason against the Republic of France.
Yet they do not want him back, they do not want a trial. I have papers
upon my person which, if I took them into an English court, would
procure for me a warrant for Bernadine's arrest. It is not this we
desire. Bernadine must die. No fate could be too terrible for a man who
has striven to corrupt the soul of a nation. It is not war, this. It
is not honest conspiracy. Is it war, I ask you, to seek to poison the
drinking water of an enemy, to send stalking into their midst some
loathsome disease? Such things belong to the ages of barbarity.
Bernadine has striven to revive them and Bernadine shall die."

"It is justice," Peter admitted.

"The question remains," Sogrange continued, "by whose hand--yours or
mine?"

Peter started uneasily.

"Is that necessary?" he asked.

"I fear that it is," Sogrange replied. "We had a brief meeting of the
executive council last night, and it was decided, for certain reasons,
to entrust this task into no other hands. You will smile when I tell you
that these accursed pamphlets have found their way into the possession
of many of the rank and file of our own order. There is a marked
disinclination on the part of those who have been our slaves, to accept
orders from any one. Espionage we can still command--the best, perhaps,
in Europe--because here we use a different class of material. But of
those underneath, we are, for the moment, doubtful. Paris is all in a
ferment. Under its outward seemliness a million throats are ready to
take up the brazen cry of revolution. One trusts nobody. One fears all
the time."

"You or I!" Peter repeated, slowly. "It will not be sufficient, then,
that we find Bernadine and deliver him over to your country's laws?"

"It will not be sufficient," Sogrange answered, sternly. "From those he
may escape. For him there must be no escape."

"Sogrange," Peter said, speaking in a low tone, "I have never yet killed
a human being."

"Nor I," Sogrange admitted. "Nor have I yet set my heel upon its head
and stamped the life from a rat upon the pavement. But one lives and one
moves on. Bernadine is the enemy of your country and mine. He makes
war after the fashion of vermin. No ordinary cut-throat would succeed
against him. It must be you or I."

"How shall we decide?" Peter asked.

"The spin of a coin," Sogrange replied. "It is best that way. It is
best, too, done quickly."

Peter produced a sovereign from his pocket and balanced it on the palm
of his hand.

"Let it be understood," Sogrange continued, "that this is a dual
undertaking. We toss only for the final honor--for the last stroke. If
the choice falls upon me, I shall count upon you to help me to the end.
If it falls upon you, I shall be at your right hand even when you strike
the blow."

"It is agreed," Peter said. "See, it is for you to call."

He threw the coin high into the air.

"I call heads," Sogrange decided.

It fell upon the table. Peter covered it with his hand and then slowly
withdrew the fingers. A little shiver ran through his veins. The
harmless head that looked up at him was like the figure of death. It was
for him to strike the blow!

"Where is Bernadine now?" he asked.

"Get me a morning paper and I will tell you," Sogrange declared, rising.
"He was in the train which was stopped outside the Gare du Nord, on his
way to England. What became of the passengers I have not heard. I knew
what was likely to happen, and I left an hour before in a 100 H. P.
Charron."

Peter rang the bell and ordered the servant who answered it to procure
the Daily Telegraph. As soon as it arrived, he spread it open upon the
table and Sogrange looked over his shoulder. These are the headings
which they saw in large black characters:

                     RENEWED RIOTS IN PARIS

                  THE GARE DU NORD IN FLAMES

         TERRIBLE ACCIDENT TO THE CALAIS-DOUVRES EXPRESS

                         MANY DEATHS


Peter's forefinger traveled down the page swiftly. It paused at the
following paragraph:

The 8.55 train from the Gare du Nord, carrying many passengers for
London, after being detained within a mile of Paris for over an hour
owing to the murder of the engine-driver, made an attempt last night
to proceed, with terrible results. Near Chantilly, whilst travelling
at over fifty miles an hour, the switches were tampered with and
the express dashed into a goods train laden with minerals. Very few
particulars are yet to hand, but the express was completely wrecked and
many lives have been lost.

Among the dead are the following:

One by one Peter read out the names. Then he stopped short. A little
exclamation broke from Sogrange's lips. The thirteenth name upon that
list of dead was that of Bernadine, Count von Hern.

"Bernadine!" Peter faltered. "Bernadine is dead!"

"Killed by the strikers!" Sogrange echoed! "It is a just thing, this."

The two men looked down at the paper and then up at one another. A
strange silence seemed to have found its way into the room. The shadow
of death lay between them. Peter touched his forehead and found it wet.

"It is a just thing, indeed," he repeated, "but justice and death are
alike terrible."...

Late in the afternoon of the same day, a motor car, splashed with mud,
drew up before the door of the house in Berkeley Square. Sogrange, who
was standing talking to Peter before the library window, suddenly broke
off in the middle of a sentence. He stepped back into the room and
gripped his friend's shoulder.

"It is the Baroness!" he exclaimed, quickly. "What does she want here?"

"The Baroness who? Peter demanded.

"The Baroness von Ratten. You must have heard of her--she is the friend
of Bernadine."

The two men had been out to lunch at the Ritz with Violet and had walked
across the Park home. Sogrange had been drawing on his gloves in the act
of starting out for a call at the Embassy.

"Does your wife know this woman?" he asked. Peter shook his head.

"I think not," he replied.

"Then she has come to see you," Sogrange continued. "What does it mean,
I wonder?"

Peter shrugged his shoulders.

"We shall know in a minute."

There was a knock at the door and his servant entered, bearing a card.

"This lady would like to see you, sir, on important business," he said.

"You can show her in here," Peter directed.

There was a very short delay. The two men had no time to exchange
a word. They heard the rustling of a woman's gown, and immediately
afterwards the perfume of violets seemed to fill the room.

"The Baroness von Ratten!" the butler announced.

The door was closed behind her. The servant had disappeared. Peter
advanced to meet his guest. She was a little above medium height, very
slim, with extraordinarily fair hair, colorless face, and strange eyes.
She was not strictly beautiful and yet there was no man upon whom her
presence was without its effect. Her voice was like her movements, slow
and with a grace of its own.

"You do not mind that I have come to see you?" she asked, raising her
eyes to Peter's. "I believe before I go that you will think terrible
things of me, but you must not begin before I have told you my errand.
It has been a great struggle with me before I made up my mind to come
here."

"Won't you sit down, Baroness?" Peter invited.

She saw Sogrange and hesitated.

"You are not alone," she said, softly. "I wish to speak with you alone."

"Permit me to present to you the Marquis de Sogrange," Peter begged. "He
is my oldest friend, Baroness. I think that whatever you might have to
say to me you might very well say before him."

"It is--of a private nature," she murmured.

"The Marquis and I have no secrets," Peter declared, "either political
or private."

She sat down and motioned Peter to take a place by her side upon the
sofa.

"You will forgive me if I am a little incoherent," she implored. "To-day
I have had a shock. You, too, have read the news? You must know that the
Count von Hern is dead--killed in the railway accident last night?"

"We read it in the Daily Telegraph," Peter replied.

"It is in all the papers," she continued. "You know that he was a very
dear friend of mine?"

"I have heard so," Peter admitted.

"Yet there was one subject," she insisted, earnestly, "upon which we
never agreed. He hated England. I have always loved it. England was kind
to me when my own country drove me out. I have always felt grateful. It
has been a sorrow to me that in so many of his schemes, in so much of
his work, Bernadine should consider his own country at the expense of
yours."

Sogrange drew a little nearer. It began to be interesting, this.

"I heard the news early this morning by telegram," she went on. "For
a long time I was prostrated. Then early this afternoon I began to
think--one must always think. Bernadine was a dear friend, but things
between us lately have been different, a little strained. Was it his
fault or mine--who can say? Does one tire with the years, I wonder? I
wonder!"

Her eyes were lifted to his and Peter was conscious of the fact that
she wished him to know that they were beautiful. She looked slowly away
again.

"This afternoon, as I sat alone," she proceeded, "I remembered that
in my keeping were many boxes of papers and many letters which have
recently arrived, all belonging to Bernadine. I reflected that there
were certainly some who were in his confidence, and that very soon
they would come from his country and take them all away. And then I
remembered what I owed to England, and how opposed I always was to
Bernadine's schemes, and I thought that the best thing I could do to
show my gratitude would be to place his papers all in the hands of some
Englishman, so that they might do no more harm to the country which has
been kind to me. So I came to you."

Again her eyes were lifted to his and Peter was very sure indeed that
they were wonderfully beautiful. He began to realize the fascination of
this woman, of whom he had heard so much. Her very absence of coloring
was a charm.

"You mean that you have brought me these papers?" he asked.

She shook her head slowly.

"No," she said, "I could not do that. There were too many of them--they
are too heavy, and there are piles of pamphlets--revolutionary
pamphlets, I am afraid--all in French, which I do not understand. No, I
could not bring them to you. But I ordered my motor car and I drove
up here to tell you that if you like to come down to the house in the
country where I have been living, to which Bernadine was to have come
to-night--yes, and bring your friend, too, if you will--you shall look
through them before any one else can arrive."

"You are very kind," Peter murmured. "Tell me where it is that you
live."

"It is beyond Hitchin," she told him, "up the Great North Road. I tell
you at once, it is a horrible house in a horrible lonely spot. Within
a day or two I shall leave it myself forever. I hate it--it gets on
my nerves. I dream of all the terrible things which perhaps have taken
place there. Who can tell? It was Bernadine's long before I came to
England."

"When are we to come?" Peter asked.

"You must come back with me now, at once," the Baroness insisted. "I
cannot tell how soon some one in his confidence may arrive."

"I will order my car," Peter declared.

She laid her hand upon his arm.

"Do you mind coming in mine?" she begged. "It is of no consequence, if
you object, but every servant in Bernadine's house is a German and a
spy. There are no women except my own maid. Your car is likely enough
known to them and there might be trouble. If you will come with me
now, you and your friend, if you like, I will send you to the station
to-night in time to catch the train home. I feel that I must have this
thing off my mind. You will come? Yes?"

Peter rang the bell and ordered his coat.

"Without a doubt," he answered. "May we not offer you some tea first?"

She shook her head.

"To-day I cannot think of eating or drinking," she replied. "Bernadine
and I were no longer what we had been, but the shock of his death seems
none the less terrible. I feel like a traitor to him for coming here,
yet I believe that I am doing what is right," she added, softly.

"If you will excuse me for one moment," Peter said, "while I take leave
of my wife, I will rejoin you presently."

Peter was absent for only a few minutes. Sogrange and the Baroness
exchanged the merest commonplaces. As they all passed down the hall,
Sogrange lingered behind.

"If you will take the Baroness out to the car," he suggested, "I will
telephone to the Embassy and tell them not to expect me."

Peter offered his arm to his companion. She seemed, indeed, to need
support. Her fingers clutched at his coat-sleeve as they passed on to
the pavement.

"I am so glad to be no longer quite alone," she whispered. "Almost I
wish that your friend were not coming. I know that Bernadine and you
were enemies, but then you were enemies not personally, but politically.
After all, it is you who stand for the things which have become so dear
to me."

"It is true that Bernadine and I were bitter antagonists," Peter
admitted, gravely. "Death, however, ends all that. I wish him no further
harm."

She sighed.

"As for me," she said, "I am growing used to being friendless. I was
friendless before Bernadine came, and latterly we have been nothing to
one another. Now, I suppose, I shall know what it is to be an outcast
once more. Did you ever hear my history, I wonder?"

Peter shook his head.

"Never, Baroness," he replied. "I understood, I believe, that your
marriage--"

"My husband divorced me," she confessed, simply. "He was quite within
his rights. He was impossible. I was very young and very sentimental.
They say that Englishwomen are cold," she added. "Perhaps that is so.
People think that I look cold. Do you?"

Sogrange suddenly opened the door of the car in which they were already
seated. She leaned back and half closed her eyes.

"It is rather a long ride," she said, "and I am worn out. I hope you
will not mind, but for myself I cannot talk when motoring. Smoke, if it
pleases you."

"Might one inquire as to our exact destination?" Sogrange asked.

"We go beyond Hitchin, up the Great North Road," she told him again.
"The house is called the High House. It stands in the middle of a heath
and I think it is the loneliest and most miserable place that was ever
built. I hate it and I am frightened in it. For some reason or other, it
suited Bernadine, but that is all over now."

The little party of three relapsed into silence. The car, driven
carefully enough through the busy streets, gradually increased its
pace as they drew clear of the suburbs. Peter leaned back in his place,
thinking. Bernadine was dead! Nothing else would have convinced him
so utterly of the fact as that simple sentence in the Daily Telegraph,
which had been followed up by a confirmation and a brief obituary notice
in all the evening papers. Curiously enough, the fact seemed to have
drawn a certain spice out of even this adventure; to point, indeed, to
a certain monotony in the future. Their present enterprise, important
though it might turn out to be, was nothing to be proud of. A woman,
greedy for gold, was selling her lover's secrets before the breath was
out of his body. Peter turned in his cushioned seat to look at her.
Without doubt, she was beautiful to one who understood, beautiful in
a strange, colorless, feline fashion, the beauty of soft limbs, soft
movements, a caressing voice, with always the promise beyond of more
than the actual words. Her eyes now were closed, her face was a little
weary. Did she really rest, Peter wondered? He watched the rising and
falling of her bosom, the quivering now and then of her eyelids. She had
indeed the appearance of a woman who had suffered.

The car rushed on into the darkness. Behind them lay that restless
phantasmagoria of lights streaming to the sky. In front, blank space.
Peter, through half-closed eyes, watched the woman by his side. From
the moment of her entrance into his library, he had summed her up in
his mind with a single word. She was, beyond a doubt, an adventuress. No
woman could have proposed the things which she had proposed, who was
not of that ilk. Yet for that reason it behooved them to have a care in
their dealings with her. At her instigation they had set out upon this
adventure, which might well turn out according to any fashion that she
chose. Yet without Bernadine what could she do? She was not the woman
to carry on the work which he had left behind, for the love of him. Her
words had been frank, her action shameful but natural. Bernadine
was dead and she had realized quickly enough the best market for his
secrets. In a few days' time his friends would have come and she would
have received nothing. He told himself that he was foolish to doubt her.
There was not a flaw in the sequence of events, no possible reason for
the suspicions which yet lingered at the back of his brain. Intrigue,
it was certain, was to her as the breath of her body. He was perfectly
willing to believe that the death of Bernadine would have affected her
little more than the sweeping aside of a fly. His very common sense bade
him accept her story.

By degrees he became drowsy. Suddenly he was startled into a very
wide-awake state. Through half-closed eyes he had seen Sogrange draw
a sheet of paper from his pocket, a gold pencil from his chain, and
commence to write. In the middle of a sentence, his eyes were abruptly
lifted. He was looking at the Baroness. Peter, too, turned his head;
he, also, looked at the Baroness. Without a doubt, she had been watching
both of them. Sogrange's pencil continued its task, only he traced
no more characters. Instead, he seemed to be sketching a face, which
presently he tore carefully up into small pieces and destroyed. He did
not even glance towards Peter, but Peter understood very well what had
happened. He had been about to send him a message, but had found
the Baroness watching. Peter was fully awake now. His faint sense of
suspicion had deepened into a positive foreboding. He had a reckless
desire to stop the car, to descend upon the road and let the secrets of
Bernadine go where they would. Then his natural love of adventure blazed
up once more. His moment of weakness had passed. The thrill was in his
blood, his nerves were tightened. He was ready for what might come,
seemingly still half asleep, yet, indeed, with every sense of intuition
and observation keenly alert.

Sogrange leaned over from his place.

"It is a lonely country, this, into which we are coming, madame," he
remarked.

She shrugged her shoulders.

"Indeed, it is not so lonely here as you will think it when we arrive
at our destination," she replied. "There are houses here, but they are
hidden by the trees. There are no houses near us."

She rubbed the pane with her hand.

"We are, I believe, very nearly there," she said. "This is the nearest
village. Afterwards, we just climb a hill and about half a mile along
the top of it is the High House."

"And the name of the village," Sogrange inquired.

"St Mary's," she told him, "In the summer people call it beautiful
around here. To me it is the most melancholy spot I ever saw. There
is so much rain, and one hears the drip, drip in the trees all the day
long. Alone I could not bear it. To-morrow or the next day I shall pack
up my belongings and come to London. I am, unfortunately," she added,
with a little sigh, "very, very poor, but it is my hope that you may
find the papers, of which I have spoken to you, valuable."

Sogrange smiled faintly. Peter and he could scarcely forbear to exchange
a single glance. The woman's candor was almost brutal. She read their
thoughts.

"We ascend the hill," she continued. "We draw now very near to the end
of our journey. There is still one thing I would say to you. Do not
think too badly of me for what I am about to do. To Bernadine, while he
lived, I was faithful. Many a time I could have told you of his plans
and demanded a great sum of money, and you would have given it me
willingly, but my lips were sealed because, in a way, I loved him. While
he lived I gave him what I owed. To-day he is dead, and, whatever I do,
it cannot concern him any more. To-day I am a free woman and I take the
side I choose."

"Dear madame," he replied, "what you have proposed to us is, after all,
quite natural and very gracious. If one has a fear at all about the
matter, it is as to the importance of these documents you speak of.
Bernadine, I know, has dealt in great affairs; but he was a diplomat by
instinct, experienced and calculating. One does not keep incriminating
papers."

She leaned a little forward. The car had swung round a corner now and
was making its way up an avenue as dark as pitch.

"The wisest of us, Monsieur le Marquis," she whispered, "reckon
sometimes without that one element of sudden death. What should you say,
I wonder, to a list of agents in France pledged to circulate in certain
places literature of an infamous sort? What should you say, monsieur, to
a copy of a secret report of your late maneuvers, franked with the name
of one of your own staff officers? What should you say," she went
on, "to a list of Socialist deputies with amounts against their name,
amounts paid in hard cash? Are these of no importance to you?"

"Madame," Sogrange answered, simply, "for such information, if it were
genuine, it would be hard to mention a price which we should not be
prepared to pay."

The car came to a sudden standstill. The first impression of the two men
was that the Baroness had exaggerated the loneliness and desolation of
the place. There was nothing mysterious or forbidding about the plain,
brownstone house before which they had stopped. The windows were
streaming with light; the hall door, already thrown open, disclosed a
very comfortable hall, brilliantly illuminated. A man-servant assisted
his mistress to alight, another ushered them in. In the background were
other servants. The Baroness glanced at the clock.

"About dinner, Carl?" she asked.

"It waits for madame," the man answered.

She nodded.

"Take care of these gentlemen till I descend," she ordered. "You will
not mind?" she added, turning pleadingly to Sogrange. "To-day I have
eaten nothing. I am faint with hunger. Afterwards, it will be a matter
but of half an hour. You can be in London again by ten o'clock."

"As you will, madame," Sogrange replied. "We are greatly indebted to you
for your hospitality. But for costume, you understand that we are as we
are?"

"It is perfectly understood," she assured him. "For myself, I rejoin you
in ten minutes. A loose gown, that is all."

Sogrange and Peter were shown into a modern bathroom by a servant who
was so anxious to wait upon them that they had difficulty in sending him
away. As soon as he was gone and the door closed behind him, Peter put
his foot against it and turned the key.

"You were going to write something to me in the car?"

Sogrange nodded.

"There was a moment," he admitted, "when I had a suspicion. It has
passed. This woman is no Roman. She sells the secrets of Bernadine as
she would sell herself. Nevertheless, it is well always to be prepared.
There were probably others beside Bernadine who had the entree here."

"The only suspicious circumstance which I have noticed," Peter remarked,
"is the number of men-servants. I have seen five already."

"It is only fair to remember," Sogrange reminded him, "that the Baroness
herself told us that there were no other save men-servants here and
that they were all spies. Without a master, I cannot see that they are
dangerous. One needs, however, to watch all the time."

"If you see anything suspicious," Peter said, "tap the table with your
forefinger. Personally, I will admit that I have had my doubts of the
Baroness, but on the whole I have come to the conclusion that they
were groundless. She is not the sort of woman to take up a vendetta,
especially an unprofitable one."

"She is an exceedingly dangerous person for an impressionable man like
myself," Sogrange remarked, arranging his tie.

The butler fetched them in a very few moments and showed them into a
pleasantly-furnished library, where he mixed cocktails for them from
a collection of bottles upon the sideboard. He was quite friendly and
inclined to be loquacious, although he spoke with a slight foreign
accent. The house belonged to an English gentleman from whom the honored
Count had taken it, furnished. They were two miles from a station and
a mile from the village. It was a lonely part, but there were always
people coming or going. With one's work one scarcely noticed it. He was
gratified that the gentlemen found his cocktails so excellent. Perhaps
he might be permitted the high honor of mixing them another? It was a
day, this, of deep sadness and gloom. One needed to drink something,
indeed, to forget the terrible thing which had happened. The Count had
been a good master, a little impatient sometimes, but kind-hearted. The
news had been a shock to them all.


Then, before they had expected her, the Baroness reappeared. She wore
a wonderful gray gown which seemed to be made in a single piece, a gown
which fitted her tightly, and yet gave her the curious appearance of a
woman walking without the burden of clothes. Sogrange, Parisian to the
finger-tips, watched her with admiring approval. She laid her fingers
upon his arm, although it was towards Peter that her eyes traveled.

"Will you take me in, Marquis?" she begged. "It is the only formality we
will allow ourselves."

They entered a long, low dining-room, paneled with oak, and with the
family portraits of the owner of the house still left upon the wall.
Dinner was served upon a round table and was laid for four. There was
a profusion of silver, very beautiful glass, and a wonderful cluster
of orchids. The Marquis, as he handed his hostess to her chair, glanced
towards the vacant place.

"It is for my companion, an Austrian lady," she explained. "To-night,
however, I think that she will not come. She was a distant connection of
Bernadine's and she is much upset. We leave her place and see. You will
sit on my other side, Baron."

The fingers which touched Peter's arm brushed his hand, and were
withdrawn as though with reluctance. She sank into her chair with a
little sigh.

"It is charming of you two, this," she declared, softly. "You help me
through this night of solitude and sadness. What I should do if I were
alone, I cannot tell. You must drink with me a toast, if you will. Will
you make it to our better acquaintance?"

No soup had been offered and champagne was served with the hors
d'oeuvre. Peter raised his glass and looked into the eyes of the woman
who was leaning so closely towards him that her soft breath fell upon
his cheek. She whispered something in his ear. For a moment, perhaps, he
was carried away, but for a moment only. Then Sogrange's voice and
the beat of his forefinger upon the table stiffened him into sudden
alertness. They heard a motor car draw up outside.

"Who can it be?" the Baroness exclaimed, setting her glass down
abruptly.

"It is, perhaps, our fourth guest who arrives," Sogrange remarked.

They all three listened, Peter and Sogrange with their glasses still
suspended in the air.

"Our fourth guest?" the Baroness repeated. "Madame von Estenier is
upstairs, lying down. I cannot tell who this may be."

Her lips were parted. The lines of her forehead had suddenly appeared.
Her eyes were turned toward the door, hard and bright. Then the glass
which she had nervously picked up again and was holding between her
fingers, fell on to the tablecloth with a little crash, and the yellow
wine ran bubbling on to her plate. Her scream echoed to the roof and
rang through the room. It was Bernadine who stood there in the doorway,
Bernadine in a long traveling ulster and the air of one newly arrived
from a journey. They all three looked at him, but there was not one who
spoke. The Baroness, after her one wild cry, was dumb.

"I am indeed fortunate," Bernadine said. "You have as yet, I see,
scarcely commenced. You probably expected me. I am charmed to find so
agreeable a party awaiting my arrival."

He divested himself of his ulster and threw it across the arm of the
butler, who stood behind him.

"Come," he continued; "for a man who has just been killed in a railway
accident, I find myself with an appetite. A glass of wine, Carl. I
do not know what that toast was, the drinking of which my coming
interrupted, but let us all drink it together. Aimee, my love to you,
dear. Let me congratulate you upon the fortitude and courage with which
you ignored those lying reports of my death. I had fears that I might
find you alone in a darkened room, with tear-stained eyes and sal
volatile by your side. This is infinitely better. Gentlemen, you are
welcome."

Sogrange lifted his glass and bowed courteously. Peter followed suit.

"Really," Sogrange murmured, "the Press nowadays becomes more unreliable
every day. It is apparent, my dear Von Hern, that this account of your
death was, to say the least of it, exaggerated."

Peter said nothing. His eyes were fixed upon the Baroness. She sat in
her chair quite motionless, but her face had become like the face of
some graven image. She looked at Bernadine, but her eyes said nothing.
Every glint of expression seemed to have left her features. Since that
one wild shriek she had remained voiceless. Encompassed by danger though
he knew they now must be, Peter found himself possessed by one thought
only. Was this a trap into which they had fallen, or was the woman, too,
deceived?

"You bring later news from Paris than I myself," Sogrange proceeded,
helping himself to one of the dishes which a footman was passing round.
"How did you reach the coast? The evening papers stated distinctly that
since the accident no attempt had been made to run trains."

"By motor car from Chantilly," Bernadine replied. "I had the misfortune
to lose my servant, who was wearing my coat, and who, I gather from the
newspaper reports, was mistaken for me. I myself was unhurt. I hired a
motor car and drove to Boulogne--not the best of journeys, let me tell
you, for we broke down three times. There was no steamer there, but I
hired a fishing boat, which brought me across the Channel in something
under eight hours. From the coast I motored direct here. I was so
anxious," he added, raising his eyes, "to see how my dear friend--my
dear Aimee--was bearing the terrible news."

She fluttered for a moment like a bird in a trap. Peter drew a little
sigh of relief. His self-respect was reinstated. He had decided that she
was innocent. Upon them, at least, would not fall the ignominy of having
been led into the simplest of traps by this white-faced Delilah. The
butler had brought her another glass, which she raised to her lips. She
drained its contents, but the ghastliness of her appearance remained
unchanged. Peter, watching her, knew the signs. She was sick with
terror.

"The conditions throughout France are indeed awful," Sogrange remarked.
"They say, too, that this railway strike is only the beginning of worse
things."

Bernadine smiled.

"Your country, dear Marquis," he said, "is on its last legs. No one
knows better than I that it is, at the present moment, honeycombed with
sedition and anarchical impulses. The people are rotten. For years the
whole tone of France has been decadent. Its fall must even now be close
at hand."

"You take a gloomy view of my country's future," Sogrange declared.

"Why should one refuse to face facts?" Bernadine replied. "One does not
often talk so frankly, but we three are met together this evening under
somewhat peculiar circumstances. The days of the glory of France are
past. England has laid out her neck for the yoke of the conqueror. Both
are doomed to fall. Both are ripe for the great humiliation. You two
gentlemen whom I have the honor to receive as my guests," he concluded,
filling his glass and bowing towards them, "in your present unfortunate
predicament represent precisely the position of your two countries."

"Ave Caesar!" Peter muttered grimly, raising his glass to his lips.

Bernadine accepted the challenge.

"It is not I, alas! who may call myself Caesar," he replied, "although
it is certainly you who are about to die."

Sogrange turned to the man who stood behind his chair.

"If I might trouble you for a little dry toast?" he inquired. "A modern
but very uncomfortable ailment," he added, with a sigh. "One's digestion
must march with the years, I suppose."

Bernadine smiled.

"Your toast you shall have, with pleasure, Marquis," he said, "but as
for your indigestion, do not let that trouble you any longer. I think
that I can promise you immunity from that annoying complaint for the
rest of your life."

"You are doing your best," Peter declared, leaning back in his chair,
"to take away my appetite."

Bernadine looked searchingly from one to the other of his two guests.

"Yes," he admitted, "you are brave men. I do not know why I should ever
have doubted it. Your pose is excellent. I have no wish, however, to see
you buoyed up by a baseless optimism. A somewhat remarkable chance has
delivered you into my hands. You are my prisoners. You, Peter, Baron
de Grost, I have hated all my days. You have stood between me and the
achievement of some of my most dearly-cherished tasks. Always I have
said to myself that the day of reckoning must come. It has arrived. As
for you, Marquis de Sogrange, if my personal feelings towards you are
less violent, you still represent the things absolutely inimical to
me and my interests. The departure of you two men was the one thing
necessary for the successful completion of certain tasks which I have in
hand at the present moment."

Peter pushed away his plate.

"You have succeeded in destroying my appetite, Count," he declared. "Now
that you have gone so far in expounding your amiable resolutions towards
us, perhaps you will go a little further and explain exactly how,
in this eminently respectable house, situated, I understand, in an
eminently respectable neighborhood, with a police station within a mile,
and a dozen or so witnesses as to our present whereabouts, you intend to
expedite our removal?"

Bernadine pointed toward the woman who sat facing him.

"Ask the Baroness how these things are arranged."

They turned towards her. She fell back in her chair with a little gasp.
She had fainted. Bernadine shrugged his shoulders. The butler and one
of the footmen, who during the whole of the conversation had stolidly
proceeded with their duties, in obedience to a gesture from their master
took her up in their arms and carried her from the room.

"The fear has come to her, too," Bernadine murmured, softly. "It may
come to you, my brave friends, before morning."

"It is possible," Peter answered, his hand stealing around to his hip
pocket, "but in the meantime, what is to prevent--"

The hip pocket was empty. Peter's sentence ended abruptly. Bernadine
mocked him.

"To prevent your shooting me in cold blood, I suppose," he remarked.
"Nothing except that my servants are too clever. No one save myself is
allowed to remain under this roof with arms in their possession.
Your pocket was probably picked before you had been in the place five
minutes. No, my dear Baron, let me assure you that escape will not be so
easy! You were always just a little inclined to be led away by the fair
sex. The best men in the world, you know, have shared that failing, and
the Baroness, alone and unprotected, had her attractions, eh?"

Then something happened to Peter which had happened to him barely a
dozen times in his life. He lost his temper and lost it rather badly.
Without an instant's hesitation, he caught up the decanter which stood
by his side and flung it in his host's face. Bernadine only partly
avoided it by thrusting out his arms. The neck caught his forehead and
the blood came streaming over his tie and collar. Peter had followed the
decanter with a sudden spring. His fingers were upon Bernadine's throat
and he thrust his head back. Sogrange sprang to the door to lock it, but
he was too late. The room seemed full of men-servants. Peter was dragged
away, still struggling fiercely.

"Tie them up!" Bernadine gasped, swaying in his chair. "Tie them up, do
you hear? Carl, give me brandy."

He swallowed half a wineglassful of the raw spirit. His eyes were red
with fury.

"Take them to the gun room," he ordered, "three of you to each of them,
mind. I'll shoot the man who lets either escape."

But Peter and Sogrange were both of them too wise to expend any more
of their strength in a useless struggle. They suffered themselves to be
conducted without resistance across the white stone hall, down a long
passage, and into a room at the end, the window and fireplace of
which were both blocked up. The floor was of red flags and the walls
whitewashed. The only furniture was a couple of kitchen chairs and a
long table. The door was of stout oak and fitted with a double lock. The
sole outlet, so far as they could see, was a small round hole at the top
of the roof. The door was locked behind them. They were alone.

"The odd trick to Bernadine!" Peter exclaimed hoarsely, wiping a spot
of blood from his forehead. "My dear Marquis, I scarcely know how to
apologize. It is not often that I lose my temper so completely."

"The matter seems to be of very little consequence," Sogrange answered.
"This was probably our intended destination in any case. Seems to be
rather an unfortunate expedition of ours, I am afraid."

"One cannot reckon upon men coming back from the dead," Peter declared.
"It isn't often that you find every morning and every evening paper
mistaken. As for the woman, I believe in her. She honestly meant to sell
us those papers of Bernadine's. I believe that she, too, will have to
face a day of reckoning."

Sogrange strolled around the room, subjecting it everywhere to a close
scrutiny. The result was hopeless. There was no method of escape save
through the door.

"There is certainly something strange about this apartment," Peter
remarked. "It is, to say the least of it, unusual to have windows in the
roof and a door of such proportions. All the same, I think that those
threats of Bernadine's were a little strained. One cannot get rid
of one's enemies, nowadays, in the old-fashioned, melodramatic way.
Bernadine must know quite well that you and I are not the sort of men to
walk into a trap of any one's setting, just as I am quite sure that he
is not the man to risk even a scandal by breaking the law openly."

"You interest me," Sogrange said. "I begin to suspect that you, too,
have made some plans."

"But naturally," Peter replied. "Once before Bernadine set a trap for me
and he nearly had a chance of sending me for a swim in the Thames. Since
then one takes precautions as a matter of course. We were followed down
here, and by this time I should imagine that the alarm is given. If all
was well, I was to have telephoned an hour ago."

"You are really," Sogrange declared, "quite an agreeable companion, my
dear Baron. You think of everything."

The door was suddenly opened. Bernadine stood upon the threshold and
behind him several of the servants.

"You will oblige me by stepping back into the study, my friends," he
ordered.

"With great pleasure," Sogrange answered, with alacrity. "We have no
fancy for this room, I can assure you."

Once more they crossed the stone hall and entered the room into which
they had first been shown. On the threshold, Peter stopped short and
listened. It seemed to him that from somewhere upstairs he could hear
the sound of a woman's sobs. He turned to Bernadine.

"The Baroness is not unwell, I trust?" he asked.

"The Baroness is as well as she is likely to be for some time,"
Bernadine replied, grimly.

They were all in the study now. Upon a table stood a telephone
instrument. Bernadine drew a small revolver from his pocket.

"Baron de Grost," he said, "I find that you are not quite such a fool as
I thought you. Some one is ringing up for you on the telephone. You will
reply that you are well and safe and that you will be home as soon as
your business here is finished. Your wife is at the other end. If you
breathe a single word to her of your approaching end, she shall hear
through the telephone the sound of the revolver shot that sends you to
Hell."

"Dear me," Peter protested, "I find this most unpleasant. If you will
excuse me, I don't think I'll answer the call at all."

"You will answer it as I have directed," Bernadine insisted. "Only
remember this--if you speak a single ill-advised word, the end will be
as I have said."

Peter picked up the receiver and held it to his ear.

"Who is there?" he asked.

It was Violet whose voice he heard. He listened for a moment to her
anxious flood of questions.

"There is not the slightest cause to be alarmed, dear," he said. "Yes, I
am down at the High House, near St. Mary's. Bernadine is here. It seems
that those reports of his death were absolutely unfounded.... Danger?
Unprotected? Why, my dear Violet, you know how careful I always am.
Simply because Bernadine used once to live here, and because the
Baroness was his friend, I spoke to Sir John Dory over the telephone
before we left, and an escort of half-a-dozen police followed us. They
are about the place now, I have no doubt, but their presence is quite
unnecessary. I shall be home before long, dear.... Yes, perhaps it
would be as well to send the car down. Any one will direct him to the
house--the High House, St. Mary's, remember. Good-by!"

Peter replaced the receiver and turned slowly round. Bernadine was
smiling.

"You did well to reassure your wife, even though it was a pack of lies
you told her," he remarked.

Peter shrugged his shoulders contemptuously.

"My dear Bernadine," he said, "up till now I have tried to take you
seriously. You are really passing the limit. I must positively ask you
to reflect a little. Do men who live the life that you and I live, trust
any one? Am I--is the Marquis de Sogrange here--after a lifetime of
experience, likely to leave the safety of our homes in company with a
lady of whom we knew nothing except that she was your companion,
without precautions? I do you the justice to believe you a person of
commonsense. I know that we are as safe in this house as we should be in
our own. War cannot be made in this fashion in an over-policed country
like England."

"Do not be too sure," Bernadine replied. "There are secrets about this
house which have not yet been disclosed to you. There are means, my dear
Baron, of transporting you into a world where you are likely to do much
less harm than here, means ready at hand, and which would leave no more
trace behind than those crumbling ashes can tell of the coal mine from
which they came."

Peter preserved his attitude of bland incredulity.

"Listen," he said, drawing a whistle from his pocket, "it is just
possible that you are in earnest. I will bet you, then, if you like, a
hundred pounds, that if I blow this whistle you will either have to open
your door within five minutes or find your house invaded by the police."

No one spoke for several moments. The veins were standing out upon
Bernadine's forehead.

"We have had enough of this folly," he cried. "If you refuse to realize
your position, so much the worse for you. Blow your whistle, if you
will. I am content."

Peter waited for no second bidding. He raised the whistle to his lips
and blew it, loudly and persistently. Again there was silence. Bernadine
mocked him.

"Try once more, dear Baron," he advised. "Your friends are perhaps a
little hard of hearing. Try once more, and when you have finished, you
and I and the Marquis de Sogrange will find our way once more to the
gun room and conclude that trifling matter of business which brought you
here."

Again Peter blew his whistle and again the silence was broken only by
Bernadine's laugh. Suddenly, however, that laugh was checked. Every one
had turned toward the door, listening. A bell was ringing throughout the
house.

"It is the front door!" one of the servants exclaimed.

No one moved. As though to put the matter beyond doubt, there was a
steady knocking to be heard from the same direction.

"It is a telegram or some late caller," Bernadine declared, hoarsely.
"Answer it, Carl. If any one would speak with the Baroness, she is
indisposed and unable to receive. If any one desires me, I am here."

The man left the room. They heard him withdraw the chain from the door.
Bernadine wiped the sweat from his forehead as he listened. He still
gripped the revolver in his hand. Peter had changed his position a
little and was standing now behind a high-backed chair. They heard
the door creak open, a voice outside, and presently the tramp of heavy
footsteps. Peter nodded understandingly.

"It is exactly as I told you," he said. "You were wise not to bet, my
friend."

Again the tramp of feet in the hall. There was something unmistakable
about the sound, something final and terrifying. Bernadine saw his
triumph slipping away. Once more this man who had defied him so
persistently, was to taste the sweets of victory. With a roar of fury
he sprang across the room. He fired his revolver twice before Sogrange,
with a terrible blow, knocked his arm upwards and sent the weapon
spinning to the ceiling. Peter struck his assailant in the mouth,
but the blow seemed scarcely to check him. They rolled on the floor
together, their arms around one another's necks. It was an affair, that,
but of a moment. Peter, as lithe as a cat, was on his feet again almost
at once, with a torn collar and an ugly mark on his face. There were
strangers in the room now and the servants had mostly slipped away
during the confusion. It was Sir John Dory himself who locked the door.
Bernadine struggled slowly to his feet. He was face to face with half a
dozen police constables in plain clothes.

"You have a charge against this man, Baron?" the police commissioner
asked.

Peter shook his head.

"The quarrel between us," he replied, "is not for the police courts,
although I will confess, Sir John, that your intervention was
opportune."

"I, on the other hand," Sogrange put in, "demand the arrest of the Count
von Hern and the seizure of all papers in this house. I am the bearer of
an autograph letter from the President of France in connection with this
matter. The Count von Hern has committed extraditable offenses against
my country. I am prepared to swear an information to that effect."

The police commissioner turned to Peter.

"Your friend's name?" he demanded.

"The Marquis de Sogrange," Peter told him.

"He is a person of authority?"

"To my certain knowledge," Peter replied, "he has the implicit
confidence of the French Government."

Sir John Dory made a sign. In another moment Bernadine would have been
arrested. It seemed, indeed, as though nothing could save him now from
this crowning humiliation. He himself, white and furious, was at a loss
how to deal with an unexpected situation. Suddenly a thing happened
stranger than any one of them there had ever dreamed of, so strange that
even men such as Peter, Sogrange and Dory, whose nerves were of iron,
faced one another, doubting and amazed. The floor beneath them rocked
and billowed like the waves of a canvas sea. The windows were filled
with flashes of red light, a great fissure parted the wall, the pictures
and book-cases came crashing down beneath a shower of masonry. It was
the affair of a second. Above them shone the stars and around them a
noise like thunder. Bernadine, who alone understood, was the first to
recover himself. He stood in the midst of them, his hands above his
head, laughing as he looked around at the strange storm, laughing like a
madman.

"The wonderful Carl," he cried. "Oh, matchless servant. Arrest me now,
if you will, you dogs of the police. Rout out my secrets, dear Baron de
Grost. Tuck them under your arm and hurry to Downing Street. This is
the hospitality of the High House, my friends. It loves you so well that
only your ashes shall leave it."

His mouth was open for another sentence when he was struck. A whole
pillar of marble from one of the rooms above came crashing through and
buried him underneath a falling shower of masonry. Peter escaped by a
few inches. Those who were left unhurt sprang through the yawning wall
out into the garden. Sir John, Sogrange and Peter, three of the men--one
limping badly, came to a standstill in the middle of the lawn. Before
them, the house was crumbling like a pack of cards, and louder even than
the thunder of the falling structure was the roar of the red flames.

"The Baroness!" Peter cried, and took one leap forward.

"I am here," she sobbed, running to them from out of the shadows. "I
have lost everything--my jewels, my clothes, all except what I have on.
They gave me but a moment's warning."

"Is there any one else in the house?" Peter demanded.

"No one but you who were in that room," she answered.

"Your companion!"

She shook her head.

"There was no companion," she faltered. "I thought it sounded better
to speak of her. I had her place laid at table, but she never even
existed."

Peter tore off his coat.

"There are the others in the room!" he exclaimed. "We must go back."

Sogrange caught him by the shoulder and pointed to a shadowy group some
distance away.

"We are all out but Bernadine," he said. "For him were is no hope.
Quick!"

They sprang back only just in time. The outside wall of the house fell
with a terrible crash. The room which they had quitted was blotted
now out of existence. From right and left, in all directions along the
country road, came the flashing of lights and little knots of hurrying
people.

"It is the end!" Peter muttered. "Yesterday I should have regretted the
passing of a brave enemy. To-day I hail with joy the death of a brute."

The Baroness, who had been sitting upon a garden seat, sobbing, came
softly up to them. She laid her fingers upon Peter's arm imploringly.

"You will not leave me friendless?" she begged. "The papers I promised
you are destroyed, but many of his secrets are here."

She tapped her forehead.

"Madame," Peter answered, "I have no wish to know them. Years ago I
swore that the passing of Bernadine should mark my own retirement
from the world in which we both lived. I shall keep my word. To-night
Bernadine is dead. To-night, Sogrange, my work is finished." The
Baroness began to sob again.

"And I thought that you were a man," she moaned, "so gallant, so
honorable--"

"Madame," Sogrange intervened, "I shall commend you to the pension list
of the Double-Four."

She dried her eyes.

"It is not money only I want," she whispered, her eyes following Peter.

Sogrange shook his head.

"You have never seen the Baroness de Grost?" he asked her.

"But no!"

"Ah!" Sogrange murmured.... "Our escort, madame, is at your service--as
far as London."

========================================
========================================

THE ZEPPELIN'S PASSENGER

By E. Phillips Oppenheim




CHAPTER I


"Never heard a sound," the younger of the afternoon callers admitted,
getting rid of his empty cup and leaning forward in his low chair. "No
more tea, thank you, Miss Fairclough. Done splendidly, thanks. No, I
went to bed last night soon after eleven--the Colonel had been route
marching us all off our legs--and I never awoke until reveille this
morning. Sleep of the just, and all that sort of thing, but a jolly
sell, all the same! You hear anything of it, sir?" he asked, turning to
his companion, who was seated a few feet away.

Captain Griffiths shook his head. He was a man considerably older than
his questioner, with long, nervous face, and thick black hair streaked
with grey. His fingers were bony, his complexion, for a soldier,
curiously sallow, and notwithstanding his height, which was
considerable, he was awkward, at times almost uncouth. His voice was
hard and unsympathetic, and his contributions to the tea-table talk had
been almost negligible.

"I was up until two o'clock, as it happened," he replied, "but I knew
nothing about the matter until it was brought to my notice officially."

Helen Fairclough, who was doing the honours for Lady Cranston, her
absent hostess, assumed the slight air of superiority to which the
circumstances of the case entitled her.

"I heard it distinctly," she declared; "in fact it woke me up. I hung
out of the window, and I could hear the engine just as plainly as though
it were over the golf links."

The young subaltern sighed.

"Rotten luck I have with these things," he confided. "That's three times
they've been over, and I've neither heard nor seen one. This time they
say that it had the narrowest shave on earth of coming down. Of course,
you've heard of the observation car found on Dutchman's Common this
morning?"

The girl assented.

"Did you see it?" she enquired.

"Not a chance," was the gloomy reply. "It was put on two covered trucks
and sent up to London by the first train. Captain Griffiths can tell you
what it was like, I dare say. You were down there, weren't you, sir?"

"I superintended its removal," the latter informed them. "It was a very
uninteresting affair."

"Any bombs in it?" Helen asked.

"Not a sign of one. Just a hard seat, two sets of field-glasses and a
telephone. It seems to have got caught in some trees and been dragged
off."

"How exciting!" the girl murmured. "I suppose there wasn't any one in
it?"

Griffiths shook his head.

"I believe," he explained, "that these observation cars, although they
are attached to most of the Zeppelins, are seldom used in night raids."

"I should like to have seen it, all the same," Helen confessed.

"You would have been disappointed," her informant assured her.
"By-the-by," he added, a little awkwardly, "are you not expecting Lady
Cranston back this evening?"

"I am expecting her every moment. The car has gone down to the station
to meet her."

Captain Griffiths appeared to receive the news with a certain
undemonstrative satisfaction. He leaned back in his chair with the air
of one who is content to wait.

"Have you heard, Miss Fairclough," his younger companion enquired, a
little diffidently, "whether Lady Cranston had any luck in town?"

Helen Fairclough looked away. There was a slight mist before her eyes.

"I had a letter this morning," she replied. "She seems to have heard
nothing at all encouraging so far."

"And you haven't heard from Major Felstead himself, I suppose?"

The girl shook her head.

"Not a line," she sighed. "It's two months now since we last had a
letter."

"Jolly bad luck to get nipped just as he was doing so well," the young
man observed sympathetically.

"It all seems very cruel," Helen agreed. "He wasn't really fit to go
back, but the Board passed him because they were so short of officers
and he kept worrying them. He was so afraid he'd get moved to another
battalion. Then he was taken prisoner in that horrible Pervais affair,
and sent to the worst camp in Germany. Since then, of course, Philippa
and I have had a wretched time, worrying."

"Major Felstead is Lady Cranston's only brother, is he not?" Griffiths
enquired.

"And my only fiance," she replied, with a little grimace. "However,
don't let us talk about our troubles any more," she continued, with an
effort at a lighter tone. "You'll find some cigarettes on that table,
Mr. Harrison. I can't think where Nora is. I expect she has persuaded
some one to take her out trophy-hunting to Dutchman's Common."

"The road all the way is like a circus," the young soldier observed,
"and there isn't a thing to be seen when you get there. The naval airmen
were all over the place at daybreak, and Captain Griffiths wasn't
far behind them. You didn't leave much for the sightseers, sir," he
concluded, turning to his neighbour.

"As Commandant of the place," Captain Griffiths replied, "I naturally
had to have the Common searched. With the exception of the observation
car, however, I think that I am betraying no confidences in telling you
that we discovered nothing of interest."

"Do you suppose that the Zeppelin was in difficulties, as she was flying
so low?" Helen enquired.

"It is a perfectly reasonable hypothesis," the Commandant assented. "Two
patrol boats were sent out early this morning, in search of her. An old
man whom I saw at Waburne declares that she passed like a long, black
cloud, just over his head, and that he was almost deafened by the noise
of the engines. Personally, I cannot believe that they would come down
so low unless she was in some trouble."

The door of the comfortable library in which they were seated was
suddenly thrown open. An exceedingly alert-looking young lady, very
much befreckled, and as yet unemancipated from the long plaits of the
schoolroom, came in like a whirlwind. In her hand she carried a man's
Homburg hat, which she waved aloft in triumph.

"Come in, Arthur," she shouted to a young subaltern who was hovering
in the background. "Look what I've got, Helen! A trophy! Just look, Mr.
Harrison and Captain Griffiths! I found it in a bush, not twenty yards
from where the observation car came down."

Helen turned the hat around in amused bewilderment.

"But, my dear child," she exclaimed, "this is nothing but an ordinary
hat! People who travel in Zeppelins don't wear things like that. How
do you do, Mr. Somerfield?" she added, smiling at the young man who had
followed Nora into the room.

"Don't they!" the latter retorted, with an air of superior knowledge.
"Just look here!"

She turned down the lining and showed it to them. "What do you make of
that?" she asked triumphantly.

Helen gazed at the gold-printed letters a little incredulously.

"Read it out," Nora insisted.

Helen obeyed:

               "Schmidt,
                    Berlin,
                         Unter den Linden, 127."

"That sounds German," she admitted.

"It's a trophy, all right," Nora declared. "One of the crew--probably
the Commander--must have come on board in a hurry and changed into
uniform after they had started."

"It is my painful duty, Miss Nora," Harrison announced solemnly,
"to inform you, on behalf of Captain Griffiths, that all articles of
whatsoever description, found in the vicinity of Dutchman's Common,
which might possibly have belonged to any one in the Zeppelin, must be
sent at once to the War Office."

"Rubbish!" Nora scoffed. "The War Office aren't going to have my hat."

"Duty," the young man began--

"You can go back to the Depot and do your duty, then, Mr. Harrison,"
Nora interrupted, "but you're not going to have my hat. I'd throw it
into the fire sooner than give it up."

"Military regulations must be obeyed, Miss Nora," Captain Griffiths
ventured thoughtfully.

"Nothing so important as hats," Harrison put in. "You see they
fit--somebody."

The girl's gesture was irreverent but convincing. "I'd listen to
anything Captain Griffiths had to say," she declared, "but you boys who
are learning to be soldiers are simply eaten up with conceit. There's
nothing in your textbook about hats. If you're going to make yourselves
disagreeable about this, I shall simply ignore the regiment."

The two young men fell into attitudes of mock dismay. Nora took a
chocolate from a box.

"Be merciful, Miss Nora!" Harrison pleaded tearfully.

"Don't break the regiment up altogether," Somerfield begged, with a
little catch in his voice.

"All very well for you two to be funny," Nora went on, revisiting the
chocolate box, "but you've heard about the Seaforths coming, haven't
you? I adore kilts, and so does Helen; don't you, Helen?"

"Every woman does," Helen admitted, smiling. "I suppose the child really
can keep the hat, can't she?" she added, turning to the Commandant.

"Officially the matter is outside my cognizance," he declared. "I shall
have nothing to say."

The two young men exchanged glances.

"A hat," Somerfield ruminated, "especially a Homburg hat, is scarcely an
appurtenance of warfare."

His brother officer stood for a moment looking gravely at the object in
question. Then he winked at Somerfield and sighed.

"I shall take the whole responsibility," he decided magnanimously, "of
saying nothing about the matter. We can't afford to quarrel with Miss
Nora, can we, Somerfield?"

"Not on your life," that young man agreed.

"Sensible boys!" Nora pronounced graciously.

"Thank you very much, Captain Griffiths, for not encouraging them in
their folly. You can take me as far as the post-office when you go,
Arthur," she continued, turning to the fortunate possessor of the
side-car, "and we'll have some golf to-morrow afternoon, if you like."

"Won't Mr. Somerfield have some tea?" Helen invited.

"Thank you very much, Miss Fairclough," the man replied; "we had tea
some time ago at Watson's, where I found Miss Nora."

Nora suddenly held up her finger. "Isn't that the car?" she asked. "Why,
it must be mummy, here already. Yes, I can hear her voice!"

Griffiths, who had moved eagerly towards the window, looked back.

"It is Lady Cranston," he announced solemnly.



CHAPTER II


The woman who paused for a moment upon the threshold of the library,
looking in upon the little company, was undeniably beautiful. She
had masses of red-gold hair, a little disordered by her long railway
journey, deep-set hazel eyes, a delicate, almost porcelain-like
complexion, and a sensitive, delightfully shaped mouth. Her figure
was small and dainty, and just at that moment she had an appearance of
helplessness which was almost childlike. Nora, after a vigorous embrace,
led her stepmother towards a chair.

"Come and sit by the fire, Mummy," she begged. "You look tired and
cold."

Philippa exchanged a general salutation with her guests. She was still
wearing her travelling coat, and her air of fatigue was unmistakable.
Griffiths, who had not taken his eyes off her since her entrance,
wheeled an easy-chair towards the hearth-rug, into which she sank with a
murmured word of thanks.

"You'll have some tea, won't you, dear?" Helen enquired.

Philippa shook her head. Her eyes met her friend's for a moment--it was
only a very brief glance, but the tragedy of some mutual sorrow seemed
curiously revealed in that unspoken question and answer. The two young
subalterns prepared to take their leave. Nora, kneeling down, stroked
her stepmother's hand.

"No news at all, then?" Helen faltered.

"None," was the weary reply.

"Any amount of news here, Mummy," Nora intervened cheerfully, "and heaps
of excitement. We had a Zeppelin over Dutchman's Common last night,
and she lost her observation car. Mr. Somerfield took me up there this
afternoon, and I found a German hat. No one else got a thing, and, would
you believe it, those children over there tried to take it away from
me."

Her stepmother smiled faintly.

"I expect you are keeping the hat, dear," she observed.

"I should say so!" Nora assented.

Philippa held out her hand to the two young men who had been waiting to
take their leave.

"You must come and dine one night this week, both of you," she said. "My
husband will be home by the later train this evening, and I'm sure he
will be glad to have you."

"Very kind of you, Lady Cranston, we shall be delighted," Harrison
declared.

"Rather!" his companion echoed.

Nora led them away, and Helen, with a word of excuse, followed them.
Griffiths, who had also risen to his feet, came a little nearer to
Philippa's chair.

"And you, too, of course, Captain Griffiths," she said, smiling
pleasantly up at him. "Must you hurry away?"

"I will stay, if I may, until Miss Fairclough returns," he answered,
resuming his seat.

"Do!" Philippa begged him. "I have had such a miserable time in town.
You can't think how restful it is to be back here."

"I am afraid," he observed, "that your journey has not been successful."

Philippa shook her head.

"It has been completely unsuccessful," she sighed. "I have not been able
to hear a word about my brother. I am so sorry for poor Helen, too. They
were only engaged, you know, a few days before he left for the front
this last time."

Captain Griffiths nodded sympathetically.

"I never met Major Felstead," he remarked, "but every one who has
seems to like him very much. He was doing so well, too, up to that last
unfortunate affair, wasn't he?"

"Dick is a dear," Philippa declared. "I never knew any one with so many
friends. He would have been commanding his battalion now, if only he
were free. His colonel wrote and told me so himself."

"I wish there were something I could do," Griffiths murmured, a little
awkwardly. "It hurts me, Lady Cranston, to see you so upset."

She looked at him for a moment in faint surprise.

"Nobody can do anything," she bemoaned. "That is the unfortunate part of
it all."

He rose to his feet and was immediately conscious, as he always was when
he stood up, that there was a foot or two of his figure which he had no
idea what to do with.

"You wouldn't feel like a ride to-morrow morning, Lady Cranston?" he
asked, with a wistfulness which seemed somehow stifled in his rather
unpleasant voice. She shook her head.

"Perhaps one morning later," she replied, a little vaguely. "I haven't
any heart for anything just now."

He took a sombre but agitated leave of his hostess, and went out into
the twilight, cursing his lack of ease, remembering the things which
he had meant to say, and hating himself for having forgotten them.
Philippa, to whom his departure had been, as it always was, a relief,
was already leaning forward in her chair with her arm around Helen's
neck.

"I thought that extraordinary man would never go," she exclaimed, "and
I was longing to send for you, Helen. London has been such a dreary
chapter of disappointments."

"What a sickening time you must have had, dear!"

"It was horrid," Philippa assented sadly, "but you know Henry is no use
at all, and I should have felt miserable unless I had gone. I have been
to every friend at the War Office, and every friend who has friends
there. I have made every sort of enquiry, and I know just as much now
as I did when I left here--that Richard was a prisoner at Wittenberg
the last time they heard, and that they have received no notification
whatever concerning him for the last two months."

Helen glanced at the calendar.

"It is just two months to-day," she said mournfully, "since we heard."

"And then," Philippa sighed, "he hadn't received a single one of our
parcels."

Helen rose suddenly to her feet. She was a tall, fair girl of the best
Saxon type, slim but not in the least angular, with every promise,
indeed, of a fuller and more gracious development in the years to come.
She was barely twenty-two years old, and, as is common with girls of her
complexion, seemed younger. Her bright, intelligent face was, above
all, good-humoured. Just at that moment, however, there was a flush of
passionate anger in her cheeks.

"It makes me feel almost beside myself," she exclaimed, "this hideous
incapacity for doing anything! Here we are living in luxury, without a
single privation, whilst Dick, the dearest thing on earth to both of us,
is being starved and goaded to death in a foul German prison!"

"We mustn't believe that it's quite so bad as that, dear," Philippa
remonstrated. "What is it, Mills?"

The elderly man-servant who had entered with a tray in his band, bowed
as he arranged it upon a side table.

"I have taken the liberty of bringing in a little fresh tea, your
ladyship," he announced, "and some hot buttered toast. Cook has sent
some of the sandwiches, too, which your ladyship generally fancies."

"It is very kind of you, Mills," Philippa said, with rather a wan little
smile. "I had some tea at South Lynn, but it was very bad. You might
take my coat, please."

She stood up, and the heavy fur coat slipped easily away from her slim,
elegant little body.

"Shall I light up, your ladyship?" Mills enquired.

"You might light a lamp," Philippa directed, "but don't draw the blinds
until lighting-up time. After the noise of London," she went on,
turning to Helen, "I always think that the faint sound of the sea is so
restful."

The man moved noiselessly about the room and returned once more to his
mistress.

"We should be glad to hear, your ladyship," he said, "if there is any
news of Major Felstead?" Philippa shook her head.

"None at all, I am sorry to say, Mills! Still, we must hope for the
best. I dare say that some of these camps are not so bad as we imagine."

"We must hope not, your ladyship," was the somewhat dismal reply. "Shall
I fasten the windows?"

"You can leave them until you draw the blinds, Mills," Philippa
directed. "I am not at home, if any one should call. See that we are
undisturbed for a little time."

"Very good, your ladyship."

The door was closed, and the two women were once more alone. Philippa
held out her arms.

"Helen, darling, come and be nice to me," she begged. "Let us both
pretend that no news is good news. Oh, I know what you are suffering,
but remember that even if Dick is your lover, he is my dear, only
brother--my twin brother, too. We have been so much to each other all
our lives. He'll stick it out, dear, if any human being can. We shall
have him back with us some day."

"But he is hungry," Helen sobbed. "I can't bear to think of his being
hungry. Every time I sit down to eat, it almost chokes me."

"I suppose he has forgotten what a whisky and soda is like," Philippa
murmured, with a little catch in her own throat.

"He always used to love one about this time," Helen faltered, glancing
at the clock.

"And cigarettes!" Philippa exclaimed. "I wonder whether they give him
anything to smoke."

"Nasty German tobacco, if they do," Helen rejoined indignantly. "And
to think that I have sent him at least six hundred of his favourite
Egyptians!"

She fell once more on her knees by her friend's side. Their arms were
intertwined, their cheeks touching. One of those strange, feminine
silences of acute sympathy seemed to hold them for a while under its
thrall. Then, almost at the same moment, a queer awakening came for both
of them. Helen's arm was stiffened. Philippa turned her head, but her
eyes were filled with incredulous fear. A little current of cool air was
blowing through the room. The French windows stood half open, and with
his back to them, a man who had apparently entered the room from the
gardens and passed noiselessly across the soft carpet, was standing
by the door, listening. They heard him turn the key. Then, in a
businesslike manner, he returned to the windows and closed them, the
eyes of the two women following him all the time. Satisfied, apparently,
with his precautions, he turned towards them just as an expression of
indignant enquiry broke from Philippa's lips. Helen sprang to her feet,
and Philippa gripped the sides of her chair. The newcomer advanced a few
steps nearer to them.



CHAPTER III


It seemed to the two women, brief though the period of actual silence
was, that in those few seconds they jointly conceived definite and
lasting impressions of the man who was to become, during the next few
weeks, an object of the deepest concern to both of them. The intruder
was slightly built, of little more than medium height, of dark
complexion, with an almost imperceptible moustache of military pattern,
black hair dishevelled with the wind, and eyes of almost peculiar
brightness. He carried himself with an assurance which was somewhat
remarkable considering the condition of his torn and mud stained
clothes, the very quality of which was almost undistinguishable. They
both, curiously enough, formed the same instinctive conviction that,
notwithstanding his tramplike appearance and his burglarious entrance,
this was not a person to be greatly feared.

The stranger brushed aside Philippa's incoherent exclamation and opened
the conversation with some ceremony.

"Ladies," he began, with a low bow, "in the first place let me offer
my most profound apologies for this unusual form of entrance to your
house."

Philippa rose from her easy-chair and confronted him. The firelight
played upon her red-gold hair, and surprise had driven the weariness
from her face. Against the black oak of the chimneypiece she had almost
the appearance of a framed cameo. Her voice was quite steady, although
its inflection betrayed some indignation.

"Will you kindly explain who you are and what you mean by this
extraordinary behaviour?" she demanded.

"It is my earnest intention to do so without delay," he assured her, his
eyes apparently rivetted upon Philippa. "Kindly pardon me."

He held out his arm to stop Helen, who, with her eye upon the bell, had
made a stealthy attempt to slip past him. Her eyes flashed as she felt
his fingers upon her arm.

"How dare you attempt to stop me!" she exclaimed.

"My dear Miss Fairclough," he remonstrated, "in the interests of all
of us, it is better that we should have a few moments of undisturbed
conversation. I am taking it for granted that I have the pleasure of
addressing Miss Fairclough?"

There was something about the man's easy confidence which was, in its
way, impressive yet irritating. Helen appeared bereft of words and
retreated to her place almost mildly. Philippa's very delicate eyebrows
were drawn together in a slight frown.

"You are acquainted with our names, then?"

"Perfectly," was the suave reply. "You, I presume, are Lady Cranston? I
may be permitted to add," he went on, looking at her steadfastly, "that
the description from which I recognise you does you less than justice."

"I find that remark, under the circumstances, impertinent," Philippa
told him coldly.

He shrugged his shoulders. There was a slight smile upon his lips and
his eyes twinkled.

"Alas!" he murmured, "for the moment I forgot the somewhat unusual
circumstances of our meeting. Permit me to offer you what I trust you
will accept as the equivalent of a letter of introduction."

"A letter of introduction," Philippa repeated, glancing at his
disordered clothes, "and you come in through the window!"

"Believe me," the intruder assured her, "it was the only way."

"Perhaps you will tell me, then," Philippa demanded, her anger gradually
giving way to bewilderment, "what is wrong with my front door?"

"For all I know, dear lady," the newcomer confessed, "yours may be
an excellent front door. I would ask you, however, to consider my
appearance. I have been obliged to conclude the last few miles of my
journey in somewhat ignominious fashion. My clothes--they were quite
nice clothes, too, when I started," he added, looking down at himself
ruefully--"have suffered. And, as you perceive, I have lost my hat."

"Your hat?" Helen exclaimed, with a sudden glance at Nora's trophy.

"Precisely! I might have posed before your butler, perhaps, as belonging
to what you call the hatless brigade, but the mud upon my clothes,
and these unfortunate rents in my garments, would have necessitated an
explanation which I thought better avoided. I make myself quite clear, I
trust?"

"Clear?" Philippa murmured helplessly.

"Clear?" Helen echoed, with a puzzled frown.

"I mean, of course," their visitor explained, "so far as regards my
choosing this somewhat surreptitious form of entrance into your house."

Philippa shrugged her shoulders and made a determined move towards the
bell. The intruder, however, barred her way. She looked up into his
face and found it difficult to maintain her indignation. His expression,
besides being distinctly pleasant, was full of a respectful admiration.

"Will you please let me pass?" she insisted.

"Madam," he replied, "I am afraid that it is your intention to ring the
bell."

"Of course it is," she admitted. "Don't dare to prevent me."

"Madam, I do not wish to prevent you," he assured her. "A few moments'
delay--that is all I plead for."

"Will you explain at once, sir," Philippa demanded, "what you mean by
forcing your way into my house in this extraordinary fashion, and by
locking that door?"

"I am most anxious to do so," was the prompt reply. "I am correct, of
course, in my first surmise that you are Lady Cranston--and you Miss
Fairclough?" he added, bowing ceremoniously to both of them. "A very
great pleasure! I recognised you both quite easily, you see, from your
descriptions."

"From our descriptions?" Philippa repeated.

The newcomer bowed.

"The descriptions, glowing, indeed, but by no means exaggerated, of your
brother Richard, Lady Cranston, and your fiance, Miss Fairclough."

"Richard?" Philippa almost shrieked.

"You have seen Dick?" Helen gasped.

The intruder dived in his pockets and produced two sealed envelopes. He
handed one each simultaneously to Helen and to Philippa.

"My letters of introduction," he explained, with a little sigh of
relief. "I trust that during their perusal you will invite me to have
some tea. I am almost starving."

The two women hastened towards the lamp.

"One moment, I beg," their visitor interposed. "I have established, I
trust, my credentials. May I remind you that I was compelled to ensure
the safety of these few minutes' conversation with you, by locking that
door. Are you likely to be disturbed?"

"No, no! No chance at all," Philippa assured him.

"If we are, we'll explain," Helen promised.

"In that case," the intruder begged, "perhaps you will excuse me."

He moved towards the door and softly turned the key, then he drew the
curtains carefully across the French windows. Afterwards he made his way
towards the tea-table. A little throbbing cry had broken from Helen's
lips.

"Philippa," she exclaimed, "it's from Dick! It's Dick's handwriting!"

Philippa's reply was incoherent. She was tearing open her own envelope.
With a well-satisfied smile, the bearer of these communications seized a
sandwich in one hand and poured himself out some tea with the other. He
ate and drank with the restraint of good-breeding, but with a voracity
which gave point to his plea of starvation. A few yards away, the
breathless silence between the two women had given place to an almost
hysterical series of disjointed exclamations.

"It's from Dick!" Helen repeated. "It's his own dear handwriting. How
shaky it is! He's alive and well, Philippa, and he's found a friend."

"I know--I know," Philippa murmured tremulously. "Our parcels have been
discovered, and he got them all at once. Just fancy, Helen, he's really
not so ill, after all!"

They drew a little closer together.

"You read yours out first," Helen proposed, "and then I'll read mine."

Philippa nodded. Her voice here and there was a little uncertain.

  MY DEAREST SISTER,

  I have heard nothing from you or Helen for so long that I was
  really getting desperate.  I have had a very rough time here,
  but by the grace of Providence I stumbled up against an old
  friend the other day, Bertram Maderstrom, whom you must have
  heard me speak of in my college days.  It isn't too much to say
  that he has saved my life.  He has unearthed your parcels, found
  me decent quarters, and I am getting double rations.  He has
  promised, too, to get this letter through to you.

  You needn't worry about me now, dear.  I am feeling twice the
  man I was a month ago, and I shall stick it out now quite easily.

  Write me as often as ever you can.  Your letters and Helen's make
  all the difference.

  My love to you and to Henry.
                                 Your affectionate brother, RICHARD.

  P.S.  Is Henry an Admiral yet?  I suppose he was in the Jutland
  scrap, which they all tell us here was a great German victory.  I
  hope he came out all right.

Philippa read the postscript with a little shiver. Then she set her
teeth as though determined to ignore it.

"Isn't it wonderful!" she exclaimed, turning towards Helen with glowing
eyes. "Now yours, dear?"

Helen's voice trembled as she read. Her eyes, too, at times were misty:

  DEAREST,

  I am writing to you so differently because I feel that you will
  really get this letter.  I have bad an astonishing stroke of luck,
  as you will gather from Philippa's note.  You can't imagine the
  difference.  A month ago I really thought I should have to chuck
  it in.  Now I am putting on flesh every day and beginning to feel
  myself again.  I owe my life to a pal with whom I was at college,
  and whom you and I, dearest, will have to remember all our lives.

  I think of you always, and my thoughts are like the flowers of
  which we see nothing in these hideous huts.  My greatest joy is
  in dreaming of the day when we shall meet again.

  Write to me often, sweetheart.  Your letters and my thoughts of
  you are the one joy of my life.

                                               Always your lover,
                                                       DICK.

There were a few moments of significant silence. The girls were leaning
together, their arms around one another's necks, their heads almost
touching. Behind them, their visitor continued to eat and drink. He rose
at last, however, reluctantly to his feet, and coughed. They started,
suddenly remembering his presence. Philippa turned impulsively towards
him with outstretched hands.

"I can't tell you how thankful we are to you," she declared.

"Both of us," Helen echoed.

He touched with his fingers a box of cigarettes which stood upon the
tea-table.

"You permit?" he asked.

"Of course," Philippa assented eagerly. "You will find some matches on
the tray there. Do please help yourself. I am afraid that I must have
seemed very discourteous, but this has all been so amazing. Won't you
have some fresh tea and some toast, or wouldn't you like some more
sandwiches?"

"Nothing more at present, thank you," he replied. "If you do not mind, I
would rather continue our conversation."

"These letters are wonderful," Philippa told him gratefully. "You know
from whom they come, of course. Dick is my twin brother, and until the
war we had scarcely ever been parted. Miss Fairclough here is engaged
to be married to him. It is quite two months since we had a line, and
I myself have been in London for the last three days, three very weary
days, making enquiries everywhere."

"I am very happy," he said, "to have brought you such good news."

Once more the normal aspect of the situation began to reimpose itself
upon the two women. They remembered the locked door, the secrecy of
their visitor's entrance, and his disordered condition.

"May I ask to whom we are indebted for this great service?" Philippa
enquired.

"My name for the present is Hamar Lessingham," was the suave reply.

"For the present?" Philippa repeated. "You have perhaps, some
explanations to make," she went on, with some hesitation; "the condition
of your clothes, your somewhat curious form of entrance?"

"With your permission."

"One moment," Helen intervened eagerly. "Is it possible, Mr. Lessingham,
that you have seen Major Felstead lately?"

"A matter of fifty-six hours ago, Miss Fairclough. I am happy to tell
you that he was looking, under the circumstances, quite reasonably
well."

Helen caught up a photograph from the table by her side, and came over
to their visitor's side.

"This was taken just before he went out the first time," she continued.
"Is he anything like that now?"

Mr. Hamar Lessingham sighed and shook his head.

"You must expect," he warned her, "that prison and hospital have had
their effect upon him. He was gaining strength every day, however, when
I left."

Philippa held out her hand. She had been looking curiously at their
visitor.

"Helen, dear, afterwards we will get Mr. Lessingham to talk to us about
Dick," she insisted. "First there are some questions which I must ask."

He bowed slightly and drew himself up. For a moment it seemed as though
they were entering upon a duel--the slight, beautiful woman and the man
in rags.

"Just now," she began, "you told us that you saw Major Felstead, my
brother, fifty-six hours ago."

"That is so," he assented.

"But it is impossible!" she pointed out. "My brother is a prisoner of
war in Germany."

"Precisely," he replied, "and not, I am afraid, under the happiest
conditions, he has been unfortunate in his camp. Let us talk about him,
shall we?"

"Are you mad," Helen demanded, "or are you trying to confuse us?"

"My dear young lady!" he protested. "Why suppose such a thing? I was
flattering myself that my conversation and deportment were, under the
circumstances, perfectly rational."

"But you are talking nonsense," Philippa insisted. "You say that you saw
Major Felstead fifty-six hours ago. You cannot mean us to believe that
fifty-six hours ago you were at Wittenberg."

"That is precisely what I have been trying to tell you," he agreed.

"But it isn't possible!" Helen gasped.

"Quite, I assure you," he continued; "in fact, we should have been
here before but for a little uncertainty as to your armaments along the
coast. There was a gun, we were told, somewhere near here, which we were
credibly informed had once been fired without the slightest accident."

Philippa's eyes seemed to grow larger and rounder.

"He's raving!" she decided.

"He isn't!" Helen cried, with sudden divination. "Is that your hat?" she
asked, pointing to the table where Nora had left her trophy.

"It is," he admitted with a smile, "but I do not think that I will claim
it."

"You were in the observation car of that Zeppelin!"

Lessingham extended his hand.

"Softly, please," he begged. "You have, I gather, arrived at the
truth, but for the moment shall it be our secret? I made an exceedingly
uncomfortable, not to say undignified descent from the Zeppelin which
passed over Dutchman's Common last night."

"Then," Philippa cried, "you are a German!"

"My dear lady, I have escaped that misfortune," Lessingham confessed.
"Do you think that none other than Germans ride in Zeppelins?"



CHAPTER IV


A new tenseness seemed to have crept into the situation. The
conversation, never without its emotional tendencies, at once changed
its character. Philippa, cold and reserved, with a threat lurking all
the time in her tone and manner, became its guiding spirit.

"We may enquire your name?" she asked.

"I am the Baron Maderstrom," was the prompt reply. "For the purpose of
my brief residence in this country, however, I fancy that the name of
Mr. Hamar Lessingham might provoke less comment."

"Maderstrom," Philippa repeated. "You were at Magdalen with my brother."

"For three terms," he assented.

"You have visited at Wood Norton. It was only an accident, then, that I
did not meet you."

"It is true," he answered, with a bow. "I received the most charming
hospitality there from your father and mother."

"Why, you are the friend," Helen exclaimed, suddenly seizing his hands,
"of whom Dick speaks in his letter!"

"It has been my great privilege to have been of service to Major
Felstead," was the grave admission. "He and I, during our college days,
were more than ordinarily intimate. I saw his name in one of the lists
of prisoners, and I went at once to Wittenberg."

A fresh flood of questions was upon Helen's lips, but Philippa brushed
her away.

"Please let me speak," she said. "You have brought us these letters from
Richard, for which we offer you our heartfelt thanks, but you did
not risk your liberty, perhaps your life, to come here simply as
his ambassador. There is something beyond this in your visit to this
country. You may be a Swede, but is it not true that at the present
moment you are in the service of an enemy?"

Lessingham bowed acquiescence.

"You are entirely right," he murmured.

"Am I also right in concluding that you have some service to ask of us?"

"Your directness, dear lady, moves me to admiration," Lessingham assured
her. "I am here to ask a trifling favour in return for those which I
have rendered and those which I may yet render to your brother."

"And that favour?"

Their visitor looked down at his torn attire.

"A suit of your brother's clothes," he replied, "and a room in which
to change. The disposal of these rags I may leave, I presume, to your
ingenuity."

"Anything else?"

"It is my wish," he continued, "to remain in this neighbourhood for a
short time--perhaps a fortnight and perhaps a month. I should value your
introduction to the hotel here, and the extension of such hospitality as
may seem fitting to you, under the circumstances."

"As Mr. Hamar Lessingham?"

"Beyond a doubt."

There was a moment's silence. Philippa's face had become almost stony.
She took a step towards the telephone. Lessingham, however, held out his
hand.

"Your purpose?" he enquired.

"I am going to ring up the Commandant here," she told him, "and explain
your presence in this house."

"An heroic impulse," he observed, "but too impulsive."

"We shall see," she retorted. "Will you let me pass?"

His fingers restrained her as gently as possible.

"Let me make a reasonable appeal to both of you," he suggested. "I am
here at your mercy. I promise you that under no circumstances will I
attempt any measure of violence. From any fear of that, I trust my name
and my friendship with your brother will be sufficient guarantee."

"Continue, then," Philippa assented.

"You will give me ten minutes in which to state my case," he begged.

"We must!" Helen exclaimed. "We must, Philippa! Please!"

"You shall have your ten minutes," Philippa conceded.

He abandoned his attitude of watchfulness and moved back on to the
hearth-rug, his hands behind him. He addressed himself to Philippa. It
was Philippa who had become his judge.

"I will claim nothing from you," he began, "for the services which I
have rendered to Richard. Our friendship was a real thing, and, finding
him in such straits, I would gladly, under any circumstances, have done
all that I have done. I am well paid for this by the thanks which you
have already proffered me."

"No thanks--nothing that we could do for you would be sufficient
recompense," Helen declared energetically.

"Let me speak for a moment of the future," he continued. "Supposing you
ring that telephone and hand me over to the authorities here? Well, that
will be the end of me, without a doubt. You will have done what seemed
to you to be the right thing, and I hope that that consciousness will
sustain you, for, believe me, though it may not be at my will, your
brother's life will most certainly answer for mine."

There was a slight pause. A sob broke from Helen's throat. Even
Philippa's lip quivered.

"Forgive me," he went on, "if that sounds like a threat. It was not so
meant. It is the simple truth. Let me hurry on to the future. I ask so
little of you. It is my duty to live in this spot for one month. What
harm can I do? You have no great concentration of soldiers here, no
docks, no fortifications, no industry. And in return for the slight
service of allowing me to remain here unmolested, I pledge my word that
Richard shall be set at liberty and shall be here with you within two
months."

Helen's face was transformed, her eyes glowed, her lips were parted
with eagerness. She turned towards Philippa, her expression, her whole
attitude an epitome of eloquent pleading.

"Philippa, you will not hesitate? You cannot?"

"I must," Philippa answered, struggling with her agitation. "I love Dick
more dearly than anything else on earth, but just now, Helen, we have to
remember, before everything, that we are English women. We have to
put our human feelings behind us. We are learning every day to make
sacrifices. You, too, must learn, dear. My answer to you, Baron
Maderstrom--or Mr. Lessingham, as you choose to call yourself--is no."

"Philippa, you are mad!" Helen exclaimed passionately. "Didn't I have to
realise all that you say when I let Dick go, cheerfully, the day
after we were engaged? Haven't I realised the duty of cheerfulness and
sacrifice through all these weary months? But there is a limit to
these things, Philippa, a sense of proportion which must be taken
into account. It's Dick's life which is in the balance against some
intangible thing, nothing that we could ever reproach ourselves with,
nothing that could bring real harm upon any one. Oh, I love my country,
too, but I want Dick! I should feel like his murderess all my life, if I
didn't consent!"

"It occurs to me," Lessingham remarked, turning towards Philippa, "that
Miss Fairclough's point of view is one to be considered."

"Doesn't all that Miss Fairclough has said apply to me?" Philippa
demanded, with a little break in her voice. "Richard is my twin brother,
he is the dearest thing in life to me. Can't you realise, though, that
what you ask of us is treason?"

"It really doesn't amount to that," Lessingham assured her. "In my own
heart I feel convinced that I have come here on a fool's errand. No
object that I could possibly attain in this neighbourhood is worth the
life of a man like Richard Felstead."

"Oh, he's right!" Helen exclaimed. "Think, Philippa! What is there here
which the whole world might not know? There are no secrets in Dreymarsh.
We are miles away from everywhere. For my sake, Philippa, I implore you
not to be unreasonable."

"In plain words," Lessingham intervened, "do not be quixotic, Lady
Cranston. There is just an idea on one side, your brother's life on the
other. You see, the scales do not balance."

"Can't you realise, though," Philippa answered, "what that idea
means? It is part of one's soul that one gives when one departs from a
principle."

"What are principles against love?" Helen demanded, almost fiercely. "A
sister may prate about them, Philippa. A wife couldn't. I'd sacrifice
every principle I ever had, every scrap of self-respect, myself and all
that belongs to me, to save Dick's life!"

There was a brief, throbbing silence. Helen was feverishly clutching
Philippa's hand. Lessingham's eyes were fixed upon the tortured face
into which he gazed. There were no women like this in his own country.

"Dear lady," he said, and for the first time his own voice shook, "I
abandon my arguments. I beg you to act as you think best for your own
future happiness. The chances of life or death are not great things for
either men like your brother or for me. I would not purchase my end, nor
he his life, at the expense of your suffering. You see, I stand on one
side. The telephone is there for your use."

"You shan't use it!" Helen cried passionately. "Phillipa, you shan't!"

Philippa turned towards her, and all the stubborn pride had gone out of
her face. Her great eyes were misty with tears, her mouth was twitching
with emotion. She threw her arms around Helen's neck.

"My dear, I can't! I can't!" she sobbed.



CHAPTER V


Philippa's breakdown was only momentary. With a few brusque words
she brought the other two down to the level of her newly recovered
equanimity.

"To be practical," she began, "we have no time to lose. I will go
and get a suit of Dick's clothes, and, Helen, you had better take Mr.
Lessingham into the gun room. Afterwards, perhaps you will have time to
ring up the hotel."

Lessingham took a quick step towards her,--almost as though he were
about to make some impetuous withdrawal. Philippa turned and met
his almost pleading gaze. Perhaps she read there his instinct of
self-abnegation.

"I am in command of the situation," she continued, a little more
lightly. "Every one must please obey me. I shan't be more than five
minutes."

She left the room, waving back Lessingham's attempt to open the door for
her. He stood for a moment looking at the place where she had vanished.
Then he turned round.

"Major Felstead's description," he said quietly, "did not do his sister
justice."

"Philippa is a dear," Helen declared enthusiastically. "Just for a
moment, though, I was terrified. She has a wonderful will."

"How long has she been married?"

"About six years."

"Are there--any children?"

Helen shook her head.

"Sir Henry had a daughter by his first wife, who lives with us."

"Six years!" Lessingham repeated. "Why, she seems no more than a child.
Sir Henry must be a great deal her senior."

"Sixteen years," Helen told him. "Philippa is twenty-nine. And now,
don't be inquisitive any more, please, and come with me. I want to show
you where to change your clothes."

She opened a door on the other side of the room, and pointed to a small
apartment across the passage.

"If you'll wait in there," she begged, "I'll bring the clothes to you
directly they come. I am going to telephone now."

"So many thanks," he answered. "I should like a pleasant bedroom and
sitting room, and a bathroom if possible. My luggage you will find
already there. A friend in London has seen to that."

She looked at him curiously.

"You are very thorough, aren't you?" she remarked.

"The people of the country whom it is my destiny to serve all are," he
replied. "One weak link, you know, may sometimes spoil the mightiest
chain."

She closed the door and took up the telephone.

"Number three, please," she began. "Are you the hotel? The manager?
Good! I am speaking for Lady Cranston. She wishes a sitting-room,
bedroom and bath-room reserved for a friend of ours who is arriving
to-day--a Mr. Hamar Lessingham. You have his luggage already, I believe.
Please do the best you can for him.--Certainly.--Thank you very much."

She set down the receiver. The door was quickly opened and shut.
Philippa reappeared, carrying an armful of clothes.

"Why, you've brought his grey suit," Helen cried in dismay, "the one he
looks so well in!"

"Don't be an idiot," Philippa scoffed. "I had to bring the first I could
find. Take them in to Mr. Lessingham, and for heaven's sake see that he
hurries! Henry's train is due, and he may be here at any moment."

"I'll tell him," Helen promised. "I'll smuggle him out of the back way,
if you like."

Philippa laughed a little drearily.

"A nice start that would be, if any one ever traced his arrival!" she
observed. "No, we must try and get him away before Henry comes, but, if
the worst comes to the worst, we'll have him in and introduce him. Henry
isn't likely to notice anything," she added, a little bitterly.

Helen disappeared with the clothes and returned almost immediately,
Philippa was sitting in her old position by the fire.

"You're not worrying about this, dear, are you?" the former asked
anxiously.

"I don't know," Philippa replied, without turning her head. "I don't
know what may come of it, Helen. I have a queer sort of feeling about
that man."

Helen sighed. "I suppose," she confessed, "I am the narrowest person on
earth. I can think of one thing, and one thing only. If Mr. Lessingham
keeps his word, Dick will be here perhaps in a month, perhaps six
weeks--certainly soon!"

"He will keep his word," Philippa said quietly. "He is that sort of
man."

The door on the other side of the room was softly opened. Lessingham's
head appeared.

"Could I have a necktie?" he asked diffidently. Philippa stretched out
her hand and took one from the basket by her side.

"Better give him this," she said, handing it over to Helen. "It is one
of Henry's which I was mending.--Stop!"

She put up her finger. They all listened.

"The car!" Philippa exclaimed, rising hastily to her feet. "That is
Henry! Go out with Mr. Lessingham, Helen," she continued, "and wait
until he is ready. Don't forget that he is an ordinary caller, and bring
him in presently."

Helen nodded understandingly and hurried out.

Philippa moved a few steps towards the other door. In a moment it was
thrown open. Nora appeared, with her arm through her father's.

"I went to meet him, Mummy," she explained. "No uniform--isn't it a
shame!"

Sir Henry patted her cheek and turned to greet his wife. There was
a shadow upon his bronzed, handsome face as he watched her rather
hesitating approach.

"Sorry I couldn't catch your train, Phil," he told her. "I had to make a
call in the city so I came down from Liverpool Street. Any luck?"

She held his hands, resisting for the moment his proffered embrace.

"Henry," she said earnestly, "do you know I am so much more anxious to
hear your news."

"Mine will keep," he replied. "What about Richard?"

She shook her head.

"I spent the whole of my time making enquiries," she sighed, "and every
one was fruitless. I failed to get the least satisfaction from any one
at the War Office. They know nothing, have heard nothing."

"I'm ever so sorry to hear it," Sir Henry declared sympathetically. "You
mustn't worry too much, though, dear. Where's Helen?"

"She is in the gun room with a caller."

"With a caller?" Nora exclaimed. "Is it any one from the Depot? I must
go and see."

"You needn't trouble," her stepmother replied. "Here they are, coming
in."

The door on the opposite side of the room was suddenly opened, and Hamar
Lessingham and Helen entered together. Lessingham was entirely at his
ease,--their conversation, indeed, seemed almost engrossing. He came at
once across the room on realising Sir Henry's presence.

"This is Mr. Hamar Lessingham--my husband," Philippa said. "Mr.
Lessingham was at college with Dick, Henry, so of course Helen and he
have been indulging in all sorts of reminiscences."

The two men shook hands.

"I found time also to examine your Leech prints," Lessingham remarked.
"You have some very admirable examples."

"Quite a hobby of mine in my younger days," Sir Henry admitted. "One
or two of them are very good, I believe. Are you staying in these parts
long, Mr. Lessingham?"

"Perhaps for a week or two," was the somewhat indifferent reply. "I am
told that this is the most wonderful air in the world, so I have come
down here to pull up again after a slight illness."

"A dreary spot just now," Sir Henry observed, "but the air's all right.
Are you a sea-fisherman, by any chance, Mr. Lessingham?"

"I have done a little of it," the visitor confessed. Sir Henry's face
lit up. He drew from his pocket a small, brown paper parcel.

"I don't mind telling you," he confided as he cut the string, "that I
don't think there's another sport like it in the world. I have tried
most of them, too. When I was a boy I was all for shooting, perhaps
because I could never get enough. Then I had a season or two at Melton,
though I was never much of a horseman. But for real, unadulterated
excitement, for sport that licks everything else into a cocked hat, give
me a strong sea rod, a couple of traces, just enough sea to keep on the
bottom all the time, and the codling biting. Look here, did you ever see
a mackerel spinner like that?" he added, drawing one out of the parcel
which he had untied. "Look at it, all of you."

Lessingham took it gingerly in his fingers. Philippa, a little
ostentatiously, turned her back upon the two men and took up a
newspaper.

"Lady Cranston does not sympathize with my interest in any sort of sport
just now," Sir Henry explained good-humouredly. "All the same I argue
that one must keep one's mind occupied somehow or other."

"Quite right, Dad!" Nora agreed. "We must carry on, as the Colonel says.
All the same, I did hope you'd come down in a new naval uniform, with
lots of gold braid on your sleeve. I think they might have made you an
admiral, Daddy, you'd look so nice on the bridge."

"I am afraid," her father replied, with his eyes glued upon the spinner
which Lessingham was holding, "that that is a consideration which didn't
seem to weigh with them much. Look at the glitter of it," he went on,
taking up another of the spinners. "You see, it's got a double swivel,
and they guarantee six hundred revolutions a minute."

"I must plead ignorance," Lessingham regretted, "of everything connected
with mackerel spinning."

"It's fine sport for a change," Sir Henry declared. "The only thing is
that if you strike a shoal one gets tired of hauling the beggars in.
By-the-by, has Jimmy been up for me, Philippa? Have you heard whether
there are any mackerel in?"

Philippa raised her eyebrows.

"Mackerel!" she repeated sarcastically.

"Have you any objection to the fish, dear?" Sir Henry enquired blandly.

Philippa made no reply. Her husband frowned and turned towards
Lessingham.

"You see," he complained a little irritably, "my wife doesn't approve of
my taking an interest even in fishing while the war's on, but, hang it
all, what are you to do when you reach my age? Thinks I ought to be a
special constable, don't you, Philippa?"

"Need we discuss this before Mr. Lessingham?" she asked, without looking
up from her paper.

Lessingham promptly prepared to take his departure.

"See something more of you, I hope," Sir Henry remarked hospitably, as
he conducted his guest to the door. "Where are you staying here?"

"At the hotel."

"Which?"

"I did not understand that there was more than one," Lessingham replied.
"I simply wrote to The Hotel, Dreymarsh."

"There is only one hotel open, of course, Mr. Lessingham," Philippa
observed, turning towards him. "Why do you ask such an absurd question,
Henry? The 'Grand' is full of soldiers. Come and see us whenever you
feel inclined, Mr. Lessingham."

"I shall certainly take advantage of your permission, Lady Cranston,"
were the farewell words of this unusual visitor as he bowed himself out.

Sir Henry moved to the sideboard and helped himself to a whisky and
soda. Philippa laid down her newspaper and watched him as though waiting
patiently for his return. Helen and Nora had already obeyed the summons
of the dressing bell.

"Henry, I want to hear your news," she insisted. He threw himself into
an easy-chair and turned over the contents of Philippa's workbasket.

"Where's that tie of mine you were mending?" he asked. "Is it finished
yet?"

"It is upstairs somewhere," she replied. "No, I have not finished it.
Why do you ask? You have plenty, haven't you?"

"Drawers full," he admitted cheerfully. "Half of them I can never wear,
though. I like that black and white fellow. Your friend Lessingham was
wearing one exactly like it."

"It isn't exactly an uncommon pattern," Philippa reminded him.

"Seems to have the family taste in clothes," Sir Henry continued,
stroking his chin. "That grey tweed suit of his was exactly the same
pattern as the suit Richard was wearing, the last time I saw him in
mufti."

"They probably go to the same tailor," Philippa remarked equably.

Sir Henry abandoned the subject. He was once more engrossed in an
examination of the mackerel spinners.

"You didn't answer my question about Jimmy Dumble," he ventured
presently.

Philippa turned and looked at him. Her eyes were usually very sweet and
soft and her mouth delightful. Just at that moment, however, there were
new and very firm lines in her face.

"Henry," she said sternly, "you are purposely fencing with me. Mr.
Lessingham's taste in clothes, or Jimmy Dumble's comings and goings, are
not what I want to hear or talk about. You went to London, unwillingly
enough, to keep your promise to me. I want to know whether you have
succeeded in getting anything from the Admiralty?"

"Nothing but the cold shoulder, my dear," he answered with a little
chuckle.

"Do you mean to say that they offered you nothing at all?" she
persisted. "You may have been out of the service too long for them to
start you with a modern ship, but surely they could have given you an
auxiliary cruiser, or a secondary command of some sort?"

"They didn't even offer me a washtub, dear," he confessed. "My name's on
a list, they said--"

"Oh, that list!" Philippa interrupted angrily. "Henry, I really can't
bear it. Couldn't they find you anything on land?"

"My dear girl," he replied a little testily, "what sort of a figure
should I cut in an office! No one can read my writing, and I couldn't
add up a column of figures to save my life. What is it?" he added, as
the door opened, and Mills made his appearance.

"Dumble is here to see you, sir."

"Show him in at once," his master directed with alacrity. "Come in,
Jimmy," he went on, raising his voice. "I've got something to show you
here."

Philippa's lips were drawn a little closer together. She swept past her
husband on her way to the door.

"I hope you will be so good," she said, looking back, "as to spare me
half an hour of your valuable time this evening. This is a subject which
I must discuss with you further at once."

"As urgent as all that, eh?" Sir Henry replied, stopping to light a
cigarette. "Righto! You can have the whole of my evening, dear, with the
greatest of pleasure.--Now then, Jimmy!"



CHAPTER VI


Jimmy Dumble possessed a very red face and an extraordinary capacity for
silence. He stood a yard or two inside the room, twirling his hat in
his hand. Sir Henry, after the closing of the door, did not for a moment
address his visitor. There was a subtle but unmistakable change in his
appearance as he stood with his hands in his pockets, and a frown on
his forehead, whistling softly to himself, his eyes fixed upon the door
through which his wife had vanished. He swung round at last towards the
telephone.

"Stand by for a moment, Jimmy, will you?" he directed.

"Aye, aye, sir!"

Sir Henry took up the receiver. He dropped his voice a little, although
it was none the less distinct.

"Number one--police-station, please.--Hullo there! The inspector
about?--That you, Inspector?--Sir Henry Cranston speaking. Could you
just step round?--Good! Tell them to show you straight into the library.
You might just drop a hint to Mills about the lights, eh? Thank you."

He laid down the receiver and turned towards the fisherman.

"Well, Jimmy," he enquired, "all serene down in the village, eh?"

"So far as I've seen or heard, sir, there ain't been a word spoke as
shouldn't be."

"A lazy lot they are," Sir Henry observed.

"They don't look far beyond the end of their noses."

"Maybe it's as well for us, sir, as they don't," was the cautious reply.

Sir Henry strolled to the further end of the room.

"Perhaps you are right, Jimmy," he admitted.

"That fellow Ben Oates seems to be the only one with ideas."

"He don't keep sober long enough to give us any trouble," Dumble
declared. "He began asking me questions a few days ago, and I know he
put Grice's lad on to find out which way we went last Saturday week,
but that don't amount to anything. He was dead drunk for three days
afterwards."

Sir Henry nodded.

"I'm not very frightened of Ben Oates, Jimmy," he confided, as he threw
open the door of a large cabinet which stood against the further wall.
"No strangers about, eh?"

"Not a sign of one, sir."

Sir Henry glanced towards the door and listened.

"Shall I just give the key a turn, sir?" his visitor asked.

"I don't think it is necessary," Sir Henry replied. "They've all gone up
to change. Now listen to me, Jimmy."

He leaned forward and touched a spring. The false back of the cabinet,
with its little array of flies, spinners, fishing hooks and tackle,
slowly rolled back. Before them stood a huge chart, wonderfully executed
in red, white and yellow.

"That's a marvellous piece of work, sir," the fisherman observed
admiringly.

"Best thing I ever did in my life," Sir Henry agreed. "Now see here,
Jimmy. We'll sail out tomorrow, or take the motor boat, according to the
wind. We'll enter Langley Shallows there and pass Dead Man's Rock on the
left side of the waterway, and keep straight on until we get Budden Wood
on the church tower. You follow me?"

"Aye, aye, sir!"

"We make for the headland from there. You see, we shall be outside the
Gidney Shallows, and number twelve will pick us up. Put all the fishing
tackle in the boat, and don't forget the bait. We must never lose sight
of the fact, Jimmy, that the main object of our lives is to catch fish."

"That's right, sir," was the hearty assent.

"We'll be off at seven o'clock sharp, then," Sir Henry decided.

"The tide'll be on the flow by that time," Jimmy observed, "and we'll
get off from the staith breakwater. That do be a fine piece of work and
no mistake," he added, as the false back of the cabinet glided slowly to
its place.

Sir Henry chuckled.

"It's nothing to the one I've got on number twelve, Jimmy," he said.
"I've got the seaweed on that, pretty well. You'll take a drop of whisky
on your way out?" he added. "Mills will look after you."

"I thank you kindly, sir."

Mills answered the bell with some concern in his face.

"The inspector is here to see you, sir," he announced. "He did mention
something about the lights. I'm sure we've all been most careful. Even
her ladyship has only used a candle in her bedroom."

"Show the inspector in," Sir Henry directed, "and I'll hear what he has
to say. And give Dumble some whisky as he goes out, and a cigar."

"Wishing you good night, sir," the latter said, as he followed Mills.
"I'll be punctual in the morning. Looks to me as though we might have
good sport."

"We'll hope for it, anyway, Jimmy," his employer replied cheerfully.
"Come in, Inspector."

The inspector, a tall, broad-shouldered man, saluted and stood at
attention. Sir Henry nodded affably and glanced towards the door. He
remained silent until Mills and Dumble had disappeared.

"Glad I happened to catch you, Inspector," he observed, sitting on the
edge of the table and helping himself to another cigarette. "Any fresh
arrivals?"

"None, sir," the man reported, "of any consequence that I can see. There
are two more young officers for the Depot, and the young lady for the
Grange, and Mr. and Mrs. Silvester returned home last night. There was
a commercial traveller came in the first train this morning, but he went
on during the afternoon."

"Hm! What about a Mr. Lessingham--a Mr. Hamar Lessingham?"

"I haven't heard of him, sir."

"Have you had the registration papers down from the hotel yet?"

"Not this evening, sir. I met the Midland and Great Northern train in
myself. Her ladyship was the only passenger to alight here."

"And I came the other way myself," Sir Henry reflected.

"Now you come to mention the matter, sir," the inspector continued,
"I was up at the hotel this afternoon, and I saw some luggage about
addressed to a name somewhat similar to that."

"Probably sent on in advance, eh?"

"There could be no other way, sir," the inspector replied, "unless the
registration paper has been mislaid. I'll step up to the hotel this
evening and make sure."

"You'll oblige me very much, if you will. By Jove," Sir Henry added,
looking towards the door, "I'd no idea it was so late!"

Philippa, who had changed her travelling dress for a plain black net
gown, was standing in the doorway. She looked at the inspector, and for
a moment the little colour which she had seemed to disappear.

"Is anything the matter?" she asked breathlessly.

"Nothing in the world, my dear," her husband assured her. "I am
frightfully sorry I'm so late. Jimmy stayed some time, and then the
inspector here looked in about our lights. Just a little more care in
this room at night, he thinks. We'll see to it, Inspector."

"I am very much obliged, sir," the man replied. "Sorry to be under the
necessity of mentioning it."

Sir Henry opened the door.

"You'll find your own way out, won't you?" he begged. "I'm a little
late."

The inspector saluted and withdrew. Sir Henry glanced round.

"I won't be ten minutes, Philippa," he promised. "I had no idea it was
so late."

"Come here one moment, please," she insisted.

He came back into the room and stood on the other side of the small
table near which she had paused.

"What is it, dear?" he enquired. "We are going to leave our talk till
after dinner, aren't we?"

She looked him in the face. There was an anxious light in her eyes, and
she was certainly not herself. "Of course! I only wanted to know--it
seemed to me that you broke off in what you were saying to the
inspector, as I came into the room. Are you sure that it was the lights
he came around about? There isn't anything else wrong, is there?"

"What else could there be?" he asked wonderingly.

"I have no idea," she replied, with well-simulated indifference. "I was
only asking you whether there was anything else?"

He shook his head.

"Nothing!"

She threw herself into an easy-chair and picked up a magazine.

"Thank you," she said. "Do hurry, please. I have a new cook and she
asked particularly whether we were punctual people."

"Six minutes will see me through it," Sir Henry promised, making for the
door. "Come to think of it, I missed my lunch. I think I'll manage it in
five."



CHAPTER VII


Sir Henry was in a pleasant and expansive humour that evening. The new
cook was an unqualified success, and he was conscious of having dined
exceedingly well. He sat in a comfortable easy-chair before a blazing
wood fire, he had just lit one of his favourite brand of cigarettes, and
his wife, whom he adored, was seated only a few feet away.

"Quite a remarkable change in Helen," he observed. "She was in the
depths of depression when I went away, and to-night she seems positively
cheerful."

"Helen varies a great deal," Philippa reminded him.

"Still, to-night, I must say, I should have expected to have found her
more depressed than ever," Sir Henry went on. "She hoped so much from
your trip to London, and you apparently accomplished nothing."

"Nothing at all."

"And you have had no letters?"

"None."

"Then Helen's high spirits, I suppose, are only part of woman's natural
inconsistency.--Philippa, dear!"

"Yes?"

"I am glad to be at home. I am glad to see you sitting there. I know you
are nursing up something, some little thunderbolt to launch at me. Won't
you launch it and let's get it over?"

Philippa laid down the book which she had been reading, and turned to
face her husband. He made a little grimace.

"Don't look so severe," he begged. "You frighten me before you begin."

"I'm sorry," she said, "but my face probably reflects my feelings. I am
hurt and grieved and disappointed in you, Henry."

"That's a good start, anyway," he groaned.

"We have been married six years," Philippa went on, "and I admit at once
that I have been very happy. Then the war came. You know quite well,
Henry, that especially at that time I was very, very fond of you, yet
it never occurred to me for a moment but that, like every other woman, I
should have to lose my husband for a time.--Stop, please," she insisted,
as he showed signs of interrupting. "I know quite well that it was
through my persuasions you retired so early, but in those days there was
no thought of war, and I always had it in my mind that if trouble came
you would find your way back to where you belonged."

"But, my dear child, that is all very well," Sir Henry protested, "but
it's not so easy to get back again. You know very well that I went up to
the Admiralty and offered my services, directly the war started."

"Yes, and what happened?" Philippa demanded. "You were, in a measure,
shelved. You were put on a list and told that you would hear from
them--a sort of Micawber-like situation with which you were perfectly
satisfied. Then you took that moor up in Scotland and disappeared for
nearly six months."

"I was supplying the starving population with food," he reminded her
genially. "We sent about four hundred brace of grouse to market, not to
speak of the salmon. We had some very fair golf, too, some of the time."

"Oh, I have not troubled to keep any exact account of your diversions!"
Philippa said scornfully. "Sometimes," she continued, "I wonder whether
you are quite responsible, Henry. How you can even talk of these things
when every man of your age and strength is fighting one way or another
for his country, seems marvellous to me. Do you realise that we are
fighting for our very existence? Do you realise that my own father, who
is fifteen years older than you, is in the firing line? This is a small
place, of course, but there isn't a man left in it of your age, with
your physique, who has had the slightest experience in either service,
who isn't doing something."

"I can't do more than send in applications," he grumbled. "Be
reasonable, my dear Philippa. It isn't the easiest thing in the world to
find a job for a sailor who has been out of it as long as I have."

"So you say, but when they ask me what you are doing, as they all did
in London this time, and I reply that you can't get a job, there is
generally a polite little silence. No one believes it. I don't believe
it."

"Philippa!"

Sir Henry turned in his chair. His cigar was burning now idly between
his fingers. His heavy eyebrows were drawn together.

"Well, I don't," she reiterated. "You can be angry, if you will--in
fact I think I should prefer you to be angry. You take no pains at
the Admiralty. You just go there and come away again, once a year or
something like that. Why, if I were you, I wouldn't leave the place
until they'd found me something--indoors or outdoors, what does it
matter so long as your hand is on the wheel and you are doing your
little for your country? But you--what do you care? You went to town
to get a job--and you come back with new mackerel spinners! You are off
fishing to-morrow morning with Jimmy Dumble. Somewhere up in the North
Sea, to-day and to-morrow and the next day, men are giving their lives
for their country. What do you care? You will sit there smoking your
pipe and catching dabs!"

"Do you know you are almost offensive, Philippa?" her husband said
quietly.

"I want to be," she retorted. "I should like you to feel that I am. In
any case, this will probably be the last conversation I shall hold with
you on the subject."

"Well, thank God for that, anyway!" he observed, strolling to the
chimneypiece and selecting a pipe from a rack. "I think you've said
about enough."

"I haven't finished," she told him ominously.

"Then for heaven's sake get on with it and let's have it over," he
begged.

"Oh, you're impossible!" Philippa exclaimed bitterly. "Listen. I give
you one chance more. Tell me the truth? Is there anything in your
health of which I do not know? Is there any possible explanation of your
extraordinary behaviour which, for some reason or other, you have kept
to yourself? Give me your whole confidence."

Sir Henry, for a moment, was serious enough. He stood looking down at
her a little wistfully.

"My dear," he told her, "I have nothing to say except this. You are my
very precious wife. I have loved you and trusted you since the day of
our marriage. I am content to go on loving and trusting you, even though
things should come under my notice which I do not understand. Can't you
accept me the same way?"

Philippa, momentarily uneasy, was nevertheless rebellious.

"Accept you the same way? How can I! There is nothing in my life to
compare in any way with the tragedy of your--"

She paused, as though unwilling to finish the sentence. He waited
patiently, however, for her to proceed.

"Of my what?"

Philippa compromised.

"Lethargy," she pronounced triumphantly.

"An excellent word," he murmured.

"It is too mild a one, but you are my husband," she remarked.

"That reminds me," he said quietly. "You are my wife."

"I know it," she admitted, "but I am also a woman, and there are limits
to my endurance. If you can give me no explanation of your behaviour,
Henry, if you really have no intention of changing it, then there is
only one course left open for me."

"That sounds rather alarming--what is it?" he demanded.

Philippa lifted her head a little. This was the pronouncement towards
which she had been leading.

"From to-day," she declared, "I cease to be your wife."

His fingers paused in the manipulation of the tobacco with which he was
filling his pipe. He turned and looked at her.

"You what?"

"I cease to be your wife."

"How do you manage that?" he asked.

"Don't jest," she begged. "It hurts me so. What I mean is surely plain
enough. I will continue to live under your roof if you wish it, or I
am perfectly willing to go back to Wood Norton. I will continue to bear
your name because I must, but the other ties between us are finished."

"You don't mean this, Philippa," he said gravely.

"But I do mean it," she insisted. "I mean every word I have spoken. So
far as I am concerned, Henry, this is your last chance."

There was a knock at the door. Mills entered with a note upon a salver.
Sir Henry took it up, glanced questioningly at his wife, and tore open
the envelope.

"There will be no answer, Mills," he said.

The man withdrew. Sir Henry read the few lines thoughtfully:--

                                       Police-station, Dreymarsh
  SIR,

  According to enquiries made I find that Mr. Hamar Lessingham
  arrived at the Hotel this evening in time for dinner.  His
  luggage arrived by rail yesterday.  It is presumed that he came
  by motor-car, but there is no car in the garage, nor any mention
  of one.  His room was taken for him by Miss Fairclough, ringing
  up for Lady Cranston about seven o'clock.

                                           Respectfully yours,
                                              JOHN HAYLOCK.

"Is your note of interest?" Philippa enquired.

"In a sense, yes," he replied, thrusting it into his waistcoat pocket.
"I presume we can consider our late subject of conversation finished
with?"

"I have nothing more to say," she pronounced.

"Very well, then," her husband agreed, "let us select another topic.
This time, supposing I choose?"

"You are welcome."

"Let us converse, then, about Mr. Hamar Lessingham."

Philippa had taken up her work. Her fingers ceased their labours, but
she did not look up.

"About Mr. Hamar Lessingham," she repeated. "Rather a limited subject, I
am afraid."

"I am not so sure," he said thoughtfully. "For instance, who is he?"

"I have no idea," she replied. "Does it matter? He was at college with
Richard, and he has been a visitor at Wood Norton. That is all that
we know. Surely it is sufficient for us to offer him any reasonable
hospitality?"

"I am not disputing it," Sir Henry assured her. "On the face of it, it
seems perfectly reasonable that you should be civil to him. On the other
hand, there are one or two rather curious points about his coming here
just now."

"Really?" Philippa murmured indifferently, bending a little lower over
her work.

"In the first place," her husband continued, "how did he arrive here?"

"For all I know," she replied, "he may have walked."

"A little unlikely. Still, he didn't come from London by either of the
evening trains, and it seems that you didn't take his rooms for him
until about seven o'clock, before which time he hadn't been to the
hotel. So, you see, one is driven to wonder how the mischief he did get
here."

"I took his rooms?" Philippa repeated, with a sudden little catch at her
heart.

"Some one from here rang up, didn't they?" Sir Henry went on carelessly.
"I gathered that we were introducing him at the hotel."

"Where did you hear that?" she demanded.

He shrugged his shoulders, but avoided answering the question.

"I have no doubt," he continued, "that the whole subject of Mr. Hamar
Lessingham is scarcely worth discussing. Yet he does seem to have
arrived here under a little halo of coincidence."

"I am afraid I have scarcely appreciated that," Philippa remarked; "in
fact, his coming here has seemed to me the most ordinary thing in the
world. After all, although one scarcely remembers that since the war,
this is a health resort, and the man has been ill."

"Quite right," Sir Henry agreed. "You are not going to bed, dear?"

Philippa had folded up her work. She stood for a moment upon the
hearth-rug. The little hardness which had tightened her mouth had
disappeared, her eyes had softened.

"May I say just one word more," she begged, "about our previous--our
only serious subject of conversation? I have tried my best since we were
married, Henry, to make you happy."

"You know quite well," he assured her, "that you have succeeded."

"Grant me one favour, then," she pleaded. "Give up your fishing
expedition to-morrow, go back to London by the first train and let me
write to Lord Rayton. I am sure he would do something for you."

"Of course he'd do something!" Her husband groaned. "I should get a
censorship in Ireland, or a post as instructor at Portsmouth."

"Wouldn't you rather take either of those than nothing?" she asked,
"than go on living the life you are living now?"

"To be perfectly frank with you, Philippa, I wouldn't," he declared
bluntly. "What on earth use should I be in a land appointment? Why, no
one could read my writing, and my nautical science is entirely out of
date. Why a cadet at Osborne could floor me in no time."

"You refuse to let me write, then?" she persisted.

"Absolutely."

"You intend to go on that fishing expedition with Jimmy Dumble
to-morrow?"

"Wouldn't miss it for anything," he confessed.

Philippa was suddenly white with anger.

"Henry, I've finished," she declared, holding out her hand to keep
him away from her. "I've finished with you entirely. I would rather be
married to an enemy who was fighting honourably for his country than to
you. What I have said, I mean. Don't come near me. Don't try to touch
me."

She swept past him on her way to the door.

"Not even a good-night kiss?" he asked, stooping down.

She looked him in the eyes.

"I am not a child," she said scornfully.

He closed the door after her. For a moment he remained as though
undecided whether to follow or not. His face had softened with her
absence. Finally, however, he turned away with a little shrug of
the shoulders, threw himself into his easy-chair and began to smoke
furiously.

The telephone bell disturbed his reflection. He rose at once and took up
the receiver.

"Yes, this is 19, Dreymarsh. Trunk call? All right, I am here."

He waited until another voice came to him faintly.

"Cranston?"

"Speaking."

"That's right. The message is Odino Berry, you understand? O-d-i-n-o
b-e-r-r-y."

"I've got it," Sir Henry replied. "Good night!" He hung up the receiver,
crossed the room to his desk, unlocked one of the drawers, and produced
a black memorandum book, secured with a brass lock. He drew a key from
his watch chain, opened the book, and ran his fingers down the O's.

"Odino," he muttered to himself. "Here it is: 'We have trustworthy
information from Berlin.' Now Berry." He turned back. "'You are being
watched by an enemy secret service agent.'"

He relocked the cipher book and replaced it in the desk. Then he
strolled over to his easy-chair and helped himself to a whisky and soda
from the tray which Mills had just arranged upon the sideboard.

"We have trustworthy information from Berlin," he repeated to himself,
"that you are being watched by an enemy secret service agent."



CHAPTER VIII


"Tell me, Mr. Lessingham," Philippa insisted, "exactly what are you
thinking of? You looked so dark and mysterious from the ridge below that
I've climbed up on purpose to ask you."

Lessingham held out his hand to steady her. They were standing on
a sharp spur of the cliffs, the north wind blowing in their faces,
thrashing into little flecks of white foam the sea below, on which the
twilight was already resting. For a moment or two neither of them could
speak.

"I was thinking of my country," he confessed. "I was looking through the
shadows there, right across the North Sea."

"To Germany?"

He shook his head.

"Further away--to Sweden."

"I forgot," she murmured. "You looked as though you were posing for a
statue of some one in exile," she observed. "Come, let us go a little
lower down--unless you want to stay here and be blown to pieces."

"I was on my way back to the hotel," he answered quickly, as he followed
her lead, "but to tell you the truth I was feeling a little lonely."

"That," she declared, "is your own fault. I asked you to come to
Mainsail Haul whenever you felt inclined."

"As I have felt inclined ever since the evening I arrived," he remarked
with a smile, "you might, perhaps, by this time have had a little too
much of me."

"On the contrary," she told him, "I quite expected you yesterday
afternoon, to tell me how you like the place and what you have been
doing. So you were thinking about--over there?" she added, moving her
head seawards.

"Over there absorbs a great deal of one's thoughts," he confessed, "and
the rest of them have been playing me queer tricks."

"Well, I should like to hear about the first half," she insisted.

"Do you know," he replied, "there are times when even now this war seems
to me like an unreal thing, like something I have been reading about,
some wild imagining of Shelley or one of the unrestrainable poets. I
can't believe that millions of the flower of Germany's manhood and
yours have perished helplessly, hopelessly, cruelly. And France--poor
decimated France!"

"Well, Germany started the war, you know," she reminded him.

"Did she?" he answered. "I sometimes wonder. Even now I fancy, if the
official papers of every one of the nations lay side by side, with their
own case stated from their own point of view, even you might feel a
little confused about that. Still, I am going to be very honest with
you. I think myself that Germany wanted war."

"There you are, then," she declared triumphantly. "The whole thing is
her responsibility."

"I do not quite go so far as that," he protested. "You see, the world is
governed by great natural laws. As a snowball grows larger with rolling,
so it takes up more room. As a child grows out of its infant clothes, it
needs the vestments of a youth and then a man. And so with Germany. She
grew and grew until the country could not hold her children, until her
banks could not contain her money, until she stretched her arms out on
every side and felt herself stifled. Germany came late into the world
and found it parcelled out, but had she not a right to her place? She
made herself great. She needed space."

"Well," Philippa observed, "you couldn't suppose that other nations
were going to give up what they had, just because she wanted their
possessions, could you?"

"Perhaps not," he admitted. "And yet, you see, the immutable law comes
in here. The stronger must possess--not only the stronger by arms,
mind, but by intellect, by learning, by proficiency in science, by
utilitarianism. The really cruel part, the part I was thinking of then,
as I looked out across the sea, is that this crude and miserable resort
to arms should be necessary."

"If only Germans themselves were as broad-minded and reasonable as
you," Philippa sighed, "one feels that there might be some hope for the
future!"

"I am not alone," he assured her, "but, you see, all over Germany there
is spread like a spider's web the lay religion of the citizen--devotion
to the Government, blind obedience to the Kaiser. Independent thought
has made Germany great in science, in political economy, in economics.
But independent thought is never turned towards her political destinies.
Those are shaped for her. For good or for evil her children have learnt
obedience."

They were descending the hillside now. At their feet lay the little
town, black and silent.

"You have helped me to understand a little," Philippa said. "You put
things so gently and yet so clearly. Now tell me, will you not, how it
is that you, who are a Swede by birth, are bearing arms for Germany?"

"That is very simple," he confessed. "My mother was a German, and when
she died she bequeathed to me large estates in Bavaria, and a very
considerable fortune. These I could never have inherited unless I
had chosen to do my military service in Germany. My family is an
impoverished one, and I have brothers and sisters dependent upon me.
Under the circumstances, hesitation on my part was impossible."

"But when the war came?" she queried.

He looked at her in surprise.

"What was there left for me then?" he demanded. "Naturally I heard
nothing but the voice of those whom I had sworn to obey. I was in that
mad rush through Belgium. I was wounded at Maubeuge, or else I should
have followed hard on the heels of that wonderful retreat of yours.
As it was, I lay for many months in hospital. I joined again--shall I
confess it?--almost unwillingly. The bloodthirstiness of it all sickened
me. I fought at Ypres, but I think that it was something of the courage
of despair, of black misery. I was wounded again and decorated. I
suppose I shall never be fit for the front again. I tried to turn to
account some of my knowledge of England and English life. Then they sent
me here."

"Here, of all places in the world!" Philippa repeated wonderingly.
"Just look at us! We have a single line of railway, a perfectly
straightforward system of roads, the ordinary number of soldiers being
trained, no mysteries, no industries--nothing. What terrible scheme are
you at work upon, Mr. Lessingham?"

He smiled.

"Between you and me," he confided, "I am not at all sure that I am not
here on a fool's errand--at least I thought so when I arrived."

She glanced up at him.

"And why not now?"

He made no answer, but their eyes met and Philippa looked hurriedly
away. There was a moment's queer, strained silence. Before them loomed
up the outline of Mainsail Haul.

"You will come in and have some tea, won't you?" she invited.

"If I may. Believe me," he added, "it has only been a certain diffidence
that has kept me away so long."

She made no reply, and they entered the house together. They found Helen
and Nora, with three or four young men from the Depot, having tea in the
drawing-room. Lessingham slipped very easily into the pleasant little
circle. If a trifle subdued, his quiet manners, and a sense of humour
which every now and then displayed itself, were most attractive.

"Wish you'd come and dine with us and meet our colonel, sir," Harrison
asked him. "He was at Magdalen a few years after Major Felstead, and I
am sure you'd find plenty to talk about."

"I am quite sure that we should," Lessingham replied. "May I come,
perhaps, towards the end of next week? I am making most strenuous
efforts to lead an absolutely quiet life here."

"Whenever you like, sir. We sha'n't be able to show you anything very
wild in the way of dissipation. Vintage port and a decent cigar are the
only changes we can make for guests."

Philippa drew her visitor on one side presently, and made him sit with
her in a distant corner of the room.

"I knew there was something I wanted to say to you," she began, "but
somehow or other I forgot when I met you. My husband was very much
struck with Helen's improved spirits. Don't you think that we had better
tell him, when he returns, that we had heard from Major Felstead?"

Lessingham agreed.

"Just let him think that your letters came by post in the ordinary way,"
he advised. "I shouldn't imagine, from what I have seen of your husband,
that he is a suspicious person, but it is just possible that he might
have associated them with me if you had mentioned them the other night.
When is he coming back?"

"I never know," Philippa answered with a sigh. "Perhaps to-night,
perhaps in a week. It depends upon what sport he is having. You are not
smoking."

Lessingham lit a cigarette.

"I find your husband," he said quietly, "rather an interesting type. We
have no one like that in Germany. He almost puzzles me."

Philippa glanced up to find her companion's dark eyes fixed upon her.

"There is very little about Henry that need puzzle any one," she
complained bitterly. "He is just an overgrown, spoilt child, devoted to
amusements, and following his fancy wherever it leads him. Why do
you look at me, Mr. Lessingham, as though you thought I was keeping
something back? I am not, I can assure you."

"Perhaps I was wondering," he confessed, "how you really felt towards a
husband whose outlook was so unnatural."

She looked down at her intertwined fingers.

"Do you know," she said softly, "I feel, somehow or other, although we
have known one another such a short time, as though we were friends,
and yet that is a question which I could not answer. A woman must always
have some secrets, you know."

"A man may try sometimes to preserve his," he sighed, "but a woman is
clever enough, as a rule, to dig them out."

A faint tinge of colour stole into her cheeks. She welcomed Helen's
approach almost eagerly.

"A woman must first feel the will," she murmured, without glancing at
him. "Helen, do you think we dare ask Mr. Lessingham to come and dine?"

"Please do not discourage such a delightful suggestion," Lessingham
begged eagerly.

"I haven't the least idea of doing so," Helen laughed, "so long as I may
have--say just ten minutes to talk about Dick."

"It is a bargain," he promised.

"We shall be quite alone," Philippa warned him, "unless Henry arrives."

"It is the great attraction of your invitation," he confessed.

"At eight o'clock, then."



CHAPTER IX


"Captain Griffiths to see your ladyship."

Philippa's fingers rested for a moment upon the keyboard of the piano
before which she was seated, awaiting Lessingham's arrival. Then she
glanced at the clock. It was ten minutes to eight.

"You can show him in, Mills, if he wishes to see me."

Captain Griffiths was ushered into the room--awkward, unwieldly, nervous
as usual. He entered as though in a hurry, and there was nothing in his
manner to denote that he had spent the last few hours making up his mind
to this visit.

"I must apologise for this most untimely call, Lady Cranston," he said,
watching the closing of the door. "I will not take up more than five
minutes of your time."

"We are very pleased to see you at any time, Captain Griffiths,"
Philippa said hospitably. "Do sit down, please."

Captain Griffiths bowed but remained standing.

"It is very near your dinner-time, I know, Lady Cranston," he continued
apologetically. "The fact of it is, however, that as Commandant here
it is my duty to examine the bona fides of any strangers in the place.
There is a gentleman named Lessingham staying at the hotel, who I
understand gave your name as reference."

Philippa's eyes looked larger than ever, and her face more innocent, as
she gazed up at her visitor.

"Why, of course, Captain Griffiths," she said. "Mr. Lessingham was at
college with my brother, and one of his best friends. He has shot down
at my father's place in Cheshire."

"You are speaking of your brother, Major Felstead?"

"My only brother."

"I am very much obliged to you, Lady Cranston," Captain Griffiths
declared. "I can see that we need not worry any more about Mr.
Lessingham."

Philippa laughed.

"It seems rather old-fashioned to think of you having to worry about
any one down here," she observed. "It really is a very harmless
neighbourhood, isn't it?"

"There isn't much going on, certainly," the Commandant admitted. "Very
dull the place seems at times."

"Now be perfectly frank," Philippa begged him. "Is there a single fact
of importance which could be learnt in this place, worth communicating
to the enemy? Is the danger of espionage here worth a moment's
consideration?"

"That," Captain Griffiths replied in somewhat stilted fashion, "is not a
question which I should be prepared to answer off-hand."

Philippa shrugged her shoulders and appealed almost feverishly to Helen,
who had just entered the room.

"Helen, do come and listen to Captain Griffiths! He is making me feel
quite creepy. There are secrets about, it seems, and he wants to know
all about Mr. Lessingham."

Helen smiled with complete self-possession.

"Well, we can set his mind at rest about Mr. Lessingham, can't we?" she
observed, as she shook hands.

"We can do more," Philippa declared. "We can help him to judge for
himself. We are expecting Mr. Lessingham for dinner, Captain Griffiths.
Do stay."

"I couldn't think of taking you by storm like this," Captain Griffiths
replied, with a wistfulness which only made his voice sound hoarser and
more unpleasant. "It is most kind of you, Lady Cranston. Perhaps you
will give me another opportunity."

"I sha'n't think of it," Philippa insisted. "You must stay and dine
to-night. We shall be a partie carrie, for Nora goes to bed directly
after dinner. I am ringing the bell to tell Mills to set an extra
place," she added.

Captain Griffiths abandoned himself to fate with a little shiver of
complacency. He welcomed Lessingham, who was presently announced, with
very much less than his usual reserve, and the dinner was in every way
a success. Towards its close, Philippa became a little thoughtful.
She glanced more than once at Lessingham, who was sitting by her side,
almost in admiration. His conversation, gay at times, always polished,
was interlarded continually with those little social reminiscences
inevitable amongst men moving in a certain circle of English society.
Apparently Richard Felstead was not the only one of his college friends
with whom he had kept in touch. The last remnants of Captain Griffiths'
suspicions seemed to vanish with their second glass of port, although
his manner became in no way more genial.

"Don't you think you are almost a little too daring?" Philippa asked her
favoured guest as he helped her afterwards to set out a bridge table.

"One adapts one's methods to one's adversary," he murmured, with a
smile, "Your friend Captain Griffiths had only the very conventional
suspicions. The mention of a few good English names, acquaintance with
the ordinary English sports, is quite sufficient with a man like that."

Helen and Griffiths were talking at the other end of the room. Philippa
raised her eyes to her companion's.

"You become more of a mystery than ever," she declared. "You are making
me even curious. Tell me really why you have paid us this visit from the
clouds?"

She was sorry almost as soon as she had asked the question. For a moment
the calm insouciance of his manner seemed to have departed. His eyes
glowed.

"In search of new things," he answered.

"Guns? Fortifications?"

"Neither."

A spirit of mischief possessed her. Lessingham's manner was baffling
and yet provocative. For a moment the political possibilities of his
presence faded away from her mind. She had an intense desire to break
through his reserve.

"Won't you tell me--why you came?"

"I could tell you more easily," he answered in a low tone, "why it will
be the most miserable day of my life when I leave."

She laughed at him with perfect heartiness.

"How delightful to be flirted with again!" she sighed. "And I thought
all German men were so heavy, and paid elaborate, underdone compliments.
Still, your secret, sir, please? That is what I want to know."

"If you will have just a little patience!" he begged, leaning so close
to her that their heads almost touched, "I promise that I will not leave
this place before I tell it to you."

Philippa's eyes for the first time dropped before his. She knew
perfectly well what she ought to have done and she was singularly
indisposed to do it. It was a most piquant adventure, after all, and
it almost helped her to forget the trouble which had been sitting so
heavily in her heart. Still avoiding his eyes, she called the others.

"We are quite ready for bridge," she announced.

They played four or five rubbers. Lessingham was by far the most expert
player, and he and Philippa in the end were the winners. The two men
stood together for a moment or two at the sideboard, helping themselves
to whisky and soda. Griffiths had become more taciturn than ever, and
even Philippa was forced to admit that the latter part of the evening
had scarcely been a success.

"Do you play club bridge in town, Mr. Lessingham?" Griffiths asked.

"Never," was the calm reply.

"You are head and shoulders above our class down here."

"Very good of you to say so," Lessingham replied courteously. "I held
good cards to-night."

"I wonder," Griffiths went on, dropping his voice a little and keeping
his eyes fixed upon his companion, "what the German substitute for
bridge is."

"I wonder," Lessingham echoed.

"As a nation," his questioner proceeded, "they probably don't waste as
much time on cards as we do."

Lessingham's interest in the subject appeared to be non-existent. He
strolled away from the sideboard towards Philippa. She, for her part,
was watching Captain Griffiths.

"So many thanks, Lady Cranston," Lessingham murmured, "for your
hospitality."

"And what about that secret?" she asked.

"You see, there are two," he answered, looking down at her. "One I shall
most surely tell you before I leave here, because it is the one secret
which no man has ever succeeded in keeping to himself. As for the
other--"

He hesitated. There was something almost like pain in his face. She
broke in hastily.

"I did not call you away to ask about either. I happened to notice
Captain Griffiths just now. Do you know that he is watching you very
closely?"

"I had an idea of it," Lessingham admitted indifferently. "He is rather
a clumsy person, is he not?"

"You will be careful?" she begged earnestly. "Remember, won't you, that
Helen and I are really in a most disgraceful position if anything should
come out."

"Nothing shall," he promised her. "I think you know, do you not, that,
whatever might happen to me, I should find some means to protect you."

For the second time she felt a curious lack of will to fittingly reprove
his boldness. She had even to struggle to keep her tone as careless as
her words.

"You really are a delightful person!" she exclaimed. "How long is it
since you descended from the clouds?"

"Sometimes I think that I am there still," he answered, "but I have
known you about seventy-six hours."

"What precision?" she laughed. "It's a national characteristic, isn't
it? Captain Griffiths," she continued, as she observed his approach, "if
you really must go, please take Mr. Lessingham with you. He is making
fun of me. I don't allow even Dick's friends to do that."

Lessingham's disclaimer was in quite the correct vein.

"You must both come again very soon," their hostess concluded, as she
shook hands. "I enjoyed our bridge immensely."

The two men were already on their way to the door when a sudden idea
seemed to occur to Captain Griffiths. He turned back.

"By-the-by, Lady Cranston," he asked, "have you heard anything from your
brother?"

Philippa shook her head sadly. Helen, who, unlike her friend, had not
had the advantage of a distinguished career upon the amateur dramatic
stage, turned away and held a handkerchief to her eyes.

"Not a word," was Philippa's sorrowful reply.

Captain Griffiths offered a clumsy expression of his sympathy.

"Bad luck!" he said. "I'm so sorry, Lady Cranston. Good night once
more."

This time their departure was uninterrupted. Helen removed her
handkerchief from her eyes, and Philippa made a little grimace at the
closed door.

"Do you believe," Helen asked seriously, "that Captain Griffiths has any
suspicions?"

Philippa shrugged her shoulders.

"If he has, who cares?" she replied, a little defiantly. "The very idea
of a duel of wits between those two men is laughable."

"Perhaps so," Helen agreed, with a shade of doubt in her tone.



CHAPTER X


Philippa and Helen started, a few mornings later, for one of their
customary walks. The crystalline October sunshine, in which every
distant tree and, seaward, each slowly travelling steamer, seemed to
gain a new clearness of outline, lay upon the deep-ploughed fields, the
yellowing bracken, and the red-gold of the bending trees, while the west
wind, which had strewn the sea with white-flecked waves, brought down
the leaves to form a carpet for their feet, and played strange music
along the wood-crested slope. In the broken land through which they
made their way, a land of trees and moorland, with here and there a
cultivated patch, the yellow gorse still glowed in unexpected corners;
queer, scentless flowers made splashes of colour in the hedgerows; a
rabbit scurried sometimes across their path; a cock pheasant, after
a moment's amazed stare, lowered his head and rushed for unnecessary
shelter. The longer they looked upwards, the bluer seemed the sky. The
grass beneath their feet was as green and soft as in springtime. Driven
by the wind, here and there a white-winged gull sailed over their
heads,--a cloud of them rested upon a freshly turned little square of
ploughed land between two woods. A flight of pigeons, like torn leaves
tossed about by the wind, circled and drifted above them. Philippa
seated herself upon the trunk of a fallen tree and gazed contentedly
about her.

"If I had a looking-glass and a few more hairpins, I should be perfectly
happy," she sighed. "I am sure my hair must look awful."

Helen glanced at it admiringly.

"I decline to say the correct thing," she declared. "I will only remind
you that there will be no one here to look at it."

"I am not so sure," Philippa replied. "These are the woods which the
special constables haunt by day and by night. They gaze up every tree
trunk for a wireless installation, and they lie behind hedges and watch
for mysterious flashes."

"Are you suggesting that we may meet Mr. Lessingham?" Helen enquired,
lazily. "I am perfectly certain that he knows nothing of the equipment
of the melodramatic spy. As to Zeppelins, don't you remember he told us
that he hated them and was terrified of bombs."

"My dear," Philippa remonstrated, "Mr. Lessingham does nothing crude."

"And yet,--" Helen began.

"Yet I suppose the man has something at the back of his head," Philippa
interrupted. "Sometimes I think that he has, sometimes I believe that
Richard must have shown him my picture, and he has come over here to see
if I am really like it."

"He does behave rather like that," her companion admitted drily.

Phillipa turned and looked at her.

"Helen," she said severely, "don't be a cat."

"If I were to express my opinion of your behaviour," Helen went on,
picking up a pine cone and examining it, "I might astonish you."

"You have an evil mind," Philippa yawned, producing her cigarette case.
"What you really resent is that Mr. Lessingham sometimes forgets to talk
about Dick."

"The poor man doesn't get much chance," Helen retorted, watching the
blue smoke from her cigarette and leaning back with an air of content.
"Whatever do you and he find to talk about, Philippa?"

"Literature--English and German," Philippa murmured demurely. "Mr.
Lessingham is remarkably well read, and he knows more about our English
poets than any man I have met for years."

"I forgot that you enjoyed that sort of thing."

"Once more, don't be a cat," Philippa enjoined. "If you want me to
confess it, I will own up at once. You know what a simple little thing
I am. I admire Mr. Lessingham exceedingly, and I find him a most
interesting companion."

"You mean," her friend observed drily "the Baron Maderstrom." Philippa
looked around and frowned.

"You are most indiscreet, Helen," she declared. "I have learnt something
of the science of espionage lately, and I can assure you that all spoken
or written words are dangerous. There is a thoroughly British squirrel
in that tree overhead, and I am sure he heard."

"I suppose the sunshine has got into your head," Helen groaned.

"If you mean that I am finding it a relief to talk nonsense, you are
right," Philippa assented. "As a matter of fact, I am feeling most
depressed. Henry telephoned from somewhere or other before breakfast
this morning, to say that he should probably be home to-night or
to-morrow. They must have landed somewhere down the coast."

"You are a most undutiful wife," Helen pronounced severely. "I am sure
Henry is a delightful person, even if he is a little irresponsible, and
it is almost pathetic to remember how much you were in love with him, a
year or two ago."

Some of the lightness vanished from Philippa's face.

"That was before the war," she sighed.

"I still think Henry is a dear, though I don't altogether understand
him," Helen said thoughtfully.

"No doubt," Philippa assented, "but you'd find the not understanding him
a little more galling, if you were his wife. You see, I didn't know that
I was marrying a sort of sporting Mr. Skimpole."

"I wonder," Helen reflected, "how Henry and Mr. Lessingham will get on
when they see more of one another."

"I really don't care," Philippa observed indifferently.

"I used to notice sometimes--that was soon after you were married,"
Helen continued, "that Henry was just a little inclined to be jealous."

Philippa withdrew her eyes from the sea. There was a queer little smile
upon her lips.

"Well, if he still is," she said, "I'll give him something to be jealous
about."

"Poor Mr. Lessingham!" Helen murmured.

Philippa's eyebrows were raised.

"Poor Mr. Lessingham?" she repeated. "I don't think you'll find that
he'll be in the least sorry for himself."

"He may be in earnest," Helen reminded her friend. "You can be horribly
attractive when you like, you know, Philippa."

Philippa smiled sweetly.

"It is just possible," she said, "that I may be in earnest myself. I've
quarrelled pretty desperately with Henry, you know, and I'm a helpless
creature without a little admiration."

Helen rose suddenly to her feet. Her eyes were fixed upon a figure
approaching through the wood.

"You really aren't respectable, Philippa," she declared. "Throw away
your cigarette, for heaven's sake, and sit up. Some one is coming."

Philippa only moved her head lazily. The sunlight, which came down in
a thousand little zigzags through the wind-tossed trees, fell straight
upon her rather pale, defiant little face, with its unexpressed evasive
charm, and seemed to find a new depth of colour in the red-gold of her
disordered hair. Her slim, perfect body was stretched almost at full
length, one leg drawn a little up, her hands carelessly drooping towards
the grass. The cigarette was still burning in the corner of her lips.

"I decline," she said, "to throw away my cigarette for any one."

"Least of all, I trust," a familiar voice interposed, "for me."

Philippa sat upright at once, smoothed her hair and looked a little
resentfully at Lessingham. He was wearing a brown tweed knickerbocker
suit, and he carried a gun under his arm.

"Whatever are you doing up here," she demanded, "and do you know
anything about our game laws? You can't come out into the woods here and
shoot things just because you feel like it."

He disposed of his gun and seated himself between them.

"That is quite all right," he assured her. "Your neighbour, Mr.
Windover, to whom these woods apparently belong, asked me to bring my
gun out this morning and try and get a woodcock."

"Gracious! You don't mean that Mr. Windover is here, too?" Philippa
demanded, looking around. Lessingham shook his head.

"His car came for him at the other side of the wood," he explained. "He
was wanted to go on the Bench. I elected to walk home."

"And the woodcock?" she asked. "I adore woodcock."

He produced one from his pocket, took up her felt hat, which was lying
amongst the bracken, and busied himself insinuating the pin feathers
under the silk band.

"There," he said, handing it to her, "the first woodcock of the season.
We got four, and I really only accepted one in the hope that you would
like it. I shall leave it with the estimable Mills, on my return."

"You must come and share it," Philippa insisted. "Those boys of Nora's
are coming in to dinner. Your gift shall be the piece de resistance."

"Then may I dine another night?" he begged. "This place encourages in me
the grossest of appetites."

"Have no fear," she replied. "You will never see that woodcock again. I
shall have it for my luncheon to-morrow. I ordered dinner before I came
out, and though it may be a simple feast, I promise that you shall not
go away hungry."

"Will you promise that you will never send me away hungry?" he asked,
dropping his voice for a moment.

She turned and studied him. Helen, who had strolled a few yards away,
was knee-deep in the golden brown bracken, picking some gorgeously
coloured leaves from a solitary bramble bush. Lessingham had thrown his
cap onto the ground, and his wind-tossed hair and the unusual colour in
his cheeks were both, in their way, becoming. His loose but well-fitting
country clothes, his tie and soft collar, were all well-chosen and
suitable. She admired his high forehead and his firm, rather proud
mouth. His eyes as well as his tone were full of seriousness.

"You know that you ought to be saying that to some Gretchen away across
that terrible North Sea," she laughed.

"There is no Gretchen who has ever made my heart shake as you do," he
whispered.

She picked up her hat and sighed.

"Really," she said, "I think things are quite complicated enough as they
are. I am in a flutter all day long, as it is, about your mission here
and your real identity. I simply could not include a flirtation amongst
my excitements."

"I have never flirted," he assured her gravely.

"Wise man," she pronounced, rising to her feet. "Come, let us go and
help Helen pick leaves. She is scratching her fingers terribly, and I'm
sure you have a knife. A dear, economical creature, Helen," she added,
as they strolled along. "I am perfectly certain that those are destined
to adorn my dining-table, and, with chrysanthemums at sixpence each,
you can't imagine how welcome they are. Come, produce the knife, Mr.
Lessingham."

The knife was forthcoming, and presently they all turned their faces
homeward. Philippa arrested both her companions on the outskirts of
the wood, and pointed to the red-tiled little town, to the sombre,
storm-beaten grey church on the edge of the cliff, to the peaceful
fields, the stretch of gorse-sprinkled common, and the rolling stretch
of green turf on the crown of the cliffs. Beyond was the foam-flecked
blue sea, dotted all over with cargo steamers.

"Would one believe," she asked satirically, "that there should be scope
here in this forgotten little spot for the brains of a--Mr. Lessingham!"

"Remember that I was sent," he protested. "The error, if error there be,
is not mine."

"And after all," Helen reminded them both, "think how easily one may be
misled by appearances. You couldn't imagine anything more honest than
the faces of the villagers and the fishermen one sees about, yet do you
know, Mr. Lessingham, that we were visited by burglars last night?"

"Seriously?" he asked.

"Without a doubt. Of course, Mainsail Haul is an invitation to thieves.
They could get in anywhere. Last night they chose the French windows and
seem to have made themselves at home in the library."

"I trust," Lessingham said, "that they did not take anything of value?"

"They took nothing at all," Philippa sighed. "That is the humiliating
part of it. They evidently didn't like our things."

"How do you know that you had burglars, if they took nothing away?"
Lessingham enquired.

"So practical!" Philippa murmured. "As a matter of fact, I heard some
one moving about, and I rang the alarm bell. Mills was downstairs
almost directly and we heard some one running down the drive. The French
windows were open, a chair was overturned in the library, and a drawer
in my husband's desk was wide open."

"The proof," Lessingham admitted, "is overwhelming. You were visited by
a burglar. Does your husband keep anything of value in his desk?"

"Henry hasn't anything of value in the world," Philippa replied drily,
"except his securities, and they are at the bank."

"Without going so far as to contradict you," Lessingham observed, with a
smile, "I still venture to disagree!"



CHAPTER XI


Sir Henry stepped back from the scales and eyed the fish which they had
been weighing, admiringly.

"You see that, Mills? You see that, Jimmy?" he pointed out. "Six and
three-quarter pounds! I was right almost to an ounce. He's a fine
fellow!"

"A very extraordinary fish, sir," the butler observed. "Will you allow
me to take your oilskins? Dinner was served nearly an hour ago."

Sir Henry slipped off his dripping overalls and handed them over.

"That's all right," he replied. "Listen. Don't say a word about my
arrival to your mistress at present. I have some writing to do. Bring
me a glass of sherry at once, or mix a cocktail if you can do so without
being missed, and take Jimmy away and give him some whisky and soda."

"But what about your own dinner, sir?"

"I'll have a tray in the gun room," his master decided, "say in twenty
minutes' time. And, Mills, who did you say were dining?"

"Two of the young officers from the Depot, sir--Mr. Harrison and Mr.
Sinclair--and Mr. Hamar Lessingham."

"Lessingham, eh?" Sir Henry repeated, as he seated himself before his
writing-table. "Mills," he added, in a confidential whisper, "what port
did you serve?"

The butler's expression was one of conscious rectitude.

"Not the vintage, sir," he announced with emphasis. "Some very excellent
wood port, which we procured for shooting luncheons. The young gentlemen
like it."

"You're a jewel, Mills," his master declared. "Now you understand--an
aperitif for me now, some whisky for Jimmy in your room, and not a word
about my being here. Good night, Jimmy. Sorry we were too late for the
mackerel, but we had some grand sport, all the same. You'll have a day
or two's rest ashore now."

"Aye, aye, sir!" Dumble replied. "We got in just in time. There's
something more than a squall coming up nor'ards."

Sir Henry listened for a moment. The French windows shook, the rain beat
against the panes, and a dull booming of wind was clearly audible from
outside.

"We timed that excellently," he agreed. "Come up and have a chat
to-morrow, Jimmy, if your wife will spare you."

"I'll be round before eleven, sir," the fisherman promised, with a grin.

Sir Henry waited for the closing of the door. Then he leaned forward for
several moments. He had scarcely the appearance of a man returned from a
week or two of open-air life and indulgence in the sport he loved best.
The healthy tan of his complexion was lessened rather than increased.
There were black lines under his eyes which seemed to speak of sleepless
nights, and a beard of several days' growth was upon his chin. He drank
the cocktail which Mills presently brought him, at a gulp, and watched
with satisfaction while the mixer was vigorously shaken and a second one
poured out.

"We've had a rough time, Mills," he observed, as he set down the glass.
"Until this morning it scarcely left off blowing."

"I'm sorry to hear it, sir," was the respectful reply. "If I may be
allowed to say so, sir, you're looking tired."

"I am tired," Sir Henry admitted. "I think, if I tried, I could go to
sleep now for twenty-four hours."

"You will pardon my reminding you, so far as regards your letters, that
there is no post out tonight, sir," Mills proceeded. "I have prepared a
warm bath and laid out your clothes for a change."

"Capital!" Sir Henry exclaimed. "It isn't a letter that's bothering me,
though, Mills. There are just a few geographical notes I want to make.
You know, I'm trying to improve the fishermen's chart of the coast round
here. That fellow Groocock--Jimmy Dumble's uncle--very nearly lost his
motor boat last week through trusting to the old one."

"Just so, sir," Mills replied deferentially, placing the empty glass
upon his tray. "If you'll excuse me, sir, I must get back to the dining
room."

"Quite right," his master assented. "They won't be out just yet, will
they?"

"Her ladyship will probably be rising in about ten minutes, sir--not
before that."

Sir Henry nodded a little impatiently. Directly the door was closed
he rose to his feet, stood for a moment listening by the side of his
fishing cabinet, then opened the glass front and touched the spring.
With the aid of a little electric torch which he took from his pocket,
he studied particularly a certain portion of the giant chart, made some
measurements with a pencil, some notes in the margin, and closed it
up again with an air of satisfaction. Then he resumed his seat, drew
a folded slip of paper from his breast pocket, a chart from another,
turned up the lamp and began to write. His face, as he stooped low,
escaped the soft shade and was for a moment almost ghastly. Every now
and then he turned and made some calculations on the blotting-paper by
his side. At last he leaned back with a little sigh of relief. He had
barely done so before the door behind him was opened.

"Are we going to stay in here, Mummy, or are we going into the
drawing-room?" Nora asked.

"In here, I think," he heard Philippa reply.

Then they both came in, followed by Helen. Nora was the first to see him
and rushed forward with a little cry of surprise.

"Why, here's Dad!" she exclaimed, flinging her arms around his neck.
"Daddy, how dare you be sitting here all by yourself whilst we are
having dinner! When did you get back? What a fish!"

Sir Henry closed down his desk, embraced his daughter, and came forward
to meet his wife.

"Fine fellow, isn't he, Nora!" he agreed. "Well, Philippa, how are you?
Pleased to see me, I hope? Another new frock, I believe, and in war
time!"

"Fancy your remembering that it was war time!" she answered, standing
very still while he leaned over and kissed her.

"Nasty one for me," Sir Henry observed good-humouredly. "How well you're
looking, Helen! Any news of Dick yet?"

Helen attempted an expression of extreme gravity with more or less
success.

"Nothing fresh," she answered.

"Well, well, no news may be good news," Sir Henry remarked consolingly.
"Jove, it's good to feel a roof over one's head again! This morning has
been the only patch of decent weather we've had."

"This morning was lovely," Helen assented. "Philippa and I went and sat
up in the woods."

Philippa, who was standing by the fire, turned and looked at her husband
critically.

"We have some men dining," she said. "They will be out in a few minutes.
Don't you think you had better go and make yourself presentable? You
smell of fish, and you look as though you hadn't shaved for a week."

"Guilty, my dear," Sir Henry admitted. "Mills is just getting me
something to eat in the gun room, and then I am going to have a bath and
change my clothes."

"And shave, Dad," Nora reminded him.

"And shave, you young pest," her father agreed, patting her on the
shoulder. "Run away and play billiards with Helen. I want to talk to
your mother until my dinner's ready."

Nora acquiesced promptly.

"Come along, Helen, I'll give you twenty-five up. Or perhaps you'd like
to play shell out?" she proposed. "Arthur Sinclair says I have improved
in my potting more than any one he ever knew."

Sir Henry opened the door and closed it after them. Then he returned and
seated himself on the lounge by Philippa's side. She glanced up at
him as though in surprise, and, stretching out her hand towards her
work-basket, took up some knitting.

"I really think I should change at once, if I were you," she suggested.

"Presently. I had a sort of foolish idea that I'd like to have a word or
two with you first. I've been away for nearly a fortnight, haven't I?"

"You have," Philippa assented. "Perhaps that is the reason why I feel
that I haven't very much to say to you."

"That sounds just a trifle hard," he said slowly.

"I am hard sometimes," Philippa confessed. "You know that quite well.
There are times when I just feel as though I had no heart at all, nor
any sympathy; when every sensation I might have had seems shrivelled up
inside me."

"Is that how you are feeling at the present time towards me, Philippa?"
he asked.

Her needles flashed through the wool for a moment in silence.

"You had every warning," she told him. "I tried to make you understand
exactly how your behaviour disgusted me before you went away."

"Yes, I remember," he admitted. "I'm afraid, dear, you think I am a
worthless sort of a fellow."

Philippa had apparently dropped a stitch. She bent lower still over her
knitting. There was a distinct frown upon her forehead, her mouth was
unrecognisable.

"Your friend Lessingham is here still, I understand?" her husband
remarked presently.

"Yes," Philippa assented, "he is dining to-night. You will probably see
him in a few minutes."

Sir Henry looked thoughtful, and studied for a moment the toe of a
remarkably unprepossessing looking shoe.

"You're so keen about that sort of thing," he said, "what about
Lessingham? He is not soldiering or anything, is he?"

"I have no idea," Philippa replied. "He walks with a slight limp and
admits that he is here as a convalescent, but he hasn't told us very
much about himself."

"I wonder you haven't tackled him," Sir Henry continued. "You're such
an ardent recruiter, you ought to make sure that he is doing his bit of
butchery."

Philippa looked up at her husband for a moment and back at her work.

"Mr. Lessingham," she said, "is a very delightful friend, whose stay
here every one is enjoying very much, but he is a comparative stranger.
I feel no responsibility as to his actions."

"And you do as to mine?"

"Naturally."

Sir Henry's head was resting on his hand, his elbow on the back of
the lounge. He seemed to be listening to the voices in the dining room
beyond.

"Hm!" he observed. "Has he been here often while I've been away?"

"As often as he chose," Philippa replied. "He has become very popular in
the neighbourhood already, and he is an exceedingly welcome guest here
at any time."

"Takes advantage of your hospitality pretty often, doesn't he?"

"He is here most days. We are always rather disappointed when he doesn't
come."

Sir Henry's frown grew a little deeper.

"What's the attraction?" he demanded.

Philippa smiled. It was the smile which those who knew her best, feared.

"Well," she confided, "I used to imagine that it was Helen, but I think
that he has become a little bored, talking about nothing but Dick and
their college days. I am rather inclined to fancy that it must be me."

"You, indeed!" he grunted. "Are you aware that you are a married woman?"

Philippa glanced up from her work. Her eyebrows were raised, and her
expression was one of mild surprise.

"How queer that you should remind me of it!" she murmured. "I am afraid
that the sea air disturbs your memory."

Sir Henry rose abruptly to his feet.

"Oh, damn!" he exclaimed.

He walked to the door. His guests were still lingering over their wine.
He could hear their voices more distinctly than ever. Then he came back
to the sofa and stood by Philippa's side.

"Philippa, old girl," he pleaded, "don't let us quarrel. I have had such
a hard fortnight, a nor'easter blowing all the time, and the dirtiest
seas I've ever known at this time of the year. For five days I hadn't a
dry stitch on me, and it was touch and go more than once. We were all in
the water together, and there was a nasty green wave that looked like
a mountain overhead, and the side of our own boat bending over us
as though it meant to squeeze our ribs in. It looked like ten to one
against us, Phil, and I got a worse chill than the sea ever gave me when
I thought that I shouldn't see you again."

Philippa laid down her knitting. She looked searchingly into her
husband's face. She was very far from indifferent to his altered tone.

"Henry," she said, "that sounds very terrible, but why do you run such
risks--unworthily? Do you think that I couldn't give you all that you
want, all that I have to give, if you came home to me with a story
like this and I knew that you had been facing death righteously and
honourably for your country's sake? Why, Henry, there isn't a man in the
world could have such a welcome as I could give you. Do you think I am
cold? Of course you don't! Do you think I want to feel as I have done
this last fortnight towards you? Why, it's misery! It makes me feel
inclined to commit any folly, any madness, to get rid of it all."

Her husband hesitated. A frown had darkened his face. He had the air of
one who is on the eve of a confession.

"Philippa," he began, "you know that when I go out on these fishing
expeditions, I also put in some work at the new chart which I am so
anxious to prepare for the fishermen."

Philippa shook her head impatiently.

"Don't talk to me about your fishermen, Henry! I'm as sick with them
as I am with you. You can see twenty or thirty of them any morning,
lounging about the quay, strapping young fellows who shelter themselves
behind the plea of privileged employment. We are notorious down here
for our skulkers, and you--you who should be the one man to set them an
example, are as bad as they are. You deliberately encourage them."

Sir Henry abandoned his position by his wife's side, His face darkened
and his eyes flashed.

"Skulkers?" he repeated furiously.

Philippa looked at him without flinching.

"Yes! Don't you like the word?"

The angry flush faded from his cheeks as quickly as it had come. He
laughed a little unnaturally, took up a cigarette from an open box, and
lit it.

"It isn't a pleasant one, is it, Philippa?" he observed, thrusting his
hands into his jacket pockets strolling away. "If one doesn't feel the
call--well, there you are, you see. Jove, that's a fine fish."

He stood admiring the codling upon the scales. Philippa continued her
work.

"If you intend to spend the rest of the evening with us," she told him
calmly, "please let me remind you again that we have guests for dinner.
Your present attire may be comfortable but it is scarcely becoming."

He turned away and came back towards her. As he passed the lamp, she
started.

"Why, you're wet," she exclaimed, "wet through!"

"Of course I am," he admitted, feeling his sleeve, "but to tell you the
truth, in the interest of our conversation I had quite forgotten it.
Here come our guests, before I have had time to escape. I can hear your
friend Lessingham's voice."



CHAPTER XII


The three dinner guests entered together, Lessingham in the middle. Sir
Henry's presence was obviously a surprise to all of them.

"No idea that you were back, sir," Harrison observed, shaking hands.

Sir Henry greeted them all good-humouredly. "I turned up about three
quarters of an hour ago," he explained, "just too late to join you at
dinner."

"Bad luck, sir," Sinclair remarked. "I hope that you had good sport?"

"Not so bad," Sir Henry admitted. "We had to go far enough for it,
though. What do you think of that for an October codling?"

They all approached the scales and admired the fish. Sir Henry stood
with his hands in his pockets, listening to their comments.

"You are enjoying your stay here, I hope, Mr. Lessingham?" he enquired.

"One could scarcely fail to enjoy even the briefest holiday in so
delightfully hospitable a place," was the somewhat measured reply.

"You're by way of being a fisherman yourself, I hear?" Sir Henry
continued.

"In a very small way," Lessingham acknowledged. "I have been out once or
twice."

"With Ben Oates, eh?"

"I believe that was the man's name."

Philippa glanced up from her work with a little exclamation of surprise.

"I had no idea of that, Mr. Lessingham. Whatever made you choose Ben
Oates? He is a most disgraceful person."

"It was entirely by accident," Lessingham explained. "I met him on the
front. It happened to be a fine morning, and he was rather pressing in
his invitation."

"I'm afraid he didn't show you much sport," Sir Henry observed. "From
what Jimmy Dumble's brother told him, he seems to have taken you in
entirely the wrong direction, and on the wrong tide."

"We had a small catch," Lessingham replied. "I really went more for the
sail than the sport, so I was not disappointed."

"The coast itself," Sir Henry remarked, "is rather an interesting one."

"I should imagine so," Lessingham assented. "Mr. Ben Oates, indeed,
told me some wonderful stories about it. He spoke of broad channels down
which a dreadnought could approach within a hundred yards of the land."

"He is quite right, too," his host agreed.

"There's a lot of deep water about here. The whole of the coast is very
curious in that way. What the--what the dickens is this?"

Sir Henry, who had been strolling about the room, picked up a Homburg
hat from the far side of a table of curios. Philippa glanced up at his
exclamation.

"That's Nora's trophy," she explained. "I told her to take it up to her
own room, but she's always wanting to show it to her friends."

"Nora's trophy?" Sir Henry repeated. "Why, it's nothing but an ordinary
man's hat."

"Nevertheless, it's a very travelled one, sir," Harrison pointed out.
"Miss Nora picked it up on Dutchman's Common, the morning after the
observation car was found there."

Sir Henry held out the hat.

"But Nora doesn't seriously suppose that the Germans come over in this
sort of headgear, does she?" he demanded.

"If you'll just look inside the lining, sir," Sinclair suggested.

Sir Henry turned it up and whistled softly. "By Jove, it's a German hat,
all right!" he exclaimed. "Doesn't look a bad shape, either."

He tried it on. There was a little peal of laughter from the men.
Philippa had ceased her knitting and was watching from the couch. Sir
Henry looked at himself in the looking-glass.

"Well, that's funny," he observed. "I shouldn't have thought it would
have been so much too small for me. Here, just try how you'd look in it,
Mr. Lessingham," he added, handing it across to him.

Lessingham accepted the situation quite coolly, and placed the hat
carefully on his head.

"It doesn't feel particularly comfortable," he remarked.

"That may be," Sir Henry suggested, "because you have it on wrong side
foremost. If you'd just turn it round, I believe you would find it a
very good fit."

Lessingham at once obeyed. Sir Henry regarded him with admiration.

"Excellent!" he exclaimed. "Look at that, Philippa. Might have been made
for him, eh?"

Lessingham looked at himself in the glass and removed the hat from his
head with some casual observation. He was entirely at his ease. His
host turned towards the door, which Mills was holding open.

"Captain Griffiths, sir," the latter announced.

Sir Henry greeted his visitor briefly.

"How are you, Griffiths?" he said. "Glad to see you. Excuse my costume,
but I am just back from a fishing expedition. We are all admiring Mr.
Lessingham in his magic hat."

Captain Griffiths shook hands with Philippa, nodded to the others, and
turned towards Lessingham.

"Put it on again, there's a good fellow, Lessingham," Sir Henry begged.
"You see, we have found a modern version of Cinderella's slipper. The
hat which fell from the Zeppelin on to Dutchman's Common fits our friend
like a glove. I never thought the Germans made such good hats, did you,
Griffiths?"

"I always thought they imported their felt hats," Captain Griffiths
acknowledged. "Is that really the one with the German name inside, which
Miss Nora brought home?"

"This is the genuine article," Lessingham assented, taking it from
his head and passing it on to the newcomer. "Notwithstanding the name
inside, I should still believe that it was an English hat. It feels too
comfortable for anything else."

The Commandant took the hat to a lamp and examined it carefully. He drew
out the lining and looked all the way round. Suddenly he gave vent to a
little exclamation.

"Here are the owner's initials," he declared, "rather faint but still
distinguishable,--B. M. Hm! There's no doubt about its being a German
hat."

"B. M.," Sir Henry muttered, looking over his shoulder. "How very
interesting! B. M.," he repeated, turning to Philippa, who had
recommenced her knitting. "Is it my fancy, or is there something a
little familiar about that?"

"I am sure that I have no idea," Philippa replied. "It conveys nothing
to me."

There was a brief but apparently pointless silence. Philippa's needles
flashed through her wool with easy regularity. Lessingham appeared to be
sharing the mild curiosity which the others showed concerning the hat.
Sir Henry was standing with knitted brows, in the obvious attitude of a
man seeking to remember something.

"B. M.," he murmured softly to himself. "There was some one I've known
or heard of in England--What's that, Mills?"

"Your dinner is served, sir," Mills, who had made a silent entrance,
announced.

Sir Henry apparently thought no more of the hat or its possible owner.
He threw it upon a neighbouring table, and his face expressed a new
interest in life.

"Jove, I'm ravenous!" he confessed. "You'll excuse me, won't you? Mills,
see that these gentlemen have cigars and cigarettes--in the billiard
room, I should think. You'll find the young people there. I'll come in
and have a game of pills later."

The two young soldiers, with Captain Griffiths, followed Sir Henry at
once from the room. Lessingham, however, lingered. He stood with his
hands behind him, looking at the closed door.

"Are you going to stay and talk nonsense with me, Mr. Lessingham?"
Philippa asked.

"If I may," he answered, without changing his position.

Philippa looked at him curiously.

"Do you see ghosts through that door?"

He shook his head.

"Do you know," he said, as he seated himself by her side, "there are
times when I find your husband quite interesting."



CHAPTER XIII


Philippa leaned back in her place.

"Exactly what do you mean by that, Mr. Lessingham?" she demanded.

He shook himself free from a curious sense of unreality, and turned
towards her.

"I must confess," he said, "that sometimes your husband puzzles me."

"Not nearly so much as he puzzles me," Philippa retorted, a little
bitterly.

"Has he always been so desperately interested in deep-sea fishing?"

Philippa shrugged her shoulders.

"More or less, but never quite to this extent. The thing has become an
obsession with him lately. If you are really going to stay and talk with
me, do you mind if we don't discuss my husband? Just now the subject is
rather a painful one with me."

"I can quite understand that," Lessingham murmured sympathetically.

"What do you think of Captain Griffiths?" she asked, a little abruptly.

"I have thought nothing more about him. Should I? Is he of any real
importance?"

"He is military commandant here."

Lessingham nodded thoughtfully.

"I suppose that means that he is the man who ought to be on my track,"
he observed.

"I shouldn't be in the least surprised to hear that he was," Philippa
said drily. "I have told you that he came and asked about you the other
night, when he dined here. He seemed perfectly satisfied then, but he
is here again to-night to see Henry, and he never visits anywhere in an
ordinary way."

"Are you uneasy about me?" Lessingham enquired.

"I am not sure," she answered frankly. "Sometimes I am almost terrified
and would give anything to hear that you were on your way home. And at
other times I realise that you are really very clever, that nothing is
likely to happen to you, and that the place will seem duller than ever
when you do go."

"That is very kind of you," he said. "In any case, I fear that my
holiday will soon be coming to an end."

"Your holiday?" she repeated. "Is that what you call it?"

"It has been little else," he replied indifferently. "There is nothing
to be learnt here of the slightest military significance."

"We told you that when you arrived," Philippa reminded him.

"I was perhaps foolish not to believe you," he acknowledged.

"So your very exciting journey through the clouds has ended in failure,
after all!" she went on, a moment or two later.

"Failure? No, I should not call it failure."

"You have really made some discoveries, then?" she enquired dubiously.

"I have made the greatest discovery in the world."

Her eyebrows were gently raised, the corners of her mouth quivered, her
eyes fell.

"Dear me! In this quiet spot?" she sighed.

"Yes!"

"Is it Helen or me?"

"Philippa!" he protested.

Her eyebrows were more raised than ever. Her mouth had lost its alluring
curve.

"Really, Mr. Lessingham!" she exclaimed. "Have I ever given you the
right to call me by my Christian name?"

"In my country," he answered, "we do not wait to ask. We take."

"Rank Prussianism," she murmured. "I really think you had better go back
there. You are adopting their methods."

"I may have to at any moment," he admitted, "or to some more distant
country still. I want something to take back with me."

"You want a keepsake, of course," Philippa declared, looking around the
room. "You can have my photograph--the one over there. Helen will give
you one of hers, too, I am sure, if you ask her. She is just as grateful
to you about Richard as I am."

"But from you," he said earnestly, "I want more than gratitude."

"Dear me, how persistent you are!" Philippa murmured. "Are you really
determined to make love to me?"

"Ah, don't mock me!" he begged. "What I am saying to you comes from my
heart."

Philippa laughed at him quietly. There was just a little break in her
voice, however.

"Don't be absurd!"

"There is nothing absurd about it," he replied, with a note of sadness
in his tone. "I felt it from the moment we met. I struggled against it,
but I have felt it growing day by day. I came here with my mind filled
with different purposes. I had no thought of amusing myself, no thought
of seeking here the happiness which up till now I seem to have missed.
I came as a servant because I was sent, a mechanical being. You have
changed everything. For you I feel what I have never felt for any woman
before. I place before you my career, my freedom, my honour."

Philippa sighed very softly.

"Do you mind ringing the bell?" she begged.

"The bell?" he repeated. "What for?"

"I want Helen to hear you," she confided, with a wonderful little smile.

"Philippa, don't mock me," he pleaded. "If this is only amusement to
you, tell me so and let me go away. It is the first time in my life
that a woman has come between me and my work. I am no longer master of
myself. I am obsessed with you. I want nothing else in life but your
love."

There was an almost startling change in Philippa's face. The banter
which had served her with so much effect, which she had relied upon as
her defensive weapon, was suddenly useless. Lessingham had created an
atmosphere around him, an atmosphere of sincerity.

"Are you in earnest?" she faltered.

"God knows I am!" he insisted.

"You--you care for me?"

"So much," he answered passionately, "that for your sake I would
sacrifice my honour, my country, my life."

"But I've only known you for such a short time," Philippa protested,
"and you're an enemy."

"I discard my birth. I renounce my adopted country," he declared
fiercely. "You have swept my life clear of every scrap of ambition and
patriotism. You have filled it with one thing only--a great, consuming
love."

"Have you forgotten my husband?"

"Do you think that if he had been a different sort of man I should have
dared to speak? Ask yourself how you can continue to live with him? You
can call him which you will. Both are equally disgraceful. Your heart
knows the truth. He is either a coward or a philanderer."

Philippa's cheeks were suddenly white. Her eyes flashed. His words had
stung her to the quick.

"A coward?" she repeated furiously. "You dare to call Henry that?"

Lessingham rose abruptly to his feet. He moved restlessly about the
room. His fists were clenched, his tone thick with passion.

"I do!" he pronounced. "Philippa, look at this matter without prejudice.
Do you believe that there is a single man of any country, of your
husband's age and rank, who would be content to trawl the seas for
fish whilst his country's blood is being drained dry? Who would weigh
a codling," he added, pointing scornfully to the scales, "whilst the
funeral march of heroes is beating throughout the world? The thing is
insensate, impossible!"

Philippa's head drooped. Her hands were nervously intertwined.

"Don't!" she pleaded, "I have suffered so much."

"Forgive me," he begged, with a sudden change of voice. "If I am
mistaken in your husband--and there is always the chance--I am sorry.
I will confess that I myself had a different opinion of him, but I can
only judge from what I have seen and from that there is no one in the
world who would not agree with me that your husband is unworthy of you."

"Oh, please stop!" Philippa cried. "Stop at once!"

Lessingham came back to his place by her side. His voice was still
shaking, but it had grown very soft.

"Philippa, forgive me," he repeated. "If you only knew how it hurts to
see you like this! Yet I must speak. There is just once in every man's
lifetime when he must tell the truth. That time has come with me--I love
you."

"So does my husband," she murmured.

"I will only remind you, then, that he shows it in strange fashion,"
Lessingham continued. "He sets your wishes at defiance. He who should be
an example in a small place like this, is only an object of contempt in
the neighbourhood. Even I, who have only lived here for so short a time,
have caught the burden of what people say."

Philippa wiped her eyes.

"Please, do you mind," she begged, "not saying anything more about
Henry. You are only reminding me of things which I try all the time to
forget."

"Believe me," Lessingham answered wistfully, "I am only too content to
ignore him, to forget that he exists, to remember only that you are the
woman who has changed my life."

Philippa looked at him in something like dismay, rather like a child who
has started an engine which she has no idea how to stop.

"But you must not--you must not talk to me like this!"

His hand closed upon hers. It lay in his grasp, unyielding, cold, yet
passive.

"Why not?" he whispered. "I have the one unalterable right, and I am
willing to pay the great price."

"Right?" she faltered.

"The right of loving you--the right of loving you better than any woman
in the world."

There was a queer silence, only partly due, as she was instantly aware,
to the emotion of the moment. A door behind them had opened. Philippa's
quicker senses had recognised her husband's footsteps. Lessingham rose
deliberately to his feet. In his heart he welcomed the interruption.
This might, perhaps, be the decisive moment. Sir Henry was strolling
towards them. His manner and his tone, however, were alike good-natured.

"I was to order you into the billiard room, Mr. Lessingham," he
announced. "Sinclair has been sent for--a night route march, or some
such horror--and they want you to make a four."

Lessingham hesitated. He had a passionate inclination to face
the situation, to tell this man the truth. Sir Henry's courteous
indifference, however, was like a harrier. He recognised the inevitable.

"I am afraid I am rather out of practice," he said, "but I shall be
delighted to do my best."



CHAPTER XIV


Sir Henry was obviously not in the best of tempers. For a mild-mannered
and easy-going man, his expression was scarcely normal.

"That fellow was making love to you," he said bluntly, as soon as the
door was closed behind Lessingham.

Philippa looked up at her husband with an air of pleasant candour.

"He was doing it very nicely, too," she admitted.

"You mean to say that you let him?"

"I listened to what he had to say," she confessed. "It didn't occur to
you, I suppose," her husband remarked, with somewhat strained sarcasm,
"that you were another man's wife?"

"I am doing my best to forget that fact," Philippa reminded him.

"I see! And he is to help you?"

"Possibly."

Sir Henry's irritation was fast merging into anger.

"I shall turn the fellow out of the house," he declared.

Philippa shrugged her shoulders.

"Why don't you?"

He seated himself on the couch by his wife's side. "Look here, Philippa,
don't let's wrangle," he begged. "I'm afraid you'll have to make up your
mind to see a good deal less of your friend Lessingham, anyway."

Philippa's brows were knitted. She was conscious of a vague uneasiness.

"Really? And why?"

"For one thing," her husband explained, "because I don't intend to have
him hanging about my house during my absence."

"The best way to prevent that would be not to go away," Philippa
suggested.

"Well, in all probability," he announced guardedly, "I am not going away
again--at least not just yet."

Philippa's manner suddenly changed. She laid down her work. Her hand
rested lightly upon her husband's shoulder.

"You mean that you are going to give up those horrible fishing
excursions of yours?"

"For the present I am," he assured her.

"And are you going to do something--some work, I mean?" she asked
breathlessly.

"For the immediate present I am going to stay at home and look after
you," he replied.

Philippa's face fell. Her manner became notably colder.

"You are very wise," she declared. "Mr. Lessingham is a most fascinating
person. We are all half in love with him--even Helen."

"The fellow must have a way with him," Sir Henry conceded grudgingly.
"As a rule the people here are not over-keen on strangers, unless they
have immediate connections in the neighbourhood. Even Griffiths, who
since they made him Commandant, is a man of many suspicions, seems
inclined to accept him."

"Captain Griffiths dined here the other night," Philippa remarked, "and
I noticed that he and Mr. Lessingham seemed to get on very well."

"The fellow's all right in his way, no doubt," Sir Henry began.

"Of course he is," Philippa interrupted. "Helen likes him quite as much
as I do."

"Does he make love to Helen, too?" Sir Henry ventured.

"Don't talk nonsense!" Philippa retorted. "He isn't that sort of a
man at all. If he has made love to me, he has done so because I have
encouraged him, and if I have encouraged him, it is your fault."

Sir Henry, with an impatient exclamation, rose from his place and took a
cigarette from an open box.

"Quite time I stayed at home, I can see. All the same, the fellow's
rather a puzzle. I can't help wondering how he succeeded in making
such an easy conquest of a lady who has scarcely been notorious for her
flirtations, and a young woman who is madly in love with another man. He
hasn't--"

"Hasn't what?"

"He hasn't," Sir Henry continued, blowing out the match which he
had been holding to his cigarette and throwing it away, "been in the
position of being able to render you or Helen any service, has he?"

"I don't understand you," Philippa replied, a little uneasily.

"There's nothing to understand," Sir Henry went on. "I was simply trying
to find some explanation for his veni, vidi, vici."

"I don't think you need go any further than the fact," Philippa
observed, "that he is well-bred, charming and companionable."

"Incidentally," Sir Henry queried, "do you happen to have come across
any one here who ever heard of him before?"

"I don't remember any one," Philippa replied. "He was at college with
Richard, you know."

Sir Henry nodded.

"Of course, that's a wonderful introduction to you and Helen," he
admitted. "And by-the-by, that reminds me," he went on, "I never saw
such a change in two women in my life, as in you and Helen. A few weeks
ago you were fretting yourselves to death about Dick. Now you don't seem
to mention him, you both of you look as though you hadn't a care in the
world, and yet you say you haven't heard from him. Upon my word, this is
getting to be a house of mysteries!"

"The only mystery in it that I can see, is you, Henry," she declared.

"Me?" he protested. "I'm one of the simplest-minded fellows alive. What
is there mysterious about me?"

"Your ignominious life," was the cold reply.

"Jove, I got it that time!" he groaned,--"got it in the neck! But didn't
I tell you just now that I was turning over a new leaf?"

"Then prove it," Philippa pleaded. "Let me write to Rayton and beg him
to use his influence to get you something to do. I am sure you would be
happier, and I can't tell you what a difference it would make to me."

"It's that indoor work I couldn't stick, old thing," he confided. "You
know, they're saying all the time it's a young man's war. They'd make me
take some one's place at home behind a desk."

"But even if they did," she protested, "even if they put you in a coal
cellar, wouldn't you be happier to feel that you were helping your
country? Wouldn't you be glad to know that I was happier?"

Sir Henry made a wry face.

"It seems to me that your outlook is a trifle superficial, dear," he
grumbled. "However--now what the dickens is the matter?"

The door had been opened by Mills, with his usual smoothness, but Jimmy
Dumble, out of breath and excited, pushed his way into the room.

"Hullo? What is it, Jimmy?" his patron demanded.

"Beg your pardon, sir," was the almost incoherent reply. "I've run all
the way up, and there's a rare wind blowing. There's one of our--our
trawlers lying off the Point, and she's sent up three green and six
yellow balls."

"Whiting, by God!" Sir Henry exclaimed.

"Whiting!" Philippa repeated, in agonised disgust. "What does this mean,
Henry?"

"It must be a shoal," her husband explained. "It means that we've got to
get amongst them quick. Is the Ida down on the beach, Jimmy?"

"She there all right, sir," was the somewhat doubtful reply, "but us'll
have a rare job to get away, sir. That there nor'easter is blowing great
guns again and it's a cruel tide."

"We've got to get out somehow," Sir Henry declared. "Mills, my oilskins
and flask at once. I sha'n't change a thing, but you might bring a
cardigan jacket and the whisky and soda."

Mills withdrew, a little dazed. Philippa, whose fingers were clenched
together, found her tongue at last.

"Henry!" she exclaimed furiously.

"What is it, my dear?"

"Do you mean to tell me that after your promise," she continued, "after
what you have just said, you are starting out to-night for another
fishing expedition?"

"Whiting, my dear," Sir Henry explained. "One can't possibly miss
whiting. Where the devil are my keys?--Here they are. Now then."

He sat down before his desk, took some papers from the top drawer,
rummaged about for a moment or two in another, and found what seemed
to be a couple of charts in oilskin cases. All the time the wind was
shaking the windows, and a storm of rain was beating against the panes.

"Help yourself to whisky and soda, Jimmy," Sir Henry invited, as he
buttoned up his coat. "You'll need it all presently."

"I thank you kindly, sir," Jimmy replied. "I am thinking that we'll both
need a drink before we're through this night."

He helped himself to a whisky and soda on the generous principle of
half and half. Philippa, who was watching her husband's preparations
indignantly, once more found words.

"Henry, you are incorrigible!" she exclaimed. "Listen to me if you
please. I insist upon it."

Sir Henry turned a little impatiently towards her. "Philippa, I really
can't stop now," he protested. "But you must! You shall!" she cried.
"You shall hear this much from me, at any rate, before you go. What I
said the other day I repeat a thousandfold now."

Sir Henry glanced at Dumble and motioned his head towards the door. The
fisherman made an awkward exit.

"A thousandfold," Philippa repeated passionately. "You hear, Henry? I do
not consider myself any more your wife. If I am here when you return, it
will be simply because I find it convenient. Your conduct is disgraceful
and unmanly."

"My dear girl!" he remonstrated. "I may be back in twenty-four--possibly
twelve hours."

"It is a matter of indifference to me when you return," was the curt
reply. "I have finished."

The door was thrown open.

"Your oilskins, sir, and flask," Mills announced, hurrying in, a little
breathless. "You'll forgive my mentioning it, sir, but it scarcely seems
a fit night to leave home."

"Got to be done this once, Mills," his master replied, struggling into
his coat.

The young people from the billiard room suddenly streamed in. Nora, who
was still carrying her cue, gazed at her father in amazement.

"Why, where's Dad going?" she cried.

"It appears," Philippa explained sarcastically, "that a shoal of whiting
has arrived."

"Very uncertain fish, whiting," Sir Henry observed, "here to-day and
gone to-morrow."

"You won't find it too easy getting off to-night, sir," Harrison
remarked doubtfully.

"Jimmy will see to that," was the confident reply. "I expect we shall be
amongst them at daybreak. Good-by, everybody! Good-by, Philippa!"

His eyes sought his wife's in vain. She had turned towards Lessingham.

"You are not hurrying off, are you, Mr. Lessingham?" she asked. "I want
you to show me that new Patience."

"I shall be delighted."

Sir Henry turned slowly away. For a moment his face darkened as his eyes
met Lessingham's. He seemed about to speak but changed his mind.

"Well, good-by, every one," he called out. "I shall be back before
midnight if we don't get out."

"And if you do?" Nora cried.

"If we do, Heaven help the whiting!"



CHAPTER XV


"Of course, we're behaving shockingly, all three of us!" Philippa
declared, as she sipped her champagne and leaned back in her seat.

"You mean by coming to a place like this?" Lessingham queried, looking
around the crowded restaurant. "We are not, in that case, the only
sinners."

"I didn't mean the mere fact of being here," Philippa explained, "but
being here with you."

"I forgot," he said gloomily, "that I was such a black sheep."

"Don't be silly," she admonished. "You're nothing of the sort. But, of
course, we are skating on rather thin ice. If I had Henry to consider
in any way, if he had any sort of a career, perhaps I should be more
careful. As it is, I think I feel a little reckless lately. Dreymarsh
has got upon my nerves. The things that I thought most of in life seem
to have crumbled away."

"Ought I to be sorry?" he asked. "I am not."

"But why are you so unsympathetic?"

"Because I am waiting by your side to rebuild," he whispered.

A tall, bronzed young soldier with his arm in a sling, stopped before
their table, and Helen, after a moment's protest and a glance at
Philippa, moved away with him to the little space reserved for the
dancers.

"What a chaperon I am!" Philippa sighed. "I scarcely know anything about
the young man except his name and that he was in Dick's regiment."

"I did not hear it," Lessingham observed, "but I feel deeply grateful
to him. It is so seldom that I have a chance to talk to you alone like
this."

"It seems incredible that we have talked so long," Philippa said,
glancing at the watch upon her wrist. "I really feel now that I know all
about you--your school days, your college days, and your soldiering. You
have been very frank, haven't you?"

"I have nothing to conceal--from you," he replied. "If there is anything
more you want to know--"

"There is nothing," she interrupted uneasily.

"Perhaps you are wise," he reflected, "and yet some day, you know, you
will have to hear it all, over and over again."

"I will not be made love to in a restaurant," she declared firmly.

"You are so particular as to localities," he complained. "You could
not see your way clear, I suppose, to suggest what you would consider a
suitable environment?"

Philippa looked at him for a moment very earnestly.

"Ah, don't let us play at things we neither of us feel!" she begged.
"And there is some one there who wants to speak to you."

Lessingham looked up into the face of the man who had paused before
their table, as one might look into the face of unexpected death. He
remained perfectly still, but the slight colour seemed slowly to
be drawn from his cheeks. Yet the newcomer himself seemed in no way
terrifying. He was tall and largely built, clean-shaven, and with
the humourous mouth of an Irishman or an American. Neither was there
anything threatening in his speech.

"Glad to run up against you, Lessingham," he said, holding out his hand.
"Gay crowd here tonight, isn't it?"

"Very," Lessingham answered, speaking very much like a man in a dream.
"Lady Cranston, will you permit me to introduce my friend--Mr. Hayter."

Philippa was immediately gracious, and a few moments passed in trivial
conversation. Then Mr. Hayter prepared to depart.

"I must be joining my friends," he observed. "Look in and see me
sometime, Lessingham--Number 72, Milan Court. You know what a nightbird
I am. Perhaps you will call and have a final drink with me when you have
finished here."

"I shall be very glad," Lessingham promised.

Mr. Hayter passed on, a man, apparently, of many acquaintances, to judge
by his interrupted progress. Lady Cranston looked at her companion. She
was puzzled.

"Is that a recent acquaintance," she asked, "as he addressed you by the
name of Lessingham?"

"Yes," was the quiet reply.

"You don't wish to talk about him?"

"No!"

Helen and her partner returned, a few moments later, and the little
party presently broke up. Lessingham drove the two women to their hotel
in Dover Street.

"We've had a most delightful evening," Philippa assured him, as they
said good night. "You are coming round to see us in the morning, aren't
you?"

"If I may," Lessingham assented.

Helen found her way into Philippa's room, later on that night. She had
nerved herself for a very thankless task.

"May I sit down for a few moments?" she asked, a little nervously. "Your
fire is so much better than mine."

Philippa glanced at her friend through the looking-glass before which
she was brushing her hair, and made a little grimace. She felt a
forewarning of what was coming.

"Of course, dear," she replied. "Have you enjoyed your evening?"

"Very much, in a way," was the somewhat hesitating reply. "Of course,
nothing really counts until Dick comes back, but it is nice to talk with
some one who knows him."

"Agreeable conversation," Philippa remarked didactically, "is one of the
greatest pleasures in life."

"You find Mr. Lessingham very interesting, don't you?" Helen asked.

Philippa finished arranging her hair to her satisfaction and drew up an
easy-chair opposite her visitor's.

"So you want to talk with me about Mr. Lessingham, do you?"

"I suppose you know that he's in love with you?" Helen began.

"I hope he is a little, my dear," was the smiling reply. "I'm sure I've
tried my best."

"Won't you talk seriously?" Helen pleaded.

"I don't altogether see the necessity," Philippa protested.

"I do, and I'll tell you why," Helen answered. "I don't think Mr.
Lessingham is at all the type of man to which you are accustomed. I
think that he is in deadly earnest about you. I think that he was in
deadly earnest from the first. You don't really care for him, do you,
dear?"

"Very much, and yet not, perhaps, quite in the way you are thinking of,"
was the quiet reply.

"Then please send him away," Helen begged.

"My dear, how can I?" Philippa objected. "He has done us an immense
service, and he can't disobey his orders."

"You don't want him to go away, then?"

Philippa was silent for several moments. "No," she admitted, "I don't
think that I do."

"You don't care for Henry any more?"

"Just as much as ever," was the somewhat bitter reply. "That's what I
resent so much. I should like Henry to believe that he had killed every
spark of love in me."

Helen moved across and sat on the arm of her friend's chair. She felt
that she was going to be very daring.

"Have you any idea at the back of your mind, dear," she asked "of making
use of Mr. Lessingham to punish Henry?"

Philippa moved a little uneasily.

"How hatefully downright you are!" she murmured. "I don't know."

"Because," Helen continued, "if you have any such idea in your mind, I
think it is most unfair to Mr. Lessingham. You know perfectly well that
anything else between you and him would be impossible."

"And why?"

"Don't be ridiculous!" Helen exclaimed vigorously. "Mr. Lessingham may
have all the most delightful qualities in the world, but he has attached
himself to a country which no English man or woman will be able to
think of without shuddering, for many years to come. You can't dream
of cutting yourself adrift from your friends and your home and your
country! It's too unnatural! I'm not even arguing with you, Philippa.
You couldn't do it! I'm wholly concerned with Mr. Lessingham. I cannot
forget what we owe him. I think it would be hatefully cruel of you to
spoil his life."

Philippa's flashes of seriousness were only momentary. She made a little
grimace. She was once more her natural, irresponsible self.

"You underrate my charm, Helen," she declared. "I really believe that I
could make his life instead of spoiling it."

"And you would pay the price?"

Philippa, slim and elflike in the firelight, rose from her chair. There
was a momentary cruelty in her face.

"I sometimes think," she said calmly, "that I would pay any price in the
world to make Henry understand how I feel. There, now run along, dear.
You're full of good intentions, and don't think it horrid of me, but
nothing that you could say would make any difference."

"You wouldn't do anything rash?" Helen pleaded.

"Well, if I run away with Mr. Lessingham, I certainly can't promise that
I'll send cards out first. Whatever I do, impulse will probably decide."

"Impulse!"

"Why not? I trust mine. Can't you?" Philippa added, with a little shrug
of the shoulders.

"Sometimes," Helen sighed, "they are such wild horses, you know. They
lead one to such terrible places."

"And sometimes," Philippa replied, "they find their way into the heaven
where our soberer thoughts could never take us. Good night, dear!"



CHAPTER XVI


Mr. William Hayter, in the solitude of his chambers at the Milan Court,
was a very altered personage. He extended no welcoming salutation to his
midnight visitor but simply motioned him to a chair.

"Well," he began, "is your task finished that you are in London?"

"My task," Lessingham replied, "might just as well never have been
entered upon. The man you sent me to watch is nothing but an ordinary
sport-loving Englishman."

"Really! You have lived as his neighbour for nearly a month, and that is
your impression of him?"

"It is," Lessingham assented. "He has been away sea-fishing, half the
time, but I have searched his house thoroughly."

"Searched his papers, eh?"

"Every one I could find, and hated the job. There are a good many charts
of the coast, but they are all for the use of the fishermen."

"Wonderful!" Hayter scoffed. "My young friend, you may yet find
distinction in some other walk of life. Our secret service, I fancy,
will very soon be able to dispense with your energies."

"And I with your secret service," Lessingham agreed heartily. "I dare
say there may be some branches of it in which existence is tolerable.
That, however, does not apply to the task upon which I have been
engaged."

"You have been completely duped," Hayter told him calmly, "and the
information you have sent us is valueless. Sir Henry Cranston, instead
of being the type of man whom you have described, is one of the greatest
experts upon coast defense and mine-laying, in the English Admiralty."

Lessingham laughed shortly.

"That," he declared, "is perfectly absurd."

"It is," Hayter repeated, with emphasis, "the precise truth. Sir Henry
Cranton's fishing excursions are myths. He is simply transferred from
his fishing boat on to one of a little fleet of so-called mine sweepers,
from which he conducts his operations. Nearly every one of the most
important towns on the east coast are protected by minefields of his
design."

Lessingham was dumbfounded. His companion's manner was singularly
convincing.

"But how could Sir Henry or any one else keep this a secret?" he
protested. "Even his wife is scarcely on speaking terms with him because
she believes him to be an idler, and the whole neighbourhood gossips
over his slackness."

"The whole neighbourhood is easily fooled," Hayter retorted. "There are
one or two who know, however."

"There are one or two," Lessingham observed grimly, "who are beginning
to suspect me."

"That is a pity," Hayter admitted, "because it will be necessary for you
to return to Dreymarsh at once."

"Return to Dreymarsh at once? But Cranston is away. There is nothing for
me to do there in his absence."

"He will be back on Wednesday or Thursday night," was the confident
reply. "He will bring with him the plan of his latest defenses of a town
on the east coast, which our cruiser squadron purpose to bombard. We
must have that chart."

Lessingham listened in mute distress.

"Could you possibly get me relieved?" he begged. "The fact is--"

"We could not, and we will not," Hayter interrupted fiercely. "Unless
you wish me to denounce you at home as a renegade and a coward, you will
go through with the work which has been allotted to you. Your earlier
mistakes will be forgiven if that chart is in my hands by Friday."

"But how do you know that he will have it?" Lessingham protested.
"Supposing you are right and he is really responsible for the minefields
you speak of, I should think the last thing he would do would be to
bring the chart back to Dreymarsh."

"As a matter of fact, that is precisely what he will do," Hayter assured
his listener. "He is bringing it back for the inspection of one of the
commissioners for the east coast defense, who is to meet him at his
house. And I wish to warn you, too, Maderstrom, that you will have very
little time. For some reason or other, Cranston is dissatisfied with the
secrecy under which he has been compelled to work, and has applied
to the Admiralty for recognition of his position. Immediately this is
given, I gather that his house will be inaccessible to you."

Lessingham sat, his arms folded, his eyes fixed upon the fire. His
thoughts were in a turmoil, yet one thing was hatefully clear. Cranston
was not the unworthy slacker he had believed him to be. Philippa's whole
point of view might well be changed by this discovery--especially now
that Cranston had made up his mind to assert himself for his wife's
sake. There was an icy fear in his heart.

"You understand," Hayter persisted coldly, "what it is you have to do?"

"Perfectly. I shall return by the afternoon train," was the despairing
reply.

"If you succeed," Hayter continued, "I shall see that you get the usual
acknowledgment, but I will, if you wish it, ask for your transfer to
another branch of the service. I am not questioning your patriotism or
your honour, Maderstrom, but you are not the man for this work."

"You are right," Lessingham said. "I am not."

"It is not my affair," Hayter proceeded, "to enquire too closely into
the means used by our agents in carrying out our designs. That I find
you in London in company with the wife of the man whom you are appointed
to watch, may be a fact capable of the most complete and satisfactory
explanation. I ask no questions. I only remind you that your country,
even though it be only your adopted country, demands from you, as from
all others in her service, unswerving loyalty, a loyalty uninfluenced by
the claims of personal sentiment, duty, or honour. Have I said enough?"

"You have said as much as it is wise for you to say," Lessingham
replied, his voice trembling with suppressed passion.

"That is all, then," the other concluded. "You know where to send
or bring the chart when you have it? If you bring it yourself, it
is possible that something which you may regard as a reward, will be
offered to you."

Lessingham rose a little wearily to his feet. His farewell to Hayter was
cold and lifeless.

He left the hotel and started on his homeward way, struggling with a
sense of intolerable depression. The streets through which he passed
were sombre and unlit.

A Zeppelin warning, a few hours before, had driven the people to their
homes. There was not a chink of light to be seen anywhere. An intense
and gloomy stillness seemed to brood over the deserted thoroughfares.
Nightbirds on their way home flitted by like shadows. Policemen lurked
in the shadows of the houses. The few vehicles left crawled about with
insufficient lights. Even the warning horns of the taxicab men sounded
furtive and repressed. Lessingham, as he marched stolidly along, felt
curiously in sympathy with his environment. Hayter's news brought him
face to face with that inner problem which had so suddenly become the
dominant factor in his life. For the first time he knew what love was.
He felt the wonder of it, the far-reaching possibilities, the strange
idealism called so unexpectedly into being. He recognized the vagaries
of Philippa's disposition, and yet, during the last few days, he had
convinced himself that she was beginning to care. Her strained relations
with her husband had been, without a doubt, her first incentive towards
the acceptance of his proffered devotion. Now he told himself with eager
hopefulness that some portion of it, however minute, must be for his own
sake. The relations between husband and wife, he reminded himself, must,
at any rate, have been strained during the last few months, or Cranston
would never have been able to keep his secret. In his gloomy passage
through this land of ill omens, however, he shivered a little as he
thought of the other possibility--tortured himself with imagining what
might happen during her revulsion of feeling, if Philippa discovered the
truth. A sense of something greater than he had yet known in life seemed
to lift him into some lofty state of aloofness, from which he could
look down and despise himself, the poor, tired plodder wearing the heavy
chains of duty. There was a life so much more wonderful, just the other
side of the clouds, a very short distance away, a life of alluring and
passionate happiness. Should he ever find the courage, he wondered, to
escape from the treadmill and go in search of it? Duty, for the last two
years, had taken him by the hand and led him along a pathway of shame.
He had never been a hypocrite about the war. He was one of those who had
acknowledged from the first that Germany had set forth, with the sword
in her hand, on a war of conquest. His own inherited martial spirit had
vaguely approved; he, too, in those earlier days, had felt the sunlight
upon his rapier. Later had come the enlightenment, the turbulent waves
of doubt, the nightmare of a nation's awakening conscience, mirrored in
his own soul. It was in a depression shared, perhaps, in a lesser
degree by millions of those whose ranks he had joined, that he felt this
passionate craving for escape into a world which took count of other
things.



CHAPTER XVII


Punctually at 12 o'clock the next morning, Lessingham presented himself
at the hotel in Dover Street and was invited by the hall porter to take
a seat in the lounge. Philippa entered, a few minutes later, her eyes
and cheeks brilliant with the brisk exercise she had been taking, her
slim figure most becomingly arrayed in grey cloth and chinchilla.

"I lost Helen in Harrod's," she announced, "but I know she's lunching
with friends, so it really doesn't matter. You'll have to take care of
me, Mr. Lessingham, until the train goes, if you will."

"For even longer than that, if you will," he murmured.

She laughed. "More pretty speeches? I don't think I'm equal to them
before luncheon."

"This time I am literal," he explained. "I am coming back to Dreymarsh
myself."

He felt his heart beat quicker, a sudden joy possessed him. Philippa's
expression was obviously one of satisfaction.

"I'm so glad," she assured him. "Do you know, I was thinking only as I
came back in the taxicab, how I should miss you."

She was standing with her foot upon the broad fender, and her first
little impulse of pleasure seemed to pass as she looked into the fire.
She turned towards him gravely.

"After all, do you think you are wise?" she asked. "Of course, I don't
think that any one at Dreymarsh has the least suspicion, but you know
Captain Griffiths did ask questions, and--well, you're safely away now.
You have been so wonderful about Dick, so wonderful altogether," she
went on, "that I couldn't bear it if trouble were to come."

He smiled at her.

"I think I know what is at the back of your mind," he said. "You think
that I am coming back entirely on your account. As it happens, this is
not so."

She looked at him with wide-open eyes.

"Surely," she exclaimed, "you have satisfied yourself that there is no
field for your ingenuity in Dreymarsh?"

"I thought that I had," he admitted. "It seems that I am wrong. I have
had orders to return."

"Orders to return?" she repeated. "From whom?"

He shook his head.

"Of course, I ought not to have asked that," she proceeded hastily,
"but it does seem odd to realise that you can receive instructions and
messages from Germany, here in London."

"Very much the same sort of thing goes on in Germany," he reminded her.

"So they say," she admitted, "but one doesn't come into contact with it.
So you are really coming back to Dreymarsh!"

"With you, if I may?"

"Naturally," she agreed.

He glanced at the clock. "We might almost be starting for lunch," he
suggested.

She nodded. "As soon as I've told Grover about the luggage."

She was absent only a few moments, and then, as it was a dry, sunny
morning, they walked down St. James Street and along Pall Mall to the
Carlton. Philippa met several acquaintances, but Lessingham walked with
his head erect, looking neither to the right nor to the left.

"Aren't you sometimes afraid of being recognised?" she asked him. "There
must be a great many men about of your time at Magdalen, for instance?"

"Nine years makes a lot of difference," he reminded her, "and besides, I
have a theory that it is only when the eyes meet that recognition really
takes place. So long as I do not look into any one's face, I feel quite
safe."

"You are sure that you would not like to go to a smaller place than the
Carlton?"

"It makes no difference," he assured her. "My credentials have been
wonderfully established for me."

"I'm so glad," she confessed. "I know it's most unfashionable, but I do
like these big places. If ever I had my way, I should like to live
in London and have a cottage in the country, instead of living in the
country and being just an hotel dweller in London."

"I wonder if New York would not do?" he ventured.

"I expect I should like New York," she murmured.

"I think," he said, "in fact, I am almost sure that when I leave here I
shall go to the United States."

She looked at him and turned suddenly away. They arrived just then at
their destination, and the moment passed. Lessingham left his companion
in the lounge while he went back into the restaurant to secure his
table and order lunch. When he came back, he found Philippa sitting very
upright and with a significant glitter in her eyes.

"Look over there," she whispered, "by the palm."

He followed the direction which she indicated. A man was standing
against one of the pillars, talking to a tall, dark woman, obviously a
foreigner, wrapped in wonderful furs. There was something familiar about
his figure and the slight droop of his head.

"Why, it's Sir Henry!" Lessingham exclaimed, as the man turned around.

"My husband," Philippa faltered.

Sir Henry, if indeed it were he, seemed afflicted with a sudden
shortsightedness. He met the incredulous gaze both of Lessingham and his
wife without recognition or any sign of flinching. At that distance it
was impossible to see the tightening of his lips and the steely flash in
his blue eyes.

"The whiting seem to have brought him a long way," Philippa said, with
an unnatural little laugh.

"Shall I go and speak to him?" Lessingham asked.

"For heaven's sake, no!" she insisted. "Don't leave me. I wouldn't have
him come near me for anything in the world. It is only a few weeks ago
that I begged him to come to London with me, and he said that he hated
the place. You don't know--the woman?"

Lessingham shook his head.

"She looks like a foreigner," was all he could say.

"Take me in to lunch at once," Philippa begged, rising abruptly to her
feet. "This is really the last straw."

They passed up the stairway and within a few feet of where Sir Henry
was standing. He appeared absorbed, however, in conversation with his
companion, and did not even turn around. Philippa's little face
seemed to have hardened as she took her seat. Only her eyes were still
unnaturally bright.

"I am so sorry if this has annoyed you," Lessingham regretted. "You
would not care to go elsewhere?"

"I? Go anywhere else?" she exclaimed scornfully. "Thank you, I am
perfectly satisfied here. And with my companion," she added, with a
brilliant little smile. "Now tell me about New York. Have you ever been
there?"

"Twice," he told her. "At present the dream of my life is to go there
with you."

She looked at him a little wonderingly.

"I wonder if you really care," she said. "Men get so much into the habit
of saying that sort of thing to women. Sometimes it seems to me they
must do a great deal of mischief. But you--Is that really your wish?"

"I would sacrifice everything that I have ever held dear in life," he
declared, with his face aglow, "for its realization."

"But you would be a deserter from your country," she pointed out. "You
would never be able to return. Your estates would be confiscated. You
would be homeless."

"Home," he said softly, "is where one's heart takes one. Home is just
where love is."

Her eyes, as they met his, were for a moment suspiciously soft. Then
she began to talk very quickly of other things, to compare notes of
countries which they had both visited, even of people whom they had met.
They were obliged to leave early to catch their train. As they passed
down the crowded restaurant they once more found themselves within a few
feet of Sir Henry. His back was turned to them, and he was apparently
ignorant of their near presence. The party had become a partie Carrie,
another man, and a still younger and more beautiful woman having joined
it.

"Of course," Philippa said, as they descended the stairs, "I am behaving
like an idiot. I ought to go and tell Henry exactly what I think of him,
or pull him away in the approved Whitechapel fashion. We lose so much,
don't we, by stifling our instincts."

"For the next few minutes," he replied, glancing at his watch, "I think
we had better concentrate our attention upon catching our train."

They reached King's Cross with only a few minutes to spare. Grover,
however, had already secured a carriage, and Helen was waiting for them,
ensconced in a corner. She accepted the news of Lessingham's return with
resignation. Philippa became thoughtful as they drew towards the close
of their journey and the slow, frosty twilight began to creep down upon
the land.

"I suppose we don't really know what war is," she observed, looking
out of the window at a comfortable little village tucked away with a
background of trees and guarded by a weather-beaten old church. "The
people are safe in their homes. You must appreciate what that means, Mr.
Lessingham."

"Indeed I do," he answered gravely. "I have seen the earth torn and
dismembered as though by the plough of some destroying angel. A few
blackened ruins where, an hour or so before, a peaceful village stood;
men and women running about like lunatics stricken with a mortal fear.
And all the time a red glow on the horizon, a blood-red glow, and little
specks of grey or brown lying all over the fields; even the cattle
racing round in terror. And every now and then the cry of Death! You are
fortunate in England."

Philippa leaned forward.

"Do you believe that our turn will come?" she asked. "Do you believe
that the wave will break over our country?"

"Who can tell?"

"Ah, no, but answer me," she begged. "Is it possible for you to land an
army here?"

"I think," he replied, "that all things are possible to the military
genius of Germany. The only question is whether it is worth while.
Germans are supposed to be sentimentalists, you know. I rather doubt it.
There is nothing would set the joybells of Berlin clanging so much as
the news of a German invasion of Great Britain. On the other hand,
there is a great party in Germany, and a very far-seeing one, which is
continually reminding the Government that, without Great Britain as a
market, Germany would never recover from the financial strain of the
war."

"This is all too impersonal," Philippa objected. "Do you, in your heart,
believe that the time might come when in the night we should hear the
guns booming in Dreymarsh Bay, and see your grey-clad soldiers forming
up on the beach and scaling our cliffs?"

"That will not be yet," he pronounced. "It has been thought of. Once it
was almost attempted. Just at present, no."

Philippa drew a sigh of relief.

"Then your mission in Dreymarsh has nothing to do with an attempted
landing?"

"Nothing," he assured her. "I can even go a little further. I can tell
you that if ever we do try to land, it will be in an unsuspected place,
in an unexpected fashion."

"Well, it's really very comforting to hear these things at first-hand,"
Philippa declared, with some return to her usual manner. "I suppose we
are really two disgraceful women, Helen and I--traitors and all the rest
of it. Here we sit talking to an enemy as though he were one of our best
friends."

"I refuse to be called an enemy," Lessingham protested. "There are times
when individuality is a far greater thing than nationality. I am just a
human being, born into the same world and warmed by the same sun as you.
Nothing can alter the fact that we are fellow creatures."

"Dreymarsh once more," Philippa announced, looking out of the window.
"And you're a terribly plausible person, Mr. Lessingham. Come round and
see us after dinner--if it doesn't interfere with your work."

"On the contrary," he murmured under his breath. "Thank you very much."



CHAPTER XVIII


Sir Henry was standing with his hands in his pockets and a very blank
expression upon his face, looking out upon the Admiralty Square. He was
alone in a large, barely furnished apartment, the walls of which were
so hung with charts that it had almost the appearance of a schoolroom
prepared for an advanced geography class. The table from which he had
risen was covered with an amazing number of scientific appliances, some
samples of rock and sand, two microscopes and several telephones.

Sir Henry, having apparently exhausted the possibilities of the outlook,
turned somewhat reluctantly away to find himself confronted by an
elderly gentleman of cheerful appearance, who at that moment had entered
the room. From the fact that he had done so without knocking, it was
obvious that he was an intimate.

"Well, my gloomy friend," the newcomer demanded, "what's wrong with
you?"

Sir Henry was apparently relieved to see his visitor. He pushed a chair
towards him and indicated with a gesture of invitation a box of cigars
upon his desk.


"Your little Laranagas," he observed. "Try one."

The visitor opened the box, sniffed at its contents, and helped himself.

"Now, then, get at it, Henry," he enjoined. "I've a Board in
half-an-hour, and three dispatches to read before I go in. What's your
trouble?"

"Look here, Rayton," was the firm reply, "I want to chuck this infernal
hole-and-corner business. I tell you I've worked it threadbare at
Dreymarsh and it's getting jolly uncomfortable."

The newcomer grinned.

"Poor chap!" he observed, watching his cigar smoke curl upwards. "You're
in a nasty mess, you know, Henry. Did I tell you that I had a letter
from your wife the other day, asking me if I couldn't find you a job?"

Sir Henry waited a little grimly, whilst his friend enjoyed the joke.

"That's all very well," he said, "but we are on the point of a
separation, or something of the sort. I'll admit it was all right at
first to run the thing on the Q.T., but that's pretty well busted up by
now. Why, according to your own reports, they know all about me on the
other side."

"Not a doubt about it," the other agreed. "I'm not sure that you haven't
got a spy fellow down at Dreymarsh now."

"I'm quite sure of it," Sir Henry replied grimly. "The brute was
lunching with my wife at the Carlton to-day, and, as luck would have it,
I was landed with that Russian Admiral's wife and sister-in-law. You're
breaking up the happy home, that's what you're doing, Rayton!"

His lordship at any rate seemed to find the process amusing. He laughed
until the tears stood in his eyes.

"I should love to have seen Philippa's face," he chuckled, "when she
walked into the restaurant and saw you there! You're supposed to be off
on a fishing expedition, aren't you?"

"I went out after whiting," Sir Henry groaned, "and I'd just promised to
chuck it for a time when I got the Admiral's message."

"Well, we'll see to your German spy, anyway," his visitor promised.

"Don't be an ass!" Sir Henry exclaimed irritably. "I don't want the
fellow touched at present. Why, he's been a sort of persona grata at my
house. Hangs around there all the time when I'm away."

"All the more reason for putting an end to his little game, I should
say," was the cheerful reply.

"And have the whole neighbourhood either laughing at my wife and Miss
Fairclough, or talking scandal about them!" Sir Henry retorted.

"I forgot that," his friend confessed ruminatively. "He's a gentlemanly
sort of fellow, from what I hear, but a rotten spy. What do you want
done with him?"

"Leave him for me to deal with," Sir Henry insisted. "I have a little
scheme on hand in which he is concerned."

Rayton scratched his chin doubtfully.

"The fellow may not be such a fool as he seems," he reminded his friend.

"I won't run any risks," Sir Henry promised. "I just want him left
there, that's all. And look here, Rayton, you know what I want from you.
I quite agreed to your proposals as to my anonymity at the time when I
was up in Scotland, but the thing's a secret no longer with the people
who count. Every one in Germany knows that I'm a mine-field specialist,
so I don't see why the dickens I should pose any longer as a sort of
half-baked idiot."

Rayton's eyes twinkled.

"You want to play the Wilson Barrett hero and make a theatrical
disclosure of your greatness," he laughed. "Poor Philippa will fall
upon her knees. You will be the hero of the village, which will probably
present you with some little article of plate. You've a good time
coming, Henry."

"Talk sense, there's a good fellow," the other begged. "You go and see
the Chief and put it to him. There isn't a single reason why I shouldn't
own up now."

"I'll see what I can do," Rayton promised, "but what about this fellow
Lessingham, or whatever else he calls himself, down there? There's a
chap named Griffiths--Commandant, isn't he?--been writing us about him."

"I won't have Lessingham touched," Sir Henry insisted. "He can't do any
particular harm down there, and there isn't a line or a drawing of mine
down at Dreymarsh which he isn't welcome to."

Lord Rayton rose to his feet.

"Look here, Henry, old fellow," he said, "I do sympathise with you up
to a certain point. I tell you what I'll do. I shall have to answer
Philippa's letter, and I'll answer it in such a way that if she is as
clever a little woman as I think she is, she'll get a hint. Of course,"
he went on ruminatively, "it is rather a misfortune that the Princess
Ollaneff and her sister are such jolly good-looking women. Makes it look
a little fishy, doesn't it? What I mean to say is, it's a far cry
from fishing for whiting in the North Sea to lunching with a beautiful
princess at the Carlton--when you think your wife's down in Norfolk."

Sir Henry threw open the door.

"Look here, I've had enough of you, Rayton," he declared. "You get back
and do an hour's work, if you can bring your mind to it."

The latter assumed a sudden dignity, necessitated by the sound of voices
in the corridor, and departed. The door had scarcely been closed
when two younger men presented themselves--Miles Ensol, Sir Henry's
secretary, a typical-looking young sailor minus his left arm; and a
pale-faced, clean-shaven man of uncertain age, in civilian clothes. Sir
Henry shook hands with the latter and pointed to the easy-chair which
his previous visitor had just vacated.

"Welcome back again, Horridge," he said cordially. "Miles, I'll ring
when I want you."

"Very good, sir," the secretary replied. "There's a fisherman from
Norfolk downstairs, when you're at liberty."

Sir Henry nodded.

"I'll see him presently. Shut him up somewhere where he can smoke."

The young man withdrew, carefully closing the door, around which Sir
Henry, with a word of apology, arranged a screen.

"I don't think," he explained, "that eavesdropping extends to these
premises, or that our voices could reach outside. Still, a ha'porth of
prevention, eh? Have a cigar, Horridge."

"I'm not smoking for a day or two, thank you, sir."

"You look as though they'd put you through it," Sir Henry remarked.

His visitor smiled.

"I've travelled fourteen miles in a barrel," he said, "and we were
out for twenty-four hours in a Danish sailing skiff. You know what the
weather's been like in the North Sea. Before that, the last word of
writing I saw on German soil was a placard, offering a reward of five
thousand marks for my detention, with a disgustingly lifelike photograph
at the top. I had about fifty yards of quay to walk in broad daylight,
and every other man I passed turned to stare after me. It gives you the
cold shivers down your back when you daren't look round to see if you're
being followed."

Sir Henry groped in the cupboard of his desk, and produced a bottle of
whisky and a syphon of soda water. His visitor nodded approvingly.

"I've touched nothing until I've reached what I consider sanctuary," he
observed. "My nerves have gone rotten for the first time in my life. Do
you mind, sir, if I lock the door?"

"Go ahead," Sir Henry assented.

He brought the whisky and soda himself across the room. Horridge resumed
his seat and held out his hand almost eagerly. For a moment or two he
shook as though he had an ague. Then, just as suddenly as it had come
upon him, the fit passed. He drained the contents of the tumbler at a
gulp, set it down empty by his side, and stretched out his hand for a
cigar.

"The end of my journey didn't help matters any," he went on. "I daren't
even make for a Dutch port, and we were picked up eventually by a tramp
steamer from Newcastle to London with coals. I hadn't been on board more
than an hour before a submarine which had been following overhauled us.
I thought it was all up then, but the fog lifted, and we found ourselves
almost in the midst of a squadron of destroyers from Harwich. I made
another transfer, and they landed me in time to catch the early morning
train from Felixstowe."

"Did they get the submarine?" his listener asked eagerly.

"Get it!" the other repeated, with a smile. "They blew it into scrap
metal."

"Plenty of movement in your life!"

"I've run the gauntlet over there once too often," Horridge said grimly.
"Just look at me now, Sir Henry. I'm twenty-nine years old, and it's
only two years and a half since I was invalided out of the navy and
took this job on. The last person I asked to guess my age put me down at
fifty. What should you have said?"

"Somewhere near it," was the candid admission. "Never mind, Horridge,
you've done your bit. You shall pass on your experience to a new hand,
take your pension and try the south coast of England for a few months.
Now let's get on with it. You know what I want to hear about."

Horridge produced from his pocket a long strip of paper.

"They're there, sir," he announced, "coaled to the scuppers, every man
standing to stations and steam up. There's the list."

He handed the paper across to Sir Henry, who glanced it down.

"The fast cruiser squadron," he observed. "Hm! Three new ships we
haven't any note of. No transports, then, Horridge?'"

"Not a sign of one, sir," was the reply. "They're after a bombardment."

He rose to his feet, walked to a giant map of England, and touched a
certain port on the east coast. Sir Henry's eyes glistened.

"You're sure?"

"It is a certainty," Horridge replied. "I've been on three of those
ships. I've dined with four of the officers. They're under sealed
orders, and the crew believes that they're going to escort out half
a dozen commerce destroyers. But I have the truth. That's their
objective," Horridge repeated, touching once more the spot upon the map,
"and they are waiting just for one thing."

Sir Henry smiled thoughtfully.

"I know what they're waiting for," he said. "Perhaps if they'd a Herr
Horridge to send over here for it, they'd have got it before now. As
it is--well, I'm not sure," he went on. "It seems a pity to disappoint
them, doesn't it? I'd love to give them a run for their money."

Horridge smiled faintly. He knew a good deal about his companion.

"They're spoiling for it, sir," he admitted. Sir Henry spoke down a
telephone and a few minutes later Ensol reappeared.

"Find Mr. Horridge a comfortable room," his chief directed, "and one of
our confidential typists. You can make out your report at your leisure,"
he went on. "Come in and see me when it's all finished."

"Certainly, sir," Horridge replied, rising.

Sir Henry held out his hand. He looked with something like wonder at
the nerve-shattered man who had risen to his feet with a certain air of
briskness.

"Horridge," he said, "I wish I had your pluck."

"I don't know any one in the service from whom you need borrow any,
sir," was the quiet reply.



CHAPTER XIX


Lessingham sat upon a fallen tree on Dutchman's Common near the scene
of his romantic descent, and looked rather ruefully over the moorland,
seawards. Above him, the sky was covered with little masses of quickly
scudding clouds. A fugitive and watery sunshine shone feebly upon a
wind-tossed sea and a rain-sodden landscape. He found a certain grim
satisfaction in comparing the disorderliness of the day with the tumult
in his own life. He felt that he had embarked upon an enterprise greater
than his capacity, for which he was in many ways entirely unsuitable.
And behind him was the scourge of the telegram which he had received a
few hours ago, a telegram harmless enough to all appearance, but which,
decoded, was like a scourge to his back.

Your work is unsatisfactory and your slackness deserves reprobation.
Great events wait upon you. The object of your search is necessary for
our imminent operations.

The sound of a horse's hoofs disturbed him. Captain Griffiths, on a
great bay mare, glanced curiously at the lonely figure by the roadside,
and then pulled up.

"Back again, Mr. Lessingham?" he remarked.

"As you see."

The Commandant fidgeted with his horse for a moment. Then he approached
a little nearer to Lessingham's side.

"You are a good walker, I perceive, Mr. Lessingham," he remarked.

"When the fancy takes me," was the equable reply.

"Have you come out to see our new guns?"

"I had no idea," Lessingham answered indifferently, "that you had any."

Griffiths smiled.

"We have a small battery of anti-aircraft guns, newly arrived from
the south of England," he said. "The secret of their coming and their
locality has kept the neighbourhood in a state of ferment for the last
week."

Lessingham remained profoundly uninterested.

"They most of them spotted the guns," his companion continued, "but not
many of them have found the searchlights yet."

"It seems a little late in the year," Lessingham observed, "to be making
preparations against Zeppelins."

"Well, they cross here pretty often, you know," Griffiths reminded him.
"It's only a matter of a few weeks ago that one almost came to grief
on this common. We picked up their observation car not fifty yards from
where you are sitting."

"I remember hearing about it," Lessingham acknowledged.

"By-the-by," the Commandant continued, smoothing his horse's neck,
"didn't you arrive that evening or the evening after?"

"I believe I did."

"Liverpool Street or King's Cross? The King's Cross train was very
nearly held up."

"I didn't come by train at all," Lessingham replied, glancing for a
moment into the clouds, "And now I come to think of it, it must have
been the evening after."

"Fine county for motoring," Griffiths continued, stroking his horse's
head.

"The roads I have been on seem very good," was the somewhat bored
admission.

"You haven't a car of your own here, have you?"

"Not at present."

Captain Griffiths glanced between his horse's ears for a few moments.
Then he turned once more towards his companion.

"Mr. Lessingham," he said, "you are aware that I am Commandant here?"

"I believe," Lessingham replied, "that Lady Cranston told me so."

"It is my duty, therefore," Griffiths went on, "to take a little more
than ordinary interest in casual visitors, especially at this time
of the year. The fact that you are well-known to Lady Cranston is, of
course, an entirely satisfactory explanation of your presence here.
At the same time, there is certain information concerning strangers of
which we keep a record, and in your case there is a line or two which we
have not been able to fill up."

"If I can be of any service," Lessingham murmured.

"Precisely," the other interrupted. "I knew you would feel like that.
Now your arrival here--we have the date, I think--October 6th. As you
have just remarked, you didn't come by train. How did you come?"

Lessingham's surprise was apparently quite genuine.

"Is that a question which you ask me to answer--officially?" he
enquired.

His interlocutor shrugged his shoulders.

"I am not putting official questions to you at all," he replied, "nor
am I cross-examining you, as might be my duty, under the circumstances,
simply because your friendship with the Cranstons is, of course, a
guarantee as to your position. But on the other hand, I think it would
be reasonable if you were to answer my question."

Lessingham nodded.

"Perhaps you are right," he admitted. "As you can tell by finding me
here this afternoon, I am a great walker. I arrived--on foot."

"I see," Griffiths reflected. "The other question which we usually ask
is, where was your last stopping place?"

"Stopping place?" Lessingham murmured.

"Yes, where did you sleep the night before you came here?" Griffiths
persisted.

Lessingham shook his head as though oppressed by some distasteful
memory.

"But I did not sleep at all," he complained. "It was one of the worst
nights which I have ever spent in my life."

Captain Griffiths gathered up his reins.

"Well," he said with clumsy sarcasm, "I am much obliged to you, Mr.
Lessingham, for the straight-forward way in which you have answered my
questions. I won't bother you any more just at present. Shall I see you
to-morrow night at Mainsail Haul?"

"Lady Cranston has asked me to dine," was the somewhat reserved reply.

His inquisitor nodded and cantered away. Lessingham looked after him
until he had disappeared, then he turned his face towards Dreymarsh and
walked steadily into the lowering afternoon. Twilight was falling as
he reached Mainsail Haul, where he found Philippa entertaining some
callers, to whom she promptly introduced him. Lessingham gathered,
almost in the first few minutes, that his presence in Dreymarsh was
becoming a subject of comment.

"My husband has played bridge with you at the club, I think," a lady
by whose side he found himself observed. "You perhaps didn't hear my
name--Mrs. Johnson?"

"I congratulate you upon your husband," Lessingham replied. "I remember
him perfectly well because he kept his temper when I revoked."

"Dear me!" she exclaimed. "He must have taken a fancy to you, then. As a
rule, they rather complain about him at bridge."

"I formed the impression," Lessingham continued, "that he was rather a
better player than the majority of the performers there."

Mrs. Johnson, who was a dark and somewhat forbidding-looking lady,
smiled.

"He thinks so, at any rate," she conceded. "Didn't he tell me that you
were invalided home from the front?"

Lessingham shook his head.

"I am quite sure that it was not mentioned," he said. "We walked home
together as far as the hotel one evening, but we spoke only of the golf
and some shooting in the neighbourhood."

Philippa, who had been maneuvering to attract Lessingham's attention,
suddenly dropped the cake basket which she was passing. There was a
little commotion. Lessingham went down on his hands and knees to help
collect the fragments, and she found an opportunity to whisper in his
ear.

"Be careful. That woman is a cat. Stay and talk to me. Please don't
bother, Mr. Lessingham. Won't you ring the bell instead?" she continued,
raising her voice.

Lessingham did as he was asked, and affected not to notice Mrs.
Johnson's inviting smile as he returned. Philippa made room for him by
her side.

"Helen and I were talking this afternoon, Mr. Lessingham," she said, "of
the days when you and Dick were both in the Magdalen Eleven and both
had just a chance of being chosen for the Varsity. You never played, did
you?"

He shook his head.

"No such luck. In any case, Richard would have been in well before me. I
always maintained that he was the first of our googlie bowlers."

"So you were at Magdalen with Major Felstead?" another caller remarked
in mild wonder.

"Mr. Lessingham and my brother were great friends," Philippa explained.
"Mr. Lessingham used to come down to shoot in Cheshire."

Lady Cranston's guests were all conscious of a little indefinable
disappointment. The gossip concerning this stranger's appearance in
Dreymarsh was practically strangled. Mrs. Johnson, however, fired a
parting shot as she rose to go.

"You were not in the same regiment as Major Felstead, were you, Mr.
Lessingham?" she asked. "No," he answered calmly.

Philippa was busy with her adieux. Mrs. Johnson remained indomitable.

"What was your regiment, Mr. Lessingham?" she persisted. "You must
forgive my seeming inquisitive, but I am so interested in military
affairs."

Lessingham bowed courteously.

"I do not remember alluding to my soldiering at all," he said coolly,
"but as a matter of fact I am in the Guards."

Mrs. Johnson accepted Philippa's hand and the inevitable. Her good-by to
Lessingham was most affable. She walked up the road with the vicar.

"I think, Vicar," she said severely, "that for a small place, Dreymarsh
is becoming one of the worst centres of gossip I ever knew. Every one
has been saying all sorts of unkind things about that charming Mr.
Lessingham, and there you are--Major Felstead's friend and a Guardsman!
Somehow or other, I felt that he belonged to one of the crack regiments.
I shall certainly ask him to dinner one night next week."

The vicar nodded benignly. He had the utmost respect for Mrs. Johnson's
cook, and his own standard of social desirability, to which the object
of their discussion had attained.

"I should be happy to meet Mr. Lessingham at any time," he pronounced,
with ample condescension. "I noticed him in church last Sunday morning."



CHAPTER XX


"My dear man, whatever shall I do with you!" Philippa exclaimed
pathetically, as the door closed upon the last of her callers. "The
Guards, indeed!"

Lessingham smiled as he resumed his place by her side.

"Well," he said, "I told the dear lady the truth. You will find my
name well up in the list of the thirty-first battalion of the Prussian
Guards."

She threw herself back in her chair and laughed. "How amusing it would
be if it weren't all so terrible! You really are a perfect political
Raffles. Do you know that this afternoon you have absolutely
reestablished yourself? Mr. Johnson will probably call on you
to-morrow--they may even ask you to dine--the vicar will write and ask
for a subscription, and Dolly Fenwick will invite you to play golf with
her."

"Do not turn my head," he begged.

"All the same," Philippa continued, more gravely, "I shall never have
a moment's peace whilst you are in the place. I was thinking about you
last night. I don't believe I have ever realised before how terrible it
would be if you really were discovered. What would they do to you?"

"Whatever they might do," he replied, a little wearily, "I must obey
orders. My orders are to remain here, but even if I were told that I
might go, I should find it hard."

"Do you mean that?" she asked.

"I think you know," he answered.

"You men are so strange," she went on, after a moment's pause. "You give
us so little time to know you, you show us so little of yourselves and
you expect so much."

"We offer everything," he reminded her.

"I want to avoid platitudes," she said thoughtfully, "but is love quite
the same thing for a man as for a woman?"

"Sometimes it is more," was the prompt reply. "Sometimes love, for a
woman, means only shelter; often, for a man, love means the blending of
all knowledge, of all beauty, all ambition, of all that he has learned
from books and from life. Sometimes a man can see no further and needs
to look no further."

Philippa suddenly felt that she was in danger. There was something in
her heart of which she had never before been conscious, some music, some
strange turn of sentiment in Lessingham's voice or the words themselves.
It was madness, she told herself breathlessly. She was in love with
her husband, if any one. She could not have lost all feeling for him so
soon. She clasped her hands tightly. Lessingham seemed conscious of his
advantage, and leaned towards her.

"If I were not offering you my whole life," he pleaded, "believe me, I
would not open my lips. If I were thinking of episodes, I would throw
myself into the sea before I asked you to give me even your fingers. But
you, and you alone, could fill the place in my life which I have always
prayed might be filled, not for a year or even a decade of years, but
for eternity."

"Oh, but you forget!" she faltered.

"I remember so much," he replied, "that I know it is hard for you to
speak. There are bonds which you have made sacred, and your
fingers shrink from tearing them asunder. If it were not for this,
Philippa--hear the speech of a renegade--my mandate should be torn in
pieces. My instructions should flutter into the waste-paper basket,
To-morrow should see us on our way to a new country and a new life. But
you must be very sure indeed."

"Is it because of me that you are staying here?" she asked.

"Upon my honour, no," he assured her. "I must stay here a little longer,
whatever it may mean for me. And so I am content to remain what I am to
you at this minute. I ask from you only that you remain just what you
are. But when the moment of my freedom comes, when my task here is
finished and I turn to go, then I must come to you."

She rose suddenly to her feet, crossed the floor, and threw open the
window. The breeze swept through the room, flapping the curtains,
blowing about loose articles into a strange confusion. She stood there
for several moments, as though in search of some respite from the
emotional atmosphere upon which she had turned her back. When she
finally closed the window, her hair was in little strands about her
face. Her eyes were soft and her lips quivering.

"You make me feel," she said, taking his hand for a moment and looking
at him almost piteously, "you make me feel everything except one thing."

"Except one thing?" he repeated.

"Can't you understand?" she continued, stretching out her hand with a
quick, impulsive little movement. "I am here in Henry's house, his wife,
the mistress of his household. All the years we've been married I have
never thought of another man. I have never indulged in even the idlest
flirtation. And now suddenly my life seems upside down. I feel as
though, if Henry stood before me now, I would strike him on the cheek. I
feel sore all over, and ashamed, but I don't know whether I have ceased
to love him. I can't tell. Nothing seems to help me. I close my eyes
and I try to think of that new world and that new life, and I know that
there is nothing repulsive in it. I feel all the joy and the strength of
being with you. And then there is Henry in the background. He seems to
have had so much of my love."

He saw the tears gathering in her eyes, and he smiled at her
encouragingly.

"Remember that at this moment I am asking you for nothing," he said.
"Just think these things out. It isn't really a matter for sorrow," he
continued. "Love must always mean happiness--for the one who is loved."

She leaned back in the corner of the sofa to which he had led her,
her eyes dry now but still very soft and sweet. He sat by her side,
fingering some of the things in her work basket. Once she held out her
hand and seemed to find comfort in his clasp. He raised her fingers to
his lips without any protest from her. She looked at him with a little
smile.

"You know, I'm not at all an Ibsen heroine," she declared. "I can't see
my way like those wonderful emancipated women."

"Yet," he said thoughtfully, "the way to the simple things is so clear."

Confidences were at an end for a time, broken up by the entrance of Nora
and Helen, and some young men from the Depot, who had looked in for a
game of billiards. Lessingham rose to leave as soon as the latter had
returned to their game. His tone and manner now were completely changed.
He seemed ill at ease and unhappy.

"I am going to have a day's fishing to-morrow," he told Philippa, "but
I must admit that I have very little faith in this man Oates. They all
tell me that your husband has any number of charts of the coast. Do you
think I could borrow one?"

"Why, of course," she replied, "if we can find it."

She took him over to her husband's desk, opened such of the drawers as
were not locked, and searched amongst their contents ruthlessly. By the
time they had finished the last drawer, Lessingham had quite a little
collection of charts, more or less finished, in his hand.

"I don't know where else to look," she said. "You might go through those
and see if they are of any use. What is it, Mills?" she added, turning
to the door.

Mills had entered noiselessly, and was watching the proceedings at Sir
Henry's desk with a distinct lack of favour. He looked away towards his
mistress, however, as he replied.

"The young woman has called with reference to a situation as
parlour-maid, your ladyship," he announced. "I have shown her into the
sewing room." Lady Cranston glanced at the clock.

"I sha'n't be more than five or ten minutes," she promised Lessingham.
"Just look through those till I come back."

She hurried away, leaving Lessingham alone in the room. He stood for a
moment listening. On the left-hand side, through the door which had
been left ajar, he could hear the click of billiard balls and occasional
peals of laughter. On the right-hand side there was silence. He moved
swiftly across the room and closed the door leading into the billiard
room, deposited on the sofa the charts which he had been carrying, and
hurried back to the secretary. With a sickening feeling of overwhelming
guilt, he drew from his pocket a key and opened, one by one, the drawers
through which they had not searched. It took him barely five minutes to
discover--nothing. With an air of relief he rearranged everything.
When Philippa returned, he was sitting on the lounge, going through the
charts which they had looked out together.

"Well?" she asked.

"There is nothing here," he decided, "which will help me very much. With
your permission I will take this," he added, selecting one at random.

She nodded and they replaced the others. Then she touched him on the
arm.

"Listen," she said, "are you perfectly certain that there is no one
coming?"

He listened for a moment.

"I can't hear any one," he answered. "They've started a four-handed game
of pool in the billiard room."

She smiled.

"Then I will disclose to you Henry's dramatic secret. See!"

She touched the spring in the side of the secretary. The false back,
with its little collection of fishing flies, rolled slowly up. The large
and very wonderful chart on which Sir Henry had bestowed so much of his
time, was revealed. Lessingham gazed at it eagerly.

"There!" she said. "That has been a great labour of love with Henry.
It is the chart, on a great scale, from which he works. I don't know
a thing about it, and for heaven's sake never tell Henry that you have
seen it."

He continued to examine the chart earnestly. Not a part of it escaped
him. Then he turned back to Philippa.

"Is that supposed to be the coast on the other side of the point?" he
asked.

"I don't exactly know where it is," she replied. "Every time Henry finds
out anything new, he comes and works at it. I believe that very soon it
will be perfect. Then he will start on another part of the coast."

"This is not the only one that he has prepared, then?" Lessingham
enquired.

She shook her head.

"I believe it is the fifth," she replied. "They all disappear when they
are finished, but I have no idea where to. To me they seem to represent
a shocking waste of time."

Lessingham was suddenly taciturn. He held out his hand. "You are dining
with us to-morrow night, remember," she said.

"I am not likely to forget," he assured her.

"And don't get drowned," she concluded. "I don't know any of these
fishermen--I hate them all--but I'm told that Oates is the worst."

"I think that we shall be quite all right," he assured her. "Thanks very
much for finding me the charts. What I have seen will help me."

Helen came in for a moment and their farewell was more or less
perfunctory. Lessingham was almost thankful to escape. There was an
unusual flush in his cheeks, a sense of bitter humiliation in his heart.
All the fervour with which he had started on his perilous quest had
faded away. No sense of duty or patriotism could revive his drooping
spirits. He felt himself suddenly an unclean and dishonoured being.



CHAPTER XXI


Towards three o'clock on the following afternoon, the boisterous wind
of an uncertain morning settled down to worse things. It tore the spray
from the crest of the gathering waves, dashed it even against the
French windows of Mainsail Haul, and came booming down the open spaces
cliffwards, like the rumble of some subterranean artillery. A little
group of fishermen in oilskins leaned over the railing and discussed
the chances of Ben Oates bringing his boat in safely. Philippa, also,
distracted by a curious anxiety, stood before the blurred window,
gazing into what seemed almost a grey chaos. "Captain Griffiths, your
ladyship."

She turned around quickly at the announcement. Even an unwelcome caller
at that moment was almost a relief to her.

"How nice of you to come and see me on such an afternoon, Captain
Griffiths," she exclaimed, as they shook hands. "Helen is over at the
Canteen, Nora is hard at work for once in her life, and I seem most
dolefully alone."

Her visitor's reception of Philippa's greeting promised little in the
way of enlivenment. He seemed more awkward and ill at ease than ever,
and his tone was almost threatening.

"I am very glad to find you alone, Lady Cranston," he said. "I came
specially to have a few words with you on a certain matter."

Her momentary impulse of relief at his visit passed away. There seemed
to her something sinister in his manner. She was suddenly conscious that
there was a new danger to be faced, and that this man's attitude towards
her was, for some reason or other, inimical. After the first shock,
however, she prepared herself to do battle.

"Well, you seem very mysterious," she observed. "I haven't broken any
laws, have I? No lights flashing from any of my windows?"

"So far as I am aware, there are no complaints of the sort," the
Commandant acknowledged, still speaking with an unnatural restraint. "My
call, I hope, may be termed, to some extent, at least, a friendly one."

"How nice!" she sighed. "Then you'll have some tea, won't you?"

"Not at present, if you please," he begged. "I have come to talk to you
about Mr. Hamar Lessingham."

"Really?" Philippa exclaimed. "Whatever has that poor man been doing
now."

"Dreymarsh," her visitor proceeded, "having been constituted, during the
last few months, a protected area, it is my duty to examine and enquire
into the business of any stranger who appears here. Mr. Hamar Lessingham
has been largely accepted without comment, owing to his friendship with
you. I regret to state, however, that certain facts have come to my
knowledge which make me wonder whether you yourself may not in some
measure have been deceived."

"This sounds very ridiculous," Philippa interposed quietly.

"A few weeks ago," Captain Griffith continued, "we received information
that this neighbourhood would probably be visited by some person
connected with the Secret Service of Germany. There is strong evidence
that the person in question is Mr. Hamar Lessingham."

"A graduate of Magdalen, my brother's intimate friend, and a frequent
visitor at my father's house in Cheshire," Philippa observed, with faint
sarcasm.

"The possibility of your having made a mistake, Lady Cranston," Captain
Griffiths rejoined, "has, I must confess, only just occurred to me. The
authorities at Magdalen College have been appealed to, and no one of the
name of Lessingham was there during any one of your brother's terms."

Philippa took the blow well. She simply stared at her caller in a
noncomprehending manner.

"We have also information," he continued gravely, "from Wood Norton
Hall--from your mother, in fact, Lady Cranston--that no college friend
of your brother, of that name, has ever visited Wood Norton."

"Go on," Philippa begged, a little faintly. "Did I ever live there
myself? Was Richard ever at Magdalen?"

Captain Griffiths proceeded with the air of a man who has a task to
finish and intends to do so, regardless of interruptions.

"I have had some conversation with Mr. Lessingham, in the course of
which I asked him to explain his method of reaching here, and his last
habitation. He simply fenced with me in the most barefaced fashion. He
practically declined to give me any account of himself."

Philippa rose and rang the bell.

"I suppose I must give you some tea," she said, "although you seem to
have come here on purpose to make my head ache."

"My object in coming here," Captain Griffiths rejoined, a little
stiffly, "is to save you some measure of personal annoyance."

"Oh, please don't think that I am ungrateful," Philippa begged. "Of
course, it is all some absurd mistake, and I'm sure we shall get to the
bottom of it presently--Tell me what you think of the storm?" she added,
as Mills entered with the tea tray. "Do you think it will get any worse,
because I am terrified to death already?"

"I am no judge of the weather here," he confessed. "I believe the
fishermen are preparing for something unusual."

She seated herself before the tea tray and insisted upon performing
her duties as hostess. Afterwards she laid her hand upon his arm and
addressed him with an air of complete candour.

"Now, Captain Griffiths," she began, "do listen to me. Just one moment
of common sense, if you please. What do you suppose there could possibly
be in our harmless seaside village to induce any one to risk his life by
coming here on behalf of the Secret Service of Germany?"

"Dreymarsh," Captain Griffiths replied, "was not made a prohibited area
for nothing."

"But, my dear man, be reasonable," Philippa persisted. "There are
perhaps a thousand soldiers in the place, the usual preparations along
the cliff for coast defence, a small battery of anti-aircraft guns, and
a couple of searchlights. There isn't a grocer's boy in the place who
doesn't know all this. There's no concealment about it. You must
admit that Germany doesn't need to send over a Secret Service agent to
acquaint herself with these insignificant facts."

Her visitor smiled very faintly. It was the first time he had relaxed
even so far as this.

"I am not in possession of any information which I can impart to you,
Lady Cranston," he said, "but I am not prepared to accept your statement
that Dreymarsh contains nothing of greater interest than the things
which you have mentioned."

There was no necessity for Philippa to play a part now. The suggestion
contained in her visitor's words had really left her in a state of
wonder.

"You are making my flesh creep!" she exclaimed. "You don't mean to say
that we have secrets here?"

"I have said the last word which it is possible for me to say upon the
subject," he declared. "You will understand, I am sure, that I am not
here in the character of an inquisitor. I simply thought it my duty, in
view of the fact that you had made yourself the social sponsor for
Mr. Lessingham, to place certain information before you, and to ask,
unofficially, of course, if you have any explanation to give? You may
even," he went on, hesitatingly, "appreciate the motives which led me to
do so."

"My dear man, what explanation could I have?" Philippa protested, "it is
an absolute and undeniable fact that Mr. Lessingham was at Magdalen
with my brother, and also that he visited us at Wood Norton. I know
both these things of my own knowledge. The only possible explanation,
therefore, is that you have been misinformed."

"Or," Captain Griffiths ventured, "that Mr. Hamar Lessingham in those
days passed under another name."

"Another name?" Philippa faltered.

"Some such name, perhaps," he continued, "as Bertram Maderstrom."

There was a short silence. Captain Griffiths had leaned back in his
chair and was caressing his upper lip. His eyes were fixed upon Philippa
and Philippa saw nothing. Her little heel dug hard into the carpet. In a
few seconds the room ceased to spin. Nevertheless, her voice sounded to
her pitifully inadequate.

"What an absurdity all this is!" she exclaimed.

"Maderstrom," Captain Griffiths said thoughtfully, "was, curiously
enough, an intimate college friend of your brother's. He was also a
visitor at Wood Norton Hall. At neither place is there any trace of
Mr. Hamar Lessingham. Perhaps you have made a mistake, Lady Cranston.
Perhaps you have recognised the man and failed to remember his name. If
so, now is the moment to declare it."

"I am very much obliged to you," Philippa retorted, "but I have never
met or heard of this Mr. Maderstrom--"

"Baron Maderstrom," he interrupted.

"Baron Maderstrom, then, in my life; whereas Mr. Lessingham I remember
perfectly."

"I am sorry," Captain Griffiths said, setting down his empty teacup and
rising slowly to his feet. "We cannot help one another, then."

"If you want me to transfer Mr. Lessingham, whom I remember perfectly,
into a German baron whom I never heard of," Philippa declared boldly, "I
am afraid that we can't."

"Baron Maderstrom was a Swedish nobleman," Captain Griffiths observed.

"Swedish or German, I know nothing of him," Philippa persisted.

"There remains, then, nothing more to be said."

"I am afraid not," Philippa agreed sweetly.

"Under the circumstances," Captain Griffiths asked, "you will not, I am
sure, expect me to dine to-night."

"Not if you object to meeting Mr. Hamar Lessingham," Philippa replied.

Her visitor's face suddenly darkened, and Philippa wondered vaguely
whether anything more than professional suspicion was responsible
for that little storm of passion which for a moment transformed his
appearance. He quickly recovered, however.

"I may still," he concluded, moving towards the door, "be forced to
present myself here in another capacity."



CHAPTER XXII


The confinement of the house, after the departure of her unwelcome
visitor, stifled Philippa. Attired in a mackintosh, with a scarf around
her head, she made her way on to the quay, and, clinging to the railing,
dragged herself along to where the fishermen were gathered together in a
little group. The storm as yet showed no signs of abatement.

"Has anything been heard of Ben Oates' boat?" she enquired.

An old fisherman pointed seawards.

"There she comes, ma'am, up on the crest of that wave; look!"

"Will she get in?" Philippa asked eagerly.

There were varied opinions, expressed in indistinct mutterings.

"She's weathering it grand," the fisherman to whom she had first spoken,
declared. "We've a line ready yonder, and we're reckoning on getting 'em
ashore all right. Lucky for Ben that the gentleman along with him is a
fine sailor. Look at that, mum!" he added in excitement. "See the way he
brought her head round to it, just in time. Boys, they'll come in on the
next one!"

One by one the sailors made their way to the very edge of the
wave-splashed beach. There were a few more minutes of breathless
anxiety. Then, after the boat had disappeared completely from sight,
hidden by a huge grey wall of sea, she seemed suddenly to climb to the
top of it, to hover there, to become mixed up with the spray and the
surf and a great green mass of waters, and then finally, with a harsh
crash of timbers and a shout from the fishermen, to be flung high and
dry upon the stones. Philippa, clutching the iron railing, saw for a
moment nothing but chaos. Her knees became weak. She was unable to move.
There was a queer dizziness in her ears. The sound of voices sounded
like part of an unreal nightmare. Then she was aware of a single figure
climbing the steps towards her. There was blood trickling down his face
from the wound in the forehead, and he was limping slightly.

"Mr. Lessingham!" she called out, as he reached the topmost step.

He took an eager step towards her.

"Philippa!" he exclaimed. "Why, what are you doing here?"

"I was frightened," she faltered. "Are you hurt?"

"Not in the least," he assured her. "We had a rough sail home, that's
all, and that fellow Oates drank himself half unconscious. Come along,
let me help you up the steps and out of this."

She clung to his arm, and they struggled up the private path to the
house. Mills let them in with many expressions of concern, and Helen
came hurrying to them from the background.

"I went out to see the storm," Philippa explained weakly, "and I saw Mr.
Lessingham's boat brought in."

"And Mr. Lessingham will come this way at once," Helen insisted. "I
haven't had a real case since I got my certificate, and I'm going to
bind his head up."

Philippa began to feel her strength returning. The horror which lay
behind those few minutes of nightmare rose up again in her mind. Mills
had hurried on into the bathroom, and the other two were preparing to
follow. She stopped them.

"Mr. Lessingham," she said, "listen. Captain Griffiths has been here. He
knows or guesses everything."

"Everything?"

Philippa nodded.

"Helen must bind your head up, of course," she continued. "After that,
think! What can we do? Captain Griffiths knows that there was no Hamar
Lessingham at college with Dick, that he never visited Wood Norton, that
there is some mystery about your arrival here, and he told me to my face
that he believes you to be Bertram Maderstrom."

"What a meddlesome fellow!" Lessingham grumbled, holding his
handkerchief to his forehead.

"Oh, please be serious!" Helen begged, looking up from the bandage which
she was preparing. "This is horrible!"

"Don't I know it!" Philippa groaned. "Mr. Lessingham, you must please
try and escape from here. You can have the car, if you like. There must
be some place where you can go and hide until you can get away from the
country."

"But I'm dining here to-night," Lessingham protested. "I'm not going to
hide anywhere."

The two women exchanged glances of despair.

"Can't I make you understand!" Philippa exclaimed pathetically. "You're
in danger here--really in danger!"

Lessingham's demeanour showed no appreciation of the situation.

"Of course, I can quite understand," he said, "that Griffiths is
suspicious about me, but, after all, no one can prove that I have broken
the law here, and I shall not make things any better by attempting an
opera bouffe flight. Can I have my head tied up and come and talk to you
about it later on?"

"Oh, if you like," Philippa assented weakly. "I can't argue."

She made her way up to her room and changed her wet clothes. When she
came down, Lessingham was standing on the hearth rug in the library,
with a piece of buttered toast in one hand and a cup of tea in the
other. His head was very neatly bound up, and he seemed quite at his
ease.

"You know," he began, as he wheeled a chair up to the fire for her,
"that man Griffiths doesn't like me. He never took to me from the first,
I could see that. If it comes to that, I don't like Griffiths. He is
one of those mean, suspicious sort of characters we could very well do
without."

Philippa, who had rehearsed a little speech several times in her
bedroom, tried to be firm.

"Mr. Lessingham," she said, "you know that we are both your friends. Do
listen, please. Captain Griffiths is Commandant here and in a position
of authority. He has a very large power. I honestly believe that it is
his intention to have you arrested--if not to-night, within a very few
days."

"I do not see how he can," Lessingham objected, helping himself to
another piece of toast. "I have committed no crime here. I have played
golf with all the respectable old gentlemen in the place, and I have
given the committee some excellent advice as to the two new holes. I
have played bridge down at the club--we will call it bridge!--and I
have kept my temper like an angel. I have dined at Mess and told them at
least a dozen new stories. I have kept my blinds drawn at night, and I
have not a wireless secreted up the chimney. I really cannot see what
they could do to me."

Philippa tried bluntness.

"You have served in the German army, and you are living in a protected
area under a false name," she declared.

"Well, of course, there is some truth in what you say," he admitted,
"but even if they have tumbled to that and can prove it, I should do no
good by running away. To be perfectly serious," he added, setting his
cup down, "there is only one thing at the present moment which would
take me out of Dreymarsh, and that is if you believe that my presence
here would further compromise you and Miss Fairclough."

Philippa was beginning to find her courage. "We're in it already, up to
the neck," she observed. "I really don't see that anything matters so
far as we are concerned."

"In that case," he decided, "I shall have the honour of presenting
myself at the usual time."



CHAPTER XXIII


Philippa and Helen met in the drawing-room, a few minutes before
eight that evening. Philippa was wearing a new black dress, a model of
simplicity to the untutored eye, but full of that undefinable appeal to
the mysterious which even the greatest artist frequently fails to create
out of any form of colour. Some fancy had induced her to strip off her
jewels at the last moment, and she wore no ornaments save a band of
black velvet around her neck. Helen looked at her curiously.

"Is this a fresh scheme for conquest, Philippa?" she asked, as they
stood together by the log fire.

Philippa unexpectedly flushed.

"I don't know what I was thinking about, really," she confessed. "Is
that the exact time, I wonder?"

"Two minutes to eight," Helen replied.

"Mr. Lessingham is always so punctual," Philippa murmured. "I wonder if
Captain Griffiths would dare!"

"We've done our best to warn him," Helen reminded her friend. "The man
is simply pig-headed."

"I can't help feeling that he's right," Philippa declared, "when he
argues that they couldn't really prove anything against him."

"Does that matter," Helen asked anxiously, "so long as he is an enemy,
living under a false name here?"

"You don't think they'd--they'd--"

"Shoot him?" Helen whispered, lowering her voice. "They couldn't do
that! They couldn't do that!"

The clock began to chime. Suddenly Philippa, who had been listening,
gave a little exclamation of relief.

"I hear his voice!" she exclaimed. "Thank goodness!"

Helen's relief was almost as great as her companion's. A moment later
Mills ushered in their guest. He was still wearing his bandage, but his
colour had returned. He seemed, in fact, almost gay.

"Nothing has happened, then?" Philippa demanded anxiously, as soon as
the door was closed.

"Nothing at all," he assured them. "Our friend Griffiths is terribly
afraid of making a mistake."

"So afraid that he wouldn't come and dine. Never mind, you'll have to
take care of us both," she added, as Mills announced dinner.

"I'll do my best," he promised, offering his arm.

If the sword of Damocles were indeed suspended over their heads, it
seemed only to heighten the merriment of their little repast. Philippa
had ordered champagne, and the warmth of the pleasant dining room, the
many appurtenances of luxury by which they were surrounded, the glow of
the wine, and the perfume of the hothouse flowers upon the table, seemed
in delicious contrast to the fury of the storm outside. They all three
appeared completely successful in a strenuous effort to dismiss all
disconcerting subjects from their minds. Lessingham talked chiefly of
the East. He had travelled in Russia, Persia, Afghanistan, and India,
and he had the unusual but striking gift of painting little word
pictures of some of the scenes of his wanderings. It was half-past nine
before they rose from the table, and Lessingham accompanied them into
the library. With the advent of coffee, they were for the first time
really alone. Lessingham sat by Philippa's side, and Helen reclined in a
low chair close at hand.

"I think," he said, "that I can venture now to tell you some news."

Helen put down her work. Philippa looked at him in silence, and her eyes
seemed to dilate.

"I have hesitated to say anything about it," Lessingham went on,
"because there is so much uncertainty about these things, but I believe
that it is now finally arranged. I think that within the next week or
ten days--perhaps a little before, perhaps a little later--your brother
Richard will be set at liberty."

"Dick? Dick coming home?" Philippa cried, springing up from her
reclining position.

"Dick?" Helen faltered, her work lying unheeded in her lap. "Mr.
Lessingham, do you mean it? Is it possible?"

"It is not only possible," Lessingham assured them, "but I believe that
it will come to pass. I have had to exercise a little duplicity, but
I fancy that it has been successful. I have insisted that without help
from an influential person in Dreymarsh, I cannot bring my labours here
to a satisfactory conclusion, and I have named as the price of that
help, Richard's absolute and immediate freedom. I heard only this
morning that there would be no difficulty."

Helen snatched up her work and groped her way towards the door.

"I will come back in a few minutes," she promised, her voice a little
broken.

Lessingham, who had opened the door for her, returned to his place.
There were no tears in Philippa's brilliant eyes, but there was a faint
patch of colour in her cheeks, and her lips were not quite steady. She
caught at his hands.

"Oh, my dear, dear friend!" she said. "If only that little nightmare
part of you did not exist. If only you could be just what you seem, and
one could feel that you were there in our lives for always! I feel that
I want to talk to you so much, to you and not the sham you. What shall I
call you?"

"Bertram, please," he whispered.

"Then Bertram, dear," she went on, "for my sake, because you have really
become dear to me, because my heart aches at the thought of your danger,
and because--see how honest I am--I am a little afraid of myself--will
you go away? The thought of your danger is like a nightmare to me. It
all seems so absurd and unreasonable--I mean that the danger which I
fear should be hanging over you. But I think that there is just a little
something back of your brain of which you have never spoken, which it
was your duty to keep to yourself, and it is just that something which
brings the danger."

"I am not afraid for myself, Philippa," he told her. "I took a false
step in life when I came here. What it was that attracted me I do not
know. I think it was the thought of that wild ride amongst the
clouds, and the starlight. It seemed such a wonderful beginning to any
enterprise. And, Philippa, for one part of my adventure, the part which
concerns you, it was a gorgeous prelude, and for the other--well, it
just does not count because I have no fear. I have faith in my fortune,
do you know that? I believe that I shall leave this place unharmed, but
I believe that if I leave it without you, I shall go back to the worst
hell in which a man could ever..."

"Bertram," she pleaded, "think of it all. Even if I cared enough--and I
don't--there is something unnatural about it. Doesn't it strike you as
horrible? My brother, my cousins, my father, are all fighting the men of
the nation whose cause you have espoused! There is a horrible, eternal
cloud of hatred which it will take generations to get rid of, if ever it
disappears. How can we two speak of love! What part of the world could
we creep into where people would not shrink away from us? I may have
lost a little of my heart to you, Bertram, I may miss you when you go
away, I may waste weary hours thinking, but that is all. Oh, you know
that it must be all!"

"I do not," he answered stubbornly.

"Oh, you must be reasonable," she begged, with a little break in her
voice. "You know very well that I ought not to listen to you. I ought
not to welcome you here. I ought to be strong and close my ears."

"But you will not do that!"

"No!" she faltered. "Please don't come any nearer. I--"

She broke off suddenly. The struggle in her face was ended, her
expression transformed. Her finger was held up as though to bid him
listen. With her other hand she clutched the back of the couch. Her eyes
were fixed upon the door. The little patch of wonderful colour faded
from her cheeks.

"Listen!" she cried, with a note of terror in her voice. "That was the
front door! Some one has come! Can't you hear them?"

Lessingham's hand stole suddenly to his pocket. She caught the glitter
of something half withdrawn, and shrank back with a half-stifled moan.

"Not before you, dear," he promised. "Please do not be afraid. If this
is the end, leave me alone with Griffiths. I shall not hurt him. I
shall not forget. And if by any chance," he added, "this is to be our
farewell, Philippa, you will remember that I love you as the flowers of
the world love their sun. Courage!"

The door facing them was opened.

"Captain Griffiths," Mills announced.

Through the open door they caught a vision of two other soldiers and
Inspector Fisher. Griffiths came into the room alone, however, and
waited until the door was closed before he spoke. He carried himself
as awkwardly as ever, but his long, lean face seemed to have taken
to itself a new expression. He had the air of a man indulging in some
strange pleasure.

"Lady Cranston," he said, "I am very sorry to intrude, but my visit here
is official."

"What is it?" she asked hoarsely.

"I have received confirmatory evidence in the matter of which I spoke to
you this afternoon," he went on. "I am sorry to disturb you at such an
hour, but it is my duty to arrest this man on a charge of espionage."

Lessingham to all appearance remained unmoved.

"A most objectionable word," he remarked.

"A most villainous profession," Captain Griffiths retorted. "Thank
heaven that in this country we are learning the art of dealing with its
disciples."

"This is all a hideous mistake," Philippa declared feverishly. "I assure
you that Mr. Lessingham has visited my father's house, that he was
well-known to me years ago."

"As the Baron Maderstrom! What arguments he has used, Lady Cranston, to
induce you to accept him here under his new identity, I do not know, but
the facts are very clear."

"He seems quite convinced, doesn't he?" Lessingham remarked, turning to
Philippa. "And as I gather that a portion of the British Army, assisted
by the local constabulary, is waiting for me outside, perhaps I had
better humour him."

"It would be as well, sir," Captain Griffiths assented grimly. "I am
glad to find you in the humour for jesting."

Lessingham turned once more to Philippa. This time his tone was more
serious.

"Lady Cranston," he begged, "won't you please leave us?"

"No!" she answered hysterically. "I know why you want me to, and I won't
go! You have done no harm, and nothing shall happen to you. I will not
leave the room, and you shall not--"

His gesture of appeal coincided with the sob in her throat. She broke
down in her speech, and Captain Griffiths moved a step nearer.

"If you have any weapon in your possession, sir," he said, "you had
better hand it over to me."

"Well, do you know," Lessingham replied, "I scarcely see the necessity.
One thing I will promise you," he added, with a sudden flash in his
eyes, "a single step nearer--a single step, mind--and you shall have
as much of my weapon as will keep you quiet for the rest of your life.
Remember that so long as you are reasonable I do not threaten you. Help
me to persuade Lady Cranston to leave us."

Captain Griffiths was out of his depths. He was not a coward, but he had
no hankering after death, and there was death in Lessingham's threat and
in the flash of his eyes. While he hesitated, there was a knock upon the
door. Mills came silently in. He carried a telegram upon a salver.

"For you, sir," he announced, addressing Captain Griffiths. "An orderly
has just brought it down."

Griffiths looked at the pink envelope and frowned. He tore it open,
however, without a word. As he read, his long, upper teeth closed
in upon his lip. So he stood there until two little drops of blood
appeared.

Then he turned to Mills.

"There is no answer," he said.

The man bowed and left the room. He walked slowly and he looked back
from the doorway. It was scarcely possible for even so perfectly trained
a servant to escape from the atmosphere of tragedy.

"Something tells me," Lessingham remarked coolly, as soon as the door
was closed, "that that message concerns me."

The Commandant made no immediate reply. He straightened out the telegram
and read it once more under the lamplight, as though to be sure there
was no possible mistake. Then he folded it up and placed it in his
waistcoat pocket.

"The notion of your arrest, sir," he said to Lessingham harshly, "is
apparently distasteful to some one at headquarters who has not digested
my information. I am withdrawing my men for the present."

"You're not going to arrest him?" Philippa cried.

"I am not," Captain Griffiths answered. "But," he added, turning to
Lessingham, "this is only a respite. I have more evidence behind all
that I have offered. You are Baron Bertram Maderstrom, a German spy,
living here in a prohibited area under a false name. That I know, and
that I shall prove to those who have interfered with me in the execution
of my duty. This is not the end."

He left the room without even a word or a salute to Philippa. Lessingham
looked after him for a moment, thoughtfully. Then he shrugged his
shoulders.

"I am quite sure that I do not like Captain Griffiths," he declared.
"There is no breeding about the fellow."



CHAPTER XXIV


Philippa, even for some moments after the departure of Captain Griffiths
and his myrmidons, remained in a sort of nerveless trance. The crisis,
with its bewildering denouement, had affected her curiously. Lessingham
rose presently to his feet.

"I wonder," he asked, "if I could have a whisky and soda?"

She stamped her foot at him in a little fit of hysterical passion.

"You're not natural!" she cried. "Whisky and soda!"

"Well, I don't know," he protested mildly, helping himself from the
table in the background. "I rather thought I was being particularly
British. When in doubt, take a drink. That is Richard all the world
over, you know."

She broke into a little mirthless laugh.

"I shall begin to think that you are a poseur!" she exclaimed.

He crossed the room towards her.

"Perhaps I am, dear," he confessed. "I want you just to sit up and lose
that unnatural look. I am not really full of cheap bravado, but I am a
philosopher. Something has happened to postpone--the end. Good luck to
it, I say!"

He raised his tumbler to his lips and set it down empty. Philippa rose
to her feet and walked restlessly to the window and back.

"I'll try and be reasonable too," she promised, resuming her seat. "I
was right, you see. Captain Griffiths has discovered everything. Can
you tell me what possible reason any one in London could have had for
interference?"

"I seem to have got a friend up there without knowing it, don't I?" he
observed.

"This is aging me terribly," Philippa declared, throwing herself back
into her seat. "All my life I have hated mysteries. Here I am face to
face with two absolutely insoluble ones. Captain Griffiths has assured
me that there is here in Dreymarsh something of sufficient importance to
account for the presence of a foreign spy. You have confirmed it. I have
been torturing my brain about that for the last twenty-four hours. Now
there happens something more inexplicable still. You are arrested, and
you are not arrested. Your identity is known, and Captain Griffiths is
forbidden to do his duty."

"It seems puzzling, does it not?" Lessingham agreed. "I shouldn't worry
about the first, but this last little episode takes some explaining."

"If anything further happens this evening, I think I shall go mad,"
Philippa sighed.

"And something is going to happen," Lessingham declared, rising to his
feet. "Did you hear that?"

Above even the roar of the wind they heard the brazen report of a gun
from almost underneath the window. The room was suddenly lightened by a
single vivid flash.

"A mortar!" Lessingham exclaimed. "And that was a rocket, unless I'm
mistaken."

"The signal for the lifeboat!" Philippa announced. "I wonder if we can
see anything."

She hastened towards the window, but paused at the abrupt opening of the
door. Nora burst in, followed more sedately by Helen.

"Mummy, there's a wreck!" the former cried in excitement. "I heard
something an hour ago, and I got up, and I've been sitting by the
window, watching. I saw the lifeboat go out, and they're signalling now
for the other one."

"It's quite true, Philippa," Helen declared. "We're going to try and
fight our way down to the beach."

"I'll go, too," Lessingham decided. "Perhaps I may be of use."

"We'll all go," Philippa agreed. "Wait while I get my things on. What
is it, Mills?" she added, as the door opened and the latter presented
himself.

"There is a trawler on the rocks just off the breakwater, your
ladyship," he announced. "They have just sent up from the beach to know
if we can take some of the crew in. They are landing them as well as
they can on the line."

"Of course we can," was the prompt reply. "Tell them to send as many as
they want to. We will find room for them, somehow. I'll go upstairs and
see about the fires. You'll all come back?" she added, turning around.

"We will all come back," Lessingham promised.

They fought their way down to the beach. At first the storm completely
deafened all sound. The lanterns, waved here and there by unseen hands,
seemed part of some ghostly tableau, of which the only background was
the raging of the storm. Then suddenly, with a startling hiss, another
rocket clove its way through the darkness. They had an instantaneous but
brilliant view of all that was happening,--saw the trawler lying on its
side, apparently only a few yards from the shore, saw the line stretched
to the beach, on which, even at that moment, a man was being drawn
ashore, licked by the spray, his strained face and wind-tossed hair
clearly visible. Then all was darkness again more complete than ever.
They struggled down on to the shingle, where the little cluster of
fishermen were hard at work with the line. Almost the first person
they ran across was Jimmy Dumble. He was standing on the edge of the
breakwater with a great lantern in his hand, superintending the line,
and, as they drew near, Lessingham, who was a little in advance, could
hear his voice above the storm. He was shouting towards the wreck, his
hand to his mouth.

"Send the master over next, you lubbers, or we'll cut the line. Do you
hear?"

There was no reply or, if there was, it was drowned in the wind.
Lessingham gripped the fisherman by the arm.

"Whom do you mean by 'master'?" he demanded. Dumble scarcely glanced at
his interlocutor.

"Why, Sir Henry Cranston, to be sure," was the agitated answer. "These
lubbers of sea hands are all coming off first, and the line won't stand
for more than another one or two," he added, dropping his voice.

Then the thrill of those few minutes' excitement unrolled itself into a
great drama before Lessingham's eyes. Sir Henry was on that ship as near
as any man might wish to be to death.

"'Ere's the next," Jimmy muttered, as they turned the windlass
vigorously. "Gosh, 'e's a heavy one, too!"

Then came a cry which sounded like a moan and above it the shrill
fearful yell of a man who feels himself dropping out of the world's
hearing. Lessingham raised the lantern which stood on the beach by
Jimmy's side. The line had broken. The body of its suspended traveller
had disappeared! And just then, strangely enough, for the first time for
over an hour, the heavens opened in one great sheet of lightning,
and they could see the figure of one man left on the ship, clinging
desperately to the rigging.

"Tie the line around me," Jimmy shouted. "Let her go. Get the other end
on the windlass."

They paid out the rope through their hands. Jimmy kicked off his boots
and plunged into the cauldron. He swam barely a dozen strokes before he
was caught on the top of an incoming wave, tossed about like a cork and
flung back upon the beach, where he lay groaning. There was a little
murmur amongst the fisherman, who rushed to lean over him.

"Swimming ain't no more use than trying to walk on the water," one of
them declared.

Lessingham raised the lantern which he was carrying, and flashed it
around.

"Where are the young ladies?" he asked.

"Gone up to the house with two as we've just taken off the wreck," some
one informed him.

Lessingham stooped down. Willing hands helped him unfasten the cord from
Jimmy's waist. He tore off his own coat and waistcoat and boots. Some
helped, other sought to dissuade him, as he secured the line around his
own waist.

"We've sent for more rockets," one man shouted in his ear. "The man will
be back in half an hour."

Lessingham pushed them on one side. He stood on the edge of the beach
and, borrowing a lantern, watched for his opportunity. Then suddenly
he vanished. They looked after him. They could see nothing but the rope
slipping past their feet, inch by inch. Sometimes it was stationary,
sometimes it was drawn taut. The first great wave that came flung a yard
or so of slack amongst them. Then, after the roar of its breaking had
died away, they saw the rope suddenly tighten, and pass rapidly out, and
the excitement began to thicken.

"That 'un didn't get him, anyway," one of them muttered.

"He'll go through the next, with luck," another declared hopefully.

Lessingham, fighting for his consciousness, deafened and half stunned
by the roar of the waters about him, still felt the exhilaration of
that great struggle. He looked once into seas which seemed to touch the
clouds, drew himself stiff, and plunged into the depths of a mountain of
foaming waters, whose summit seemed to him like one of those grotesque
and nightmare-distorted efforts of the opium-eating brain. Then the roar
sounded all behind him, and he knew that he was through the breakers.
He swam to the side of the ship and clutched hold of a chain. It was Sir
Henry's out-stretched hand which pulled him on to the deck.

"My God, that was a swim!" the latter declared, as he pulled his rescuer
up, not in the least recognising him. "Let's have the end of that cord,
quick! So!" he went on, paying it out through his fingers until the end
of the rope appeared. "You'd better get your breath, young man, and then
over you go. I'll follow."

"I'm damned if I do!" was the vigorous reply. "You start off while I get
my breath."

They were suddenly half drowned with a shower of spray. Sir Henry held
Lessingham in a grip of iron, or he would have been swept overboard.

"Get one arm through the chains, man," he shouted. "My God!" he added,
peering through the gloom. "Lessingham!"

"Well, don't stop to worry about that," was the fierce reply. "Let's get
on with our job."

Sir Henry threw off his oilskins and his underneath coat.

"Follow me when they wave the lantern twice," he directed. "If we either
of us get the knock--well, thanks!"

Lessingham felt the grip of Sir Henry's hand as he passed him and went
overboard into the darkness. Then, with one arm through the chains,
he drew towards him by means of his heel the coat which Sir Henry had
thrown upon the deck. Gradually it came within reach of his disengaged
hand. He seized it, shook it out, and dived eagerly into the breast
pocket. There were several small articles which he threw ruthlessly
away, and then a square packet, wrapped in oilcloth, which bent to his
fingers. Another breaking wave threw him on his back. One arm was still
through the chain, the other gripped what some illuminating instinct
had already convinced him was the chart! As soon as he had recovered
his breath, a grim effort of humour parted his lips. He lay there for a
moment and laughed till the spray, this time with a rush of green water
underneath, very nearly swept him from his place.

They were waving a lantern on the beach when he struggled again to his
feet.

He slipped the little packet down his clothes next to his skin, and
groped about to find the end of the line which Sir Henry and he had
fastened to a staple below the chains. Then he drew a long breath,
gripped the rope and shouted. A second or two later he was back in the
cauldron.

As they pulled him on to the beach, he had but one idea. Whatever
happened, he must not lose consciousness. The packet was still there
against the calf of his leg. It must be his own hands which removed his
clothes. It seemed to him that those few bronzed faces, those half a
dozen rude lanterns, had become magnified and multiplied a hundredfold.
It was an army of blue-jerseyed fishermen which patted him on the back
and welcomed him, lanterns like the stars flashing everywhere around.
He set his teeth and fought against the buzzing in his ears. He tried to
speak, and his voice sounded like a weak, far away whisper.

"I am all right," he kept on saying.

Then he felt himself leaning on two brawny arms. His feet followed the
mesmeric influence of their movement. Was he going into the clouds, he
wondered? They stopped to open a gate, the gate leading to the gardens
of Mainsail Haul. How did he get there? He had no idea. More movements
of his feet, and then unexpected warmth. He looked around him. There
were voices. He listened. The one voice? The one face bending over his,
her eyes wet with tears, her whispers an incoherent stream of broken
words. Then the warmth seemed to come back to his veins. He sat up and
found himself on the couch in the library, the rain dripping from him in
little pools, and he knew that he had succeeded. He had not fainted.

"I am all right," he repeated. "What a mess I am making!"

The voices around him were still a little tangled, but the hand which
held a steaming tumbler to his lips was Philippa's.

"Drink it all," she begged.

He felt the tears come into his eyes, felt the warm blood streaming
through his body, felt a little wet patch at the back of the calf of his
leg, and the hand which set down the empty tumbler was almost steady.

"There's a hot bath ready," Philippa told him; "some dry clothes, and a
bedroom with a fire in. Do let Mills show you the way."

He rose at once, prepared to follow her. His feet were not quite so
steady as he would have wished, but he made a very presentable show.
Mills, with a little apology, held out his arm. Philippa walked by his
other side.

"As soon as you have finished your bath and got into some dry clothes,"
Philippa whispered, "please ring, or send Mills to let us know."

He was even able to smile at her.

"I am quite all right," he assured her once more.



CHAPTER XXV


Philippa, unusually early on the following morning, glanced at the empty
breakfast table with a little air of disappointment, and rang the bell.

"Mills," she enquired, "is no one down?"

"Sir Henry is, I believe, on the beach, your ladyship," the man
answered, "and Miss Helen and Miss Nora are with him."

"And Mr. Lessingham?"

"Mr. Lessingham, your ladyship," Mills continued, looking carefully
behind him as though to be sure that the door was closed, "has
disappeared."

"Disappeared?" Philippa repeated. "What do you mean, Mills?"

"I left Mr. Lessingham last night, your ladyship," Mills explained,
"in a suit of the master's clothes and apparently preparing for bed--I
should say this morning, as it was probably about two o'clock. I called
him at half past eight, as desired, and found the room empty. The bed
had not been slept in."

"Was there no note or message?" Philippa asked incredulously.

"Nothing, your ladyship. One of the maid servants believes that she
heard the front door open at five o'clock this morning."

"Ring up the hotel," Philippa instructed, "and see if he is there."

Mills departed to execute his commission. Philippa stood looking out
of the window, across the lawn and shrubbery and down on to the beach.
There was still a heavy sea, but it was merely the swell from the day
before. The wind had dropped, and the sun was shining brilliantly.
Sir Henry, Helen, and Nora were strolling about the beach as though
searching for something. About fifty yards out, the wrecked trawler
was lying completely on its side, with the end of one funnel visible.
Scattered groups of the villagers were examining it from the sands. In
due course Mills returned.

"The hotel people know nothing of Mr. Lessingham, your ladyship, beyond
the fact that he did not return last night. They received a message
from Hill's Garage, however, about half an hour ago, to say that their
mechanic had driven Mr. Lessingham early this morning to Norwich, where
he had caught the mail train to London, The boy was to say that Mr.
Lessingham would be back in a day or so."

Philippa pushed open the windows and made her way down towards the
beach. She leaned over the rail of the promenade and waved her hand to
the others, who clambered up the shingle to meet her.

"Scarcely seen you yet, my dear, have I?" Sir Henry observed.

He stooped and kissed her forehead, a salute which she suffered without
response. Helen pointed to the wreck.

"It doesn't seem possible, does it," she said, "that men's lives should
have been lost in that little space. Two men were drowned, they say,
through the breaking of the rope. They recovered the bodies this
morning."

"Everything else seems to have been washed on shore except my coat," Sir
Henry grumbled. "I was down here at daylight, looking for it."

"Your coat!" Philippa repeated scornfully. "Fancy thinking of that, when
you only just escaped with your life!"

"But to tell you the truth, my dear," Sir Henry explained, "my
pocketbook and papers of some value were in the pocket of that coat. I
can't think how I came to forget them. I think it was the surprise
of seeing that fellow Lessingham crawl on to the wreck looking like a
drowned rat. Jove, what a pluck he must have!"


"The fishermen can talk of nothing else," Nora put in excitedly. "Mummy,
it was simply splendid! Helen and I had gone up with two of the rescued
men, but I got back just in time to see them fasten the rope round his
waist and watch him plunge in."

"How is he this morning?" Helen asked.

"Gone," Philippa replied.

They all looked at her in surprise.

"Gone?" Sir Henry repeated. "What, back to the hotel, do you mean?"

"His bed has not been slept in," Philippa told them. "He must have
slipped away early this morning, gone to Hill's Garage, hired a car, and
motored to Norwich. From there he went on to London. He has sent word
that he will be back in a few days."

"I hope to God he won't!" Sir Henry muttered.

Philippa swung round upon him.

"What do you mean by that?" she demanded. "Don't you want to thank him
for saving your life?"

"My dear, I certainly do," Sir Henry replied, "but just now--well, I am
a little taken aback. Gone to London, eh? Tore away without warning
in the middle of the night to London! And coming back, too--that's the
strange part of it!"

One would think, from Sir Henry's expression, that he was finding
food for much satisfaction in this recital of Lessingham's sudden
disappearance.

"He is a wonderful fellow, this Lessingham," he added thoughtfully. "He
must have--yes, by God, he must have--In that storm, too!"

"If you could speak coherently, Henry," Philippa observed, "I should
like to say that I am exceedingly anxious to know why Mr. Lessingham has
deserted us so precipitately."

Sir Henry would have taken his wife's arm, but she avoided him. He
shrugged his shoulders and plodded up the steep path by her side.

"The whole question of Lessingham is rather a problem," he said. "Of
course, you and Helen have seen very much more of him than I have. Isn't
it true that people have begun to make curious remarks about him?"

"How did you know that, Henry?" Philippa demanded.

"Well, one hears things," he replied. "I should gather, from what I
heard, that his position here had become a little precarious. Hence his
sudden disappearance."

"But he is coming back again," Philippa reminded her husband.

"Perhaps!"

Philippa signified her desire that her husband should remain a little
behind with her. They walked side by side up the gravel path. Philippa
kept her hands clasped behind her.

"To leave the subject of Mr. Lessingham for a time," she began, "I feel
very reluctant to ask for explanations of anything you do, but I must
confess to a certain curiosity as to why I should find you lunching at
the Canton with two very beautiful ladies, a few days ago, when you left
here with Jimmy Dumble to fish for whiting; and also why you return here
on a trawler which belongs to another part of the coast?"

Sir Henry made a grimace.

"I was beginning to wonder whether curiosity was dead," he observed
good-humouredly. "If you wouldn't mind giving me another--well, to be
on the safe side let us say eight days--I think I shall be able to offer
you an explanation which you will consider satisfactory."

"Thank you," Philippa rejoined, with cold surprise; "I see no reason why
you should not answer such simple questions at once."

Sir Henry sighed deprecatingly, and made another vain attempt to take
his wife's arm.

"Philippa, be a little brick," he begged. "I know I seem to have been
playing the part of a fool just lately, but there has been a sort of
reason for it."

"What reason could there possibly be," she demanded, "which you could
not confide in me?"

He was silent for a moment. When he spoke again there was a new
earnestness in his tone.

"Philippa," he said, "I have been working for some time at a little
scheme which isn't ripe to talk about yet, not even to you, but which
may lead to something which I hope will alter your opinion. You couldn't
see your way clear to trust me a little longer, could you?" he begged,
with rather a plaintive gleam in his blue eyes. "It would make it so
much easier for me to say no more but just have you sit tight."

"I wonder," she answered coldly, "if you realise how much I have
suffered, sitting tight, as you call it, and waiting for you to do
something!"

"My fishing excursions," he went on desperately, "have not been
altogether a matter of sport."

"I know that quite well," she replied. "You have been making that chart
you promised your miserable fishermen. None of those things interest me,
Henry. I fear--I am very much inclined to say that none of your doings
interest me. Least of all," she went on, her voice quivering with
passion, "do I appreciate in the least these mysterious appeals for my
patience. I have some common sense, Henry."

"You're a suspicious little beast," he told her.

"Suspicious!" she scoffed. "What a word to use from a man who goes
off fishing for whiting, and is lunching at the Carlton, some days
afterwards, with two ladies of extraordinary attractions!"

"That was a trifle awkward," Sir Henry admitted, with a little burst of
candour, "but it goes in with the rest, Philippa."

"Then it can stay with the rest," she retorted, "exactly where I have
placed it in my mind. Please understand me. Your conduct for the last
twelve months absolves me from any tie there may be between us. If this
explanation that you promise comes--in time, and I feel like it, very
well. Until it does, I am perfectly free, and you, as my husband, are
non-existent. That is my reply, Henry, to your request for further
indulgence."

"Rather a foolish one, my dear," he answered, patting her shoulder, "but
then you are rather a child, aren't you?"

She swung away from him angrily.

"Don't touch me!" she exclaimed. "I mean every word of what I have said.
As for my being a child--well, you may be sorry some day that you have
persisted in treating me like one."

Sir Henry paused for a moment, watching her disappearing figure. There
was an unusual shade of trouble in his face. His love for and confidence
in his wife had been so absolute that even her threats had seemed to him
like little morsels of wounded vanity thrown to him out of the froth
of her temper. Yet at that moment a darker thought crossed his mind.
Lessingham, he realised, was not a rival, after all, to be despised. He
was a man of courage and tact, even though Sir Henry, in his own mind,
had labelled him as a fool. If indeed he were coming back to Dreymarsh,
what could it be for? How much had Philippa known about him? He stood
there for a few moments in indecision. A great impulse had come to him
to break his pledge, to tell her the truth. Then he made his disturbed
way into the breakfast room.

"Where's your mother, Nora?" he asked, as Helen took Philippa's place at
the head of the table.

"She wants some coffee and toast sent up to her room." Nora explained.
"The wind made her giddy."

Sir Henry breakfasted in silence, rang the bell, and ordered his car.

"You going away again, Daddy?" Nora asked.

"I am going to London this morning," he replied, a little absently.

"To London?" Helen repeated. "Does Philippa know?"

"I haven't told her yet."

Helen turned towards Nora.

"I wish you'd run up and see if your mother wants any more coffee,
there's a dear," she suggested.

Nora acquiesced at once. As soon as she had left the room, Helen leaned
over and laid her hand upon Sir Henry's arm.

"Don't go to London, Henry," she begged.

"But my dear Helen, I must," he replied, a little curtly.

"I wouldn't if I were you," she persisted. "You know, you've tried
Philippa very high lately, and she is in an extremely emotional state.
She is all worked up about last night, and I wouldn't leave her alone if
I were you."

Sir Henry's blue eyes seemed suddenly like points of steel as he leaned
towards her.

"You think that she is in love with that fellow Lessingham?" he asked
bluntly.

"No, I don't," Helen replied, "but I think she is more furious with you
than you believe. For months you have acted--well, how shall I say?"

"Oh, like a coward, if you like, or a fool. Go on."

"She has asked for explanations to which she is perfectly entitled,"
Helen continued, "and you have given her none. You have treated her like
something between a doll and a child. Philippa is as good and sweet as
any woman who ever lived, but hasn't it ever occurred to you that women
are rather mysterious beings? They may sometimes do, out of a furious
sense of being wrongly treated, out of a sort of aggravated pique, what
they would never do for any other reason. If you must go, come back
to-night, Henry. Come back, and if you are obstinate, and won't tell
Philippa all that she has a right to know, tell her about that luncheon
in town."

Sir Henry frowned.

"It's all very well, you know, Helen," he said, "but a woman ought to
trust her husband."

"I am your friend, remember," Helen replied, "and upon my word, I
couldn't trust and believe even in Dick, if he behaved as you have done
for the last twelve months."

Sir Henry made a grimace.

"Well, that settles it, I suppose, then," he observed. "I'll have one
more try and see what I can do with Philippa. Perhaps a hint of what's
going on may satisfy her."

He climbed the stairs, meeting Nora on her way down, and knocked at his
wife's door. There was no reply. He tried the handle and found the door
locked.

"Are you there, Philippa?" he asked.

"Yes!" she replied coldly.

"I am going to London this morning. Can I have a few words with you
first?"

"No!"

Sir Henry was a little taken aback.

"Don't be silly, Philippa," he persisted. "I may be away for four or
five days."

There was no answer. Sir Henry suddenly remembered another entrance
from a newly added bathroom. He availed himself of it and found Philippa
seated in an easy-chair, calmly progressing with her breakfast. She
raised her eyebrows at his entrance.

"These are my apartments," she reminded him.

"Don't be a little fool," he exclaimed impatiently.

Philippa deliberately buttered herself a piece of toast, picked up her
book, and became at once immersed in it.

"You don't wish to talk to me, then?" he demanded.

"I do not," she agreed. "You have had all the opportunities which any
man should need, of explaining certain matters to me. My curiosity
in them has ended; also my interest--in you. You say you are going to
London. Very well. Pray do not hurry home on my account."

Sir Henry, as he turned to leave the room, made the common mistake of a
man arguing with a woman--he attempted to have the last word.

"Perhaps I am better out of the way, eh?"

"Perhaps so," Philippa assented sweetly.



CHAPTER XXVI


Philippa, late that afternoon, found what she sought--solitude. She had
walked along the sands until Dreymarsh lay out of sight on the other
side of a spur of the cliffs. Before her stretched a long and level
plain, a fringe of sand, and a belt of shingly beach. There was not a
sign of any human being in sight, and of buildings only a quaint tower
on the far horizon.

She found a dry place on the pebbles, removed her hat and sat down, her
hands clasped around her knees, her eyes turned seaward. She had
come out here to think, but it was odd how fugitive and transient her
thoughts became. Her husband was always there in the background, but
in those moments it was Lessingham who was the predominant figure. She
remembered his earnestness, his tender solicitude for her, the courage
which, when necessity demanded, had flamed up in him, a born and natural
quality. She remembered the agony of those few minutes on the preceding
day, when nothing but what still seemed a miracle had saved him. At one
moment she felt herself inclined to pray that he might never come back.
At another, her heart ached to see him once more. She knew so well
that if he came it would be for her sake, that he would come to ask her
finally the question with which she had fenced. She knew, too, that his
coming would be the moment of her life. She was so much of a woman, and
the passionate craving of her sex to give love for love was there in her
heart, almost omnipotent. And in the background there was that bitter
desire to bring suffering upon the man who had treated her like a child,
who had placed her in a false position with all other women, who had
dawdled and idled away his days, heedless of his duty, heedless of every
serious obligation. When she tried to reason, her way seemed so clear,
and yet, behind it all, there was that cold impulse of almost Victorian
prudishness, the inheritance of a long line of virtuous women, a
prudishness which she had once, when she had believed that it was part
of her second nature, scoffed at as being the outcome of one of the
finer forms of selfishness.

She told herself that she had come there to decide, and decision came no
nearer to her. A late afternoon star shone weakly in the sky. A faint,
vaporous mist obscured the horizon and floated in tangled wreaths upon
the face of the sea. Only that line of sand seemed still clear-cut and
distinct, and as she glanced along it her eyes were held by something
approaching, something which seemed at first nothing but a black, moving
speck, then gradually resolved itself into the semblance of a man on
horseback, galloping furiously. She watched him as he drew nearer and
nearer, the sand flying from his horse's hoofs, his figure motionless,
his eyes apparently fixed upon some distant spot. It was not until he
had come within fifty yards of her that she recognised him. His horse
shied at the sight of her and was suddenly swung round with a powerful
wrist. Little specks of sand, churned up in the momentary stampede
of hoofs, fell upon her skirt. For the rest, she watched the struggle
composedly, a struggle which was over almost as soon as it was begun.
Captain Griffiths leaned down from his trembling but subdued horse.

"Lady Cranston!" he exclaimed in astonishment.

"That's me," she replied, smiling up at him. "Have you been riding off
your bad temper?"

He glanced down at his horse's quivering sides. Back as far as one could
see there was that regular line of hoof marks.

"Am I bad-tempered?" he asked.

"Well," she observed, "I don't know you well enough to answer that
question. I was simply thinking of yesterday evening."

He slipped from his horse and stood before her. His long, severe face
had seldom seemed more malevolent.

"I had enough to make me bad-tempered," he declared. "I had tracked
down a German spy, step by step, until I had him there, waiting for
arrest--expecting it, even--and then I got that wicked message."

"What was that wicked message after all?" she enquired.

"That doesn't matter," he answered. "It was from a quarter where they
ought to know better, and it ordered me to make no arrest. I have sent
to the War Office to-day a full report, and I am praying that they may
change their minds."

Philippa sighed.

"If you hadn't received that telegram last night," she observed, "it
seems to me that I should have been a widow to-day."

He frowned, and struck his boot heavily with his riding whip.

"Yes, I heard of that," he admitted. "I dare say if he hadn't gone,
though, some one else would."

"Would you have gone if you had been there?" she asked.

"If you had told me to," he replied, looking at her steadfastly.

Philippa felt a little shiver. There was something ominous in the
intensity of his gaze and the meaning which he had contrived to impart
to his tone. She rose to her feet.

"Well," she said, "don't let me keep you here. I am getting cold."

He passed his arm through the bridle of his horse. "I will walk with
you, if I may," he proposed. She made no reply, and they set their faces
homewards.

"I hear Lessingham has left the place," he remarked, a little abruptly.

"Oh, I expect he'll come back," Philippa replied.

"How long is it, Lady Cranston, since you took to consorting with German
spies?" he asked.

"Don't be foolish--or impertinent," she enjoined. "You are making a
ridiculous mistake about Mr. Lessingham."

He laughed unpleasantly.

"No need for us to fence," he said. "You and I know who he is. What I
do want to know, what I have been wondering all the way from the point
there--four miles of hard galloping and one question--why are you his
friend? What is he to you?"

"Really, Captain Griffiths," she protested, looking up at him, "of what
possible interest can that be to you?"

"Well, it is, anyhow," he answered gruffly. "Anything that concerns you
is of interest to me."

Philippa realised at that moment, perhaps for the first time, what it
all meant. She realised the significance of those apparently purposeless
afternoon calls, when through sheer boredom she had had to send for
Helen to help her out; the significance of those long silences, the
melancholy eyes which seemed to follow her movements. She felt an
unaccountable desire to laugh, and then, at the first twitchings of her
lips, she restrained herself. She knew that tragedy was stalking by her
side.

"I think, Captain Griffiths," she said gravely, "that you are talking
nonsense, and you are not a very good hand at it. Won't you please ride
on?"

He made no movement to mount his horse. He plodded along the soft sand
by her side--a queer, elongated figure, his gloomy eyes fixed upon the
ground.

"Until this fellow Lessingham came you were never so hard," he
persisted.

She looked at him with genuine curiosity.

"I was never so hard?" she repeated. "Do you imagine that I have ever
for a single moment considered my demeanour towards you--you of all
persons in the world? I simply don't remember when you have been there
and when you haven't. I don't remember the humours in which I have been
when we have conversed. All that you have said seems to me to be the
most arrant nonsense."

He swung himself into the saddle and gathered up the reins.

"Thank you," he said bitterly, "I understand. Only let me tell you
this," he went on, his whip poised in his hand. "You may have powerful
friends who saved your--"

He hesitated so long that she glanced up at him and read all that he had
wished to say in his face.

"My what?" she asked.

His courage failed him.

"Mr. Lessingham," he proceeded, "from arrest. But if he shows his face
here again in Dreymarsh, I sha'n't stop to arrest him. I shall shoot him
on sight and chance the consequences."

"They'll hang you!" she declared savagely.

He laughed at her.

"Hang me for shooting a man whom I can prove to be a German spy? They
won't dare! They won't even dare to place me under arrest for an hour.
Why, when the truth becomes known," he went on, his voice gaining
courage as the justice of his case impressed itself upon him, "what do
you suppose is going to happen to two women who took this fellow in and
befriended him, introduced him under a false name to their friends, gave
him the run of their house--this man whom they knew all the time was a
German? You, Lady Cranston, chafing and scolding your husband by night
and by day because he isn't where you think he ought to be; you, so
patriotic that you cannot bear the sight of him out of uniform; you--the
hostess, the befriender, the God knows what of Bertram Maderstrom! It
will be a pretty tale when it's all told!"

"I really think," Philippa asserted calmly, "that you are the most
utterly impossible and obnoxious creature I have ever met."

His face was dangerous for a moment. They had not yet reached the
promontory which sheltered them from Dreymarsh.

"Perhaps," he muttered, leaning malignly towards her, "I could make
myself even more obnoxious."

"Quite possibly," she replied, "only I want to tell you this. If you
come a single inch nearer to me, one of them shall shoot you."

"Your friend or your husband, eh?" he scoffed.

She waved him on.

"I think," she told him, "that either of them would be quite capable of
ridding the world of a coward like you."

"A coward?" he repeated.

"Precisely! Isn't it a coward's part to terrorise a woman?"

"I don't want to terrorise you," he said sulkily.

"Well, you must admit that you haven't shown any particular desire to
make yourself agreeable," she pointed out.

He turned suddenly upon her.

"I am a fool, I know," he declared bitterly. "I'm an awkward, nervous,
miserable fool, my own worst enemy as they say of me in the Mess,
turning the people against me I want to have like me, stumbling into
every blunder a fool can. I'm the sort of man women make sport of, and
you've done it for them cruelly, perfectly."

"Captain Griffiths!" she protested. "When have I ever been anything but
kind and courteous to you?"

"It isn't your kindness I want, nor your courtesy! There's a curse upon
my tongue," he went on desperately. "I'm not like other men. I don't
know how to say what I feel. I can't put it into words. Every one
misunderstands me. You, too! Here I rode up to you this afternoon and
my heart was beating for joy, and in five minutes I had made an enemy of
you. Damn that fellow Lessingham! It is all his fault!"

Without the slightest warning he brought down his hunting crop upon his
horse's flanks. The mare gave one great plunge, and he was off, riding
at a furious gallop. Philippa watched him with immense relief. In the
far distance she could see two little specks growing larger and larger.
She hurried on towards them.

"Whatever did you do to Captain Griffiths, Mummy?" Nora demanded. "Why
he passed us without looking down, galloping like a madman, and his face
looked--well, what did it look like, Helen?"

Helen was gazing uneasily along the sands.

"Like a man riding for his enemy," she declared.



CHAPTER XXVII


Philippa and Helen looked at one another a little dolefully across the
luncheon table.

"I suppose one misses the child," Helen said.

"I feel too depressed for words," Philippa admitted.

"A few days ago," Helen reminded her companion, "we were getting all the
excitement that was good for any one."

"And a little more," Philippa agreed. "I don't know why things seem
so flat now. We really ought to be glad that nothing terrible has
happened."

"What with Henry and Mr. Lessingham both away," Helen continued, "and
Captain Griffiths not coming near the place, we really have reverted to
the normal, haven't we? I wonder--if Mr. Lessingham has gone back."

"I do not think so," Philippa murmured.

Helen frowned slightly.

"Personally," she said, with some emphasis, "I hope that he has."

"If we are considering the personal point of view only," Philippa
retorted, "I hope that he has not."

Helen looked her disapproval.

"I should have thought that you had had enough playing with fire," she
observed.

"One never has until one has burned one's fingers," Philippa sighed.
"I know perfectly well what is the matter with you," she continued
severely. "You are fretting because curried chicken is Dick's favourite
dish."

"I am not such a baby," Helen protested. "All the same, it does make one
think. I wonder--"

"I know exactly what you were going to say," Philippa interrupted. "You
were going to say that you wondered whether Mr. Lessingham would keep
his promise."

"Whether he would be able to," Helen corrected. "It does seem so
impossible, doesn't it?"

"So does Mr. Lessingham himself," Philippa reminded her. "It isn't
exactly a usual thing, is it, to have a perfectly charming and well-bred
young man step out of a Zeppelin into your drawing-room."

"You really believe, then," Helen asked eagerly, "that he will be able
to keep his promise?"

Philippa nodded confidently.

"Do you know," she said, "I believe that Mr. Lessingham, by some means
or another, would keep any promise he ever made. I am expecting to see
Dick at any moment now, so you can get on with your lunch, dear, and not
sit looking at the curry with tears in your eyes."

"It isn't the curry so much as the chutney," Helen protested faintly.
"He never would touch any other sort."

"Well, I shouldn't be surprised if he were here to finish the bottle,"
Philippa declared. "I have a feeling this morning that something is
going to happen."

"How long has Nora gone away for?" Helen enquired, after a moment's
pause.

"A fortnight or three weeks," Philippa answered. "Her grandmother wired
that she would be glad to have her until Christmas."

"Just why," Helen asked seriously, "have you sent her away?"

Philippa toyed with her curry, and glanced around as though she
regretted Mills' absence from the room.

"I thought it best," she said quietly. "You see, I am not quite sure
what the immediate future of this menage is going to be."

Helen leaned across the table and laid her hand upon her friend's.

"Dear," she sighed, "it worries me so to hear you talk like that."

"Why?"

"Because you know perfectly well, although you profess to ignore it,
that at the bottom of your heart there is no one else but Henry. It
isn't fair, you know."

"To whom isn't it fair?" Philippa demanded.

"To Mr. Lessingham."

Philippa was thoughtful for a few moments.

"Perhaps," she admitted, "that is a point of view which I have not
sufficiently considered."

Helen pressed home her advantage.

"I don't think you realise, Philippa," she said, "how madly in love with
you the man is. In a perfectly ingenuous way, too. No one could help
seeing it."

"Then where does the unfairness come in?" Philippa asked. "It is within
my power to give him all that he wants."

"But you wouldn't do it, Philippa. You know that you wouldn't!" Helen
objected. "You may play with the idea in your mind, but that's just as
far as you'd ever get."


Philippa looked her friend steadily in the face. "I disagree with you,
Helen," she said. Helen set down the glass which she had been in the act
of raising to her lips. It was her first really serious intimation of
the tragedy which hovered over her future sister-in-law's life. Somehow
or other, Philippa had seemed, even to her, so far removed from that
strenuous world of over-drugged, over-excited feminine decadence, to
whom the changing of a husband or a lover is merely an incident in
the day's excitements. Philippa, with her frail and almost flowerlike
beauty, her love of the wholesome ways of life, and her strong
affections, represented other things. Now, for the first time, Helen was
really afraid, afraid for her friend.

"But you couldn't ever--you wouldn't leave Henry!"

Philippa seemed to find nothing monstrous in the idea.

"That is just what I am seriously thinking of doing," she confided.

Helen affected to laugh, but her mirth was obviously forced. Their
conversation ceased perforce with the return of Mills into the room.

Then the wonderful thing happened. The windows of the dining room faced
the drive to the house and both women could clearly see a motor car turn
in at the gate and stop at the front door. It was obviously a hired
car, as the driver was not in livery, but the tall, mulled-up figure
in unfamiliar clothes who occupied the front seat was for the moment a
mystery to them. Only Helen seemed to have some wonderful premonition of
the truth, a premonition which she was afraid to admit even to herself.
Her hand began to shake. Philippa looked at her in amazement.

"You look as though you had seen a ghost, Helen!" she exclaimed. "Who on
earth can it be, coming at this time of the day?"

Helen was speechless, and Philippa divined at once the cause of her
agitation. She sprang to her feet.

"Helen, you don't imagine--" she gasped. "Listen!"

There was a voice in the hail--a familiar voice, though strained a
little and hoarse; Mills' decorous greetings, agitated but fervent. And
then--Major Richard Felstead!

"Dick!" Helen screamed, as she threw herself into his arms. "Oh, Dick!
Dick!"

It was an incoherent, breathless moment. Somehow or other, Philippa
found herself sharing her brother's embrace. Then the fire of questions
and answers was presently interrupted by Mills, triumphantly bearing in
a fresh dish of curry.

"What will the Major take to drink, your ladyship?" he asked.

Felstead laughed a little chokingly.

"Upon my word, there's something wonderfully sound about Mills!" he
said. "It's a ghoulish thing to ask for in the middle of the day, isn't
it, Philippa, but can I have some champagne?"

"You can have the whole cellarful," Philippa assured him joyously. "Be
sure you bring the best, Mills."

"The Perrier Jonet 1904, your ladyship," was the murmured reply.

Mills' disappearance was very brief, and in a very few moments they
found themselves seated once more at the table. They sat one on
either side of him, watching his glass and his plate. By degrees their
questions and his answers became more intelligible.

"When did you get here?" they wanted to know.

"I arrived in Harwich about daylight this morning," he told them; "came
across from Holland. I hired a car and drove straight here."

"When did you know you were coming home?" Helen asked.

"Only two days ago," he replied. "I never was so surprised in my life.
Even now I can't realise my good luck. I can't see what I've done. The
last two months, in fact, seem to me to have been a dream. Jove!" he
went on, as he drank his wine, "I never thought I should be such a pig
as to care so much for eating and drinking!"

"And think what weeks of it you have before you?" Helen explained,
clapping her hands. "Philippa and I will have a new interest in life--to
make you fat."

He laughed.

"It won't be very difficult," he promised them. "I had several months of
semi-starvation before the miracle happened. It was all just the chance
of having had a pal up at Magdalen who's been serving in the German
Army--Bertram Maderstrom was his name. You remember him, Philippa? He
was a Swede in those days."

"What a dear he must have been to have remembered and to have been so
faithful!" Philippa observed, looking away for a moment.

"He's a real good sort," Felstead declared enthusiastically, "although
Heaven knows why he's turned German! He worked like a slave for me. I
dare say he didn't find it so difficult to get me better quarters and a
servant, and decent food, but when they told me that I was free--well,
it nearly knocked me silly."

"The dear fellow!" Philippa murmured pensively.

"Do you remember him, either of you?" Felstead continued. "Rather
good-looking he was, and a little shy, but quite a sportsman."

"I--seem to remember," Philippa admitted.

"The name sounds familiar," Helen echoed. "Do have some more chutney,
Dick."

"Thanks! What a pig I am making of myself!" he observed cheerfully.
"You girls will think I can't talk about any one but Maderstrom, but the
whole business beats me so completely. Of course, we were great pals, in
a way, but I never thought that I was the apple of his eye, or anything
of that sort. How he got the influence, too, I can't imagine. And oh!
I knew there was something else I was going to ask you girls,"
Felstead went on. "Have you ever had a letter, or rather a letter each,
uncensored? Just a line or two? I think I mentioned Maderstrom which I
should not have been allowed to do in the ordinary prison letters."

Felstead was helping himself to cheese, and he saw nothing of the quick
glance which passed between the two women.

"Yes, we had them, Dick," Philippa told him. "It was one afternoon--it
doesn't seem so very long ago. And oh, how thankful we were!"

Felstead nodded.

"He got them across all right, then. Tell me, did they come through
Holland? What was the postmark?"

"The postmark," Philippa repeated, a little doubtfully. "You heard what
Dick asked, Helen? The postmark?"

"I don't think there was one," Helen replied, glancing anxiously at
Philippa.

Felstead set down his glass.

"No postmark? You mean no foreign postmark, I suppose? They were posted
in England, eh?"

Philippa shook her head.

"They came to us, Dick," she said, "by hand."

Felstead was, without a doubt, astonished. He turned round in his chair
towards Philippa.

"By hand?" he repeated. "Do you mean to say that they were actually
brought here by hand?"

Perhaps something in his manner warned them. Philippa laughed as she
bent over his chair.

"We will tell you how they came, presently," she declared, "but
not until you have finished your lunch, drunk the last drop of that
champagne, and had at least two glasses of the port that Mills has been
decanting so carefully. After that we will see. Just now I have only one
feeling, and I know that Helen has it, too. Nothing else matters except
that we have you home again."

Felstead patted his sister on the cheek, drew her face down to his and
kissed her.

"It's so wonderful to be at home!" he exclaimed apologetically. "But I
must warn you that I am the rabidest person alive. I went out to the
war with a certain amount of respect for the Germans. I have come back
loathing them like vermin. I spent--but I won't go on."

Mills made his appearance with the decanter of port.

"I beg your ladyship's pardon," he said, as he filled Felstead's glass,
"but Mr. Lessingham has arrived and is in the library, waiting to see
you."



CHAPTER XXVIII


To Major Richard Felstead, Mills' announcement was without significance.
For the first time he became conscious, however, of something which
seemed almost like a secret understanding between his sister and his
fiancee.

"Tell Mr. Lessingham I shall be with him in a minute or two, if he will
kindly wait," Philippa instructed.

"Who is Mr. Lessingham?" Richard enquired, as soon as the door had
closed behind Mills. "Seems a queer time to call."

Helen glanced at Philippa, whose lips framed a decided negative.

"Mr. Lessingham is a gentleman staying in the neighbourhood," the
latter replied. "You will probably make his acquaintance before long.
Incidentally, he saved Henry's life the other night."

"Sounds exciting," Richard observed. "What form of destruction was Henry
courting?"

"There was a trawler shipwrecked in the storm," Philippa explained. "You
can see it from all the front windows. Henry was on board, returning
from one of his fishing excursions. They were trying to find Dumble's
anchorage and were driven in on to that low ridge of rock. A rope broke,
or something, they had no more rockets, and Mr. Lessingham swam out with
the line."

"Sounds like a plucky chap," Richard admitted.

Philippa rose to her feet regretfully.

"I expect he has come to wish us good-by," she said. "I'll leave you
with Helen, Dick. Don't let her overfeed you. And you know where the
cigars are, Helen. Take Dick into the gun room afterwards. You'll have
it all to yourselves and there is a fire there."

Philippa entered the library in a state of agitation for which she was
glad to have some reasonable excuse. She held out both her hands to
Lessingham.

"Dick is back--just arrived!" she exclaimed. "I can't tell you how happy
we are, and how grateful!"

Lessingham raised her fingers to his lips.

"I am glad," he said simply. "Do you mean that he is in the house here,
now?"

"He is in the dining room with Helen."

Lessingham for a moment was thoughtful.

"Don't you think," he suggested, "that it would be better to keep us
apart?"

"I was wondering," she confessed.

"Have you told him about my bringing the letters?"

She shook her head.

"We nearly did. Then I stopped--I wasn't sure."

"You were wise," he said.

"Are you wise?" she asked him quickly.

"In coming back here?"

She nodded.

"Captain Griffiths knows everything," she reminded him. "He is simply
furious because your arrest was interfered with. I really believe that
he is dangerous."

Lessingham was unmoved.

"I had to come back," he said simply.

"Why did you go away so suddenly?"

"Well, I had to do that, too," he replied, "only the governing causes
were very different. We will speak, if you do not mind, only of the
cause which has brought me back. That I believe you know already."

Philippa was curiously afraid. She looked towards the door as though
with some vague hope of escape. She realised that the necessity for
decision had arrived.

"Philippa," he went on, "do you see what this is?"

He handed her two folded slips of paper. She started. At the top of one
she recognised a small photograph of herself.

"What are they?" she asked. "What does it mean?"

"They are passports for America," he told her.

"For--for me?" she faltered.

"For you and me."

They slipped from her fingers. He picked them up from the carpet. Her
face was hidden for a moment in her hands.

"I know so well how you are feeling," he said humbly. "I know how
terrible a shock this must seem to you when it comes so near. You are
so different from the other women who might do this thing. It is so much
harder for you than for them."

She lifted her head. There was still something of the look of a scared
child in her face.

"Don't imagine me better than I am," she begged. "I am not really
different from any other woman, only it is the first time this sort of
thing has ever come into my life."

"I know. You see," he went on, a little wistfully, "you have not taken
me, as yet, very far into your confidence, Philippa. You know that I
love you as a man loves only once. It sounds like an empty phrase to say
it, but if you will give me your life to take care of, I shall only have
one thought--to make you happy. Could I succeed? That is what you have
to ask yourself. You are not happy now. Do you think that, if you stay
on here, the future is likely to be any better for you?"

She shook her head drearily.

"I believe," she confessed, "that I have reached the very limit of my
endurance."

He came a little nearer. His hands rested upon her shoulders very
lightly, yet they seemed like some enveloping chain. More than ever in
those few moments she realised the spiritual qualities of his face.
His eyes were aglow. His voice, a little broken with emotion, was
wonderfully tender. He looked at her as though she were some precious
and sacred thing.

"I am rich," he said, "and there are few parts of the world where we
could not live. We could find our way to the islands, like your great
writer Stevenson in whom you delight so much; islands full of colour,
and wonderful birds, and strange blue skies; islands where the peace of
the tropics dulls memory, and time beats only in the heart. The world is
a great place, Philippa, and there are corners where the sordid crime of
this ghastly butchery has scarcely been heard of, where the horror and
the taint of it are as though they never existed, where the sun and
moon are still unashamed, and the grey monsters ride nowhere upon the
sapphire seas."

"It sounds like a fairy tale," she murmured, with a half pathetic smile.

"Love always fashions life like a fairy tale," he replied.

She stood perfectly still.

"You must have my answer now, at this moment?" she asked at last.

"There are yet some hours," he told her. "I have a very powerful
automobile here, and to-night there is a full moon. If we leave here at
ten o'clock, we can catch the steamer to-morrow afternoon. Everything
has been made very easy for me. And fortune, too, is with us--your
vindictive commandant, Captain Griffiths, is in London. You see,
you have the whole afternoon for thought. I want you only for your
happiness. At ten o'clock I shall come here. If you are coming with me,
you must be ready then. You understand?"

"I understand," she assented, under her breath. "And now," she went
on, raising her eyes, "somehow I think that you are right. It would be
better for you and Dick not to meet."

"I am sure of it," he agreed. "I shall come for my answer at ten
o'clock. I wonder--"

He stood looking at her, his eyes hungry to find some sign in her face.
There was so much kindness there, so much that might pass, even,
for affection, and yet something which, behind it all, chilled his
confidence. He left his sentence uncompleted and turned towards the
door. Suddenly she called him back. She held up her finger. Her whole
expression had changed. She was alarmed.

"Wait!" she begged. "I can hear Dick's voice. Wait till he has crossed
the hail."

They both stood, for a moment, quite silent. Then they heard a little
protesting cry from Helen, and a good-humoured laugh from Richard. The
door was thrown open.

"You don't mind our coming through to the gun room, Phil?" her brother
asked. "We're not--My God!"

There was a queer silence, broken by Helen, who stood on the threshold,
the picture of distress.

"I tried to get him to go the other way, Philippa."

Richard took a quick step forward. His hands were outstretched.

"Bertram!" he exclaimed. "Is this a miracle? You here with my sister?"

Lessingham held out his hand. Suddenly Richard dropped his. His
expression had become sterner.

"I don't understand," he said simply. "Somebody please explain."



CHAPTER XXIX


For a few brief seconds no one seemed inclined to take upon themselves
the onus of speech. Richard's amazement seemed to increase upon
reflection.

"Maderstrom!" he exclaimed. "Bertram! What in the name of all that's
diabolical are you doing here?"

"I am just a derelict," Lessingham explained, with a faint smile. "Glad
to see you, Richard. You are a day earlier than I expected."

"You knew that I was coming, then?" Richard demanded.

"Naturally," Lessingham replied. "I had the great pleasure of arranging
for your release."

"Look here," Richard went on, "I'm groping about a bit. I don't
understand. Forgive me if I run off the track. I'm not forgetting our
friendship, Maderstrom, or what I owe to you since you came and found me
at Wittenburg. But for all that, you have served in the German Army and
are an enemy, and I want to know what you are doing here, in England, in
my brother-in-law's house."

"No particular harm, Richard, I promise you," Lessingham replied mildly.

"You are here under a false name!"

"Hamar Lessingham, if you do not mind," the other assented. "I prefer my
own name, but I do not fancy that the use of it would ensure me a very
warm welcome over here just now. Besides," he added, with a glance
at Philippa, "I have to consider the friends whose hospitality I have
enjoyed."

In a shadowy sort of way the truth began to dawn upon Richard. His tone
became grimmer and his manner more menacing.

"Maderstrom," he said, "we met last under different circumstances. I
will admit that I cut a poor figure, but mine was at least an honourable
imprisonment. I am not so sure that yours is an honourable freedom."

Philippa laid her hand upon her brother's arm.

"Dick, dear, do remember that they were starving you to death!" she
begged.

"You would never have lived through it," Helen echoed.

"You are talking to Mr. Lessingham," Philippa protested, "as though he
were an enemy, instead of the best friend you ever had in your life."

Richard waved them away.

"You must leave this to us," he insisted. "Maderstrom and I will be
able to understand one another, at any rate. What are you doing in this
house--in England? What is your mission here?"

"Whatever it may have been, it is accomplished," Lessingham said
gravely. "At the present moment, my plans are to leave your country
to-night."

"Accomplished?" Richard repeated. "What the devil do you mean?
Accomplished? Are you playing the spy in this country?"

"You would probably consider my mission espionage," Lessingham admitted.

"And you have brought it to a successful conclusion?"

"I have."

Philippa threw her arms around her brother's neck. "Dick," she pleaded,
"please listen. Mr. Lessingham has been here, in this district, ever
since he landed in England. What possible harm could he do? We haven't
a single secret to be learned. Everybody knows where our few guns are.
Everybody knows where our soldiers are quartered. We haven't a harbour
or any secret fortifications. We haven't any shipping information which
it would be of the least use signalling anywhere. Mr. Lessingham has
spent his time amongst trifles here. Take Helen away somewhere and
forget that you have seen him in the house. Remember that he has saved
Henry's life as well as yours."

"I invite no consideration upon that account," Lessingham declared. "All
that I did for you in Germany, I did, or should have attempted to do,
for my old friend. Your release was different. I am forced to admit
that it was the price paid for my sojourn here. I will only ask you to
remember that the bargain was made without your knowledge, and that you
are in no way responsible for it."

"A price," Richard pronounced fiercely, "which I refuse to pay!"

Lessingham shrugged his shoulders.

"The alternative," he confessed, "is in your hands."

Richard moved towards the telephone.

"I am sorry, Maderstrom," he said, "but my duty is clear. Who is
Commandant here, Philippa?"

Philippa stood between her brother and the telephone. There was a queer,
angry patch of colour in her cheeks. Her eyes were on fire.

"Richard," she exclaimed, "you shall not do this from my house! I forbid
you!"

"Do what?"

"Give information. Do you know what it would mean if they believed you?"

"Death," he answered. "Maderstrom knew the risk he ran when he came to
this country under a false name."

"Perfectly," Lessingham admitted.

"But I won't have it!" Philippa protested. "He has become our friend.
Day by day we have grown to like him better and better. He has saved
your life, Dick. He has brought you back to us. Think what it is that
you purpose!"

"It is what every soldier has to face," Richard declared.

"You men drive me crazy with your foolish ideas!" Philippa cried
desperately. "The war is in your brains, I think. You would carry it
from the battlefields into your daily life. Because two great countries
are at war, is everything to go by--chivalry?--all the finer, sweeter
feelings of life? If you two met on the battlefield, it would be
different. Here in my drawing-room, I will not have this black demon of
the war dragged in as an excuse for murder! Take Dick away, Helen!" she
begged. "Mr. Lessingham is leaving to-night. I will pledge my word that
until then he remains a harmless citizen."

"Women don't understand these things, Philippa--" Richard began.

"Thank heavens we understand them better than you men!" Philippa
interrupted fiercely. "You have but one idea--to strike--the narrow
idea of men that breeds warfare. I tell you that if ever universal peace
comes, if ever the nations are taught the horror of this lust for blood,
this criminal outrage against civilisation, it is the women who will
become the teachers, because amongst your instincts the brutish ones of
force are the first to leap to the surface at the slightest provocation.
We women see further, we know more. I swear to you, Richard, that if you
interfere I will never forgive you as long as I live!"

Richard stared at his sister in amazement. There seemed to be some new
spirit born within her. Throughout all their days he had never known her
so much in earnest, so passionately insistent. He looked from her to the
man whom she sought to protect, and who answered, unasked, the thoughts
that were in his mind.

"Whatever harm I may have been able to do," Lessingham announced, "is
finished. I leave this place to-night, probably for ever. As for the
Commandant," he went on with a faint smile, "he is already upon my
track. There is nothing you can tell him about me which he does not
know. It is just a matter of hours, the toss of a coin, whether I get
away or not."

"They've found you out, then?" Richard exclaimed.

"Only a miracle saved me from arrest a week ago," Lessingham
acknowledged. "Your Commandant here is at the present moment in London
for the sole purpose of denouncing me."

"And yet you remain here, paying afternoon calls?" Richard observed
incredulously. "I'm hanged if I can see through this!"

"You see," Lessingham explained gently. "I am a fatalist!"

It was Helen who finally led her lover from the room. He looked back
from the door.

"Maderstrom," he said, "you know quite well how personally I feel
towards you. I am grateful for what you have done for me, even though I
am beginning to understand your motives. But as regards the other things
we are both soldiers. I am going to talk to Helen for a time. I want to
understand a little more than I do at present."

Lessingham nodded.

"Let me help you," he begged. "Here is the issue in plain words. All
that I did for you at Wittenberg, I should have done in any case for
the sake of our friendship. Your freedom would probably never have been
granted to me but for my mission, although even that I might have tried
to arrange. I brought your letters here, and I traded them with your
sister and Miss Fairclough for the shelter of their hospitality and
their guarantees. Now you know just where friendship ended and the other
things began. Do what you believe to be your duty."

Richard followed Helen out, closing the door after him. Lessingham
looked down into Philippa's face.

"You are more wonderful even than I thought," he continued softly. "You
say so little and you live so near the truth. It is those of us who feel
as you do--who understand--to whom this war is so terrible."

"I want to ask you one question before I send you away," she told him.
"This journey to America?"

"It is a mission on behalf of Germany," he explained, "but it is, after
all, an open one. I have friends--highly placed friends--in my own
country, who in their hearts feel as I do about the war. It is through
them that I am able to turn my back upon Europe. I have done my share
of fighting," he went on sadly, "and the horror of it will never quite
leave me. I think that no one has ever charged me with shirking my duty,
and yet the sheer, black ugliness of this ghastly struggle, its criminal
inutility, have got into my blood so that I think I would rather pass
out of the world in some simple way than find myself back again in that
debauch of blood. Is this cowardice, Philippa?"

She looked at him with shining eyes.

"There isn't any one in the world," she said, "who could call you a
coward. Whatever I may decide, whatever I may feel towards you, that at
least I know."

He kissed her fingers.

"At ten o'clock," he began--

"But listen," she interrupted. "Apart from anything which Dick might
do, you are in terrible danger here, all the more if you really have
accomplished something. Why not go now, at this moment? Why wait? These
few hours may make all the difference."

He smiled.

"They may, indeed, make all the difference to my life," he answered.
"That is for you."

He followed Mills, who had obeyed her summons, out of the room. Philippa
moved to the window and watched him until he had disappeared. Then very
slowly she left the room, walked up the stairs, made her way to her own
little suite of apartments, and locked the door.



CHAPTER XXX


It was a happy, if a trifle hysterical little dinner party that evening
at Mainsail Haul. Philippa was at times unusually silent, but Helen had
expanded in the joy of her great happiness. Richard, shaved and with
his hair cut, attired once more in the garb of civilisation, seemed
a different person. Even in these few hours the lines about his mouth
seemed less pronounced. They talked freely of Maderstrom.

"A regular 'Vanity Fair' problem," Richard declared, balancing his wine
glass between his fingers, "a problem, too, which I can't say I have
solved altogether yet. The only thing is that if he is really going
to-night, I don't see why I shouldn't let the matter drift out of my
mind."

"It is so much better," Helen agreed. "Try as hard as ever I can, I
cannot picture his doing any harm to anybody. And as for any information
he may have gained here, well, I think that we can safely let him take
it back to Germany."

"He was always," Richard continued reminiscently, "a sort of cross
between a dreamer, an idealist, and a sportsman. There was never
anything of the practical man of affairs about him. He was scrupulously
honourable, and almost a purist in his outlook upon life. I have met
a great many Germans," Richard went on, "and I've killed a few, thank
God!--but he is about as unlike the ordinary type as any one I ever met.
The only pity is that he ever served his time with them."

Philippa had been listening attentively. She was more than ever silent
after her brother's little appreciation of his friend. Richard glanced
at her good-humouredly.

"You haven't killed the fatted calf for me in the shape of clothes,
Philippa," he observed. "One would think that you were going on a
journey."

She glanced down at her high-necked gown and avoided Helen's anxious
eyes.

"I may go for a walk," she said, "and leave you two young people to talk
secrets. I am rather fond of the garden these moonlight nights."

"When is Henry coming back?" her brother enquired.

Philippa's manner was quiet but ominous.

"I have no idea," she confessed. "He comes and goes as the whim seizes
him, and I very seldom know where he is. One week it is whiting and
another codling. Lately he seems to have shown some partiality for
London life."

Richard's eyes were wide open now.

"You mean to say that he is still not doing anything?"

"Nothing whatever."

"But what excuse does he give--or rather I should say reason?" Richard
persisted.

"He says that he is too old for a ship, and he won't work in an office,"
Philippa replied. "That is what he says. His point of view is so
impossible that I can not even discuss it with him."

"It's the rummest go I ever came across," Richard remarked
reminiscently. "I should have said that old Henry would have been up and
at 'em at the Admiralty before the first gun was fired."

"On the contrary," Philippa rejoined, "he took advantage of the war to
hire a Scotch moor at half-price, about a week after hostilities had
commenced."

"It's a rum go," Richard repeated. "I can't fancy Henry as a skulker.
Forgive me, Philippa," he added.

"You are entirely forgiven," she assured him drily.

"He comes of such a fine fighting stock," Richard mused. "I suppose his
health is all right?"

"His health," Philippa declared, "is marvellous. I should think he is
one of the strongest men I know."

Her brother patted her hand.

"You've been making rather a trouble of it, old girl," he said
affectionately. "It's no good doing that, you know. You wait and let me
have a talk with Henry."

"I think," she replied, "that nearly everything possible has already
been said to him."

"Perhaps you've put his back up a bit," Richard suggested, "and he may
really be on the lookout for something all the time."

"It has been a long search!" Philippa retorted, with quiet sarcasm. "Let
us talk about something else."

They gossiped for a time over acquaintances and relations, made their
plans for the week--Richard must report at the War Office at once.

Philippa grew more and more silent as the meal drew to a close. It was
at Helen's initiative that they left Richard alone for a moment over
his port. She kept her arm through her friend's as they crossed the hall
into the drawing-room, and closed the door behind them. Philippa stood
upon the hearth rug. Already her mouth had come together in a straight
line. Her eyes met Helen's defiantly.

"I know exactly what you are going to say, Helen," she began, "and I
warn you that it will be of no use."

Helen drew up a small chair and seated herself before the fire.

"Are you going away with Mr. Lessingham, Philippa?" she asked.

"I am," was the calm response. "I made up my mind this afternoon. We are
leaving to-night."

Helen stretched out one foot to the blaze.

"Motoring?" she enquired.

"Naturally," Philippa replied. "You know there are no trains leaving
here to-night."

"You'll have a cold ride," Helen remarked. "I should take your heavy fur
coat."

Philippa stared at her companion.

"You don't seem much upset, Helen!"

"I think," Helen declared, looking up, "that nothing that has ever
happened to me in my life has made me more unhappy, but I can see that
you have reasoned it all out, and there is not a single argument I could
use which you haven't already discounted. It is your life, Philippa, not
mine."

"Since you are so philosophical," Philippa observed, "let me ask
you--should you do what I am going to do, if you were in my place?"

"I should not," was the firm reply.

Philippa laughed heartily.

"Oh, I know what you are going to say!" Helen continued quickly. "You'll
tell me, won't you, that I am not temperamental. I think in your heart
you rather despise my absolute fidelity to Richard. You would call it
cowlike, or something of that sort. There is a difference between us,
Philippa, and that is why I am afraid to argue with you."

"What should you do," Philippa demanded, "if Richard failed you in some
great thing?"

"I might suffer," Helen confessed, "but my love would be there all the
same. Perhaps for that reason I should suffer the more, but I should
never be able to see with those who judged him hardly."

"You think, then," Philippa persisted, "that I ought still to remain
Henry's loving and affectionate wife, ready to take my place amongst the
pastimes of his life--when he feels inclined, for instance, to wander
from his dark lady-love to something petite and of my complexion, or
when he settles down at home for a few days after a fortnight's sport on
the sea and expects me to tell him the war news?"

"I don't think that I should do that," Helen admitted quietly, "but I am
quite certain that I shouldn't run away with another man."

"Why not?"

"Because I should be punishing myself too much."

Philippa's eyes suddenly flashed.

"Helen," she said, "you are not such a fool as you try to make me think.
Can't you see what is really at the back of it all in my mind? Can't you
realise that, whatever the punishment it may bring, it will punish Henry
more?"

"I see," Helen observed. "You are running away with Mr. Lessingham to
annoy Henry?"

"Oh, he'll be more than annoyed!" Philippa laughed sardonically. "He has
terrible ideas about the sanctity of things that belong to him. He'll be
remarkably sheepish for some time to come. He may even feel a few little
stabs. When I have time, I am going to write him a letter which he can
keep for the rest of his life. It won't please him!"

"Where are you--and Mr. Lessingham going to live?" Helen enquired.

"In America, to start with. I've always longed to go to the States."

"What shall you do," Helen continued, "if you don't get out of the
country safely?"

"Mr. Lessingham seems quite sure that we shall," Philippa replied, "and
he seems a person of many expedients. Of course, if we didn't, I should
go back to Cheshire. I should have gone back there, anyway, before now,
if Mr. Lessingham hadn't come."

"Well, it all seems very simple," Helen admitted. "I think Mr.
Lessingham is a perfectly delightful person, and I shouldn't wonder if
you didn't now and then almost imagine that you were happy."

"You seem to be taking my going very coolly," Philippa remarked.

"I told you how I felt about it just now," Helen reminded her. "Your
going is like a great black cloud that I have seen growing larger and
larger, day by day. I think that, in his way, Dick will suffer just as
much as Henry. We shall all be utterly miserable."

"Why don't you try and persuade me not to go, then?" Philippa demanded.
"You sit there talking about it as though I were going on an ordinary
country-house visit."

Helen raised her head, and Philippa saw that her eyes were filled with
tears.

"Philippa dear," she said, "if I thought that all the tears that were
ever shed, all the words that were ever dragged from one's heart, could
have any real effect, I'd go on my knees to you now and implore you to
give up this idea. But I think--you won't be angry with me, dear?--I
think you would go just the same."

"You seem to think that I am obstinate," Philippa complained.

"You see, you are temperamental, dear," Helen reminded her. "You have a
complex nature. I know very well that you need the daily love that Henry
doesn't seem to have been willing to give you lately, and I couldn't
stop your turning towards the sun, you know. Only--all the time there's
that terrible anxiety--are you quite sure it is the sun?"

"You believe in Mr. Lessingham, don't you?" Philippa asked.

"I do indeed," Helen replied. "I am not quite sure, though, that I
believe in you."

Philippa was a little startled.

"Well, I never!" she exclaimed. "Exactly what do you mean by that,
Helen?"

"I am not quite sure," Helen continued, "that when the moment has really
come, and your head is upturned and your arms outstretched, and your
feet have left this world in which you are now, I am not quite sure that
you will find all that you seek."

"You think he doesn't love me?"

"I am not convinced," Helen replied calmly, "that you love him."

"Why, you idiot," Philippa declared feverishly, "of course I love him!
I think he is one of the sweetest, most lovable persons I ever knew,
and as to his being a Swede, I shouldn't care whether he were a Fiji
Islander or a Chinese."

Helen nodded sympathetically.

"I agree with you," she said, "but listen. You know that I haven't
uttered a single word to dissuade you. Well, then, grant me just one
thing. Before you start off this evening, tell Mr. Lessingham the truth,
whatever it may be, the truth which you haven't told me. It very likely
won't make any difference. Two people as nice as you and he, who are
going to join their lives, generally do, I believe, find the things they
seek. Still, tell him."

Philippa made no reply. Richard opened the door and lingered upon the
threshold. Helen rose to her feet.

"I am coming, Dick," she called out cheerfully. "There's a gorgeous fire
in the gun room, and two big easy-chairs, and we'll have just the time I
have been looking forward to all day. You'll tell me things, won't you?"

She looked very sweet as she came towards him, her eyes raised to him,
her face full of the one happiness. He passed his arm around her waist.

"I'll try, dear," he said. "You won't be lonely, Philippa?"

"I'll come and disturb you when I am," she promised.

The door closed. She stood gazing down into the fire, listening to their
footsteps as they crossed the hall.



CHAPTER XXXI


Lessingham stood for a moment by the side of the car from which he had
just descended, glanced at the huge tyres and the tins of petrol lashed
on behind.

"Nothing more you want, chauffeur?" he asked.

"Nothing, sir," was the almost inaudible reply.

"You have the route map?"

"Yes, sir, and enough petrol for three hundred miles."

Lessingham turned away, pushed open the gate, and walked up the drive
of Mainsail Haul. Decidedly it was the moment of his life. He was
hard-pressed, as he knew, by others besides Griffiths. A few hours now
was all the start he could reasonably expect. He was face to face with a
very real and serious danger, which he could no longer ignore, and from
which escape was all the time becoming more difficult. And yet all
the emotionalism of this climax was centred elsewhere. It was from
Philippa's lips that he would hear his real sentence; it was her answer
which would fill him once more with the lust for life, or send him on in
his rush through the night for safety, callous, almost indifferent as to
its result.

He walked up the drive, curiously at his ease, in a state of suspended
animation, which knew no hope and feared no disappointment. Just before
he reached the front door, the postern gate in the wall on his left-hand
side opened, and Philippa stood there, muffled up in her fur coat,
framed in the faint and shadowy moonlight against the background of
seabounded space. He moved eagerly towards her.

"I heard the car," she whispered. "Come and sit down for a moment. It
isn't in the least cold, and the moon is just coming up over the sea.
I came out," she went on, as he walked obediently by her side, "because
the house somehow stifled me."

She led him to a seat. Below, the long waves were breaking through upon
the rocks, throwing little fountains of spray into the air. The village
which lay at their feet was silent and lifeless--there was, indeed, a
curious absence of sound, except when the incoming waves broke upon the
rocks and ground the pebbles together in their long, backward swish.
Very soon the sleeping country, now wrapped in shadows, would take form
and outline in the light of the rising moon; hedges would divide the
square fields, the black woods would take shape and the hills their
mystic solemnity. But those few minutes were minutes of suspense.
Lessingham was to some extent conscious of their queer, allegorical
significance.

"I have come," he reminded her quite steadily, "for my answer."

She showed him the small bag by her side upon the seat, and touched her
cloak. She was indeed prepared for a journey.

"You see," she told him, "here I am."

His face was suddenly transformed. She was almost afraid of the effect
of her words. She found herself struggling in his arms.

"Not yet," she begged. "Please remember where we are."

He released her reluctantly. A few yards away, they could hear the soft
purring of the six-cylinder engine, inexorable reminder of the passing
moments. He caught her by the hand.

"Come," he whispered passionately. "Every moment is precious."

She hesitated no longer. The open postern gate seemed to him suddenly to
lead down the great thoroughfare of a new and splendid life. He was to
be one of those favoured few to whom was given the divine prize. And
then he stopped short, even while she walked willingly by his side. He
knew so well the need for haste. The gentle murmur of that engine was
inviting him all the while. Yet he knew there was one thing more which
must be said.

"Philippa," he began, "you know what we are doing? We can escape, I
believe. My flight is all wonderfully arranged. But there will be no
coming back. It will be all over when our car passes over the hills
there. You will not regret? You care enough even for this supreme
sacrifice?"

"I shall never reproach you as long as I live," she promised. "I have
made up my mind to come, and I am ready."

"But it is because you care?" he pleaded anxiously.

"It is because I care, for one reason."

"In the great way?" he persisted. "In the only way?"

She hesitated. He suddenly felt her hand grow colder in his. He saw her
frame shiver beneath its weight of furs.

"Don't ask me quite that," she begged breathlessly. "Be content to know
that I have counted the cost, and that I am willing to come."

He felt the chill of impending disaster. He closed the little gate
through which they had been about to pass, and stood with his back to
it. In that faint light which seemed to creep over the world before the
moon itself was revealed, she seemed to him at that moment the fairest,
the most desirable thing on earth. Her face was upturned towards his,
half pathetic, half protesting against the revelation which he was
forcing from her.

"Listen, Philippa," he said, "Miss Fairclough warned me of one thing. I
put it on one side. It did not seem to be possible. Now I must ask you a
question. You have some other motive, have you not, for choosing to come
away with me? It is not only because you love me better than any one
else in the world, as I do you, and therefore that we belong to one
another and it is right and good that we should spend our lives in one
another's company? There is something else, is there not, at the root of
your determination? Some ally?"

It was a strange moment for Philippa. Nothing had altered within her,
and yet a wonderful pity was glowing in her heart, tearing at her
emotions, bringing a sob into her throat.

"You mean--Henry?" she faltered.

"I mean your husband," he assented.

She was suddenly passionately angry with herself. It seemed to her that
the days of childishness were back. She was behaving like an imbecile
whilst he played the great game.

"You see," he went on, his own voice a little unsteady, "this is one
of those moments in both our lives when anything except the exact truth
would mean shipwreck. You still love your husband?"

"I am such a fool!" she sobbed, clutching at his arm.

"You were willing to go away with me," he continued mercilessly, "partly
because of the anger you felt towards him, and partly out of revenge,
and just a little because you liked me. Is that not so?"

Her head pressed upon his arm. She nodded. It was just that convulsive
movement of her head, with its wealth of wonderful hair and its plain
black motoring hat, which dealt the death-blow to his hopes. She was
just a child once more--and she trusted him.

"Very well, then," he said, "just let me think--for a moment."

She understood enough not to raise her head. Lessingham was gazing out
through the chaotic shadows of the distant banks of clouds from which
the moon was rising. Already the pain had begun, and yet with it was
that queer sense of exaltation which comes with sacrifice.

"We have been very nearly foolish," he told her, with grave kindliness.
"It is well, perhaps, that we were in time. Those windows which lead
into your library,--through which I first came to you, by-the-by,--" he
added, with a strange, reminiscent little sigh, "are they open?"

"Yes!" she whispered.

"Come, then," he invited. "Before I leave there is something I want to
make clear to you."

They made their way rather like two conspirators along the little
terraced walk. Philippa opened the window and closed it again behind
them. The room was empty. Lessingham, watching her closely, almost
groaned as he saw the wonderful relief in her face. She threw off the
cloak, and he groaned again as he remembered how nearly it had been his
task to remove it. In her plain travelling dress, she turned and looked
at him very pathetically.

"You have, perhaps, a morning paper here?" he enquired.

"A newspaper? Why, yes, the Times," she answered, a little surprised.

He took it from the table towards which she pointed, and held it under
the lamplight. Presently he called to her. His forefinger rested upon a
certain column.

"Read this," he directed.

She read it out in a tone which passed from surprise to blank wonder:

Commander Sir Henry Cranston, Baronet, to receive the D.S.O. for special
services, and to be promoted to the rank of Acting Rear-Admiral.

"What does it mean?" she asked feverishly. "Henry? A D.S.O. for Henry
for special services?"

"It means," he told her, with a forced smile, "that your husband is, as
you put it in your expressive language, a fraud."



CHAPTER XXXII


For a moment Philippa was unsteady upon her feet. Lessingham led her to
a chair. From outside came the low, cautious hooting of the motor horn,
calling to its dilatory passenger.

"I can not, of course, explain everything to you," he began, in a tone
of unusual restraint, "but I do know that for the last two years your
husband has been responsible to the Admiralty for most of the mine
fields around your east coast. To begin with, his stay in Scotland was
a sham. He was most of the time with the fleet and round the coasts. His
fishing excursions from here have been of the same order, only more so.
All the places of importance, from here to the mouth of the Thames, have
been mined, or rather the approaches to them have been mined, under
his instructions. My mission in this country, here at Dreymarsh--do
not shrink from me if you can help it--was to obtain a copy of his mine
protection scheme of a certain town on the east coast."

"Why should I shrink from you?" she murmured. "This is all too
wonderful! What a little beast Henry must think me!" she added, with
truly feminine and marvellously selfish irrelevance.

"You and Miss Fairclough," Lessingham went on, "have rather scoffed at
my presence here on behalf of our Secret Service. It seemed to you both
very ridiculous. Now you understand."

"It makes no difference," Philippa protested tearfully. "You always told
us the truth."

"And I shall continue to do so," Lessingham assured her. "I am not a
clever person at my work which is all new to me, but fortune favoured
me the night your husband was shipwrecked. I succeeded in stealing from
him, on board that wrecked trawler, the plan of the mine field which I
was sent over to procure."

"Of course you had to do it if you could," Philippa sobbed. "I think it
was very clever of you."

He smiled.

"There are others who might look at the matter differently," he said. "I
am going to ask you a question which I know is unnecessary, but I must
have your answer to take away with me. If you had known all the time
that your husband, instead of being a skulker, as you thought him, was
really doing splendid work for his country, you would not have listened
to me for one moment, would you? You would not have let me grow to love
you?"

She clutched his hands.

"You are the dearest man in the world," she exclaimed, her lips still
quivering, "but, as you say, you know the answer. I was always in love
with Henry. It was because I loved him that I was so furious. I liked
you so much that it was mean of me ever to think of--of what so nearly
happened."

"So nearly happened!" he repeated, with a sudden access of the bitterest
self-pity.

Once more the low, warning hoot of the motor horn, this time a
little more impatient, broke the silence. Philippa was filled with an
unreasoning terror.

"You must go!" she implored. "You must go this minute! If they were to
take you, I couldn't bear it. And that man Griffiths--he has sworn that
if he can not get the Government authority, he will shoot you!"

"Griffiths has gone to London," he reminded her.

"Yes, but he may be back by this train," she cried, glancing at the
clock, "and I have a strange sort of fancy--I have had it all day--that
Henry might come, too. It is overdue now. Any one might arrive here. Oh,
please, for my sake, hurry away!" she begged, the tears streaming from
her eyes. "If anything should happen, I could never forgive myself. It
is because you have been so dear, so true and honourable, that all this
time has been wasted. If it were to cost you your life!"


She was seized by a fit of nervous anxiety which became almost a
paroxysm. She buttoned his coat for him and almost dragged him to the
door. And then she stopped for a moment to listen. Her eyes became
distended. Her lips were parted. She shook as though with an ague.

"It is too late!" she faltered hysterically. "I can hear Henry's voice!
Quick! Come to the window. You must get out that way and through the
postern gate."

"Your husband will have seen the car," he protested. "And besides, there
is your dressing-bag and your travelling coat."

"I shall tell him everything," she declared wildly. "Nothing matters
except that you escape. Oh, hurry! I can hear Henry talking to Jimmy
Dumble--for God's sake--"

The words died away upon her lips. The door had been opened and closed
again immediately. There was the quick turn of the lock, sounding like
the click of fate. Sir Henry, well inside the room, nodded to them both
affably.

"Well, Philippa? You weren't expecting me, eh? Hullo, Lessingham! Not
gone yet? Running it a trifle fine, aren't you?"

Lessingham glanced towards the fastened door.

"Perhaps," he admitted, "a trifle too fine."

Sir Henry was suddenly taken by storm. Philippa had thrown herself into
his arms. Her fingers were locked around his neck. Her lips, her eyes,
were pleading with him.

"Henry! Henry, you must forgive me! I never knew--I never dreamed what
you were really doing. I shall never forgive myself, but you--you will
be generous."

"That's all right, dear," he promised, stooping down to kiss her.
"Partly my fault, of course. I had to humour those old ladies down at
Whitehall who wanted me to pose as a particularly harmless idiot. You
see," he went on, glancing towards Lessingham, "they were always afraid
that my steps might be dogged by spies, if my position were generally
known."

Philippa did not relinquish her attitude. She was still clinging to her
husband. She refused to let him go.

"Henry," she begged, "oh, listen to me! I have so much to confess, so
much of which I am ashamed! And yet, with it all, I want to entreat--to
implore one great favour from you."

Sir Henry looked down into his wife's face.

"Is it one I can grant?" he asked gravely.

"If you want me ever to be happy again, you will," she sobbed. "For
Helen's sake as well as mine, help Mr. Lessingham to escape."

Lessingham took a quick step forward. He had the air of one who has
reached the limits of his endurance.

"You mean this kindly, Lady Cranston, I know," he said, "but I desire no
intervention."

Sir Henry patted his wife's hand and held her a little away from him.
There was a curious but unmistakable change in his deportment. His mouth
had not altogether lost its humorous twist, but his jaw seemed more
apparent, the light in his eyes was keener, and there was a ring of
authority in his tone.

"Come," he said, "let us understand one another, Philippa, and you had
better listen, too, Mr. Lessingham. I can promise you that your chances
of escape will not be diminished by my taking up these few minutes of
your time. Philippa," he went on, turning back to her, "you have always
posed as being an exceedingly patriotic Englishwoman, yet it seems to
me that you have made a bargain with this man, knowing full well that he
was in the service of Germany, to give him shelter and hospitality here,
access to my house and protection amongst your friends, in return for
certain favours shown towards your brother."

Philippa was speechless. It was a view of the matter which she and Helen
had striven so eagerly to avoid.

"But, Henry," she protested, "his stay here seemed so harmless. You
yourself have laughed at the idea of espionage at Dreymarsh. There is
nothing to discover. There is nothing going on here which the whole
world might not know."

"That was never my plea," Lessingham intervened.

"Nor is it the truth," Sir Henry added sternly.

"The Baron Maderstrom was sent here, Philippa, to spy upon me, to gain
access by any means to this house, to steal, if he could, certain plans
and charts prepared by me."

Philippa began to tremble. She seemed bereft of words.

"He told me this," she faltered. "He told me not half an hour ago."

There was a tapping at the door. Sir Henry moved towards it but did not
turn the key.

"Who is that?" he asked.

"Captain Griffiths is here with an escort, sir," Mills announced. "He
has seized the motor car outside, and he begs to be allowed to come in."



CHAPTER XXXIII


Mills' words were plainly audible throughout the room. Philippa made
eager signs to Lessingham, pointing to the French windows. Lessingham,
however, shook his head.

"I prefer," he said gently, "to finish my conversation with your
husband."'

There was another and more insistent summons from outside. This time it
was Captain Griffiths' raucous voice.

"Sir Henry Cranston," he called out, "I am here with authority. I beg to
be admitted."

"Where is your escort?"

"In the hall."

"If I let you come in," Sir Henry continued, "will you come alone?"

"I should prefer it," was the eager reply. "I wish to make this business
as little unpleasant to--to everybody as possible."

Sir Henry softly turned the key, opened the door, and admitted
Griffiths. The man seemed to see no one else but Lessingham. He would
have hastened at once towards him, but Sir Henry laid his hand upon his
arm.

"You must kindly restrain your impatience for a few moments," he
insisted. "This is a private conference. Your business with the Baron
Maderstrom can be adjusted later."

"It is my duty," Griffiths proclaimed impatiently, "to arrest that man
as a spy. I have authority, granted me this morning in London."

"Quite so," Sir Henry observed, "but we are in the midst of a very
interesting little discussion which I intend to conclude. Your turn will
come later, Captain Griffiths."

"I can countenance no discussion with such men as that," Griffiths
declared scornfully. "I am here in the execution of my duty, and I
resent any interference with it."

"No one wishes to interfere with you," Sir Henry assured him, "but until
I say the word you will obey my orders."

"So far as I am concerned," Lessingham intervened, "I wish it to be
understood that I offer no defence."

"You have no defence," Sir Henry reminded him suavely. "I gather that
not only had you the effrontery to steal a chart from my pocket in the
midst of a life struggle upon the trawler, but you have capped this
exploit with a deliberate attempt to abduct my wife."


Griffiths seemed for a moment almost beside himself. His eyes glowed.
His long fingers twitched. He kept edging a little nearer to Lessingham.

"Both charges," the latter confessed, looking Sir Henry in the eyes,
"are true."

Then Philippa found herself. She saw the sudden flash in her husband's
eyes, the grim fury in Griffiths' face. She stepped once more forward.

"Henry," she insisted, "you must listen to what I have to say."

"We have had enough words," Griffiths interposed savagely.

Sir Henry ignored the interruption.

"I am listening, Philippa," he said calmly.

"It was my intention an hour ago to leave this place with Mr. Lessingham
to-night," she told him deliberately.

"The devil it was!" Sir Henry muttered.

"As for the reason, you know it," she continued, her tone full of
courage. "I am willing to throw myself at your feet now, but all the
same I was hardly treated. I was made the scapegoat of your stupid
promise. You kept me in ignorance of things a wife should know. You even
encouraged me to believe you a coward, when a single word from you
would have changed everything. Therefore, I say that it is you who are
responsible for what I nearly did, and what I should have done but for
him--listen, Henry--but for him!"

"But for him," her husband repeated curiously.

"It was Mr. Lessingham," she declared, "who opened my eyes concerning
you. It was he who refused to let me yield to that impulse of anger.
Look at my coat there. My bag is on that table. I was ready to leave
with him to-night. Before we went, he insisted on telling me everything
about you. He could have escaped, and I was willing to go with him.
Instead, he spent those precious minutes telling me the truth about you.
That was the end."

"Lady Cranston omits to add," Lessingham put in, "that before I did
so she told me frankly that her feelings for me were of warm
friendliness--that her love was given to her husband, and her husband
only."

"How long is this to go on?" Griffiths asked harshly. "I have
the authority here and the power to take that man. These domestic
explanations have nothing to do with the case."

"Excuse me," Sir Henry retorted, with quiet emphasis, "they have a great
deal to do with it."

"I am Commandant of this place--" Griffiths commenced.

"And I possess an authority here which you had better not dispute," Sir
Henry reminded him sternly.

There was a moment's tense silence. Griffiths set his teeth hard, but
his hand wandered towards the back of his belt.

"I am now," Sir Henry continued, "going to announce to you a piece
of news, over which we shall all be gloating when to-morrow morning's
newspapers are issued, but which is not as yet generally known. During
last night, a considerable squadron of German cruisers managed to cross
the North Sea and found their way to a certain port of considerable
importance to us."

Lessingham started, His face was drawn as though with pain. He had the
air of one who shrinks from the news he is about to hear.

"Incidentally," Sir Henry continued, "three-quarters of the squadron
also found their way to the bottom of the sea, and the other quarter met
our own squadron, lying in wait for their retreat, and will not return."

Lessingham swayed for a moment upon his feet. One could almost fancy
that Sir Henry's tone was tinged with pity as he turned towards him.

"The chart of the mine field of which you possessed yourself," he said,
"which it was the object of your visit here to secure, was a chart
specially prepared for you. You see, our own Secret Service is not
altogether asleep. Those very safe and inviting-looking channels for
British and Allied traffic--I marked them very clearly, didn't I?--were
where I'd laid my mines. The channels which your cruisers so carefully
avoided were the only safe avenues. So you see why it is, Maderstrom,
that I have no grudge against you."

Lessingham's face for a moment was the face of a stricken man. There was
a look of dull horror in his eyes.

"Is this the truth?" he gasped.

"It is the truth," Sir Henry assured him gravely.

"Does this conclude the explanations?" Captain Griffiths demanded
impatiently. "Your news is magnificent, Sir Henry. As regards this
felon--"

Sir Henry held up his hand.

"Maderstrom's fate," he said, "is mine to deal with and not yours,
Captain Griffiths."

Philippa was the first to grasp the intentions of the man who was
standing only a few feet from her. She threw herself upon his arm and
dragged down the revolver which he had raised. Sir Henry, with a shout
of fury, was upon them at once. He took Griffiths by the throat and
threw him upon the sofa. The revolver clattered harmlessly on to the
carpet.

"His Majesty's Service has no use for madmen," he thundered. "You know
that I possess superior authority here."

"That man shall not escape!" Griffiths shouted.

He struggled for his whistle. Sir Henry snatched it from him and picked
up the revolver from the carpet.

"Look here, Griffiths," he remonstrated severely, "one single move
in opposition to my wishes will cost you your career. Let there be
no misunderstanding about it. That man will not be arrested by you
to-night."

Griffiths staggered to his feet. He was half cowed, half furious.

"You take the responsibility for this, Sir Henry?" he demanded thickly.
"The man is a proved traitor. If you assist him to escape, you are
subject to penalties--"

Sir Henry threw open the door.

"Captain Griffiths," he interrupted, "I am not ignorant of my position
in this matter. Believe me, your last chance of retaining your position
here is to remember that you have had specific orders to yield to my
authority in all matters. Kindly leave this room and take your soldiers
back to their quarters."

Griffiths hesitated for a single moment. He had the appearance of a man
half demented by a passion which could find no outlet. Then he left the
room, without salute, without a glance to the right or to the left. Out
in the hall, a moment later, they heard a harsh voice of command.
The hall door was opened and closed behind the sound of retreating
footsteps.

"Sir Henry," Lessingham reminded him, "I have not asked for your
intervention."

"My dear fellow, you wouldn't," was the prompt reply. "As for the little
trouble that has happened in the North Sea, don't take it too much to
heart, it was entirely the fault of the people who sent you here."

"The fault of the people who sent me here," Lessingham repeated. "I
scarcely understand."

"It's simple enough," Sir Henry continued. "You see, you are about as
fit to be a spy as Philippa, my wife here, is to be a detective. You
possess the one insuperable obstacle of having the instincts of a
gentleman.--Come, come," he went on, "we have nothing more to say to one
another. Open that window and take the narrow path down to the beach.
Jimmy Dumble is waiting for you at the gate. He will row you out to a
Dutch trawler which is lying even now off the point."

"You mean me to get away?" Lessingham exclaimed, bewildered.

"Believe me, it will cost nothing," Sir Henry assured him. "I was not
bluffing when I told Captain Griffiths that I had supreme authority
here. He knows perfectly well that I am within my rights in aiding your
escape."

Philippa moved swiftly to where Lessingham was standing. She gave him
her hands.

"Dear friend," she begged, "so wonderful a friend as you have been,
don't refuse this last thing."

"Be a sensible fellow, Maderstrom," Sir Henry said. "Remember that you
can't do yourself or your adopted country a ha'porth of good by playing
the Quixote."

"Besides," Philippa continued, holding his hands tightly, "it is, after
all, only an exchange. You have saved Henry's life, set Richard free,
and brought us happiness. Why should you hesitate to accept your own
liberty?"

Sir Henry threw open the window and looked towards a green light out at
sea.

"There's your trawler," he pointed out, "and remember the tide will turn
in half an hour. I don't wish to hurry you."

Lessingham raised Philippa's fingers to his lips.

"I shall think of you both always," he said simply. "You are very
wonderful people."

He turned towards the window. Sir Henry took up the Homburg hat from the
table by his side.

"Better take your hat," he suggested.

Lessingham paused, accepted it, and looked steadfastly at the donor.

"You knew from the first?" he asked.

"From the very first," Sir Henry assured him. "Don't look so
confounded," he went on consolingly. "Remember that espionage is the
only profession in which it is an honour to fail."

Philippa came a little shyly into her husband's arms, as he turned back
into the room. The tenderness in his own face, however, and a little
catch in his voice, broke down at once the wall of reserve which had
grown up between them.

"My dear little woman!" he murmured. "My little sweetheart! You don't
know how I've ached to explain everything to you--including the Russian
ladies."

"Explain them at once, sir!" Philippa insisted, pretending to draw her
face away for a moment.

"They were the wife and sister-in-law of the Russian Admiral, Draskieff,
who was sent over to report upon our method of mine laying," he told
her.

"You and I have to go up to a little dinner they are giving to-morrow or
the next day."

"Oh, dear, what an idiot I was!" Philippa exclaimed ruefully. "I
imagined--all sorts of things. But, Henry dear," she went on, "do you
know that we have a great surprise for you--here in the house?"

"No surprise, dear," he assured her, shaking his head. "I knew the very
hour that Richard left Wittenberg. And here he is, by Jove!"

Richard and Helen entered together. Philippa could not even wait for the
conclusion of the hearty but exceedingly British greeting which passed
between the two men.

"Listen to me, both of you!" she cried incoherently. "Helen, you
especially! You never heard anything so wonderful in your life! They
weren't fishing excursions at all. There weren't any whiting. Henry was
laying mines all the time, and he's blown up half the German fleet! It's
all in the Times this morning. He's got a D.S.O.--Henry has--and he's a
Rear-Admiral! Oh, Helen, I want to cry!"

The two women wandered into a far corner of the room. Richard wrung his
brother-in-law's hand.

"Philippa isn't exactly coherent," he remarked, "but it sounds all
right."

"You see," Sir Henry explained, "I've been mine laying ever since the
war started. I always had ideas of my own about mine fields, as you may
remember. I started with Scotland, and then they moved me down here.
The Admiralty thought they'd be mighty clever, and they insisted upon my
keeping my job secret. It led to a little trouble with Philippa, but I
think we are through with all that.--I suppose you know that those two
young women have been engaged in a regular conspiracy, Dick?"

"I know a little," Richard replied gravely, "and I'm sure you will
believe that I wouldn't have countenanced it for a moment if I'd had any
idea what they were up to."

"I'm sure you wouldn't," Sir Henry agreed. "Anyway, it led to no harm."

"Maderstrom, then," Richard asked, with a sudden more complete
apprehension of the affair, "was over here to spy upon you?"

"That's the ticket," Sir Henry assented.

Richard frowned.

"And he bribed Philippa and Helen with my liberty!"

"Don't you worry about that," his brother-in-law begged. "They must have
known by instinct that a chap like Maderstrom couldn't do any harm."

"Where is he now?" Richard asked eagerly. "Helen insisted upon keeping
me out of the way but we've heard all sorts of rumours. The Commandant
has been up here after him, hasn't he?"

"Yes, and I sent him away with a flea in his ear! I don't like the
fellow."

"And Maderstrom?"

"The pseudo-Mr. Lessingham, eh?" Sir Henry observed. "Well, to tell you
the truth, Dick, if there is one person I am a little sorry for in the
history of the last few weeks, it's Maderstrom."

"You, too?" Richard exclaimed. "Why, every one seems crazy about the
fellow."

Sir Henry nodded.

"I remember him in your college days, Dick. He was a gentleman and a
good sort, only unfortunately his mother was a German. He did his bit of
soldiering with the Prussian Guards at the beginning of the war, got a
knock and volunteered for the Secret Service. They sent him over here.
The fellow must have no end of pluck, for, as I dare say you know, they
let him down from the observation car of a Zeppelin. He finds his
way here all right, makes his silly little bargain with our dear but
gullible womenkind, and sets himself to watch--to watch me, mind. The
whole affair is too ridiculously transparent. For a time he can't bring
himself even to touch my papers here, although, as it happens, they
wouldn't have done him the least bit of good. It was only the stress
and excitement of the shipwreck last week that he ventured to steal the
chart which I had so carefully prepared for him. I really think, if
he hadn't done that, I should have had to slip it into his pocket or
absolutely force it upon him somehow. He sends it off like a lamb and
behold the result! We've crippled the German Navy for the rest of the
war."

"It was a faked chart, then, of course?" Richard demanded breathlessly.

"And quite the cleverest I ever prepared," Sir Henry acknowledged. "I
can assure you that it would have taken in Von Tirpitz himself, if he'd
got hold of it."

"But where is Maderstrom now, sir?" Richard asked.

Sir Henry moved his head towards the window, where Philippa, for the
last few moments, had softly taken her place. Her eyes were watching
a green light bobbing up and down in the distance. Suddenly she gave a
little exclamation.

"It's moving!" she cried. "He's off!"

"He's safe on a Dutch trawler," Sir Henry declared. "And I think," he
added, moving towards the sideboard, "it's time you and I had a drink
together, Dick."

They helped themselves to whisky and soda. There were still many
explanations to be given. Half-concealed by the curtain, Philippa stood
with her eyes turned seawards. The green light was dimmer now, and the
low, black outline of the trawler crept slowly over the glittering track
of moonlight. She gave a little start as it came into sight. There was
a sob in her throat, tears burning in her eyes. Her fingers clutched the
curtains almost passionately. She stood there watching until her eyes
ached. Then she felt an arm around her waist and her husband's whisper
in her ear.

"I haven't let you wander too far, have I, Phil?"

She turned quickly towards him, eager for the comfort of his extended
arms. Her face was buried in his shoulder.

"You know," she murmured.

========================================
========================================

A MILLIONAIRE OF YESTERDAY

By E. Phillips Oppenheim




CHAPTER I


"Filth," grunted Trent--"ugh! I tell you what it is, my venerable
friend--I have seen some dirty cabins in the west of Ireland and some
vile holes in East London. I've been in some places which I can't think
of even now without feeling sick. I'm not a particular chap, wasn't
brought up to it--no, nor squeamish either, but this is a bit thicker
than anything I've ever knocked up against. If Francis doesn't hurry
we'll have to chuck it! We shall never stand it out, Monty!"

The older man, gaunt, blear-eyed, ragged, turned over on his side. His
appearance was little short of repulsive. His voice when he spoke was,
curiously enough, the voice of a gentleman, thick and a trifle rough
though it sounded.

"My young friend," he said, "I agree with you--in effect--most heartily.
The place is filthy, the surroundings are repulsive, not to add
degrading. The society is--er--not congenial--I allude of course to our
hosts--and the attentions of these unwashed, and I am afraid I must
say unclothed, ladies of dusky complexion is to say the least of it
embarrassing."

"Dusky complexion!" Trent interrupted scornfully, "they're coal black!"

Monty nodded his head with solemn emphasis. "I will go so far as to
admit that you are right," he acknowledged. "They are as black as sin!
But, my friend Trent, I want you to consider this: If the nature of our
surroundings is offensive to you, think what it must be to me. I may,
I presume, between ourselves, allude to you as one of the people.
Refinement and luxury have never come in your way, far less have they
become indispensable to you. You were, I believe, educated at a
Board School, I was at Eton. Afterwards you were apprenticed to a
harness-maker, I--but no matter! Let us summarise the situation."

"If that means cutting it short, for Heaven's sake do so," Trent
grumbled. "You'll talk yourself into a fever if you don't mind. Let's
know what you're driving at."

"Talking," the elder man remarked with a slight shrug of his shoulders,
"will never have a prejudicial effect upon my health. To men of
your--pardon me--scanty education the expression of ideas in speech is
doubtless a labour. To me, on the other hand, it is at once a pleasure
and a relief. What I was about to observe is this: I belong by birth
to what are called, I believe, the classes, you to the masses. I have
inherited instincts which have been refined and cultivated, perhaps
over-cultivated by breeding and associations--you are troubled with
nothing of the sort. Therefore if these surroundings, this discomfort,
not to mention the appalling overtures of our lady friends, are
distressing to you, why, consider how much more so they must be to me!"

Trent smiled very faintly, but he said nothing. He was sitting
cross-legged with his back against one of the poles which supported
the open hut, with his eyes fixed upon the cloud of mist hanging over
a distant swamp. A great yellow moon had stolen over the low range of
stony hills--the mist was curling away in little wreaths of gold. Trent
was watching it, but if you had asked him he would have told you that
he was wondering when the alligators came out to feed, and how near the
village they ventured. Looking at his hard, square face and keen,
black eyes no one would surely have credited him with any less material
thoughts.

"Furthermore," the man whom Trent had addressed as Monty continued,
"there arises the question of danger and physical suitability to
the situation. Contrast our two cases, my dear young friend. I am
twenty-five years older than you, I have a weak heart, a ridiculous
muscle, and the stamina of a rabbit. My fighting days are over. I
can shoot straight, but shooting would only serve us here until our
cartridges were gone--when the rush came a child could knock me over.
You, on the contrary, have the constitution of an ox, the muscles of a
bull, and the wind of an ostrich. You are, if you will pardon my saying
so, a magnificent specimen of the animal man. In the event of trouble
you would not hesitate to admit that your chances of escape would be
at least double mine." Trent lit a match under pretence of lighting his
pipe--in reality because only a few feet away he had seen a pair of
bright eyes gleaming at them through a low shrub. A little native boy
scuttled away--as black as night, woolly-headed, and shiny; he had crept
up unknown to look with fearful eyes upon the wonderful white strangers.
Trent threw a lump of earth at him and laughed as he dodged it.

"Well, go ahead, Monty," he said. "Let's hear what you're driving at.
What a gab you've got to be sure!"

Monty waved his hand--a magnificent and silencing gesture.

"I have alluded to these matters," he continued, "merely in order
to show you that the greater share of danger and discomfort in this
expedition falls to my lot. Having reminded you of this, Trent, I refer
to the concluding sentence of your last speech. The words indicated, as
I understood them, some doubt of our ability to see this thing through."

He paused, peering over to where Trent was sitting with grim, immovable
face, listening with little show of interest. He drew a long, deep
breath and moved over nearer to the doorway. His manner was suddenly
changed.

"Scarlett Trent," he cried, "Scarlett Trent, listen to me! You are young
and I am old! To you this may be one adventure amongst many--it is my
last. I've craved for such a chance as this ever since I set foot in
this cursed land. It's come late enough, too late almost for me, but I'm
going through with it while there's breath in my body. Swear to me now
that you will not back out! Do you hear, Trent? Swear!"

Trent looked curiously at his companion, vastly interested in this
sudden outburst, in the firmness of his tone and the tightening of
the weak mouth. After all, then, the old chap had some grit in him. To
Trent, who had known him for years as a broken-down hanger-on of
the settlement at Buckomari, a drunkard, gambler, a creature to all
appearance hopelessly gone under, this look and this almost passionate
appeal were like a revelation. He stretched out his great hand and
patted his companion on the back--a proceeding which obviously caused
him much discomfort.

"Bravo, old cockie!" he said. "Didn't imagine you'd got the grit. You
know I'm not the chap to be let down easy. We'll go through with it,
then, and take all chances! It's my game right along. Every copper I've
got went to pay the bearers here and to buy the kickshaws and rum for
old What's-his-name, and I'm not anxious to start again as a pauper.
We'll stay here till we get our concessions, or till they bury us, then!
It's a go!"

Monty--no one at Buckomari had ever known of any other name for
him--stretched out a long hand, with delicate tapering fingers, and let
it rest for a moment gingerly in the thick, brown palm of his companion.
Then he glanced stealthily over his shoulder and his eyes gleamed.

"I think, if you will allow me, Trent, I will just moisten my lips--no
more--with some of that excellent brandy."

Trent caught his arm and held it firmly.

"No, you don't," he said, shaking his head. "That's the last bottle, and
we've got the journey back. We'll keep that, in case of fever."

A struggle went on in the face of the man whose hot breath fell upon
Trent's cheek. It was the usual thing--the disappointment of the baffled
drunkard--a little more terrible in his case perhaps because of the
remnants of refinement still to be traced in his well-shaped features.
His weak eyes for once were eloquent, but with the eloquence of cupidity
and unwholesome craving, his lean cheeks twitched and his hands shook.

"Just a drop, Trent!" he pleaded. "I'm not feeling well, indeed I'm not!
The odours here are so foul. A liqueur-glassful will do me all the good
in the world."

"You won't get it, Monty, so it's no use whining," Trent said bluntly.
"I've given way to you too much already. Buck up, man! We're on the
threshold of fortune and we need all our wits about us."

"Of fortune--fortune!" Monty's head dropped upon his chest, his nostrils
dilated, he seemed to fall into a state of stupor. Trent watched him
half curiously, half contemptuously.

"You're terribly keen on money-making for an old 'un," he remarked,
after a somewhat lengthy pause. "What do you want to do with it?"

"To do with it!" The old man raised his head. "To do with it!" The gleam
of reawakened desire lit up his face. He sat for a moment thinking. Then
he laughed softly.

"I will tell you, Master Scarlett Trent," he said, "I will tell you why
I crave for wealth. You are a young and an ignorant man. Amongst
other things you do not know what money will buy. You have your coarse
pleasures I do not doubt, which seem sweet to you! Beyond them--what?
A tasteless and barbaric display, a vulgar generosity, an ignorant and
purposeless prodigality. Bah! How different it is with those who know!
There are many things, my young friend, which I learned in my younger
days, and amongst them was the knowledge of how to spend money. How to
spend it, you understand! It is an art, believe me! I mastered it, and,
until the end came, it was magnificent. In London and Paris to-day to
have wealth and to know how to spend it is to be the equal of princes!
The salons of the beautiful fly open before you, great men will clamour
for your friendship, all the sweetest triumphs which love and sport can
offer are yours. You stalk amongst a world of pygmies a veritable giant,
the adored of women, the envied of men! You may be old--it matters not;
ugly--you will be fooled into reckoning yourself an Adonis. Nobility
is great, art is great, genius is great, but the key to the pleasure
storehouse of the world is a key of gold--of gold!"

He broke off with a little gasp. He held his throat and looked
imploringly towards the bottle. Trent shook his head stonily. There
was something pitiful in the man's talk, in that odd mixture of bitter
cynicism and passionate earnestness, but there was also something
fascinating. As regards the brandy, however, Trent was adamant.

"Not a drop," he declared. "What a fool you are to want it, Monty!
You're a wreck already. You want to pull through, don't you? Leave the
filthy stuff alone. You'll not live a month to enjoy your coin if we get
it!"

"Live!" Monty straightened himself out. A tremor went through all his
frame.

"Live!" he repeated, with fierce contempt; "you are making the common
mistake of the whole ignorant herd. You are measuring life by its
length, when its depth alone is of any import. I want no more than a
year or two at the most, and I promise you, Mr. Scarlett Trent, my most
estimable young companion, that, during that year, I will live more than
you in your whole lifetime. I will drink deep of pleasures which you
know nothing of, I will be steeped in joys which you will never reach
more nearly than the man who watches a change in the skies or a sunset
across the ocean! To you, with boundless wealth, there will be depths of
happiness which you will never probe, joys which, if you have the wit to
see them at all, will be no more than a mirage to you."

Trent laughed outright, easily and with real mirth. Yet in his heart
were sown already the seeds of a secret dread. There was a ring of
passionate truth in Monty's words. He believed what he was saying.
Perhaps he was right. The man's inborn hatred of a second or inferior
place in anything stung him. Were there to be any niches after all in
the temple of happiness to which he could never climb? He looked back
rapidly, looked down the avenue of a squalid and unlovely life, saw
himself the child of drink-sodden and brutal parents, remembered the
Board School with its unlovely surroundings, his struggles at a dreary
trade, his running away and the fierce draughts of delight which the
joy and freedom of the sea had brought to him on the morning when he had
crept on deck, a stowaway, to be lashed with every rope-end and to do
the dirty work of every one. Then the slavery at a Belgian settlement,
the job on a steamer trading along the Congo, the life at Buckomari, and
lastly this bold enterprise in which the savings of years were invested.
It was a life which called aloud for fortune some day or other to make
a little atonement. The old man was dreaming. Wealth would bring him,
uneducated though he was, happiness enough and to spare.

A footstep fell softly upon the turf outside. Trent sprang at once into
an attitude of rigid attention. His revolver, which for four days had
been at full cock by his side, stole out and covered the approaching
shadow stealing gradually nearer and nearer. The old man saw nothing,
for he slept, worn out with excitement and exhaustion.



CHAPTER II


A fat, unwholesome--looking creature, half native, half Belgian, waddled
across the open space towards the hut in which the two strangers had
been housed. He was followed at a little distance by two sturdy natives
bearing a steaming pot which they carried on a pole between them. Trent
set down his revolver and rose to his feet.

"What news, Oom Sam?" he asked. "Has the English officer been heard of?
He must be close up now."

"No news," the little man grunted. "The King, he send some of his own
supper to the white men. 'They got what they want,' he say. 'They start
work mine soon as like, but they go away from here.' He not like them
about the place! See!"

"Oh, that be blowed!" Trent muttered. "What's this in the pot? It don't
smell bad."

"Rabbit," the interpreter answered tersely. "Very good. Part King's own
supper. White men very favoured."

Trent bent over the pot which the two men had set upon the ground. He
took a fork from his belt and dug it in.

"Very big bones for a rabbit, Sam," he remarked doubtfully.

Sam looked away. "Very big rabbits round here," he remarked. "Best keep
pot. Send men away."

Trent nodded, and the men withdrew.

"Stew all right," Sam whispered confidentially. "You eat him. No fear.
But you got to go. King beginning get angry. He say white men not to
stay. They got what he promised, now they go. I know King--know this
people well! You get away quick. He think you want be King here! You got
the papers--all you want, eh?"

"Not quite, Sam," Trent answered. "There's an Englishman, Captain
Francis, on his way here up the Coast, going on to Walgetta Fort. He
must be here to-morrow. I want him to see the King's signature. If he's
a witness these niggers can never back out of the concession. They're
slippery devils. Another chap may come on with more rum and they'll
forget us and give him the right to work the mines too. See!"

"I see," Sam answered; "but him not safe to wait. You believe me. I
know these tam niggers. They take two days get drunk, then get devils,
four--raving mad. They drunk now. Kill any one to-morrow--perhaps you.
Kill you certain to-morrow night. You listen now!"

Trent stood up in the shadow of the overhanging roof. Every now and then
came a wild, shrill cry from the lower end of the village. Some one was
beating a frightful, cracked drum which they had got from a trader. The
tumult was certainly increasing. Trent swore softly, and then looked
irresolutely over his shoulder to where Monty was sleeping.

"If the worst comes we shall never get away quickly," he muttered. "That
old carcase can scarcely drag himself along."

Sam looked at him with cunning eyes.

"He not fit only die," he said softly. "He very old, very sick man, you
leave him here! I see to him."

Trent turned away in sick disgust.

"We'll be off to-morrow, Sam," he said shortly. "I say! I'm beastly
hungry. What's in that pot?"

Sam spread out the palms of his hands.

"He all right, I see him cooked," he declared. "He two rabbits and one
monkey."

Trent took out a plate and helped himself.

"All right," he said. "Be off now. We'll go to-morrow before these
towsly-headed beauties are awake."

Sam nodded and waddled off. Trent threw a biscuit and hit his companion
on the cheek.

"Here, wake up, Monty!" he exclaimed. "Supper's come from the royal
kitchen. Bring your plate and tuck in!"

Monty struggled to his feet and came meekly towards where the pot stood
simmering upon the ground.

"I'm not hungry, Trent," he said, "but I am very thirsty, very thirsty
indeed. My throat is all parched. I am most uncomfortable. Really
I think your behaviour with regard to the brandy is most unkind and
ungenerous; I shall be ill, I know I shall. Won't you--"

"No, I won't," Trent interrupted. "Now shut up all that rot and eat
something."

"I have no appetite, thank you," Monty answered, with sulky dignity.

"Eat something, and don't be a silly ass!" Trent insisted. "We've a hard
journey before us, and you'll need all the strength in your carcase
to land in Buckomari again. Here, you've dropped some of your precious
rubbish."

Trent stooped forward and picked up what seemed to him at first to be
a piece of cardboard from the ground. He was about to fling it to its
owner, when he saw that it was a photograph. It was the likeness of a
girl, a very young girl apparently, for her hair was still down her
back and her dress was scarcely of the orthodox length. It was not
particularly well taken, but Trent had never seen anything like it
before. The lips were slightly parted, the deep eyes were brimming with
laughter, the pose was full of grace, even though the girl's figure was
angular. Trent had seen as much as this, when he felt the smart of a
sudden blow upon the cheek, the picture was snatched from his hand, and
Monty--his face convulsed with anger--glowered fiercely upon him.

"You infernal young blackguard! You impertinent meddling blockhead! How
dare you presume to look at that photograph! How dare you, sir! How dare
you!"

Trent was too thoroughly astonished to resent either the blow or the
fierce words. He looked up into his aggressor's face in blank surprise.

"I only looked at it," he muttered. "It was lying on the floor."

"Looked at it! You looked at it! Like your confounded impertinence, sir!
Who are you to look at her! If ever I catch you prying into my concerns
again, I'll shoot you--by Heaven I will!"

Trent laughed sullenly, and, having finished eating, lit his pipe.

"Your concerns are of no interest to me," he said shortly; "keep 'em to
yourself--and look here, old 'un, keep your hands off me! I ain't a safe
man to hit let me tell you. Now sit down and cool off! I don't want any
more of your tantrums."

Then there was a long silence between the two men. Monty sat where Trent
had been earlier in the night at the front of the open hut, his eyes
fixed upon the ever-rising moon, his face devoid of intelligence, his
eyes dim. The fire of the last few minutes had speedily burnt out. His
half-soddened brain refused to answer to the sudden spasm of memory
which had awakened a spark of the former man. If he had thoughts at
all, they hung around that brandy bottle. The calm beauty of the African
night could weave no spell upon him. A few feet behind, Trent, by the
light of the moon, was practising tricks with a pack of greasy cards.
By and by a spark of intelligence found its way into Monty's brain. He
turned round furtively.

"Trent," he said, "this is slow! Let us have a friendly game--you and
I."

Trent yawned.

"Come on, then," he said. "Single Poker or Euchre, eh?"

"I do not mind," Monty replied affably. "Just which you prefer."

"Single Poker, then," Trent said.

"And the stakes?"

"We've nothing left to play for," Trent answered gloomily, "except
cartridges."

Monty made a wry face. "Poker for love, my dear Trent," he said,
"between you and me, would lack all the charm of excitement. It would
be, in fact, monotonous! Let us exercise our ingenuity. There must be
something still of value in our possession."

He relapsed into an affectation of thoughtfulness. Trent watched him
curiously. He knew quite well that his partner was dissembling, but he
scarcely saw to what end. Monty's eyes, moving round the grass-bound
hut, stopped at Trent's knapsack which hung from the central pole. He
uttered a little exclamation.

"I have it," he declared. "The very thing."

"Well!"

"You are pleased to set an altogether fictitious value upon half bottle
of brandy we have left," he said. "Now I tell you what I will do. In a
few months we shall both be rich men. I will play you for my I O U, for
fifty pounds, fifty sovereigns, Trent, against half the contents of that
bottle. Come, that is a fair offer, is it not? How we shall laugh at
this in a year or two! Fifty pounds against a tumblerful--positively
there is no more--a tumblerful of brandy."

He was watching Trent's face all the time, but the younger man gave
no sign. When he had finished, Trent took up the cards, which he had
shuffled for Poker, and dealt them out for Patience. Monty's eyes were
dim with disappointment.

"What!" he cried. "You don't agree! Did you understand me? Fifty pounds,
Trent! Why, you must be mad!"

"Oh, shut up!" Trent growled. "I don't want your money, and the brandy's
poison to you! Go to sleep!"

Monty crept a little nearer to his partner and laid his hand upon his
arm. His shirt fell open, showing the cords of his throat swollen and
twitching. His voice was half a sob.

"Trent, you are a young man--not old like me. You don't understand my
constitution. Brandy is a necessity to me! I've lived on it so long that
I shall die if you keep it from me. Remember, it's a whole day since I
tasted a drop! Now I'll make it a hundred. What do you say to that? One
hundred!"

Trent paused in his game, and looked steadfastly into the eager face
thrust close to his. Then he shrugged his shoulders and gathered up the
cards.

"You're the silliest fool I ever knew," he said bluntly, "but I suppose
you'll worry me into a fever if you don't have your own way."

"You agree?" Monty shrieked. Trent nodded and dealt the cards.

"It must be a show after the draw," he said. "We can't bet, for we've
nothing to raise the stakes with!"

Monty was breathing hard and his fingers trembled, as though the ague of
the swamps was already upon him. He took up his cards one by one, and as
he snatched up the last he groaned. Not a pair!

"Four cards," he whispered hoarsely. Trent dealt them out, looked at
his own hand, and, keeping a pair of queens, took three more cards. He
failed to improve, and threw them upon the floor. With frantic eagerness
Monty grovelled down to see them--then with a shriek of triumph he threw
down a pair of aces.

"Mine!" he said. "I kept an ace and drew another. Give me the brandy!"

Trent rose up, measured the contents of the bottle with his forefinger,
and poured out half the contents into a horn mug. Monty stood trembling
by.

"Mind," Trent said, "you are a fool to drink it and I am a fool to let
you! You risk your life and mine. Sam has been up and swears we must
clear out to-morrow. What sort of form do you think you'll be in to walk
sixty miles through the swamps and bush, with perhaps a score of these
devils at our heels? Come now, old 'un, be reasonable."

The veins on the old man's forehead stood out like whipcord.

"I won it," he cried. "Give it me! Give it me, I say."

Trent made no further protest. He walked back to where he had been
lying and recommenced his Patience. Monty drank off the contents of the
tumbler in two long, delicious gulps! Then he flung the horn upon the
floor and laughed aloud.

"That's better," he cried, "that's better! What an ass you are, Trent!
To imagine that a drain like that would have any effect at all, save to
put life into a man! Bah! what do you know about it?"

Trent did not raise his head. He went on with his solitary game and, to
all appearance, paid no heed to his companion's words. Monty was not in
the humour to be ignored. He flung himself on the ground opposite to his
companion.

"What a slow-blooded sort of creature you are, Trent!" he said. "Don't
you ever drink, don't you ever take life a little more gaily?"

"Not when I am carrying my life in my hands," Trent answered grimly. "I
get drunk sometimes--when there's nothing on and the blues come--never
at a time like this though."

"It is pleasant to hear," the old man remarked, stretching out his
limbs, "that you do occasionally relax. In your present frame of
mind--you will not be offended I trust--you are just a little heavy as
a companion. Never mind. In a year's time I will be teaching you how to
dine--to drink champagne, to--by the way, Trent, have you ever tasted
champagne?"

"Never," Trent answered gruffly "Don't know that I want to either."

Monty was compassionate. "My young friend," he said, "I would give my
soul to have our future before us, to have your youth and never to have
tasted champagne. Phew! the memory of it is delicious!"

"Why don't you go to bed?" Trent said. "You'll need all your strength
to-morrow!"

Monty waved his hand with serene contempt.

"I am a man of humours, my dear friend," he said, "and to-night my
humour is to talk and to be merry. What is it the philosophers tell
us?--that the sweetest joys of life are the joys of anticipation. Here
we are, then, on the eve of our triumph--let us talk, plan, be happy.
Bah! how thirsty it makes one! Come, Trent, what stake will you have me
set up against that other tumblerful of brandy."

"No stake that you can offer," Trent answered shortly. "That drop of
brandy may stand between us and death. Pluck up your courage, man, and
forget for a bit that there is such a thing as drink."

Monty frowned and looked stealthily across towards the bottle.

"That's all very well, my friend," he said, "but kindly remember that
you are young, and well, and strong. I am old, and an invalid. I need
support. Don't be hard on me, Trent. Say fifty again.

"No, nor fifty hundred," Trent answered shortly. "I don't want your
money. Don't be such a fool, or you'll never live to enjoy it."

Monty shuffled on to his feet, and walked aimlessly about the hut. Once
or twice as he passed the place where the bottle rested, he hesitated;
at last he paused, his eyes lit up, he stretched out his hand
stealthily. But before he could possess himself of it Trent's hand was
upon his collar.

"You poor fool!" he said; "leave it alone can't you? You want to poison
yourself I know. Well, you can do as you jolly well like when you are
out of this--not before."

Monty's eyes flashed evil fires, but his tone remained persuasive.
"Trent," he said, "be reasonable. Look at me! I ask you now whether I
am not better for that last drop. I tell you that it is food and wine
to me. I need it to brace me up for to-morrow. Now listen! Name your own
stake! Set it up against that single glass! I am not a mean man, Trent.
Shall we say one hundred and fifty?"

Trent looked at him half scornfully, half deprecatingly.

"You are only wasting your breath, Monty," he said. "I couldn't touch
money won in such a way, and I want to get you out of this alive.
There's fever in the air all around us, and if either of us got a touch
of it that drop of brandy might stand between us and death. Don't worry
me like a spoilt child. Roll yourself up and get to sleep! I'll keep
watch."

"I will be reasonable," Monty whined. "I will go to sleep, my friend,
and worry you no more when I have had just one sip of that brandy! It is
the finest medicine in the world for me! It will keep the fever off. You
do not want money you say! Come, is there anything in this world which I
possess, or may possess, which you will set against that three inches of
brown liquid?"

Trent was on the point of an angry negative. Suddenly he
stopped--hesitated--and said nothing. Monty's face lit up with sudden
hope.

"Come," he cried, "there is something I see! You're the right sort,
Trent. Don't be afraid to speak out. It's yours, man, if you win it.
Speak up!"

"I will stake that brandy," Trent answered, "against the picture you let
fall from your pocket an hour ago."



CHAPTER III


For a moment Monty stood as though dazed. Then the excitement which
had shone in his face slowly subsided. He stood quite silent, muttering
softly to himself, his eyes fixed upon Trent.

"Her picture! My little girl's picture! Trent, you're joking, you're
mad!"

"Am I?" Trent answered nonchalantly. "Perhaps so! Anyhow those are my
terms! You can play or not as you like! I don't care."

A red spot burned in Monty's cheeks, and a sudden passion shook him. He
threw himself upon Trent and would have struck him but that he was as
a child in the younger man's grasp. Trent held him at a distance easily
and without effort.

"There's nothing for you to make a fuss about," he said gruffly. "I
answered a plain question, that's all. I don't want to play at all. I
should most likely lose, and you're much better without the brandy."

Monty was foaming with passion and baffled desire. "You beast!" he
cried, "you low, ill-bred cur! How dared you look at her picture! How
dare you make me such an offer! Let me go, I say! Let me go!"

But Trent did not immediately relax his grasp. It was evidently not safe
to let him go. His fit of anger bordered upon hysterics. Presently he
grew calmer but more maudlin. Trent at last released him, and, thrusting
the bottle of brandy into his coat-pocket, returned to his game of
Patience. Monty lay on the ground watching him with red, shifty eyes.

"Trent," he whimpered. But Trent did not answer him.

"Trent, you needn't have been so beastly rough. My arm is black and blue
and I am sore all over."

But Trent remained silent. Monty crept a little nearer. He was beginning
to feel a very injured person.

"Trent," he said, "I'm sorry we've had words. Perhaps I said more than I
ought to have done. I did not mean to call you names. I apologise."

"Granted," Trent said tersely, bending over his game.

"You see, Trent," he went on, "you're not a family man, are you? If you
were, you would understand. I've been down in the mire for years, an
utter scoundrel, a poor, weak, broken-down creature. But I've always
kept that picture! It's my little girl! She doesn't know I'm alive,
never will know, but it's all I have to remind me of her, and I couldn't
part with it, could I?"

"You'd be a blackguard if you did," Trent answered curtly.

Monty's face brightened.

"I was sure," he declared, "that upon reflection you would think so.
I was sure of it. I have always found you very fair, Trent, and very
reasonable. Now shall we say two hundred?"

"You seem very anxious for a game," Trent remarked. "Listen, I will
play you for any amount you like, my I O U against your I O U. Are you
agreeable?"

Monty shook his head. "I don't want your money, Trent," he said. "You
know that I want that brandy. I will leave it to you to name the stake I
am to set up against it."

"As regards that," Trent answered shortly, "I've named the stake; I'll
not consider any other."

Monty's face once more grew black with anger.

"You are a beast, Trent--a bully!" he exclaimed passionately; "I'll not
part with it!"

"I hope you won't," Trent answered. "I've told you what I should think
of you if you did."

Monty moved a little nearer to the opening of the hut. He drew the
photograph hesitatingly from his pocket, and looked at it by the
moonlight. His eyes filled with maudlin tears. He raised it to his lips
and kissed it.

"My little girl," he whispered. "My little daughter." Trent had re-lit
his pipe and started a fresh game of Patience. Monty, standing in the
opening, began to mutter to himself.

"I am sure to win--Trent is always unlucky at cards--such a little risk,
and the brandy--ah!"

He sucked in his lips for a moment with a slight gurgling sound. He
looked over his shoulder, and his face grew haggard with longing. His
eyes sought Trent's, but Trent was smoking stolidly and looking at the
cards spread out before him, as a chess-player at his pieces.

"Such a very small risk," Monty whispered softly to himself. "I need the
brandy too. I cannot sleep without it! Trent!"

Trent made no answer. He did not wish to hear. Already he had repented.
He was not a man of keen susceptibility, but he was a trifle ashamed of
himself. At that moment he was tempted to draw the cork, and empty the
brandy out upon the ground.

"Trent! Do you hear, Trent?"

He could no longer ignore the hoarse, plaintive cry. He looked
unwillingly up. Monty was standing over him with white, twitching face
and bloodshot eyes.

"Deal the cards," he muttered simply, and sat down.

Trent hesitated. Monty misunderstood him and slowly drew the photograph
from his pocket and laid it face downwards upon the table. Trent bit his
lip and frowned.

"Rather a foolish game this," he said. "Let's call it off, eh? You shall
have--well, a thimbleful of the brandy and go to bed. I'll sit up, I'm
not tired."

But Monty swore a very profane and a very ugly oath.

"I'll have the lot," he muttered. "Every drop; every d--d drop! Ay, and
I'll keep the picture. You see, my friend, you see; deal the cards."

Then Trent, who had more faults than most men, but who hated bad
language, looked at the back of the photograph, and, shuddering,
hesitated no longer. He shuffled the cards and handed them to Monty.

"Your deal," he said laconically. "Same as before I suppose?"

Monty nodded, for his tongue was hot and his mouth dry, and speech was
not an easy thing. But he dealt the cards, one by one with jealous care,
and when he had finished he snatched upon his own, and looked at each
with sickly disappointment.

"How many?" Trent asked, holding out the pack. Monty hesitated, half
made up his mind to throw away three cards, then put one upon the table.
Finally, with a little whine, he laid three down with trembling fingers
and snatched at the three which Trent handed him. His face lit up, a
scarlet flush burned in his cheek. It was evident that the draw had
improved his hand.

Trent took his own cards up, looked at them nonchalantly, and helped
himself to one card. Monty could restrain himself no longer. He threw
his hand upon the ground.

"Three's," he cried in fierce triumph, "three of a kind--nines!"

Trent laid his own cards calmly down.

"A full hand," he said, "kings up."

Monty gave a little gasp and then a moan. His eyes were fixed with a
fascinating glare upon those five cards which Trent had so calmly laid
down. Trent took up the photograph, thrust it carefully into his pocket
without looking at it, and rose to his feet.

"Look here, Monty," he said, "you shall have the brandy; you've no right
to it, and you're best without it by long chalks. But there, you shall
have your own way."

Monty rose to his feet and balanced himself against the post.

"Never mind--about the brandy," he faltered. "Give me back the
photograph."

Trent shrugged his shoulders. "Why?" he asked coolly. "Full hand beats
three, don't it? It was my win and my stake."

"Then--then take that!" But the blow never touched Trent. He thrust out
his hand and held his assailant away at arm's length.

Monty burst into tears.

"You don't want it," he moaned; "what's my little girl to you? You never
saw her, and you never will see her in your life."

"She is nothing to me of course," Trent answered. "A moment or so ago
her picture was worth less to you than a quarter of a bottle of brandy."

"I was mad," Monty moaned. "She was my own little daughter, God help
her!"

"I never heard you speak of her before," Trent remarked.

There was a moment's silence. Then Monty crept out between the posts
into the soft darkness, and his voice seemed to come from a great
distance.

"I have never told you about her," he said, "because she is not the sort
of woman who is spoken of at all to such men as you. I am no more worthy
to be her father than you are to touch the hem of her skirt. There was
a time, Trent, many, many years ago, when I was proud to think that she
was my daughter, my own flesh and blood. When I began to go down--it
was different. Down and down and lower still! Then she ceased to be my
daughter! After all it is best. I am not fit to carry her picture. You
keep it. Trent--you keep it--and give me the brandy."

He staggered up on to his feet and crept back into the hut. His hands
were outstretched, claw-like and bony, his eyes were fierce as a wild
cat's. But Trent stood between him and the brandy bottle.

"Look here," he said, "you shall have the picture back--curse you! But
listen. If I were you and had wife, or daughter, or sweetheart like this
"--he touched the photograph almost reverently--"why, I'd go through
fire and water but I'd keep myself decent; ain't you a silly old fool,
now? We've made our piles, you can go back and take her a fortune, give
her jewels and pretty dresses, and all the fal-de-lals that women love.
You'll never do it if you muddle yourself up with that stuff. Pull
yourself together, old 'un. Chuck the drink till we've seen this thing
through at any rate!"

"You don't know my little girl," Monty muttered. "How should you? She'd
care little for money or gewgaws, but she'd break her heart to see her
old father--come to this--broken down--worthless--a hopeless, miserable
wretch. It's too late. Trent, I'll have just a glass I think. It will do
me good. I have been fretting, Trent, you see how pale I am."

He staggered towards the bottle. Trent watched him, interfering no
longer. With a little chuckle of content he seized upon it and, too
fearful of interference from Trent to wait for a glass, raised it to his
lips. There was a gurgling in his throat--a little spasm as he choked,
and released his lips for a moment. Then the bottle slid from his
nerveless fingers to the floor, and the liquor oozed away in a little
brown stream; even Trent dropped his pack of cards and sprang up
startled. For bending down under the sloping roof was a European, to all
appearance an Englishman, in linen clothes and white hat. It was the man
for whom they had waited.



CHAPTER IV


Trent moved forward and greeted the newcomer awkwardly. "You're Captain
Francis," he said. "We've been waiting for you."

The statement appeared to annoy the Explorer. He looked nervously at the
two men and about the hut.

"I don't know how the devil you got to hear of my coming, or what you
want with me," he answered brusquely. "Are you both English?"

Trent assented, waving his hand towards his companion in introductory
fashion.

"That's my pal, Monty," he said. "We're both English right enough."

Monty raised a flushed face and gazed with bloodshot eyes at the man
who was surveying him so calmly. Then he gave a little gurgling cry and
turned away. Captain Francis started and moved a step towards him. There
was a puzzled look in his face--as though he were making an effort to
recall something familiar.

"What is the matter with him?" he asked Trent.

"Drink!"

"Then why the devil don't you see that he doesn't get too much?" the
newcomer said sharply. "Don't you know what it means in this climate?
Why, he's on the high-road to a fever now. Who on this earth is it he
reminds me of?"

Trent laughed shortly.

"There's never a man in Buckomari--no, nor in all Africa--could keep
Monty from the drink," he said. "Live with him for a month and try it.
It wouldn't suit you--I don't think."

He glanced disdainfully at the smooth face and careful dress of their
visitor, who bore the inspection with a kindly return of contempt.

"I've no desire to try," he said; "but he reminds me very strongly of
some one I knew in England. What do you call him--Monty?"

Trent nodded.

"Never heard any other name," he said.

"Have you ever heard him speak of England?" Francis asked.

Trent hesitated. What was this newcomer to him that he should give away
his pal? Less than nothing! He hated the fellow already, with a rough,
sensitive man's contempt of a bearing and manners far above his own.

"Never. He don't talk."

Captain Francis moved a step towards the huddled-up figure breathing
heavily upon the floor, but Trent, leaning over, stopped him.

"Let him be," he said gruffly. "I know enough of him to be sure that he
needs no one prying and ferreting into his affairs. Besides, it isn't
safe for us to be dawdling about here. How many soldiers have you
brought with you?"

"Two hundred," Captain Francis answered shortly.

Trent whistled.

"We're all right for a bit, then," he said; "but it's a pretty sort of a
picnic you're on, eh?"

"Never mind my business," Captain Francis answered curtly; "what about
yours? Why have you been hanging about here for me?"

"I'll show you," Trent answered, taking a paper from his knapsack. "You
see, it's like this. There are two places near this show where I've
found gold. No use blowing about it down at Buckomari--the fellows there
haven't the nerve of a kitten. This cursed climate has sapped it all out
of them, I reckon. Monty and I clubbed together and bought presents
for his Majesty, the boss here, and Monty wrote out this little
document--sort of concession to us to sink mines and work them, you see.
The old buffer signed it like winking, directly he spotted the rum, but
we ain't quite happy about it; you see, it ain't to be supposed that
he's got a conscience, and there's only us saw him put his mark there.
We'll have to raise money to work the thing upon this, and maybe
there'll be difficulties. So what we thought was this. Here's an English
officer coming; let's get him to witness it, and then if the King don't
go on the square, why, it's a Government matter."

Captain Francis lit a cigarette and smoked thoughtfully for a moment or
two.

"I don't quite see," he said, "why we should risk a row for the sake of
you two."

Trent snorted.

"Look here," he said; "I suppose you know your business. You don't
want me to tell you that a decent excuse for having a row with this old
Johnny is about the best thing that could happen to you. He's a bit too
near the borders of civilisation to be a decent savage. Sooner or later
some one will have to take him under their protection. If you don't
do it, the French will. They're hanging round now looking out for an
opportunity. Listen!"

Both men moved instinctively towards the open part of the hut and looked
across towards the village. Up from the little open space in front
of the King's dwelling-house leaped a hissing bright flame; they
had kindled a fire, and black forms of men, stark naked and wounding
themselves with spears, danced around it and made the air hideous with
discordant cries. The King himself, too drunk to stand, squatted upon
the ground with an empty bottle by his side. A breath of wind brought a
strong, noxious odour to the two men who stood watching. Captain Francis
puffed hard at his cigarette.

"Ugh!" he muttered; "beastly!"

"You may take my word for it," Trent said gruffly, "that if your two
hundred soldiers weren't camped in the bush yonder, you and I and poor
Monty would be making sport for them to-night. Now come. Do you think a
quarrel with that crew is a serious thing to risk?"

"In the interests of civilisation," Captain Francis answered, with a
smile, "I think not."

"I don't care how you put it," Trent answered shortly. "You soldiers all
prate of the interests of civilisation. Of course it's all rot. You want
the land--you want to rule, to plant a flag, and be called a patriot."

Captain Francis laughed. "And you, my superior friend," he said,
glancing at Trent, gaunt, ragged, not too clean, and back at Monty--"you
want gold--honestly if you can get it, if not--well, it is not too wise
to ask. Your partnership is a little mysterious, isn't it--with a man
like that? Out of your magnificent morality I trust that he may get his
share."

Trent flushed a brick-red. An angry answer trembled upon his lips, but
Oom Sam, white and with his little fat body quivering with fear, came
hurrying up to them in the broad track of the moonlight.

"King he angry," he called out to them breathlessly. "Him mad drunk
angry. He say white men all go away, or he fire bush and use the
poisoned arrow. Me off! Got bearers waiting."

"If you go before we've finished," Trent said, "I'll not pay you a
penny. Please yourself."

The little fat man trembled--partly with rage, partly with fear.

"You stay any longer," he said, "and King him send after you and kill on
way home. White English soldiers go Buckomari with you?"

Trent shook his head.

"Going the other way," he said, "down to Wana Hill."

Oom Sam shook his head vigorously.

"Now you mind," he said; "I tell you, King send after you. Him blind
mad."

Oom Sam scuttled away. Captain Francis looked thoughtful. "That little
fat chap may be right," he remarked. "If I were you I'd get out of this
sharp. You see, I'm going the other way. I can't help you."

Trent set his teeth.

"I've spent a good few years trying to put a bit together, and this is
the first chance I've had," he said; "I'm going to have you back me as
a British subject on that concession. We'll go down into the village now
if you're ready."

"I'll get an escort," Francis said. "Best to impress 'em a bit, I think.
Half a minute."

He stepped back into the hut and looked steadfastly at the man who was
still lying doubled up upon the floor. Was it his fancy, or had those
eyes closed swiftly at his turning--was it by accident, too, that Monty,
with a little groan, changed his position at that moment, so that his
face was in the shadow? Captain Francis was puzzled.

"It's like him," he said to himself softly; "but after all the thing's
too improbable!"

He turned away with a shade upon his face and followed Trent out into
the moonlight. The screeching from the village below grew louder and
more hideous every minute.



CHAPTER V


The howls became a roar, blind passion was changed into purposeful fury.
Who were these white men to march so boldly into the presence of the
King without even the formality of sending an envoy ahead? For the King
of Bekwando, drunk or sober, was a stickler for etiquette. It pleased
him to keep white men waiting. For days sometimes a visitor was kept
waiting his pleasure, not altogether certain either as to his ultimate
fate, for there were ugly stories as to those who had journeyed to
Bekwando and never been seen or heard of since. Those were the sort of
visitors with whom his ebon Majesty loved to dally until they became
pale with fright or furious with anger and impatience; but men like this
white captain, who had brought him no presents, who came in overwhelming
force and demanded a passage through his country as a matter of right
were his special detestation. On his arrival he had simply marched into
the place at the head of his columns of Hausas without ceremony, almost
as a master, into the very presence of the King. Now he had come again
with one of those other miscreants who at least had knelt before him and
brought rum and many other presents. A slow, burning, sullen wrath was
kindled in the King's heart as the three men drew near. His people,
half-mad with excitement and debauch, needed only a cry from him to have
closed like magic round these insolent intruders. His thick lips were
parted, his breath came hot and fierce whilst he hesitated. But away
outside the clearing was that little army of Hausas, clean-limbed,
faithful, well drilled and armed. He choked down his wrath. There were
grim stories about those who had yielded to the luxury of slaying these
white men--stories of villages razed to the ground and destroyed, of
a King himself who had been shot, of vengeance very swift and very
merciless. He closed his mouth with a snap and sat up with drunken
dignity. Oom Sam, in fear and trembling, moved to his side.

"What they want?" the King asked.

Oom Sam spread out the document which Trent had handed him upon a
tree-stump, and explained. His Majesty nodded more affably. The document
reminded him of the pleasant fact that there were three casks of rum to
come to him every year. Besides, he rather liked scratching his royal
mark upon the smooth, white paper. He was quite willing to repeat the
performance, and took up the pen which Sam handed him readily.

"Him white man just come," Oom Sam explained; "want see you do this."

His Majesty was flattered, and, with the air of one to whom the signing
of treaties and concessions is an everyday affair, affixed a thick,
black cross upon the spot indicated.

"That all right?" he asked Oom Sam.

Oom Sam bowed to the ground.

"Him want to know," he said, jerking his head towards Captain Francis,
"whether you know what means?"

His forefinger wandered aimlessly down the document. His Majesty's reply
was prompt and cheerful.

"Three barrels of rum a year."

Sam explained further. "There will be white men come digging," he said;
"white men with engines that blow, making holes under the ground and
cutting trees."

The King was interested. "Where?" he asked.

Oom Sam pointed westward through the bush.

"Down by creek-side."

The King was thoughtful "Rum come all right?" he asked.

Oom Sam pointed to the papers.

"Say so there," he declared. "All quite plain."

The King grinned. It was not regal, but he certainly did it. If white
men come too near they must be shot--carefully and from ambush. He
leaned back with the air of desiring the conference to cease. Oom Sam
turned to Captain Francis.

"King him quite satisfied," he declared. "Him all explained before--he
agree."

The King suddenly woke up again. He clutched Sam by the arm, and
whispered in his ear. This time it was Sam who grinned.

"King, him say him signed paper twice," he explained. "Him want four
barrels of rum now."

Trent laughed harshly.

"He shall swim in it, Sam," he said; "he shall float down to hell upon
it."

Oom Sam explained to the King that, owing to the sentiments of affection
and admiration with which the white men regarded him, the three barrels
should be made into four, whereupon his Majesty bluntly pronounced the
audience at an end and waddled off into his Imperial abode.

The two Englishmen walked slowly back to the hut. Between them there had
sprung up from the first moment a strong and mutual antipathy. The blunt
savagery of Trent, his apparently heartless treatment of his weaker
partner, and his avowed unscrupulousness, offended the newcomer much in
the same manner as in many ways he himself was obnoxious to Trent. His
immaculate fatigue-uniform, his calm superciliousness, his obvious air
of belonging to a superior class, were galling to Trent beyond measure.
He himself felt the difference--he realised his ignorance, his unkempt
and uncared-for appearance. Perhaps, as the two men walked side by side,
some faint foreshadowing of the future showed to Trent another and
a larger world where they two would once more walk side by side, the
outward differences between them lessened, the smouldering irritation of
the present leaping up into the red-hot flame of hatred. Perhaps it was
just as well for John Francis that the man who walked so sullenly by
his side had not the eyes of a seer, for it was a wild country and Trent
himself had drunk deep of its lawlessness. A little accident with a
knife, a carelessly handled revolver, and the man who was destined to
stand more than once in his way would pass out of his life for ever. But
in those days Trent knew nothing of what was to come--which was just as
well for John Francis.

      *           *           *           *            *

Monty was sitting up when they reached the hut, but at the sight of
Trent's companion he cowered back and affected sleepiness. This time,
however, Francis was not to be denied. He walked to Monty's side, and
stood looking down upon him.

"I think," he said gently, "that we have met before."

"A mistake," Monty declared. "Never saw you in my life. Just off to
sleep."

But Francis had seen the trembling of the man's lips, and his nervously
shaking hands.

"There is nothing to fear," he said; "I wanted to speak to you as a
friend."

"Don't know you; don't want to speak to you," Monty declared.

Francis stooped down and whispered a name in the ear of the sullen man.
Trent leaned forward, but he could not hear it--only he too saw the
shudder and caught the little cry which broke from the white lips of his
partner.

Monty sat up, white, despairing, with strained, set face and bloodshot
eyes.

"Look here," he said, "I may be what you say, and I may not. It's no
business of yours. Do you hear? Now be off and leave me alone! Such as
I am, I am. I won't be interfered with. But--" Monty's voice became a
shriek.

"Leave me alone!" he cried. "I have no name I tell you, no past, no
future. Let me alone, or by Heaven I'll shoot you!"

Francis shrugged his shoulders, and turned away with a sigh.

"A word with you outside," he said to Trent--and Trent followed him
out into the night. The moon was paling--in the east there was a faint
shimmer of dawn. A breeze was rustling in the trees. The two men stood
face to face.

"Look here, sir," Francis said, "I notice that this concession of yours
is granted to you and your partner jointly whilst alive and to the
survivor, in case of the death of either of you."

"What then?" Trent asked fiercely.

"This! It's a beastly unfair arrangement, but I suppose it's too late to
upset it. Your partner is half sodden with drink now. You know what that
means in this climate. You've the wit to keep sober enough yourself.
You're a strong man, and he is weak. You must take care of him. You can
if you will."

"Anything else?" Trent asked roughly.

The officer looked his man up and down.

"We're in a pretty rough country," he said, "and a man gets into the
habit of having his own way here. But listen to me! If anything happens
to your partner here or in Buckomari, you'll have me to reckon with. I
shall not forget. We are bound to meet! Remember that!"

Trent turned his back upon him in a fit of passion which choked down all
speech. Captain Francis lit a cigarette and walked across towards his
camp.



CHAPTER VI


A sky like flame, and an atmosphere of sulphur. No breath of air, not
a single ruffle in the great, drooping leaves of the African trees and
dense, prickly shrubs. All around the dank, nauseous odour of poison
flowers, the ceaseless dripping of poisonous moisture. From the face of
the man who stood erect, unvanquished as yet in the struggle for life,
the fierce sweat poured like rain--his older companion had sunk to the
ground and the spasms of an ugly death were twitching at his whitening
lips.

"I'm done, Trent," he gasped faintly. "Fight your way on alone. You've
a chance yet. The way's getting a bit easier--I fancy we're on the right
track and we've given those black devils the slip! Nurse your strength!
You've a chance! Let me be. It's no use carrying a dead man." Gaunt and
wild, with the cold fear of death before him also, the younger man broke
out into a fit of cursing.

"May they rot in the blackest corner of hell, Oom Sam and those
miserable vermin!" he shouted. "A path all the way, the fever season
over, the swamps dry! Oh! when I think of Sam's smooth jargon I would
give my chance of life, such as it is, to have him here for one moment.
To think that beast must live and we die!"

"Prop me up against this tree, Trent--and listen," Monty whispered.
"Don't fritter away the little strength you have left."

Trent did as he was told. He had no particular affection for his partner
and the prospect of his death scarcely troubled him. Yet for twenty
miles and more, through fetid swamps and poisoned jungles, he had
carried him over his shoulder, fighting fiercely for the lives of both
of them, while there remained any chance whatever of escape. Now he knew
that it was in vain, he regretted only his wasted efforts--he had no
sentimental regrets in leaving him. It was his own life he wanted--his
own life he meant to fight for.

"I wouldn't swear at Oom Sam too hard," Monty continued. "Remember for
the last two days he was doing all he could to get us out of the
place. It was those fetish fellows who worked the mischief and
he--certainly--warned us all he could. He took us safely to Bekwando and
he worked the oracle with the King!"

"Yes, and afterwards sneaked off with Francis," Trent broke in bitterly,
"and took every bearer with him--after we'd paid them for the return
journey too. Sent us out here to be trapped and butchered like rats. If
we'd only had a guide we should have been at Buckomari by now."

"He was right about the gold," Monty faltered. "It's there for the
picking up. If only we could have got back we were rich for life. If you
escape--you need never do another stroke of work as long as you live."

Trent stood upright, wiped the dank sweat from his forehead and gazed
around him fiercely, and upwards at that lurid little patch of blue sky.

"If I escape!" he muttered. "I'll get out of this if I die walking. I'm
sorry you're done, Monty," he continued slowly. "Say the word and I'll
have one more spell at carrying you! You're not a heavy weight and I'm
rested now!"

But Monty, in whose veins was the chill of death and who sought only for
rest, shook his head.

"It shakes me too much," he said, "and it's only a waste of strength.
You get on, Trent, and don't you bother about me. You've done your duty
by your partner and a bit more. You might leave me the small revolver in
case those howling savages come up--and Trent!"

"Yes--"

"The picture--just for a moment. I'd like to have one look at her!"

Trent drew it out from his pocket--awkwardly--and with a little shame
at the care which had prompted him to wrap it so tenderly in the oilskin
sheet. Monty shaded his face with his hands, and the picture stole up
to his lips. Trent stood a little apart and hated himself for this
last piece of inhumanity. He pretended to be listening for the stealthy
approach of their enemies. In reality he was struggling with the feeling
which prompted him to leave this picture with the dying man.

"I suppose you'd best have it," he said sullenly at last.

But Monty shook his head feebly and held out the picture.

Trent took it with an odd sense of shame which puzzled him. He was not
often subject to anything of the sort.

"It belongs to you, Trent. I lost it on the square, and it's the only
social law I've never broken--to pay my gambling debts. There's one word
more!"

"Yes."

"It's about that clause in our agreement. I never thought it was quite
fair, you know, Trent!"

"Which clause?"

"The clause which--at my death--makes you sole owner of the whole
concession. You see--the odds were scarcely even, were they? It wasn't
likely anything would happen to you!"

"I planned the thing," Trent said, "and I saw it through! You did
nothing but find a bit of brass. It was only square that the odds should
be in my favour. Besides, you agreed. You signed the thing."

"But I wasn't quite well at the time," Monty faltered. "I didn't quite
understand. No, Trent, it's not quite fair. I did a bit of the work at
least, and I'm paying for it with my life!"

"What's it matter to you now?" Trent said, with unintentional brutality.
"You can't take it with you."

Monty raised himself a little. His eyes, lit with feverish fire, were
fastened upon the other man.

"There's my little girl!" he said hoarsely. "I'd like to leave her
something. If the thing turns out big, Trent, you can spare a small
share. There's a letter here! It's to my lawyers. They'll tell you all
about her."

Trent held out his hands for the letter.

"All right," he said, with sullen ungraciousness. "I'll promise
something. I won't say how much! We'll see."

"Trent, you'll keep your word," Monty begged. "I'd like her to know that
I thought of her."

"Oh, very well," Trent declared, thrusting the letter into his pocket.
"It's a bit outside our agreement, you know, but I'll see to it anyhow.
Anything else?"

Monty fell back speechless. There was a sudden change in his face.
Trent, who had seen men die before, let go his hand and turned away
without any visible emotion. Then he drew himself straight, and set his
teeth hard together.

"I'm going to get out of this," he said to himself slowly and with
fierce emphasis. "I'm not for dying and I won't die!"

He stumbled on a few steps, a little black snake crept out of its bed
of mud, and looked at him with yellow eyes protruding from its upraised
head. He kicked it savagely away--a crumpled, shapeless mass. It was a
piece of brutality typical of the man. Ahead he fancied that the air was
clearer--the fetid mists less choking--in the deep night-silence a few
hours back he had fancied that he had heard the faint thunder of the
sea. If this were indeed so, it would be but a short distance now to the
end of his journey. With dull, glazed eyes and clenched hands, he reeled
on. A sort of stupor had laid hold of him, but through it all his brain
was working, and he kept steadily to a fixed course. Was it the sea in
his ears, he wondered, that long, monotonous rolling of sound, and there
were lights before his eyes--the lights of Buckomari, or the lights of
death!

They found him an hour or two later unconscious, but alive, on the
outskirts of the village.


Three days later two men were seated face to face in a long wooden
house, the largest and most important in Buckomari village.

Smoking a corn-cob pipe and showing in his face but few marks of the
terrible days through which he had passed was Scarlett Trent--opposite
to him was Hiram Da Souza, the capitalist of the region. The Jew--of Da
Souza's nationality it was impossible to have any doubt--was coarse and
large of his type, he wore soiled linen clothes and was smoking a black
cigar. On the little finger of each hand, thickly encrusted with dirt,
was a diamond ring, on his thick, protruding lips a complacent smile.
The concession, already soiled and dog-eared, was spread out before
them.

It was Da Souza who did most of the talking. Trent indeed had the
appearance of a man only indirectly interested in the proceedings.

"You see, my dear sir," Da Souza was saying, "this little concession
of yours is, after all, a very risky business. These niggers have
absolutely no sense honour. Do I not know it--alas--to my cost?"

Trent listened in contemptuous silence. Da Souza had made a fortune
trading fiery rum on the Congo and had probably done more to debauch the
niggers he spoke of so bitterly than any man in Africa.

"The Bekwando people have a bad name--very bad name. As for any sense of
commercial honour--my dear Trent, one might as well expect diamonds to
spring up like mushrooms under our feet."

"The document," Trent said, "is signed by the King and witnessed by
Captain Francis, who is Agent-General out here, or something of the
sort, for the English Government. It was no gift and don't you think
it, but a piece of hard bartering. Forty bearers carried our presents to
Bekwando and it took us three months to get through. There is enough in
it to make us both millionaires.

"Then why," Da Souza asked, looking up with twinkling eyes, "do you want
to sell me a share in it?"

"Because I haven't a darned cent to bless myself with," Trent answered
curtly. "I've got to have ready money. I've never had my fist on five
thousand pounds before--no, nor five thousand pence, but, as I'm a
living man, let me have my start and I'll hold my own with you all."

Da Souza threw himself back in his chair with uplifted hands.

"But my dear friend," he cried, "my dear young friend, you were not
thinking--do not say that you were thinking of asking such a sum as five
thousand pounds for this little piece of paper!"

The amazement, half sorrowful, half reproachful, on the man's face was
perfectly done. But Trent only snorted.

"That piece of paper, as you call it, cost us the hard savings of years,
it cost us weeks and months in the bush and amongst the swamps--it cost
a man's life, not to mention the niggers we lost. Come, I'm not here to
play skittles. Are you on for a deal or not? If you're doubtful about it
I've another market. Say the word and we'll drink and part, but if
you want to do business, here are my terms. Five thousand for a sixth
share!"

"Sixth share," the Jew screamed, "sixth share?"

Trent nodded.

"The thing's worth a million at least," he said. "A sixth share is a
great fortune. Don't waste any time turning up the whites of your eyes
at me. I've named my terms and I shan't budge from them. You can lay
your bottom dollar on that."

Da Souza took up the document and glanced it through once more.

"The concession," he remarked, "is granted to Scarlett Trent and to one
Monty jointly. Who is this Monty, and what has he to say to it?"

Trent set his teeth hard, and he never blenched.

"He was my partner, but he died in the swamps, poor chap. We had
horrible weather coming back. It pretty near finished me."

Trent did not mention the fact that for four days and nights they were
hiding in holes and up trees from the natives whom the King of Bekwando
had sent after them, that their bearers had fled away, and that they had
been compelled to leave the track and make their way through an unknown
part of the bush.

"But your partner's share," the Jew asked. "What of that?"

"It belongs to me," Trent answered shortly. "We fixed it so before we
started. We neither of us took much stock in our relations. If I had
died, Monty would have taken the lot. It was a fair deal. You'll find it
there!"

The Jew nodded.

"And your partner?" he said. "You saw him die! There is no doubt about
that?"

Trent nodded.

"He is as dead," he said, "as Julius Caesar."

"If I offered you--" Da Souza began.

"If you offered me four thousand, nine hundred and ninety-nine pounds,"
Trent interrupted roughly, "I would tell you to go to glory."

Da Souza sighed. It was a hard man to deal with--this.

"Very well," he said, "if I give way, if I agree to your terms, you will
be willing to make over this sixth share to me, both on your own account
and on account of your late partner?"

"You're right, mate," Trent assented. "Plank down the brass, and it's a
deal."

"I will give you four thousand pounds for a quarter share," Da Souza
said.

Trent knocked the ashes from his pipe and stood up.

"Here, don't waste any more of my time," he said. "Stand out of the way,
I'm off."

Da Souza kept his hands upon the concession.

"My dear friend," he said, "you are so violent. You are so abrupt. Now
listen. I will give you five thousand for a quarter share. It is half my
fortune."

"Give me the concession," Trent said. "I'm off."

"For a fifth," Da Souza cried.

Trent moved to the door without speech. Da Souza groaned.

"You will ruin me," he said, "I know it. Come then, five thousand for a
sixth share. It is throwing money away."

"If you think so, you'd better not part," Trent said, still lingering in
the doorway. "Just as you say. I don't care."

For a full minute Da Souza hesitated. He had an immense belief in the
richness of the country set out in the concession; he knew probably more
about it than Trent himself. But five thousand pounds was a great deal
of money and there was always the chance that the Government might not
back the concession holders in case of trouble. He hesitated so long
that Trent was actually disappearing before he had made up his mind.

"Come back, Mr. Trent," he called out. "I have decided. I accept. I join
with you."

Trent slowly returned. His manner showed no exultation.

"You have the money here?" he asked.

Da Souza laid down a heap of notes and gold upon the table. Trent
counted them carefully and thrust them into his pocket. Then he took up
a pen and wrote his name at the foot of the assignment which the Jew had
prepared.

"Have a drink?" he asked.

Da Souza shook his head.

"The less we drink in this country," he said, "the better. I guess out
here, spirits come next to poison. I'll smoke with you, if you have a
cigar handy."

Trent drew a handful of cigars from his pocket. "They're beastly," he
said, "but it's a beastly country. I'll be glad to turn my back on it."

"There is a good deal," Da Souza said, "which we must now talk about."

"To-morrow," Trent said curtly. "No more now! I haven't got over my
miserable journey yet. I'm going to try and get some sleep."

He swung out into the heavy darkness. The air was thick with unwholesome
odours rising from the lake-like swamp beyond the drooping circle of
trees. He walked a little way towards the sea, and sat down upon a log.
A faint land-breeze was blowing, a melancholy soughing came from
the edge of the forest only a few hundred yards back, sullen,
black, impenetrable. He turned his face inland unwillingly, with a
superstitious little thrill of fear. Was it a coyote calling, or had he
indeed heard the moan of a dying man, somewhere back amongst that dark,
gloomy jungle? He scoffed at himself! Was he becoming as a girl, weak
and timid? Yet a moment later he closed his eyes, and pressed his hands
tightly over his hot eyeballs. He was a man of little imaginative force,
yet the white face of a dying man seemed suddenly to have floated up out
of the darkness, to have come to him like a will-o'-the-wisp from the
swamp, and the hollow, lifeless eyes seemed ever to be seeking his,
mournful and eloquent with dull reproach. Trent rose to his feet with
an oath and wiped the sweat from his forehead. He was trembling, and he
cursed himself heartily.

"Another fool's hour like this," he muttered, "and the fever will
have me. Come out of the shadows, you white-faced, skulking reptile,
you--bah! what a blithering fool I am! There is no one there! How could
there be any one?"

He listened intently. From afar off came the faint moaning of the wind
in the forest and the night sounds of restless animals. Nearer there was
no one--nothing stirred. He laughed out loud and moved away to spend his
last night in his little wooden home. On the threshold he paused, and
faced once more that black, mysterious line of forest.

"Well, I've done with you now," he cried, a note of coarse exultation in
his tone. "I've gambled for my life and I've won. To-morrow I'll begin
to spend the stakes."



CHAPTER VII


In a handsomely appointed room of one of the largest hotels in London
a man was sitting at the head of a table strewn with blotting-paper and
writing materials of every description. Half a dozen chairs had been
carelessly pushed back, there were empty champagne bottles upon the
sideboard, the air was faintly odorous of tobacco smoke--blue wreaths
were still curling upwards towards the frescoed ceiling. Yet the
gathering had not been altogether a festive one. There were sheets of
paper still lying about covered with figures, a brass-bound ledger lay
open at the further end of the table, In the background a young man,
slim, pale, ill-dressed in sober black, was filling a large tin box with
documents and letters.

It had been a meeting of giants. Men whose names were great in the world
of finance had occupied those elaborately decorated leather chairs.
There had been cynicism, criticism, and finally enthusiasm. For the man
who remained it had been a triumph. He had appeared to do but little in
the way of persuasion. His manners had been brusque, and his words had
been few. Yet he remained the master of the situation. He had gained
a victory not only financial but moral, over men whose experience and
knowledge were far greater than his. He was no City magnate, nor had he
ever received any training in those arts and practices which go to the
making of one. For his earlier life had been spent in a wilder country
where the gambling was for life and not merely for gold. It was Scarlett
Trent who sat there in thoughtful and absorbed silence. He was leaning a
little back in a comfortably upholstered chair, with his eyes fixed on
a certain empty spot upon the table. The few inches of polished mahogany
seemed to him--empty of all significance in themselves--to be reflecting
in some mysterious manner certain scenes in his life which were now
very rarely brought back to him. The event of to-day he knew to be the
culmination of a success as rapid as it had been surprising. He was a
millionaire. This deal to-day, in which he had held his own against the
shrewdest and most astute men of the great city, had more than doubled
his already large fortune. A few years ago he had landed in England
friendless and unknown, to-day he had stepped out from even amongst
the chosen few and had planted his feet in the higher lands whither
the faces of all men are turned. With a grim smile upon his lips, he
recalled one by one the various enterprises into which he had entered,
the courage with which he had forced them through, the solid strength
with which he had thrust weaker men to the wall and had risen a little
higher towards his goal upon the wreck of their fortunes. Where other
men had failed he had succeeded. To-day the triumph was his alone. He
was a millionaire--one of the princes of the world!

The young man, who had filled his box and also a black bag, was ready
to go. He ventured most respectfully to break in upon the reflections of
his employer.

"Is there anything more for me to do, sir?"

Trent woke from his day-dream into the present. He looked around the
room and saw that no papers had been omitted. Then he glanced keenly
into his clerk's face.

"Nothing more," he said. "You can go."

It was significant of the man that, notwithstanding his hour of triumph,
he did not depart in the slightest degree from the cold gruffness of his
tone. The little speech which his clerk had prepared seemed to stick in
his throat.

"I trust, sir, that you will forgive--that you will pardon the liberty,
if I presume to congratulate you upon such a magnificent stroke of
business!"

Scarlett Trent faced him coldly. "What do you know about it?" he asked.
"What concern is it of yours, young man, eh?"

The clerk sighed, and became a little confused. He had indulged in
some wistful hopes that for once his master might have relaxed, that an
opportune word of congratulation might awaken some spark of generosity
in the man who had just added a fortune to his great store. He had a
girl-wife from whose cheeks the roses were slowly fading, and very
soon would come a time when a bank-note, even the smallest, would be a
priceless gift. It was for her sake he had spoken. He saw now that he
had made a mistake.

"I am very sorry, sir," he said humbly. "Of course I know that these men
have paid an immense sum for their shares in the Bekwando Syndicate. At
the same time it is not my business, and I am sorry that I spoke."

"It is not your business at any time to remember what I receive for
properties," Scarlett Trent said roughly. "Haven't I told you that
before? What did I say when you came to me? You were to hear nothing and
see nothing outside your duties! Speak up, man! Don't stand there like a
jay!"

The clerk was pale, and there was an odd sensation in his throat. But he
thought of his girl-wife and he pulled himself together.

"You are quite right, sir," he said. "To any one else I should
never have mentioned it. But we were alone, and I thought that the
circumstances might make it excusable."

His employer grunted in an ominous manner.

"When I say forget, I mean forget," he declared. "I don't want to be
reminded by you of my own business. D'ye think I don't know it?"

"I am very sure that you do, sir," the clerk answered humbly. "I quite
see that my allusion was an error."

Scarlett Trent had turned round in his chair, and was eying the pale,
nervous figure with a certain hard disapproval.

"That's a beastly coat you've got on, Dickenson," he said. "Why don't
you get a new one?"

"I am standing in a strong light, sir," the young man answered, with a
new fear at his heart. "It wants brushing, too. I will endeavour to get
a new one--very shortly."

His employer grunted again.

"What's your salary?" he asked.

"Two pounds fifteen shillings a week, sir."

"And you mean to say that you can't dress respectably on that? What do
you do with your money, eh? How do you spend it? Drink and music-halls,
I suppose!"

The young man was able at last to find some spark of dignity. A pink
spot burned upon his cheeks.

"I do not attend music-halls, sir, nor have I touched wine or spirits
for years. I--I have a wife to keep, and perhaps--I am expecting--"

He stopped abruptly. How could he mention that other matter which, for
all its anxieties, still possessed for him a sort of quickening joy in
the face of that brutal stare. He did not conclude his sentence, the
momentary light died out of his pale commonplace features. He hung his
head and was silent.

"A wife," Scarlett Trent repeated with contempt, "and all the rest of it
of course. Oh, what poor donkeys you young men are! Here are you, with
your way to make in the world, with your foot scarcely upon the bottom
rung of the ladder, grubbing along on a few bob a week, and you choose
to go and chuck away every chance you ever might have for a moment's
folly. A poor, pretty face I suppose. A moonlight walk on a Bank
Holiday, a little maudlin sentiment, and over you throw all your chances
in life. No wonder the herd is so great, and the leaders so few," he
added, with a sneer.

The young man raised his head. Once more the pink spot was burning. Yet
how hard to be dignified with the man from whom comes one's daily bread.

"You are mistaken, sir," he said. "I am quite happy and quite
satisfied."

Scarlett Trent laughed scornfully.

"Then you don't look it," he exclaimed.

"I may not, sir," the young man continued, with a desperate courage,
"but I am. After all happiness is spelt with different letters for all
of us. You have denied yourself--worked hard, carried many burdens and
run great risks to become a millionaire. I too have denied myself, have
worked and struggled to make a home for the girl I cared for. You have
succeeded and you are happy. I can hold Edith's--I beg your pardon,
my wife's hand in mine and I am happy. I have no ambition to be a
millionaire. I was very ambitious to win my wife."

Scarlett Trent looked at him for a moment open mouthed and open-eyed.
Then he laughed outright and a chill load fell from the heart of the man
who for a moment had forgotten himself. The laugh was scornful perhaps,
but it was not angry.

"Well, you've shut me up," he declared. "You seem a poor sort of a
creature to me, but if you're content, it's no business of mine. Here
buy yourself an overcoat, and drink a glass of wine. I'm off!"

He rose from his seat and threw a bank-note over the table. The clerk
opened it and handed it back with a little start.

"I am much obliged to you, sir," he said humbly, "but you have made a
mistake. This note is for fifty pounds."

Trent glanced at it and held out his hand. Then he paused.

"Never mind," he said, with a short laugh, "I meant to give you a fiver,
but it don't make much odds. Only see that you buy some new clothes."

The clerk half closed his eyes and steadied himself by grasping the back
of a chair. There was a lump in his throat in earnest now.

"You--you mean it, sir?" he gasped. "I--I'm afraid I can't thank you!"

"Don't try, unless you want me to take it back," Trent said, strolling
to the sideboard. "Lord, how those City chaps can guzzle! Not a drop of
champagne left. Two unopened bottles though! Here, stick 'em in your bag
and take 'em to the missis, young man. I paid for the lot, so there's no
use leaving any. Now clear out as quick as you can. I'm off!"

"You will allow me, sir--"

Scarlett Trent closed the door with a slam and disappeared. The young
man passed him a few moments later as he stood on the steps of the hotel
lighting a cigar. He paused again, intent on stammering out some words
of thanks. Trent turned his back upon him coldly.



CHAPTER VIII


Trent, on leaving the hotel, turned for almost the first time in his
life westwards. For years the narrow alleys, the thronged streets, the
great buildings of the City had known him day by day, almost hour by
hour. Its roar and clamour, the strife of tongues and keen measuring
of wits had been the salt of his life. Steadily, sturdily, almost
insolently, he had thrust his way through to the front ranks. In many
respects those were singular and unusual elements which had gone to
the making of his success. His had not been the victory of honied
falsehoods, of suave deceit, of gentle but legalised robbery. He had
been a hard worker, a daring speculator with nerves of iron, and courage
which would have glorified a nobler cause. Nor had his been the methods
of good fellowship, the sharing of "good turns," the camaraderie of
finance. The men with whom he had had large dealings he had treated as
enemies rather than friends, ever watching them covertly with close but
unslackening vigilance. And now, for the present at any rate it was all
over. There had come a pause in his life. His back was to the City and
his face was set towards an unknown world. Half unconsciously he had
undertaken a little voyage of exploration.

From the Strand he crossed Trafalgar Square into Pall Mall, and up the
Haymarket into Piccadilly. He was very soon aware that he had wandered
into a world whose ways were not his ways and with whom he had no
kinship. Yet he set himself sedulously to observe them, conscious that
what he saw represented a very large side of life. From the first he
was aware of a certain difference in himself and his ways. The careless
glance of a lounger on the pavement of Pall Mall filled him with a
sudden anger. The man was wearing gloves, an article of dress which
Trent ignored, and smoking a cigarette, which he loathed. Trent was
carelessly dressed in a tweed suit and red tie, his critic wore a silk
hat and frock coat, patent-leather boots, and a dark tie of invisible
pattern. Yet Trent knew that he was a type of that class which would
look upon him as an outsider, and a black sheep, until he had bought his
standing. They would expect him to conform to their type, to learn to
speak their jargon, to think with their puny brains and to see with
their short-sighted eyes. At the "Criterion" he turned in and had a
drink, and, bolder for the wine which he had swallowed at a gulp, he
told himself that he would do nothing of the sort. He would not alter
a jot. They must take him as he was, or leave him. He suffered his
thoughts to dwell for a moment upon his wealth, on the years which had
gone to the winning of it, on a certain nameless day, the memory of
which even now sent sometimes the blood running colder through his
veins, on the weaker men who had gone under that he might prosper. Now
that it was his, he wanted the best possible value for it; it was the
natural desire of the man to be uppermost in the bargain. The delights
of the world behind, it seemed to him that he had already drained. The
crushing of his rivals, the homage of his less successful competitors,
the grosser pleasures of wine, the music-halls, and the unlimited
spending of money amongst people whom he despised had long since palled
upon him. He had a keen, strong desire to escape once and for ever from
his surroundings. He lounged along, smoking a large cigar, keen-eyed and
observant, laying up for himself a store of impressions, unconsciously
irritated at every step by a sense of ostracism, of being in some
indefinable manner without kinship and wholly apart from this world, in
which it seemed natural now that he should find some place. He gazed
at the great houses without respect or envy, at the men with a fierce
contempt, at the women with a sore feeling that if by chance he should
be brought into contact with any of them they would regard him as a
sort of wild animal, to be humoured or avoided purely as a matter of
self-interest. The very brightness and brilliancy of their toilettes,
the rustling of their dresses, the trim elegance and daintiness which he
was able to appreciate without being able to understand, only served
to deepen his consciousness of the gulf which lay between him and them.
They were of a world to which, even if he were permitted to enter it,
he could not possibly belong. He returned such glances as fell upon him
with fierce insolence; he was indeed somewhat of a strange figure in
his ill-fitting and inappropriate clothes amongst a gathering of smart
people. A lady looking at him through raised lorgnettes turned and
whispered something with a smile to her companion--once before he had
heard an audible titter from a little group of loiterers. He returned
the glance with a lightning-like look of diabolical fierceness, and,
turning round, stood upon the curbstone and called a hansom.

A sense of depression swept over him as he was driven through the
crowded streets towards Waterloo. The half-scornful, half-earnest
prophecy, to which he had listened years ago in a squalid African
hut, flashed into his mind. For the first time he began to have dim
apprehensions as to his future. All his life he had been a toiler, and
joy had been with him in the fierce combat which he had waged day by
day. He had fought his battle and he had won--where were the fruits
of his victory? A puny, miserable little creature like Dickenson could
prate of happiness and turn a shining face to the future--Dickenson who
lived upon a pittance, who depended upon the whim of his employer, and
who confessed to ambitions which were surely pitiable. Trent lit a fresh
cigar and smiled; things would surely come right with him--they must.
What Dickenson could gain was surely his by right a thousand times over.

He took the train for Walton, travelling first class, and treated with
much deference by the officials on the line. As he alighted and passed
through the booking-hall into the station-yard a voice hailed him. He
looked up sharply. A carriage and pair of horses was waiting, and inside
a young woman with a very smart hat and a profusion of yellow hair.

"Come on, General," she cried. "I've done a skip and driven down to meet
you. Such jokes when they miss me. The old lady will be as sick as they
make 'em. Can't we have a drive round for an hour, eh?"

Her voice was high-pitched and penetrating. Listening to it Trent
unconsciously compared it with the voices of the women of that other
world into which he had wandered earlier in the afternoon. He turned a
frowning face towards her.

"You might have spared yourself the trouble," he said shortly. "I didn't
order a carriage to meet me and I don't want one. I am going to walk
home."

She tossed her head.

"What a beastly temper you're in!" she remarked. "I'm not particular
about driving. Do you want to walk alone?"

"Exactly!" he answered. "I do!"

She leaned back in the carriage with heightened colour.

"Well, there's one thing about me," she said acidly. "I never go where I
ain't wanted."

Trent shrugged his shoulders and turned to the coachman.

"Drive home, Gregg," he said. "I'm walking."

The man touched his hat, the carriage drove off, and Trent, with a grim
smile upon his lips, walked along the dusty road. Soon he paused before
a little white gate marked private, and, unlocking it with a key which
he took from his pocket, passed through a little plantation into a large
park-like field. He took off his hat and fanned himself thoughtfully as
he walked. The one taste which his long and absorbing struggle with the
giants of Capel Court had never weakened was his love for the country.
He lifted his head to taste the breeze which came sweeping across from
the Surrey Downs, keenly relishing the fragrance of the new-mown hay and
the faint odour of pines from the distant dark-crested hill. As he came
up the field towards the house he looked with pleasure upon the great
bed of gorgeous-coloured rhododendrons which bordered his lawn, the dark
cedars which drooped over the smooth shaven grass, and the faint flush
of colour from the rose-gardens beyond. The house itself was small, but
picturesque. It was a grey stone building of two stories only, and from
where he was seemed completely embowered in flowers and creepers. In a
way, he thought, he would be sorry to leave it. It had been a pleasant
summer-house for him, although of course it was no fit dwelling-house
for a millionaire. He must look out for something at once now--a country
house and estate. All these things would come as a matter of course.

He opened another gate and passed into an inner plantation of pines and
shrubs which bordered the grounds. A winding path led through it, and,
coming round a bend, he stopped short with a little exclamation. A girl
was standing with her back to him rapidly sketching upon a little block
which she had in her left hand.

"Hullo!" he remarked, "another guest! and who brought you down, young
lady, eh?"

She turned slowly round and looked at him in cold surprise. Trent knew
at once that he had made a mistake. She was plainly dressed in white
linen and a cool muslin blouse, but there was something about her,
unmistakable even to Trent, which placed her very far apart indeed from
any woman likely to have become his unbidden guest. He knew at once that
she was one of that class with whom he had never had any association.
She was the first lady whom he had ever addressed, and he could have
bitten out his tongues when he remembered the form of his doing so.

"I beg your pardon, miss," he said confusedly, "my mistake! You see,
your back was turned to me."

She nodded and smiled graciously.

"If you are Mr. Scarlett Trent," she said, "it is I who should
apologise, for I am a flagrant trespasser. You must let me explain."



CHAPTER IX


The girl had moved a step towards him as she spoke, and a gleam of
sunlight which had found its way into the grove flashed for a moment on
the stray little curls of her brown-gold hair and across her face.
Her lips were parted in a delightful smile; she was very pretty, and
inclined to be apologetic. But Scarlett Trent had seen nothing save that
first glance when the sun had touched her face with fire. A strong man
at all times, and more than commonly self-masterful, he felt himself
now as helpless as a child. A sudden pallor had whitened his face to
the lips, there were strange singings in his ears, and a mist before his
eyes. It was she! There was no possibility of any mistake. It was the
girl for whose picture he had gambled in the hut at Bekwando--Monty's
baby-girl, of whom he had babbled even in death. He leaned against a
tree, stricken dumb, and she was frightened. "You are ill," she cried.
"I'm so sorry. Let me run to the house and fetch some one!"

He had strength enough to stop her. A few deep breaths and he was
himself again, shaken and with a heart beating like a steam-engine, but
able at least to talk intelligently.

"I'm sorry--didn't mean to frighten you," he said. "It's the heat. I
get an attack like this sometimes. Yes, I'm Mr. Trent. I don't know what
you're doing here, but you're welcome."

"How nice of you to say so!" she answered brightly. "But then perhaps
you'll change your mind when you know what I have been doing."

He laughed shortly.

"Nothing terrible, I should say. Looks as though you've been making a
picture of my house; I don't mind that."

She dived in her pocket and produced a card-case.

"I'll make full confession," she said frankly. "I'm a journalist."

"A what!" he repeated feebly.

"A journalist. I'm on the Hour. This isn't my work as a rule; but the
man who should have come is ill, and his junior can't sketch, so they
sent me! Don't look as though I were a ghost, please. Haven't you ever
heard of a girl journalist before?"

"Never," he answered emphatically. "I didn't know that ladies did such
things!"

She laughed gaily but softly; and Trent understood then what was meant
by the music of a woman's voice.

"Oh, it's not at all an uncommon thing," she answered him. "You won't
mind my interviewing you, will you?"

"Doing what?" he asked blankly.

"Interviewing you! That's what I've come for, you know; and we want a
little sketch of your house for the paper. I know you don't like it. I
hear you've been awfully rude to poor little Morrison of the Post; but
I'll be very careful what I say, and very quick."

He stood looking at her, a dazed and bewildered man. From the trim
little hat, with its white band and jaunty bunch of cornflowers, to
the well-shaped patent shoes, she was neatly and daintily dressed. A
journalist! He gazed once more into her face, at the brown eyes watching
him now a little anxiously, the mouth with the humorous twitch at
the corner of her lips. The little wisps of hair flashed again in the
sunlight. It was she! He had found her.

She took his silence for hesitation, and continued a little anxiously.

"I really won't ask you many questions, and it would do me quite a lot
of good to get an interview with you. Of course I oughtn't to have begun
this sketch without permission. If you mind that, I'll give it up."

He found his tongue awkwardly, but vigorously.

"You can sketch just as long as ever you please, and make what use of it
you like," he said. "It's only a bit of a place though!"

"How nice of you! And the interview?"

"I'll tell you whatever you want to know," he said quietly.

She could scarcely believe in her good fortune, especially when she
remembered the description of the man which one of the staff had given.
He was gruff, vulgar, ill-tempered; the chief ought to be kicked for
letting her go near him! This was what she had been told. She laughed
softly to herself.

"It is very good indeed of you, Mr. Trent," she said earnestly. "I was
quite nervous about coming, for I had no idea that you would be so kind.
Shall I finish my sketch first, and then perhaps you will be able to
spare me a few minutes for the interview?"

"Just as you like," he answered. "May I look at it?"

"Certainly," she answered, holding out the block; "but it isn't half
finished yet."

"Will it take long?"

"About an hour, I think."

"You are very clever," he said, with a little sigh.

She laughed outright.

"People are calling you the cleverest man in London to-day," she said.

"Pshaw! It isn't the cleverness that counts for anything that makes
money."

Then he set his teeth hard together and swore vigorously but silently.
She had become suddenly interested in her work. A shrill burst of
laughter from the lawn in front had rung sharply out, startling them
both. A young woman with fluffy hair and in a pale blue dinner-dress was
dancing to an unseen audience. Trent's eyes flashed with anger, and his
cheeks burned. The dance was a music-hall one, and the gestures were not
refined. Before he could stop himself an oath had broken from his lips.
After that he dared not even glance at the girl by his side.

"I'm very sorry," he muttered. "I'll stop that right away."

"You mustn't disturb your friends on my account," she said quietly. She
did not look up, but Trent felt keenly the alteration in her manner.

"They're not my friends," he exclaimed passionately "I'll clear them out
neck and crop."

She looked up for a moment, surprised at his sudden vehemence. There
was no doubt about his being in earnest. She continued her work without
looking at him, but her tone when she spoke was more friendly.

"This will take me a little longer than I thought to finish properly,"
she said. "I wonder might I come down early to-morrow morning? What time
do you leave for the City?"

"Not until afternoon, at any rate," he said. "Come to-morrow,
certainly--whenever you like. You needn't be afraid of that rabble. I'll
see you don't have to go near them."

"You must please not make any difference or alter your arrangements on
my account," she said. "I am quite used to meeting all sorts of people
in my profession, and I don't object to it in the least. Won't you go
now? I think that that was your dinner-bell."

He hesitated, obviously embarrassed but determined. "There is one
question," he said, "which I should very much like to ask you. It will
sound impertinent. I don't mean it so. I can't explain exactly why I
want to know, but I have a reason."

"Ask it by all means," she said. "I'll promise that I'll answer it if I
can."

"You say that you are--a journalist. Have you taken it up for a pastime,
or--to earn money?"

"To earn money by all means," she answered, laughing. "I like the work,
but I shouldn't care for it half so much if I didn't make my living at
it. Did you think that I was an amateur?"

"I didn't know," he answered slowly. "Thank you. You will come
to-morrow?"

"Of course! Good evening."

"Good evening."

Trent lifted his hat, and turned away unwillingly towards the house,
full of a sense that something wonderful had happened to him. He was
absent-minded, but he stopped to pat a little dog whose attentions he
usually ignored, and he picked a creamy-white rose as he crossed the
lawn and wondered why it should remind him of her.



CHAPTER X


Trent's appearance upon the lawn was greeted with a shout of enthusiasm.
The young lady in blue executed a pas seut, and came across to him on
her toes, and the girl with the yellow hair, although sulky, gave him
to understand by a sidelong glance that her favour was not permanently
withdrawn. They neither of them noticed the somewhat ominous air of
civility with which he received their greetings, or the contempt in his
eyes as he looked them silently over.

"Where are the lost tribe?" he inquired, as the girls, one on either
side, escorted him to the house.

They received his witticism with a piercing shriek of laughter.

"Mamma and her rag of a daughter are in the drawing room," explained
Miss Montressor--the young lady with fluffy hair who dressed in blue and
could dance. "Such a joke, General! They don't approve of us! Mamma says
that she shall have to take her Julie away if we remain. We are not
fit associates for her. Rich, isn't it! The old chap's screwing up his
courage now with brandy and soda to tell you so!"

Trent laughed heartily. The situation began to appeal to him. There was
humour in it which he alone could appreciate.

"Does he expect me to send you away?" he asked.

"That's a cert!" Miss Montressor affirmed. "The old woman's been playing
the respectable all day, turning up the whites of her eyes at me because
I did a high kick in the hall, and groaning at Flossie because she had a
few brandies; ain't that so, Flossie?"

The young lady with yellow hair confirmed the statement with much
dignity.

"I had a toothache," she said, "and Mrs. Da Souza, or whatever the old
cat calls herself, was most rude. I reckon myself as respectable as she
is any day, dragging that yellow-faced daughter of hers about with her
and throwing her at men's heads."

Miss Montressor, who had stopped to pick a flower, rejoined them.

"I say, General," she remarked, "fair's fair, and a promise is a
promise. We didn't come down here to be made fools of by a fat old
Jewess. You won't send us away because of the old wretch?"

"I promise," said Trent, "that when she goes you go, and not before. Is
that sufficient?"

"Right oh!" the young lady declared cheerfully. "Now you go and prink up
for dinner. We're ready, Flossie and I. The little Jew girl's got a new
dress--black covered with sequins. It makes her look yellower than ever.
There goes the bell, and we're both as hungry as hunters. Look sharp!"

Trent entered the house. Da Souza met him in the hall, sleek, curly,
and resplendent in a black dinner-suit. The years had dealt lightly with
him, or else the climate of England was kinder to his yellow skin than
the moist heat of the Gold Coast. He greeted Trent with a heartiness
which was partly tentative, partly boisterous.

"Back from the coining of the shekels, my dear friend," he exclaimed.
"Back from the spoiling of the Egyptians, eh? How was money to-day?"

"An eighth easier," Trent answered, ascending the stairs.

Da Souza fidgeted about with the banisters, and finally followed him.

"There was just a word," he remarked, "a little word I wanted with you."

"Come and talk while I wash," Trent said shortly. "Dinner's on, and I'm
hungry."

"Certainly, certainly," Da Souza murmured, closing the door behind them
as they entered the lavatory. "It is concerning these young ladies."

"What! Miss Montressor and her friend?" Trent remarked thrusting his
head into the cold water. "Phew!"

"Exactly! Two very charming young ladies, my dear friend, very charming
indeed, but a little--don't you fancy just a little fast!"

"Hadn't noticed it," Trent answered, drying himself. "What about it?"

Da Souza tugged at his little black imperial, and moved uneasily about.

"We--er--men of the world, my dear Trent, we need not be so particular,
eh?--but the ladies--the ladies are so observant."

"What ladies?" Trent asked coolly.

"It is my wife who has been talking to me," Da Souza continued. "You
see, Julie is so young--our dear daughter she is but a child; and, as
my wife says, we cannot be too particular, too careful, eh; you
understand!"

"You want them to go? Is that it?"

Da Souza spread out his hands--an old trick, only now the palms were
white and the diamonds real.

"For myself," he declared, "I find them charming. It is my wife who says
to me, 'Hiram, those young persons, they are not fit company for our
dear, innocent Julie! You shall speak to Mr. Trent. He will understand!'
Eh?"

Trent had finished his toilet and stood, the hairbrushes still in his
hands, looking at Da Souza's anxious face with a queer smile upon his
lips.

"Yes, I understand, Da Souza," he said. "No doubt you are right, you
cannot be too careful. You do well to be particular."

Da Souza winced. He was about to speak, but Trent interrupted him.

"Well, I'll tell you this, and you can let the missis know, my fond
father. They leave to-morrow. Is that good enough?"

Da Souza caught at his host's hand, but Trent snatched it away.

"My dear--my noble--"

"Here, shut up and don't paw me," Trent interrupted. "Mind, not a word
of this to any one but your wife; the girls don't know they're going
themselves yet."

They entered the dining-room, where every one else was already
assembled. Mrs. Da Souza, a Jewess portly and typical, resplendent
in black satin and many gold chains and bangles, occupied the seat of
honour, and by her side was a little brown girl, with dark, timid eyes
and dusky complexion, pitiably over-dressed but with a certain elf-like
beauty, which it was hard to believe that she could ever have inherited.
Miss Montressor and her friend sat on either side of their host--an
arrangement which Mrs. Da Souza lamented, but found herself powerless to
prevent, and her husband took the vacant place. Dinner was served, and
with the opening of the champagne, which was not long delayed, tongues
were loosened.

"It was very hot in the City to-day," Mrs. Da Souza remarked to her
host. "Dear Julie was saying what a shame it seemed that you should
be there and we should be enjoying your beautiful gardens. She is so
thoughtful, so sympathetic! Dear girl!"

"Very kind of your daughter," Trent answered, looking directly at her
and rather inclined to pity her obvious shyness. "Come, drink up, Da
Souza, drink up, girls! I've had a hard day and I want to forget for a
bit that there's any such thing as work."

Miss Montressor raised her glass and winked at her host.

"It don't take much drinking, this, General," she remarked, cheerily
draining her glass! "Different to the 'pop' they give us down at the
'Star,' eh, Flossie? Good old gooseberry I call that!"

"Da Souza, look after Miss Flossie," Trent said. "Why don't you fill her
glass? That's right!"

"Hiram!"

Da Souza removed his hand from the back of his neighbour's chair and
endeavoured to look unconscious. The girl tittered--Mrs. Da Souza was
severely dignified. Trent watched them all, half in amusement, half in
disgust. What a pandemonium! It was time indeed for him to get rid of
them all. From where he sat he could see across the lawn into the little
pine plantation. It was still light--if she could look in at the open
window what would she think? His cheeks burned, and he thrust the hand
which was seeking his under the table savagely away. And then an idea
flashed in upon him--a magnificent, irresistible idea. He drank off a
glass of champagne and laughed loud and long at one of his neighbour's
silly sayings. It was a glorious joke! The more he thought of it, the
more he liked it. He called for more champagne, and all, save the little
brown girl, greeted the magnum which presently appeared with cheers.
Even Mrs. Da Souza unbent a little towards the young women against whom
she had declared war. Faces were flushed and voices grew a little thick.
Da Souza's arm unchidden sought once more the back of his neighbour's
chair, Miss Montressor's eyes did their utmost to win a tender glance
from their lavish host. Suddenly Trent rose to his feet. He held a glass
high over his head. His face was curiously unmoved, but his lips were
parted in an enigmatic smile.

"A toast, my friends!" he cried. "Fill up, the lot of you! Come! To our
next meeting! May fortune soon smile again, and may I have another home
before long as worthy a resting-place for you as this!"

Bewilderment reigned. No one offered to drink the toast. It was Miss
Montressor who asked the question which was on every one's lips.

"What's up?" she exclaimed. "What's the matter with our next meeting
here to-morrow night, and what's all that rot about your next home and
fortune?"

Trent looked at them all in well-simulated amazement.

"Lord!" he exclaimed, "you don't know--none of you! I thought Da Souza
would have told you the news!"

"What news?" Da Souza cried, his beady eyes protuberant, and his glass
arrested half-way to his mouth.

"What are you talking about, my friend?"

Trent set down his glass.

"My friends," he said unsteadily, "let me explain to you, as shortly as
I can, what an uncertain position is that of a great financier."

Da Souza leaned across the table. His face was livid, and the corners of
his eyes were bloodshot.

"I thought there was something up," he muttered. "You would not have me
come into the City this morning. D--n it, you don't mean that you--"

"I'm bust!" Trent said roughly. "Is that plain enough? I've been bulling
on West Australians, and they boomed and this afternoon the Government
decided not to back us at Bekwando, and the mines are to be shut down.
Tell you all about it if you like."

No one wanted to hear all about it. They shrunk from him as though he
were a robber. Only the little brown girl was sorry, and she looked at
him with dark, soft eyes.

"I've given a bill of sale here," Trent continued. "They'll be round
to-morrow. Better pack to-night. These valuers are such robbers. Come,
another bottle! It'll all have to be sold. We'll make a night of it."

Mrs. Da Souza rose and swept from the room--Da Souza had fallen forward
with his head upon his hands. He was only half sober, but the shock
was working like madness in his brain. The two girls, after whispering
together for a moment, rose and followed Mrs. Da Souza. Trent stole
from his place and out into the garden. With footsteps which were steady
enough now he crossed the velvety lawns, and plunged into the shrubbery.
Then he began to laugh softly as he walked. They were all duped! They
had accepted his story without the slightest question. He leaned over
the gate which led into the little plantation, and he was suddenly grave
and silent. A night-wind was blowing fragrant and cool. The dark boughs
of the trees waved to and fro against the background of deep blue sky.
The lime leaves rustled softly, the perfume of roses came floating
across from the flower-gardens. Trent stood quite still, listening and
thinking.

"God! what a beast I am!" he muttered. "It was there she sat! I'm not
fit to breathe the same air."

He looked back towards the house. The figures of the two girls, with Da
Souza standing now between them, were silhouetted against the window.
His face grew dark and fierce.

"Faugh!" he exclaimed, "what a kennel I have made of my house! What a
low-down thing I have begun to make of life! Yet--I was a beggar--and I
am a millionaire. Is it harder to change oneself? To-morrow"--he looked
hard at the place where she had sat--"to-morrow I will ask her!"

On his way back to the house a little cloaked figure stepped out from
behind a shrub. He looked at her in amazement. It was the little brown
girl, and her eyes were wet with tears.

"Listen," she said quickly. "I have been waiting to speak to you! I want
to say goodbye and to thank you. I am very, very sorry, and I hope that
some day very soon you will make some more money and be happy again."

Her lips were quivering. A single glance into her face assured him
of her honesty. He took the hand which she held out and pressed her
fingers.

"Little Julie," he said, "you are a brick. Don't you bother about me. It
isn't quite so bad as I made out--only don't tell your mother that."

"I'm very glad," she murmured. "I think that it is hateful of them all
to rush away, and I made up my mind to say goodbye however angry it made
them. Let me go now, please. I want to get back before mamma misses me."

He passed his arm around her tiny waist. She looked at him with
frightened eyes.

"Please let me go," she murmured.

He kissed her lips, and a moment afterwards vaguely repented it. She
buried her face in her hands and ran away sobbing. Trent lit a cigar and
sat down upon a garden seat.

"It's a queer thing," he said reflectingly. "The girl's been thrown
repeatedly at my head for a week and I might have kissed her at any
moment, before her father and mother if I had liked, and they'd have
thanked me. Now I've done it I'm sorry. She looked prettier than I've
ever seen her too--and she's the only decent one of the lot. Lord! what
a hubbub there'll be in the morning!"

The stars came out and the moon rose, and still Scarlett Trent lingered
in the scented darkness. He was a man of limited imagination and little
given to superstitions. Yet that night there came to him a presentiment.
He felt that he was on the threshold of great events. Something new
in life was looming up before him. He had cut himself adrift from the
old--it was a very wonderful and a very beautiful figure which was
beckoning him to follow in other paths. The triumph of the earlier part
of the day seemed to lie far back in a misty and unimportant past. There
was a new world and a greater, if fortune willed that he should enter
it.



CHAPTER XI


Trent was awakened next morning by the sound of carriage wheels in the
drive below. He rang his bell at once. After a few moments' delay it was
answered by one of his two men-servants.

"Whose carriage is that in the drive?" he asked. "It is a fly for Mr. Da
Souza, sir."

"What! has he gone?" Trent exclaimed.

"Yes, sir, he and Mrs. Da Souza and the young lady."

"And Miss Montressor and her friend?"

"They shared the fly, sir. The luggage all went down in one of the
carts."

Trent laughed outright, half scornfully, half in amusement.

"Listen, Mason," he said, as the sound of wheels died away. "If any of
those people come back again they are not to be admitted--do you hear?
if they bring their luggage you are not to take it in. If they come
themselves you are not to allow them to enter the house. You understand
that?"

"Yes, sir.

"Very good! Now prepare my bath at once, and tell the cook, breakfast
in half an hour. Let her know that I am hungry. Breakfast for one, mind!
Those fools who have just left will get a morning paper at the station
and they may come back. Be on the look-out for them and let the other
servants know. Better have the lodge gate locked."

"Very good, sir."

The man who had been lamenting the loss of an easy situation and
possibly even a month's wages, hastened to spread more reassuring news
in the lower regions. It was a practical joke of the governor's--very
likely a ruse to get rid of guests who had certainly been behaving
as though the Lodge was their permanent home. There was a chorus of
thanksgiving. Groves, the butler, who read the money articles in the
Standard every morning with solemn interest and who was suspected of
investments, announced that from what he could make out the governor
must have landed a tidy little lump yesterday. Whereupon the cook set to
work to prepare a breakfast worthy of the occasion.

Trent had awakened with a keen sense of anticipated pleasure. A new
and delightful interest had entered into his life. It is true that,
at times, it needed all his strength of mind to keep his thoughts from
wandering back into that unprofitable and most distasteful past--in the
middle of the night even, he had woke up suddenly with an old man's
cry in his ears--or was it the whispering of the night-wind in the tall
elms? But he was not of an imaginative nature. He felt himself strong
enough to set his heel wholly upon all those memories. If he had not
erred on the side of generosity, he had at least played the game fairly.
Monty, if he had lived, could only have been a disappointment and a
humiliation. The picture was hers--of that he had no doubt! Even then
he was not sure that Monty was her father. In any case she would never
know. He recognised no obligation on his part to broach the subject. The
man had done his best to cut himself altogether adrift from his former
life. His reasons doubtless had been sufficient. It was not necessary
to pry into them--it might even be unkindness. The picture, which no man
save himself had ever seen, was the only possible link between the past
and the present--between Scarlett Trent and his drunken old partner,
starved and fever-stricken, making their desperate effort for wealth in
unknown Africa, and the millionaire of to-day. The picture remained his
dearest possession--but, save his own, no other eyes had ever beheld it.

He dressed with more care than usual, and much less satisfaction. He was
a man who rather prided himself upon neglecting his appearance, and, so
far as the cut and pattern of his clothes went, he usually suggested
the artisan out for a holiday. To-day for the first time he regarded his
toilet with critical and disparaging eyes. He found the pattern of his
tweed suit too large, and the colour too pronounced, his collars were
old-fashioned and his ties hideous. It was altogether a new experience
with him, this self-dissatisfaction and sensitiveness to criticism,
which at any other time he would have regarded with a sort of insolent
indifference. He remembered his walk westward yesterday with a shudder,
as though indeed it had been a sort of nightmare, and wondered whether
she too had regarded him with the eyes of those loungers on the
pavement--whether she too was one of those who looked for a man to
conform to the one arbitrary and universal type. Finally he tied his
necktie with a curse, and went down to breakfast with little of his
good-humour left.

The fresh air sweeping in through the long, open windows, the glancing
sunlight and the sense of freedom, for which the absence of his guests
was certainly responsible, soon restored his spirits. Blest with an
excellent morning appetite--the delightful heritage of a clean life--he
enjoyed his breakfast and thoroughly appreciated his cook's efforts.
If he needed a sauce, Fate bestowed one upon him, for he was scarcely
midway through his meal before a loud ringing at the lodge gates proved
the accuracy of his conjectures. Mr. Da Souza had purchased a morning
paper at the junction, and their host's perfidy had become apparent.
Obviously they had decided to treat the whole matter as a practical joke
and to brave it out, for outside the gates in an open fly were the whole
party. They had returned, only to find that according to Trent's orders
the gates were closed upon them.

Trent moved his seat to where he could have a better view, and continued
his breakfast. The party in the cab looked hot, and tumbled, and cross.
Da Souza was on his feet arguing with the lodge-keeper--the women seemed
to be listening anxiously. Trent turned to the servant who was waiting
upon him.

"Send word down," he directed, "that I will see Mr. Da Souza alone. No
one else is to be allowed to enter. Pass me the toast before you go."

Da Souza entered presently, apologetic and abject, prepared at the same
time to extenuate and deny. Trent continued his breakfast coolly.

"My dear friend!" Da Souza exclaimed, depositing his silk hat upon the
table, "it is a very excellent joke of yours. You see, we have entered
into the spirit of it--oh yes, we have done so indeed! We have taken
a little drive before breakfast, but we have returned. You knew, of
course, that we would not dream of leaving you in such a manner. Do you
not think, my dear friend, that the joke was carried now far enough? The
ladies are hungry; will you send word to the lodge-keeper that he may
open the gate?"

Trent helped himself to coffee, and leaned back in his chair, stirring
it thoughtfully.

"You are right, Da Souza," he said. "It is an excellent joke. The cream
of it is too that I am in earnest; neither you nor any of those ladies
whom I see out there will sit at my table again."

"You are not in earnest! You do not mean it!"

"I can assure you," Trent replied grinning, "that I do!"

"But do you mean," Da Souza spluttered, "that we are to go like this--to
be turned out--the laughing-stock of your servants, after we have come
back too, all the way?--oh, it is nonsense! It's not to be endured!"

"You can go to the devil!" Trent answered coolly. "There is not one of
you whom I care a fig to see again. You thought that I was ruined, and
you scudded like rats from a sinking ship. Well, I found you out, and a
jolly good thing too. All I have to say is now, be off, and the quicker
the better!"

Then Da Souza cringed no longer, and there shot from his black eyes the
venomous twinkle of the serpent whose fangs are out. He leaned over the
table, and dropped his voice.

"I speak," he said, "for my wife, my daughter, and myself, and I assure
you that we decline to go!"



CHAPTER XII


Trent rose up with flashing eyes. Da Souza shrank back from his
outstretched hands. The two men stood facing one another. Da Souza was
afraid, but the ugly look of determination remained upon his white
face. Trent felt dimly that there was something which must be explained
between them. There had been hints of this sort before from Da Souza.
It was time the whole thing was cleared up. The lion was ready to throw
aside the jackal.

"I give you thirty seconds," he said, "to clear out. If you haven't come
to your senses then, you'll be sorry for it."

"Thirty seconds is not long enough," Da Souza answered, "for me to tell
you why I decline to go. Better listen to me quietly, my friend. It will
be best for you. Afterwards you will admit it."

"Go ahead," Trent said, "I'm anxious to hear what you've got to say.
Only look here! I'm a bit short-tempered this morning, and I shouldn't
advise you to play with your words!"

"This is no play at all," Da Souza remarked, with a sneer. "I ask you to
remember, my friend, our first meeting."

Trent nodded.

"Never likely to forget it," he answered.

"I came down from Elmina to deal with you," Da Souza continued. "I had
made money trading in Ashanti for palm-oil and mahogany. I had money
to invest--and you needed it. You had land, a concession to work
gold-mines, and build a road to the coast. It was speculative, but we
did business. I came with you to England. I found more money."

"You made your fortune," Trent said drily. "I had to have the money, and
you ground a share out of me which is worth a quarter of a million to
you!"

"Perhaps it is," Da Souza answered, "perhaps it is not. Perhaps it
is worth nothing at all. Perhaps, instead of being a millionaire, you
yourself are a swindler and an adventurer!"

"If you don't speak out in half a moment," Trent said in a low tone,
"I'll twist the tongue out of your head."

"I am speaking out," Da Souza answered. "It is an ugly thing I have to
say, but you must control yourself."

The little black eyes were like the eyes of a snake. He was showing his
teeth. He forgot to be afraid.

"You had a partner," he said. "The concession was made out to him
together with yourself."

"He died," Trent answered shortly. "I took over the lot by arrangement."

"A very nice arrangement," Da Souza drawled with a devilish smile. "He
is old and weak. You were with him up at Bekwando where there are no
white men--no one to watch you. You gave him brandy to drink--you watch
the fever come, and you write on the concession if one should die all
goes to the survivor. And you gave him brandy in the bush where the
fever is, and--behold you return alone! When people know this they will
say, 'Oh yes, it is the way millionaires are made.'"

He stopped, out of breath, for the veins were standing out upon his
forehead, and he remembered what the English doctor at Cape Coast Castle
had told him. So he was silent for a moment, wiping the perspiration
away and struggling against the fear which was turning the blood to ice
in his veins. For Trent's face was not pleasant to look upon.

"Anything else?"

Da Souza pulled himself together. "Yes," he said; "what I have said is
as nothing. It is scandalous, and it would make talk, but it is nothing.
There is something else."

"Well?"

"You had a partner whom you deserted."

"It is a lie! I carried him on my back for twenty hours with a pack of
yelling niggers behind. We were lost, and I myself was nigh upon a dead
man. Who would have cumbered himself with a corpse? Curse you and your
vile hints, you mongrel, you hanger-on, you scurrilous beast! Out, and
spread your stories, before my fingers get on your throat! Out!"

Da Souza slunk away before the fire in Trent's eyes, but he had no idea
of going. He stood in safety near the door, and as he leaned forward,
speaking now in a hoarse whisper, he reminded Trent momentarily of one
of those hideous fetish gods in the sacred grove at Bekwando.

"Your partner was no corpse when you left him," he hissed out. "You were
a fool and a bungler not to make sure of it. The natives from Bekwando
found him and carried him bound to the King, and your English explorer,
Captain Francis, rescued him. He's alive now!"

Trent stood for a moment like a man turned to stone. Alive! Monty alive!
The impossibility of the thing came like a flash of relief to him. The
man was surely on the threshold of death when he had left him, and the
age of miracles was past.

"You're talking like a fool, Da Souza. Do you mean to take me in with an
old woman's story like that?"

"There's no old woman's story about what I've told you," Da Souza
snarled. "The man's alive and I can prove it a dozen times over. You
were a fool and a bungler."

Trent thought of the night when he had crept back into the bush and had
found no trace of Monty, and gradually there rose up before him a lurid
possibility Da Souza's story was true. The very thought of it worked
like madness in his brains. When he spoke he strove hard to steady his
voice, and even to himself it sounded like the voice of one speaking a
long way off.

"Supposing that this were true," he said, "what is he doing all this
time? Why does he not come and claim his share?"

Da Souza hesitated. He would have liked to have invented another reason,
but it was not safe. The truth was best.

"He is half-witted and has lost his memory. He is working now at one of
the Basle mission-places near Attra."

"And why have you not told me this before?"

Da Souza shrugged his shoulders. "It was not necessary," he said. "Our
interests were the same, it was better for you not to know."

"He remembers nothing, then?"

Da Souza hesitated. "Oom Sam," he said, "my half-brother, keeps an eye
on him. Sometimes he gets restless, he talks, but what matter? He has no
money. Soon he must die. He is getting an old man!"

"I shall send for him," Trent said slowly. "He shall have his share!"

It was the one fear which had kept Da Souza silent. The muscles of his
face twitched, and his finger-nails were buried in the flesh of his fat,
white hands. Side by side he had worked with Trent for years without
being able to form any certain estimate of the man or his character.
Many a time he had asked himself what Trent would do if he knew--only
the fear of his complete ignorance of the man had kept him silent all
these years. Now the crisis had come! He had spoken! It might mean ruin.

"Send for him?" Da Souza said. "Why? His memory has gone--save for
occasional fits of passion in which he raves at you. What would people
say?--that you tried to kill him with brandy, that the clause in the
concession was a direct incentive for you to get rid of him, and you
left him in the bush only a few miles from Buckomari to be seized by the
natives. Besides, how can you pay him half? I know pretty well how you
stand. On paper, beyond doubt you are a millionaire; but what if all
claims were suddenly presented against you to be paid in sovereigns?
I tell you this, my friend, Mr. Scarlett Trent, and I am a man of
experience and I know. To-day in the City it is true that you could
raise a million pounds in cash, but let me whisper a word, one little
word, and you would be hard pressed to raise a thousand. It is true
there is the Syndicate, that great scheme of yours yesterday from which
you were so careful to exclude me--you are to get great monies from
them in cash. Bah! don't you see that Monty's existence breaks up that
Syndicate--smashes it into tiny atoms, for you have sold what was not
yours to sell, and they do not pay for that, eh? They call it fraud!"

He paused, out of breath, and Trent remained silent; he knew very well
that he was face to face with a great crisis. Of all things this was the
most fatal which could have happened to him. Monty alive! He remembered
the old man's passionate cry for life, for pleasure, to taste once more,
for however short a time, the joys of wealth. Monty alive, penniless,
half-witted, the servant of a few ill-paid missionaries, toiling all
day for a living, perhaps fishing with the natives or digging, a slave
still, without hope or understanding, with the end of his days well in
view! Surely it were better to risk all things, to have him back at any
cost? Then a thought more terrible yet than any rose up before him like
a spectre, there was a sudden catch at his heart-strings, he was cold
with fear. What would she think of the man who deserted his partner,
an old man, while life was yet in him, and safety close at hand? Was
it possible that he could ever escape the everlasting stigma of
cowardice--ay, and before him in great red letters he saw written in
the air that fatal clause in the agreement, to which she and all others
would point with bitter scorn, indubitable, overwhelming evidence
against him. He gasped for breath and walked restlessly up and down the
room. Other thoughts came crowding in upon him. He was conscious of a
new element in himself. The last few years had left their mark upon him.
With the handling of great sums of money and the acquisition of wealth
had grown something of the financier's fever. He had become a power,
solidly and steadfastly he had hewn his way into a little circle whose
fascination had begun to tell in his blood. Was he to fall without a
struggle from amongst the high places, to be stripped of his wealth,
shunned as a man who was morally, if not in fact, a murderer, to be
looked upon with never-ending scorn by the woman whose picture for years
had been a religion to him, and whose appearance only a few hours ago
had been the most inspiring thing which had entered into his life?
He looked across the lawn into the pine grove with steadfast eyes and
knitted brows, and Da Souza watched him, ghastly and nervous. At least
he must have time to decide!

"If you send for him," Da Souza said slowly, "you will be absolutely
ruined. It will be a triumph for those whom you have made jealous,
who have measured their wits with yours and gone under. Oh! but the
newspapers will enjoy it--that is very certain. Our latest millionaire,
his rise and fall! Cannot you see it in the placards? And for what? To
give wealth to an old man long past the enjoyment of it--ay, imbecile
already! You will not be a madman, Trent?"

Trent winced perceptibly. Da Souza saw it and rejoiced. There was
another awkward silence. Trent lit a cigar and puffed furiously at it.

"I will think it over, at least," he said in a low tone. "Bring back
your wife and daughter, and leave me alone for a while."

"I knew," Da Souza murmured, "that my friend would be reasonable."

"And the young ladies?"

"Send them to--"

"I will send them back to where they came from," Da Souza interrupted
blandly.



CHAPTER XIII


It is probable that Mrs. Da Souza, excellent wife and mother though she
had proved herself to be, had never admired her husband more than when,
followed by the malevolent glances of Miss Montressor and her friend,
she, with her daughter and Da Souza, re-entered the gates of the Lodge.
The young ladies had announced their intention of sitting in the fly
until they were allowed speech with their late host; to which he had
replied that they were welcome to sit there until doomsday so long as
they remained outside his gates. Mr. Da Souza lingered for a moment
behind and laid his finger upon his nose.

"It ain't no use, my dears," he whispered confidentially. "He's fairly
got the hump. Between you and me he'd give a bit not to have us, but me
and him being old friends--you see, we know a bit about one another."

"Oh, that's it, is it?" Miss Montressor remarked, with a toss of her
head. "Well, you and your wife and your little chit of a daughter are
welcome to him so far as we are concerned, aren't they, Flossie?"

"Well, I should say so," agreed the young lady, who rather affected
Americanisms.

Da Souza stroked his little imperial, and winked solemnly.

"You are young ladies of spirit," he declared. "Now--"

"Hiram!"

"I am coming, my dear," he called over his shoulder. "One word more, my
charming young friends! No. 7, Racket's Court, City, is my address.
Look in sometime when you're that way, and we'll have a bit of lunch
together, and just at present take my advice. Get back to London and
write him from there. He is not in a good humour at present."

"We are much obliged, Mr. Da Souza," the young lady answered loftily.
"As we have engagements in London this afternoon, we may as well go
now--eh, Flossie?"

"Right along," answered the young lady, "I'm with you, but as to writing
Mr. Trent, you can tell him from me, Mr. Da Souza, that we want to have
nothing more to do with him. A fellow that can treat ladies as he has
treated us is no gentleman. You can tell him that. He's an ignorant,
common fellow, and for my part I despise him."

"Same here," echoed Miss Montressor, heartily. "We ain't used to
associate with such as him!"

"Hiram!"

Mr. Da Souza raised his hat and bowed; the ladies were tolerably
gracious and the fly drove off. Whereupon Mr. Da Souza followed his wife
and daughter along the drive and caught them up upon the doorstep. With
mingled feelings of apprehension and elation he ushered them into the
morning-room where Trent was standing looking out of the window with his
hands behind him. At their entrance he did not at once turn round. Mr.
Da Souza coughed apologetically.

"Here we are, my friend," he remarked. "The ladies are anxious to wish
you good morning."

Trent faced them with a sudden gesture of impatience. He seemed on the
point of an angry exclamation, when his eyes met Julie Da Souza's. He
held his breath for a moment and was silent. Her face was scarlet
with shame, and her lips were trembling. For her sake Trent restrained
himself.

"Glad to see you back again, Julie," he said, ignoring her mother's
outstretched hand and beaming smile of welcome. "Going to be a hot day,
I think. You must get out in the hay-field. Order what breakfast you
please, Da Souza," he continued on his way to the door; "you must be
hungry--after such an early start!"

Mrs. Da Souza sat down heavily and rang the bell.

"He was a little cool," she remarked, "but that was to be expected. Did
you observe the notice he took of Julie? Dear child!"

Da Souza rubbed his hands and nodded meaningly. The girl, who, between
the two, was miserable enough, sat down with a little sob. Her mother
looked at her in amazement.

"My Julie," she exclaimed, "my dear child! You see, Hiram, she is faint!
She is overcome!"

The child, she was very little more, broke out at last in speech,
passionately, yet with a miserable fore-knowledge of the ineffectiveness
of anything she might say.

"It is horrible," she cried, "it is maddening! Why do we do it? Are we
paupers or adventurers? Oh! let me go away! I am ashamed to stay in this
house!"

Her father, his thumbs in the armholes of his waistcoat and his legs far
apart, looked at her in blank and speechless amazement; her mother, with
more consideration but equal lack of sympathy, patted her gently on the
back of her hand.

"Silly Julie," she murmured, "what is there that is horrible, little
one?"

The dark eyes blazed with scorn, the delicately curved lips shook.

"Why, the way we thrust ourselves upon this man is horrible!" she cried.
"Can you not see that we are not welcome, that he wishes us gone?"

Da Souza smiled in a superior manner; the smile of a man who, if only he
would, could explain all things. He patted his daughter on the head with
a touch which was meant to be playful.

"My little one," he said, "you are mistaken! Leave these matters to
those who are older and wiser than you. It is but just now that my good
friend said to me, 'Da Souza,' he say, 'I will not have you take your
little daughter away!' Oh, we shall see! We shall see!"

Julie's tears crept through the fingers closely pressed over her eyes.

"I do not believe it," she sobbed. "He has scarcely looked at me all the
time, and I do not want him to. He despises us all--and I don't blame
him. It is horrid!"

Mrs. Da Souza, with a smile which was meant to be arch, had something to
say, but the arrival of breakfast broke up for a while the conversation.
Her husband, whom Nature had blessed with a hearty appetite at all
times, was this morning after his triumph almost disposed to be
boisterous. He praised the cooking, chaffed the servants to their
infinite disgust, and continually urged his wife and daughter to keep
pace with him in his onslaught upon the various dishes which were placed
before him. Before the meal was over Julie had escaped from the table
crying softly. Mr. Da Souza's face darkened as he looked up at the sound
of her movement, only to see her skirt vanishing through the door.

"Shall you have trouble with her, my dear?" he asked his wife anxiously.

That estimable lady shook her head with a placid smile. "Julie is so
sensitive," she muttered, "but she is not disobedient. When the time
comes I can make her mind."

"But the time has come!" Da Souza exclaimed. "It is here now, and
Julie is sulky. She will have red eyes and she is not gay! She will not
attract him. You must speak with her, my dear."

"I will go now--this instant," she answered, rising. "But, Hiram, there
is one thing I would much like to know."

"Ugh! You women! You are always like that! There is so much that you
want to know!"

"Most women, Hiram--not me! Do I ever seek to know your secrets? But
this time--yes, it would be wiser to tell me a little!"

"Well?"

"This Mr. Trent, he asked us here, but it is plain that our company is
not pleasant to him. He does his best to get rid of us--he succeeds--he
plans that we shall not return. You see him alone and all that is
altered. His little scheme has been in vain. We remain! He does not look
at our Julie. He speaks of marriage with contempt. Yet you say he will
marry her--he, a millionaire! What does it mean, Hiram?"

"The man, he is in my power," Da Souza says in a ponderous and stealthy
whisper. "I know something."

She rose and imprinted a solemn kiss upon his forehead. There was
something sacramental about the deliberate caress.

"Hiram," she said, "you are a wonderful man!"



CHAPTER XIV


Scarlett Trent spent the first part of the morning, to which he had been
looking forward so eagerly, alone in his study with locked door to keep
out all intruders. He had come face to face with the first serious check
in his career, and it had been dealt him too by the one man whom, of all
his associates, he disliked and despised. In the half-open drawer by his
side was the barrel of a loaded revolver. He drew it out, laid it on the
table before him, and regarded it with moody, fascinated eyes. If only
it could be safely done, if only for one moment he could find himself
face to face with Da Souza in Bekwando village, where human life was
cheap and the slaying of a man an incident scarcely worth noting in the
day's events! The thing was easy enough there--here it was too risky. He
thrust the weapon back into the drawer with a sigh of regret, just as Da
Souza himself appeared upon the scene.

"You sent for me, Trent," the latter remarked timidly. "I am quite ready
to answer any more questions."

"Answer this one, then," was the gruff reply. "In Buckomari village
before we left for England I was robbed of a letter. I don't think I
need ask you who was the thief."

"Really, Trent--I--"

"Don't irritate me; I'm in an ill humour for anything of that sort. You
stole it! I can see why now! Have you got it still?"

The Jew shrugged his shoulders.

"Yes."

"Hand it over."

Da Souza drew a large folding case from his pocket and after searching
through it for several moments produced an envelope. The handwriting was
shaky and irregular, and so faint that even in the strong, sweet light
of the morning sunshine Trent had difficulty in reading it. He tore it
open and drew out a half-sheet of coarse paper. It was a message from
the man who for long he had counted dead.


"BEKWANDO.

"MY DEAR TRENT,-I have been drinking as usual! Some men see snakes, but
I have seen death leering at me from the dark corners of this vile hut,
and death is an evil thing to look at when one's life has been evil as
mine has been. Never mind! I have sown and I must reap! But, my friend,
a last word with you. I have a notion, and more than a notion, that I
shall never pass back alive through these pestilential swamps. If you
should arrive, as you doubtless will, here is a charge which I lay upon
you. That agreement of ours is scarcely a fair one, is it, Trent? When
I signed it, I wasn't quite myself. Never mind! I'll trust to you to do
what's fair. If the thing turns out a great success, put some sort of
a share at any rate to my credit and let my daughter have it. You will
find her address from Messrs. Harris and Culsom, Solicitors, Lincoln's
Inn Fields. You need only ask them for Monty's daughter and show them
this letter. They will understand. I believe you to be a just man,
Scarlett Trent, although I know you to be a hard one. Do then as I ask.

"MONTY."


Da Souza had left the room quietly. Trent read the letter through twice
and locked it up in his desk. Then he rose and lit a pipe, knocking out
the ashes carefully and filling the bowl with dark but fragrant tobacco.
Presently he rang the bell.

"Tell Mr. Da Souza I wish to see him here at once," he told the servant,
and, though the message was a trifle peremptory from a host to his
guest, Da Souza promptly appeared, suave and cheerful.

"Shut the door," Trent said shortly.

Da Souza obeyed with unabashed amiability. Trent watched him with
something like disgust. Da Souza returning caught the look, and felt
compelled to protest.

"My dear Trent," he said, "I do not like the way you address me, or your
manners towards me. You speak as though I were a servant. I do not like
it all, and it is not fair. I am your guest, am I not?"

"You are my guest by your own invitation," Trent answered roughly, "and
if you don't like my manners you can turn out. I may have to endure you
in the house till I have made up my mind how to get rid of you, but I
want as little of your company as possible. Do you hear?"

Da Souza did hear it, and the worm turned. He sat down in the most
comfortable easy-chair, and addressed Trent directly.

"My friend," he said, "you are out of temper, and that is a bad thing.
Now listen to me! You are in my power. I have only to go into the
City to-morrow and breathe here and there a word about a certain old
gentleman who shall be nameless, and you would be a ruined man in
something less than an hour; added to this, my friend, you would most
certainly be arrested for conspiracy and fraud. That Syndicate of yours
was a very smart stroke of business, no doubt, and it was clever of you
to keep me in ignorance of it, but as things have turned out now,
that will be your condemnation. They will say, why did you keep me in
ignorance of this move, and the answer--why, it is very clear! I knew
you were selling what was not yours to sell!"

"I kept you away," Trent said scornfully, "because I was dealing with
men who would not have touched the thing if they had known that you were
in it!"

"Who will believe it?" Da Souza asked, with a sneer. "They will say that
it is but one more of the fairy tales of this wonderful Mr. Scarlett
Trent."

The breath came through Trent's lips with a little hiss and his eyes
were flashing with a dull fire. But Da Souza held his ground. He had
nerved himself up to this and he meant going through with it.

"You think I dare not breathe a word for my own sake," he continued.
"There is reason in that, but I have other monies. I am rich enough
without my sixth share of that Bekwando Land and Mining Company which
you and the Syndicate are going to bring out! But then, I am not a fool!
I have no wish to throw away money. Now I propose to you therefore a
friendly settlement. My daughter Julie is very charming. You admire her,
I am sure. You shall marry her, and then we will all be one family. Our
interests will be the same, and you may be sure that I shall look after
them. Come! Is that not a friendly offer?"

For several minutes Trent smoked furiously, but he did not speak. At the
end of that time he took the revolver once more from the drawer of his
writing-table and fingered it.

"Da Souza," he said, "if I had you just for five minutes at Bekwando we
would talk together of black-mail, you and I, we would talk of marrying
your daughter. We would talk then to some purpose--you hound! Get out of
the room as fast as your legs will carry you. This revolver is loaded,
and I'm not quite master of myself."

Da Souza made off with amazing celerity. Trent drew a short, quick
breath. There was a great deal of the wild beast left in him still. At
that moment the desire to kill was hot in his blood. His eyes glared as
he walked up and down the room. The years of civilisation seemed to have
become as nothing. The veneer of the City speculator had fallen away.
He was once more as he had been in those wilder days when men made
their own laws, and a man's hold upon life was a slighter thing than
his thirst for gold. As such, he found the atmosphere of the little room
choking him, he drew open the French windows of his little study and
strode out into the perfumed and sunlit morning. As such, he found
himself face to face unexpectedly and without warning with the girl whom
he had discovered sketching in the shrubbery the day before.



CHAPTER XV


Probably nothing else in the world could so soon have transformed
Scarlett Trent from the Gold Coast buccaneer to the law-abiding tenant
of a Surrey villa. Before her full, inquiring eyes and calm salute he
found himself at once abashed and confused. He raised his hand to his
head, only to find that he had come out without a hat, and he certainly
appeared, as he stood there, to his worst possible advantage.

"Good morning, miss," he stammered; "I'm afraid I startled you!"

She winced a little at his address, but otherwise her manner was not
ungracious.

"You did a little," she admitted. "Do you usually stride out of your
windows like that, bareheaded and muttering to yourself?"

"I was in a beastly temper," he admitted. "If I had known who was
outside--it would have been different."

She looked into his face with some interest. "What an odd thing!" she
remarked. "Why, I should have thought that to-day you would have been
amiability itself. I read at breakfast-time that you had accomplished
something more than ordinarily wonderful in the City and had made--I
forget how many hundreds of thousands of pounds. When I showed the
sketch of your house to my chief, and told him that you were going to
let me interview you to-day, I really thought that he would have raised
my salary at once."

"It's more luck than anything," he said. "I've stood next door to ruin
twice. I may again, although I'm a millionaire to-day."

She looked at him curiously--at his ugly tweed suit, his yellow boots,
and up into the strong, forceful face with eyes set in deep hollows
under his protruding brows, at the heavy jaws giving a certain
coarseness to his expression, which his mouth and forehead, well-shaped
though they were, could not altogether dispel. And at he same time
he looked at her, slim, tall, and elegant, daintily clothed from her
shapely shoes to her sailor hat, her brown hair, parted in the middle,
escaping a little from its confinement to ripple about her forehead, and
show more clearly the delicacy of her complexion. Trent was an ignorant
man on many subjects, on others his taste seemed almost intuitively
correct. He knew that this girl belonged to a class from which his
descent and education had left him far apart, a class of which he knew
nothing, and with whom he could claim no kinship. She too was realising
it--her interest in him was, however, none the less deep. He was a
type of those powers which to-day hold the world in their hands, make
kingdoms tremble, and change the fate of nations. Perhaps he was all
the more interesting to her because, by all the ordinary standards of
criticism, he would fail to be ranked, in the jargon of her class, as a
gentleman. He represented something in flesh and blood which had never
seemed more than half real to her--power without education. She liked
to consider herself--being a writer with ambitions who took herself
seriously--a student of human nature. Here was a specimen worth
impaling, an original being, a creature of a new type such as never had
come within the region of her experience. It was worth while ignoring
small idiosyncrasies which might offend, in order to annex him. Besides,
from a journalistic point of view, the man was more than interesting--he
was a veritable treasure.

"You are going to talk to me about Africa, are you not?" she reminded
him. "Couldn't we sit in the shade somewhere. I got quite hot walking
from the station."

He led the way across the lawn, and they sat under a cedar-tree. He was
awkward and ill at ease, but she had tact enough for both.

"I can't understand," he began, "how people are interested in the stuff
which gets into papers nowadays. If you want horrors though, I can
supply you. For one man who succeeds over there, there are a dozen who
find it a short cut down into hell. I can tell you if you like of my
days of starvation."

"Go on!"

Like many men who talk but seldom, he had the gift when he chose
to speak of reproducing his experiences in vivid though unpolished
language. He told her of the days when he had worked on the banks of the
Congo with the coolies, a slave in everything but name, when the sun had
burned the brains of men to madness, and the palm wine had turned them
into howling devils. He told her of the natives of Bekwando, of the days
they had spent amongst them in that squalid hut when their fate hung in
the balance day by day, and every shout that went up from the warriors
gathered round the house of the King was a cry of death. He spoke of
their ultimate success, of the granting of the concession which had laid
the foundation of his fortunes, and then of that terrible journey back
through the bush, followed by the natives who had already repented of
their action, and who dogged their footsteps hour after hour, waiting
for them only to sleep or rest to seize upon them and haul them back to
Bekwando, prisoners for the sacrifice.

"It was only our revolvers which kept them away," he went on. "I shot
eight or nine of them at different times when they came too close, and
to hear them wailing over the bodies was one of the most hideous things
you can imagine. Why, for months and months afterwards I couldn't sleep.
I'd wake up in the night and fancy that I heard that cursed yelling
outside my window--ay, even on the steamer at night-time if I was on
deck before moonlight, I'd seem to hear it rising up out of the water.
Ugh!"

She shuddered.

"But you both escaped?" she said.

There was a moment's silence. The shade of the cedar-tree was deep and
cool, but it brought little relief to Trent. The perspiration stood out
on his forehead in great beads, he breathed for a moment in little gasps
as though stifled.

"No," he answered; "my partner died within a mile or two of the Coast.
He was very ill when we started, and I pretty well had to carry him the
whole of the last day. I did my best for him. I did, indeed, but it was
no good. I had to leave him. There was no use sacrificing oneself for a
dead man."

She inclined her head sympathetically.

"Was he an Englishman?" she asked.

He faced the question just as he had faced death years before leering at
him, a few feet from the muzzle of his revolver.

"He was an Englishman. The only name we had ever heard him called by was
'Monty.' Some said he was a broken-down gentleman. I believe he was."

She was unconscious of his passionate, breathless scrutiny, unconscious
utterly of the great wave of relief which swept into his face as he
realised that his words were without any special meaning to her.

"It was very sad indeed," she said. "If he had lived, he would have
shared with you, I suppose, in the concession?"

Trent nodded.

"Yes, we were equal partners. We had an arrangement by which, if one
died, the survivor took the lot. I didn't want it though, I'd rather he
had pulled through. I would indeed," he repeated with nervous force.

"I am quite sure of that," she answered. "And now tell me something
about your career in the City after you came to England. Do you know, I
have scarcely ever been in what you financiers call the City. In a way
it must be interesting."

"You wouldn't find it so," he said. "It is not a place for such as you.
It is a life of lies and gambling and deceit. There are times when I
have hated it. I hate it now!"

She was unaffectedly surprised. What a speech for a millionaire of
yesterday!

"I thought," she said, "that for those who took part in it, it possessed
a fascination stronger than anything else in the world."

He shook his head.

"It is an ugly fascination," he said. "You are in the swim, and you must
hold your own. You gamble with other men, and when you win you chuckle.
All the time you're whittling your conscience away--if ever you had any.
You're never quite dishonest, and you're never quite honest. You come
out on top, and afterwards you hate yourself. It's a dirty little life!"

"Well," she remarked after a moment's pause, "you have surprised me very
much. At any rate you are rich enough now to have no more to do with
it."

He kicked a fir cone savagely away.

"If I could," he said, "I would shut up my office to-morrow, sell out,
and live upon a farm. But I've got to keep what I've made. The more you
succeed the more involved you become. It's a sort of slavery."

"Have you no friends?" she asked.

"I have never," he answered, "had a friend in my life."

"You have guests at any rate!"

"I sent 'em away last night!"

"What, the young lady in blue?" she asked demurely.

"Yes, and the other one too. Packed them clean off, and they're not
coming back either!"

"I am very pleased to hear it," she remarked.

"There's a man and his wife and daughter here I can't get rid of quite
so easily," he went on gloomily, "but they've got to go!"

"They would be less objectionable to the people round here who might
like to come and see you," she remarked, "than two unattached young
ladies."

"May be," he answered. "Yet I'd give a lot to be rid of them."

He had risen to his feet and was standing with his back to the
cedar-tree, looking away with fixed eyes to where the sunlight fell upon
a distant hillside gorgeous with patches and streaks of yellow gorse and
purple heather. Presently she noticed his abstraction and looked also
through the gap in the trees.

"You have a beautiful view here," she said. "You are fond of the
country, are you not?"

"Very," he answered.

"It is not every one," she remarked, "who is able to appreciate it,
especially when their lives have been spent as yours must have been."

He looked at her curiously. "I wonder," he said, "if you have any idea
how my life has been spent."

"You have given me," she said, "a very fair idea about some part of it
at any rate."

He drew a long breath and looked down at her.

"I have given you no idea at all," he said firmly. "I have told you a
few incidents, that is all. You have talked to me as though I were an
equal. Listen! you are probably the first lady with whom I have ever
spoken. I do not want to deceive you. I never had a scrap of education.
My father was a carpenter who drank himself to death, and my mother was
a factory girl. I was in the workhouse when I was a boy. I have never
been to school. I don't know how to talk properly, but I should be worse
even than I am, if I had not had to mix up with a lot of men in the City
who had been properly educated. I am utterly and miserably ignorant.
I've got low tastes and lots of 'em. I was drunk a few nights ago--I've
done most of the things men who are beasts do. There! Now, don't you
want to run away?"

She shook her head and smiled up at him. She was immensely interested.

"If that is the worst," she said gently, "I am not at all frightened.
You know that it is my profession to write about men and women. I belong
to a world of worn-out types, and to meet any one different is quite a
luxury."

"The worst!" A sudden fear sent an icy coldness shivering through his
veins. His heart seemed to stop beating, his cheeks were blanched.
The worst of him. He had not told her that he was a robber, that the
foundation of his fortunes was a lie; that there lived a man who might
bring all this great triumph of his shattered and crumbling about his
ears. A passionate fear lest she might ever know of these things was
born in his heart at that moment, never altogether to leave him.

The sound of a footstep close at hand made them both turn their heads.
Along the winding path came Da Souza, with an ugly smirk upon his white
face, smoking a cigar whose odour seemed to poison the air. Trent turned
upon him with a look of thunder.

"What do you want here, Da Souza?" he asked fiercely.

Da Souza held up the palms of his hands.

"I was strolling about," he said, "and I saw you through the trees. I
did not know that you were so pleasantly engaged," he added, with a wave
of his hat to the girl, "or I would not have intruded."

Trent kicked open the little iron gate which led into the garden beyond.

"Well, get out, and don't come here again," he said shortly. "There's
plenty of room for you to wander about and poison the air with those
abominable cigars of yours without coming here."

Da Souza replaced his hat upon his head. "The cigars, my friend, are
excellent. We cannot all smoke the tobacco of a millionaire, can we,
miss?"

The girl, who was making some notes in her book, continued her work
without the slightest appearance of having heard him.

Da Souza snorted, but at that moment he felt a grip like iron upon his
shoulder, and deemed retreat expedient.

"If you don't go without another word," came a hot whisper in his ear,
"I'll throw you into the horse-pond."

He went swiftly, ungracious, scowling. Trent returned to the girl. She
looked up at him and closed her book.

"You must change your friends," she said gravely. "What a horrible man!"

"He is a beast," Trent answered, "and go he shall. I would to Heaven
that I had never seen him."

She rose, slipped her note-book into her pocket, and drew on her gloves.

"I have taken up quite enough of your time," she said. "I am so much
obliged to you, Mr. Trent, for all you have told me. It has been most
interesting."

She held out her hand, and the touch of it sent his heart beating with
a most unusual emotion. He was aghast at the idea of her imminent
departure. He realised that, when she passed out of his gate, she passed
into a world where she would be hopelessly lost to him, so he took his
courage into his hands, and was very bold indeed.

"You have not told me your name," he reminded her.

She laughed lightly.

"How very unprofessional of me! I ought to have given you a card! For
all you know I may be an impostor, indulging an unpardonable curiosity.
My name is Wendermott--Ernestine Wendermott."

He repeated it after her.

"Thank you," he said. "I am beginning to think of some more things which
I might have told you."

"Why, I should have to write a novel then to get them all in," she said.
"I am sure you have given me all the material I need here."

"I am going," he said abruptly, "to ask you something very strange and
very presumptuous!"

She looked at him in surprise, scarcely understanding what he could
mean.

"May I come and see you some time?"

The earnestness of his gaze and the intense anxiety of his tone almost
disconcerted her. He was obviously very much in earnest, and she had
found him far from uninteresting.

"By all means," she answered pleasantly, "if you care to. I have a
little flat in Culpole Street--No. 81. You must come and have tea with
me one afternoon."

"Thank you," he said simply, with a sigh of immense relief.

He walked with her to the gate, and they talked about rhododendrons.

Then he watched her till she became a speck in the dusty road--she
had refused a carriage, and he had had tact enough not to press any
hospitality upon her.

"His little girl!" he murmured. "Monty's little girl!"



CHAPTER XVI


Ernestine Wendermott travelled back to London in much discomfort,
being the eleventh occupant of a third-class carriage in a particularly
unpunctual and dilatory train. Arrived at Waterloo, she shook out her
skirts with a little gesture of relief and started off to walk to the
Strand. Half-way across the bridge she came face to face with a tall,
good-looking young man who was hurrying in the opposite direction. He
stopped short as he recognised her, dropped his eyeglass, and uttered a
little exclamation of pleasure.

"Ernestine, by all that's delightful! I am in luck to-day!"

She smiled slightly and gave him her hand, but it was evident that this
meeting was not wholly agreeable to her.

"I don't quite see where the luck comes in," she answered. "I have no
time to waste talking to you now. I am in a hurry."

"You will allow me," he said hopefully, "to walk a little way with you?"

"I am not able to prevent it--if you think it worth while," she
answered.

He looked down--he was by her side now--in good-humoured protest.

"Come, Ernestine," he said, "you mustn't bear malice against me. Perhaps
I was a little hasty when I spoke so strongly about your work. I don't
like your doing it and never shall like it, but I've said all I want to.
You won't let it divide us altogether, will you?"

"For the present," she answered, "it occupies the whole of my time, and
the whole of my thoughts."

"To the utter exclusion, I suppose," he remarked, "of me?"

She laughed gaily.

"My dear Cecil! when have I ever led you to suppose for a moment that I
have ever wasted any time thinking of you?"

He was determined not to be annoyed, and he ignored both the speech and
the laugh.

"May I inquire how you are getting on?"

"I am getting on," she answered, "very well indeed. The Editor is
beginning to say very nice things to me, and already the men treat me
just as though I were a comrade! It is so nice of them!"

"Is it?" he muttered doubtfully.

"I have just finished," she continued, "the most important piece of work
they have trusted me with yet, and I have been awfully lucky. I have
been to interview a millionaire!"

"A man?"

She nodded. "Of course!"

"It isn't fit work for you," he exclaimed hastily.

"You will forgive me if I consider myself the best judge of that," she
answered coldly. "I am a journalist, and so long as it is honest work my
sex doesn't count. If every one whom I have to see is as courteous to me
as Mr. Trent has been, I shall consider myself very lucky indeed."

"As who?" he cried.

She looked up at him in surprise. They were at the corner of the Strand,
but as though in utter forgetfulness of their whereabouts, he had
suddenly stopped short and gripped her tightly by the arm. She shook
herself free with a little gesture of annoyance.

"Whatever is the matter with you, Cecil? Don't gape at me like that, and
come along at once, unless you want to be left behind. Yes, we are very
short-handed and the chief let me go down to see Mr. Trent. He didn't
expect for a moment that I should get him to talk to me, but I did, and
he let me sketch the house. I am awfully pleased with myself I can tell
you."

The young man walked by her side for a moment in silence. She looked up
at him casually as they crossed the street, and something in his face
surprised her.

"Why, Cecil, what on earth is the matter with you?" she exclaimed.

He looked down at her with a new seriousness.

"I was thinking," he said, "how oddly things turn out. So you have been
down to interview Mr. Scarlett Trent for a newspaper, and he was civil
to you!"

"Well, I don't see anything odd about that," she exclaimed impatiently.
"Don't be so enigmatical. If you've anything to say, say it! Don't look
at me like an owl!"

"I have a good deal to say to you," he answered gravely. "How long shall
you be at the office?"

"About an hour--perhaps longer."

"I will wait for you!"

"I'd rather you didn't. I don't want them to think that I go trailing
about with an escort."

"Then may I come down to your flat? I have something really important to
say to you, Ernestine. It does not concern myself at all. It is wholly
about you. It is something which you ought to know."

"You are trading upon my curiosity for the sake of a tea," she laughed.
"Very well, about five o'clock."

He bowed and walked back westwards with a graver look than usual upon
his boyish face, for he had a task before him which was very little to
his liking. Ernestine swung open the entrance door to the "Hour", and
passed down the rows of desks until she reached the door at the further
end marked "Sub-Editor." She knocked and was admitted at once.

A thin, dark young man, wearing a pince-nez and smoking a cigarette,
looked up from his writing as she entered. He waved her to a seat, but
his pen never stopped for a second.

"Back, Miss Wendermott! Very good! What did you get?"

"Interview and sketch of the house," she responded briskly.

"Interview by Jove! That's good! Was he very difficult?"

"Ridiculously easy! Told me everything I asked and a lot more. If
I could have got it all down in his own language it would have been
positively thrilling."

The sub-editor scribbled in silence for a moment or two. He had reached
an important point in his own work. His pen went slower, hesitated for a
moment, and then dashed on with renewed vigour.

"Read the first few sentences of what you've got," he remarked.

Ernestine obeyed. To all appearance the man was engrossed in his own
work, but when she paused he nodded his head appreciatively.

"It'll do!" he said. "Don't try to polish it. Give it down, and see that
the proofs are submitted to me. Where's the sketch?"

She held it out to him. For a moment he looked away from his own work
and took the opportunity to light a fresh cigarette. Then he nodded,
hastily scrawled some dimensions on the margin of the little drawing and
settled down again to work.

"It'll do," he said. "Give it to Smith. Come back at eight to look at
your proofs after I've done with them. Good interview! Good sketch!
You'll do, Miss Wendermott."

She went out laughing softly. This was quite the longest conversation
she had ever had with the chief. She made her way to the side of the
first disengaged typist, and sitting in an easy-chair gave down her
copy, here and there adding a little but leaving it mainly in the rough.
She knew whose hand, with a few vigorous touches would bring the whole
thing into the form which the readers of the "Hour", delighted in, and
she was quite content to have it so. The work was interesting and more
than an hour had passed before she rose and put on her gloves.

"I am coming back at eight," she said, "but the proofs are to go in to
Mr. Darrel! Nothing come in for me, I suppose?"

The girl shook her head, so Ernestine walked out into the street. Then
she remembered Cecil Davenant and his strange manner--the story which
he was even now waiting to tell her. She looked at her watch and after a
moment's hesitation called a hansom.

81, Culpole Street, she told him. "This is a little extravagant," she
said to herself as the man wheeled his horse round, "but to-day I think
that I have earned it."



CHAPTER XVII


"Ernestine," he said gravely, "I am going to speak to you about your
father!"

She looked up at him in swift surprise.

"Is it necessary?"

"I think so," he answered. "You won't like what I'm going to tell you!
You'll think you've been badly treated. So you have! I pledged my word,
in a weak hour, with the others. To-day I'm going to break it. I think
it best."

"Well?"

"You've been deceived! You were told always that your father had died in
prison. He didn't."

"What!"

Her sharp cry rang out strangely into the little room. Already he could
see signs of the coming storm, and the task which lay before him seemed
more hateful than ever.

"Listen," he said. "I must tell you some things which you know in order
to explain others which you do not know. Your father was a younger son
born of extravagant parents, virtually penniless and without the least
capacity for earning money. I don't blame him--who could? I couldn't
earn money myself. If I hadn't got it I daresay that I should go to the
bad as he did."

The girl's lips tightened, and she drew a little breath through her
teeth. Davenant hesitated.

"You know all about that company affair. Of course they made your father
the butt of the whole thing, although he was little more than a tool. He
was sent to prison for seven years. You were only a child then and your
mother was dead. Well, when the seven years were up, your relations
and mine too, Ernestine, concocted what I have always considered an
ill-begotten and a miserably selfish plot. Your father, unfortunately,
yielded to them, for your sake. You were told that he had died in
prison. He did not. He lived through his seven years there, and when he
came out did so in another name and went abroad on the morning of the
day of his liberation."

"Good God!" she cried. "And now!"

"He is dead," Davenant answered hastily, "but only just lately. Wait
a minute. You are going to be furiously angry. I know it, and I don't
blame you. Only listen for a moment. The scheme was hatched up between
my father and your two uncles. I have always hated it and always
protested against it. Remember that and be fair to me. This is how they
reasoned. Your father's health, they said, was ruined, and if he lives
the seven years what is there left for him when he comes out? He was a
man, as you know, of aristocratic and fastidious tastes. He would have
the best of everything--society, clubs, sport. Now all these were barred
against him. If he had reappeared he could not have shown his face in
Pall Mall, or on the racecourses, and every moment of his life would be
full of humiliations and bitterness. Virtually then, for such a man as
he was, life in England was over. Then there was you. You were a pretty
child and the Earl had no children. If your father was dead the story
would be forgotten, you would marry brilliantly and an ugly page in the
family history would be blotted out. That was how they looked at it--it
was how they put it to your father."

"He consented?"

"Yes, he consented! He saw the wisdom of it for your sake, for the sake
of the family, even for his own sake. The Earl settled an income upon
him and he left England secretly on the morning of his release. We had
the news of his death only a week or two ago."

She stood up, her eyes blazing, her hands clenched together.

"I thank God," she said "that I have found the courage to break away
from those people and take a little of my life into my own hands. You
can tell them this if you will, Cecil,--my uncle Lord Davenant, your
mother, and whoever had a say in this miserable affair. Tell them from
me that I know the truth and that they are a pack of cowardly, unnatural
old women. Tell them that so long as I live I will never willingly
speak to one of them again.

"I was afraid you'd take it like that," he remarked dolefully.

"Take it like that!" she repeated in fierce scorn. "How else could a
woman hear such news? How else do you suppose she could feel to be told
that she had been hoodwinked, and kept from her duty and a man's heart
very likely broken, to save the respectability of a worn-out old family.
Oh, how could they have dared to do it? How could they have dared to do
it?"

"It was a beastly mistake," he admitted.

A whirlwind of scorn seemed to sweep over her. She could keep still no
longer. She walked up and down the little room. Her hands were clenched,
her eyes flashing.

"To tell me that he was dead--to let him live out the rest of his poor
life in exile and alone! Did they think that I didn't care? Cecil," she
exclaimed, suddenly turning and facing him, "I always loved my father!
You may think that I was too young to remember him--I wasn't, I loved
him always. When I grew up and they told me of his disgrace I was
bitterly sorry, for I loved his memory--but it made no difference.
And all the time it was a weak, silly lie! They let him come out, poor
father, without a friend to speak to him and they hustled him out of the
country. And I, whose place was there with him, never knew!"

"You were only a child, Ernestine. It was twelve years ago."

"Child! I may have been only a child, but I should have been old enough
to know where my place was. Thank God I have done with these people and
their disgusting shibboleth of respectability."

"You are a little violent," he remarked.

"Pshaw!" She flashed a look of scorn upon him. "You don't understand!
How should you, you are of their kidney--you're only half a man.
Thank God that my mother was of the people! I'd have died to have gone
smirking through life with a brick for a heart and milk and water in my
veins! Of all the stupid pieces of brutality I ever heard of, this is
the most callous and the most heartbreaking."

"It was a great mistake," he said, "but I believe they did it for the
best."

She sat down with a little gesture of despair.

"I really think you'd better go away, Cecil," she said. "You exasperate
me too horribly. I shall strike you or throw something at you soon. Did
it for the best! What a miserable whine! Poor dear old dad, to think
that they should have done this thing."

She buried her face in her handkerchief and sobbed for the second time
since her childhood. Davenant was wise enough to attempt no sort of
consolation. He leaned a little forward and hid his own face with the
palm of his hand. When at last she looked up her face had cleared and
her tone was less bitter. It would have gone very hard with the Earl of
Eastchester, however, if he had called to see his niece just then.

"Well," she said, "I want to know now why, after keeping silent all this
time, you thought it best to tell me the truth this afternoon?"

"Because," he answered, "you told me that you had just been to see
Scarlett Trent!"

"And what on earth had that to do with it?"

"Because Scarlett Trent was with your father when he died. They were on
an excursion somewhere up in the bush--the very excursion that laid the
foundation of Trent's fortune."

"Go on," she cried. "Tell me all that you know! this is wonderful!"

"Well, I am glad to tell you this at any rate," he said. "I always liked
your father and I saw him off when he left England, and have written to
him often since. I believe I was his only correspondent in this country,
except his solicitors. He had a very adventurous and, I am afraid, not a
very happy time. He never wrote cheerfully, and he mortgaged the greater
part of his income. I don't blame him for anything he did. A man needs
some responsibility, or some one dependent upon him to keep straight. To
be frank with you, I don't think he did."

"Poor dad," she murmured, "of course he didn't! I know I'd have gone to
the devil as fast as I could if I'd been treated like it!"

"Well, he drifted about from place to place and at last he got to the
Gold Coast. Here I half lost sight of him, and his few letters were more
bitter and despairing than ever. The last I had told me that he was just
off on an expedition into the interior with another Englishman.
They were to visit a native King and try to obtain from him certain
concessions, including the right to work a wonderful gold-mine somewhere
near the village of Bekwando."

"Why, the great Bekwando Land Company!" she cried. "It is the one
Scarlett Trent has just formed a syndicate to work."

Davenant nodded.

"Yes. It was a terrible risk they were running," he said, "for the
people were savage and the climate deadly. He wrote cheerfully for him,
though. He had a partner, he said, who was strong and determined, and
they had presents, to get which he had mortgaged the last penny of his
income. It was a desperate enterprise perhaps, but it suited him, and
he went on to tell me this, Ernestine. If he succeeded and he became
wealthy, he was returning to England just for a sight of you. He was
so changed, he said, that no one in the world would recognise him. Poor
fellow! It was the last line I had from him."

"And you are sure," Ernestine said slowly, "that Scarlett Trent was his
partner?"

"Absolutely. Trent's own story clinches the matter. The prospectus of
the mine quotes the concession as having been granted to him by the King
of Bekwando in the same month as your father wrote to me."

"And what news," she asked, "have you had since?"

"Only this letter--I will read it to you--from one of the missionaries
of the Basle Society. I heard nothing for so long that I made inquiries,
and this is the result."

Ernestine took it and read it out steadily.


"FORTNRENIG.

"DEAR Sir,--In reply to your letter and inquiry, respecting the
whereabouts of a Mr. Richard Grey, the matter was placed in my hands by
the agent of Messrs. Castle, and I have personally visited Buckomari, the
village at which he was last heard of. It seems that in February, 18--he
started on an expedition to Bekwando in the interior with an Englishman
by the name of Trent, with a view to buying land from a native King,
or obtaining the concession to work the valuable gold-mines of that
country. The expedition seems to have been successful, but Trent
returned alone and reported that his companion had been attacked by
bush-fever on the way back and had died in a few hours.

"I regret very much having to send you such sad and scanty news in
return for your handsome donation to our funds. I have made every
inquiry, but cannot trace any personal effects or letter. Mr. Grey, I
find, was known out here altogether by the nickname of Monty.

"I deeply regret the pain which this letter will doubtless cause you, and
trusting that you may seek and receive consolation where alone it may be
found,

"I am,

"Yours most sincerely,

"Chas. ADDISON."


Ernestine read the letter carefully through, and instead of handing it
back to Davenant, put it into her pocket when she rose up. "Cecil," she
said, "I want you to leave me at once! You may come back to-morrow at
the same time. I am going to think this out quietly."

He took up his hat. "There is one thing more, Ernestine," he said
slowly. "Enclosed in the letter from the missionary at Attra was another
and a shorter note, which, in accordance with his request, I burnt as
soon as I read it. I believe the man was honest when he told me that
for hours he had hesitated whether to send me those few lines or not.
Eventually he decided to do so, but he appealed to my honour to destroy
the note as soon as I had read it."

"Well!"

"He thought it his duty to let me know that there had been rumours as
to how your father met his death. Trent, it seems, had the reputation of
being a reckless and daring man, and, according to some agreement which
they had, he profited enormously by your father's death. There seems to
have been no really definite ground for the rumour except that the body
was not found where Trent said that he had died. Apart from that,
life is held cheap out there, and although your father was in delicate
health, his death under such conditions could not fail to be suspicious.
I hope I haven't said too much. I've tried to put it to you exactly as
it was put to me!"

"Thank you," Ernestine said, "I think I understand."



CHAPTER XVIII


Dinner at the Lodge that night was not a very lively affair. Trent had
great matters in his brain and was not in the least disposed to make
conversation for the sake of his unbidden guests. Da Souza's few remarks
he treated with silent contempt, and Mrs. Da Souza he answered only in
monosyllables. Julie, nervous and depressed, stole away before dessert,
and Mrs. Da Souza soon followed her, very massive, and frowning with
an air of offended dignity. Da Souza, who opened the door for them,
returned to his seat, moodily flicking the crumbs from his trousers with
his serviette.

"Hang it all, Trent," he remarked in an aggrieved tone, "you might be a
bit more amiable! Nice lively dinner for the women I must say."

"One isn't usually amiable to guests who stay when they're not asked,"
Trent answered gruffly. "However, if I hadn't much to say to your wife
and daughter, I have a word or two to say to you, so fill up your glass
and listen."

Da Souza obeyed, but without heartiness. He stretched himself out in his
chair and looked down thoughtfully at the large expanse of shirt-front,
in the centre of which flashed an enormous diamond.

"I've been into the City to-day as you know," Trent continued, "and I
found as I expected that you have been making efforts to dispose of your
share in the Bekwando Syndicate."

"I can assure you--"

"Oh rot!" Trent interrupted. "I know what I'm talking about. I won't
have you sell out. Do you hear? If you try it on I'll queer the
market for you at any risk. I won't marry your daughter, I won't be
blackmailed, and I won't be bullied. We're in this together, sink or
swim. If you pull me down you've got to come too. I'll admit that if
Monty were to present himself in London to-morrow and demand his full
pound of flesh we should be ruined, but he isn't going to do it. By
your own showing there is no immediate risk, and you've got to leave the
thing in my hands to do what I think best. If you play any hanky-panky
tricks--look here, Da Souza, I'll kill you, sure! Do you hear? I could
do it, and no one would be the wiser so far as I was concerned. You take
notice of what I say, Da Souza. You've made a fortune, and be satisfied.
That's all!"

"You won't marry Julie, then?" Da Souza said gloomily.

"No, I'm shot if I will!" Trent answered. "And look here, Da Souza,
I'm leaving here for town to-morrow--taken a furnished flat in Dover
Street--you can stay here if you want, but there'll only be a caretaker
in the place. That's all I've got to say. Make yourself at home with the
port and cigars. Last night, you know! You'll excuse me! I want a breath
of fresh air."

Trent strolled through the open window into the garden, and breathed
a deep sigh of relief. He was a free man again now. He had created new
dangers--a new enemy to face--but what did he care? All his life had
been spent in facing dangers and conquering enemies. What he had done
before he could do again! As he lit a pipe and walked to and fro, he
felt that this new state of things lent a certain savour to life--took
from it a certain sensation of finality not altogether agreeable, which
his recent great achievements in the financial world seemed to have
inspired. After all, what could Da Souza do? His prosperity was
altogether bound up in the success of the Bekwando Syndicate--he was
never the man to kill the goose which was laying such a magnificent
stock of golden eggs. The affair, so far as he was concerned, troubled
him scarcely at all on cool reflection. As he drew near the little
plantation he even forgot all about it. Something else was filling his
thoughts!

The change in him became physical as well as mental. The hard face of
the man softened, what there was of coarseness in its rugged outline
became altogether toned down. He pushed open the gate with fingers which
were almost reverent; he came at last to a halt in the exact spot where
he had seen her first. Perhaps it was at that moment he realised most
completely and clearly the curious thing which had come to him--to him
of all men, hard-hearted, material, an utter stranger in the world of
feminine things. With a pleasant sense of self-abandonment he groped
about, searching for its meaning. He was a man who liked to understand
thoroughly everything he saw and felt, and this new atmosphere in which
he found himself was a curious source of excitement to him. Only he knew
that the central figure of it all was this girl, that he had come out
here to think about her, and that henceforth she had become to him the
standard of those things which were worth having in life. Everything
about her had been a revelation to him. The women whom he had come
across in his battle upwards, barmaids and their fellows, fifth-rate
actresses, occasionally the suburban wife of a prosperous City man, had
impressed him only with a sort of coarse contempt. It was marvellous how
thoroughly and clearly he had recognised Ernestine at once as a type of
that other world of womenkind, of which he admittedly knew nothing. Yet
it was so short a time since she had wandered into his life, so short a
time that he was even a little uneasy at the wonderful strength of this
new passion, a thing which had leaped up like a forest tree in a world
of magic, a live, fully-grown thing, mighty and immovable in a single
night. He found himself thinking of all the other things in life from a
changed standpoint. His sense of proportions was altered, his financial
triumphs were no longer omnipotent. He was inclined even to brush them
aside, to consider them more as an incident in his career. He associated
her now with all those plans concerning the future which he had been
dimly formulating since the climax of his successes had come. She was of
the world which he sought to enter--at once the stimulus and the object
of his desires. He forgot all about Da Souza and his threats, about the
broken-down, half-witted old man who was gazing with wistful eyes across
the ocean which kept him there, an exile--he remembered nothing save the
wonderful, new thing which had come into his life. A month ago he would
have scoffed at the idea of there being anything worth considering
outside the courts and alleys of the money-changers' market. To-night he
knew of other things. To-night he knew that all he had done so far was
as nothing--that as yet his foot was planted only on the threshold of
life, and in the path along which he must hew his way lay many fresh
worlds to conquer. To-night he told himself that he was equal to them
all. There was something out here in the dim moonlight, something
suggested by the shadows, the rose-perfumed air, the delicate and
languid stillness, which crept into his veins and coursed through his
blood like magic.

     *           *           *           *           *

Yet every now and then the same thought came; it lay like a small but
threatening black shadow across all those brilliant hopes and dreams
which were filling his brain. So far he had played the game of life as a
hard man, perhaps, and a selfish one, but always honestly. Now, for the
first time, he had stepped aside from the beaten track. He told himself
that he was not bound to believe Da Souza's story, that he had left
Monty with the honest conviction that he was past all human help. Yet
he knew that such consolation was the merest sophistry. Through the
twilight, as he passed to and fro, he fancied more than once that the
wan face of an old man, with wistful, sorrowing eyes, was floating
somewhere before him--and he stopped to listen with bated breath to
the wind rustling in the elm-trees, fancying he could bear that same
passionate cry ringing still in his ears--the cry of an old man parted
from his kin and waiting for death in a lonely land.




CHAPTER XIX


Ernestine found a letter on her plate a few mornings afterwards which
rather puzzled her. It was from a firm of solicitors in Lincoln's
Inn--the Eastchester family solicitors--requesting her to call that
morning to see them on important business. There was not a hint as
to the nature of it, merely a formal line or two and a signature.
Ernestine, who had written insulting letters to all her relatives during
the last few days, smiled as she laid it down. Perhaps the family had
called upon Mr. Cuthbert to undertake their defence and bring her round
to a reasonable view of things. The idea was amusing enough, but her
first impulse was not to go. Nothing but the combination of an idle
morning and a certain measure of curiosity induced her to keep the
appointment.

She was evidently expected, for she was shown at once into the private
office of the senior partner. The clerk who ushered her in pronounced
her name indistinctly, and the elderly man who rose from his chair at
her entrance looked at her inquiringly.

"I am Miss Wendermott," she said, coming forward. "I had a letter from
you this morning; you wished to see me, I believe."

Mr. Cuthbert dropped at once his eyeglass and his inquiring gaze, and
held out his hand.

"My dear Miss Wendermott," he said, "you must pardon the failing
eyesight of an old man. To be sure you are, to be sure. Sit down, Miss
Wendermott, if you please. Dear me, what a likeness!"

"You mean to my father?" she asked quietly.

"To your father, certainly, poor, dear old boy! You must excuse me, Miss
Wendermott. Your father and I were at Eton together, and I think I may
say that we were always something more than lawyer and client--a good
deal more, a good deal more! He was a fine fellow at heart--a fine, dear
fellow. Bless me, to think that you are his daughter!"

"It's very nice to hear you speak of him so, Mr. Cuthbert," she said.
"My father may have been very foolish--I suppose he was really worse
than foolish--but I think that he was most abominably and shamefully
treated, and so long as I live I shall never forgive those who were
responsible for it. I don't mean you, Mr. Cuthbert, of course. I mean my
grand-father and my uncle." Mr. Cuthbert shook his head slowly.

"The Earl," he said, "was a very proud man--a very proud man."

"You may call it pride," she exclaimed. "I call it rank and brutal
selfishness! They had no right to force such a sacrifice upon him. He
would have been content, I am sure, to have lived quietly in England--to
have kept out of their way, to have conformed to their wishes in any
reasonable manner. But to rob him of home and friends and family and
name--well, may God call them to account for it, and judge them as they
judged him!"

"I was against it," he said sadly, "always."

"So Mr. Davenant told me," she said. "I can't quite forgive you, Mr.
Cuthbert, for letting me grow up and be so shamefully imposed upon, but
of course I don't blame you as I do the others. I am only thankful
that I have made myself independent of my relations. I think, after the
letters which I wrote to them last night, they will be quite content to
let me remain where they put my father--outside their lives."

"I had heard," Mr. Cuthbert said hesitatingly, "that you were following
some occupation. Something literary, is it not?"

"I am a journalist," Ernestine answered promptly, "and I'm proud to say
that I am earning my own living."

He looked at her with a fine and wonderful curiosity. In his way he was
quite as much one of the old school as the Earl of Eastchester, and
the idea of a lady--a Wendermott, too--calling herself a journalist
and proud of making a few hundreds a year was amazing enough to him. He
scarcely knew how to answer her.

"Yes, yes," he said, "you have some of your father's spirit, some of his
pluck too. And that reminds me--we wrote to you to call."

"Yes."

"Mr. Davenant has told you that your father was engaged in some
enterprise with this wonderful Mr. Scarlett Trent, when he died."

"Yes! He told me that!"

"Well, I have had a visit just recently from that gentleman. It seems
that your father when he was dying spoke of his daughter in England, and
Mr. Trent is very anxious now to find you out, and speaks of a large sum
of money which he wishes to invest in your name."

"He has been a long time thinking about it," Ernestine remarked.

"He explained that," Mr. Cuthbert continued, "in this way. Your father
gave him our address when he was dying, but the envelope on which it
was written got mislaid, and he only came across it a day or two ago. He
came to see me at once, and he seems prepared to act very handsomely. He
pressed very hard indeed for your name and address, but I did not feel
at liberty to disclose them before seeing you."

"You were quite right, Mr. Cuthbert," she answered. "I suppose this is
the reason why Mr. Davenant has just told me the whole miserable story."

"It is one reason," he admitted, "but in any case I think that Mr.
Davenant had made up his mind that you should know."

"Mr. Trent, I suppose, talks of this money as a present to me?"

"He did not speak of it in that way," Mr. Cuthbert answered, "but in a
sense that is, of course, what it amounts to. At the same time I should
like to say that under the peculiar circumstances of the case I should
consider you altogether justified in accepting it."

Ernestine drew herself up. Once more in her finely flashing eyes and
resolute air the lawyer was reminded of his old friend.

"I will tell you what I should call it, Mr. Cuthbert," she said, "I will
tell you what I believe it is! It is blood-money."

Mr. Cuthbert dropped his eyeglass, and rose from his chair, startled.

"Blood-money! My dear young lady! Blood-money!"

"Yes! You have heard the whole story, I suppose! What did it sound like
to you? A valuable concession granted to two men, one old, the other
young! one strong, the other feeble! yet the concession read, if one
should die the survivor should take the whole. Who put that in, do you
suppose? Not my father! you may be sure of that. And one of them does
die, and Scarlett Trent is left to take everything. Do you think that
reasonable? I don't. Now, you say, after all this time he is fired
with a sudden desire to behave handsomely to the daughter of his dead
partner. Fiddlesticks! I know Scarlett Trent, although he little knows
who I am, and he isn't that sort of man at all. He'd better have kept
away from you altogether, for I fancy he's put his neck in the noose
now! I do not want his money, but there is something I do want from Mr.
Scarlett Trent, and that is the whole knowledge of my father's death."

Mr. Cuthbert sat down heavily in his chair.

"But, my dear young lady," he said, "you do not suspect Mr. Trent
of--er--making away with your father!'

"And why not? According to his own showing they were alone together when
he died. What was to prevent it? I want to know more about it, and I am
going to, if I have to travel to the Gold Coast myself. I will tell you
frankly, Mr. Cuthbert--I suspect Mr. Scarlett Trent. No, don't interrupt
me. It may seem absurd to you now that he is Mr. Scarlett Trent,
millionaire, with the odour of civilisation clinging to him, and the
respectability of wealth. But I, too, have seen him, and I have heard
him talk. He has helped me to see the other man--half-savage, splendidly
masterful, forging his way through to success by sheer pluck and
unswerving obstinacy. Listen, I admire your Mr. Trent! He is a man,
and when he speaks to you you know that he was born with a destiny. But
there is the other side. Do you think that he would let a man's life
stand in his way? Not he! He'd commit a murder, or would have done in
those days, as readily as you or I would sweep away a fly. And it
is because he is that sort of man that I want to know more about my
father's death."

"You are talking of serious things, Miss Wendermott," Mr. Cuthbert said
gravely.

"Why not? Why shirk them? My father's death was a serious thing, wasn't
it? I want an account of it from the only man who can render it."

"When you disclose yourself to Mr. Trent I should say that he would
willingly give you--"

She interrupted him, coming over and standing before him, leaning
against his table, and looking him in the face.

"You don't understand. I am not going to disclose myself! You will reply
to Mr. Trent that the daughter of his old partner is not in need of
charity, however magnificently tendered. You understand?"

"I understand, Miss Wendermott."

"As to her name or whereabouts you are not at liberty to disclose them.
You can let him think, if you will, that she is tarred with the same
brush as those infamous and hypocritical relatives of hers who sent her
father out to die."

Mr. Cuthbert shook his head.

"I think, young lady, if you will allow me to say so that you are making
a needless mystery of the matter, and further, that you are embarking
upon what will certainly prove to be a wild-goose chase. We had news
of your father not long before his sad death, and he was certainly in
ill-health."

She set her lips firmly together, and there was a look in her face which
alone was quite sufficient to deter Mr. Cuthbert from further argument.

"It may be a wild-goose chase," she said. "It may not. At any rate
nothing will alter my purpose. Justice sleeps sometimes for very many
years, but I have an idea that Mr. Scarlett Trent may yet have to face a
day of settlement."

     *           *           *           *           *

She walked through the crowded streets homewards, her nerves tingling
and her pulses throbbing with excitement. She was conscious of having
somehow ridded herself of a load of uncertainty and anxiety. She was
committed now at any rate to a definite course. There had been moments
of indecision--moments in which she had been inclined to revert to her
first impressions of the man, which, before she had heard Davenant's
story, had been favourable enough. That was all over now. That pitifully
tragic figure--the man who died with a tardy fortune in his hands, an
outcast in a far off country--had stirred in her heart a passionate
sympathy--reason even gave way before it. She declared war against Mr.
Scarlett Trent.



CHAPTER XX


Ernestine walked from Lincoln's Inn to the office of the Hour, where she
stayed until nearly four. Then, having finished her day's work, she
made her way homewards. Davenant was waiting for her in her rooms. She
greeted him with some surprise.

"You told me that I might come to tea," he reminded her. "If you're
expecting any one else, or I'm in the way at all, don't mind saying so,
please!"

She shook her head.

"I'm certainly not expecting any one," she said. "To tell you the truth
my visiting-list is a very small one; scarcely any one knows where I
live. Sit down, and I will ring for tea."

He looked at her curiously. "What a colour you have, Ernestine!" he
remarked. "Have you been walking fast?"

She laughed softly, and took off her hat, straightening the wavy brown
hair, which had escaped bounds a little, in front of the mirror. She
looked at herself long and thoughtfully at the delicately cut but strong
features, the clear, grey eyes and finely arched eyebrows, the curving,
humorous mouth and dainty chin. Davenant regarded her in amazement.

"Why, Ernestine," he exclaimed, "are you taking stock of your good
looks?"

"Precisely what I am doing," she answered laughing. "At that moment I
was wondering whether I possessed any."

"If you will allow me," he said, "to take the place of the mirror, I
think that I could give you any assurances you required."

She shook her head.

"You might be more flattering," she said, "but you would be less
faithful."

He remained standing upon the hearthrug. Ernestine returned to the
mirror.

"May I know," he asked, "for whose sake is this sudden anxiety about
your appearance?"

She turned away and sat in a low chair, her hands clasped behind her
head, her eyes fixed upon vacancy.

"I have been wondering," she said, "whether if I set myself to it as
to a task I could make a man for a moment forget himself--did I say
forget?--I mean betray!"

"If I were that man," he remarked smiling, "I will answer for it that
you could."

"You! But then you are only a boy, you have nothing to conceal, and you
are partial to me, aren't you? No, the man whom I want to influence is a
very different sort of person. It is Scarlett Trent."

He frowned heavily. "A boor," he said. "What have you to do with him?
The less the better I should say."

"And from my point of view, the more the better," she answered. "I have
come to believe that but for him my father would be alive to-day."

"I do not understand! If you believe that, surely you do not wish to see
the man--to have him come near you!"

"I want him punished!"

He shook his head. "There is no proof. There never could be any proof!"

"There are many ways," she said softly, "in which a man can be made to
suffer."

"And you would set yourself to do this?"

"Why not? Is not anything better than letting him go scot-free? Would
you have me sit still and watch him blossom into a millionaire peer,
a man of society, drinking deep draughts of all the joys of life, with
never a thought for the man he left to rot in an African jungle? Oh, any
way of punishing him is better than that. I have declared war against
Scarlett Trent."

"How long," he asked, "will it last?"

"Until he is in my power," she answered slowly. "Until he has fallen
back again to the ruck. Until he has tasted a little of the misery from
which at least he might have saved my father!"

"I think," he said, "that you are taking a great deal too much for
granted. I do not know Scarlett Trent, and I frankly admit that I am
prejudiced against him and all his class. Yet I think that he deserves
his chance, like any man. Go to him and ask him, face to face, how your
father died, declare yourself, press for all particulars, seek even for
corroboration of his word. Treat him if you will as an enemy, but as an
honourable one!"

She shook her head.

"The man," she said, "has all the plausibility of his class. He has
learned it in the money school, where these things become an art.
He believes himself secure--he is even now seeking for me. He is all
prepared with his story. No, my way is best."

"I do not like your way," he said. "It is not like you, Ernestine."

"For the sake of those whom one loves," she said, "one will do much that
one hates. When I think that but for this man my father might still have
been alive, might have lived to know how much I loathed those who sent
him into exile--well, I feel then that there is nothing in the world I
would not do to crush him!"

He rose to his feet--his fresh, rather boyish, face was wrinkled with
care.

"I shall live to be sorry, Ernestine," he said, "that I ever told you
the truth about your father."

"If I had discovered it for myself," she said, "and, sooner or later, I
should have discovered it, and had learned that you too had been in the
conspiracy, I should never have spoken to you again as long as I lived."

"Then I must not regret it," he said, "only I hate the part you are
going to play. I hate to think that I must stand by and watch, and say
nothing."

"There is no reason," she said, "why you should watch it; why do you not
go away for a time?"

"I cannot," he answered sadly, "and you know why."

She was impatient, but she looked at him for a moment with a gleam of
sadness in her eyes.

"It would be much better for you," she said, "if you would make up your
mind to put that folly behind you."

"It may be folly, but it is not the sort of folly one forgets."

"You had better try then, Cecil," she said, "for it is quite hopeless.
You know that. Be a man and leave off dwelling upon the impossible. I do
not wish to marry, and I do not expect to, but if ever I did, it would
not be you!"

He was silent for a few moments--looking gloomily across at the girl,
loathing the thought that she, his ideal of all those things which
most become a woman, graceful, handsome, perfectly bred, should ever be
brought into contact at all with such a man as this one whose confidence
she was planning to gain. No, he could not go away and leave her! He
must be at hand, must remain her friend.

"I wonder," he said, "couldn't we have one of our old evenings again?
Listen--"

"I would rather not," she interrupted softly. "If you will persist in
talking of a forbidden subject you must go away. Be reasonable, Cecil."

He was silent for a moment. When he spoke again his tone was changed.

"Very well," he said. "I will try to let things be as you wish--for the
present. Now do you want to hear some news?"

She nodded.

"Of course."

"It's about Dick--seems rather a coincidence too. He was at the Cape,
you know, with a firm of surveyors, and he's been offered a post on the
Gold Coast."

"The Gold Coast! How odd! Anywhere near--?"

"The offer came from the Bekwando Company!"

"Is he going?"

"Yes."

She was full of eager interest. "How extraordinary! He might be able to
make some inquiries for me."

He nodded.

"What there is to be discovered about Mr. Scarlett Trent, he can find
out! But, Ernestine, I want you to understand this! I have nothing
against the man, and although I dislike him heartily, I think it is
madness to associate him in any way with your father's death."

"You do not know him. I do!"

"I have only told you my opinion," he answered, "it is of no
consequence. I will see with your eyes. He is your enemy and he shall be
my enemy. If there is anything shady in his past out there, depend upon
it Dick will hear of it."

She pushed the wavy hair back from her forehead--her eyes were bright,
and there was a deep flush of colour in her cheeks. But the man was not
to be deceived. He knew that these things were not for him. It was the
accomplice she welcomed and not the man.

"It is a splendid stroke of fortune," she said. "You will write to Fred
to-day, won't you? Don't prejudice him either way. Write as though your
interest were merely curiosity. It is the truth I want to get at, that
is all. If the man is innocent I wish him no harm--only I believe him
guilty."

"There was a knock at the door--both turned round. Ernestine's trim
little maidservant was announcing a visitor who followed close behind.

"Mr. Scarlett Trent."



CHAPTER XXI


Ernestine was a delightful hostess, she loved situations, and her social
tact was illimitable. In a few minutes Trent was seated in a comfortable
and solid chair with a little round table by his side, drinking tea and
eating buttered scones, and if not altogether at his ease very nearly
so. Opposite him was Davenant, dying to escape yet constrained to be
agreeable, and animated too with a keen, distasteful curiosity to
watch Ernestine's methods. And Ernestine herself chatted all the time,
diffused good fellowship and tea--she made an atmosphere which had a
nameless fascination for the man who had come to middle-age without
knowing what a home meant. Davenant studied him and became thoughtful.
He took note of the massive features, the iron jaw, the eyes as bright
as steel, and his thoughtfulness became anxiety. Ernestine too was
strong, but this man was a rock. What would happen if she carried out
her purpose, fooled, betrayed him, led him perhaps to ruin? Some day her
passion would leap up, she would tell him, they would be face to face,
injured man and taunting woman. Davenant had an ugly vision as he sat
there. He saw the man's eyes catch fire, the muscles of his face twitch,
he saw Ernestine shrink back, white with terror and the man followed
her.

"Cecil! Aren't you well? you're looking positively ghastly!"

He pulled himself together--it had been a very realistic little
interlude.

"Bad headache!" he said, smiling. "By the by, I must go!"

"If you ever did such a thing as work," she remarked, "I should say that
you had been doing too much. As it is, I suppose you have been sitting
up too late. Goodbye. I am so glad that you were here to meet Mr. Trent.
Mr. Davenant is my cousin, you know," she continued, turning to her
visitor, "and he is almost the only one of my family who has not cast me
off utterly."

Davenant made his adieux with a heavy heart. He hated the hypocrisy with
which he hoped for Scarlett Trent's better acquaintance and the latter's
bluff acceptance of an invitation to look him up at his club. He walked
out into the street cursing his mad offer to her and the whole business.
But Ernestine was very well satisfied.

She led Trent to talk about Africa again, and he plunged into the
subject without reserve. He told her stories and experiences with a
certain graphic and picturesque force which stamped him as the possessor
of an imaginative power and command of words for which she would
scarcely have given him credit. She had the unusual gift of making the
best of all those with whom she came in contact. Trent felt that he was
interesting her, and gained confidence in himself.

All the time she was making a social estimate of him. He was not by any
means impossible. On the contrary there was no reason why he should not
become a success. That he was interested in her was already obvious, but
that had become her intention. The task began to seem almost easy as she
sat and listened to him.

Then he gave her a start. Quietly and without any warning he changed the
subject into one which was fraught with embarrassment for her. At his
first words the colour faded from her cheeks.

"I've been pretty lucky since I got back. Things have gone my way a
bit and the only disappointment I've had worth speaking of has been in
connection with a matter right outside money. I've been trying to find
the daughter of that old partner of mine--I told you about her--and I
can't."

She changed her seat a little. There was no need for her to affect any
interest in what he was saying. She listened to every word intently.

"Monty," he said reflectingly, "was a good old sort in a way, and I had
an idea, somehow, that his daughter would turn out something like the
man himself, and at heart Monty was all right. I didn't know who she was
or her name--Monty was always precious close, but I had the address of a
firm of lawyers who knew all about her. I called there the other day and
saw an old chap who questioned and cross-questioned me until I wasn't
sure whether I was on my head or my heels, and, after all, he told me
to call again this afternoon for her address. I told him of course that
Monty died a pauper and he'd no share of our concession to will away,
but I'd done so well that I thought I'd like to make over a trifle to
her--in fact I'd put away 10,000 pounds worth of Bekwando shares for
her. I called this afternoon, and do you know, Miss Wendermott, the
young lady declined to have anything to say to me--wouldn't let me know
who she was that I might have gone and talked this over in a friendly
way with her. Didn't want money, didn't want to hear about her father!"

"You must have been disappointed."

"I'll admit it," he replied. "I was; I'd come to think pretty well of
Monty although he was a loose fish and I'd a sort of fancy for seeing
his daughter."

She took up a screen as though to shield the fire from her face.
Would the man's eyes never cease questioning her--could it be that he
suspected? Surely that was impossible!

"Why have you never tried to find her before?" she asked.

"That's a natural question enough," he admitted. "Well, first, I only
came across a letter Monty wrote with the address of those lawyers a
few days ago, and, secondly, the Bekwando Mine and Land Company has only
just boomed, and you see that made me feel that I'd like to give a lift
up to any one belonging to poor old Monty I could find. I've a mind to
go on with the thing myself and find out somehow who this young lady
is!"

"Who were the lawyers?"

"Cuthbert and Cuthbert."

"They are most respectable people," she said. "I know Mr. Cuthbert and
their standing is very high. If Mr. Cuthbert told you that the young
lady wished to remain unknown to you, I am quite sure that you may
believe him."

"That's all right," Trent said, "but here's what puzzles me. The girl
may be small enough and mean enough to decline to have anything to
say to me because her father was a bad lot, and she doesn't want to be
reminded of him, but for that very reason can you imagine her virtually
refusing a large sum of money? I told old Cuthbert all about it. There
was 10,000 pounds worth of shares waiting for her and no need for any
fuss. Can you understand that?"

"It seems very odd," she said. "Perhaps the girl objects to being given
money. It is a large sum to take as a present from a stranger."

"If she is that sort of girl," he said decidedly, "she would at least
want to meet and talk with the man who saw the last of her father. No,
there's something else in it, and I think that I ought to find her.
Don't you?"

She hesitated.

"I'm afraid I can't advise you," she said; "only if she has taken so
much pains to remain unknown, I am not sure--I think that if I were you
I would assume that she has good reason for it."

"I can see no good reason," he said, "and there is a mystery behind it
which I fancy would be better cleared up. Some day I will tell you more
about it."

Evidently Ernestine was weary of the subject, for she suddenly changed
it. She led him on to talk of other things. When at last he glanced at
the clock he was horrified to see how long he had stayed.

"You'll remember, I hope, Miss Wendermott," he said, "that this is the
first afternoon call I've ever paid. I've no idea how long I ought to
have stayed, but certainly not two hours."

"The time has passed quickly," she said, smiling upon him, so that his
momentary discomfort passed away. "I have been very interested in the
stories of your past, Mr. Trent, but do you know I am quite as much
interested, more so even, in your future."

"Tell me what you mean," he asked.

"You have so much before you, so many possibilities. There is so much
that you may gain, so much that you may miss."

He looked puzzled.

"I have a lot of money," he said. "That's all! I haven't any friends
nor any education worth speaking of. I don't see quite where the
possibilities come in."

She crossed the room and came over close to his side, resting her arm
upon the mantelpiece. She was still wearing her walking-dress, prim and
straight in its folds about her tall, graceful figure, and her hair,
save for the slight waviness about the forehead, was plainly dressed.
There were none of the cheap arts about her to which Trent had become
accustomed in women who sought to attract. Yet, as she stood looking
down at him, a faint smile, half humorous, half satirical, playing about
the corners of her shapely mouth, he felt his heart beat faster than
ever it had done in any African jungle. It was the nervous and
emotional side of the man to which she appealed. He felt unlike himself,
undergoing a new phase of development. There was something stirring
within him which he could not understand.

"You haven't any friends," she said softly, "nor any education, but you
are a millionaire! That is quite sufficient. You are a veritable Caesar
with undiscovered worlds before you."

"I wish I knew what you meant," he said, with some hesitation.

She laughed softly.

"Don't you understand," she said, "that you are the fashion? Last year
it was Indian Potentates, the year before it was actors, this year it
is millionaires. You have only to announce yourself and you may take
any place you choose in society. You have arrived at the most auspicious
moment. I can assure you that before many months are past you will know
more people than ever you have spoken to in your life before--men whose
names have been household words to you and nothing else will be calling
you 'old chap' and wanting to sell you horses, and women, who last week
would look at you through lorgnettes as though you were a denizen of
some unknown world, will be lavishing upon you their choicest smiles and
whispering in your ear their 'not at home' afternoon. Oh, it's lucky
I'm able to prepare you a little for it, or you would be taken quite by
storm."

He was unmoved. He looked at her with a grim tightening of the lips.

"I want to ask you this," he said. "What should I be the better for it
all? What use have I for friends who only gather round me because I am
rich? Shouldn't I be better off to have nothing to do with them, to live
my own life, and make my own pleasures?"

She shrugged her shoulders.

"These people," she said, "of whom I have been speaking are masters
of the situation. You can't enjoy money alone! You want to race, hunt,
entertain, shoot, join in the revels of country houses! You must be one
of them or you can enjoy nothing."

Monty's words were ringing back in his ears. After all, pleasures could
be bought--but happiness!

"And you," he said, "you too think that these things you have mentioned
are the things most to be desired in life?"

A certain restraint crept into her manner.

"Yes," she answered simply.

"I have been told," he said, "that you have given up these things to
live your life differently. That you choose to be a worker. You have
rich relations--you could be rich yourself!"

She looked him steadily in the face.

"You are wrong," she said, "I have no money. I have not chosen a
profession willingly--only because I am poor!"

"Ah!"

The monosyllable was mysterious to her. But for the wild improbability
of the thing she would have wondered whether indeed he knew her secret.
She brushed the idea away. It was impossible.

"At least," he said, "you belong to these people."

"Yes," she answered, "I am one of the poor young women of society."

"And you would like," he continued, "to be one of the rich ones--to take
your place amongst them on equal terms. That is what you are looking
forward to in life!"

She laughed gaily.

"Of course I am! If there was the least little chance of it I should be
delighted. You mustn't think that I'm different from other girls in that
respect because I'm more independent. In this country there's only one
way of enjoying life thoroughly, and that you will find out for yourself
very soon."

He rose and held out his hand.

"Thank you very much," he said, "for letting me come. May I--"

"You may come," she said quietly, "as often as you like."



CHAPTER XXII


"Mr. Scarlett Trent, the Gold King, left for Africa on Thursday last on
the Dunottar Castle, to pay a brief visit to his wonderful possessions
there before the great Bekwando Mining and Exploration Company is
offered to the public. Mr. Trent is already a millionaire, and should he
succeed in floating the Company on the basis of the Prospectus, he will
be a multi-millionaire, and certainly one of the richest of Englishmen.
During his absence workmen are to be kept going night and day at
his wonderful palace in Park Lane, which he hopes to find ready for
occupation on his return. Mr. Trent's long list of financial successes
are too well known to be given here, but who will grudge wealth to a
man who is capable of spending it in such a lordly fashion? We wish Mr.
Trent a safe voyage and a speedy return."

The paper slipped from his fingers and he looked thoughtfully out
seaward. It was only one paragraph of many, and the tone of all was the
same. Ernestine's words had come true--he was already a man of note. A
few months had changed his life in the most amazing way--when he looked
back upon it now it was with a sense of unreality--surely all these
things which had happened were part of a chimerical dream. It was barely
possible for him to believe that it was he, Scarlett Trent, who had
developed day by day into what he was at that moment. For the man was
changed in a hundred ways. His grey flannel clothes was cut by the
Saville Row tailor of the moment, his hands and hair, his manner of
speech and carriage were all altered. He recalled the men he had
met, the clubs he had joined, his stud of horses at Newmarket, the
country-houses at which he had visited. His most clear impression of the
whole thing was how easy everything had been made for him. His oddness
of speech, his gaucheries, his ignorances and nervousness had all been
so lightly treated that they had been brushed away almost insensibly. He
had been able to do so little that was wrong--his mistakes were ignored
or admired as originality, and yet in some delicate way the right thing
had been made clear to him. Ernestine had stood by his side, always
laughing at this swift fulfilment of her prophecy, always encouraging
him, always enigmatic. Yet at the thought of her a vague sense of
trouble crept into his heart. He took a worn photograph from his pocket
and looked at it long and searchingly, and when he put it away he
sighed. It made no difference of course, but he would rather have found
her like that, the child with sweet, trustful eyes and a laughing mouth.
Was there no life at all, then, outside this little vortex into which
at her bidding he had plunged? Would she never have been content with
anything else? He looked across the placid, blue sea to where the sun
gleamed like silver on a white sail, and sighed again. He must make
himself what she would have him. There was no life for him without her.

The captain came up for his morning chat and some of the passengers, who
eyed him with obvious respect, lingered for a moment about his chair on
their promenade. Trent lit a cigar and presently began to stroll up and
down himself. The salt sea-air was a wonderful tonic to him after
the nervous life of the last few months. He found his spirits rapidly
rising. This voyage had been undertaken in obedience to a sudden but
overpowering impulse. It had come to him one night that he must know for
himself how much truth there was in Da Souza's story. He could not live
with the thought that a thunderbolt was ever in the skies, that at any
moment his life might lie wrecked about him. He was going out by one
steamer and back by the next, the impending issue of his great Company
afforded all the excuse that was necessary. If Da Souza's story was
true--well, there were many things which might be done, short of a
complete disclosure. Monty might be satisfied, if plenty of money were
forthcoming, to abandon his partnership and release the situation from
its otherwise endless complications. Trent smoked his cigar placidly
and, taking off his cap bared his head to the sweeping sea-wind, which
seemed laden with life and buoyancy. Suddenly as he swung round by
the companion-way he found himself confronted by a newcomer who came
staggering out from the gangway. There was a moment's recoil and a sharp
exclamation. Trent stood quite still and a heavy frown darkened his
face.

"Da Souza!" he exclaimed. "How on earth came you on board?"

Da Souza's face was yellower than ever and he wore an ulster buttoned
up to his chin. Yet there was a flash of malice in his eyes as he
answered--

"I came by late tender at Southampton," he said.

"It cost me a special from London and the agents told me I couldn't do
it, but here I am, you see!"

"And a poor-looking object you are," Trent said contemptuously. "If
you've life enough in you to talk, be so good as to tell me what the
devil you mean by following me like this!"

"I came," Da Souza answered, "in both our interests--chiefly in my own!"

"I can believe that," Trent answered shortly, "now speak up. Tell me
what you want."

Da Souza groaned and sank down upon a vacant deck-chair.

"I will sit down," he said, "I am not well! The sea disagrees with me
horribly. Well, well, you want to know why I came here! I can answer
that question by another. What are you doing here? Why are you going to
Africa?"

"I am going," Trent said, "to see how much truth there was in that story
you told me. I am going to see old Monty if he is alive."

Da Souza groaned.

"It is cruel madness," he said, "and you are such an obstinate man! Oh
dear! oh dear!"

"I prefer," Trent said, "a crisis now, to ruin in the future. Besides, I
have the remnants of a conscience."

"You will ruin yourself, and you will ruin me," Da Souza moaned. "How am
I to have a quarter share if Monty is to come in for half, and how are
you to repay him all that you would owe on a partnership account? You
couldn't do it, Trent. I've heard of your four-in-hand, and your yacht,
and your racers, and that beautiful house in Park Lane. I tell you that
to part with half your fortune would ruin you, and the Bekwando Company
could never be floated."

"I don't anticipate parting with half," Trent said coolly. "Monty hasn't
long to live--and he ought not to be hard to make terms with."

Da Souza beat his hands upon the handles of his deck-chair.

"But why go near him at all? He thinks that you are dead. He has no idea
that you are in England. Why should he know? Why do you risk ruin like
this?"

"There are three reasons," Trent answered. "First, he may find his way
to England and upset the applecart; secondly, I've only the shreds of a
conscience, but I can't leave a man whom I'm robbing of a fortune in
a state of semi-slavery, as I daresay he is, and the third reason is
perhaps the strongest of all; but I'm not going to tell it you."

Da Souza blinked his little eyes and looked up with a cunning smile.

"Your first reason," he said, "is a poor sort of one. Do you suppose
I don't have him looked after a bit?--no chance of his getting back to
England, I can tell you. As for the second, he's only half-witted, and
if he was better off he wouldn't know it."

"Even if I gave way to you in this," Trent answered, "the third reason
is strong enough."

Da Souza's face was gloomy. "I know it's no use trying to move you," he
said, "but you're on a silly, dangerous, wild goose-chase."

"And what about yourself?" Trent asked. "I imagine you have some other
purpose in taking this voyage than just to argue with me."

"I am going to see," Da Souza said, "that you do as little mischief as
possible."

Trent walked the length of the deck and back. "Da Souza," he said,
stopping in front of him, "you're a fool to take this voyage. You know
me well enough to be perfectly assured that nothing you could say would
ever influence me. There's more behind it. You've a game of your own to
play over there. Now listen! If I catch you interfering with me in
any way, we shall meet on more equal terms than when you laughed at my
revolver at Walton Lodge! I never was over-scrupulous in those old days,
Da Souza, you know that, and I have a fancy that when I find myself on
African soil again I may find something of the old man in me yet. So
look out, my friend, I've no mind to be trifled with, and, mark me--if
harm comes to that old man, it will be your life for his, as I'm a
living man. You were afraid of me once, Da Souza. I haven't changed so
much as you may think, and the Gold Coast isn't exactly the centre of
civilisation. There! I've said my say. The less I see of you now till we
land, the better I shall be pleased."

He walked away and was challenged by the Doctor to a game of
shuffleboard. Da Souza remained in his chair, his eyes blinking as
though with the sun, and his hands gripping nervously the sides of his
chair.



CHAPTER XXIII

After six weeks' incessant throbbing the great engines were still, and
the Dunottar Castle lay at anchor a mile or two from the African coast
and off the town of Attra. The heat, which in motion had been hard
enough to bear, was positively stifling now. The sun burned down upon
the glassy sea and the white deck till the varnish on the rails cracked
and blistered, and the sweat streamed like water from the faces of the
labouring seamen. Below at the ship's side half a dozen surf boats were
waiting, manned by Kru boys, who alone seemed perfectly comfortable, and
cheerful as usual. All around were preparations for landing--boxes were
being hauled up from the hold, and people were going about in reach of
small parcels and deck-chairs and missing acquaintances. Trent, in white
linen clothes and puggaree, was leaning over the railing, gazing towards
the town, when Da Souza came up to him--

"Last morning, Mr. Trent!"

Trent glanced round and nodded.

"Are you disembarking here?" he asked.

Da Souza admitted the fact. "My brother will meet me," he said. "He is
very afraid of the surf-boats, or he would have come out to the steamer.
You remember him?"

"Yes, I remember him," Trent answered. "He was not the sort of person
one forgets."

"He is a very rough diamond," Da Souza said apologetically. "He has
lived here so long that he has become almost half a native."

"And the other half a thief," Trent muttered.

Da Souza was not in the least offended.

"I am afraid," he admitted, "that his morals are not up to the
Threadneedle Street pitch, eh, Mr. Trent? But he has made quite a great
deal of money. Oh, quite a sum I can assure you. He sends me some over
to invest!"

"Well, if he's carrying on the same old game," Trent remarked, "he ought
to be coining it! By the by, of course he knows exactly where Monty is?"

"It is what I was about to say," Da Souza assented, with a vigorous nod
of the head. "Now, my dear Mr. Trent, I know that you will have your
way. It is no use my trying to dissuade you, so listen. You shall waste
no time in searching for Monty. My brother will tell you exactly where
he is."

Trent hesitated. He would have preferred to have nothing at all to do
with Da Souza, and the very thought of Oom Sam made him shudder. On the
other hand, time was valuable to him and he might waste weeks looking
for the man whom Oom Sam could tell him at once where to find. On the
whole, it was better to accept Da Souza's offer.

"Very well, Da Souza," he said, "I have no time to spare in this country
and the sooner I get back to England the better for all of us. If your
brother knows where Monty is, so much the better for both of us. We will
land together and meet him."

Already the disembarking had commenced. Da Souza and Trent took their
places side by side on the broad, flat-bottomed boat, and soon they were
off shorewards and the familiar song of the Kru boys as they bent over
their oars greeted their ears. The excitement of the last few strokes
was barely over before they sprang upon the beach and were surrounded by
a little crowd, on the outskirts of whom was Oom Sam. Trent was seized
upon by an Englishman who was representing the Bekwando Land and Mining
Investment Company and, before he could regain Da Souza, a few rapid
sentences had passed between the latter and his brother in Portuguese.
Oom Sam advanced to Trent hat in hand--

"Welcome back to Attra, senor?"

Trent nodded curtly.

"Place isn't much changed," he remarked.

"It is very slowly here," Oom Sam said, "that progress is made! The
climate is too horrible. It makes dead sheep of men."

"You seem to hang on pretty well," Trent remarked carelessly. "Been up
country lately?"

"I was trading with the King of Bekwando a month ago," Oom Sam answered.

"Palm-oil and mahogany for vile rum I suppose," Trent said.

The man extended his hands and shrugged his shoulders. The old gesture.

"They will have it," he said. "Shall we go to the hotel, Senor Trent,
and rest?"

Trent nodded, and the three men scrambled up the beach, across an open
space, and gained the shelter of a broad balcony, shielded by a striped
awning which surrounded the plain white stone hotel. A Kru boy welcomed
them with beaming face and fetched them drinks upon a Brummagem tray.
Trent turned to the Englishman who had followed them up.

"To-morrow," he said, "I shall see you about the contracts. My first
business is a private matter with these gentlemen. Will you come up here
and breakfast with me?"

The Englishman, a surveyor from a London office, assented with
enthusiasm.

"I can't offer to put you up," he said gloomily. "Living out here's
beastly. See you in the morning, then."

He strolled away, fanning himself. Trent lit a long cigar.

"I understand," he said turning to Oom Sam, "that old Monty is alive
still. If so, it's little short of a miracle, for I left him with
scarcely a gasp in his body, and I was nearly done myself.

"It was," Oom Sam said, "veree wonderful. The natives who were chasing
you, they found him and then the Englishman whom you met in Bekwando on
his way inland, he rescued him. You see that little white house with a
flagstaff yonder?"

He pointed to a little one-storey building about a mile away along the
coast. Trent nodded.

"That is," Oom Sam said, "a station of the Basle Mission and old Monty
is there. You can go and see him any time you like, but he will not know
you."

"Is he as far gone as that?" Trent asked slowly.

"His mind," Oom Sam said, "is gone. One little flickering spark of life
goes on. A day! a week! who can tell how long?"

"Has he a doctor?" Trent asked.

"The missionary, he is a medical man," Oom Sam explained. "Yet he is
long past the art of medicine."

It seemed to Trent, turning at that moment to relight his cigar, that
a look of subtle intelligence was flashed from one to the other of the
brothers. He paused with the match in his fingers, puzzled, suspicious,
anxious. So there was some scheme hatched already between these precious
pair! It was time indeed that he had come.

"There was something else I wanted to ask," he said a moment or two
later. "What about the man Francis. Has he been heard of lately?"

Oom Sam shook his head.

"Ten months ago," he answered, "a trader from Lulabulu reported having
passed him on his way to the interior. He spoke of visiting Sugbaroo,
another country beyond. If he ventured there, he will surely never
return."

Trent set down his glass without a word, and called to some Kru boys in
the square who carried litters.

"I am going," he said, "to find Monty."



CHAPTER XXIV


An old man, with his face turned to the sea, was making a weary attempt
at digging upon a small potato patch. The blaze of the tropical sun had
become lost an hour or so before in a strange, grey mist, rising not
from the sea, but from the swamps which lay here and there--brilliant,
verdant patches of poison and pestilence. With the mist came a moist,
sticky heat, the air was fetid. Trent wiped the perspiration from his
forehead and breathed hard. This was an evil moment for him.

Monty turned round at the sound of his approaching footsteps. The
two men stood face to face. Trent looked eagerly for some sign of
recognition--none came.

"Don't you know me?" Trent said huskily. "I'm Scarlett Trent--we went
up to Bekwando together, you know. I thought you were dead, Monty, or I
wouldn't have left you."

"Eh! What!"

Monty mumbled for a moment or two and was silent. A look of dull
disappointment struggled with the vacuity of his face. Trent noticed
that his hands were shaking pitifully and his eyes were bloodshot.

"Try and think, Monty," he went on, drawing a step nearer to him. "Don't
you remember what a beastly time we had up in the bush--how they kept us
day after day in that villainous hut because it was a fetish week, and
how after we had got the concessions those confounded niggers followed
us! They meant our lives, Monty, and I don't know how you escaped! Come!
make an effort and pull yourself together. We're rich men now, both of
us. You must come back to England and help me spend a bit."

Monty had recovered a little his power of speech. He leaned over his
spade and smiled benignly at his visitor.

"There was a Trentham in the Guards," he said slowly, "the Honourable
George Trentham, you know, one of poor Abercrombie's sons, but I thought
he was dead. You must dine with me one night at the Travellers'! I've
given up eating myself, but I'm always thirsty."

He looked anxiously away towards the town and began to mumble. Trent was
in despair. Presently he began again.

"I used to belong to the Guards,--always dined there till Jacques left.
Afterwards the cooking was beastly, and--I can't quite remember where
I went then. You see--I think I must be getting old. I don't remember
things. Between you and me," he sidled a little closer to Trent, "I
think I must have got into a bit of a scrape of some sort--I feel as
though there was a blank somewhere...."

Again he became unintelligible. Trent was silent for several minutes.
He could not understand that strained, anxious look which crept into
Monty's face every time he faced the town. Then he made his last effort.

"Monty, do you remember this?"

Zealously guarded, yet a little worn at the edges and faded, he drew the
picture from its case and held it before the old man's blinking eyes.
There was a moment of suspense, then a sharp, breathless cry which ended
in a wail.

"Take it away," Monty moaned. "I lost it long ago. I don't want to see
it! I don't want to think."

"I have come," Trent said, with an unaccustomed gentleness in his tone,
"to make you think. I want you to remember that that is a picture of
your daughter. You are rich now and there is no reason why you should
not come back to her. Don't you understand, Monty?"

It was a grey, white face, shrivelled and pinched, weak eyes without
depth, a vapid smile in which there was no meaning. Trent, carried away
for a moment by an impulse of pity, felt only disappointment at the
hopelessness of his task. He would have been honestly glad to have
taken the Monty whom he had known back to England, but not this man!
For already that brief flash of awakened life seemed to have died away.
Monty's head was wagging feebly and he was casting continually little,
furtive glances towards the town.

"Please go away," he said. "I don't know you and you give me a pain in
my head. Don't you know what it is to feel a buzz, buzz, buzzing inside?
I can't remember things. It's no use trying."

"Monty, why do you look so often that way?" Trent said quietly. "Is some
one coming out from the town to see you?"

Monty threw a quick glance at him and Trent sighed. For the glance was
full of cunning, the low cunning of the lunatic criminal.

"No one, no one," he said hastily. "Who should come to see me? I'm only
poor Monty. Poor old Monty's got no friends. Go away and let me dig."

Trent walked a few paces apart, and passed out of the garden to a low,
shelving bank and looked downward where a sea of glass rippled on to the
broad, firm sands. What a picture of desolation! The grey, hot mist,
the whitewashed cabin, the long, ugly potato patch, the weird, pathetic
figure of that old man from whose brain the light of life had surely
passed for ever. And yet Trent was puzzled. Monty's furtive glance
inland, his half-frightened, half-cunning denial of any anticipated
visit suggested that there was some one else who was interested in his
existence, and some one too with whom he shared a secret. Trent lit a
cigar and sat down upon the sandy turf. Monty resumed his digging. Trent
watched him through the leaves of a stunted tree, underneath which he
had thrown himself.

For an hour or more nothing happened. Trent smoked, and Monty, who had
apparently forgotten all about his visitor, plodded away amongst the
potato furrows, with every now and then a long, searching look towards
the town. Then there came a black speck stealing across the broad
rice-field and up the steep hill, a speck which in time took to itself
the semblance of a man, a Kru boy, naked as he was born save for a
ragged loin-cloth, and clutching something in his hand. He was invisible
to Trent until he was close at hand; it was Monty whose changed attitude
and deportment indicated the approach of something interesting. He had
relinquished his digging and, after a long, stealthy glance towards the
house, had advanced to the extreme boundary of the potato patch. His
behaviour here for the first time seemed to denote the hopeless lunatic.
He swung his long arms backward and forwards, cracking his fingers, and
talked unintelligibly to himself, hoarse, guttural murmurings without
sense or import. Trent changed his place and for the first time saw the
Kru boy. His face darkened and an angry exclamation broke from his lips.
It was something like this which he had been expecting.

The Kru boy drew nearer and nearer. Finally he stood upright on
the rank, coarse grass and grinned at Monty, whose lean hands were
outstretched towards him. He fumbled for a moment in his loin-cloth.
Then he drew out a long bottle and handed it up. Trent stepped out as
Monty's nervous fingers were fumbling with the cork. He made a grab at
the boy who glided off like an eel. Instantly he whipped out a revolver
and covered him.

"Come here," he cried.

The boy shook his head. "No understand."

"Who sent you here with that filthy stuff?" he asked sternly. "You'd
best answer me."

The Kru boy, shrinking away from the dark muzzle of that motionless
revolver, was spellbound with fear. He shook his head.

"No understand."

There was a flash of light, a puff of smoke, a loud report. The Kru boy
fell forward upon his face howling with fear. Monty ran off towards the
house mumbling to himself.

"The next time," Trent said coolly, "I shall fire at you instead of at
the tree. Remember I have lived out here and I know all about you and
your kind. You can understand me very well if you choose, and you've
just got to. Who sends you here with that vile stuff?"

"Massa, I tell! Massa Oom Sam, he send me!"

"And what is the stuff?"

"Hamburgh gin, massa! very good liquor! Please, massa, point him pistol
the other way."

Trent took up the flask, smelt its contents and threw it away with a
little exclamation of disgust.

"How often have you been coming here on this errand?" he asked sternly.

"Most every day, massa--when him Mr. Price away."

Trent nodded.

"Very good," he said. "Now listen to me. If ever I catch you round here
again or anywhere else on such an errand, I'll shoot you like a dog. Now
be off."

The boy bounded away with a broad grin of relief. Trent walked up to the
house and asked for the missionary's wife. She came to him soon, in what
was called the parlour. A frail, anaemic-looking woman with tired eyes
and weary expression.

"I'm sorry to trouble you, Mrs. Price," Trent said, plunging at once
into his subject, "but I want to speak to you about this old man, Monty.
You've had him some time now, haven't you?"

"About four years," she answered. "Captain Francis left him with
my husband; I believe he found him in one of the villages inland, a
prisoner."

Trent nodded.

"He left you a little money with him, I believe."

The woman smiled faintly.

"It was very little," she said, "but such as it is, we have never
touched it. He eats scarcely anything and we consider that the little
work he has done has about paid us for keeping him."

"Did you know," Trent asked bluntly, "that he had been a drunkard?"

"Captain Francis hinted as much," the woman answered. "That was one
reason why he wanted to leave him with us. He knew that we did not allow
anything in the house."

"It was a pity," Trent said, "that you could not have watched him a
little more out of it. Why, his brain is sodden with drink now!"

The woman was obviously honest in her amazement. "How can that be?" she
exclaimed. "He has absolutely no money and he never goes off our land."

"He has no need," Trent answered bitterly. "There are men in Attra who
want him dead, and they have been doing their best to hurry him off. I
caught a Kru boy bringing him gin this afternoon. Evidently it has been
a regular thing."

"I am very sorry indeed to hear this," the woman said, "and I am sure
my husband will be too. He will feel that, in a certain measure, he has
betrayed Captain Francis's trust. At the same time we neither of us had
any idea that anything of this sort was to be feared, or we would have
kept watch."

"You cannot be blamed," Trent said. "I am satisfied that you knew
nothing about it. Now I am going to let you into a secret. Monty is a
rich man if he had his rights, and I want to help him to them. I shall
take him back to England with me, but I can't leave for a week or so. If
you can keep him till then and have some one to watch him day and night,
I'll give your husband a hundred pounds for your work here, and build
you a church. It's all right! Don't look as though I were mad. I'm a
very rich man, that's all, and I shan't miss the money, but I want
to feel that Monty is safe till I can start back to England. Will you
undertake this?"

"Yes," the woman answered promptly, "we will. We'll do our honest best."

Trent laid a bank-note upon the table.

"Just to show I'm in earnest," he remarked, rising. "I shall be
up-country for about a month. Look after the old chap well and you'll
never regret it."

Trent went thoughtfully back to the town. He had committed himself now
to a definite course of action. He had made up his mind to take Monty
back with him to England and face the consequences.



CHAPTER XXV


On the summit of a little knoll, with a pipe between his teeth and
his back against a palm-tree, Trent was lounging away an hour of the
breathless night. Usually a sound sleeper, the wakefulness, which had
pursued him from the instant his head had touched his travelling pillow
an hour or so back, was not only an uncommon occurrence, but one which
seemed proof against any effort on his part to overcome it. So he had
risen and stolen away from the little camp where his companions lay
wrapped in heavy slumber. They had closed their eyes in a dense
and tropical darkness--so thick indeed that they had lit a fire,
notwithstanding the stifling heat, to remove that vague feeling of
oppression which chaos so complete seemed to bring with it. Its embers
burnt now with a faint and sickly glare in the full flood of yellow
moonlight which had fallen upon the country. From this point of vantage
Trent could trace backwards their day's march for many miles, the white
posts left by the surveyor even were visible, and in the background rose
the mountains of Bekwando. It had been a hard week's work for Trent. He
had found chaos, discontent, despair. The English agent of the Bekwando
Land Company was on the point of cancelling his contract, the surveyors
were spending valuable money without making any real attempt to start
upon their undoubtedly difficult task. Everywhere the feeling seemed to
be that the prosecution of his schemes was an impossibility. The road
was altogether in the clouds. Trent was flatly told that the labour
they required was absolutely unprocurable. Fortunately Trent knew the
country, and he was a man of resource. From the moment when he had
appeared upon the spot, things had begun to right themselves. He had
found Oom Sam established as a sort of task-master and contractor, and
had promptly dismissed him, with the result that the supply of Kru boys
was instantly doubled. He had found other sources of labour and
started them at once on clearing work, scornfully indifferent to the
often-expressed doubts of the English surveyor as to possibility of
making the road at all. He had chosen overseers with that swift and
intuitive insight into character which in his case amounted almost to
genius. With a half-sheet of notepaper and a pencil, he had mapped out a
road which had made one, at least, of the two surveyors thoughtful, and
had largely increased his respect for the English capitalist. Now he was
on his way back from a tour almost to Bekwando itself by the route of
the proposed road. Already the work of preparation had begun. Hundreds
of natives left in their track were sawing down palm-trees, cutting away
the bush, digging and making ready everywhere for that straight, wide
thoroughfare which was to lead from Bekwando village to the sea-coast.
Cables as to his progress had already been sent back to London. Apart
from any other result, Trent knew that he had saved the Syndicate a
fortune by his journey here.

The light of the moon grew stronger--the country lay stretched out
before him like a map. With folded arms and a freshly-lit pipe Trent
leaned with his back against the tree and fixed eyes. At first he saw
nothing but that road, broad and white, stretching to the horizon and
thronged with oxen-drawn wagons. Then the fancy suddenly left him and
a girl's face seemed to be laughing into his--a face which was ever
changing, gay and brilliant one moment, calm and seductively beautiful
the next. He smoked his pipe furiously, perplexed and uneasy. One moment
the face was Ernestine's, the next it was Monty's little girl laughing
up at him from the worn and yellow tin-type. The promise of the one--had
it been fulfilled in the woman? At least he knew that here was the one
great weakness of his life. The curious flood of sentiment, which
had led him to gamble for the child's picture, had merged with equal
suddenness into passion at the coming of her later presentment. High
above all his plans for the accumulation of power and wealth, he set
before him now a desire which had become the moving impulse of his
life--a desire primitive but overmastering--the desire of a strong man
for the woman he loves. In London he had scarcely dared admit so much
even to himself. Here, in this vast solitude, he was more master of
himself--dreams which seemed to him the most beautiful and the most
daring which he had ever conceived, filled his brain and stirred his
senses till the blood in his veins seemed flowing to a new and wonderful
music. Those were wonderful moments for him.

His pipe was nearly out, and a cooler breeze was stealing over the
plain. After all, perhaps an hour or so's sleep would be possible now.
He stretched himself and yawned, cast one more glance across the moonlit
plain, and then stood suddenly still, stiffened into an attitude of
breathless interest. Yonder, between two lines of shrubs, were moving
bodies--men, footsore and weary, crawling along with slow, painful
movements; one at least of them was a European, and even at that
distance Trent could tell that they were in grievous straits. He felt
for his revolver, and, finding that it was in his belt, descended the
hill quickly towards them.

With every step which he took he could distinguish them more plainly.
There were five Kru boys, a native of a tribe which he did not
recognise, and a European who walked with reeling footsteps, and who, it
was easy to see, was on the point of exhaustion. Soon they saw him, and
a feeble shout greeted his approach. Trent was within hailing distance
before he recognised the European. Then, with a little exclamation of
surprise, he saw that it was Captain Francis.

They met face to face in a moment, but Francis never recognised him. His
eyes were bloodshot, a coarse beard disguised his face, and his clothes
hung about him in rags. Evidently he was in a terrible plight. When he
spoke his voice sounded shrill and cracked.

"We are starving men," he said; "can you help us?"

"Of course we can," Trent answered quickly. "This way. We've plenty of
stores."

The little party stumbled eagerly after him. In a few moments they were
at the camp. Trent roused his companions, packages were hastily undone
and a meal prepared. Scarcely a word was said or a question asked. One
or two of the Kru boys seemed on the verge of insanity--Francis himself
was hysterical and faint. Trent boiled a kettle and made some beef-tea
himself. The first mouthful Francis was unable to swallow. His throat
had swollen and his eyes were hideously bloodshot. Trent, who had seen
men before in dire straits, fed him from a spoon and forced brandy
between his lips. Certainly, at the time, he never stopped to consider
that he was helping back to life the man who in all the world was most
likely to do him ill.

"Better?" he asked presently.

"Much. What luck to find you. What are you after--gold?"

Trent shook his head.

"Not at present. We're planning out the new road from Attra to
Bekwando."

Francis looked up with surprise.

"Never heard of it," he said; "but there's trouble ahead for you. They
are dancing the war-dance at Bekwando, and the King has been shut up for
three days with the priest and never opened his mouth. We were on our
way from the interior, and relied upon them for food and drink. They've
always been friendly, but this time we barely escaped with our lives."

Trent's face grew serious. This was bad news for him, and he was
thankful that they had not carried out their first plan and commenced
their prospecting at Bekwando village.

"We have a charter," he said, "and, if necessary, we must fight. I'm
glad to be prepared though."

"A charter!" Francis pulled himself together and looked curiously at the
man who was still bending over him.

"Great Heavens!" he exclaimed, "why, you are Scarlett Trent, the man
whom I met with poor Villiers in Bekwando years ago."

Trent nodded.

"We waited for you," he said, "to witness our concession. I thought that
you would remember."

"I thought," Francis said slowly, "that there was something familiar
about you.... I remember it all now. You were gambling with poor old
Monty for his daughter's picture against a bottle of brandy."

Trent winced a little.

"You have an excellent memory," he said drily.

Francis raised himself a little, and a fiercer note crept into his tone.

"It is coming back to me," he said. "I remember more about you now,
Scarlett Trent. You are the man who left his partner to die in a jungle,
that you might rob him of his share in the concession. Oh yes, you see
my memory is coming back! I have an account against you, my man."

"It's a lie!" said Trent passionately. "When I left him, I honestly
believed him to be a dead man."


"How many people will believe that?" Francis scoffed. "I shall take
Monty with me to England. I have finished with this country for
awhile--and then--and then--"

He was exhausted, and sank back speechless. Trent sat and watched him,
smoking in thoughtful silence. They two were a little apart from the
others, and Francis was fainting. A hand upon his throat--a drop from
that phial in the medicine-chest--and his faint would carry him into
eternity. And still Trent sat and smoked.



CHAPTER XXVI


It was Trent himself who kept watch through that last long hour of
moonlit darkness till the wan morning broke. With its faint, grey
streaks came the savages of Bekwando, crawling up in a semicircle
through the long, rough grass, then suddenly, at a signal, bounding
upright with spears poised in their hands--an ugly sight in the dim dawn
for men chilled with the moist, damp air and only half-awake. But Trent
had not been caught napping. His stealthy call to arms had aroused them
in time at least to crawl behind some shelter and grip their rifles. The
war-cry of the savages was met with a death-like quiet--there were no
signs of confusion nor terror. A Kru boy, who called out with fright,
was felled to the ground by Trent with a blow which would have staggered
an ox. With their rifles in hand, and every man stretched flat upon
the ground, Trent's little party lay waiting. Barely a hundred yards
separated them, yet there was no sign of life from the camp. The long
line of savages advanced a few steps more, their spears poised above
their heads, their half-naked forms showing more distinctly as they
peered forward through the grey gloom, savage and ferocious. The white
men were surely sleeping still. They were as near now as they could get.
There was a signal and then a wild chorus of yells. They threw aside all
disguise and darted forward, the still morning air hideous with their
cry of battle. Then, with an awful suddenness, their cry became the cry
of death, for out from the bushes belched a yellow line of fire as the
rifles of Trent and his men rang out their welcome. A dozen at least of
the men of Bekwando looked never again upon the faces of their wives,
the rest hesitated. Trent, in whom was the love of fighting, made then
his first mistake. He called for a sally, and rushed out, revolver in
hand, upon the broken line. Half the blacks ran away like rabbits; the
remainder, greatly outnumbering Trent and his party, stood firm. In a
moment it was hand-to-hand fighting, and Trent was cursing already the
bravado which had brought him out to the open.

For a while it was a doubtful combat. Then, with a shout of triumph,
the chief, a swarthy, thick-set man of herculean strength, recognised
Francis and sprang upon him. The blow which he aimed would most surely
have killed him, but that Trent, with the butt-end of a rifle, broke
its force a little. Then, turning round, he blew out the man's brains as
Francis sank backwards. A dismal yell from his followers was the chief's
requiem; then they turned and fled, followed by a storm of bullets as
Trent's men found time to reload. More than one leaped into the air and
fell forward upon their faces. The fight was over, and, when they came
to look round, Francis was the only man who had suffered.

Morning had dawned even whilst they had been fighting. Little wreaths
of mist were curling upwards, and the sun shone down with a cloudless,
golden light, every moment more clear as the vapours melted away.
Francis was lying upon his face groaning heavily; the Kru boys, to whom
he was well known, were gathered in a little circle around him. Trent
brushed them on one side and made a brief examination. Then he had
him carried carefully into one of the tents while he went for his
medicine-chest.

Preparations for a start were made, but Trent was thoughtful. For the
second time within a few hours this man, in whose power it was to ruin
him, lay at his mercy. That he had saved his life went for nothing. In
the heat of battle there had been no time for thought or calculation.
Trent had simply obeyed the generous instinct of a brave man whose
blood was warm with the joy of fighting. Now it was different. Trent was
seldom sentimental, but from the first he had had an uneasy presentiment
concerning this man who lay now within his power and so near to death.
A mutual antipathy seemed to have been born between them from the first
moment when they had met in the village of Bekwando. As though it were
yesterday, he remembered that leave-taking and Francis's threatening
words. Trent had always felt that the man was his enemy--certainly the
power to do him incalculable harm, if not to altogether ruin him, was
his now. And he would not hesitate about it. Trent knew that, although
broadly speaking he was innocent of any desire to harm or desert Monty,
no power on earth would ever convince Francis of that. Appearances were,
and always must be, overwhelmingly against him. Without interference
from any one he had already formulated plans for quietly putting Monty
in his rightful position, and making over to him his share in the
Bekwando Syndicate. But to arrange this without catastrophe would need
skill and tact; interference from any outside source would be fatal,
and Francis meant to interfere--nothing would stop him. Trent walked
backwards and forwards with knitted brows, glancing every now and then
at the unconscious man. Francis would certainly interfere if he were
allowed to recover!



CHAPTER XXVII


A fortnight afterwards Trent rode into Attra, pale, gaunt, and
hollow-eyed. The whole history of those days would never be known by
another man! Upon Trent they had left their mark for ever. Every hour of
his time in this country he reckoned of great value--yet he had devoted
fourteen days to saving the life of John Francis. Such days too--and
such nights! They had carried him sometimes in a dead stupor, sometimes
a raving madman, along a wild bush-track across rivers and swamps
into the town of Garba, where years ago a Congo trader, who had made a
fortune, had built a little white-washed hospital! He was safe now, but
surely never a man before had walked so near the "Valley of the Shadow
of Death." A single moment's vigilance relaxed, a blanket displaced,
a dose of brandy forgotten, and Trent might have walked this life a
multi-millionaire, a peer, a little god amongst his fellows, freed for
ever from all anxiety. But Francis was tended as never a man was tended
before. Trent himself had done his share of the carrying, ever keeping
his eyes fixed upon the death-lit face of their burden, every ready to
fight off the progress of the fever and ague, as the twitching lips or
shivering limbs gave warning of a change. For fourteen days he had not
slept; until they had reached Garba his clothes had never been changed
since they had started upon their perilous journey. As he rode into
Attra he reeled a little in his saddle, and he walked into the office of
the Agent more like a ghost than a man.

Two men, Cathcart and his assistant, who was only a boy, were lounging
in low chairs. As he entered they looked up, exchanging quick, startled
glances. Then Cathcart gave vent to a little exclamation.

"Great Heavens, Trent, what have you been doing?" Trent sank into a
chair. "Get me some wine," he said. "I am all right but over-tired."

Cathcart poured champagne into a tumbler. Trent emptied it at a gulp
and asked for biscuits. The man's recuperative powers were wonderful.
Already the deathly whiteness was passing from his cheeks.

"Where is Da Souza?" he asked.

"Gone back to England," Cathcart answered, looking out of the open
casement shaded from the sun by the sloping roof. "His steamer started
yesterday."

Trent was puzzled. He scarcely understood this move.

"Did he give any reason?"

Cathcart smoked for a moment in silence. After all though a disclosure
would be unpleasant, it was inevitable and as well now as any time. "I
think," Cathcart said, "that he has gone to try and sell his shares in
the Bekwando concessions."

"Gone--to--sell--his--shares!" Trent repeated slowly. "You mean to say
that he has gone straight from here to put a hundred thousand Bekwando
shares upon the market?"

Cathcart nodded.

He said so!

"And why? Did he tell you that?"

"He has come to the conclusion," Cathcart said, "that the scheme is
impracticable altogether and the concessions worthless. He is going to
get what he can for his shares while he has the chance."

Trent drained his tumbler and lit a cigar. "So much for Da Souza," he
said. "And now I should like to know, Mr. Stanley Cathcart, what the
devil you and your assistant are doing shacking here in the cool of the
day when you are the servants of the Bekwando Company and there's work
to be done of the utmost importance? The whole place seems to be asleep.
Where's your labour? There's not a soul at work. We planned exactly
when to start the road. What the mischief do you mean by wasting a
fortnight?"

Cathcart coughed and was obviously ill-at-ease, but he answered with
some show of dignity.

"I have come to the conclusion, Mr. Trent, that the making of the road
is impracticable and useless. There is insufficient labour and poor
tools, no satisfactory method of draining the swampy country, and
further, I don't think any one would work with the constant fear of an
attack from those savages."

"So that's your opinion, is it?" Trent said grimly.

"That is my opinion," Cathcart answered. "I have embodied it in a report
which I despatched to the secretary of the Company by Mr. Da Souza."

Trent rose and opened the door which swung into the little room.

"Out you go!" he said fiercely.

Cathcart looked at him in blank astonishment.

"What do you mean?" he exclaimed. "These are my quarters!"

"They're nothing of the sort," Trent answered. "They are the
headquarters in this country of the Bekwando Company, with which you
have nothing to do! Out you go!"

"Don't talk rubbish!" Cathcart said angrily. "I'm the authorised and
properly appointed surveyor here!"

"You're a liar!" Trent answered, "you've no connection at all with the
Company! you're dismissed, sir, for incompetence and cowardice, and
if you're not off the premises in three minutes it'll be the worse for
you!"

"You--you--haven't the power to do this," Cathcart stuttered.

Trent laughed.

"We'll see about that," he said. "I never had much faith in you, sir,
and I guess you only got the job by a rig. But out you go now, sharp. If
there's anything owing you, you can claim it in London.

"There are all my clothes--" Cathcart began.

Trent laid his hands upon his shoulders and threw him softly outside.

"I'll send your clothes to the hotel," he said. "Take my advice, young
man, and keep out of my sight till you can find a steamer to take you
where they'll pay you for doing nothing. You're the sort of man who
irritates me and it's a nasty climate for getting angry in!"

Cathcart picked himself up. "Well, I should like to know who's going to
make your road," he said spitefully.

"I'll make it myself," Trent roared. "Don't you think a little thing
like some stupid laws of science will stand in my way, or the way of
a man who knows his own mind. I tell you I'll level that road from the
tree there which we marked as the starting-point to the very centre of
Bekwando."

He slammed the door and re-entered the room. The boy was there, sitting
upon the office stool hard at work with a pair of compasses.

"What the devil are you doing there?" Trent asked. "Out you go with your
master!"

The boy looked up. He had a fair, smooth face, but lips like Trent's
own.

"I'm just thinking about that first bend by Kurru corner, sir," he said,
"I'm not sure about the level."

Trent's face relaxed. He held out his hand.

"My boy," he said, "I'll make your fortune as sure as my name is
Scarlett Trent!"

"We'll make that road anyway," the boy answered, with a smile.

     *           *           *           *           *

After a rest Trent climbed the hill to the Basle Mission House. There
was no sign of Monty on the potato patch, and the woman who opened the
door started when she saw him.

"How is he?" Trent asked quickly.

The woman looked at him in wonder.

"Why, he's gone, sir--gone with the Jewish gentleman who said that you
had sent him."

"Where to?" Trent asked quickly.

"Why, to England in the Ophir!" the woman answered.

Then Trent began to feel that, after all, the struggle of his life was
only beginning.



CHAPTER XXVIII


It was then perhaps that Trent fought the hardest battle of his life.
The start was made with only a dozen Kru boys, Trent himself, stripped
to the shirt, labouring amongst them spade in hand. In a week the
fishing boats were deserted, every one was working on the road. The
labour was immense, but the wages were magnificent. Real progress was
made and the boy's calculations were faultless. Trent used the cable
freely.

"Have dismissed Cathcart for incompetence--road started--progress
magnificent," he wired one week, and shortly afterwards a message
came back--"Cathcart cables resigned--scheme impossible--shares
dropping--wire reply."

Trent clenched his fist, and his language made the boy, who had never
heard him violent, look up in surprise. Then he put on his coat and
walked out to the cable station.

"Cathcart lies. I dismissed him for cowardice and incompetence. The
road is being made and I pledge my word that it will be finished in six
months. Let our friends sell no shares."

Then Trent went back and, hard as he had worked before, he surpassed it
all now. Far and wide he sent ever with the same inquiry--for labour and
stores. He spent money like water, but he spent from a bottomless purse.
Day after day Kru boys, natives and Europeans down on their luck, came
creeping in. Far away across the rolling plain the straight belt of
flint-laid road-bed stretched to the horizon, one gang in advance
cutting turf, another beating in the small stones. The boy grew thin and
bronzed, Trent and he toiled as though their lives hung upon the work.
So they went on till the foremost gang came close to the forests, beyond
which lay the village of Bekwando.

Then began the period of the greatest anxiety, for Trent and the boy and
a handful of the others knew what would have sent half of the natives
flying from their work if a whisper had got abroad. A few soldiers were
drafted down from the Fort, arms were given out to all those who could
be trusted to use them and by night men watched by the great red fires
which flared along the path of their labours. Trent and the boy took it
by turns to watch, their revolvers loaded by their side, and their eyes
ever turned towards that dark line of forest whence came nothing but the
singing of night birds and the calling of wild animals. Yet Trent would
have no caution relaxed, the more they progressed, the more vigilant the
watch they kept. At last came signs of the men of Bekwando. In the small
hours of the morning a burning spear came hurtling through the darkness
and fell with a hiss and a quiver in the ground, only a few feet from
where Trent and the boy lay. Trent stamped on it hastily and gave no
alarm. But the boy stole round with a whispered warning to those who
could be trusted to fight.

Yet no attack came on that night or the next; on the third Trent and the
boy sat talking and the latter frankly owned that he was nervous.

"It's not that I'm afraid," he said, smiling. "You know it isn't that!
But all day long I've had the same feeling--we're being watched! I'm
perfectly certain that the beggars are skulking round the borders of the
forest there. Before morning we shall hear from them."

"If they mean to fight," Trent said, "the sooner they come out the
better. I'd send a messenger to the King only I'm afraid they'd kill
him. Oom Sam won't come! I've sent for him twice."

The boy was looking backwards and forwards along the long line of
disembowelled earth.

"Trent," he said suddenly, "you're a wonderful man. Honestly, this road
is a marvellous feat for untrained labour and with such rotten odds
and ends of machinery. I don't know what experience you'd had of
road-making."

"None," Trent interjected.

"Then it's wonderful!"

Trent smiled upon the boy with such a smile as few people had ever seen
upon his lips.

"There's a bit of credit to you, Davenant," he said. "I'd never have
been able to figure out the levelling alone. Whether I go down or not,
this shall be a good step up on the ladder for you."

The boy laughed.

"I've enjoyed it more than anything else in my life," he said. "Fancy
the difference between this and life in a London office. It's been
magnificent! I never dreamed what life was like before."

Trent looked thoughtfully into the red embers. "You had the mail
to-day," the boy continued. "How were things in London?"

"Not so bad," Trent answered. "Cathcart has been doing all the harm
he can, but it hasn't made a lot of difference. My cables have been
published and our letters will be in print by now, and the photographs
you took of the work. That was a splendid idea!"

"And the shares?"

"Down a bit--not much. Da Souza seems to be selling out carefully a
few at a time, and my brokers are buying most of them. Pound shares are
nineteen shillings to-day. They'll be between three and four pounds, a
week after I get back."

"And when shall you go?" the boy asked.

"Directly I get a man out here I can trust and things are fixed with his
Majesty the King of Bekwando! We'll both go then, and you shall spend a
week or two with me in London."

The boy laughed.

"What a time we'll have!" he cried. "Say, do you know your way round?"

Trent shook his head.

"I'm afraid not," he said. "You'll have to be my guide."

"Right you are," was the cheerful answer. "I'll take you to Jimmy's, and
the Empire, and down the river, and to a match at Lord's, and to Henley
if we're in time, and I'll take you to see my aunt! You'll like her."

Trent nodded.

"I'll expect to," he said. "Is she anything like you?"

"Much cleverer," the boy said, "but we've been great chums all our life.
She's the cleverest woman ever knew, earns lots of money writing for
newspapers.

"Here, you've dropped your cigar, Trent."

Trent groped for it on the ground with shaking fingers.

"Writes for newspapers?" he repeated slowly. "I wonder--her name isn't
Davenant, is it?"

The boy shook his head.

"No, she's my mother's cousin really--only I call her Aunty, we
always got on so. She isn't really much older than me, her name is
Wendermott--Ernestine Wendermott. Ernestine's a pretty name, don't you
think?"

Trent rose to his feet, muttering something about a sound in the forest.
He stood with his back to the boy looking steadily at the dark line of
outlying scrub, seeing in reality nothing, yet keenly anxious that the
red light of the dancing flames should not fall upon his face. The boy
leaned on his elbow and looked in the same direction. He was puzzled by
a fugitive something which he had seen in Trent's face.

Afterwards Trent liked sometimes to think that it was the sound of her
name which had saved them all. For, whereas his gaze had been idle at
first, it became suddenly fixed and keen. He stooped down and whispered
something to the boy. The word was passed along the line of sleeping men
and one by one they dropped back into the deep-cut trench. The red fire
danced and crackled--only a few yards outside the flame-lit space came
the dark forms of men creeping through the rough grass like snakes.



CHAPTER XXIX

The attack was a fiasco, the fighting was all over in ten minutes. A
hundred years ago the men of Bekwando, who went naked and knew no drink
more subtle than palm wine had one virtue--bravery. But civilisation
pressing upon their frontiers had brought Oom Sam greedy for ivory and
gold, and Oom Sam had bought rum and strong waters. The nerve of the
savage had gone, and his muscle had become a flaccid thing. When they
had risen from the long grass with a horrid yell and had rushed in upon
the hated intruders with couched spears only to be met by a blinding
fire of Lee-Metford and revolver bullets their bravery vanished like
breath from the face of a looking-glass. They hesitated, and a rain of
bullets wrought terrible havoc amongst their ranks. On every side the
fighting-men of Bekwando went down like ninepins--about half a dozen
only sprang forward for a hand-to-hand fight, the remainder, with
shrieks of despair, fled back to the shelter of the forest, and not one
of them again ever showed a bold front to the white man. Trent, for a
moment or two, was busy, for a burly savage, who had marked him out by
the light of the gleaming flames, had sprung upon him spear in hand, and
behind him came others. The first one dodged Trent's bullet and was upon
him, when the boy shot him through the cheek and he went rolling over
into the fire, with a death-cry which rang through the camp high above
the din of fighting, another behind him Trent shot himself, but the
third was upon him before he could draw his revolver and the two rolled
over struggling fiercely, at too close quarters for weapons, yet with
the thirst for blood fiercely kindled in both of them. For a moment
Trent had the worst of it--a blow fell upon his forehead (the scar of
which he never lost) and the wooden club was brandished in the air for
a second and more deadly stroke. But at that moment Trent leaped up,
dashed his unloaded revolver full in the man's face and, while he
staggered with the shock, a soldier from behind shot him through the
heart. Trent saw him go staggering backwards and then himself sank down,
giddy with the blow he had received. Afterwards he knew that he must
have fainted, for when he opened his eyes the sun was up and the men
were strolling about looking at the dead savages who lay thick in the
grass. Trent sat up and called for water.

"Any one hurt?" he asked the boy who brought him some. The boy grinned,
but shook his head.

"Plenty savages killed," he said, "no white man or Kru boy."

"Where's Mr. Davenant," Trent asked suddenly.

The boy looked round and shook his head.

"No seen Mr. Dav'nant," he said. "Him fight well though! Him not hurt!"

Trent stood up with a sickening fear at his heart. He knew very well
that if the boy was about and unhurt he would have been at his side. Up
and down the camp he strode in vain. At last one of the Kru boys thought
he remembered seeing a great savage bounding away with some one on his
back. He had thought that it was one of their wounded--it might have
been the boy. Trent, with a sickening sense of horror, realised the
truth. The boy had been taken prisoner.

Even then he preserved his self-control to a marvellous degree. First of
all he gave directions for the day's work--then he called for volunteers
to accompany him to the village. There was no great enthusiasm. To fight
in trenches against a foe who had no cover nor any firearms was rather
a different thing from bearding them in their own lair. Nevertheless,
about twenty men came forward, including a guide, and Trent was
satisfied.

They started directly after breakfast and for five hours fought their
way through dense undergrowth and shrubs with never a sign of a path,
though here and there were footsteps and broken boughs. By noon some of
the party were exhausted and lagged behind, an hour later a long line of
exhausted stragglers were following Trent and the native guide. Yet to
all their petitions for a rest Trent was adamant. Every minute's delay
might lessen the chance of saving the boy, even now they might have
begun their horrible tortures. The thought inspired him with fresh
vigour. He plunged on with long, reckless strides which soon placed a
widening gap between him and the rest of the party.

By degrees he began to recollect his whereabouts. The way grew less
difficult--occasionally there were signs of a path. Every moment the
soft, damp heat grew more intense and clammy. Every time he touched
his forehead he found it dripping. But of these things he recked very
little, for every step now brought him nearer to the end of his journey.
Faintly, through the midday silence he could hear the clanging of copper
instruments and the weird mourning cry of the defeated natives. A few
more steps and he was almost within sight of them. He slackened his
pace and approached more stealthily until only a little screen of bushes
separated him from the village and, peering through them, he saw a sight
which made his blood run cold within him.

They had the boy! He was there, in that fantastic circle bound hand and
foot, but so far as he could see, at present unhurt. His face was turned
to Trent, white and a little scared, but his lips were close-set and he
uttered no sound. By his side stood a man with a native knife dancing
around and singing--all through the place were sounds of wailing and
lamentation, and in front of his hut the King was lying, with an empty
bottle by his side, drunk and motionless. Trent's anger grew fiercer
as he watched. Was this a people to stand in his way, to claim the
protection and sympathy of foreign governments against their own
bond, that they might keep their land for misuse and their bodies for
debauchery? He looked backwards and listened. As yet there was no sign
of any of his followers and there was no telling how long these antics
were to continue. Trent looked to his revolver and set his teeth. There
must be no risk of evil happening to the boy. He walked boldly out into
the little space and called to them in a loud voice.

There was a wild chorus of fear. The women fled to the huts--the men ran
like rats to shelter. But the executioner of Bekwando, who was a fetish
man and holy, stood his ground and pointed his knife at Trent. Two
others, seeing him firm, also remained. The moment was critical.

"Cut those bonds!" Trent ordered, pointing to the boy.

The fetish man waved his hands and drew a step nearer to Trent, his
knife outstretched. The other two backed him up. Already a spear was
couched.

Trent's revolver flashed out in the sunlight.

"Cut that cord!" he ordered again.

The fetish man poised his knife. Trent hesitated no longer, but shot him
deliberately through the heart. He jumped into the air and fell forward
upon his face with a death-cry which seemed to find an echo from every
hut and from behind every tree of Bekwando. It was like the knell of
their last hope, for had he not told them that he was fetish, that his
body was proof against those wicked fires and that if the white men
came, he himself would slay them! And now he was dead! The last barrier
of their superstitious hope was broken down. Even the drunken King sat
up and made strange noises.

Trent stooped down and, picking up the knife, cut the bonds which had
bound the boy. He staggered up to his feet with a weak, little laugh.

"I knew you'd find me," he said. "Did I look awfully frightened?"

Trent patted him on the shoulder. "If I hadn't been in time," he said,
"I'd have shot every man here and burned their huts over their
heads. Pick up the knife, old chap, quick. I think those fellows mean
mischief."

The two warriors who had stood by the priest were approaching, but when
they came within a few yards of Trent's revolver they dropped on their
knees. It was their token of submission. Trent nodded, and a moment
afterwards the reason for their non-resistance was made evident. The
remainder of the expedition came filing into the little enclosure.

Trent lit a cigar and sat down on a block of wood to consider what
further was best to be done. In the meantime the natives were bringing
yams to the white men with timid gestures. After a brief rest Trent
called them to follow him. He walked across to the dwelling of the
fetish man and tore down the curtain of dried grass which hung before
the opening. Even then it was so dark inside that they had to light a
torch before they could see the walls, and the stench was horrible.

A little chorus of murmurs escaped the lips of the Europeans as the
interior became revealed to them. Opposite the door was a life-size
and hideous effigy of a grinning god, made of wood and painted in many
colours. By its side were other more horrible images and a row of human
skulls hung from the roof. The hand of a white man, blackened with age,
was stuck to the wall by a spear-head, the stench and filth of the whole
place were pestilential. Yet outside a number of women and several of
the men were on their knees hoping still against hope for aid from
their ancient gods. There was a cry of horror when Trent unceremoniously
kicked over the nearest idol--a yell of panic when the boy, with a gleam
of mischief in his eyes, threw out amongst them a worm-eaten, hideous
effigy and with a hearty kick stove in its hollow side. It lay there
bald and ugly in the streaming sunshine, a block of misshapen wood
ill-painted in flaring daubs, the thing which they had worshipped in
gloom and secret, they and a generation before them--all the mystery of
its shrouded existence, the terrible fetish words of the dead priest,
the reverence which an all-powerful and inherited superstition had kept
alive within them, came into their minds as they stood there trembling,
and then fled away to be out of the reach of the empty, staring
eyes--out of reach of the vengeance which must surely fall from the
skies upon these white savages. So they watched, the women beating their
bosoms and uttering strange cries, the men stolid but scared. Trent and
the boy came out coughing, and half-stupefied with the rank odour, and a
little murmur went up from them. It was a device of the gods--a sort of
madness with which they were afflicted. But soon their murmurs turned
again into lamentation when they saw what was to come. Men were running
backwards and forwards, piling up dried wood and branches against the
idol-house, a single spark and the thing was done. A tongue of flame
leaped up, a thick column of smoke stole straight up in the breathless
air. Amazed, the people stood and saw the home of dreadful mystery,
whence came the sentence of life and death, the voice of the King-maker,
the omens of war and fortune, enveloped in flames, already a ruined and
shapeless mass. Trent stood and watched it, smoking fiercely and felt
himself a civiliser. But the boy seemed to feel some of the pathos
of the moment and he looked curiously at the little crowd of wailing
natives.

"And the people?" he asked.

"They are going to help me make my road," Trent said firmly. "I am going
to teach them to work!"



CHAPTER XXX


MY DEAR AUNT ERNIE,--At last I have a chance of sending you a
letter--and, this time at any rate, you won't have to complain about
my sending you no news. I'll promise you that, before I begin, and you
needn't get scared either, because it's all good. I've been awfully
lucky, and all because that fellow Cathcart turned out such a funk and
a bounder. It's the oddest thing in the world too, that old Cis should
have written me to pick up all the news I could about Scarlett Trent and
send it to you. Why, he's within a few feet of me at this moment, and
I've been seeing him continually ever since I came here. But there, I'll
try and begin at the beginning.

"You know Cathcart got the post of Consulting Surveyor and Engineer to
the Bekwando Syndicate, and he was head man at our London place. Well,
they sent me from Capetown to be junior to him, and a jolly good move
for me too. I never did see anything in Cathcart! He's a lazy sort of
chap, hates work, and I guess he only got the job because his uncle had
got a lot of shares in the business. It seems he never wanted to come,
hates any place except London, which accounts for a good deal.

"All the time when we were waiting, he wasn't a bit keen and kept on
rotting about the good times he might have been having in London, and
what a fearful country we were stranded in, till he almost gave me the
blues, and if there hadn't been some jolly good shooting and a few nice
chaps up at the Fort, I should have been miserable. As it was, I left
him to himself a good deal, and he didn't like that either. I think
Attra was a jolly place, and the landing in surf boats was no end of
fun. Cathcart got beastly wet, and you should have seen what a stew he
was in because he'd put on a beautiful white suit and it got spoilt.
Well, things weren't very lively at Attra at first, I'm bound to admit.
No one seemed to know much about the Bekwando Land Company, and the
country that way was very rough. However, we got sent out at last, and
Cathcart, he simply scoffed at the whole thing from the first. There
was no proper labour, not half enough machinery, and none of the right
sort--and the gradients and country between Bekwando and the sea were
awful. Cathcart made a few reports and we did nothing but kick our heels
about until HE came. You'll see I've written that in big letters, and
I tell you if ever a man deserved to have his name written in capitals
Scarlett Trent does, and the oddest part of it is he knows you, and he
was awfully decent to me all the time.

"Well, out he went prospecting, before he'd been in the country
twenty-four hours, and he came back quite cheerful. Then he spoke to
Cathcart about starting work, and Cathcart was a perfect beast. He as
good as told him that he'd come out under false pretences, that the
whole affair was a swindle and that the road could not be made. Trent
didn't hesitate, I can tell you. There were no arguments or promises
with him. He chucked Cathcart on the spot, turned him out of the place,
and swore he'd make the road himself. I asked if I might stop, and I
think he was glad, anyhow we've been ever such pals ever since, and I
never expect to have such a time again as long as I live! But do you
know, Auntie, we've about made that road. When I see what we've done,
sometimes I can't believe it. I only wish some of the bigwigs who've
never been out of an office could see it. I know I'll hate to come away.

"You'd never believe the time we had--leaving out the fighting, which I
am coming to by and by. We were beastly short of all sorts of machinery
and our labour was awful. We had scarcely any at first, but Trent found
'em somehow, Kru boys and native Zulus and broken-down Europeans--any
one who could hold a pick. More came every day, and we simply cut our
way through the country. I think I was pretty useful, for you see I was
the only chap there who knew even a bit about engineering or practical
surveying, and I'd sit up all night lots of times working the thing out.
We had a missionary came over the first Sunday, and wanted to preach,
but Trent stopped him. 'We've got to work here,' he said, 'and Sunday
or no Sunday I can't let my men stop to listen to you in the cool of the
day. If you want to preach, come and take a pick now, and preach when
they're resting,' and he did and worked well too, and afterwards when we
had to knock off, he preached, and Trent took the chair and made 'em all
listen. Well, when we got a bit inland we had the natives to deal with,
and if you ask me I believe that's one reason Cathcart hated the whole
thing so. He's a beastly coward I think, and he told me once he'd never
let off a revolver in his life. Well, they tried to surprise us one
night, but Trent was up himself watching, and I tell you we did give 'em
beans. Great, ugly-looking, black chaps they were. Aunt Ernie, I shall
never forget how I felt when I saw them come creeping through the long,
rough grass with their beastly spears all poised ready to throw. And now
for my own special adventure. Won't you shiver when you read this! I
was taken prisoner by one of those chaps, carried off to their beastly
village and very nearly murdered by a chap who seemed to be a cross
between an executioner and a high-priest, and who kept dancing round me,
singing a lot of rot and pointing a knife at me. You see, I was right
on the outside of the fighting and I got a knock on the head with the
butt-end of a spear, and was a bit silly for a moment, and a great chap,
who'd seen me near Trent and guessed I was somebody, picked me up as
though I'd been a baby and carried me off. Of course I kicked up no
end of a row as soon as I came to, but what with the firing and the
screeching no one heard me, and Trent said it was half an hour before
he missed me and an hour before they started in pursuit. Anyhow, there
I was, about morning-time when you were thinking of having your cup of
tea, trussed up like a fowl in the middle of the village, and all the
natives, beastly creatures, promenading round me and making faces and
bawling out things--oh, it was beastly I can tell you! Then just as they
seemed to have made up their mind to kill me, up strode Scarlett Trent
alone, if you please, and he walked up to the whole lot of 'em as bold
as brass. He'd got a long way ahead of the rest and thought they meant
mischief, so he wouldn't wait for the others but faced a hundred of them
with a revolver in his hand, and I can tell you things were lively
then. I'd never be able to describe the next few minutes--one man Trent
knocked down with his fist, and you could hear his skull crack, then he
shot the chap who had been threatening me, and cut my bonds, and then
they tried to resist us, and I thought it was all over. They were
horribly afraid of Trent though, and while they were closing round us
the others came up and the natives chucked it at once. They used to be
a very brave race, but since they were able to get rum for their timber
and ivory, they're a lazy and drunken lot. Well, I must tell you what
Trent did then. He went to the priest's house where the gods were
kept--such a beastly hole--and he burned the place before the eyes of
all the natives. I believe they thought every moment that we should be
struck dead, and they stood round in a ring, making an awful row, but
they never dared interfere. He burnt the place to the ground, and then
what do you think he did? From the King downward he made every Jack one
of them come and work on his road. You'll never believe it, but it's
perfectly true. They looked upon him as their conqueror, and they came
like lambs when he ordered it. They think they're slaves you know, and
don't understand their pay, but they get it every week and same as all
the other labourers--and oh, Aunt Ernie, you should see the King work
with a pickaxe! He is fat and so clumsy and so furiously angry, but he's
too scared of Trent to do anything but obey orders, and there he works
hour after hour, groaning, and the perspiration rolls off him as though
he were in a Turkish bath. I could go on telling you odd things that
happen here for hours, but I must finish soon as the chap is starting
with the mail. I am enjoying it. It is something like life I can tell
you, and aren't I lucky? Trent made me take Cathcart's place. I am
getting 800 pounds a year, and only fancy it, he says he'll see that the
directors make me a special grant. Everything looks very different here
now, and I do hope the Company will be a success. There's whole heaps
of mining machinery landed and waiting for the road to be finished to
go up, and people seem to be streaming into the place. I wonder what
Cathcart will say when he knows that the road is as good as done, and
that I've got his job!

"Chap called for mail. Goodbye.

"Ever your affectionate

"FRED.

"Trent is a brick."

Ernestine read the letter slowly, line by line, word by word. To tell
the truth it was absorbingly interesting to her. Already there had
come rumours of the daring and blunt, resistless force with which
this new-made millionaire had confronted a gigantic task. His terse
communications had found their way into the Press, and in them and in
the boy's letter she seemed to discover something Caesaric. That night
it was more than usually difficult for her to settle down to her own
work. She read her nephew's letter more than once and continually
she found her thoughts slipping away--traveling across the ocean to
a tropical strip of country, where a heterogeneous crowd of men were
toiling and digging under a blazing sun. And, continually too, she
seemed to see a man's face looking steadily over the sea to her, as he
stood upright for a moment and rested from his toil. She was very fond
of the boy--but the face was not his!



CHAPTER XXXI


A special train from Southampton had just steamed into Waterloo with the
passengers from the Royal Mail steamer Ophir. Little groups of sunburnt
men were greeting old friends upon the platform, surrounded by piles of
luggage, canvas trunks and steamer chairs. The demand for hansoms was
brisk, cab after cab heavily loaded was rolling out of the yard. There
were grizzled men and men of fair complexion, men in white helmets and
puggarees, and men in silk hats. All sorts were represented there, from
the successful diamond digger who was spasmodically embracing a lady in
black jet of distinctly Jewish proclivities, to a sporting lord who
had been killing lions. For a few minutes the platforms were given over
altogether to a sort of pleasurable confusion, a vivid scene, full
of colour and human interest. Then the people thinned away, and, very
nearly last of all, a wizened-looking, grey-headed man, carrying a black
bag and a parcel, left the platform with hesitating footsteps and turned
towards the bridge. He was followed almost immediately by Hiram Da
Souza, who, curiously enough, seemed to have been on the platform when
the train came in and to have been much interested in this shabby,
lonely old man, who carried himself like a waif stranded in an unknown
land. Da Souza was gorgeous in frock coat and silk hat, a carnation
in his buttonhole, a diamond in his black satin tie, yet he was not
altogether happy. This little man hobbling along in front represented
fate to him. On the platform at Waterloo he had heard him timidly ask
a bystander the way to the offices of the Bekwando Land and Gold
Exploration Company, Limited. If ever he got there, what would be the
price of Bekwando shares on the morrow?

On the bridge Da Souza saw him accost a policeman, and brushing close
by, heard him ask the same question. The man shook his head, but pointed
eastwards.

"I can't say exactly, sir, but somewhere in the City, for certain," he
answered. "I should make for the Bank of England, a penny 'bus along
that way will take you--and ask again there."

The old man nodded his thanks and stepped along Da Souza felt that his
time had come. He accosted him with an urbane smile.

"Excuse me," he said, "but I think I heard you ask for the offices of
the Bekwando Land Company."

The old man looked up eagerly. "If you can direct me there, sir," he
said, "I shall be greatly obliged."

"I can do so," Da Souza said, falling into step, "and will with
pleasure. I am going that way myself. I hope," he continued in a tone of
kindly concern, "that you are not a shareholder in the Company."

The old man dropped his bag with a clatter upon the pavement, and his
lips moved for a moment without any speech coming from them. Da Souza
picked up the bag and devoutly hoped that none of his City friends were
in the way.

"I don't exactly know about being a shareholder," the old man said
nervously, "but I've certainly something to do with it. I am, or should
have been, joint vendor. The Company is wealthy, is it not?"

Da Souza changed the bag into his other hand and thrust his arm through
his companion's.

"You haven't seen the papers lately, have you?"

"No! I've just landed--to-day--from Africa!"

"Then I'm sorry to say there's some bad news for you," Da Souza said.
"The Bekwando Land and Gold Company has gone into liquidation--smashed
up altogether. They say that all the directors and the vendor will be
arrested. It seems to have been a gigantic swindle."

Monty had become a dead weight upon his arm. They were in the Strand
now, and he pushed open the swing-door of a public-house, and made
his way into the private bar. When Monty opened his eyes he was on a
cushioned seat, and before him was a tumbler of brandy half empty. He
stared round him wildly. His lips were moist and the old craving was hot
upon him. What did it mean? After all he had broken his vow, then! Had
he not sworn to touch nothing until he had found his little girl and his
fortune? yet the fire of spirits was in his veins and the craving was
tearing him to pieces. Then he remembered! There was no fortune, no
little girl! His dreams were all shattered, the last effort of his life
had been in vain. He caught hold of the tumbler with fingers that shook
as though an ague were upon him, lifted it to his lips and drank. Then
there came the old blankness, and he saw nothing but what seemed to
him the face of a satyr--dark and evil--mocking him through the shadows
which had surely fallen now for ever. Da Souza lifted him up and
conveyed him carefully to a four-wheel cab.

     *           *           *           *           *

An hour afterwards Da Souza, with a grin of content upon his unshapely
mouth, exchanged his frock coat for a gaudy smoking-jacket, and, with a
freshly-lit cigar in his mouth, took up the letters which had arrived by
the evening post. Seeing amongst them one with an African stamp he tore
it open hastily, and read:--

"MY DEAR HIRAM,--You was in luck now or never, if you really want
to stop that half--witted creature from doing mischief in London. I
sometimes think, my brother, that you would do better to give me even
more of your confidence. You are a very clever man, but you do keep
yourself so secret. If I too were not clever, how would I know to send
you this news, how would I know that it will make you glad? But there,
you will go your way. I know it!

"Now for the news! Monty, as I cabled (I send the bill) has gone
secretly to London. Since Scarlett Trent found our Hausa friend and
the rum flask, there have been no means of getting liquor to him, so I
suppose he has very near regained his senses, anyhow he shipped off
very cunning, not even Missionary Walsh knowing, but he made a very big
mistake, the news of which I send to you knowing it will be good.
Hiram, he stole the money to pay for his passage from the missionary's
cash-box! All one day he stood under a tree looking out to sea, and a
steamer from Capetown called, and when he heard the whistle and saw the
surf boats he seemed to wake up. He walked up and down restlessly for a
long time, muttering to himself. Mrs. Walsh came out to him and he was
still staring at the steamer. She told him to come in out of the sun,
which was very hot, but he shook his head. 'She's calling me,' he kept
on saying, 'calling me!' She heard him in the room where the money was
and then saw no more of him. But others saw him running to the shore,
and he paid to be taken out to the steamer. They wouldn't take him on
at first, because he hadn't secured a passage, but he laid down and
wouldn't move. So, as he had the money, they took him, and when I heard
I cabled to you. But what harm can he do, for you are his master? He is
a thief and you know it. Surely you can do with him what you will.

"Trent was here yesterday and heard for the first time of his flight.
How he took it I cannot tell you, for I was not the one to tell him, but
this I know for a fact. He cabled to Capetown offering 100 pounds if the
Star Line steamer leaving to-morrow would call for him here. Hiram, he
is a great man, this Trent. I hate him, for he has spoilt much trade for
me, and he treats me as though I were the dirt under his feet, but never
a man before who has set foot upon the Coast could have done what he has
done. Without soldiers he has beaten the Bekwando natives, and made them
even work for him. He has stirred the whole place here into a state of
fever! A thousand men are working upon his road and sinking shafts upon
the Bekwando hills. Gold is already coming down, nuggets of it, and he
is opening a depot to buy all the mahogany and ivory in the country. He
spends money like water, he never rests, what he says must be done is
done! The authorities are afraid of him, but day by day they become more
civil! The Agent here called him once an adventurer, and threatened him
with arrest for his fighting with the Bekwandos. Now they go to him cap
in hand, for they know that he will be a great power in this country.
And Hiram, my brother, you have not given me your trust though I speak
to you so openly, but here is the advice of a brother, for blood is
blood, and I would have you make monies. Don't you put yourself against
Trent. Be on his side, for his is the winning side. I don't know what
you got in your head about that poor scarecrow Monty, but I tell you,
Hiram, Trent is the man to back right through. He has the knack of
success, and he is a genius. My! he's a great man, and he's a king out
here. You be on his side, Hiram, and you're all right.

"Now goodbye, but send me the money for the cable when you write, and
remember--Monty is a thief and Trent is the man to back, which reminds
me that Trent repaid to Missionary Walsh all the money which Monty took,
which it seems was left with Walsh by him for Monty's keep. But Monty
does not know that, so you have the string to make him dance.

"Which comes from your brother

"SAMUEL.

"P.S.--Do not forget the small account for disbursements."


Da Souza folded up the letter, and a look of peace shone in his face.
Presently he climbed the stairs to a little back-room and noiselessly
unlocked the door. Monty, with pale face and bloodshot eyes, was walking
up and down, mumbling to himself. He addressed Da Souza eagerly.

"I think I will go away now," he said. "I am very much obliged to you
for looking after me."

Da Souza gazed at him with well-affected gravity. "One moment first," he
said, "didn't I understand you that you had just come from Africa?"

Monty nodded.

"The Gold Coast?"

Monty nodded again, but with less confidence.

"By any chance--were you called Monty there?"

Monty turned ghastly pale. Surely his last sin had not found him out. He
was silent, but there was no need for speech. Da Souza motioned him to
sit down.

"I am very sorry," he said, "of course it's true. The police have been
here."

"The police!" Monty moaned.

Da Souza nodded. Benevolence was so rare a part for him to play, that he
rather enjoyed it.

"Don't be scared," he said. "Yes, your description is out, and you are
wanted for stealing a few pounds from a man named Walsh. Never mind. I
won't give you up. You shall lie snug here for a few days!"

Monty fell on his knees. "You won't let any one know that I am here!" he
pleaded.

"Not I," Da Souza answered fervently.

Monty rose to his feet, his face full of dumb misery.

"Now," he muttered, "I shall never see her--never--never--never!"

There was a bottle half full of spirits upon the table and a tumbler
as yet unused. A gleam flashed in his eyes. He filled the tumbler
and raised it to his lips. Da Souza watched him curiously with the
benevolent smile still upon his face.



CHAPTER XXXII


"You are very smart, Ernestine," he said, looking her admiringly.

"One must be smart at Ascot," she answered, "or stay away."

"I've just heard some news," he continued.

"Yes?"

"Who do you think is here?"

She glanced at him sideways under her lace parasol. "Every one I should
think."

"Including," he said, "Mr. Scarlett Trent!" She grew a shade paler, and
leaned for a moment against the rail of the paddock in which they were
lounging.

"I thought," she said, "that the Mazetta Castle was not due till
to-day."

"She touched at Plymouth in the night, and he had a special train up. He
has some horses running, you know."

"I suppose," she remarked, "that he is more of a celebrity than ever
now!"

"Much more," he answered. "If he chooses he will be the lion of the
season! By the by, you had nothing of interest from Fred?"

She shook her head impatiently.

"Nothing but praises! According to Fred, he's a hero!"

"I hate him," Davenant said sulkily.

"And so," she answered softly, "do I! Do you see him coming, Cecil?"

"In good company too," the young man laughed bitterly.

A little group of men, before whom every one fell back respectfully,
were strolling through the paddock towards the horses. Amongst them was
Royalty, and amongst them also was Scarlett Trent. But when he saw
the girl in the white foulard smile at him from the paling he forgot
etiquette and everything else. He walked straight across to her with
that keen, bright light in his eyes which Fred had described so well in
his letter.

"I am very fortunate," he said, taking the delicately gloved hand into
his fingers, "to find you so soon. I have only been in England a few
hours."

She answered him slowly, subjecting him the while to a somewhat close
examination. His face was more sunburnt than ever she had seen a man's,
but there was a wonderful force and strength in his features, which
seemed to have become refined instead of coarsened by the privations
through which he had passed. His hand, as she had felt, was as hard as
iron, and it was not without reluctance that she felt compelled to
take note of his correct attire and easy bearing. After all he must be
possessed of a wonderful measure of adaptability.

"You have become famous," she said. "Do you know that you are going to
be made a lion?"

"I suppose the papers have been talking a lot of rot," he answered
bluntly. "I've had a fairly rough time, and I'm glad to tell you this,
Miss Wendermott--I don't believe I'd ever have succeeded but for your
nephew Fred. He's the pluckiest boy I ever knew."

"I am very pleased to hear it," she answered. "He's a dear boy!"

"He's a brick," Trent answered. "We've been in some queer scrapes
together--I've lots of messages for you! By the by, are you alone?"

"For the moment," she answered; "Mr. Davenant left me as you came up.
I'm with my cousin, Lady Tresham. She's on the lawn somewhere."

He looked down the paddock and back to her.

"Walk with me a little way," he said, "and I will show you Iris before
she starts."

"You!" she exclaimed.

He pointed to the card. It was surely an accident that she had not
noticed it before. Mr. Trent's Iris was amongst the entries for the Gold
Cup.

"Why, Iris is the favourite!"

He nodded.

"So they tell me! I've been rather lucky haven't I, for a beginner? I
found a good trainer, and I had second call on Cannon, who's riding
him. If you care to back him for a trifle, I think you'll be all right,
although the odds are nothing to speak of."

She was walking by his side now towards the quieter end of the paddock.

"I hear you have been to Torquay," he said, looking at her critically,
"it seems to have agreed with you. You are looking well!"

She returned his glance with slightly uplifted eyebrows, intending to
convey by that and her silence a rebuke to his boldness. He was blandly
unconscious, however, of her intent, being occupied just then in
returning the greetings of passers-by. She bit her lip and looked
straight ahead.

"After all," he said, "unless you are very keen on seeing Iris, I think
we'd better give it up. There are too many people around her already."

"Just as you like," she answered, "only it seems a shame that you
shouldn't look over your own horse before the race if you want to. Would
you like to try alone?"

"Certainly not," he answered. "I shall see plenty of her later. Are you
fond of horses?"

"Very."

"Go to many race-meetings?"

"Whenever I get the chance!--I always come here."

"It is a great sight," he said thoughtfully, looking around him. "Are
you here just for the pleasure of it, or are you going to write about
it?"

She laughed.

"I'm going to write about some of the dresses," she said. "I'm afraid no
one would read my racing notes."

"I hope you'll mention your own," he said coolly. "It's quite the
prettiest here."

She scarcely knew whether to be amused or offended.

"You are a very downright person, Mr. Trent," she said.

"You don't expect me to have acquired manners yet, do you?" he answered
drily.

"You have acquired a great many things," she said, "with surprising
facility. Why not manners?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"No doubt they will come, but I shall want a lot of polishing. I
wonder--"

"Well?"

"Whether any one will ever think it worth while to undertake the task."

She raised her eyes and looked him full in the face. She had made up her
mind exactly what to express--and she failed altogether to do it. There
was a fire and a strength in the clear, grey eyes fixed so earnestly
upon hers which disconcerted her altogether. She was desperately angry
with herself and desperately uneasy.

"You have the power," she said with slight coldness, "to buy most
things. By the by, I was thinking only just now, how sad it was that
your partner did not live. He shared the work with you, didn't he? It
seems such hard lines that he could not have shared the reward!"

He showed no sign of emotion such as she had expected, and for which she
had been narrowly watching him. Only he grew at once more serious, and
he led her a little further still from the crush of people. It was the
luncheon interval, and though the next race was the most important of
the day, the stream of promenaders had thinned off a little.

"It is strange," he said, "that you should have spoken to me of my
partner. I have been thinking about him a good deal lately."

"In what way?"

"Well, first of all, I am not sure that our agreement was altogether
a fair one," he said. "He had a daughter and I am very anxious to find
her! I feel that she is entitled to a certain number of shares in the
Company, and I want her to accept them."

"Have you tried to find her?" she asked.

He looked steadily at her for a moment, but her parasol had dropped a
little upon his side and he could not see her face.

"Yes, I have tried," he said slowly, "and I have suffered a great
disappointment. She knows quite well that I am searching for her, and
she prefers to remain undiscovered."

"That sounds strange," she remarked, with her eyes fixed upon the
distant Surrey hills. "Do you know her reason?"

"I am afraid," he said deliberately, "that there can be only one. It's a
miserable thing to believe of any woman, and I'd be glad--"

He hesitated. She kept her eyes turned away from him, but her manner
denoted impatience.

"Over on this side," he continued, "it seems that Monty was a gentleman
in his day, and his people were--well, of your order! There was an Earl
I believe in the family, and no doubt they are highly respectable. He
went wrong once, and of course they never gave him another chance. It
isn't their way--that sort of people! I'll admit he was pretty low down
when I came across him, but I reckon that was the fault of those who
sent him adrift--and after all there was good in him even then. I am
going to tell you something now, Miss Wendermott, which I've often
wanted to--that is, if you're interested enough to care to hear it!"

All the time she was asking herself how much he knew. She motioned him
to proceed.

"Monty had few things left in the world worth possessing, but there was
one which he had never parted with, which he carried with him always.
It was the picture of his little girl, as she had been when his trouble
happened."

He stooped a little as though to see over the white rails, but she was
too adroit. Her face remained hidden from him by that little cloud of
white lace.

"It is an odd thing about that picture," he went on slowly, "but he
showed it to me once or twice, and I too got very fond of it! It was
just a little girl's face, very bright and very winsome, and over there
we were lonely, and it got to mean a good deal to both of us. And one
night Monty would gamble--it was one of his faults, poor chap--and he
had nothing left but his picture, and I played him for it--and won!"

"Brute!" she murmured in an odd, choked tone.

"Sounds so, doesn't it? But I wanted that picture. Afterwards came our
terrible journey back to the Coast, when I carried the poor old chap
on my back day by day, and stood over him at night potting those black
beasts when they crept up too close--for they were on our track all the
time. I wouldn't tell you the whole story of those days, Miss Wendermott
for it would keep you awake at night; but I've a fancy for telling you
this. I'd like you to believe it, for it's gospel truth. I didn't leave
him until I felt absolutely and actually certain that he couldn't live
an hour. He was passing into unconsciousness, and a crowd of those
natives were close upon our heels. So I left him and took the picture
with me--and I think since then that it has meant almost as much to me
as ever it had been to him."

"That," she remarked, "sounds a little far-fetched--not to say
impossible."

"Some day," he answered boldly, "I shall speak to you of this again, and
I shall try to convince you that it is truth!"

He could not see her face, but he knew very well in some occult manner
that she had parted with some at least of her usual composure. As a
matter of fact she was nervous and ill-at-ease.

"You have not yet told me," she said abruptly, "what you imagine can be
this girl's reasons for remaining unknown."

"I can only guess them," he said gravely; "I can only suppose that she
is ashamed of her father and declines to meet any one connected with
him. It is very wrong and very narrow of her. If I could talk to her for
ten minutes and tell her how the poor old chap used to dream about her
and kiss her picture, I can't think but she'd be sorry."

"Try and think," she said, looking still away from him, "that she must
have another reason. You say that you liked her picture! Try and be
generous in your thoughts of her for its sake."

"I will try," he answered, "especially--"

"Yes?"

"Especially--because the picture makes me think--sometimes--of you!"



CHAPTER XXXIII


Trent had done many brave things in his life, but he had never been
conscious of such a distinct thrill of nervousness as he experienced
during those few minutes' silence. Ernestine, for her part, was
curiously exercised in her mind. He had shaken her faith in his
guilt--he had admitted her to his point of view. She judged herself from
his standpoint, and the result was unpleasant. She had a sudden impulse
to tell him the truth, to reveal her identity, tell him her reasons for
concealment. Perhaps her suspicions had been hasty. Then the personal
note in his last speech had produced a serious effect on her, and all
the time she felt that her silence was emboldening him, as indeed it
was.

"The first time I saw you," he went on, "the likeness struck me. I felt
as though I were meeting some one whom I had known all my life."

She laughed a little uneasily. "And you found yourself instead the
victim of an interviewer! What a drop from the romantic to the prosaic!"

"There has never been any drop at all," he answered firmly, "and you
have always seemed to me the same as that picture--something quite
precious and apart from my life. It's been a poor sort of thing perhaps.
I came from the people, I never had any education, I was as rough as
most men of my sort, and I have done many things which I would sooner
cut off my right hand than do again. But that was when I lived in the
darkness. It was before you came."

"Mr. Trent, will you take me back to Lady Tresham, please?"

"In a moment," he answered gravely. "Don't think that I am going to be
too rash. I know the time hasn't come yet. I am not going to say any
more. Only I want you to know this. The whole success of my life is as
nothing compared with the hope of one day--"

"I will not hear another word," she interrupted hastily, and underneath
her white veil he could see a scarlet spot of colour in her cheeks; in
her speech, too, there was a certain tremulousness. "If you will not
come with me I must find Lady Tresham alone."

They turned round, but as they neared the middle of the paddock progress
became almost impossible. The bell had rung for the principal race of
the day and the numbers were going up. The paddock was crowded with
others beside loiterers, looking the horses over and stolidly pushing
their way through the little groups to the front rank. From Tattersall's
came the roar of clamorous voices. All around were evidences of that
excitement which always precedes a great race.

"I think," he said, "that we had better watch the race from these
railings. Your gown will be spoilt in the crowd if we try to get out of
the paddock, and you probably wouldn't get anywhere in time to see it."

She acquiesced silently, recognising that, although he had not alluded
to it in words, he had no intention of saying anything further at
present. Trent, who had been looking forward to the next few minutes
with all the eagerness of a man who, for the first time in his life,
runs the favourite in a great race, smiled as he realised how very
content he was to stay where nothing could be seen until the final
struggle was over. They took up their places side by side and leaned
over the railing.

"Have you much money on Iris?" she asked.

"A thousand both ways," he answered. "I don't plunge, but as I backed
her very early I got 10 to 1 and 7 to 2. Listen! They're off!"

There was a roar from across the course, followed by a moment's
breathless silence. The clamour of voices from Tattersall's subsided,
and in its place rose the buzz of excitement from the stands, the murmur
of many voices gradually growing in volume. Far away down the straight
Ernestine and Trent, leaning over the rail, could see the little
coloured specks come dancing into sight. The roar of voices once more
beat upon the air.

"Nero the Second wins!"

"The favourite's done!"

"Nero the Second for a monkey!"

"Nero the Second romps in!"


"Iris! Iris! Iris wins!"

It was evident from the last shout and the gathering storm of excitement
that, after all, it was to be a race. They were well in sight now; Nero
the Second and Iris, racing neck-and-neck, drawing rapidly away from
the others. The air shook with the sound of hoarse and fiercely excited
voices.

"Nero the Second wins!"

"Iris wins!"

Neck-and-neck they passed the post. So it seemed at least to Ernestine
and many others, but Trent shook his head and looked at her with a
smile.

"Iris was beaten by a short neck," he said. "Good thing you didn't back
her. That's a fine horse of the Prince's, though!"

"I'm so sorry," she cried. "Are you sure?"

He nodded and pointed to the numbers which were going up. She flashed a
sudden look upon him which more than compensated him for his defeat.
At least he had earned her respect that day, as a man who knew how to
accept defeat gracefully. They walked slowly up the paddock and stood on
the edge of the crowd, whilst a great person went out to meet his horse
amidst a storm of cheering. It chanced that he caught sight of Trent on
the way, and, pausing for a moment, he held out his hand.

"Your horse made a magnificent fight for it, Mr. Trent," he said. "I'm
afraid I only got the verdict by a fluke. Another time may you be the
fortunate one!"

Trent answered him simply, but without awkwardness. Then his horse came
in and he held out his hand to the crestfallen jockey, whilst with his
left he patted Iris's head.

"Never mind, Dick," he said cheerfully, "you rode a fine race and the
best horse won. Better luck next time."

Several people approached Trent, but he turned away at once to
Ernestine.

"You will let me take you to Lady Tresham now," he said.

"If you please," she answered quietly.

They left the paddock by the underground way. When they emerged upon
the lawn the band was playing and crowds of people were strolling about
under the trees.

"The boxes," Trent suggested, "must be very hot now!"

He turned down a side-walk away from the stand towards an empty
seat under an elm-tree, and, after a moment's scarcely perceptible
hesitation, she followed his lead. He laughed softly to himself. If this
was defeat, what in the world was better?

"This is your first Ascot, is it not?" she asked.

"My first!"

"And your first defeat?"

"I suppose it is," he admitted cheerfully. "I rather expected to win,
too."

"You must be very disappointed, I am afraid."

"I have lost," he said thoughtfully, "a gold cup. I have gained--"

She half rose and shook out her skirts as though about to leave him. He
stopped short and found another conclusion to his sentence.

"Experience!"

A faint smile parted her lips. She resumed her seat.

"I am glad to find you," she said, "so much of a philosopher. Now talk
to me for a few minutes about what you have been doing in Africa."

He obeyed her, and very soon she forgot the well dressed crowd of
men and women by whom they were surrounded, the light hum of gay
conversation, the band which was playing the fashionable air of the
moment. She saw instead the long line of men of many races, stripped to
the waist and toiling as though for their lives under a tropical sun,
she saw the great brown water-jars passed down the line, men fainting
beneath the burning sun and their places taken by others. She heard the
shrill whistle of alarm, the beaten drum; she saw the spade exchanged
for the rifle, and the long line of toilers disappear behind the natural
earthwork which their labours had created. She saw black forms rise
stealthily from the long, rank grass, a flight of quivering spears, the
horrid battle-cry of the natives rang in her ears. The whole drama of
the man's great past rose up before her eyes, made a living and real
thing by his simple but vigorous language. That he effaced himself
from it went for nothing; she saw him there perhaps more clearly than
anything else, the central and domineering figure, a man of brains and
nerve who, with his life in his hands, faced with equal immovability
a herculean task and the chances of death. Certain phrases in Fred's
letter had sunk deep into her mind, they were recalled very vividly by
the presence of the man himself, telling his own story. She sat in the
sunlight with the music in her ears, listening to his abrupt, vivid
speech, and a fear came to her which blanched her cheeks and caught at
her throat. The hand which held her dainty parasol of lace shook, and an
indescribable thrill ran through her veins. She could no more think
of this man as a clodhopper, a coarse upstart without manners or
imagination. In many ways he fell short of all the usual standards by
which the men of her class were judged, yet she suddenly realised that
he possessed a touch of that quality which lifted him at once far over
their heads. The man had genius. Without education or culture he had yet
achieved greatness. By his side the men who were passing about on the
lawn became suddenly puppets. Form and style, manners and easy speech
became suddenly stripped of their significance to her. The man at her
side had none of these things, yet he was of a greater world. She felt
her enmity towards him suddenly weakened. Only her pride now could
help her. She called upon it fiercely. He was the man whom she had
deliberately believed to be guilty of her father's death, the man whom
she had set herself to entrap. She brushed all those other thoughts away
and banished firmly that dangerous kindness of manner into which she had
been drifting.

And he, on his part, felt a glow of keen pleasure when he realised how
the events of the day had gone in his favour. If not yet of her world,
he knew now that his becoming so would be hereafter purely a matter of
time. He looked up through the green leaves at the blue sky, bedappled
with white, fleecy clouds, and wondered whether she guessed that his
appearance here, his ownership of Iris, the studious care with which he
had placed himself in the hands of a Saville Row tailor were all for her
sake. It was true that she had condescended to Bohemianism, that he had
first met her as a journalist, working for her living in a plain serge
suit and a straw hat. But he felt sure that this had been to a certain
extent a whim with her. He stole a sidelong glance at her--she was
the personification of daintiness from the black patent shoes showing
beneath the flouncing of her skirt, to the white hat with its clusters
of roses. Her foulard gown was as simple as genius could make it, and
she wore no ornaments, save a fine clasp to her waistband of dull gold,
quaintly fashioned, and the fine gold chain around her neck, from which
hung her racing-glasses. She was to him the very type of everything
aristocratic. It might be, as she had told him, that she chose to work
for her living, but he knew as though by inspiration that her people and
connections were of that world to which he could never belong, save
on sufferance. He meant to belong to it, for her sake--to win her! He
admitted the presumption, but then it would be presumption of any man to
lift his eyes to her. He estimated his chances with common sense; he
was not a man disposed to undervalue himself. He knew the power of his
wealth and his advantage over the crowd of young men who were her equals
by birth. For he had met some of them, had inquired into their lives,
listened to their jargon, and had come in a faint sort of way to
understand them. It had been an encouragement to him. After all it was
only serious work, life lived out face to face with the great realities
of existence which could make a man. In a dim way he realised that there
were few in her own class likely to satisfy Ernestine. He even dared to
tell himself that those things which rendered him chiefly unfit for her,
the acquired vulgarities of his rougher life, were things which he
could put away; that a time would come when he would take his place
confidently in her world, and that the end would be success. And all the
while from out of the blue sky Fate was forging a thunderbolt to launch
against him!



CHAPTER XXXIV


"And now," she said, rising, "you really must take me to Lady Tresham!
They will think that I am lost."

"Are you still at your rooms?" he asked.

She nodded.

"Yes, only I'm having them spring-cleaned for a few days. I am staying
at Tresham House."

"May I come and see you there?"

The man's quiet pertinacity kindled a sort of indignation in her. The
sudden weakness in her defences was unbearable.

"I think not," she answered shortly. "You don't know Lady Tresham, and
they might not approve. Lady Tresham is rather old-fashioned."

"Oh, Lady Tresham is all right," he answered. "I suppose I shall see you
to-night if you are staying there. They have asked me to dinner!"

She was taken aback and showed it. Again he had the advantage. He did
not tell her that on his return he had found scores of invitations from
people he had never heard of before.

"You are by way of going into society, then," she answered insolently.

"I don't think I've made any particular efforts," he answered.

"Money," she murmured, "is an everlasting force!"

"The people of your world," he answered, with a flash of contempt, "are
the people who find it so."

She was silent then, and Trent was far from being discouraged by her
momentary irritability. He was crossing the lawn now by her side,
carrying himself well, with a new confidence in his air and bearing
which she did not fail to take note of. The sunlight, the music, and
the pleasant air of excitement were all in his veins. He was full of
the strong joy of living. And then, in the midst of it all, came a dull,
crashing blow. It was as though all his castles in the air had come
toppling about his ears, the blue sky had turned to stony grey and the
sweet waltz music had become a dirge. Always a keen watcher of men's
faces, he had glanced for a second time at a gaunt, sallow man who wore
a loose check suit and a grey Homburg hat. The eyes of the two men met.
Then the blood had turned to ice in Trent's veins and the ground had
heaved beneath his feet. It was the one terrible chance which Fate had
held against him, and she had played the card.

Considering the nature and suddenness of the blow which had fallen upon
him, Trent's recovery was marvellous. The two men had come face to
face upon the short turf, involuntarily each had come to a standstill.
Ernestine looked from one to the other a little bewildered.

"I should like a word with you, Trent," Captain Francis said quietly.

Trent nodded.

"In five minutes," he said, "I will return here--on the other side of
the band-stand, say."

Francis nodded and stood aside. Trent and Ernestine continued their
progress towards the stand.

"Your friend," Ernestine remarked, "seemed to come upon you like a
modern Banquo!"

Trent, who did not understand the allusion, was for once discreet.

"He is a man with whom I had dealings abroad," he said, "I did not
expect him to turn up here."

"In West Africa?" she asked quickly.

Trent smiled enigmatically.

"There are many foreign countries besides Africa," he said, "and I've
been in most of them. This is box No. 13, then. I shall see you this
evening."

She nodded, and Trent was free again. He did not make his way at once
to the band-stand. Instead he entered the small refreshment-room at
the base of the building and called for a glass of brandy. He drank
it slowly, his eyes fixed upon the long row of bottles ranged upon
the shelf opposite to him, he himself carried back upon a long wave of
thoughts to a little West African station where the moist heat rose
in fever mists and where an endless stream of men passed backward and
forward to their tasks with wan, weary faces and slowly dragging limbs.
What a cursed chance which had brought him once more face to face with
the one weak spot in his life, the one chapter which, had he the power,
he would most willingly seal for ever! From outside came the ringing of
a bell, the hoarse shouting of many voices in the ring, through the open
door a vision of fluttering waves of colour, lace parasols and picture
hats, little trills of feminine laughter, the soft rustling of muslins
and silks. A few moments ago it had all seemed so delightful to him--and
now there lay a hideous blot upon the day.

It seemed to him when he left the little bar that he had been there for
hours, as a matter of fact barely five minutes had passed since he had
left Ernestine. He stood for a moment on the edge of the walk, dazzled
by the sunlight, then he stepped on to the grass and made his way
through the throng. The air was full of soft, gay music, and the skirts
and flounces of the women brushed against him at every step. Laughter
and excitement were the order of the day. Trent, with his suddenly
pallid face and unseeing eyes, seemed a little out of place in such a
scene of pleasure. Francis, who was smoking a cigar, looked up as he
approached and made room for him upon the seat.

"I did not expect to see you in England quite so soon, Captain Francis,"
Trent said.

"I did not expect," Francis answered, "ever to be in England again. I am
told that my recovery was a miracle. I am also told that I owe my Life
to you!"

Trent shrugged his shoulders.

"I would have done as much for any of my people," he said, "and you
don't owe me any thanks. To be frank with you, I hoped you'd die."

"You could easily have made sure of it," Francis answered.

"It wasn't my way," Trent answered shortly. "Now what do you want with
me?"

Francis turned towards him with a curious mixture of expressions in his
face.

"Look here," he said, "I want to believe in you! You saved my life and
I'm not over-anxious to do you a mischief. But you must tell me what you
have done with Vill--Monty."

"Don't you know where he is?" Trent asked quickly.

"I? Certainly not! How should I?"

"Perhaps not," Trent said, "but here's the truth. When I got back to
Attra Monty had disappeared--ran away to England, and as yet I've heard
never a word of him. I'd meant to do the square thing by him and bring
him back myself. Instead of that he gave us all the slip, but unless
he's a lot different to what he was last time I saw him, he's not fit to
be about alone."

"I heard that he had left," Francis said, "from Mr. Walsh."

"He either came quite alone," Trent said, "in which case it is odd that
nothing has been heard of him, or Da Souza has got hold of him."

"Oom Sam's brother?"

Trent nodded.

"And his interest?" Francis asked.

"Well, he is a large shareholder in the Company," Trent said. "Of course
he could upset us all if he liked. I should say that Da Souza would try
all he could to keep him in the background until he had disposed of his
shares."

"And how does your stock hold?"

"I don't know," Trent said. "I only landed yesterday. I'm pretty certain
though that there's no market for the whole of Da Souza's holding."

"He has a large interest, then?"

"A very large one," Trent answered drily.

"I should like," Francis said, "to understand this matter properly. As
a matter of fact I suppose that Monty is entitled to half the
purchase-money you received for the Company."

Trent assented.

"It isn't that I grudge him that," he said, "although, with the other
financial enterprises I have gone into, I don't know how I should raise
half a million of money to pay him off. But don't you see my sale of the
charter to the Company is itself, Monty being alive, an illegal act.
The title will be wrong, and the whole affair might drift into Chancery,
just when a vigorous policy is required to make the venture a success.
If Monty were here and in his right mind, I think we could come to
terms, but, when I saw him last at any rate, he was quite incapable, and
he might become a tool to anything. The Bears might get hold of him and
ruin us all. In short, it's a beastly mess!"

Francis looked at him keenly.

"What do you expect me to do?" he asked.

"I have no right to expect anything," Trent said. "However, I saved your
life and you may consider yourself therefore under some obligation to
me. I will tell you then what I would have you do. In the first place,
I know no more where he is than you do. He may be in England or he may
not. I shall go to Da Souza, who probably knows. You can come with me if
you like. I don't want to rob the man of a penny. He shall have all he
is entitled to--only I do want to arrange terms with him quietly, and
not have the thing talked about. It's as much for the others' sake as
my own. The men who came into my Syndicate trusted me, and I don't want
them left."

Francis took a little silver case from his pocket, lit a cigarette, and
smoked for a moment or two thoughtfully.

"It is possible," he said at last, "that you are an honest man. On the
other hand you must admit that the balance of probability from my point
of view is on the other side. Let us travel backwards a little way--to
my first meeting with you. I witnessed the granting of this concession
to you by the King of Bekwando. According to its wording you were
virtually Monty's heir, and Monty was lying drunk, in a climate where
strong waters and death walk hand-in-hand. You leave him in the bush,
proclaim his death, and take sole possession. I find him alive, do the
best I can for him, and here the first act ends. Then what afterwards?
I hear of you as an empire-maker and a millionaire. Nevertheless, Monty
was alive and you knew he was alive, but when I reach Attra he has been
spirited away! I want to know where! You say you don't know. It may be
true, but it doesn't sound like it."

Trent's under-lip was twitching, a sure sign of the tempest within, but
he kept himself under restraint and said never a word.

Francis continued, "Now I do not wish to be your enemy, Scarlett Trent,
or to do you an ill turn, but this is my word to you. Produce Monty
within a week and open reasonable negotiations for treating him fairly,
and I will keep silent. But if you can't produce him at the end of that
time I must go to his relations and lay all these things before them."

Trent rose slowly to his feet.

"Give me your address," he said, "I will do what I can."

Francis tore a leaf from his pocket-book and wrote a few words upon it.

"That will find me at any time," he said. "One moment, Trent. When I saw
you first you were with--a lady."

"Well!"

"I have been away from England so long," Francis continued slowly, "that
my memory has suffered. Yet that lady's face was somehow familiar. May I
ask her name?"

"Miss Ernestine Wendermott," Trent answered slowly.

Francis threw away his cigarette and lit another.

"Thank you," he said.



CHAPTER XXXV


Da Souza's office was neither furnished nor located with the idea of
impressing casual visitors. It was in a back-street off an alley, and
although within a stone's throw of Lothbury its immediate surroundings
were not exhilarating. A blank wall faced it, a green-grocer's shop
shared with a wonderful, cellar-like public-house the honour of its more
immediate environment. Trent, whose first visit it was, looked about him
with surprise mingled with some disgust.

He pushed open the swing door and found himself face to face with Da
Souza's one clerk--a youth of unkempt appearance, shabbily but flashily
dressed, with sallow complexion and eyes set close together. He was
engaged at that particular moment in polishing a large diamond pin upon
the sleeve of his coat, which operation he suspended to gaze with much
astonishment at this unlooked-for visitor. Trent had come straight from
Ascot, straight indeed from his interview with Francis, and was still
wearing his racing-glasses.

"I wish to see Mr. Da Souza," Trent said. "Is he in?"

"I believe so, sir," the boy answered. "What name?"

"Trent! Mr. Scarlett Trent!"

The door of an inner office opened, and Da Souza, sleek and curled,
presented himself. He showed all his white teeth in the smile with which
he welcomed his visitor. The light of battle was in his small, keen
eyes, in his cringing bow, his mock humility.

"I am most honoured, Mr. Trent, sir," he declared. "Welcome back to
England. When did you return?"

"Yesterday," Trent said shortly.

"And you have come," Da Souza continued, "fresh from the triumphs of the
race-course. It is so, I trust?"

"I have come straight from Ascot," Trent replied, "but my horse was
beaten if that is what you mean. I did not come here to talk about
racing though. I want a word with you in private."

"With much pleasure, sir," Da Souza answered, throwing open with a
little flourish the door of his sanctum. "Will you step in? This way!
The chair is dusty. Permit me!"

Trent threw a swift glance around the room in which he found himself. It
was barely furnished, and a window, thick with dust, looked out on
the dingy back-wall of a bank or some public building. The floor was
uncovered, the walls were hung with yellow maps of gold-mines all in
the West African district. Da Souza himself, spick and span, with glossy
boots and a flower in his buttonhole, was certainly the least shabby
thing in the room.

"You know very well," Trent said, "what I have come about. Of course
you'll pretend you don't, so to save time I'll tell you. What have you
done with Monty?"

Da Souza spread outwards the palms of his hands. He spoke with
well-affected impatience.

"Monty! always Monty! What do I want with him? It is you who should look
after him, not I."

Trent turned quietly round and locked the door. Da Souza would have
called out, but a paroxysm of fear had seized him. His fat, white face
was pallid, and his knees were shaking. Trent's hand fell upon his
shoulder, and Da Souza felt as though the claws of a trap had gripped
him.

"If you call out I'll throttle you," Trent said. "Now listen. Francis is
in England and, unless Monty is produced, will tell the whole story. I
shall do the best I can for all of us, but I'm not going to have Monty
done to death. Come, let's have the truth."

Da Souza was grey now with a fear greater even than a physical one. He
had been so near wealth. Was he to lose everything?

"Mr. Trent," he whispered, "my dear friend, have reason. Monty, I tell
you, is only half alive, he hangs on, but it is a mere thread of life.
Leave it all to me! To-morrow he shall be dead!--oh, quite naturally.
There shall be no risk! Trent, Trent!"

His cry ended in a gurgle, for Trent's hand was on his throat.

"Listen, you miserable hound," he whispered. "Take me to him this
moment, or I'll shake the life out of you. Did you ever know me go back
from my word?"

Da Souza took up his hat with an ugly oath and yielded. The two men left
the office together.

     *           *           *           *           *

"Listen!"

The two women sat in silence, waiting for some repetition of the sound.
This time there was certainly no possibility of any mistake. From the
room above their heads came the feeble, quavering sobbing of an old man.
Julie threw down her book and sprang up.

"Mother, I cannot bear it any longer," she cried. "I know where the key
is, and I am going into that room."

Mrs. Da Souza's portly frame quivered with excitement.

"My child," she pleaded, "don't Julie, do remember! Your father will
know, and then--oh, I shall be frightened to death!"

"It is nothing to do with you, mother," the girl said, "I am going."

Mrs. Da Souza produced a capacious pocket-handkerchief, reeking with
scent, and dabbed her eyes with it. From the days when she too had been
like Julie, slim and pretty, she had been every hour in dread of her
husband. Long ago her spirit had been broken and her independence
subdued. To her friend and confidants no word save of pride and love
for her husband had ever passed her lips, yet now as she watched her
daughter she was conscious of a wild, passionate wish that her fate at
least might be a different one. And while she mopped her eyes and looked
backward, Julie disappeared.

Even Julie, as she ascended the stairs with the key of the locked room
in her hand, was conscious of unusual tremors. If her position with
regard to her father was not the absolute condition of serfdom into
which her mother had been ground down, she was at least afraid of him,
and she remembered the strict commands he had laid upon them all. The
room was not to be open save by himself. All cries and entreaties were
to be disregarded, every one was to behave as though that room did not
exist. They had borne it already for days, the heart-stirring moans,
the faint, despairing cries of the prisoner, and she could bear it no
longer. She had a tender little heart, and from the first it had been
moved by the appearance of the pitiful old man, leaning so heavily upon
her father's arm, as they had come up the garden walk together. She made
up her mind to satisfy herself at least that his isolation was of his
own choice. So she went boldly up the stairs and thrust the key into the
lock. A moment's hesitation, then she threw it open.

Her first impulse, when she had looked into the face of the man who
stumbled up in fear at her entrance, was to then and there abandon her
enterprise--for Monty just then was not a pleasant sight to look upon.
The room was foul with the odour of spirits and tobacco smoke. Monty
himself was unkempt and unwashed, his eyes were bloodshot, and he had
fallen half across the table with the gesture of a drunken man. At the
sight of him her pity died away. After all, then, the sobbing they had
heard was the maudlin crying of a drunken man. Yet he was very old, and
there was something about the childish, breathless fear with which he
was regarding her which made her hesitate. She lingered instead, and
finding him tongue-tied, spoke to him.

"We heard you talking to yourself downstairs," she said, "and we were
afraid that you might be in pain."

"Ah," he muttered, "That is all, then! There is no one behind you--no
one who wants me!"

"There is no one in the house," she assured him, "save my mother and
myself."

He drew a little breath which ended in a sob. "You see," he said
vaguely, "I sit up here hour by hour, and I think that I fancy things.
Only a little while ago I fancied that I heard Mr. Walsh's voice, and he
wanted the mission-box, the wooden box with the cross, you know. I keep
on thinking I hear him. Stupid, isn't it?"

He smiled weakly, and his bony fingers stole round the tumbler which
stood by his side. She shook her head at him smiling, and crossed over
to him. She was not afraid any more.

"I wouldn't drink if I were you," she said, "it can't be good for you,
I'm sure!"

"Good," he answered slowly, "it's poison--rank poison."

"If I were you," she said, "I would put all this stuff away and go for a
nice walk. It would do you much more good."

He shook his head.

"I daren't," he whispered. "They're looking for me now. I must
hide--hide all the time!"

"Who are looking for you?" she asked.

"Don't you know? Mr. Walsh and his wife! They have come over after me!"

"Why?"

"Didn't you know," he muttered, "that I am a thief?"

She shook her head.

"No, I certainly didn't. I'm very sorry!"

He nodded his head vigorously a great many times.

"Won't you tell me about it?" she asked. "Was it anything very bad?"

"I don't know," he said. "It's so hard to remember! It is something like
this! I seem to have lived for such a long time, and when I look back I
can remember things that happened a very long time ago, but then there
seems a gap, and everything is all misty, and it makes my head ache
dreadfully to try and remember," he moaned.

"Then don't try," she said kindly. "I'll read to you for a little time
if you like, and you shall sit quite quiet."

He seemed not to have heard her. He continued presently--

"Once before I died, it was all I wanted. Just to have heard her speak,
to have seen my little girl grown into a woman, and the sea was always
there, and Oom Sam would always come with that cursed rum. Then one day
came Trent and talked of money and spoke of England, and when he went
away it rang for ever in my ears, and at night I heard her calling for
me across the sea. So I stole out, and the great steamer was lying
there with red fires at her funnel, and I was mad. She was crying for me
across the sea, so I took the money!"

She patted his hand gently. There was a lump in her throat, and her eyes
were wet.

"Was it your daughter you wanted so much to see?" she asked softly.

"My daughter! My little girl," he answered! "And I heard her calling to
me with her mother's voice across the sea. So I took the money."

"No one would blame you very much for that, I am sure," she said
cheerfully. "You are frightening yourself needlessly. I will speak to
Father, and he shall help you."

He held up his hand.

"He is hiding me," he whispered. "It is through him I knew that they
were after me. I don't mind for myself, but she might get to know, and I
have brought disgrace enough upon her. Listen!"

There were footsteps upon the stairs. He clung to her in an agony of
terror.

"They are coming!" he cried. "Hide me! Oh, hide me!"

But she too was almost equally terrified, for she had recognised her
father's tread. The door was thrown open and De Souza entered, followed
by Scarlett Trent.



CHAPTER XXXVI


The old man and the girl were equally terrified, both without cause. Da
Souza forgot for a moment to be angry at his daughter's disobedience;
and was quick to see that her presence there was all to his advantage.
Monty, as white as death, was stricken dumb to see Trent. He sank back
gasping into a chair. Trent came up to him with outstretched hands and
with a look of keen pity in his hard face.

"Monty, old chap," he said, "what on earth are you scared at? Don't
you know I'm glad to see you! Didn't I come to Attra to get you back to
England? Shake hands, partner. I've got lots of money for you and good
news."

Monty's hand was limp and cold, his eyes were glazed and expressionless.
Trent looked at the half-empty bottle by his side and turned savagely to
Da Souza.

"You blackguard!" he said in a low tone, "you wanted to kill him, did
you? Don't you know that to shut him up here and ply him with brandy is
as much murder as though you stood with a knife at his throat?"

"He goes mad without something to drink," Da Souza muttered.

"He'll go mad fast enough with a bottle of brandy within reach, and you
know it," Trent answered fiercely. "I am going to take him away from
here."

Da Souza was no longer cringing. He shrugged his shoulders and thrust
his fat little hands into his trousers pockets.

"Very well," he said darkly, "you go your own way. You won't take my
advice. I've been a City man all my life, and I know a thing or two. You
bring Monty to the general meeting of the Bekwando Company and explain
his position, and I tell you, you'll have the whole market toppling
about your ears. No concern of mine, of course. I have got rid of a few
of my shares, and I'll work a few more off before the crash. But what
about you? What about Scarlett Trent, the millionaire?"

"I can afford to lose a bit," Trent answered quietly, "I'm not afraid."

Da Souza laughed a little hysterically.

"You think you're a financial genius, I suppose," he said, "because
you've brought a few things off. Why, you don't know the A B C of the
thing. I tell you this, my friend. A Company like the Bekwando Company
is very much like a woman's reputation, drop a hint or two, start just a
bit of talk, and I tell you the flames'll soon do the work."

Trent turned his back upon him.

"Monty," he said, "you aren't afraid to come with me?"

Monty looked at him, perplexed and troubled.

"You've nothing to be afraid of," Trent continued. "As to the money at
Mr. Walsh's house, I settled that all up with him before I left Attra.
It belonged to you really, for I'd left more than that for you."

"There is no one, then," Monty asked in a slow, painful whisper, "who
will put me in prison?"

"I give you my word, Monty," Trent declared, "that there is not a single
soul who has any idea of the sort."

"You see, it isn't that I mind," Monty continued in a low, quivering
voice, "but there's my little girl! My real name might come out, and I
wouldn't have her know what I've been for anything."

"She shall not know," Trent said, "I'll promise you'll be perfectly safe
with me."

Monty rose up weakly. His knees were shaking, and he was in a pitiful
state. He cast a sidelong glance at the brandy bottle by his side, and
his hand stole out towards it. But Trent stopped him gently but firmly.

"Not now, Monty," he said, "you've had enough of that!"

The man's hand dropped to his side. He looked into Trent's face, and the
years seemed to fade away into a mist.

"You were always a hard man, Scarlett Trent," he said. "You were always
hard on me!"

"Maybe so," Trent answered, "yet you'd have died in D.T. before now but
for me! I kept you from it as far as I could. I'm going to keep you from
it now!"

Monty turned a woebegone face around the little room.

"I don't know," he said; "I'm comfortable here, and I'm too old, Trent,
to live your life. I'd begin again, Trent, I would indeed, if I were
ten years younger. It's too late now! I couldn't live a day without
something to keep up my strength!"

"He's quite right, Trent," Da Souza put in hastily. "He's too old to
start afresh now. He's comfortable here and well looked after; make him
an allowance, or give him a good lump sum in lieu of all claims. I'll
draw it out; you'll sign it, won't you, Monty? Be reasonable, Trent!
It's the best course for all of us!"

But Trent shook his head. "I have made up my mind," he said. "He must
come with me. Monty, there is the little girl!

"Too late," Monty moaned; "look at me!"

"But if you could leave her a fortune, make her magnificent presents?"

Monty wavered then. His dull eyes shone once more!

"If I could do that," he murmured.

"I pledge my word that you shall," Trent answered. Monty rose up.

"I am ready," he said simply. "Let us start at once."

Da Souza planted himself in front of them.

"You defy me!" he said. "You will not trust him with me or take my
advice. Very well, my friend! Now listen! You want to ruin me! Well,
if I go, the Bekwando Company shall go too, you understand! Ruin for me
shall mean ruin for Mr. Scarlett Trent--ah, ruin and disgrace. It shall
mean imprisonment if I can bring it about, and I have friends! Don't you
know that you are guilty of fraud? You sold what wasn't yours and put
the money in your pocket! You left your partner to rot in a fever swamp,
or to be done to death by those filthy blacks. The law will call
that swindling! You will find yourself in the dock, my friend, in the
prisoners' dock, I say! Come, how do you like that, Mr. Scarlett Trent?
If you leave this room with him, you are a ruined man. I shall see to
it."

Trent swung him out of the way--a single contemptuous turn of the wrist,
and Da Souza reeled against the mantelpiece. He held out his hand to
Monty and they left the room together.



CHAPTER XXXVII


"From a conversational point of view," Lady Tresham remarked, "our guest
to-night seems scarcely likely to distinguish himself."

Ernestine looked over her fan across the drawing-room.

"I have never seen such an alteration in a man," she said, "in so short
a time. This morning he amazed me. He knew the right people and did the
right things--carried himself too like a man who is sure of himself.
To-night he is simply a booby."

"Perhaps it is his evening clothes," Lady Tresham remarked, "they take
some getting used to, I believe."

"This morning," Ernestine said, "he had passed that stage altogether.
This is, I suppose, a relapse! Such a nuisance for you!"

Lady Tresham rose and smiled sweetly at the man who was taking her in.

"Well, he is to be your charge, so I hope you may find him more amusing
than he looks," she answered.

It was an early dinner, to be followed by a visit to a popular theatre.
A few hours ago Trent was looking forward to his evening with the
keenest pleasure--now he was dazed--he could not readjust his point of
view to the new conditions. He knew very well that it was his wealth,
and his wealth only, which had brought him as an equal amongst these
people, all, so far as education and social breeding was concerned, of
so entirely a different sphere. He looked around the table. What would
they say if they knew? He would be thrust out as an interloper. Opposite
to him was a Peer who was even then engaged in threading the meshes of
the Bankruptcy Court, what did they care for that?--not a whit! He was
of their order though he was a beggar. But as regards himself, he was
fully conscious of the difference. The measure of his wealth was the
measure of his standing amongst them. Without it he would be thrust
forth--he could make no claim to association with them. The thought
filled him with a slow, bitter anger. He sent away his soup untasted,
and he could not find heart to speak to the girl who had been the
will-o'-the-wisp leading him into this evil plight.

Presently she addressed him.

"Mr. Trent!"

He turned round and looked at her.

"Is it necessary for me to remind you, I wonder," she said, "that it is
usual to address a few remarks--quite as a matter of form, you know--to
the woman whom you bring in to dinner?"

He eyed her dispassionately.

"I am not used to making conversation," he said. "Is there anything in
the world which I could talk about likely to interest you?"

She took a salted almond from a silver dish by his side and smiled
sweetly upon him. "Dear me!" she said, "how fierce! Don't attempt it
if you feel like that, please! What have you been doing since I saw you
last?--losing your money or your temper, or both?"

He looked at her with a curiously grim smile.

"If I lost the former," he said, "I should very soon cease to be a
person of interest, or of any account at all, amongst your friends."

She shrugged her shoulders.

"You do not strike one," she remarked, "as the sort of person likely to
lose a fortune on the race-course."

"You are quite right," he answered, "I think that I won money. A couple
of thousand at least."

"Two thousand pounds!" She actually sighed, and lost her appetite for
the oyster patty with which she had been trifling. Trent looked around
the table.

"At the same time," he continued in a lower key, "I'll make a confession
to you, Miss Wendermott, I wouldn't care to make to any one else here.
I've been pretty lucky as you know, made money fast--piled it up in
fact. To-day, for the first time, I have come face to face with the
possibility of a reverse."

"Is this a new character?" she murmured. "Are you becoming
faint-hearted?"

"It is no ordinary reverse," he said slowly. "It is
collapse--everything!"

"O--oh!"

She looked at him attentively. Her own heart was beating. If he had
not been engrossed by his care lest any one might over-hear their
conversation, he would have been astonished at the change in her face.

"You are talking in enigmas surely," she said. "Nothing of that sort
could possibly happen to you. They tell me that the Bekwando Land shares
are priceless, and that you must make millions."

"This afternoon," he said, raising his glass to his lips and draining
it, "I think that I must have dozed upon the lawn at Ascot. I sat there
for some time, back amongst the trees, and I think that I must have
fallen to sleep. There was a whisper in my ears and I saw myself
stripped of everything. How was it? I forget now! A concession
repudiated, a bank failure, a big slump--what does it matter? The money
was gone, and I was simply myself again, Scarlett Trent, a labourer,
penniless and of no account."

"It must have been an odd sensation," she said thoughtfully.

"I will tell you what it made me realise," he said. "I am drifting into
a dangerous position. I am linking myself to a little world to whom,
personally, I am as nothing and less than nothing. I am tolerated for my
belongings! If by any chance I were to lose these, what would become of
me?"

"You are a man," she said, looking at him earnestly; "you have the nerve
and wits of a man, what you have done before you might do again."

"In the meantime I should be ostracised."

"By a good many people, no doubt."

He held his peace for a time, and ate and drank what was set before him.
He was conscious that his was scarcely a dinner-table manner. He was
too eager, too deeply in earnest. People opposite were looking at them,
Ernestine talked to her vis-a-vis. It was some time before he spoke
again, when he did he took up the thread of their conversation where he
had left it.

"By the majority, of course," he said. "I have wondered sometimes
whether there might be any one who would be different."

"I should be sorry," she said demurely.

"Sorry, yes; so would the tradespeople who had had my money and the men
who call themselves my friends and forget that they are my debtors."

"You are cynical."

"I cannot help it," he answered. "It is my dream. To-day, you know, I
have stood face to face with evil things."

"Do you know," she said, "I should never have called you a dreamer, a
man likely to fancy things. I wonder if anything has really happened to
make you talk like this?"

He flashed a quick glance at her underneath his heavy brows. Nothing in
her face betrayed any more than the most ordinary interest in what
he was saying. Yet somehow, from that moment, he had uneasy doubts
concerning her, whether there might be by any chance some reason for
the tolerance and the interest with which she had regarded him from the
first. The mere suspicion of it was a shock to him. He relapsed once
more into a state of nervous silence. Ernestine yawned, and her hostess
threw more than one pitying glance towards her.

Afterwards the whole party adjourned to the theatre, altogether in an
informal manner. Some of the guests had carriages waiting, others went
down in hansoms. Ernestine was rather late in coming downstairs and
found Trent waiting for her in the hall. She was wearing a wonderful
black satin opera cloak with pale green lining, her maid had touched up
her hair and wound a string of pearls around her neck. He watched her
as she came slowly down the stairs, buttoning her gloves, and looking at
him with eyebrows faintly raised to see him waiting there alone. After
all, what folly! Was it likely that wealth, however great, could ever
make him of her world, could ever bring him in reality one degree nearer
to her? That night he had lost all confidence. He told himself that it
was the rankest presumption to even think of her.

"The others," he said, "have gone on. Lady Tresham left word that I was
to take you."

She glanced at the old-fashioned clock which stood in the corner of the
hall.

"How ridiculous to have hurried so!" she said. "One might surely be
comfortable here instead of waiting at the theatre."

She walked towards the door with him. His own little night-brougham was
waiting there, and she stepped into it.

"I am surprised at Lady Tresham," she said, smiling. "I really don't
think that I am at all properly chaperoned. This comes, I suppose, from
having acquired a character for independence."

Her gown seemed to fill the carriage--a little sea of frothy lace and
muslin. He hesitated on the pavement.

"Shall I ride outside?" he suggested. "I don't want to crush you."

She gathered up her skirt at once and made room for him. He directed the
driver and stepped in beside her.

"I hope," she said, "that your cigarette restored your spirits. You are
not going to be as dull all the evening as you were at dinner, are you?"

He sighed a little wistfully. "I'd like to talk to you," he said simply,
"but somehow to-night... you know it was much easier when you were a
journalist from the 'Hour'."

"Well, that is what I am now," she said, laughing. "Only I can't get
away from all my old friends at once. The day after to-morrow I shall be
back at work."

"Do you mean it?" he asked incredulously.

"Of course I do! You don't suppose I find this sort of thing
particularly amusing, do you? Hasn't it ever occurred to you that
there must be a terrible sameness about people who have been brought
up amongst exactly the same surroundings and taught to regard life from
exactly the same point of view?"

"But you belong to them--you have their instincts."

"I may belong to them in some ways, but you know that I am a revolted
daughter. Haven't I proved it? Haven't I gone out into the world, to
the horror of all my relatives, for the sole purpose of getting a firmer
grip of life? And yet, do you know, Mr. Trent, I believe that to-night
you have forgotten that. You have remembered my present character only,
and, in despair of interesting a fashionable young lady, you have not
talked to me at all, and I have been very dull."

"It is quite true," he assented. "All around us they were talking of
things of which I knew nothing, and you were one of them."

"How foolish! You could have talked to me about Fred and the road-making
in Africa and I should have been more interested than in anything they
could have said to me."

They were passing a brilliantly-lit corner, and the light flashed upon
his strong, set face with its heavy eyebrows and firm lips. He leaned
back and laughed hoarsely. Was it her fancy, she wondered, or did he
seem not wholly at his ease.

"Haven't I told you a good deal? I should have thought that Fred and I
between us had told you all about Africa that you would care to hear."

She shook her head. What she said next sounded to him, in a certain
sense, enigmatic.

"There is a good deal left for you to tell me," she said. "Some day I
shall hope to know everything."

He met her gaze without flinching.

"Some day," he said, "I hope you will."



CHAPTER XXXVIII


The carriage drew up at the theatre and he handed her out--a little
awkwardly perhaps, but without absolute clumsiness. They found all the
rest of the party already in their seats and the curtain about to go up.
They took the two end stalls, Trent on the outside. One chair only, next
to him, remained unoccupied.

"You people haven't hurried," Lady Tresham remarked, leaning forward.

"We are in time at any rate," Ernestine answered, letting her cloak fall
upon the back of the stall.

The curtain was rung up and the play began. It was a modern society
drama, full of all the most up-to-date fashionable jargon and topical
illusions. Trent grew more and more bewildered at every moment.
Suddenly, towards the end of the first act, a fine dramatic situation
leaped out like a tongue of fire. The interest of the whole audience, up
to then only mildly amused, became suddenly intense. Trent sat forward
in his seat. Ernestine ceased to fan herself. The man and the woman
stood face to face--the light badinage which had been passing between
them suddenly ended--the man, with his sin stripped bare, mercilessly
exposed, the woman, his accuser, passionately eloquent, pouring out her
scorn upon a mute victim. The audience knew what the woman in the play
did not know, that it was for love of her that the man had sinned, to
save her from a terrible danger which had hovered very near her life.
The curtain fell, the woman leaving the room with a final taunt flung
over her shoulder, the man seated at a table looking steadfastly into
the fire with fixed, unseeing eyes. The audience drew a little breath
and then applauded; the orchestra struck up and a buzz of conversation
began.

It was then that Ernestine first noticed how absorbed the man at her
side had become. His hands were gripping the arms of the stall, his eyes
were fixed upon the spot somewhere behind the curtain where this sudden
little drama had been played out, as though indeed they could pierce the
heavy upholstery and see beyond into the room where the very air seemed
quivering still with the vehemence of the woman's outpoured scorn.
Ernestine spoke to him at last, the sound of her voice brought him back
with a start to the present.

"You like it?"

"The latter part," he answered. "What a sudden change! At first I
thought it rubbish, afterwards it was wonderful!"

"Hubert is a fine actor," she remarked, fanning herself. "It was his
first opportunity in the play, and he certainly took advantage of it."

He turned deliberately round in his seat towards her, and she was struck
with the forceful eagerness of his dark, set face.

"The man," he whispered hoarsely, "sinned for the love of the woman.
Was he right? Would a woman forgive a man who deceived her for her own
sake--when she knew?"

Ernestine held up her programme and studied it deeply.

"I cannot tell," she said, "it depends."

Trent drew a little breath and turned away. A quiet voice from his other
side whispered in his ear--"The woman would forgive if she cared for the
man."

     *           *           *           *           *

Trent turned sharply and the light died out of his voice. Surely it
was an evil omen, this man's coming; for it was Captain Francis who
had taken the vacant seat and who was watching his astonishment with a
somewhat saturnine smile.

"Rather a stupid play, isn't it? By the by, Trent, I wish you would ask
Miss Wendermott's permission to present me. I met her young cousin out
at Attra."

Ernestine heard and leaned forward smiling. Trent did as he was asked,
with set teeth and an ill grace. From then, until the curtain went up
for the next act, he had only to sit still and listen.

Afterwards the play scarcely fulfilled the promise of its commencement.
At the third act Trent had lost all interest in it. Suddenly an idea
occurred to him. He drew a card from his pocket and, scribbling a word
or two on it, passed it along to Lady Tresham. She leaned forward and
smiled approval upon him.

"Delightful!"

Trent reached for his hat and whispered in Ernestine's ear.

"You are all coming to supper with me at the 'Milan,'" he said; "I am
going on now to see about it."

She smiled upon him, evidently pleased.

"What a charming idea! But do you mean all of us?"

"Why not?"

He found his carriage outside without much difficulty and drove quickly
round to the Milan Restaurant. The director looked doubtful.

"A table for eighteen, sir! It is quite too late to arrange it, except
in a private room."

"The ladies prefer the large room," Trent answered decidedly, "and you
must arrange it somehow. I'll give you carte blanche as to what you
serve, but it must be of the best."

The man bowed. This must be a millionaire, for the restaurant was the
"Milan."

"And the name, sir?"

"Scarlett Trent--you may not know me, but Lady Tresham, Lord Colliston,
and the Earl of Howton are amongst my guests."

The man saw no more difficulties. The name of Scarlett Trent was the
name which impressed him. The English aristocrat he had but little
respect for, but a millionaire was certainly next to the gods.

"We must arrange the table crossways, sir, at the end of the room," he
said. "And about the flowers?"

"The best, and as many as you can get," Trent answered shortly. "I have
a 100 pound note with me. I shall not grumble if I get little change out
of it, but I want value for the money."

"You shall have it, sir!" the man answered significantly--and he kept
his word.

Trent reached the theatre only as the people were streaming out. In the
lobby he came face to face with Ernestine and Francis. They were talking
together earnestly, but ceased directly they saw him.

"I have been telling Captain Francis," Ernestine said, "of your
delightful invitation."

"I hope that Captain Francis will join us," Trent said coldly.

Francis stepped behind for a moment to light a cigarette.

"I shall be delighted," he answered.

     *           *           *           *           *

The supper party was one of those absolute and complete successes which
rarely fall to the lot of even the most carefully thought out of social
functions. Every one of Lady Tresham's guests had accepted the hurried
invitation, every one seemed in good spirits, and delighted at the
opportunity of unrestrained conversation after several hours at the
theatre. The supper itself, absolutely the best of its kind, from the
caviare and plovers' eggs to the marvellous ices, and served in one of
the handsomest rooms in London, was really beyond criticism. To Trent
it seemed almost like a dream, as he leaned back in his chair and
looked down at the little party--the women with their bare shoulders and
jewels, bathed in the soft glow of the rose-shaded electric lights, the
piles of beautiful pink and white flowers, the gleaming silver, and the
wine which frothed in their glasses. The music of the violins on the
balcony blended with the soft, gay voices of the women. Ernestine was by
his side, every one was good-humoured and enjoying his hospitality.
Only one face at the table was a reminder of the instability of his
fortunes--a face he had grown to hate during the last few hours with
a passionate, concentrated hatred. Yet the man was of the same race as
these people, his connections were known to many of them, he was making
new friends and reviving old ties every moment. During a brief lull in
the conversation his clear, soft voice suddenly reached Trent's ears. He
was telling a story.

"Africa," he was saying, "is a country of surprises. Attra seems to be
a city of hopeless exile for all white people. Last time I was there I
used to notice every day a very old man making a pretence of working
in a kitchen garden attached to a little white mission-house--a Basle
Society depot. He always seemed to be leaning on his spade, always
gazing out seawards in the same intent, fascinated way. Some one told me
his history at last. He was an Englishman of good position who had got
into trouble in his younger days and served a term of years in prison.
When he came out, sooner than disgrace his family further, he published
a false account of his death and sailed under a disguised name for
Africa. There he has lived ever since, growing older and sinking lower,
often near fortune but always missing it, a slave to bad habits, weak
and dissolute if you like, but ever keeping up his voluntary sacrifice,
ever with that unconquerable longing for one last glimpse of his own
country and his own people. I saw him, not many months ago, still there,
still with his eyes turned seawards and with the same wistful droop of
the head. Somehow I can't help thinking that that old man was also a
hero."

The tinkling of glasses and the sort murmuring of whispered conversation
had ceased during Francis' story. Every one was a little affected--the
soft throbbing of the violins upon the balcony was almost a relief. Then
there was a little murmur of sympathetic remarks--but amongst it all
Trent sat at the head of the table with white, set face but with red
fire before his eyes. This man had played him false. He dared not look
at Ernestine--only he knew that her eyes were wet with tears and that
her bosom was heaving.

The spirits of men and women who sup are mercurial things, and it was a
gay leave-taking half an hour or so later in the little Moorish room
at the head of the staircase. But Ernestine left her host without even
appearing to see his outstretched hand, and he let her go without a
word. Only when Francis would have followed her Trent laid a heavy hand
upon his shoulder.

"I must have a word with you, Francis," he said.

"I will come back," he said. "I must see Miss Wendermott into her
carriage."

But Trent's hand remained there, a grip of iron from which there was no
escaping. He said nothing, but Francis knew his man and had no idea of
making a scene. So he remained till the last had gone and a tall, black
servant had brought their coats from the cloak-room.

"You will come with me please," Trent said, "I have a few words to say
to you."

Francis shrugged his shoulders and obeyed.



CHAPTER XXXIX


Scarcely a word passed between the two men until they found themselves
in the smoking-room of Trent's house. A servant noiselessly arranged
decanters and cigars upon the sideboard, and, in response to an
impatient movement of Trent's, withdrew. Francis lit a cigarette. Trent,
contrary to his custom, did not smoke. He walked to the door and softly
locked it. Then he returned and stood looking down at his companion.

"Francis," he said, "you have been my enemy since the day I saw you
first in Bekwando village."

"Scarcely that," Francis objected. "I have distrusted you since then if
you like."

"Call it what you like," Trent answered. "Only to-night you have served
me a scurvy trick. You were a guest at my table and you gave me not the
slightest warning. On the contrary, this morning you offered me a week's
respite."

"The story I told," Francis answered, "could have had no significance to
them."

"I don't know whether you are trying to deceive me or not," Trent said,
"only if you do not know, let me tell you--Miss Wendermott is that old
man's daughter!"

The man's start was real. There was no doubt about that. "And she knew?"

"She knew that he had been in Africa, but she believed that he had
died there. What she believes at this moment I cannot tell. Your story
evidently moved her. She will probably try to find out from you the
truth."

Francis nodded.

"She has asked me to call upon her to-morrow."

"Exactly. Now, forgive my troubling you with personal details, but
you've got to understand. I mean Miss Wendermott to be my wife."

Francis sat up in his chair genuinely surprised. Something like a scowl
was on his dark, sallow face.

"Your wife!" he exclaimed, "aren't you joking, Trent?"

"I am not," Trent answered sharply. "From the moment I saw her that has
been my fixed intention. Every one thinks of me as simply a speculator
with the money fever in my veins. Perhaps that was true once. It isn't
now! I must be rich to give her the position she deserves. That's all I
care for money."'

"I am very much interested," Francis said slowly, "to hear of your
intentions. Hasn't it occurred to you, however, that your behaviour
toward Miss Wendermott's father will take a great deal of explanation?"

"If there is no interference," Trent said, "I can do it. There is
mystery on her part too, for I offered a large reward and news of him
through my solicitor, and she actually refused to reply. She has refused
any money accruing to her through her father, or to be brought into
contact with any one who could tell her about him."

"The fact," Francis remarked drily, "is scarcely to her credit. Monty
may have been disreputable enough, I've no doubt he was; but his
going away and staying there all these years was a piece of noble
unselfishness."

"Monty has been hardly used in some ways," Trent said. "I've done my
best by him, though."

"That," Francis said coldly, "is a matter of opinion."

"I know very well," Trent answered, "what yours is. You are welcome to
it. You can blackguard me all round London if you like in a week--but I
want a week's grace."

"Why should I grant it you?"

Trent shrugged his shoulders.

"I won't threaten," he said, "and I won't offer to bribe you, but I've
got to have that week's grace. We're both men, Francis, who've been
accustomed to our own way, I think. I want to know on what terms you'll
grant it me."

Francis knocked the ash off his cigarette and rose slowly to his feet.

"You want to know," he repeated meditatively, "on what terms I'll hold
my tongue for a week. Well, here's my answer! On no terms at all!"

"You don't mean that," Trent said quietly.

"We shall see," Francis answered grimly. "I'll be frank with you, Trent.
When we came in here you called me your enemy. Well, in a sense you were
right. I distrusted and disliked you from the moment I first met you
in Bekwando village with poor old Monty for a partner, and read the
agreement you had drawn up and the clause about the death of either
making the survivor sole legatee. In a regular fever swamp Monty was
drinking poison like water--and you were watching. That may have seemed
all right to you. To me it was very much like murder. It was my mistrust
of you which made me send men after you both through the bush, and,
sure enough, they found poor Monty abandoned, left to die while you had
hastened off to claim your booty. After that I had adventures enough
of my own for a bit and I lost sight of you until I came across you and
your gang road-making, and I am bound to admit that you saved my life.
That's neither here nor there. I asked about Monty and you told me some
plausible tale. I went to the place you spoke of--to find him of course
spirited away. We have met again in England, Scarlett Trent, and I
have asked once more for Monty. Once more I am met with evasions. This
morning I granted you a week--now I take back my word. I am going to
make public what I know to-morrow morning."

"Since this morning, then," Trent said, "your ill-will toward me has
increased."

"Quite true," Francis answered. "We are playing with the cards upon
the table, so I will be frank with you. What you told me about your
intentions towards Miss Wendermott makes me determined to strike at
once!"

"You yourself, I fancy," Trent said quietly, "admired her?"

"More than any woman I have ever met," Francis answered promptly, "and I
consider your attitude towards her grossly presumptuous."

Trent stood quite still for a moment--then he unlocked the door.

"You had better go, Francis," he said quietly. "I have a defence
prepared but I will reserve it. And listen, when I locked that door it
was with a purpose. I had no mind to let you leave as you are leaving.
Never mind. You can go--only be quick."

Francis paused upon the threshold. "You understand," he said
significantly.

"I understand," Trent answered.

     *           *           *           *           *

An hour passed, and Trent still remained in the chair before his
writing-table, his head upon his hand, his eyes fixed upon vacancy.
Afterwards he always thought of that hour as one of the bitterest of
his life. A strong and self-reliant man, he had all his life ignored
companionship, had been well content to live without friends,
self-contained and self-sufficient. To-night the spectre of a great
loneliness sat silently by his side! His heart was sore, his pride had
been bitterly touched, the desire and the whole fabric of his life was
in imminent and serious danger.

The man who had left him was an enemy and a prejudiced man, but Trent
knew that he was honest. He was the first human being to whom he had
ever betrayed the solitary ambition of his life, and his scornful words
seemed still to bite the air. If--he was right! Why not? Trent looked
with keen, merciless eyes through his past, and saw never a thing there
to make him glad. He had started life a workman, with a few ambitions
all of a material nature--he had lived the life of a cold, scheming
money-getter, absolutely selfish, negatively moral, doing little evil
perhaps, but less good. There was nothing in his life to make him worthy
of a woman's love, most surely there was nothing which could ever make
it possible that such a woman as Ernestine Wendermott should ever
care for him. All the wealth of Africa could never make him anything
different from what he was. And yet, as he sat and realised this, he
knew that he was writing down his life a failure. For, beside his desire
for her, there were no other things he cared for in life. Already he was
weary of financial warfare--the City life had palled upon him. He looked
around the magnificent room in the mansion which his agents had bought
and furnished for him. He looked at the pile of letters waiting for him
upon his desk, little square envelopes many of them, but all telling the
same tale, all tributes to his great success, and the mockery of it all
smote hard upon the walls of his fortitude. Lower and lower his head
drooped until it was buried in his folded arms--and the hour which
followed he always reckoned the bitterest of his life.



CHAPTER XL


A little earlier than usual next morning Trent was at his office in the
City, prepared for the worst, and in less than half an hour he found
himself face to face with one of those crises known to most great
financiers at some time or other during their lives. His credit was
not actually assailed, but it was suspended. The general public did not
understand the situation, even those who were in a measure behind the
scenes found it hard to believe that the attack upon the Bekwando Gold
and Land shares was purely a personal one. For it was Da Souza who had
fired the train, who had flung his large holding of shares upon the
market, and, finding them promptly taken up, had gone about with many
pious exclamations of thankfulness and sinister remarks. Many smaller
holders followed suit, and yet never for a moment did the market waver.
Gradually it leaked out that Scarlett Trent was the buyer, and public
interest leaped up at once. Would Trent be able to face settling-day
without putting his vast holdings upon the market? If so the bulls
were going to have the worst knock they had had for years--and
yet--and yet--the murmur went round from friend to friend--"Sell your
Bekwandos."

At midday there came an urgent message from Trent's bankers, and as he
read it he cursed. It was short but eloquent.

"DEAR SIR,--We notice that your account to-day stands 119,000 pounds
overdrawn, against which we hold as collateral security shares in
the Bekwando Land Company to the value of 150,000 pounds. As we have
received certain very disquieting information concerning the value of
these shares, we must ask you to adjust the account before closing hours
to-day, or we shall be compelled to place the shares upon the market.

"Yours truly,

"A. SINCLAIR, General Manager."


Trent tore the letter into atoms, but he never quailed. Telegraph and
telephone worked his will, he saw all callers, a cigar in his mouth and
flower in his buttonhole, perfectly at his ease, sanguine and confident.
A few minutes before closing time he strolled into the bank and no one
noticed a great bead of perspiration which stood out upon his forehead.
He made out a credit slip for 119,000 pounds, and, passing it across the
counter with a roll of notes and cheques, asked for his shares.

They sent for the manager. Trent was ushered with much ceremony into his
private room. The manager was flushed and nervous.

"I am afraid you must have misunderstood my note, Mr. Trent," he
stammered. But Trent, remembering all that he had gone through to raise
the money, stopped him short.

"This is not a friendly call, Mr. Sinclair," he said, "but simply a
matter of business. I wish to clear my account with you to the last
halfpenny, and I will take my shares away with me. I have paid in the
amount I owe. Let one of your clerks make out the interest account."

The manager rang the bell for the key of the security safe. He opened it
and took out the shares with fingers which trembled a good deal.

"Did I understand you, Mr. Trent, that you desired to absolutely close
the account?" he asked.

"Most decidedly," Trent answered.

"We shall be very sorry to lose you."

"The sorrow will be all on your side, then," Trent answered grimly. "You
have done your best to ruin me, you and that blackguard Da Souza, who
brought me here. If you had succeeded in lumping those shares upon the
market to-day or to-morrow, you know very well what the result would
have been. I don't know whose game you have been playing, but I can
guess!"

"I can assure you, Mr. Trent," the manager declared in his suavest
and most professional manner, "that you are acting under a complete
misapprehension. I will admit that our notice was a little short.
Suppose we withdraw it altogether, eh? I am quite satisfied. We will put
back the shares in the safe and you shall keep your money."

"No, I'm d--d if you do!" Trent answered bluntly. "You've had your money
and I'll have the shares. I don't leave this bank without them, and I'll
be shot if ever I enter it again."

So Trent, with his back against the wall and not a friend to help him,
faced for twenty-four hours the most powerful bull syndicate which had
ever been formed against a single Company. Inquiries as to his right
of title had poured in upon him, and to all of them he had returned the
most absolute and final assurances. Yet he knew when closing-time came,
that he had exhausted every farthing he possessed in the world--it
seemed hopeless to imagine that he could survive another day. But with
the morning came a booming cable from Bekwando. There had been a great
find of gold before ever a shaft had been sunk; an expert, from whom as
yet nothing had been heard, wired an excited and wonderful report. Then
the men who had held on to their Bekwandos rustled their morning papers
and walked smiling to their offices. Prices leaped up. Trent's directors
ceased to worry him and wired invitations to luncheon at the West End.
The bulls were the sport of everybody. When closing-time came Trent had
made 100,000 pounds, and was looked upon everywhere as one of the rocks
of finance.

Only then he began to realise what the strain had been to him. His hard,
impassive look had never altered, he had been seen everywhere in his
accustomed City haunts, his hat a little better brushed than usual, his
clothes a little more carefully put on, his buttonhole more obvious and
his laugh readier. No one guessed the agony through which he had passed,
no one knew that he had spent the night at a little inn twelve miles
away, to which he had walked after nine o'clock at night. He had not
a single confidant, even his cashier had no idea whence came the large
sums of money which he had paid away right and left. But when it was
all over he left the City, and, leaning back in the corner of his little
brougham, was driven away to Pont Street. Here he locked himself in his
room, took off his coat and threw himself upon a sofa with a big cigar
between his teeth.

"If you let any one in to see me, Miles," he told the footman, "I'll
kick you out of the house." So, though the bell rang often, he remained
alone. But as he lay there with half-closed eyes living again through
the tortures of the last few hours, he heard a voice that startled him.
It was surely hers--already! He sprang up and opened the door. Ernestine
and Captain Francis were in the hall.

He motioned them to follow him into the room. Ernestine was flushed
and her eyes were very bright. She threw up her veil and faced him
haughtily. "Where is he?" she asked. "I know everything. I insist upon
seeing him at once."

"That," he said coolly, "will depend upon whether he is fit to see you!"

He rang the bell.

"Tell Miss Fullagher to step this way a moment," he ordered.

"He is in this house, then," she cried. He took no notice. In a moment
a young woman dressed in the uniform of one of the principal hospitals
entered.

"Miss Fullagher," he asked, "how is the patient?"

"We've had a lot of trouble with him, sir," she said significantly. "He
was terrible all last night, and he's very weak this morning. Is this
the young lady, sir?"

"This is the young lady who I told you would want to see him when you
thought it advisable."

The nurse looked doubtful. "Sir Henry is upstairs, sir," she said. "I
had better ask his advice."

Trent nodded and she withdrew. The three were left alone, Ernestine and
Francis remained apart as though by design. Trent was silent.

She returned in a moment or two.

"Sir Henry has not quite finished his examination, sir," she announced.
"The young lady can come up in half an hour."

Again they were left alone. Then Trent crossed the room and stood
between them and the door.

"Before you see your father, Miss Wendermott," he said, "I have an
explanation to make to you!"



CHAPTER XLI


She looked at him calmly, but in her set, white face he seemed to read
already his sentence!

"Do you think it worth while, Mr. Trent? There is so much, as you put
it, to be explained, that the task, even to a man of your versatility,
seems hopeless!"

"I shall not trouble you long," he said. "At least one man's word should
be as good as another's--and you have listened to what my enemy"--he
motioned towards Francis--"has to say."

Francis shrugged his shoulders.

"I can assure you," he interrupted, "that I have no feeling of enmity
towards you in the slightest. My opinion you know. I have never troubled
to conceal it. But I deny that I am prejudiced by any personal feeling."

Trent ignored his speech.

"What I have to say to you," he continued addressing Ernestine, "I want
to say before you see your father. I won't take up your time. I won't
waste words. I take you back ten years to when I met him at Attra and we
became partners in a certain enterprise. Your father at that time was a
harmless wreck of a man who was fast killing himself with brandy. He
had some money, I had none. With it we bought the necessary outfit and
presents for my enterprise and started for Bekwando. The whole of the
work fell to my share, and with great trouble I succeeded in obtaining
the concessions we were working for. Your father spent all his time
drinking, and playing cards, when I would play with him. The agreement
as to the sharing of the profits was drawn up, it is true, by me, but at
that time he made no word of complaint. I had no relations, he described
himself as cut off wholly from his. It was here Francis first came
on the scene. He found your father half drunk, and when he read the
agreement it was plain what he thought. He thought that I was letting
your father kill himself that the whole thing might be mine. He has
probably told you so. I deny it. I did all I could to keep him sober!

"On our homeward way your father was ill and our bearers deserted us. We
were pursued by the natives, who repented their concession, and I had
to fight them more than once, half a dozen strong, with your father
unconscious at my feet. It is true that I left him in the bush, but it
was at his bidding and I believed him dying. It was my only chance and
I took it. I escaped and reached Attra. Then, to raise money to reach
England, I had to borrow from a man named Da Souza, and afterwards,
in London, to start the Company, I had to make him my partner in the
profits of the concession. One day I quarrelled with him--it was just
at the time I met you--and then, for the first time, I heard of your
father's being alive. I went out to Africa to bring him back and Da
Souza followed me in abject fear, for as my partner he lost half if your
father's claim was good. I found your father infirm and only half sane.
I did all I could for him whilst I worked in the interior, and meant
to bring him back to England with me when I came, unfortunately he
recovered a little and suddenly seized upon the idea of visiting
England. He left before me and fell into the hands of Da Souza, who
had the best possible reasons in the world for keeping him in the
background. I rescued him from them in time to save him from death and
brought him to my own house, sent for doctors and nurses, and, when
he was fit for you to see, I should have sent for you. I did not, I'll
admit, make any public declaration of his existence, for the simple
reason that it would have crippled our Company, and there are the
interests of the shareholders to be considered, but I executed and
signed a deed of partnership days ago which makes him an equal sharer in
every penny I possess. Now this is the truth, Miss Wendermott, and if
it is not a story I am particularly proud of, I don't very well see what
else I could have done. It is my story and it is a true one. Will you
believe it or will you take his word against mine?"

She would have spoken, but Francis held up his hand.

"My story," he said coolly, "has been told behind your back. It is only
fair to repeat it to your face. I have told Miss Wendermott this--that I
met you first in the village of Bekwando with a concession in your hand
made out to you and her father jointly, with the curious proviso that in
the event of the death of one the other was his heir. I pointed out to
Miss Wendermott that you were in the prime of life and in magnificent
condition, while her father was already on the threshold of the grave
and drinking himself into a fever in a squalid hut in a village of
swamps. I told her that I suspected foul play, that I followed you both
and found her father left to the tender mercies of the savages,
deserted by you in the bush. I told her that many months afterwards he
disappeared, simultaneously with your arrival in the country, that a day
or two ago you swore to me you had no idea where he was. That has been
my story, Trent, let Miss Wendermott choose between them."

"I am content," Trent cried fiercely. "Your story is true enough, but it
is cunningly linked together. You have done your worst. Choose!"

For ever afterwards he was glad of that single look of reproach which
seemed to escape her unwittingly as her eyes met his. But she turned
away and his heart was like a stone.

"You have deceived me, Mr. Trent. I am very sorry, and very
disappointed."

"And you," he cried passionately, "are you yourself so blameless? Were
you altogether deceived by your relations, or had you never a suspicion
that your father might still be alive? You had my message through Mr.
Cuthbert; I met you day by day after you knew that I had been your
father's partner, and never once did you give yourself away! Were you
tarred with the same brush as those canting snobs who doomed a poor old
man to a living death? Doesn't it look like it? What am I to think of
you?"

"Your judgment, Mr. Trent," she answered quietly, "is of no importance
to me! It does not interest me in any way. But I will tell you this. If
I did not disclose myself, it was because I distrusted you. I wanted to
know the truth, and I set myself to find it out."

"Your friendship was a lie, then!" he cried, with flashing eyes. "To you
I was nothing but a suspected man to be spied upon and betrayed."

She faltered and did not answer him. Outside the nurse was knocking at
the door. Trent waved them away with an imperious gesture.

"Be off," he cried, "both of you! You can do your worst! I thank Heaven
that I am not of your class, whose men have flints for hearts and whose
women can lie like angels."

They left him alone, and Trent, with a groan, plucked from his heart
the one strong, sweet hope which had changed his life so wonderfully.
Upstairs, Monty was sobbing, with his little girl's arms about him.



CHAPTER XLII


With the darkness had come a wind from the sea, and the boy crept
outside in his flannels and planter's hat and threw himself down in a
cane chair with a little murmur of relief. Below him burned the white
lights of the town, a little noisier than usual to-night, for out in
the bay a steamer was lying-to, and there had been a few passengers and
cargo to land. The boy had had a hard day's work, or he would have been
in the town himself to watch for arrivals and wait for the mail. He
closed his eyes, half asleep, for the sun had been hot and the murmurs
of the sea below was almost like a lullaby. As he lay there a man's
voice from the path reached him. He sprang up, listening intently. It
must have been fancy--and yet! He leaned over the wooden balcony. The
figure of a man loomed out through the darkness, came nearer, became
distinct. Fred recognised him with a glad shout.

"Trent!" he cried. "Scarlett Trent, by all that's amazing!"

Trent held out his hand quickly. Somehow the glad young voice, quivering
with excitement, touched his heart in an unexpected and unusual manner.
It was pleasant to be welcomed like this--to feel that one person in the
world at least was glad of his coming. For Trent was a sorely stricken
man and the flavour of life had gone from him. Many a time he had looked
over the steamer's side during that long, lonely voyage and gazed almost
wishfully into the sea, in whose embrace was rest. It seemed to him
that he had been a gambler playing for great stakes, and the turn of the
wheel had gone against him.

"Fred!"

They stood with hands locked together, the boy breathless with surprise.
Then he saw that something was wrong.

"What is it, Trent?" he asked quickly. "Have we gone smash after all, or
have you been ill?"

Trent shook his head and smiled gravely.

"Neither," he said. "The Company is booming, I believe. Civilised ways
didn't agree with me, I'm afraid. That's all! I've come back to have a
month or two's hard work--the best physic in the world."

"I am delighted to see you," Fred said heartily. "Everything's going
A1 here, and they've built me this little bungalow, only got in it last
week--stunning, isn't it? But--just fancy your being here again so soon!
Are your traps coming up?"

"I haven't many," Trent answered. "They're on the way. Have you got room
for me?"

"Room for you!" the boy repeated scornfully. "Why, I'm all alone here.
It's the only thing against the place, being a bit lonely. Room for you!
I should think there is! Here, Dick! Dinner at once, and some wine!"

Trent was taken to see his room, the boy talking all the time, and later
on dinner was served and the boy did the honours, chaffing and talking
lightly. But later on when they sat outside, smoking furiously to keep
off the mosquitoes and watching the fireflies dart in and out amongst
the trees, the boy was silent. Then he leaned over and laid his hand on
Trent's arm.

"Tell me all about it--do," he begged.

Trent was startled, touched, and suddenly filled with a desire for
sympathy such as he had never before in his life experienced. He
hesitated, but it was only for a moment.

"I never thought to tell any one," he said slowly, "I think I'd like
to!"

And he did. He told his whole story. He did not spare himself. He spoke
of the days of his earlier partnership with Monty, and he admitted the
apparent brutality of his treatment of him on more than one occasion.
He spoke of Ernestine too--of his strange fancy for the photograph
of Monty's little girl, a fancy which later on when he met her became
almost immediately the dominant passion of his life. Then he spoke of
the coming of Francis, of the awakening of Ernestine's suspicions,
and of that desperate moment when he risked everything on her faith in
him--and lost. There was little else to tell and afterwards there was
a silence. But presently the boy's hand fell upon his arm almost
caressingly and he leaned over through the darkness.

"Women are such idiots," the boy declared, with all the vigour and
certainty of long experience. "If only Aunt Ernestine had known you half
as well as I do, she would have been quite content to have trusted you
and to have believed that what you did was for the best. But I say,
Trent, you ought to have waited for it. After she had seen her father
and talked with him she must have understood you better. I shall write
to her."

But Trent shook his head.

"No," he said sternly, "it is too late now. That moment taught me all I
wanted to know. It was her love I wanted, Fred, and--that--no use hoping
for that, or she would have trusted me. After all I was half a madman
ever to have expected it--a rough, coarse chap like me, with only a
smattering of polite ways! It was madness! Some day I shall get over it!
We'll chuck work for a bit, soon, Fred, and go for some lions. That'll
give us something to think about at any rate."



But the lions which Trent might have shot lived in peace, for on the
morrow he was restless and ill, and within a week the deadly fever of
the place had him in its clutches. The boy nursed him and the German
doctor came up from Attra and, when he learnt who his patient was, took
up his quarters in the place. But for all his care and the boy's nursing
things went badly with Scarlett Trent.

To him ended for a while all measure of days--time became one long
night, full of strange, tormenting flashes of thought, passing like red
fire before his burning eyes. Sometimes it was Monty crying to him from
the bush, sometimes the yelling of those savages at Bekwando seemed to
fill the air, sometimes Ernestine was there, listening to his passionate
pleading with cold, set face. In the dead of night he saw her and the
still silence was broken by his hoarse, passionate cries, which they
strove in vain to check. And when at last he lay white and still with
exhaustion, the doctor looked at the boy and softly shook his head. He
had very little hope.

Trent grew worse. In those rare flashes of semi-consciousness which
sometimes come to the fever-stricken, he reckoned himself a dying man
and contemplated the end of all things without enthusiasm and without
regret. The one and only failure of his life had eaten like canker into
his heart. It was death he craved for in the hot, burning nights, and
death came and sat, a grisly shadow, at his pillow. The doctor and the
boy did their best, but it was not they who saved him.

There came a night when he raved, and the sound of a woman's name rang
out from the open windows of the little bungalow, rang out through the
drawn mosquito netting amongst the palm-trees, across the surf-topped
sea to the great steamer which lay in the bay. Perhaps she heard
it--perhaps after all it was a fancy. Only, in the midst of his fever,
a hand as soft as velvet and as cool as the night sea-wind touched his
forehead, and a voice sounded in his ears so sweetly that the blood
burned no longer in his veins, so sweetly that he lay back upon his
pillow like a man under the influence of a strong narcotic and slept.
Then the doctor smiled and the boy sobbed.

"I came," she said softly, "because it was the only atonement I could
make. I ought to have trusted you. Do you know, even my father told me
that."

"I have made mistakes," he said, "and of course behaved badly to him."

"Now that everything has been explained," she said, "I scarcely see what
else you could have done. At least you saved him from Da Souza when his
death would have made you a freer man. He is looking forward to seeing
you, you must make haste and get strong."

"For his sake," he murmured.

She leaned over and caressed him lightly. "For mine, dear."

========================================
