========================================

A MOUNTAIN WOMAN

By Elia Wilkinson Peattie



          To

          My best Friend, and kindest Critic,

          My Husband.


Transcriber's Note: I have omitted signature designations and have
closed abbreviations, e.g., "do n't" becoming "don't," etc. In addition,
I have made the following changes to the text:

     PAGE  LINE  ORIGINAL         CHANGED TO
       38    19  seem to          seemed to
       47     9  beafsteak        beefsteak
       56     4  divertisement    divertissement
       91    19  divertisement    divertissement
      155    17  scarfs.          scarves.
      169    20  scarfs,          scarves,




FOREWORD.


MOST of the tales in this little book have been printed before. "A
Mountain Woman" appeared in Harper's Weekly, as did "The Three Johns"
and "A Resuscitation." "Jim Lancy's Waterloo" was printed in the
Cosmopolitan, "A Michigan Man" in Lippincott's, and "Up the Gulch" in
Two Tales. The courtesy of these periodicals in permitting the stories
to be republished is cordially acknowledged.

E. W. P.




Contents


     A MOUNTAIN WOMAN

     JIM LANCY'S WATERLOO

     THE THREE JOHNS

     A RESUSCITATION

     TWO PIONEERS

     UP THE GULCH

     A MICHIGAN MAN

     A LADY OF YESTERDAY




A Mountain Woman

IF Leroy Brainard had not had such a respect for literature, he would
have written a book.

As it was, he played at being an architect--and succeeded in being a
charming fellow. My sister Jessica never lost an opportunity of laughing
at his endeavors as an architect.

"You can build an enchanting villa, but what would you do with a
cathedral?"

"I shall never have a chance at a cathedral," he would reply. "And,
besides, it always seems to me so material and so impertinent to build a
little structure of stone and wood in which to worship God!"

You see what he was like? He was frivolous, yet one could never tell
when he would become eloquently earnest.

Brainard went off suddenly Westward one day. I suspected that Jessica
was at the bottom of it, but I asked no questions; and I did not hear
from him for months. Then I got a letter from Colorado.

"I have married a mountain woman," he wrote. "None of your puny breed
of modern femininity, but a remnant left over from the heroic ages,--a
primitive woman, grand and vast of spirit, capable of true and steadfast
wifehood. No sophistry about her; no knowledge even that there is
sophistry. Heavens! man, do you remember the rondeaux and triolets I
used to write to those pretty creatures back East? It would take a Saga
man of the old Norseland to write for my mountain woman. If I were an
artist, I would paint her with the north star in her locks and her feet
on purple cloud. I suppose you are at the Pier. I know you usually are
at this season. At any rate, I shall direct this letter thither, and
will follow close after it. I want my wife to see something of life. And
I want her to meet your sister."

"Dear me!" cried Jessica, when I read the letter to her; "I don't know
that I care to meet anything quite so gigantic as that mountain woman.
I'm one of the puny breed of modern femininity, you know. I don't think
my nerves can stand the encounter."

"Why, Jessica!" I protested. She blushed a little.

"Don't think bad of me, Victor. But, you see, I've a little scrap-book
of those triolets upstairs." Then she burst into a peal of irresistible
laughter. "I'm not laughing because I am piqued," she said frankly.
"Though any one will admit that it is rather irritating to have a man
who left you in a blasted condition recover with such extraordinary
promptness. As a philanthropist, one of course rejoices, but as a woman,
Victor, it must be admitted that one has a right to feel annoyed. But,
honestly, I am not ungenerous, and I am going to do him a favor. I shall
write, and urge him not to bring his wife here. A primitive woman, with
the north star in her hair, would look well down there in the Casino
eating a pineapple ice, wouldn't she? It's all very well to have a soul,
you know; but it won't keep you from looking like a guy among women who
have good dressmakers. I shudder at the thought of what the poor thing
will suffer if he brings her here."

Jessica wrote, as she said she would; but, for all that, a fortnight
later she was walking down the wharf with the "mountain woman," and I
was sauntering beside Leroy. At dinner Jessica gave me no chance to talk
with our friend's wife, and I only caught the quiet contralto tones of
her voice now and then contrasting with Jessica's vivacious soprano. A
drizzling rain came up from the east with nightfall. Little groups of
shivering men and women sat about in the parlors at the card-tables,
and one blond woman sang love songs. The Brainards were tired with their
journey, and left us early. When they were gone, Jessica burst into
eulogy.

"That is the first woman," she declared, "I ever met who would make a
fit heroine for a book."

"Then you will not feel under obligations to educate her, as you
insinuated the other day?"

"Educate her! I only hope she will help me to unlearn some of the things
I know. I never saw such simplicity. It is antique!"

"You're sure it's not mere vacuity?" "Victor! How can you? But you
haven't talked with her. You must to-morrow. Good-night." She gathered
up her trailing skirts and started down the corridor. Suddenly she
turned back. "For Heaven's sake!" she whispered, in an awed tone, "I
never even noticed what she had on!"

The next morning early we made up a riding party, and I rode with
Mrs. Brainard. She was as tall as I, and sat in her saddle as if quite
unconscious of her animal. The road stretched hard and inviting under
our horses' feet. The wind smelled salt. The sky was ragged with gray
masses of cloud scudding across the blue. I was beginning to glow with
exhilaration, when suddenly my companion drew in her horse.

"If you do not mind, we will go back," she said.

Her tone was dejected. I thought she was tired.

"Oh, no!" she protested, when I apologized for my thoughtlessness in
bringing her so far. "I'm not tired. I can ride all day. Where I come
from, we have to ride if we want to go anywhere; but here there seems to
be no particular place to--to reach."

"Are you so utilitarian?" I asked, laughingly. "Must you always have
some reason for everything you do? I do so many things just for the mere
pleasure of doing them, I'm afraid you will have a very poor opinion of
me."

"That is not what I mean," she said, flushing, and turning her large
gray eyes on me. "You must not think I have a reason for everything I
do." She was very earnest, and it was evident that she was unacquainted
with the art of making conversation. "But what I mean," she went on,
"is that there is no place--no end--to reach." She looked back over her
shoulder toward the west, where the trees marked the sky line, and an
expression of loss and dissatisfaction came over her face. "You
see," she said, apologetically, "I'm used to different things--to the
mountains. I have never been where I could not see them before in my
life."

"Ah, I see! I suppose it is odd to look up and find them not there."

"It's like being lost, this not having anything around you. At least,
I mean," she continued slowly, as if her thought could not easily put
itself in words,--"I mean it seems as if a part of the world had been
taken down. It makes you feel lonesome, as if you were living after the
world had begun to die."

"You'll get used to it in a few days. It seems very beautiful to me
here. And then you will have so much life to divert you."

"Life? But there is always that everywhere."

"I mean men and women."

"Oh! Still, I am not used to them. I think I might be not--not very
happy with them. They might think me queer. I think I would like to show
your sister the mountains."

"She has seen them often."

"Oh, she told me. But I don't mean those pretty green hills such as we
saw coming here. They are not like my mountains. I like mountains that
go beyond the clouds, with terrible shadows in the hollows, and belts
of snow lying in the gorges where the sun cannot reach, and the snow is
blue in the sunshine, or shining till you think it is silver, and the
mist so wonderful all about it, changing each moment and drifting up and
down, that you cannot tell what name to give the colors. These mountains
of yours here in the East are so quiet; mine are shouting all the time,
with the pines and the rivers. The echoes are so loud in the valley that
sometimes, when the wind is rising, we can hardly hear a man talk unless
he raises his voice. There are four cataracts near where I live, and
they all have different voices, just as people do; and one of them
is happy--a little white cataract--and it falls where the sun shines
earliest, and till night it is shining. But the others only get the sun
now and then, and they are more noisy and cruel. One of them is always
in the shadow, and the water looks black. That is partly because the
rocks all underneath it are black. It falls down twenty great ledges in
a gorge with black sides, and a white mist dances all over it at every
leap. I tell father the mist is the ghost of the waters. No man ever
goes there; it is too cold. The chill strikes through one, and makes
your heart feel as if you were dying. But all down the side of the
mountain, toward the south and the west, the sun shines on the granite
and draws long points of light out of it. Father tells me soldiers
marching look that way when the sun strikes on their bayonets. Those are
the kind of mountains I mean, Mr. Grant."

She was looking at me with her face transfigured, as if it, like the
mountains she told me of, had been lying in shadow, and waiting for the
dazzling dawn.

"I had a terrible dream once," she went on; "the most terrible dream
ever I had. I dreamt that the mountains had all been taken down, and
that I stood on a plain to which there was no end. The sky was burning
up, and the grass scorched brown from the heat, and it was twisting as
if it were in pain. And animals, but no other person save myself, only
wild things, were crouching and looking up at that sky. They could not
run because there was no place to which to go."

"You were having a vision of the last man," I said. "I wonder myself
sometimes whether this old globe of ours is going to collapse suddenly
and take us with her, or whether we will disappear through slow
disastrous ages of fighting and crushing, with hunger and blight to help
us to the end. And then, at the last, perhaps, some luckless fellow,
stronger than the rest, will stand amid the ribs of the rotting earth
and go mad."

The woman's eyes were fixed on me, large and luminous. "Yes," she said;
"he would go mad from the lonesomeness of it. He would be afraid to be
left alone like that with God. No one would want to be taken into God's
secrets."

"And our last man," I went on, "would have to stand there on that
swaying wreck till even the sound of the crumbling earth ceased. And
he would try to find a voice and would fail, because silence would have
come again. And then the light would go out--"

The shudder that crept over her made me stop, ashamed of myself.

"You talk like father," she said, with a long-drawn breath. Then she
looked up suddenly at the sun shining through a rift in those reckless
gray clouds, and put out one hand as if to get it full of the headlong
rollicking breeze. "But the earth is not dying," she cried. "It is
well and strong, and it likes to go round and round among all the other
worlds. It likes the sun and moon; they are all good friends; and it
likes the people who live on it. Maybe it is they instead of the fire
within who keep it warm; or maybe it is warm just from always going, as
we are when we run. We are young, you and I, Mr. Grant, and Leroy, and
your beautiful sister, and the world is young too!" Then she laughed a
strong splendid laugh, which had never had the joy taken out of it
with drawing-room restrictions; and I laughed too, and felt that we had
become very good companions indeed, and found myself warming to the joy
of companionship as I had not since I was a boy at school.

That afternoon the four of us sat at a table in the Casino together. The
Casino, as every one knows, is a place to amuse yourself. If you have a
duty, a mission, or an aspiration, you do not take it there with you,
it would be so obviously out of place; if poverty is ahead of you, you
forget it; if you have brains, you hasten to conceal them; they would be
a serious encumbrance.

There was a bubbling of conversation, a rustle and flutter such as there
always is where there are many women. All the place was gay with flowers
and with gowns as bright as the flowers. I remembered the apprehensions
of my sister, and studied Leroy's wife to see how she fitted into this
highly colored picture. She was the only woman in the room who seemed
to wear draperies. The jaunty slash and cut of fashionable attire were
missing in the long brown folds of cloth that enveloped her figure. I
felt certain that even from Jessica's standpoint she could not be called
a guy. Picturesque she might be, past the point of convention, but she
was not ridiculous.

"Judith takes all this very seriously," said Leroy, laughingly. "I
suppose she would take even Paris seriously."

His wife smiled over at him. "Leroy says I am melancholy," she said,
softly; "but I am always telling him that I am happy. He thinks I am
melancholy because I do not laugh. I got out of the way of it by being
so much alone. You only laugh to let some one else know you are pleased.
When you are alone there is no use in laughing. It would be like
explaining something to yourself."

"You are a philosopher, Judith. Mr. Max Mueller would like to know
you."

"Is he a friend of yours, dear?"

Leroy blushed, and I saw Jessica curl her lip as she noticed the blush.
She laid her hand on Mrs. Brainard's arm.

"Have you always been very much alone?" she inquired.

"I was born on the ranch, you know; and father was not fond of leaving
it. Indeed, now he says he will never again go out of sight of it. But
you can go a long journey without doing that; for it lies on a plateau
in the valley, and it can be seen from three different mountain passes.
Mother died there, and for that reason and others--father has had
a strange life--he never wanted to go away. He brought a lady from
Pennsylvania to teach me. She had wonderful learning, but she didn't
make very much use of it. I thought if I had learning I would not waste
it reading books. I would use it to--to live with. Father had a library,
but I never cared for it. He was forever at books too. Of course,"
she hastened to add, noticing the look of mortification deepen on her
husband's face, "I like books very well if there is nothing better at
hand. But I always said to Mrs. Windsor--it was she who taught me--why
read what other folk have been thinking when you can go out and think
yourself? Of course one prefers one's own thoughts, just as one prefers
one's own ranch, or one's own father."

"Then you are sure to like New York when you go there to live," cried
Jessica; "for there you will find something to make life entertaining
all the time. No one need fall back on books there."

"I'm not sure. I'm afraid there must be such dreadful crowds of people.
Of course I should try to feel that they were all like me, with just the
same sort of fears, and that it was ridiculous for us to be afraid of
each other, when at heart we all meant to be kind."

Jessica fairly wrung her hands. "Heavens!" she cried. "I said you would
like New York. I am afraid, my dear, that it will break your heart!"

"Oh," said Mrs. Brainard, with what was meant to be a gentle jest, "no
one can break my heart except Leroy. I should not care enough about any
one else, you know."

The compliment was an exquisite one. I felt the blood creep to my own
brain in a sort of vicarious rapture, and I avoided looking at Leroy
lest he should dislike to have me see the happiness he must feel. The
simplicity of the woman seemed to invigorate me as the cool air of her
mountains might if it blew to me on some bright dawn, when I had come,
fevered and sick of soul, from the city.

When we were alone, Jessica said to me: "That man has too much vanity,
and he thinks it is sensitiveness. He is going to imagine that his wife
makes him suffer. There's no one so brutally selfish as your sensitive
man. He wants every one to live according to his ideas, or he
immediately begins suffering. That friend of yours hasn't the courage
of his convictions. He is going to be ashamed of the very qualities that
made him love his wife."

There was a hop that night at the hotel, quite an unusual affair as to
elegance, given in honor of a woman from New York, who wrote a novel a
month.

Mrs. Brainard looked so happy that night when she came in the parlor,
after the music had begun, that I felt a moisture gather in my eyes just
because of the beauty of her joy, and the forced vivacity of the women
about me seemed suddenly coarse and insincere. Some wonderful red
stones, brilliant as rubies, glittered in among the diaphanous black
driftings of her dress. She asked me if the stones were not very pretty,
and said she gathered them in one of her mountain river-beds.

"But the gown?" I said. "Surely, you do not gather gowns like that in
river-beds, or pick them off mountain-pines?"

"But you can get them in Denver. Father always sent to Denver for my
finery. He was very particular about how I looked. You see, I was all he
had--" She broke off, her voice faltering.

"Come over by the window," I said, to change her thought. "I have
something to repeat to you. It is a song of Sydney Lanier's. I think he
was the greatest poet that ever lived in America, though not many agree
with me. But he is my dear friend anyway, though he is dead, and I never
saw him; and I want you to hear some of his words."

I led her across to an open window. The dancers were whirling by us.
The waltz was one of those melancholy ones which speak the spirit of the
dance more eloquently than any merry melody can. The sound of the sea
booming beyond in the darkness came to us, and long paths of light, now
red, now green, stretched toward the distant light-house. These were the
lines I repeated:--

     "What heartache--ne'er a hill!
     Inexorable, vapid, vague, and chill
     The drear sand levels drain my spirit low.
     With one poor word they tell me all they know;
     Whereat their stupid tongues, to tease my pain,
     Do drawl it o'er and o'er again.
     They hurt my heart with griefs I cannot name;
        Always the same--the same."


But I got no further. I felt myself moved with a sort of passion which
did not seem to come from within, but to be communicated to me from her.
A certain unfamiliar happiness pricked through with pain thrilled me,
and I heard her whispering,--

"Do not go on, do not go on! I cannot stand it to-night!"

"Hush," I whispered back; "come out for a moment!" We stole into the
dusk without, and stood there trembling. I swayed with her emotion.
There was a long silence. Then she said: "Father may be walking alone
now by the black cataract. That is where he goes when he is sad. I can
see how lonely he looks among those little twisted pines that grow from
the rock. And he will be remembering all the evenings we walked there
together, and all the things we said." I did not answer. Her eyes were
still on the sea.

"What was the name of the man who wrote that verse you just said to me?"

I told her.

"And he is dead? Did they bury him in the mountains? No? I wish I could
have put him where he could have heard those four voices calling down
the canyon."

"Come back in the house," I said; "you must come, indeed," I said, as
she shrank from re-entering.

Jessica was dancing like a fairy with Leroy. They both saw us and smiled
as we came in, and a moment later they joined us. I made my excuses
and left my friends to Jessica's care. She was a sort of social
tyrant wherever she was, and I knew one word from her would insure the
popularity of our friends--not that they needed the intervention of any
one. Leroy had been a sort of drawing-room pet since before he stopped
wearing knickerbockers.

"He is at his best in a drawing-room," said Jessica, "because there
he deals with theory and not with action. And he has such beautiful
theories that the women, who are all idealists, adore him."

The next morning I awoke with a conviction that I had been idling too
long. I went back to the city and brushed the dust from my desk. Then
each morning, I, as Jessica put it, "formed public opinion" to the
extent of one column a day in the columns of a certain enterprising
morning journal.

Brainard said I had treated him shabbily to leave upon the heels of his
coming. But a man who works for his bread and butter must put a limit to
his holiday. It is different when you only work to add to your general
picturesqueness. That is what I wrote Leroy, and it was the unkindest
thing I ever said to him; and why I did it I do not know to this day. I
was glad, though, when he failed to answer the letter. It gave me a more
reasonable excuse for feeling out of patience with him.

The days that followed were very dull. It was hard to get back into the
way of working. I was glad when Jessica came home to set up our little
establishment and to join in the autumn gayeties. Brainard brought his
wife to the city soon after, and went to housekeeping in an odd sort of
a way.

"I couldn't see anything in the place save curios," Jessica reported,
after her first call on them. "I suppose there is a cookingstove
somewhere, and maybe even a pantry with pots in it. But all I saw was
Alaska totems and Navajo blankets. They have as many skins around on
the floor and couches as would have satisfied an ancient Briton. And
everybody was calling there. You know Mr. Brainard runs to curios in
selecting his friends as well as his furniture. The parlors were full
this afternoon of abnormal people, that is to say, with folks one reads
about. I was the only one there who hadn't done something. I guess it's
because I am too healthy."

"How did Mrs. Brainard like such a motley crew?"

"She was wonderful--perfectly wonderful! Those insulting creatures were
all studying her, and she knew it. But her dignity was perfect, and she
looked as proud as a Sioux chief. She listened to every one, and they
all thought her so bright."

"Brainard must have been tremendously proud of her."

"Oh, he was--of her and his Chilcat portieres."

Jessica was there often, but--well, I was busy. At length, however, I
was forced to go. Jessica refused to make any further excuses for me.
The rooms were filled with small celebrities.

"We are the only nonentities," whispered Jessica, as she looked around;
"it will make us quite distinguished."

We went to speak to our hostess. She stood beside her husband, looking
taller than ever; and her face was white. Her long red gown of clinging
silk was so peculiar as to give one the impression that she was dressed
in character. It was easy to tell that it was one of Leroy's fancies. I
hardly heard what she said, but I know she reproached me gently for not
having been to see them. I had no further word with her till some one
led her to the piano, and she paused to say,--

"That poet you spoke of to me--the one you said was a friend of
yours--he is my friend now too, and I have learned to sing some of his
songs. I am going to sing one now." She seemed to have no timidity at
all, but stood quietly, with a half smile, while a young man with a
Russian name played a strange minor prelude. Then she sang, her voice
a wonderful contralto, cold at times, and again lit up with gleams of
passion. The music itself was fitful, now full of joy, now tender, and
now sad:

     "Look off, dear love, across the sallow sands,
        And mark yon meeting of the sun and sea,
     How long they kiss in sight of all the lands,
        Ah! longer, longer we."

"She has a genius for feeling, hasn't she?" Leroy whispered to me.

"A genius for feeling!" I repeated, angrily. "Man, she has a heart and a
soul and a brain, if that is what you mean! I shouldn't think you would
be able to look at her from the standpoint of a critic."

Leroy shrugged his shoulders and went off. For a moment I almost hated
him for not feeling more resentful. I felt as if he owed it to his wife
to take offence at my foolish speech.

It was evident that the "mountain woman" had become the fashion. I
read reports in the papers about her unique receptions. I saw her name
printed conspicuously among the list of those who attended all sorts
of dinners and musicales and evenings among the set that affected
intellectual pursuits. She joined a number of women's clubs of an
exclusive kind.

"She is doing whatever her husband tells her to," said Jessica. "Why,
the other day I heard her ruining her voice on 'Siegfried'!"

But from day to day I noticed a difference in her. She developed a
terrible activity. She took personal charge of the affairs of her house;
she united with Leroy in keeping the house filled with guests; she got
on the board of a hospital for little children, and spent a part of
every day among the cots where the sufferers lay. Now and then when we
spent a quiet evening alone with her and Leroy, she sewed continually on
little white night-gowns for these poor babies. She used her carriage to
take the most extraordinary persons riding.

"In the cause of health," Leroy used to say, "I ought to have the
carriage fumigated after every ride Judith takes, for she is always
accompanied by some one who looks as if he or she should go into
quarantine."

One night, when he was chaffing her in this way, she flung her sewing
suddenly from her and sprang to her feet, as if she were going to give
way to a burst of girlish temper. Instead of that, a stream of tears
poured from her eyes, and she held out her trembling hands toward
Jessica.

"He does not know," she sobbed. "He cannot understand."

One memorable day Leroy hastened over to us while we were still at
breakfast to say that Judith was ill,--strangely ill. All night long
she had been muttering to herself as if in a delirium. Yet she answered
lucidly all questions that were put to her.

"She begs for Miss Grant. She says over and over that she 'knows,'
whatever that may mean."

When Jessica came home she told me she did not know. She only felt that
a tumult of impatience was stirring in her friend.

"There is something majestic about her,-something epic. I feel as if
she were making me live a part in some great drama, the end of which I
cannot tell. She is suffering, but I cannot tell why she suffers."

Weeks went on without an abatement in this strange illness. She did not
keep her bed. Indeed, she neglected few of her usual occupations. But
her hands were burning, and her eyes grew bright with that wild sort of
lustre one sees in the eyes of those who give themselves up to strange
drugs or manias. She grew whimsical, and formed capricious friendships,
only to drop them.

And then one day she closed her house to all acquaintances, and sat
alone continually in her room, with her hands clasped in her lap, and
her eyes swimming with the emotions that never found their way to her
tongue.

Brainard came to the office to talk with me about her one day. "I am a
very miserable man, Grant," he said. "I am afraid I have lost my wife's
regard. Oh, don't tell me it is partly my fault. I know it well enough.
And I know you haven't had a very good opinion of me lately. But I am
remorseful enough now, God knows. And I would give my life to see her
as she was when I found her first among the mountains. Why, she used to
climb them like a strong man, and she was forever shouting and singing.
And she had peopled every spot with strange modern mythological
creatures. Her father is an old dreamer, and she got the trick from
him. They had a little telescope on a great knoll in the centre of the
valley, just where it commanded a long path of stars, and they used to
spend nights out there when the frost literally fell in flakes. When I
think how hardy and gay she was, how full of courage and life, and look
at her now, so feverish and broken, I feel as if I should go mad. You
know I never meant to do her any harm. Tell me that much, Grant."

"I think you were very egotistical for a while, Brainard, and that is a
fact. And you didn't appreciate how much her nature demanded. But I
do not think you are responsible for your wife's present condition. If
there is any comfort in that statement, you are welcome to it."

"But you don't mean--" he got no further.

"I mean that your wife may have her reservations, just as we all have,
and I am paying her high praise when I say it. You are not so narrow,
Leroy, as to suppose for a moment that the only sort of passion a woman
is capable of is that which she entertains for a man. How do I know
what is going on in your wife's soul? But it is nothing which even an
idealist of women, such as I am, old fellow, need regret."

How glad I was afterward that I spoke those words. They exercised a
little restraint, perhaps, on Leroy when the day of his terrible trial
came. They made him wrestle with the demon of suspicion that strove to
possess him. I was sitting in my office, lagging dispiritedly over my
work one day, when the door burst open and Brainard stood beside me.
Brainard, I say, and yet in no sense the man I had known,--not a hint
in this pale creature, whose breath struggled through chattering teeth,
and whose hands worked in uncontrollable spasms, of the nonchalant
elegant I had known. Not a glimpse to be seen in those angry and
determined eyes of the gayly selfish spirit of my holiday friend.

"She's gone!" he gasped. "Since yesterday. And I'm here to ask you what
you think now? And what you know."

A panorama of all shameful possibilities for one black moment floated
before me. I remember this gave place to a wave, cold as death, that
swept from head to foot; then Brainard's hands fell heavily on my
shoulders.

"Thank God at least for this much," he said, hoarsely; "I didn't know at
first but I had lost both friend and wife. But I see you know nothing.
And indeed in my heart I knew all the time that you did not. Yet I had
to come to you with my anger. And I remembered how you defended her.
What explanation can you offer now?"

I got him to sit down after a while and tell me what little there was
to tell. He had been away for a day's shooting, and when he returned he
found only the perplexed servants at home. A note was left for him. He
showed it to me.

"There are times," it ran, "when we must do as we must, not as we would.
I am going to do something I have been driven to do since I left my
home. I do not leave any message of love for you, because you would not
care for it from a woman so weak as I. But it is so easy for you to be
happy that I hope in a little while you will forget the wife who yielded
to an influence past resisting. It may be madness, but I am not great
enough to give it up. I tried to make the sacrifice, but I could not.
I tried to be as gay as you, and to live your sort of life; but I could
not do it. Do not make the effort to forgive me. You will be happier if
you simply hold me in the contempt I deserve."

I read the letter over and over. I do not know that I believe that the
spirit of inanimate things can permeate to the intelligence of man. I
am sure I always laughed at such ideas. Yet holding that note with its
shameful seeming words, I felt a consciousness that it was written in
purity and love. And then before my eyes there came a scene so
vivid that for a moment the office with its familiar furniture was
obliterated. What I saw was a long firm road, green with midsummer
luxuriance. The leisurely thudding of my horse's feet sounded in my
ears. Beside me was a tall, black-robed figure. I saw her look back with
that expression of deprivation at the sky line. "It's like living after
the world has begun to die," said the pensive minor voice. "It seems as
if part of the world had been taken down."

"Brainard," I yelled, "come here! I have it. Here's your explanation. I
can show you a new meaning for every line of this letter. Man, she has
gone to the mountains. She has gone to worship her own gods!"

Two weeks later I got a letter from Brainard, dated from Colorado.

"Old man," it said, "you're right. She is here. I found my mountain
woman here where the four voices of her cataracts had been calling to
her. I saw her the moment our mules rounded the road that commands the
valley. We had been riding all night and were drenched with cold dew,
hungry to desperation, and my spirits were of lead. Suddenly we got out
from behind the granite wall, and there she was, standing, where I had
seen her so often, beside the little waterfall that she calls the happy
one. She was looking straight up at the billowing mist that dipped down
the mountain, mammoth saffron rolls of it, plunging so madly from the
impetus of the wind that one marvelled how it could be noiseless. Ah,
you do not know Judith! That strange, unsophisticated, sometimes awkward
woman you saw bore no more resemblance to my mountain woman than I to
Hercules. How strong and beautiful she looked standing there wrapped in
an ecstasy! It was my primitive woman back in her primeval world. How
the blood leaped in me! All my old romance, so different from the common
love-histories of most men, was there again within my reach! All the
mystery, the poignant happiness were mine again. Do not hold me in
contempt because I show you my heart. You saw my misery. Why should
I grudge you a glimpse of my happiness? She saw me when I touched her
hand, not before, so wrapped was she. But she did not seem surprised.
Only in her splendid eyes there came a large content. She pointed to the
dancing little white fall. 'I thought something wonderful was going to
happen,' she whispered, 'for it has been laughing so.'

"I shall not return to New York. I am going to stay here with my
mountain woman, and I think perhaps I shall find out what life means
here sooner than I would back there with you. I shall learn to see large
things large and small things small. Judith says to tell you and Miss
Grant that the four voices are calling for you every day in the valley.

"Yours in fullest friendship,

"LEROY BRAINARD."



Jim Lancy's Waterloo


"WE must get married before time to put in crops," he wrote. "We must
make a success of the farm the first year, for luck. Could you manage
to be ready to come out West by the last of February? After March opens
there will be no let-up, and I do not see how I could get away. Make it
February, Annie dear. A few weeks more or less can make no difference to
you, but they make a good deal of difference to me."

The woman to whom this was written read it with something like anger. "I
don't believe he's so impatient for me!" she said to herself. "What he
wants is to get the crops in on time." But she changed the date of their
wedding, and made it February.

Their wedding journey was only from the Illinois village where she lived
to their Nebraska farm. They had never been much together, and they had
much to say to each other.

"Farming won't come hard to you," Jim assured her. "All one needs to
farm with is brains."

"What a success you'll make of it!" she cried saucily.

"I wish I had my farm clear," Jim went on; "but that's more than any one
has around me. I'm no worse off than the rest. We've got to pay off the
mortgage, Annie."

"Of course we must. We'll just do without till we get the mortgage
lifted. Hard work will do anything, I guess. And I'm not afraid to work,
Jim, though I've never had much experience."

Jim looked out of the window a long time, at the gentle undulations of
the brown Iowa prairie. His eyes seemed to pierce beneath the sod,
to the swelling buds of the yet invisible grass. He noticed how
disdainfully the rains of the new year beat down the grasses of the
year that was gone. It opened to his mind a vision of the season's
possibilities. For a moment, even amid the smoke of the car, he seemed
to scent clover, and hear the stiff swishing of the corn and the dull
burring of the bees.

"I wish sometimes," he said, leaning forward to look at his bride, "that
I had been born something else than a farmer. But I can no more help
farming, Annie, than a bird can help singing, or a bee making honey. I
didn't take to farming. I was simply born with a hoe in my hand."

"I don't know a blessed thing about it," Annie confessed. "But I made up
my mind that a farm with you was better than a town without you. That's
all there is to it, as far as I am concerned."

Jim Lancy slid his arm softly about her waist, unseen by the other
passengers. Annie looked up apprehensively, to see if any one was
noticing. But they were eating their lunches. It was a common coach on
which they were riding. There was a Pullman attached to the train, and
Annie had secretly thought that, as it was their wedding journey, it
might be more becoming to take it. But Jim had made no suggestion about
it. What he said later explained the reason.

"I would have liked to have brought you a fine present," he said. "It
seemed shabby to come with nothing but that little ring. But I put
everything I had on our home, you know. And yet, I'm sure you'll think
it poor enough after what you've been used to. You'll forgive me for
only bringing the ring, my dear?"

"But you brought me something better," Annie whispered. She was a
foolish little girl. "You brought me love, you know." Then they rode
in silence for a long time. Both of them were new to the phraseology of
love. Their simple compliments to each other were almost ludicrous. But
any one who might have chanced to overhear them would have been charmed,
for they betrayed an innocence as beautiful as an unclouded dawn.

Annie tried hard not to be depressed by the treeless stretches of the
Nebraska plains.

"This is different from Illinois," she ventured once, gently; "it is
even different from Iowa."

"Yes, yes," cried Jim, enthusiastically, "it is different! It is the
finest country in the world! You never feel shut in. You can always see
off. I feel at home after I get in Nebraska. I'd choke back where you
live, with all those little gullies and the trees everywhere. It's a
mystery to me how farmers have patience to work there."

Annie opened her eyes. There was evidently more than one way of looking
at a question. The farm-houses seemed very low and mean to her, as she
looked at them from the window. There were no fences, excepting now
and then the inhospitable barbed wire. The door-yards were bleak to her
eyes, without the ornamental shrubbery which every farmer in her part
of the country was used to tending. The cattle stood unshedded in their
corrals. The reapers and binders stood rusting in the dull drizzle.

"How shiftless!" cried Annie, indignantly. "What do these men mean by
letting their machinery lie out that way? I should think one winter of
lying out would hurt it more than three summers of using."

"It does. But sheds are not easily had. Lumber is dear."

"But I should think it would be economy even then."

"Yes," he said, "perhaps. But we all do that way out here. It takes
some money for a man to be economical with. Some of us haven't even that
much."

There was a six-mile ride from the station. The horses were waiting,
hitched up to a serviceable light wagon, and driven by the "help." He
was a thin young man, with red hair, and he blushed vicariously for Jim
and Annie, who were really too entertained with each other, and at the
idea of the new life opening up before them, to think anything about
blushing. At the station, a number of men insisted on shaking hands
with Jim, and being introduced to his wife. They were all bearded, as
if shaving were an unnecessary labor, and their trousers were tucked in
dusty top-boots, none of which had ever seen blacking. Annie had a sense
of these men seeming unwashed, or as if they had slept in their clothes.
But they had kind voices, and their eyes were very friendly. So she
shook hands with them all with heartiness, and asked them to drive out
and bring their womenkind.

"I am going to make up my mind not to be lonesome," she declared; "but,
all the same, I shall want to see some women."

Annie had got safe on the high seat of the wagon, and was balancing her
little feet on the inclined foot-rest, when a woman came running across
the street, calling aloud,--

"Mr. Lancy! Mr. Lancy! You're not going to drive away without
introducing me to your wife!"

She was a thin little woman, with movements as nervous and as graceless
as those of a grasshopper. Her dun-colored garments seemed to have all
the hue bleached out of them with wind and weather. Her face was brown
and wrinkled, and her bright eyes flashed restlessly, deep in their
sockets. Two front teeth were conspicuously missing; and her faded hair
was blown in wisps about her face. Jim performed the introduction, and
Annie held out her hand. It was a pretty hand, delicately gloved in dove
color. The woman took it in her own, and after she had shaken it, held
it for a silent moment, looking at it. Then she almost threw it from
her. The eyes which she lifted to scan the bright young face above
her had something like agony in them. Annie blushed under this fierce
scrutiny, and the woman, suddenly conscious of her demeanor, forced a
smile to her lips.

"I'll come out an' see yeh," she said, in cordial tones. "May be, as a
new housekeeper, you'll like a little advice. You've a nice place, an' I
wish yeh luck."

"Thank you. I'm sure I'll need advice," cried Annie, as they drove off.
Then she said to Jim, "Who is that old woman?"

"Old woman? Why, she ain't a day over thirty, Mis' Dundy ain't."

Annie looked at her husband blankly. But he was already talking of
something else, and she asked no more about the woman, though all the
way along the road the face seemed to follow her. It might have been
this that caused the tightening about her heart. For some way her
vivacity had gone; and the rest of the ride she asked no questions, but
sat looking straight before her at the northward stretching road, with
eyes that felt rather than saw the brown, bare undulations, rising
every now and then clean to the sky; at the side, little famished-looking
houses, unacquainted with paint, disorderly yards, and endless reaches
of furrowed ground, where in summer the corn had waved.

The horses needed no indication of the line to make them turn up a
smooth bit of road that curved away neatly 'mid the ragged grasses.
At the end of it, in a clump of puny scrub oaks, stood a square little
house, in uncorniced simplicity, with blank, uncurtained windows staring
out at Annie, and for a moment her eyes, blurred with the cold, seemed
to see in one of them the despairing face of the woman with the wisps of
faded hair blowing about her face.

"Well, what do you think of it?" Jim cried, heartily, swinging her down
from her high seat, and kissing her as he did so. "This is your home,
my girl, and you are as welcome to it as you would be to a palace, if I
could give it to you."

Annie put up her hands to hide the trembling of her lips; and she let
Jim see there were tears in her eyes as an apology for not replying. The
young man with the red hair took away the horses, and Jim, with his arm
around his wife's waist, ran toward the house and threw open the door
for her to enter. The intense heat of two great stoves struck in
their faces; and Annie saw the big burner, erected in all its black
hideousness in the middle of the front room, like a sort of household
hoodoo, to be constantly propitiated, like the gods of Greece; and in
the kitchen, the new range, with a distracted tea-kettle leaping on it,
as if it would like to loose its fetters and race away over the prairie
after its cousin, the locomotive.

It was a house of four rooms, and a glance revealed the fact that it had
been provided with the necessaries.

"I think we can be very comfortable here," said Jim, rather doubtfully.

Annie saw she must make some response. "I am sure we can be more than
comfortable, Jim," she replied. "We can be happy. Show me, if you
please, where my room is. I must hang my cloak up in the right place so
that I shall feel as if I were getting settled."

It was enough. Jim had no longer any doubts. He felt sure they were
going to be happy ever afterward.

It was Annie who got the first meal; she insisted on it, though both the
men wanted her to rest. And Jim hadn't the heart to tell her that, as
a general thing, it would not do to put two eggs in the corn-cake, and
that the beefsteak was a great luxury. When he saw her about to break an
egg for the coffee, however, he interfered.

"The shells of the ones you used for the cake will settle the coffee
just as well," he said. "You see we have to be very careful of eggs out
here at this season."

"Oh! Will the shells really settle it? This is what you must call
prairie lore. I suppose out here we find out what the real relations of
invention and necessity are--eh?"

Jim laughed disproportionately. He thought her wonderfully witty. And
he and the help ate so much that Annie opened her eyes. She had thought
there would be enough left for supper. But there was nothing left.

For the next two weeks Jim was able to be much with her; and they amused
themselves by decorating the house with the bright curtainings that
Annie had brought, and putting up shelves for a few pieces of china. She
had two or three pictures, also, which had come from her room in her old
home, and some of those useless dainty things with which some women like
to litter the room.

"Most folks," Jim explained, "have to be content with one fire, and sit
in the kitchen; but I thought, as this was our honeymoon, we would put
on some lugs."

Annie said nothing then; but a day or two after she ventured,--

"Perhaps it would be as well now, dear, if we kept in the kitchen. I'll
keep it as bright and pleasant as I can. And, anyway, you can be more
about with me when I'm working then. We'll lay a fire in the front-room
stove, so that we can light it if anybody comes. We can just as well
save that much."

Jim looked up brightly. "All right," he said. "You're a sensible little
woman. You see, every cent makes a difference. And I want to be able to
pay off five hundred dollars of that mortgage this year."

So, after that, they sat in the kitchen; and the fire was laid in the
front room, against the coming of company. But no one came, and it
remained unlighted.

Then the season began to show signs of opening,--bleak signs, hardly
recognizable to Annie; and after that Jim was not much in the house.
The weeks wore on, and spring came at last, dancing over the hills. The
ground-birds began building, and at four each morning awoke Annie with
their sylvan opera. The creek that ran just at the north of the house
worked itself into a fury and blustered along with much noise toward
the great Platte which, miles away, wallowed in its vast sandy bed. The
hills flushed from brown to yellow, and from mottled green to intensest
emerald, and in the superb air all the winds of heaven seemed to meet
and frolic with laughter and song.

Sometimes the mornings were so beautiful that, the men being afield and
Annie all alone, she gave herself up to an ecstasy and kneeled by the
little wooden bench outside the door, to say, "Father, I thank Thee,"
and then went about her work with all the poem of nature rhyming itself
over and over in her heart.

It was on such a day as this that Mrs. Dundy kept her promise and came
over to see if the young housekeeper needed any of the advice she
had promised her. She had walked, because none of the horses could be
spared. It had got so warm now that the fire in the kitchen heated
the whole house sufficiently, and Annie had the rooms clean to
exquisiteness. Mrs. Dundy looked about with envious eyes.

"How lovely!" she said.

"Do you think so?" cried Annie, in surprise. "I like it, of course,
because it is home, but I don't see how you could call anything here
lovely."

"Oh, you don't understand," her visitor went on. "It's lovely because it
looks so happy. Some of us have--well, kind o' lost our grip."

"It's easy to do that if you don't feel well," Annie remarked
sympathetically. "I haven't felt as well as usual myself, lately. And
I do get lonesome and wonder what good it does to fix up every day when
there is no one to see. But that is all nonsense, and I put it out of my
head."

She smoothed out the clean lawn apron with delicate touch. Mrs. Dundy
followed the movement with her eyes.

"Oh, my dear," she cried, "you don't know nothin' about it yet! But you
will know! You will!" and those restless, hot eyes of hers seemed to
grow more restless and more hot as they looked with infinite pity at the
young woman before her.

Annie thought of these words often as the summer came on, and the heat
grew. Jim was seldom to be seen now. He was up at four each morning,
and the last chore was not completed till nine at night. Then he threw
himself in bed and lay there log-like till dawn. He was too weary to
talk much, and Annie, with her heart aching for his fatigue, forbore to
speak to him. She cooked the most strengthening things she could, and
tried always to look fresh and pleasant when he came in. But she often
thought her pains were in vain, for he hardly rested his sunburned
eyes on her. His skin got so brown that his face was strangely changed,
especially as he no longer had time to shave, and had let a rough beard
straggle over his cheeks and chin. On Sundays Annie would have liked to
go to church, but the horses were too tired to be taken out, and she did
not feel well enough to walk far; besides, Jim got no particular good
out of walking over the hills unless he had a plough in his hand.

Harvest came at length, and the crop was good. There were any way from
three to twenty men at the house then, and Annie cooked for all of them.
Jim had tried to get some one to help her, but he had not succeeded.
Annie strove to be brave, remembering that farm-women all over the
country were working in similar fashion. But in spite of all she could
do, the days got to seem like nightmares, and sleep between was but a
brief pause in which she was always dreaming of water, and thinking that
she was stooping to put fevered lips to a running brook. Some of these
men were very disgusting to Annie. Their manners were as bad as they
could well be, and a coarse word came naturally to their lips.

"To be master of the soil, that is one thing," said she to herself in
sickness of spirit; "but to be the slave of it is another. These men
seem to have got their souls all covered with muck." She noticed that
they had no idea of amusement. They had never played anything. They did
not even care for base-ball. Their idea of happiness appeared to be to
do nothing; and there was a good part of the year in which they were
happy,--for these were not for the most part men owning farms; they
were men who hired out to help the farmer. A good many of them had been
farmers at one time and another, but they had failed. They all talked
politics a great deal,--politics and railroads. Annie had not much
patience with it all. She had great confidence in the course of things.
She believed that in this country all men have a fair chance. So when it
came about that the corn and the wheat, which had been raised with such
incessant toil, brought them no money, but only a loss, Annie stood
aghast.

"I said the rates were ruinous," Jim said to her one night, after it was
all over, and he had found out that the year's slavish work had brought
him a loss of three hundred dollars; "it's been a conspiracy from the
first. The price of corn is all right. But by the time we set it down in
Chicago we are out eighteen cents a bushel. It means ruin. What are we
going to do? Here we had the best crop we've had for years--but what's
the use of talking! They have us in their grip."

"I don't see how it is," Annie protested. "I should think it would be
for the interest of the roads to help the people to be as prosperous as
possible."

"Oh, we can't get out! And we're bound to stay and raise grain. And
they're bound to cart it. And that's all there is to it. They force
us to stand every loss, even to the shortage that is made in
transportation. The railroad companies own the elevators, and they have
the cinch on us. Our grain is at their mercy. God knows how I'm going to
raise that interest. As for the five hundred we were going to pay on the
mortgage this year, Annie, we're not in it."

Autumn was well set in by this time, and the brilliant cold sky hung
over the prairies as young and fresh as if the world were not old and
tired. Annie no longer could look as trim as when she first came to the
little house. Her pretty wedding garments were beginning to be worn and
there was no money for more. Jim would not play chess now of evenings.
He was forever writing articles for the weekly paper in the adjoining
town. They talked of running him for the state legislature, and he was
anxious for the nomination.

"I think I might be able to stand it if I could fight 'em!" he declared;
"but to sit here idle, knowing that I have been cheated out of my year's
work, just as much as if I had been knocked down on the road and
the money taken from me, is enough to send me to the asylum with a
strait-jacket on!"

Life grew to take on tragic aspects. Annie used to find herself
wondering if anywhere in the world there were people with light
hearts. For her there was no longer anticipation of joy, or present
companionship, or any divertissement in the whole world. Jim read books
which she did not understand, and with a few of his friends, who dropped
in now and then evenings or Sundays, talked about these books in an
excited manner.

She would go to her room to rest, and lying there in the darkness on the
bed, would hear them speaking together, sometimes all at once, in those
sternly vindictive tones men use when there is revolt in their souls.

"It is the government which is helping to impoverish us," she would hear
Jim saying. "Work is money. That is to say, it is the active form of
money. The wealth of a country is estimated by its power of production.
And its power of production means work. It means there are so many men
with so much capacity. Now the government owes it to these men to have
money enough to pay them for their work; and if there is not enough
money in circulation to pay to each man for his honest and necessary
work, then I say that government is in league with crime. It is trying
to make defaulters of us. It has a hundred ways of cheating us. When I
bought this farm and put the mortgage on it, a day's work would bring
twice the results it will now. That is to say, the total at the end of
the year showed my profits to be twice what they would be now, even if
the railway did not stand in the way to rob us of more than we earn.
So that it will take just twice as many days' work now to pay off this
mortgage as it would have done at the time it was contracted. It's a
conspiracy, I tell you! Those Eastern capitalists make a science of
ruining us."

He got more eloquent as time went on, and Annie, who had known him
first as rather a careless talker, was astonished at the boldness of his
language. But conversation was a lost art with him. He no longer talked.
He harangued.

In the early spring Annie's baby was born,--a little girl with a nervous
cry, who never slept long at a time, and who seemed to wail merely from
distaste at living. It was Mrs. Dundy who came over to look after the
house till Annie got able to do so. Her eyes had that fever in them,
as ever. She talked but little, but her touch on Annie's head was more
eloquent than words. One day Annie asked for the glass, and Mrs. Dundy
gave it to her. She looked in it a long time. The color was gone from
her cheeks, and about her mouth there was an ugly tightening. But her
eyes flashed and shone with that same--no, no, it could not be that in
her face also was coming the look of half-madness! She motioned Mrs.
Dundy to come to her.

"You knew it was coming," she said, brokenly, pointing to the reflection
in the glass. "That first day, you knew how it would be."

Mrs. Dundy took the glass away with a gentle hand.

"How could I help knowing?" she said simply. She went into the next
room, and when she returned Annie noticed that the handkerchief stuck in
her belt was wet, as if it had been wept on.

A woman cannot stay long away from her home on a farm at planting time,
even if it is a case of life and death. Mrs. Dundy had to go home, and
Annie crept about her work with the wailing baby in her arms. The house
was often disorderly now; but it could not be helped. The baby had to
be cared for. It fretted so much that Jim slept apart in the mow of
the barn, that his sleep might not be disturbed. It was a pleasant, dim
place, full of sweet scents, and he liked to be there alone. Though he
had always been an unusual worker, he worked now more like a man who was
fighting off fate, than a mere toiler for bread.

The corn came up beautifully, and far as the eye could reach around
their home it tossed its broad green leaves with an oceanlike swelling
of sibilant sound. Jim loved it with a sort of passion. Annie loved
it, too. Sometimes, at night, when her fatigue was unbearable, and her
irritation wearing out both body and soul, she took her little one in
her arms and walked among the corn, letting its rustling soothe the baby
to sleep.

The heat of the summer was terrible. The sun came up in that blue sky
like a curse, and hung there till night came to comfort the blistering
earth. And one morning a terrible thing happened. Annie was standing
out of doors in the shade of those miserable little oaks, ironing, when
suddenly a blast of air struck her in the face, which made her look up
startled. For a moment she thought, perhaps, there was a fire near in
the grass. But there was none. Another blast came, hotter this time, and
fifteen minutes later that wind was sweeping straight across the plain,
burning and blasting. Annie went in the house to finish her ironing, and
was working there, when she heard Jim's footstep on the door-sill. He
could not pale because of the tan, but there was a look of agony and of
anger-almost brutish anger--in his eyes. Then he looked, for a moment,
at Annie standing there working patiently, and rocking the little crib
with one foot, and he sat down on the door-step and buried his face in
his brown arms.

The wind blew for three days. At the end of that time every ear was
withered in the stalk. The corn crop was ruined.

But there were the other crops which must be attended to, and Jim
watched those with the alertness of a despairing man; and so harvest
came again, and again the house was filled with men who talked their
careless talk, and who were not ashamed to gorge while this one woman
cooked for them. The baby lay on a quilt on the floor in the coolest
part of the kitchen. Annie fed it irregularly. Sometimes she almost
forgot it. As for its wailing, she had grown so used to it that she
hardly heard it, any more than she did the ticking of the clock. And
yet, tighter than anything else in life, was the hold that little thing
had on her heart-strings. At night, after the interminable work had been
finished--though in slovenly fashion--she would take it up and caress it
with fierceness, and worn as she was, would bathe it and soothe it, and
give it warm milk from the big tin pail.

"Lay the child down," Jim would say impatiently, while the men would
tell how their wives always put the babies on the bed and let them cry
if they wanted to. Annie said nothing, but she hushed the little one
with tender songs.

One day, as usual, it lay on its quilt while Annie worked. It was a
terribly busy morning. She had risen at four to get the washing out of
the way before the men got on hand, and there were a dozen loaves of
bread to bake, and the meals to get, and the milk to attend to, and the
chickens and pigs to feed. So occupied was she that she never was able
to tell how long she was gone from the baby. She only knew that the heat
of her own body was so great that the blood seemed to be pounding at her
ears, and she staggered as she crossed the yard. But when she went at
last with a cup of milk to feed the little one, it lay with clenched
fists and fixed eyes, and as she lifted it, a last convulsion laid it
back breathless, and its heart had ceased to beat.

Annie ran with it to her room, and tried such remedies as she had.
But nothing could keep the chill from creeping over the wasted little
form,--not even the heat of the day, not even the mother's agonized
embrace. Then, suddenly, Annie looked at the clock. It was time to get
the dinner. She laid the piteous tiny shape straight on the bed, threw a
sheet over it, and went back to the weltering kitchen to cook for those
men, who came at noon and who must be fed--who must be fed.

When they were all seated at the table, Jim among them, and she had
served them, she said, standing at the head of the table, with her hands
on her hips:--

"I don't suppose any of you have time to do anything about it; but I
thought you might like to know that the baby is dead. I wouldn't think
of asking you to spare the horses, for I know they have to rest. But I
thought, if you could make out on a cold supper, that I would go to the
town for a coffin."

There was satire in the voice that stung even through the dull
perceptions of these men, and Jim arose with a cry and went to the room
where his dead baby lay.

About two months after this Annie insisted that she must go home to
Illinois. Jim protested in a way.

"You know, I'd like to send you," he said; "but I don't see where the
money is to come from. And since I've got this nomination, I want to run
as well as I can. My friends expect me to do my best for them. It's a
duty, you know, and nothing less, for a few men, like me, to get in the
legislature. We're going to get a railroad bill through this session
that will straighten out a good many things. Be patient a little longer,
Annie."

"I want to go home," was the only reply he got. "You must get the money,
some way, for me to go home with."

"I haven't paid a cent of interest yet," he cried angrily. "I don't see
what you mean by being so unreasonable!"

"You must get the money, some way," she reiterated.

He did not speak to her for a week, except when he was obliged to. But
she did not seem to mind; and he gave her the money. He took her to the
train in the little wagon that had met her when she first came. At the
station, some women were gossiping excitedly, and Annie asked what they
were saying.

"It's Mis' Dundy," they said. "She's been sent to th' insane asylum at
Lincoln. She's gone stark mad. All she said on the way out was,
'Th' butter won't come! Th' butter won't come!'" Then they laughed a
little--a strange laugh; and Annie thought of a drinking-song she had
once heard, "Here's to the next who dies."

Ten days after this Jim got a letter from her. "I am never coming back,
Jim," it said. "It is hopeless. I don't think I would mind standing
still to be shot down if there was any good in it. But I'm not going
back there to work harder than any slave for those money-loaners and the
railroads. I guess they can all get along without me. And I am sure I
can get along without them. I do not think this will make you feel very
bad. You haven't seemed to notice me very much lately when I've been
around, and I do not think you will notice very much when I am gone. I
know what this means. I know I am breaking my word when I leave you. But
remember, it is not you I leave, but the soil, Jim! I will not be its
slave any longer. If you care to come for me here, and live another
life--but no, there would be no use. Our love, like our toil, has been
eaten up by those rapacious acres. Let us say goodby."

Jim sat all night with this letter in his hand. Sometimes he dozed
heavily in his chair. But he did not go to bed; and the next morning he
hitched up his horses and rode to town. He went to the bank which held
his notes.

"I'll confess judgment as soon as you like," he said. "It's all up with
me."

It was done as quickly as the law would allow. And the things in the
house were sold by auction. All the farmers were there with their wives.
It made quite an outing for them. Jim moved around impassively, and
chatted, now and then, with some of the men about what the horses ought
to bring.

The auctioneer was a clever fellow. Between the putting up of the
articles, he sang comic songs, and the funnier the song, the livelier
the bidding that followed. The horses brought a decent price, and the
machinery a disappointing one; and then, after a delicious snatch about
Nell who rode the sway-backed mare at the county fair, he got down to
the furniture,--the furniture which Jim had bought when he was expecting
Annie.

Jim was walking around with his hands in his pockets, looking
unconcerned, and, as the furniture began to go off, he came and sat down
in the midst of it. Every one noticed his indifference. Some of them
said that after all he couldn't have been very ambitious. He didn't seem
to take his failure much to heart. Every one was concentrating attention
on the cookingstove, when Jim leaned forward, quickly, over a little
wicker work-stand.

There was a bit of unfinished sewing there, and it fell out as he lifted
the cover. It was a baby's linen shirt. Jim let it lie, and then lifted
from its receptacle a silver thimble. He put it in his vest-pocket.

The campaign came on shortly after this, and Jim Lancy was defeated.
"I'm going to Omaha," said he to the station-master, "and I've got just
enough to buy a ticket with. There's a kind of satisfaction in giving
the last cent I have to the railroads."

Two months later, a "plain drunk" was registered at the station in
Nebraska's metropolis. When they searched him they found nothing in
his pockets but a silver thimble, and Joe Benson, the policeman who had
brought in the "drunk," gave it to the matron, with his compliments. But
she, when no one noticed, went softly to where the man was sleeping, and
slipped it back into his pocket, with a sigh. For she knew somehow--as
women do know things--that he had not stolen that thimble.



THE equinoctial line itself is not more imaginary than the line which
divided the estates of the three Johns. The herds of the three Johns
roamed at will, and nibbled the short grass far and near without let or
hindrance; and the three Johns themselves were utterly indifferent as to
boundary lines. Each of them had filed his application at the office
of the government land-agent; each was engaged in the tedious task of
"proving up;" and each owned one-third of the L-shaped cabin which stood
at the point where the three ranches touched. The hundred and sixty
acres which would have completed this quadrangle had not yet been "taken
up."

The three Johns were not anxious to have a neighbor. Indeed, they had
made up their minds that if one appeared on that adjoining "hun'erd an'
sixty," it would go hard with him. For they did not deal in justice very
much--the three Johns. They considered it effete. It belonged in the
East along with other outgrown superstitions. And they had given it
out widely that it would be healthier for land applicants to give them
elbow-room. It took a good many miles of sunburnt prairie to afford
elbow-room for the three Johns.

They met by accident in Hamilton at the land-office. John Henderson,
fresh from Cincinnati, manifestly unused to the ways of the country,
looked at John Gillispie with a lurking smile. Gillispie wore a
sombrero, fresh, white, and expansive. His boots had high heels, and
were of elegant leather and finely arched at the instep. His corduroys
disappeared in them half-way up the thigh. About his waist a sash of
blue held a laced shirt of the same color in place. Henderson puffed at
his cigarette, and continued to look a trifle quizzical.

Suddenly Gillispie walked up to him and said, in a voice of complete
suavity, "Damn yeh, smoke a pipe!"

"Eh?" said Henderson, stupidly.

"Smoke a pipe," said the other. "That thing you have is bad for your
complexion."

"I can take care of my complexion," said Henderson, firmly.

The two looked each other straight in the eye.

"You don't go on smoking that thing till you have apologized for that
grin you had on your phiz a moment ago."

"I laugh when I please, and I smoke what I please," said Henderson,
hotly, his face flaming as he realized that he was in for his first
"row."

That was how it began. How it would have ended is not known--probably
there would have been only one John--if it had not been for the almost
miraculous appearance at this moment of the third John. For just then
the two belligerents found themselves prostrate, their pistols only
half-cocked, and between them stood a man all gnarled and squat, like
one of those wind-torn oaks which grow on the arid heights. He was no
older than the others, but the lines in his face were deep, and his
large mouth twitched as he said:--

"Hold on here, yeh fools! There's too much blood in you to spill. You'll
spile th' floor, and waste good stuff. We need blood out here!"

Gillispie bounced to his feet. Henderson arose suspiciously, keeping his
eyes on his assailants.

"Oh, get up!" cried the intercessor. "We don't shoot men hereabouts till
they git on their feet in fightin' trim."

"What do you know about what we do here?" interrupted Gillispie. "This
is the first time I ever saw you around."

"That's so," the other admitted. "I'm just down from Montana. Came to
take up a quarter section. Where I come from we give men a show, an' I
thought perhaps yeh did th' same here."

"Why, yes," admitted Gillispie, "we do. But I don't want folks to laugh
too much--not when I'm around--unless they tell me what the joke is. I
was just mentioning it to the gentleman," he added, dryly.

"So I saw," said the other; "you're kind a emphatic in yer remarks.
Yeh ought to give the gentleman a chance to git used to the ways of
th' country. He'll be as tough as th' rest of us if you'll give him a
chance. I kin see it in him."

"Thank you," said Henderson. "I'm glad you do me justice. I wish you
wouldn't let daylight through me till I've had a chance to get my
quarter section. I'm going to be one of you, either as a live man or a
corpse. But I prefer a hundred and sixty acres of land to six feet of
it."

"There, now!" triumphantly cried the squat man. "Didn't I tell yeh? Give
him a show! 'Tain't no fault of his that he's a tenderfoot. He'll get
over that."

Gillispie shook hands with first one and then the other of the men.
"It's a square deal from this on," he said. "Come and have a drink."

That's how they met--John Henderson, John Gillispie, and John Waite.
And a week later they were putting up a shanty together for common use,
which overlapped each of their reservations, and satisfied the law with
its sociable subterfuge.

The life wasn't bad, Henderson decided; and he adopted all the ways of
the country in an astonishingly short space of time. There was a freedom
about it all which was certainly complete. The three alternated in the
night watch. Once a week one of them went to town for provisions. They
were not good at the making of bread, so they contented themselves with
hot cakes. Then there was salt pork for a staple, and prunes. They slept
in straw-lined bunks, with warm blankets for a covering. They made a
point of bringing reading-matter back from town every week, and there
were always cards to fall back on, and Waite sang songs for them with
natural dramatic talent.

Nevertheless, in spite of their contentment, none of them was sorry when
the opportunity offered for going to town. There was always a bit of
stirring gossip to be picked up, and now and then there was a "show" at
the "opera-house," in which, it is almost unnecessary to say, no opera
had ever been sung. Then there was the hotel, at which one not only
got good fare, but a chat with the three daughters of Jim O'Neal, the
proprietor--girls with the accident of two Irish parents, who were,
notwithstanding, as typically American as they well could be. A
half-hour's talk with these cheerful young women was all the more to be
desired for the reason that within riding distance of the three Johns'
ranch there were only two other women. One was Minerva Fitch, who had
gone out from Michigan accompanied by an oil-stove and a knowledge of
the English grammar, with the intention of teaching school, but who had
been unable to carry these good intentions into execution for the reason
that there were no children to teach,--at least, none but Bow-legged
Joe. He was a sad little fellow, who looked like a prairie-dog, and who
had very much the same sort of an outlook on life. The other woman was
the brisk and efficient wife of Mr. Bill Deems, of "Missourah." Mr.
Deems had never in his life done anything, not even so much as bring in
a basket of buffalo chips to supply the scanty fire. That is to say, he
had done nothing strictly utilitarian. Yet he filled his place. He
was the most accomplished story-teller in the whole valley, and this
accomplishment of his was held in as high esteem as the improvisations
of a Welsh minstrel were among his reverencing people. His wife alone
deprecated his skill, and interrupted his spirited narratives with
sarcastic allusions concerning the empty cupboard, and the "state of her
back," to which, as she confided to any who would listen, "there was not
a rag fit to wear."

These two ladies had not, as may be surmised, any particular attraction
for John Henderson. Truth to tell, Henderson had not come West with the
intention of liking women, but rather with a determination to see
and think as little of them as possible. Yet even the most confirmed
misogynist must admit that it is a good thing to see a woman now and
then, and for this reason Henderson found it amusing to converse with
the amiable Misses O'Neal. At twenty-five one cannot be unyielding in
one's avoidance of the sex.

Henderson, with his pony at a fine lope, was on his way to town one day,
in that comfortable frame of mind adduced by an absence of any ideas
whatever, when he suddenly became conscious of a shiver that seemed
to run from his legs to the pony, and back again. The animal gave a
startled leap, and lifted his ears. There was a stirring in the coarse
grasses; the sky, which a moment before had been like sapphire, dulled
with an indescribable grayness.

Then came a little singing afar off, as if from a distant convocation
of cicadae, and before Henderson could guess what it meant, a cloud
of dust was upon him, blinding and bewildering, pricking with sharp
particles at eyes and nostrils. The pony was an ugly fellow, and when
Henderson felt him put his forefeet together, he knew what that meant,
and braced himself for the struggle. But it was useless; he had not yet
acquired the knack of staying on the back of a bucking bronco, and the
next moment he was on the ground, and around him whirled that saffron
chaos of dust. The temperature lowered every moment. Henderson
instinctively felt that this was but the beginning of the storm. He
picked himself up without useless regrets for his pony, and made his way
on.

The saffron hue turned to blackness, and then out of the murk shot a
living green ball of fire, and ploughed into the earth. Then sheets of
water, that seemed to come simultaneously from earth and sky, swept the
prairie, and in the midst of it struggled Henderson, weak as a little
child, half bereft of sense by the strange numbness of head and dullness
of eye. Another of those green balls fell and burst, as it actually
appeared to him, before his horrified eyes, and the bellow and blare of
the explosion made him cry out in a madness of fright and physical pain.
In the illumination he had seen a cabin only a few feet in front of him,
and toward it he made frantically, with an animal's instinctive desire
for shelter.

The door did not yield at once to his pressure, and in the panic of
his fear he threw his weight against it. There was a cry from within, a
fall, and Henderson flung himself in the cabin and closed the door.

In the dusk of the storm he saw a woman half prostrate. It was she
whom he had pushed from the door. He caught the hook in its staple,
and turned to raise her. She was not trembling as much as he, but, like
himself, she was dizzy with the shock of the lightning. In the midst of
all the clamor Henderson heard a shrill crying, and looking toward the
side of the room, he dimly perceived three tiny forms crouched in one of
the bunks. The woman took the smallest of the children in her arms, and
kissed and soothed it; and Henderson, after he had thrown a blanket at
the bottom of the door to keep out the drifting rain, sat with his back
to it, bracing it against the wind, lest the frail staple should give
way. He managed some way to reach out and lay hold of the other little
ones, and got them in his arms,--a boy, so tiny he seemed hardly human,
and a girl somewhat sturdier. They cuddled in his arms, and clutched his
clothes with their frantic little hands, and the three sat so while the
earth and the heavens seemed to be meeting in angry combat.

And back and forth, back and forth, in the dimness swayed the body of
the woman, hushing her babe.

Almost as suddenly as the darkness had fallen, it lifted. The lightning
ceased to threaten, and almost frolicked,--little wayward flashes of
white and yellow dancing in mid-air. The wind wailed less frequently,
like a child who sobs in its sleep. And at last Henderson could make his
voice heard.

"Is there anything to build a fire with?" he shouted. "The children are
shivering so."

The woman pointed to a basket of buffalo chips in the corner, and he
wrapped his little companions up in a blanket while he made a fire in
the cooking-stove. The baby was sleeping by this time, and the woman
began tidying the cabin, and when the fire was burning brightly, she put
some coffee on.

"I wish I had some clothes to offer you," she said, when the wind had
subsided sufficiently to make talking possible. "I'm afraid you'll have
to let them get dry on you."

"Oh, that's of no consequence at all! We're lucky to get off with our
lives. I never saw anything so terrible. Fancy! half an hour ago it was
summer; now it is winter!"

"It seems rather sudden when you're not used to it," the woman admitted.
"I've lived in the West six years now; you can't frighten me any more.
We never die out here before our time comes."

"You seem to know that I haven't been here long," said Henderson, with
some chagrin.

"Yes," admitted the woman; "you have the ear-marks of a man from the
East."

She was a tall woman, with large blue eyes, and a remarkable quantity of
yellow hair braided on top of her head. Her gown was of calico, of such
a pattern as a widow might wear.

"I haven't been out of town a week yet," she said. "We're not half
settled. Not having any one to help makes it harder; and the baby is
rather fretful."

"But you're not alone with all these little codgers?" cried Henderson,
in dismay.

The woman turned toward him with a sort of defiance. "Yes, I am," she
said; "and I'm as strong as a horse, and I mean to get through all
right. Here were the three children in my arms, you may say, and no way
to get in a cent. I wasn't going to stand it just to please other folk.
I said, let them talk if they want to, but I'm going to hold down a
claim, and be accumulating something while the children are getting up a
bit. Oh, I'm not afraid!"

In spite of this bold assertion of bravery, there was a sort of break in
her voice. She was putting dishes on the table as she talked, and turned
some ham in the skillet, and got the children up before the fire,
and dropped some eggs in water,--all with a rapidity that bewildered
Henderson.

"How long have you been alone?" he asked, softly.

"Three months before baby was born, and he's five months old now.
I--I--you think I can get on here, don't you? There was nothing else to
do."

She was folding another blanket over the sleeping baby now, and the
action brought to her guest the recollection of a thousand tender
moments of his dimly remembered youth.

"You'll get on if we have anything to do with it," he cried, suppressing
an oath with difficulty, just from pure emotion.

And he told her about the three Johns' ranch, and found it was only
three miles distant, and that both were on the same road; only her
cabin, having been put up during the past week, had of course been
unknown to him. So it ended in a sort of compact that they were to help
each other in such ways as they could. Meanwhile the fire got genial,
and the coffee filled the cabin with its comfortable scent, and all of
them ate together quite merrily, Henderson cutting up the ham for the
youngsters; and he told how he chanced to come out; and she entertained
him with stories of what she thought at first when she was brought a
bride to Hamilton, the adjacent village, and convulsed him with stories
of the people, whom she saw with humorous eyes.

Henderson marvelled how she could in those few minutes have rescued the
cabin from the desolation in which the storm had plunged it. Out of the
window he could see the stricken grasses dripping cold moisture, and the
sky still angrily plunging forward like a disturbed sea. Not a tree or
a house broke the view. The desolation of it swept over him as it never
had before. But within the little ones were chattering to themselves in
odd baby dialect, and the mother was laughing with them.

"Women aren't always useless," she said, at parting; "and you tell your
chums that when they get hungry for a slice of homemade bread they can
get it here. And the next time they go by, I want them to stop in and
look at the children. It'll do them good. They may think they won't
enjoy themselves, but they will."

"Oh, I'll answer for that!" cried he, shaking hands with her. "I'll tell
them we have just the right sort of a neighbor."

"Thank you," said she, heartily. "And you may tell them that her name is
Catherine Ford."

Once at home, he told his story.

"H'm!" said Gillispie, "I guess I'll have to go to town myself
to-morrow."

Henderson looked at him blackly. "She's a woman alone, Gillispie," said
he, severely, "trying to make her way with handicaps--"

"Shet up, can't ye, ye darned fool?" roared Gillispie. "What do yeh take
me fur?"

Waite was putting on his rubber coat preparatory to going out for his
night with the cattle. "Guess you're makin' a mistake, my boy," he said,
gently. "There ain't no danger of any woman bein' treated rude in these
parts."

"I know it, by Jove!" cried Henderson, in quick contriteness.

"All right," grunted Gillispie, in tacit acceptance of this apology. "I
guess you thought you was in civilized parts."

Two days after this Waite came in late to his supper. "Well, I seen
her," he announced.

"Oh! did you?" cried Henderson, knowing perfectly well whom he meant.
"What was she doing?"

"Killin' snakes, b'gosh! She says th' baby's crazy fur um, an' so she
takes aroun' a hoe on her shoulder wherever she goes, an' when she sees
a snake, she has it out with 'im then an' there. I says to 'er, 'Yer
don't expec' t' git all th' snakes outen this here country, d' yeh?'
'Well,' she says, 'I'm as good a man as St. Patrick any day.' She is a
jolly one, Henderson. She tuk me in an' showed me th' kids, and give me
a loaf of gingerbread to bring home. Here it is; see?"

"Hu!" said Gillispie. "I'm not in it." But for all of his scorn he was
not above eating the gingerbread.

It was gardening time, and the three Johns were putting in every spare
moment in the little paling made of willow twigs behind the house. It
was little enough time they had, though, for the cattle were new to each
other and to the country, and they were hard to manage. It was generally
conceded that Waite had a genius for herding, and he could take the
"mad" out of a fractious animal in a way that the others looked on as
little less than superhuman. Thus it was that one day, when the clay had
been well turned, and the seeds arranged on the kitchen table, and
all things prepared for an afternoon of busy planting, that Waite
and Henderson, who were needed out with the cattle, felt no little
irritation at the inexplicable absence of Gillispie, who was to look
after the garden. It was quite nightfall when he at last returned.
Supper was ready, although it had been Gillispie's turn to prepare it.

Henderson was sore from his saddle, and cross at having to do more than
his share of the work. "Damn yeh!" he cried, as Gillispie appeared.
"Where yeh been?"

"Making garden," responded Gillispie, slowly.

"Making garden!" Henderson indulged in some more harmless oaths.

Just then Gillispie drew from under his coat a large and friendly
looking apple-pie. "Yes," he said, with emphasis; "I've bin a-makin'
garden fur Mis' Ford."

And so it came about that the three Johns knew her and served her, and
that she never had a need that they were not ready to supply if they
could. Not one of them would have thought of going to town without
stopping to inquire what was needed at the village. As for Catherine
Ford, she was fighting her way with native pluck and maternal
unselfishness. If she had feared solitude she did not suffer from it.
The activity of her life stifled her fresh sorrow. She was pleasantly
excited by the rumors that a railroad was soon to be built near the
place, which would raise the value of the claim she was "holding down"
many thousand dollars.

It is marvellous how sorrow shrinks when one is very healthy and very
much occupied. Although poverty was her close companion, Catherine had
no thought of it in this primitive manner of living. She had come out
there, with the independence and determination of a Western woman, for
the purpose of living at the least possible expense, and making the most
she could while the baby was "getting out of her arms." That process
has its pleasures, which every mother feels in spite of burdens, and
the mind is happily dulled by nature's merciful provision. With a little
child tugging at the breast, care and fret vanish, not because of the
happiness so much as because of a certain mammal complacency, which
is not at all intellectual, but serves its purpose better than the
profoundest method of reasoning.

So without any very unbearable misery at her recent widowhood, this
healthy young woman worked in field and house, cared for her little
ones, milked the two cows out in the corral, sewed, sang, rode, baked,
and was happy for very wholesomeness. Sometimes she reproached herself
that she was not more miserable, remembering that long grave back in
the unkempt little prairie cemetery, and she sat down to coax her sorrow
into proper prominence. But the baby cooing at her from its bunk, the
low of the cattle from the corral begging her to relieve their heavy
bags, the familiar call of one of her neighbors from without, even
the burning sky of the summer dawns, broke the spell of this conjured
sorrow, and in spite of herself she was again a very hearty and happy
young woman. Besides, if one has a liking for comedy, it is
impossible to be dull on a Nebraska prairie. The people are a merrier
divertissement than the theatre with its hackneyed stories. Catherine
Ford laughed a good deal, and she took the three Johns into her
confidence, and they laughed with her. There was Minerva Fitch, who
insisted on coming over to tell Catherine how to raise her children, and
who was almost offended that the children wouldn't die of sunstroke
when she predicted. And there was Bob Ackerman, who had inflammatory
rheumatism and a Past, and who confided the latter to Mrs. Ford while
she doctored the former with homoeopathic medicines. And there were all
the strange visionaries who came out prospecting, and quite naturally
drifted to Mrs. Ford's cabin for a meal, and paid her in compliments of
a peculiarly Western type. And there were the three Johns themselves.
Catherine considered it no treason to laugh at them a little.

Yet at Waite she did not laugh much. There had come to be something
pathetic in the constant service he rendered her. The beginning of his
more particular devotion had started in a particular way. Malaria was
very bad in the country. It had carried off some of the most vigorous
on the prairie, and twice that summer Catherine herself had laid out the
cold forms of her neighbors on ironing-boards, and, with the assistance
of Bill Deems of Missourah, had read the burial service over them. She
had averted several other fatal runs of fever by the contents of her
little medicine-case. These remedies she dealt out with an intelligence
that astonished her patients, until it was learned that she was studying
medicine at the time that she met her late husband, and was persuaded to
assume the responsibilities of matrimony instead of those of the medical
profession.

One day in midsummer, when the sun was focussing itself on the raw pine
boards of her shanty, and Catherine had the shades drawn for coolness
and the water-pitcher swathed in wet rags, East Indian fashion, she
heard the familiar halloo of Waite down the road. This greeting, which
was usually sent to her from the point where the dipping road lifted
itself into the first view of the house, did not contain its usual note
of cheerfulness. Catherine, wiping her hands on her checked apron, ran
out to wave a welcome; and Waite, his squat body looking more distorted
than ever, his huge shoulders lurching as he walked, came fairly
plunging down the hill.

"It's all up with Henderson!" he cried, as Catherine approached. "He's
got the malery, an' he says he's dyin'."

"That's no sign he's dying, because he says so," retorted Catherine.

"He wants to see yeh," panted Waite, mopping his big ugly head. "I think
he's got somethin' particular to say."

"How long has he been down?"

"Three days; an' yeh wouldn't know 'im."

The children were playing on the floor at that side of the house where
it was least hot. Catherine poured out three bowls of milk, and cut some
bread, meanwhile telling Kitty how to feed the baby.

"She's a sensible thing, is the little daughter," said Catherine, as she
tied on her sunbonnet and packed a little basket with things from the
cupboard. She kissed the babies tenderly, flung her hoe--her only weapon
of defence--over her shoulder, and the two started off.

They did not speak, for their throats were soon too parched. The prairie
was burned brown with the sun; the grasses curled as if they had been on
a gridiron. A strong wind was blowing; but it brought no comfort, for
it was heavy with a scorching heat. The skin smarted and blistered under
it, and the eyes felt as if they were filled with sand. The sun seemed
to swing but a little way above the earth, and though the sky was
intensest blue, around about this burning ball there was a halo of
copper, as if the very ether were being consumed in yellow fire.

Waite put some big burdock-leaves on Catherine's head under her bonnet,
and now and then he took a bottle of water from his pocket and made her
swallow a mouthful. She staggered often as she walked, and the road was
black before her. Still, it was not very long before the oddly shaped
shack of the three Johns came in sight; and as he caught a glimpse of
it, Waite quickened his footsteps.

"What if he should be gone?" he said, under his breath.

"Oh, come off!" said Catherine, angrily. "He's not gone. You make me
tired!"

But she was trembling when she stopped just before the door to compose
herself for a moment. Indeed, she trembled so very much that Waite
put out his sprawling hand to steady her. She gently felt the pressure
tightening, and Waite whispered in her ear:

"I guess I'd stand by him as well as anybody, excep' you, Mis' Ford.
He's been my bes' friend. But I guess you like him better, eh?"

Catherine raised her finger. She could hear Henderson's voice within;
it was pitiably querulous. He was half sitting up in his bunk, and
Gillispie had just handed him a plate on which two cakes were swimming
in black molasses and pork gravy. Henderson looked at it a moment; then
over his face came a look of utter despair. He dropped his head in his
arms and broke into uncontrolled crying.

"Oh, my God, Gillispie," he sobbed, "I shall die out here in this
wretched hole! I want my mother. Great God, Gillispie, am I going to die
without ever seeing my mother?"

Gillispie, maddened at this anguish, which he could in no way alleviate,
sought comfort by first lighting his pipe and then taking his revolver
out of his hip-pocket and playing with it. Henderson continued to shake
with sobs, and Catherine, who had never before in her life heard a man
cry, leaned against the door for a moment to gather courage. Then she
ran into the house quickly, laughing as she came. She took Henderson's
arms away from his face and laid him back on the pillow, and she stooped
over him and kissed his forehead in the most matter-of-fact way.

"That's what your mother would do if she were here," she cried, merrily.
"Where's the water?"

She washed his face and hands a long time, till they were cool and his
convulsive sobs had ceased. Then she took a slice of thin bread from her
basket and a spoonful of amber jelly. She beat an egg into some milk and
dropped a little liquor within it, and served them together on the first
clean napkin that had been in the cabin of the three Johns since it was
built.

At this the great fool on the bed cried again, only quietly, tears
of weak happiness running from his feverish eyes. And Catherine
straightened the disorderly cabin. She came every day for two weeks, and
by that time Henderson, very uncertain as to the strength of his legs,
but once more accoutred in his native pluck, sat up in a chair, for
which she had made clean soft cushions, writing a letter to his mother.
The floor was scrubbed; the cabin had taken to itself cupboards made
of packing-boxes; it had clothes-presses and shelves; curtains at the
windows; boxes for all sort of necessaries, from flour to tobacco; and
a cook-book on the wall, with an inscription within which was more
appropriate than respectful.

The day that she announced that she would have no further call to come
back, Waite, who was looking after the house while Gillispie was afield,
made a little speech.

"After this here," he said, "we four stands er falls together. Now
look here, there's lots of things can happen to a person on this cussed
praira, and no one be none th' wiser. So see here, Mis' Ford, every
night one of us is a-goin' to th' roof of this shack. From there we can
see your place. If anything is th' matter--it don't signify how little
er how big--you hang a lantern on th' stick that I'll put alongside th'
house to-morrow. Yeh can h'ist th' light up with a string, and every
mornin' before we go out we'll look too, and a white rag'll bring us
quick as we can git there. We don't say nothin' about what we owe yeh,
fur that ain't our way, but we sticks to each other from this on."

Catherine's eyes were moist. She looked at Henderson. His face had no
expression in it at all. He did not even say good-by to her, and she
turned, with the tears suddenly dried under her lids, and walked down
the road in the twilight.

Weeks went by, and though Gillispie and Waite were often at Catherine's,
Henderson never came. Gillispie gave it out as his opinion that
Henderson was an ungrateful puppy; but Waite said nothing. This strange
man, who seemed like a mere untoward accident of nature, had changed
during the summer. His big ill-shaped body had grown more gaunt;
his deep-set gray eyes had sunk deeper; the gentleness which had
distinguished him even on the wild ranges of Montana became more marked.
Late in August he volunteered to take on himself the entire charge of
the night watch.

"It's nicer to be out at night," he said to Catherine. "Then you don't
keep looking off at things; you can look inside;" and he struck his
breast with his splay hand.

Cattle are timorous under the stars. The vastness of the plains, the
sweep of the wind under the unbroken arch, frighten them; they are
made for the close comforts of the barn-yard; and the apprehension is
contagious, as every ranchman knows. Waite realized the need of becoming
good friends with his animals. Night after night, riding up and down
in the twilight of the stars, or dozing, rolled in his blanket, in the
shelter of a knoll, he would hear a low roar; it was the cry of the
alarmist. Then from every direction the cattle would rise with trembling
awkwardness on their knees, and answer, giving out sullen bellowings.
Some of them would begin to move from place to place, spreading the
baseless alarm, and then came the time for action, else over the plain
in mere fruitless frenzy would go the whole frantic band, lashed to
madness by their own fears, trampling each other, heedless of any
obstacle, in pitiable, deadly rout. Waite knew the premonitory signs
well, and at the first warning bellow he was on his feet, alert
and determined, his energy nerved for a struggle in which he always
conquered.

Waite had a secret which he told to none, knowing, in his unanalytical
fashion, that it would not be believed in. But soon as ever the dark
heads of the cattle began to lift themselves, he sent a resonant voice
out into the stillness. The songs he sang were hymns, and he made them
into a sort of imperative lullaby. Waite let his lungs and soul fill
with the breath of the night; he gave himself up to the exaltation of
mastering those trembling brutes. Mounting, melodious, with even and
powerful swing he let his full notes fall on the air in the confidence
of power, and one by one the reassured cattle would lie down again,
lowing in soft contentment, and so fall asleep with noses stretched out
in mute attention, till their presence could hardly be guessed except
for the sweet aroma of their cuds.

One night in the early dusk, he saw Catherine Ford hastening across the
prairie with Bill Deems. He sent a halloo out to them, which they both
answered as they ran on. Waite knew on what errand of mercy Catherine
was bent, and he thought of the children over at the cabin alone. The
cattle were quiet, the night beautiful, and he concluded that it was
safe enough, since he was on his pony, to ride down there about midnight
and see that the little ones were safe.

The dark sky, pricked with points of intensest light, hung over him
so beneficently that in his heart there leaped a joy which even his
ever-present sorrow could not disturb. This sorrow Waite openly admitted
not only to himself, but to others. He had said to Catherine: "You see,
I'll always hev to love yeh. An' yeh'll not git cross with me; I'm not
goin' to be in th' way." And Catherine had told him, with tears in her
eyes, that his love could never be but a comfort to any woman. And these
words, which the poor fellow had in no sense mistaken, comforted him
always, became part of his joy as he rode there, under those piercing
stars, to look after her little ones. He found them sleeping in their
bunks, the baby tight in Kitty's arms, the little boy above them in the
upper bunk, with his hand in the long hair of his brown spaniel. Waite
softly kissed each of them, so Kitty, who was half waking, told her
mother afterwards, and then, bethinking him that Catherine might not be
able to return in time for their breakfast, found the milk and bread,
and set it for them on the table. Catherine had been writing, and her
unfinished letter lay open beside the ink. He took up the pen and wrote,

"The childdren was all asleep at twelv.

"J. W."


He had not more than got on his pony again before he heard an ominous
sound that made his heart leap. It was a frantic dull pounding of
hoofs. He knew in a second what it meant. There was a stampede among
the cattle. If the animals had all been his, he would not have lost
his sense of judgment. But the realization that he had voluntarily
undertaken the care of them, and that the larger part of them belonged
to his friends, put him in a passion of apprehension that, as a
ranchman, was almost inexplicable. He did the very thing of all others
that no cattle-man in his right senses would think of doing. Gillispie
and Henderson, talking it over afterward, were never able to understand
it. It is possible--just barely possible--that Waite, still drunk on his
solitary dreams, knew what he was doing, and chose to bring his little
chapter to an end while the lines were pleasant. At any rate, he rode
straight forward, shouting and waving his arms in an insane endeavor to
head off that frantic mob. The noise woke the children, and they peered
from the window as the pawing and bellowing herd plunged by, trampling
the young steers under their feet.

In the early morning, Catherine Ford, spent both in mind and body, came
walking slowly home. In her heart was a prayer of thanksgiving. Mary
Deems lay sleeping back in her comfortless shack, with her little son by
her side.

"The wonder of God is in it," said Catherine to herself as she walked
home. "All the ministers of all the world could not have preached me
such a sermon as I've had to-night."

So dim had been the light and so perturbed her mind that she had not
noticed how torn and trampled was the road. But suddenly a bulk in her
pathway startled her. It was the dead and mangled body of a steer. She
stooped over it to read the brand on its flank. "It's one of the three
Johns'," she cried out, looking anxiously about her. "How could that
have happened?"

The direction which the cattle had taken was toward her house, and she
hastened homeward. And not a quarter of a mile from her door she found
the body of Waite beside that of his pony, crushed out of its familiar
form into something unspeakably shapeless. In her excitement she half
dragged, half carried that mutilated body home, and then ran up her
signal of alarm on the stick that Waite himself had erected for her
convenience. She thought it would be a long time before any one reached
her, but she had hardly had time to bathe the disfigured face and
straighten the disfigured body before Henderson was pounding at her
door. Outside stood his pony panting from its terrific exertions.
Henderson had not seen her before for six weeks. Now he stared at her
with frightened eyes.

"What is it? What is it?" he cried. "What has happened to you, my--my
love?"

At least afterward, thinking it over as she worked by day or tossed in
her narrow bunk at night, it seemed to Catherine that those were the
words he spoke. Yet she could never feel sure; nothing in his manner
after that justified the impassioned anxiety of his manner in those
first few uncertain moments; for a second later he saw the body of his
friend and learned the little that Catherine knew. They buried him
the next day in a little hollow where there was a spring and some wild
aspens.

"He never liked the prairie," Catherine said, when she selected the
spot. "And I want him to lie as sheltered as possible."

After he had been laid at rest, and she was back, busy with tidying her
neglected shack, she fell to crying so that the children were scared.

"There's no one left to care what becomes of us," she told them,
bitterly. "We might starve out here for all that any one cares."

And all through the night her tears fell, and she told herself that they
were all for the man whose last thought was for her and her babies; she
told herself over and over again that her tears were all for him. After
this the autumn began to hurry on, and the snow fell capriciously, days
of biting cold giving place to retrospective glances at summer. The last
of the vegetables were taken out of the garden and buried in the cellar;
and a few tons of coal--dear almost as diamonds--were brought out to
provide against the severest weather. Ordinarily buffalo chips were
the fuel. Catherine was alarmed at the way her wretched little store of
money began to vanish. The baby was fretful with its teething, and was
really more care than when she nursed it. The days shortened, and it
seemed to her that she was forever working by lamp-light The prairies
were brown and forbidding, the sky often a mere gray pall. The monotony
of the life began to seem terrible. Sometimes her ears ached for a
sound. For a time in the summer so many had seemed to need her that
she had been happy in spite of her poverty and her loneliness. Now,
suddenly, no one wanted her. She could find no source of inspiration.
She wondered how she was going to live through the winter, and keep her
patience and her good-nature.

"You'll love me," she said, almost fiercely, one night to the
children--"you'll love mamma, no matter how cross and homely she gets,
won't you?"

The cold grew day by day. A strong winter was setting in. Catherine took
up her study of medicine again, and sat over her books till midnight.
It occurred to her that she might fit herself for nursing by spring, and
that the children could be put with some one--she did not dare to think
with whom. But this was the only solution she could find to her problem
of existence.

November settled down drearily. Few passed the shack. Catherine, who
had no one to speak with excepting the children, continually devised
amusements for them. They got to living in a world of fantasy, and
were never themselves, but always wild Indians, or arctic explorers,
or Robinson Crusoes. Kitty and Roderick, young as they were, found a
never-ending source of amusement in these little grotesque dreams and
dramas. The fund of money was getting so low that Catherine was obliged
to economize even in the necessities. If it had not been for her two
cows, she would hardly have known how to find food for her little ones.
But she had a wonderful way of making things with eggs and milk, and she
kept her little table always inviting. The day before Thanksgiving she
determined that they should all have a frolic.

"By Christmas," she said to Kitty, "the snow may be so bad that I cannot
get to town. We'll have our high old time now."

There is no denying that Catherine used slang even in talking to the
children. The little pony had been sold long ago, and going to town
meant a walk of twelve miles. But Catherine started out early in the
morning, and was back by nightfall, not so very much the worse, and
carrying in her arms bundles which might have fatigued a bronco.

The next morning she was up early, and was as happy and ridiculously
excited over the prospect of the day's merrymaking as if she had been
Kitty. Busy as she was, she noticed a peculiar oppression in the air,
which intensified as the day went on. The sky seemed to hang but a
little way above the rolling stretch of frost-bitten grass. But Kitty
laughing over her new doll, Roderick startling the sullen silence
with his drum, the smell of the chicken, slaughtered to make a prairie
holiday, browning in the oven, drove all apprehensions from Catherine's
mind. She was a common creature. Such very little things could make her
happy. She sang as she worked; and what with the drumming of her boy,
and the little exulting shrieks of her baby, the shack was filled with a
deafening and exhilarating din.

It was a little past noon, when she became conscious that there was
sweeping down on her a gray sheet of snow and ice, and not till then did
she realize what those lowering clouds had signified. For one moment she
stood half paralyzed. She thought of everything,--of the cattle, of the
chance for being buried in this drift, of the stock of provisions, of
the power of endurance of the children. While she was still thinking,
the first ice-needles of the blizzard came peppering the windows. The
cattle ran bellowing to the lee side of the house and crouched there,
and the chickens scurried for the coop. Catherine seized such blankets
and bits of carpet as she could find, and crammed them at windows and
doors. Then she piled coal on the fire, and clothed the children in all
they had that was warmest, their out-door garments included; and with
them close about her, she sat and waited. The wind seemed to push
steadily at the walls of the house. The howling became horrible. She
could see that the children were crying with fright, but she could
not hear them. The air was dusky; the cold, in spite of the fire,
intolerable. In every crevice of the wretched structure the ice and snow
made their way. It came through the roof, and began piling up in little
pointed strips under the crevices. Catherine put the children all
together in one bunk, covered them with all the bedclothes she had, and
then stood before them defiantly, facing the west, from whence the
wind was driving. Not suddenly, but by steady pressure, at length the
window-sash yielded, and the next moment that whirlwind was in the
house,--a maddening tumult of ice and wind, leaving no room for
resistance; a killing cold, against which it was futile to fight.
Catherine threw the bedclothes over the heads of the children, and then
threw herself across the bunk, gasping and choking for breath. Her
body would not have yielded to the suffering yet, so strongly made and
sustained was it; but her dismay stifled her. She saw in one horrified
moment the frozen forms of her babies, now so pink and pleasant to the
sense; and oblivion came to save her from further misery.

She was alive--just barely alive--when Gillispie and Henderson got
there, three hours later, the very balls of their eyes almost frozen
into blindness. But for an instinct stronger than reason they would
never have been able to have found their way across that trackless
stretch. The children lying unconscious under their coverings were
neither dead nor actually frozen, although the men putting their hands
on their little hearts could not at first discover the beating. Stiff
and suffering as these young fellows were, it was no easy matter to get
the window back into place and re-light the fire. They had tied flasks
of liquor about their waists; and this beneficent fluid they used with
that sense of appreciation which only a pioneer can feel toward
whiskey. It was hours before Catherine rewarded them with a gleam
of consciousness. Her body had been frozen in many places. Her arms,
outstretched over her children and holding the clothes down about
them, were rigid. But consciousness came at length, dimly struggling up
through her brain; and over her she saw her friends rubbing and rubbing
those strong firm arms of hers with snow.

She half raised her head, with a horror of comprehension in her eyes,
and listened. A cry answered her,--a cry of dull pain from the baby.
Henderson dropped on his knees beside her.

"They are all safe," he said. "And we will never leave you again. I have
been afraid to tell you how I love you. I thought I might offend you. I
thought I ought to wait--you know why. But I will never let you run the
risks of this awful life alone again. You must rename the baby. From
this day his name is John. And we will have the three Johns again
back at the old ranch. It doesn't matter whether you love me or not,
Catherine, I am going to take care of you just the same. Gillispie
agrees with me."

"Damme, yes," muttered Gillispie, feeling of his hip-pocket for
consolation in his old manner.

Catherine struggled to find her voice, but it would not come.

"Do not speak," whispered John. "Tell me with your eyes whether you will
come as my wife or only as our sister."

Catherine told him.

"This is Thanksgiving day," said he. "And we don't know much about
praying, but I guess we all have something in our hearts that does just
as well."

"Damme, yes," said Gillispie, again, as he pensively cocked and uncocked
his revolver.




A Resuscitation

AFTER being dead twenty years, he walked out into the sunshine.

It was as if the bones of a bleached skeleton should join themselves on
some forgotten plain, and look about them for the vanished flesh.

To be dead it is not necessary to be in the grave. There are places
where the worms creep about the heart instead of the body.

The penitentiary is one of these. David Culross had been in the
penitentiary twenty years. Now, with that worm-eaten heart, he came out
into liberty and looked about him for the habiliments with which he had
formerly clothed himself,--for hope, self-respect, courage, pugnacity,
and industry.

But they had vanished and left no trace, like the flesh of the dead men
on the plains, and so, morally unapparelled, in the hideous skeleton of
his manhood, he walked on down the street under the mid-June sunshine.

You can understand, can you not, how a skeleton might wish to get back
into its comfortable grave? David Culross had not walked two blocks
before he was seized with an almost uncontrollable desire to beg to be
shielded once more in that safe and shameful retreat from which he had
just been released. A horrible perception of the largeness of the world
swept over him. Space and eternity could seem no larger to the usual man
than earth--that snug and insignificant planet--looked to David Culross.

"If I go back," he cried, despairingly, looking up to the great building
that arose above the stony hills, "they will not take me in." He was
absolutely without a refuge, utterly without a destination; he did not
have a hope. There was nothing he desired except the surrounding of
those four narrow walls between which he had lain at night and dreamed
those ever-recurring dreams,-dreams which were never prophecies or
promises, but always the hackneyed history of what he had sacrificed by
his crime, and relinquished by his pride.

The men who passed him looked at him with mingled amusement and pity.
They knew the "prison look," and they knew the prison clothes. For
though the State gives to its discharged convicts clothes which are
like those of other men, it makes a hundred suits from the same sort of
cloth. The police know the fabric, and even the citizens recognize
it. But, then, were each man dressed in different garb he could not be
disguised. Every one knows in what dull school that sidelong glance is
learned, that aimless drooping of the shoulders, that rhythmic lifting
of the heavy foot.

David Culross wondered if his will were dead. He put it to the test.
He lifted up his head to a position which it had not held for many
miserable years. He put his hands in his pockets in a pitiful attempt at
nonchalance, and walked down the street with a step which was meant to
be brisk, but which was in fact only uncertain. In his pocket were ten
dollars. This much the State equips a man with when it sends him out of
its penal halls. It gives him also transportation to any point within
reasonable distance that he may desire to reach. Culross had requested a
ticket to Chicago. He naturally said Chicago. In the long colorless days
it had been in Chicago that all those endlessly repeated scenes had been
laid. Walking up the street now with that wavering ineffectual gait,
these scenes came back to surge in his brain like waters ceaselessly
tossed in a wind-swept basin.

There was the office, bare and clean, where the young stoop-shouldered
clerks sat writing. In their faces was a strange resemblance, just as
there was in the backs of the ledgers, and in the endless bills on
the spindles. If one of them laughed, it was not with gayety, but with
gratification at the discomfiture of another. None of them ate well.
None of them were rested after sleep. All of them rode on the stuffy
one-horse cars to and from their work. Sundays they lay in bed very
late, and ate more dinner than they could digest. There was a certain
fellowship among them,--such fellowship as a band of captives among
cannibals might feel, each of them waiting with vital curiosity to
see who was the next to be eaten. But of that fellowship that plans
in unison, suffers in sympathy, enjoys vicariously, strengthens into
friendship and communion of soul they knew nothing. Indeed, such
camaraderie would have been disapproved of by the Head Clerk. He would
have looked on an emotion with exactly the same displeasure that he
would on an error in the footing of the year's accounts. It was tacitly
understood that one reached the proud position of Head Clerk by having
no emotions whatever.

Culross did not remember having been born with a pen in his hand, or
even with one behind his ear; but certainly from the day he had been
let out of knickerbockers his constant companion had been that greatly
overestimated article. His father dying at a time that cut short David's
school-days, he went out armed with his new knowledge of double-entry,
determined to make a fortune and a commercial name. Meantime, he lived
in a suite of three rooms on West Madison Street with his mother, who
was a good woman, and lived where she did that she might be near her
favorite meeting-house. She prayed, and cooked bad dinners, principally
composed of dispiriting pastry. Her idea of house-keeping was to keep
the shades down, whatever happened; and when David left home in the
evening for any purpose of pleasure, she wept. David persuaded himself
that he despised amusement, and went to bed each night at half-past nine
in a folding bedstead in the front room, and, by becoming absolutely
stolid from mere vegetation, imagined that he was almost fit to be a
Head Clerk.

Walking down the street now after the twenty years, thinking of these
dead but innocent days, this was the picture he saw; and as he reflected
upon it, even the despoiled and desolate years just passed seemed richer
by contrast.

He reached the station thus dreaming, and found, as he had been told
when the warden bade him good-by, that a train was to be at hand
directly bound to the city. A few moments later he was on that train.
Well back in the shadow, and out of sight of the other passengers, he
gave himself up to the enjoyment of the comfortable cushion. He would
willingly have looked from the window,--green fields were new and
wonderful; drifting clouds a marvel; men, houses, horses, farms, all a
revelation,--but those haunting visions were at him again, and would not
leave brain or eye free for other things.

But the next scene had warmer tints. It was the interior of a rich
room,--crimson and amber fabrics, flowers, the gleam of a statue beyond
the drapings; the sound of a tender piano unflinging a familiar melody,
and a woman. She was just a part of all the luxury.

He himself, very timid and conscious of his awkwardness, sat near,
trying barrenly to get some of his thoughts out of his brain on to his
tongue.

"Strange, isn't it," the woman broke in on her own music, "that we
have seen each other so very often and never spoken? I've often thought
introductions were ridiculous. Fancy seeing a person year in and year
out, and really knowing all about him, and being perfectly acquainted
with his name--at least his or her name, you know--and then never
speaking! Some one comes along, and says, 'Miss Le Baron, this is Mr.
Culross,' just as if one didn't know that all the time! And there you
are! You cease to be dumb folks, and fall to talking, and say a lot of
things neither of you care about, and after five or six weeks of time
and sundry meetings, get down to honestly saying what you mean. I'm so
glad we've got through with that first stage, and can say what we think
and tell what we really like."

Then the playing began again,--a harplike intermingling of soft sounds.
Zoe Le Baron's hands were very girlish. Everything about her was
unformed. Even her mind was so. But all promised a full completion.
The voice, the shoulders, the smile, the words, the lips, the arms, the
whole mind and body, were rounding to maturity.

"Why do you never come to church in the morning?" asks Miss Le Baron,
wheeling around on her piano-stool suddenly. "You are only there at
night, with your mother."

"I go only on her account," replies David, truthfully. "In the morning
I am so tired with the week's work that I rest at home. I ought to go, I
know."

"Yes, you ought," returns the young woman, gravely. "It doesn't really
rest one to lie in bed like that. I've tried it at boarding-school. It
was no good whatever."

"Should you advise me," asks David, in a confiding tone, "to arise early
on Sunday?"

The girl blushes a little. "By all means!" she cries, her eyes
twinkling, "and--and come to church. Our morning sermons are really very
much better than those in the evening." And she plays a waltz, and what
with the music and the warmth of the room and the perfume of the roses,
a something nameless and mystical steals over the poor clerk, and
swathes him about like the fumes of opium. They are alone. The silence
is made deeper by that rhythmic unswelling of sound. As the painter
flushes the bare wall into splendor, these emotions illuminated his
soul, and gave to it that high courage that comes when men or women
suddenly realize that each life has its significance,-their own lives no
less than the lives of others.

The man sitting there in the shadow in that noisy train saw in his
vision how the lad arose and moved, like one under a spell, toward the
piano. He felt again the enchantment of the music-ridden quiet, of the
perfume, and the presence of the woman.

"Knowing you and speaking with you have not made much difference with
me," he whispers, drunk on the new wine of passion, "for I have loved
you since I saw you first. And though it is so sweet to hear you speak,
your voice is no more beautiful than I thought it would be. I have loved
you a long time, and I want to know--"

The broken man in the shadow remembered how the lad stopped, astonished
at his boldness and his fluency, overcome suddenly at the thought of
what he was saying. The music stopped with a discord. The girl arose,
trembling and scarlet.

"I would not have believed it of you," she cries, "to take advantage of
me like this, when I am alone--and--everything. You know very well that
nothing but trouble could come to either of us from your telling me a
thing like that."

He puts his hands up to his face to keep off her anger. He is trembling
with confusion.

Then she broke in penitently, trying to pull his hands away from his
hot face: "Never mind! I know you didn't mean anything. Be good, do, and
don't spoil the lovely times we have together. You know very well
father and mother wouldn't let us see each other at all if they--if they
thought you were saying anything such as you said just now."

"Oh, but I can't help it!" cries the boy, despairingly. "I have never
loved anybody at all till now. I don't mean not another girl, you know.
But you are the first being I ever cared for. I sometimes think mother
cares for me because I pay the rent. And the office--you can't imagine
what that is like. The men in it are moving corpses. They're proud to be
that way, and so was I till I knew you and learned what life was like.
All the happy moments I have had have been here. Now, if you tell me
that we are not to care for each other--"

There was some one coming down the hall. The curtain lifted. A
middle-aged man stood there looking at him.

"Culross," said he, "I'm disappointed in you. I didn't mean to listen,
but I couldn't help hearing what you said just now. I don't blame you
particularly. Young men will be fools. And I do not in any way mean to
insult you when I tell you to stop your coming here. I don't want to see
you inside this door again, and after a while you will thank me for
it. You have taken a very unfair advantage of my invitation. I make
allowances for your youth."

He held back the curtain for the lad to pass out. David threw a
miserable glance at the girl. She was standing looking at her father
with an expression that David could not fathom. He went into the hall,
picked up his hat, and walked out in silence.

David wondered that night, walking the chilly streets after he
quitted the house, and often, often afterward, if that comfortable and
prosperous gentleman, safe beyond the perturbations of youth, had
any idea of what he had done. How COULD he know anything of the black
monotony of the life of the man he turned from his door? The "desk's
dead wood" and all its hateful slavery, the dull darkened rooms where
his mother prosed through endless evenings, the bookless, joyless,
hopeless existence that had cramped him all his days rose up before
him, as a stretch of unbroken plain may rise before a lost man till it
maddens him.

The bowed man in the car-seat remembered with a flush of reminiscent
misery how the lad turned suddenly in his walk and entered the door of
a drinking-room that stood open. It was very comfortable within. The
screens kept out the chill of the autumn night, the sawdust-sprinkled
floor was clean, the tables placed near together, the bar glittering,
the attendants white-aproned and brisk.

David liked the place, and he liked better still the laughter that came
from a room within. It had a note in it a little different from anything
he had ever heard before in his life, and one that echoed his mood. He
ventured to ask if he might go into the farther room.

It does not mean much when most young men go to a place like this. They
take their bit of unwholesome dissipation quietly enough, and are a
little coarser and more careless each time they indulge in it, perhaps.
But certainly their acts, whatever gradual deterioration they may
indicate, bespeak no sudden moral revolution. With this young clerk it
was different. He was a worse man from the moment he entered the door,
for he did violence to his principles; he killed his self-respect.

He had been paid at the office that night, and he had the money--a
week's miserable pittance--in his pocket. His every action revealed the
fact that he was a novice in recklessness. His innocent face piqued the
men within. They gave him a welcome that amazed him. Of course the rest
of the evening was a chaos to him. The throat down which he poured the
liquor was as tender as a child's. The men turned his head with
their ironical compliments. Their boisterous good-fellowship was as
intoxicating to this poor young recluse as the liquor.

It was the revulsion from this feeling, when he came to a consciousness
that the men were laughing at him and not with him, that wrecked his
life. He had gone from beer to whiskey, and from whiskey to brandy, by
this time, at the suggestion of the men, and was making awkward lunges
with a billiard cue, spurred on by the mocking applause of the others.
One young fellow was particularly hilarious at his expense. His jokes
became insults, or so they seemed to David.

A quarrel followed, half a jest on the part of the other, all serious
as far as David was concerned. And then--Well, who could tell how it
happened? The billiard cue was in David's hand, and the skull of the
jester was split, a horrible gaping thing, revoltingly animal.

David never saw his home again. His mother gave it out in church that
her heart was broken, and she wrote a letter to David begging him to
reform. She said she would never cease to pray for him, that he might
return to grace. He had an attorney, an impecunious and very aged
gentleman, whose life was a venerable failure, and who talked so much
about his personal inconveniences from indigestion that he forgot to
take a very keen interest in the concerns of his client. David's trial
made no sensation. He did not even have the cheap sympathy of the
morbid. The court-room was almost empty the dull spring day when the
east wind beat against the window, jangling the loose panes all through
the reading of the verdict.

Twenty years!

Twenty years in the penitentiary!

David looked up at the judge and smiled. Men have been known to smile
that way when the car-wheel crashes over their legs, or a bullet lets
the air through their lungs.

All that followed would have seemed more terrible if it had not appeared
to be so remote. David had to assure himself over and over that it was
really he who was put in that disgraceful dress, and locked in that
shameful walk from corridor to workroom, from work-room to chapel.
The work was not much more monotonous than that to which he had been
accustomed in the office. Here, as there, one was reproved for not doing
the required amount, but never praised for extraordinary efforts. Here,
as there, the workers regarded each other with dislike and suspicion.
Here, as there, work was a penalty and not a pleasure.

It is the nights that are to be dreaded in a penitentiary. Speech eases
the brain of free men; but the man condemned to eternal silence is
bound to endure torments. Thought, which might be a diversion, becomes
a curse; it is a painful disease which becomes chronic. It does not take
long to forget the days of the week and the months of the year when
time brings no variance. David drugged himself on dreams. He knew it was
weakness, but it was the wine of forgetfulness, and he indulged in it.
He went over and over, in endless repetition, every scene in which Zoe
Le Baron had figured.

He learned by a paper that she had gone to Europe. He was glad of that.
For there were hours in which he imagined that his fate might have
caused her distress--not much, of course, but perhaps an occasional hour
of sympathetic regret. But it was pleasanter not to think of that. He
preferred to remember the hours they had spent together while she was
teaching him the joy of life.

How lovely her gray eyes were! Deep, yet bright, and full of silent
little speeches. The rooms in which he imagined her as moving were
always splendid; the gowns she wore were of rustling silk. He never in
any dream, waking or sleeping, associated her with poverty or sorrow or
pain. Gay and beautiful, she moved from city to city, in these visions
of David's, looking always at wonderful things, and finding laughter in
every happening.

It was six months after his entrance into his silent abode that a letter
came for him.

"By rights, Culross," said the warden, "I should not give this letter
to you. It isn't the sort we approve of. But you're in for a good spell,
and if there is anything that can make life seem more tolerable, I don't
know but you're entitled to it. At least, I'm not the man to deny it to
you."

This was the letter:--

"MY DEAR FRIEND,--I hope you do not think that all these months, when
you have been suffering so terribly, I have been thinking of other
things! But I am sure you know the truth. You know that I could not send
you word or come to see you, or I would have done it. When I first heard
of what you had done, I saw it all as it happened,--that dreadful scene,
I mean, in the saloon. I am sure I have imagined everything just as it
was. I begged papa to help you, but he was very angry. You see, papa was
so peculiar. He thought more of the appearances of things, perhaps, than
of facts. It infuriated him to think of me as being concerned about you
or with you. I did not know he could be so angry, and his anger did not
die, but for days it cast such a shadow over me that I used to wish I
was dead. Only I would not disobey him, and now I am glad of that. We
were in France three months, and then, coming home, papa died. It was
on the voyage. I wish he had asked me to forgive him, for then I think
I could have remembered him with more tenderness. But he did nothing of
the kind. He did not seem to think he had done wrong in any way, though
I feel that some way we might have saved you. I am back here in Chicago
in the old home. But I shall not stay in this house. It is so large
and lonesome, and I always see you and father facing each other angrily
there in the parlor when I enter it. So I am going to get me some cosey
rooms in another part of the city, and take my aunt, who is a sweet old
lady, to live with me; and I am going to devote my time--all of it--and
all of my brains to getting you out of that terrible place. What is the
use of telling me that you are a murderer? Do I not know you could not
be brought to hurt anything? I suppose you must have killed that poor
man, but then it was not you, it was that dreadful drink--it was Me!
That is what continually haunts me. If I had been a braver girl, and
spoken the words that were in my heart, you would not have gone into
that place. You would be innocent to-day. It was I who was responsible
for it all. I let father kill your heart right there before me, and
never said a word. Yet I knew how it was with you, and--this is what
I ought to have said then, and what I must say now--and all the time I
felt just as you did. I thought I should die when I saw you go away, and
knew you would never come back again. Only I was so selfish, I was so
wicked, I would say nothing.

"I have no right to be comfortable and hopeful, and to have friends,
with you shut up from liberty and happiness. I will not have those
comfortable rooms, after all. I will live as you do. I will live alone
in a bare room. For it is I who am guilty! And then I will feel that I
also am being punished.

"Do you hate me? Perhaps my telling you now all these things, and that I
felt toward you just as you did toward me, will not make you happy. For
it may be that you despise me.

"Anyway, I have told you the truth now. I will go as soon as I hear from
you to a lawyer, and try to find out how you may be liberated. I am sure
it can be done when the facts are known.

"Poor boy! How I do hope you have known in your heart that I was not
forgetting you. Indeed, day or night, I have thought of nothing else.
Now I am free to help you. And be sure, whatever happens, that I am
working for you.

"ZOE LE BARON."


That was all. Just a girlish, constrained letter, hardly hinting at the
hot tears that had been shed for many weary nights, coyly telling of the
impatient young love and all the maidenly shame.

David permitted himself to read it only once. Then a sudden resolution
was born-a heroic one. Before he got the letter he was a crushed
and unsophisticated boy; when he had read it, and absorbed its full
significance, he became suddenly a man, capable of a great sacrifice.

"I return your letter," he wrote, without superscription, "and thank you
for your anxiety about me. But the truth is, I had forgotten all about
you in my trouble. You were not in the least to blame for what happened.
I might have known I would come to such an end. You thought I was good,
of course; but it is not easy to find out the life of a young man. It is
rather mortifying to have a private letter sent here, because the warden
reads them all. I hope you will enjoy yourself this winter, and hasten
to forget one who had certainly forgotten you till reminded by your
letter, which I return.

"Respectfully,

"DAVID CULROSS."


That night some deep lines came into his face which never left it, and
which made him look like a man of middle age.

He never doubted that his plan would succeed; that, piqued and indignant
at his ingratitude, she would hate him, and in a little time forget
he ever lived, or remember him only to blush with shame at her past
association with him. He saw her happy, loved, living the usual life of
women, with all those things that make life rich.

For there in the solitude an understanding of deep things came to him.
He who thought never to have a wife grew to know what the joy of it must
be. He perceived all the subtle rapture of wedded souls. He learned what
the love of children was, the pride of home, the unselfish ambition
for success that spurs men on. All the emotions passed in procession at
night before him, tricked out in palpable forms.

A burst of girlish tears would dissipate whatever lingering pity Zoe
felt for him. How often he said that! With her sensitiveness she would
be sure to hate a man who had mortified her.

So he fell to dreaming of her again as moving among happy and luxurious
scenes, exquisitely clothed, with flowers on her bosom and jewels on
her neck; and he saw men loving her, and was glad, and saw her at last
loving the best of them, and told himself in the silence of the night
that it was as he wished.

Yet always, always, from weary week to weary week, he rehearsed the
scenes. They were his theatre, his opera, his library, his lecture hall.

He rehearsed them again there on the cars. He never wearied of them. To
be sure, other thoughts had come to him at night. Much that to most men
seems complex and puzzling had grown to appear simple to him. In a way
his brain had quickened and deepened through the years of solitude. He
had thought out a great many things. He had read a few good books and
digested them, and the visions in his heart had kept him from being
bitter.

Yet, suddenly confronted with liberty, turned loose like a pastured
colt, without master or rein, he felt only confusion and dismay. He
might be expected to feel exultation. He experienced only fright. It is
precisely the same with the liberated colt.

The train pulled into a bustling station, in which the multitudinous
noises were thrown back again from the arched iron roof. The relentless
haste of all the people was inexpressibly cruel to the man who looked
from the window wondering whither he would go, and if, among all the
thousands that made up that vast and throbbing city, he would ever find
a friend.

For a moment David longed even for that unmaternal mother who had
forgotten him in the hour of his distress; but she had been dead for
many years.

The train stopped. Every one got out. David forced himself to his feet
and followed. He had been driven back into the world. It would have
seemed less terrible to have been driven into a desert. He walked
toward the great iron gates, seeing the people and hearing the noises
confusedly.

As he entered the space beyond the grating some one caught him by the
arm. It was a little middle-aged woman in plain clothes, and with sad
gray eyes.

"Is this David?" said she.

He did not speak, but his face answered her.

"I knew you were coming to-day. I've waited all these years, David. You
didn't think I believed what you said in that letter did you? This way,
David,--this is the way home."




Two Pioneers

IT was the year of the small-pox. The Pawnees had died in their cold
tepees by the fifties, the soldiers lay dead in the trenches without the
fort, and many a gay French voyageur, who had thought to go singing down
the Missouri on his fur-laden raft in the springtime, would never again
see the lights of St. Louis, or the coin of the mighty Choteau company.

It had been a winter of tragedies. The rigors of the weather and the
scourge of the disease had been fought with Indian charm and with
Catholic prayer. Both were equally unavailing. If a man was taken sick
at the fort they put him in a warm room, brought him a jug of water
once a day, and left him to find out what his constitution was worth.
Generally he recovered; for the surgeon's supplies had been exhausted
early in the year. But the Indians, in their torment, rushed into the
river through the ice, and returned to roll themselves in their blankets
and die in ungroaning stoicism.

Every one had grown bitter and hard. The knives of the trappers were
sharp, and not one whit sharper than their tempers. Some one said that
the friendly Pawnees were conspiring with the Sioux, who were always
treacherous, to sack the settlement. The trappers doubted this. They and
the Pawnees had been friends many years, and they had together killed
the Sioux in four famous battles on the Platte. Yet--who knows? There
was pestilence in the air, and it had somehow got into men's souls as
well as their bodies.

So, at least, Father de Smet said. He alone did not despair. He
alone tried neither charm nor curse. He dressed him an altar in the
wilderness, and he prayed at it--but not for impossible things. When in
a day's journey you come across two lodges of Indians, sixty souls in
each, lying dead and distorted from the plague in their desolate tepees,
you do not pray, if you are a man like Father de Smet. You go on to the
next lodge where the living yet are, and teach them how to avoid death.

Besides, when you are young, it is much easier to act than to pray. When
the children cried for food, Father de Smet took down the rifle from
the wall and went out with it, coming back only when he could feed the
hungry. There were places where the prairie was black with buffalo, and
the shy deer showed their delicate heads among the leafless willows
of the Papillion. When they--the children--were cold, this young man
brought in baskets of buffalo chips from the prairie and built them
a fire, or he hung more skins up at the entrance to the tepees. If he
wanted to cross a river and had no boat at hand, he leaped the uncertain
ice, or, in clear current, swam, with his clothes on his head in a
bundle.

A wonderful traveller for the time was Father de Smet. Twice he had gone
as far as the land of the Flathead nation, and he could climb mountain
passes as well as any guide of the Rockies. He had built a dozen
missions, lying all the way from the Columbia to the Kaw. He had always
a jest at his tongue's end, and served it out with as much readiness as
a prayer; and he had, withal, an arm trained to do execution. Every
man on the plains understood the art of self-preservation. Even in
Cainsville, over by the council ground of the western tribes, which was
quite the most civilized place for hundreds of miles, life was uncertain
when the boats came from St. Louis with bad whiskey in their holds. But
no one dared take liberties with the holy father. The thrust from his
shoulder was straight and sure, and his fist was hard.

Yet it was not the sinner that Father de Smet meant to crush. He always
supplemented his acts of physical prowess with that explanation. It
was the sin that he struck at from the shoulder--and may not even an
anointed one strike at sin?

Father de Smet could draw a fine line, too, between the things which
were bad in themselves, and the things which were only extrinsically
bad. For example, there were the soups of Mademoiselle Ninon. Mam'selle
herself was not above reproach, but her soups were. Mademoiselle Ninon
was the only Parisian thing in the settlement. And she was certainly to
be avoided--which was perhaps the reason that no one avoided her. It
was four years since she had seen Paris. She was sixteen then, and she
followed the fortunes of a certain adventurer who found it advisable to
sail for Montreal. Ninon had been bored back in Paris, it being dull
in the mantua-making shop of Madame Guittar. If she had been a man she
would have taken to navigation, and might have made herself famous by
sailing to some unknown part of the New World. Being a woman, she took
a lover who was going to New France, and forgot to weep when he found an
early and violent death. And there were others at hand, and Ninon sailed
around the cold blue lakes, past Sault St. Marie, and made her way
across the portages to the Mississippi, and so down to the sacred rock
of St. Louis. That was a merry place. Ninon had fault to find neither
with the wine nor the dances. They were all that one could have desired,
and there was no limit to either of them. But still, after a time, even
this grew tiresome to one of Ninon's spirit, and she took the first
opportunity to sail up the Missouri with a certain young trapper
connected with the great fur company, and so found herself at
Cainsville, with the blue bluffs rising to the east of her, and the low
white stretches of the river flats undulating down to where the sluggish
stream wound its way southward capriciously.

Ninon soon tired of her trapper. For one thing she found out that he
was a coward. She saw him run once in a buffalo fight. That was when the
Pawnee stood still with a blanket stretched wide in a gaudy square,
and caught the head of the mad animal fairly in the tough fabric; his
mustang's legs trembled under him, but he did not move,--for a mustang
is the soul of an Indian, and obeys each thought; the Indian himself
felt his heart pounding at his ribs; but once with that garment fast
over the baffled eyes of the struggling brute, the rest was only a
matter of judicious knife-thrusts. Ninon saw this. She rode past her
lover, and snatched the twisted bullion cord from his hat that she had
braided and put there, and that night she tied it on the hat of the
Pawnee who had killed the buffalo.

The Pawnees were rather proud of the episode, and as for the Frenchmen,
they did not mind. The French have always been very adaptable in
America. Ninon was universally popular.

And so were her soups.

Every man has his price. Father de Smet's was the soups of Mademoiselle
Ninon. Fancy! If you have an educated palate and are obliged to eat
the strong distillation of buffalo meat, cooked in a pot which has been
wiped out with the greasy petticoat of a squaw! When Ninon came down
from St. Louis she brought with her a great box containing neither
clothes, furniture, nor trinkets, but something much more wonderful!
It was a marvellous compounding of spices and seasonings. The aromatic
liquids she set before the enchanted men of the settlement bore no more
relation to ordinary buffalo soup than Chateaubrand's Indian maidens
did to one of the Pawnee girls, who slouched about the settlement with
noxious tresses and sullen slavish coquetries.

Father de Smet would not at any time have called Ninon a scarlet woman.
But when he ate the dish of soup or tasted the hot corn-cakes that she
invariably invited him to partake of as he passed her little house, he
refrained with all the charity of a true Christian and an accomplished
epicure from even thinking her such. And he remembered the words of the
Saviour, "Let him who is without sin among you cast the first stone."

To Father de Smet's healthy nature nothing seemed more superfluous than
sin. And he was averse to thinking that any committed deeds of which he
need be ashamed. So it was his habit, especially if the day was pleasant
and his own thoughts happy, to say to himself when he saw one of the
wild young trappers leaving the cabin of Mademoiselle Ninon: "He has
been for some of the good woman's hot cakes," till he grew quite to
believe that the only attractions that the adroit Frenchwoman possessed
were of a gastronomic nature.

To tell the truth, the attractions of Mademoiselle Ninon were varied. To
begin with, she was the only thing in that wilderness to suggest home.
Ninon had a genius for home-making. Her cabin, in which she cooked,
slept, ate, lived, had become a boudoir.

The walls were hung with rare and beautiful skins; the very floor made
rich with huge bear robes, their permeating odors subdued by heavy
perfumes brought, like the spices, from St. Louis. The bed, in daytime,
was a couch of beaver-skins; the fireplace had branching antlers
above it, on which were hung some of the evidences of the fair Ninon's
coquetry, such as silken scarves, of the sort the voyageurs from the far
north wore; and necklaces made by the Indians of the Pacific coast and
brought to Ninon by--but it is not polite to inquire into these matters.
There were little moccasins also, much decorated with porcupine-quills,
one pair of which Father de Smet had brought from the Flathead nation,
and presented to Ninon that time when she nursed him through a frightful
run of fever. She would take no money for her patient services.

"Father," said she, gravely, when he offered it to her, "I am not
myself virtuous. But I have the distinction of having preserved the only
virtuous creature in the settlement for further usefulness. Sometimes,
perhaps, you will pray for Ninon."

Father de Smet never forgot those prayers.

These were wild times, mind you. No use to keep your skirts coldly clean
if you wished to be of help. These men were subduing a continent. Their
primitive qualities came out. Courage, endurance, sacrifice, suffering
without complaint, friendship to the death, indomitable hatred,
unfaltering hope, deep-seated greed, splendid gayety--it takes these
things to subdue a continent. Vice is also an incidental,--that is to
say, what one calls vice. This is because it is the custom to measure
these men as if they were governed by the laws of civilization, where
there is neither law nor civilization.

This much is certain: gentlemen cannot conquer a country. They
tried gentlemen back in Virginia, and they died, partly from lack of
intellect, but mostly from lack of energy. After the yeomen have fought
the conquering fight, it is well enough to bring in gentlemen, who
are sometimes clever lawmakers, and who look well on thrones or in
presidential chairs.

But to return to the winter of the smallpox. It was then that the priest
and Ninon grew to know each other well. They became acquainted first
in the cabin where four of the trappers lay tossing in delirium. The
horrible smell of disease weighted the air. Outside wet snow fell
continuously and the clouds seemed to rest only a few feet above the
sullen bluffs. The room was bare of comforts, and very dirty. Ninon
looked about with disgust.

"You pray," said she to the priest, "and I will clean the room."

"Not so," returned the broad-shouldered father, smilingly, "we will both
clean the room." Thus it came that they scrubbed the floor together, and
made the chimney so that it would not smoke, and washed the blankets on
the beds, and kept the woodpile high. They also devised ventilators, and
let in fresh air without exposing the patients. They had no medicine,
but they continually rubbed the suffering men with bear's grease.

"It's better than medicine," said Ninon, after the tenth day, as, wan
with watching, she held the cool hand of one of the recovering men in
her own. "If we had had medicines we should have killed these men."

"You are a woman of remarkable sense," said the holy father, who was
eating a dish of corn-meal and milk that Ninon had just prepared, "and a
woman also of Christian courage."

"Christian courage?" echoed Ninon; "do you think that is what you call
it? I am not afraid, no, not I; but it is not Christian courage. You
mistake in calling it that." There were tears in her eyes. The priest
saw them.

"God lead you at last into peaceful ways," said he, softly, lifting one
hand in blessing. "Your vigil is ended. Go to your home and sleep. You
know the value of the temporal life that God has given to man. In the
hours of the night, Ninon, think of the value of eternal life, which it
is also His to give."

Ninon stared at him a moment with a dawning horror in her eyes.

Then she pointed to the table.

"Whatever you do," said she, "don't forget the bear's grease." And she
went out laughing. The priest did not pause to recommend her soul to
further blessing. He obeyed her directions.

March was wearing away tediously. The river was not yet open, and the
belated boats with needed supplies were moored far down the river. Many
of the reduced settlers were dependent on the meat the Indians brought
them for sustenance. The mud made the roads almost impassable; for the
frost lay in a solid bed six inches below the surface, and all above
that was semiliquid muck. Snow and rain alternated, and the frightful
disease did not cease its ravages.

The priest got little sleep. Now he was at the bed of a little
half-breed child, smoothing the straight black locks from the narrow
brow; now at the cot of some hulking trapper, who wept at the pain, but
died finally with a grin of bravado on his lips; now in a foul tepee,
where some grave Pawnee wrapped his mantle about him, and gazed with
prophetic and unflinching eyes into the land of the hereafter.

The little school that the priest started had been long since abandoned.
It was only the preservation of life that one thought of in these days.
And recklessness had made the men desperate. To the ravages of disease
were added horrible murders. Moral health is always low when physical
health is so.

Give a nation two winters of grippe, and it will have an epidemic of
suicide. Give it starvation and small-pox, and it will have a contagion
of murders. There are subtle laws underlying these things,--laws which
the physicians think they can explain; but they are mistaken. The reason
is not so material as it seems.

But spring was near in spite of falling snow and the dirty ice in the
river. There was not even a flushing of the willow twigs to tell it by,
nor a clearing of the leaden sky,--only the almanac. Yet all men
were looking forward to it The trappers put in the feeble days of
convalescence, making long rafts on which to pile the skins dried over
winter,--a fine variety, worth all but their weight in gold. Money was
easily got in those days; but there are circumstances under which money
is valueless.

Father de Smet thought of this the day before Easter, as he plunged
through the mud of the winding street in his bearskin gaiters. Stout
were his legs, firm his lungs, as he turned to breathe in the west wind;
clear his sharp and humorous eyes. He was going to the little chapel
where the mission school had previously been held. Here was a rude
pulpit, and back of it a much-disfigured virgin, dressed in turkey-red
calico. Two cheap candles in their tin sticks guarded this figure, and
beneath, on the floor, was spread an otter-skin of perfect beauty. The
seats were of pine, without backs, and the wind whistled through the
chinks between the logs. Moreover, the place was dirty. Lenten service
had been out of the question. The living had neither time nor strength
to come to worship; and the dead were not given the honor of a burial
from church in these times of terror. The priest looked about him in
dismay, the place was so utterly forsaken; yet to let Easter go by
without recognition was not to his liking. He had been the night
before to every house in the settlement, bidding the people to come to
devotions on Sunday morning. He knew that not one of them would
refuse his invitation. There was no hero larger in the eyes of these
unfortunates than the simple priest who walked among them with his
unpretentious piety. The promises were given with whispered blessings,
and there were voices that broke in making them, and hands that shook
with honest gratitude. The priest, remembering these things, and all the
awful suffering of the winter, determined to make the service symbolic,
indeed, of the resurrection and the life,--the annual resurrection and
life that comes each year, a palpable miracle, to teach the dullest that
God reigns.

"How are you going to trim the altar?" cried a voice behind him.

He turned, startled, and in the doorway stood Mademoiselle Ninon,
her short skirt belted with a red silk scarf,--the token of some
trapper,--her ankles protected with fringed leggins, her head covered
with a beribboned hat of felt, such as the voyageurs wore.

"Our devotions will be the only decorations we can hang on it. But
gratitude is better than blossoms, and humanity more beautiful than
green wreaths," said the father, gently.

It was a curious thing, and one that he had often noticed himself; he
gave this woman--unworthy as she was--the best of his simple thoughts.

Ninon tiptoed toward the priest with one finger coquettishly raised to
insure secrecy.

"You will never believe it," she whispered, "no one would believe it!
But the fact is, father, I have two lilies."

"Lilies," cried the priest, incredulously, "two lilies?"

"That's what I say, father--two marvellously fair lilies with little
sceptres of gold in them, and leaves as white as snow. The bulbs were
brought me last autumn by--; that is to say, they were brought from St.
Louis. Only now have they blossomed. Heavens, how I have watched the
buds! I have said to myself every morning for a fortnight: 'Will they
open in time for the good father's Easter morning service?' Then I said:
'They will open too soon. Buds,' I have cried to them, 'do not dare
to open yet, or you will be horribly passee by Easter. Have the
kindness, will you, to save yourselves for a great event.' And they did
it; yes, father, you may not believe, but no later than this morning
these sensible flowers opened up their leaves boldly, quite conscious
that they were doing the right thing, and to-morrow, if you please, they
will be here. And they will perfume the whole place; yes."

She stopped suddenly, and relaxed her vivacious expression for one of
pain.

"You are certainly ill," cried the priest. "Rest yourself." He tried to
push her on to one of the seats; but a sort of convulsive rigidity came
over her, very alarming to look at.

"You are worn out," her companion said gravely. "And you are chilled."

"Yes, I'm cold," confessed Ninon. "But I had to come to tell you about
the lilies. But, do you see, I never could bring myself to put them in
this room as it is now. It would be too absurd to place them among this
dirt. We must clean the place."

"The place will be cleaned. I will see to it. But as for you, go home
and care for yourself." Ninon started toward the door with an uncertain
step. Suddenly she came back.

"It is too funny," she said, "that red calico there on the Virgin.
Father, I have some laces which were my mother's, who was a good woman,
and which have never been worn by me. They are all I have to remember
France by and the days when I was--different. If I might be permitted--"
she hesitated and looked timidly at the priest.

"'She hath done what she could,'" murmured Father de Smet, softly.
"Bring your laces, Ninon." He would have added: "Thy sins be forgiven
thee." But unfortunately, at this moment, Pierre came lounging down the
street, through the mud, fresh from Fort Laramie. His rifle was slung
across his back, and a full game-bag revealed the fact that he had
amused himself on his way. His curly and wind-bleached hair blew out
in time-torn banners from the edge of his wide hat. His piercing, black
eyes were those of a man who drinks deep, fights hard, and lives
always in the open air. Wild animals have such eyes, only there is this
difference: the viciousness of an animal is natural; at least one-half
of the viciousness of man is artificial and devised.

When Ninon saw the frost-reddened face of this gallant of the plains,
she gave a little cry of delight, and the color rushed back into her
face. The trapper saw her, and gave a rude shout of welcome. The next
moment, he had swung her clear of the chapel steps; and then the two
went down the street together, Pierre pausing only long enough to doff
his hat to the priest.

"The Virgin will wear no fresh laces," said the priest, with some
bitterness; but he was mistaken. An hour later, Ninon was back, not only
with a box of laces, but also with a collection of cosmetics, with which
she proceeded to make startling the scratched and faded face of the
wooden Virgin, who wore, after the completion of Ninon's labors, a
decidedly piquant and saucy expression. The very manner in which the
laces were draped had a suggestion of Ninon's still unforgotten art as
a maker of millinery, and was really a very good presentment of Paris
fashions four years past. Pierre, meantime, amused himself by filling up
the chinks in the logs with fresh mud,--a commodity of which there was
no lack,--and others of the neighbors, incited by these extraordinary
efforts, washed the dirt from seats, floor, and windows, and brought
furs with which to make presentable the floor about the pulpit.

Father de Smet worked harder than any of them. In his happy enthusiasm
he chose to think this energy on the part of the others was prompted by
piety, though well he knew it was only a refuge from the insufferable
ennui that pervaded the place. Ninon suddenly came up to him with a
white face.

"I am not well," she said. Her teeth were chattering, and her eyes had
a little blue glaze over them. "I am going home. In the morning I will
send the lilies."

The priest caught her by the hand.

"Ninon," he whispered, "it is on my soul not to let you go to-night.
Something tells me that the hour of your salvation is come. Women worse
than you, Ninon, have come to lead holy lives. Pray, Ninon, pray to the
Mother of Sorrows, who knows the sufferings and sins of the heart."
He pointed to the befrilled and highly fashionable Virgin with her
rouge-stained cheeks.

Ninon shrank from him, and the same convulsive rigidity he had noticed
before, held her immovable. A moment later, she was on the street again,
and the priest, watching her down the street, saw her enter her cabin
with Pierre.

.......


It was past midnight when the priest was awakened from his sleep by
a knock on the door. He wrapped his great buffalo-coat about him, and
answered the summons. Without in the damp darkness stood Pierre.

"Father," he cried, "Ninon has sent for you. Since she left you, she has
been very ill. I have done what I could; but now she hardly speaks, but
I make out that she wants you." Ten minutes later, they were in Ninon's
cabin. When Father de Smet looked at her he knew she was dying. He had
seen the Indians like that many times during the winter. It was the
plague, but driven in to prey upon the system by the exposure. The
Parisienne's teeth were set, but she managed to smile upon her visitor
as he threw off his coat and bent over her. He poured some whiskey for
her; but she could not get the liquid over her throat.

"Do not," she said fiercely between those set white teeth, "do not
forget the lilies." She sank back and fixed her glazing eyes on the
antlers, and kept them there watching those dangling silken scarves,
while the priest, in haste, spoke the words for the departing soul.

The next morning she lay dead among those half barbaric relics of her
coquetry, and two white lilies with hearts of gold shed perfume from an
altar in a wilderness.



Up the Gulch

"GO West?" sighed Kate. "Why, yes! I'd like to go West."

She looked at the babies, who were playing on the floor with their
father, and sighed again.

"You've got to go somewhere, you know, Kate. It might as well be west as
in any other direction. And this is such a chance! We can't have mamma
lying around on sofas without any roses in her cheeks, can we?" He put
this last to the children, who, being yet at the age when they talked
in "Early English," as their father called it, made a clamorous but
inarticulate reply.

Major Shelly, the grandfather of these very young persons, stroked his
mustache and looked indulgent.

"Show almost human intelligence, don't they?" said their father, as he
lay flat on his back and permitted the babies to climb over him.

"Ya-as," drawled the major. "They do. Don't see how you account for it,
Jack."

Jack roared, and the lips of the babies trembled with fear.

Their mother said nothing. She was on the sofa, her hands lying
inert, her eyes fixed on her rosy babies with an expression which her
father-in-law and her husband tried hard not to notice.

It was not easy to tell why Kate was ailing. Of course, the babies were
young, but there were other reasons.

"I believe you're too happy," Jack sometimes said to her. "Try not to
be quite so happy, Kate. At least, try not to take your happiness so
seriously. Please don't adore me so; I'm only a commonplace fellow. And
the babies--they're not going to blow away."

But Kate continued to look with intense eyes at her little world, and
to draw into it with loving and generous hands all who were willing to
come.

"Kate is just like a kite," Jack explained to his father, the major;
"she can't keep afloat without just so many bobs."

Kate's "bobs" were the unfortunates she collected around her. These
absorbed her strength. She felt their misery with sympathies that were
abnormal. The very laborer in the streets felt his toil less keenly than
she, as she watched the drops gather on his brow.

"Is life worth keeping at the cost of a lot like that?" she would ask.
She felt ashamed of her own ease. She apologized for her own serene and
perfect happiness. She even felt sorry for those mothers who had not
children as radiantly beautiful as her own.

"Kate must have a change," the major had given out. He was going West on
business and insisted on taking her with him. Jack looked doubtful.
He wasn't sure how he would get along without Kate to look after
everything. Secretly, he had an idea that servants were a kind of wild
animal that had to be fed by an experienced keeper. But when the time
came, he kissed her good-by in as jocular a manner as he could summon,
and refused to see the tears that gathered in her eyes.

Until Chicago was reached, there was nothing very different from that
which Kate had been in the habit of seeing. After that, she set herself
to watch for Western characteristics. She felt that she would know them
as soon as she saw them.

"I expected to be stirred up and shocked," she explained to the major.
But somehow, the Western type did not appear. Commonplace women with
worn faces--browned and seamed, though not aged--were at the stations,
waiting for something or some one. Men with a hurried, nervous air were
everywhere. Kate looked in vain for the gayety and heartiness which she
had always associated with the West.

After they got beyond the timber country and rode hour after hour on a
tract smooth as a becalmed ocean, she gave herself up to the feeling of
immeasurable vastness which took possession of her. The sun rolled
out of the sky into oblivion with a frantic, headlong haste. Nothing
softened the aspect of its wrath. Near, red, familiar, it seemed to
visibly bowl along the heavens. In the morning it rose as baldly as it
had set. And back and forth over the awful plain blew the winds,--blew
from east to west and back again, strong as if fresh from the chambers
of their birth, full of elemental scents and of mighty murmurings.

"This is the West!" Kate cried, again and again.

The major listened to her unsmilingly. It always seemed to him a waste
of muscular energy to smile. He did not talk much. Conversation had
never appealed to him in the light of an art. He spoke when there was a
direction or a command to be given, or an inquiry to be made. The major,
if the truth must be known, was material. Things that he could taste,
touch, see, appealed to him. He had been a volunteer in the civil
war,--a volunteer with a good record,--which he never mentioned; and,
having acquitted himself decently, let the matter go without asking
reprisal or payment for what he had freely given. He went into business
and sold cereal foods.

"I believe in useful things," the major expressed himself. "Oatmeal,
wheat,-men have to have them. God intended they should. There's Jack--my
son-Jack Shelly--lawyer. What's the use of litigation? God didn't design
litigation. It doesn't do anybody any good. It isn't justice you get.
It's something entirely different,--a verdict according to law. They say
Jack's clever. But I'm mighty glad I sell wheat."

He didn't sell it as a speculator, however. That wasn't his way.

"I earn what I make," he often said; and he had grown rich in the
selling of his wholesome foods.

. . . . . . .

Helena lies among round, brown hills. Above it is a sky of deep and
illimitable blue. In the streets are crumbs of gold, but it no longer
pays to mine for these; because, as real estate, the property is more
valuable. It is a place of fictitious values. There is excitement in the
air. Men have the faces of speculators. Every laborer is patient at
his task because he cherishes a hope that some day he will be a
millionnaire. There is hospitality, and cordiality and good fellowship,
and an undeniable democracy. There is wealth and luxurious living. There
is even culture,--but it is obtruded as a sort of novelty; it is not
accepted as a matter of course.

Kate and the major were driven over two or three miles of dusty, hard
road to a distant hotel, which stands in the midst of greenness,--in
an oasis. Immediately above the green sward that surrounds it the brown
hills rise, the grass scorched by the sun.

Kate yielded herself to the almost absurd luxury of the place with ease
and complacency. She took kindly to the great verandas. She adapted
herself to the elaborate and ill-assorted meals. She bathed in the
marvellous pool, warm with the heat of eternal fires in mid-earth. This
pool was covered with a picturesque Moorish structure, and at one end
a cascade tumbled, over which the sun, coming through colored windows,
made a mimic prism in the white spray. The life was not unendurable. The
major was seldom with her, being obliged to go about his business;
and Kate amused herself by driving over the hills, by watching the
inhabitants, by wondering about the lives in the great, pretentious,
unhomelike houses with their treeless yards and their closed shutters.
The sunlight, white as the glare on Arabian sands, penetrated
everywhere. It seemed to fairly scorch the eye-balls.

"Oh, we're West, now," Kate said, exultantly. "I've seen a thousand
types. But yet--not quite THE type--not the impersonation of simplicity
and daring that I was looking for."

The major didn't know quite what she was talking about. But he
acquiesced. All he cared about was to see her grow stronger; and that
she was doing every day. She was growing amazingly lovely, too,-at least
the major thought so. Every one looked at her; but that was, perhaps,
because she was such a sylph of a woman. Beside the stalwart major, she
looked like a fairy princess.

One day she suddenly realized the fact that she had had a companion on
the veranda for several mornings. Of course, there were a great many
persons--invalids, largely--sitting about, but one of them had been
obtruding himself persistently into her consciousness. It was not that
he was rude; it was only that he was thinking about her. A person with
a temperament like Kate's could not long be oblivious to a thing like
that; and she furtively observed the offender with that genius for
psychological perception which was at once her greatest danger and her
charm.

The man was dressed with a childish attempt at display. His shirt-front
was decorated with a diamond, and his cuff-buttons were of onyx with
diamond settings. His clothes were expensive and perceptibly new, and
he often changed his costumes, but with a noticeable disregard for
propriety. He was very conscious of his silk hat, and frequently wiped
it with a handkerchief on which his monogram was worked in blue.

When the 'busses brought up their loads, he was always on hand to watch
the newcomers. He took a long time at his dinners, and appeared to
order a great deal and eat very little. There were card-rooms and a
billiard-hall, not to mention a bowling-alley and a tennis-court, where
the other guests of the hotel spent much time. But this man never
visited them. He sat often with one of the late reviews in his hand,
looking as if he intended giving his attention to it at any moment.
But after he had scrupulously cut the leaves with a little carved ivory
paper-cutter, he sat staring straight before him with the book open, but
unread, in his hand.

Kate took more interest in this melancholy, middle-aged man than she
would have done if she had not been on the outlook for her Western
type,--the man who was to combine all the qualities of chivalry, daring,
bombast, and generosity, seasoned with piquant grammar, which she firmly
believed to be the real thing. But notwithstanding this kindly and
somewhat curious interest, she might never have made his acquaintance if
it had not been for a rather unpleasant adventure.

The major was "closing up a deal" and had hurried away after breakfast,
and Kate, in the luxury of convalescence, half-reclined in a great chair
on the veranda and watched the dusky blue mist twining itself around the
brown hills. She was not thinking of the babies; she was not worrying
about home; she was not longing for anything, or even indulging in
a dream. That vacuous content which engrosses the body after long
indisposition, held her imperatively. Suddenly she was aroused from this
happy condition of nothingness by the spectacle of an enormous bull-dog
approaching her with threatening teeth. She had noticed the monster
often in his kennel near the stables, and it was well understood that he
was never to be permitted his freedom. Now he walked toward her with a
solid step and an alarming deliberateness. Kate sat still and tried to
assure herself that he meant no mischief, but by the time the great body
had made itself felt on the skirt of her gown she could restrain her
fear no longer, and gave a nervous cry of alarm. The brute answered with
a growl. If he had lacked provocation before, he considered that he had
it now. He showed his teeth and flung his detestable body upon her;
and Kate felt herself growing dizzy with fear. But just then an arm was
interposed and the dog was flung back. There was a momentary struggle.
Some gentlemen came hurrying out of the office; and as they beat the
dog back to its retreat, Kate summoned words from her parched throat to
thank her benefactor.

It was the melancholy man with the new clothes. This morning he
was dressed in a suit of the lightest gray, with a white marseilles
waistcoat, over which his glittering chain shone ostentatiously. White
tennis-shoes, a white rose in his buttonhole, and a white straw hat
in his hand completed a toilet over which much time had evidently been
spent. Kate noted these details as she held out her hand.

"I may have been alarmed without cause," she said; "but I was horribly
frightened. Thank you so much for coming to my rescue. And I think, if
you would add to your kindness by getting me a glass of water--"

When he came back, his hand was trembling a little; and as Kate looked
up to learn the cause, she saw that his face was flushed. He was
embarrassed. She decided that he was not accustomed to the society of
ladies. "Brutes like that dog ain't no place in th' world--that's my
opinion. There are some bad things we can't help havin' aroun'; but a
bull-dog ain't one of 'em."

"I quite agree with you," Kate acquiesced, as she drank the water. "But
as this is the first unpleasant experience of any kind that I have had
since I came here, I don't feel that I have any right to complain."

"You're here fur yur health?"

"Yes. And I am getting it. You're not an invalid, I imagine?"

"No--no-op. I'm here be--well, I've thought fur a long time I'd like t'
stay at this here hotel."

"Indeed!"

"Yes. I've been up th' gulch these fifteen years. Bin livin' on a shelf
of black rock. Th' sun got 'round 'bout ten. Couldn't make a thing
grow." The man was looking off toward the hills, with an expression of
deep sadness in his eyes. "Didn't never live in a place where nothin'
'd grow, did you? I took geraniums up thar time an' time agin. Red
ones. Made me think of mother; she's in Germany. Watered 'em mornin' an'
night. Th' damned things died."

The oath slipped out with an artless unconsciousness, and there was
a little moisture in his eyes. Kate felt she ought to bring the
conversation to a close. She wondered what Jack would say if he saw her
talking with a perfect stranger who used oaths! She would have gone into
the house but for something that caught her eye. It was the hand of the
man; that hand was a bludgeon. All grace and flexibility had gone out
of it, and it had become a mere instrument of toil. It was seamed and
misshapen; yet it had been carefully manicured, and the pointed nails
looked fantastic and animal-like. A great seal-ring bore an elaborate
monogram, while the little finger displayed a collection of diamonds and
emeralds truly dazzling to behold. An impulse of humanity and a sort
of artistic curiosity, much stronger than her discretion, urged Kate to
continue her conversation.

"What were you doing up the gulch?" she said.

The man leaned back in his chair and regarded her a moment before
answering. He realized the significance of her question. He took it as
a sign that she was willing to be friendly. A look of gratitude,
almost tender, sprang into his eyes,--dull gray eyes, they were, with a
kindliness for their only recommendation.

"Makin' my pile," he replied. "I've been in these parts twenty years.
When I come here, I thought I was goin' to make a fortune right off. I
had all th' money that mother could give me, and I lost everything I had
in three months. I went up th' gulch." He paused, and wiped his forehead
with his handkerchief.

There was something in his remark and the intonation which made Kate say
softly:

"I suppose you've had a hard time of it."

"Thar you were!" he cried. "Thar was th' rock--risin', risin', black! At
th' bottom wus th' creek, howlin' day an' night! Lonesome! Gee! No one
t' talk to. Of course, th' men. Had some with me always. They didn't
talk. It's too-too quiet t' talk much. They played cards. Curious, but I
never played cards. Don't think I'd find it amusin'. No, I worked. Came
down here once in six months or three months. Had t' come--grub-staked
th' men, you know. Did you ever eat salt pork?" He turned to Kate
suddenly with this question.

"Why, yes; a few times. Did you have it?"

"Nothin' else, much. I used t' think of th' things mother cooked. Mother
understood cookin', if ever a woman did. I'll never forget th' dinner
she gave me th' day I came away. A woman ought t' cook. I hear American
women don't go in much for cookin'."

"Oh, I think that's a mistake," Kate hastened to interrupt. "All that I
know understand how to serve excellent dinners. Of course, they may not
cook them themselves, but I think they could if it were necessary."

"Hum!" He picked up a long glove that had fallen from Kate's lap and
fingered it before returning it.

"I s'pose you cook?"

"I make a specialty of salads and sorbets," smiled Kate. "I guess
I could roast meat and make bread; but circumstances have not yet
compelled me to do it. But I've a theory that an American woman can do
anything she puts her mind to."

The man laughed out loud,--a laugh quite out of proportion to the mild
good humor of the remark; but it was evident that he could no longer
conceal his delight at this companionship.

"How about raisin' flowers?" he asked. "Are you strong on that?"

"I've only to look at a plant to make it grow," Kate cried, with
enthusiasm. "When my friends are in despair over a plant, they bring it
to me, and I just pet it a little, and it brightens up. I've the most
wonderful fernery you ever saw. It's green, summer and winter. Hundreds
of people stop and look up at it, it is so green and enticing, there
above the city streets."

"What city?"

"Philadelphia."

"Mother's jest that way. She has a garden of roses. And the
mignonette--"

But he broke off suddenly, and sat once more staring before him.

"But not a damned thing," he added, with poetic pensiveness, "would grow
in that gulch."

"Why did you stay there so long?" asked Kate, after a little pause in
which she managed to regain her waning courage.

"Bad luck. You never see a place with so many false leads. To-day you'd
get a streak that looked big. To-morrow you'd find it a pocket. One
night I'd go t' bed with my heart goin' like a race-horse. Next night
it would be ploddin' along like a winded burro. Don't know what made
me stick t' it. It was hot there, too! And cold! Always roastin' ur
freezin'. It'd been different if I'd had any one t' help me stand it.
But th' men were always findin' fault. They blamed me fur everythin'.
I used t' lie awake at night an' hear 'em talkin' me over. It made me
lonesome, I tell you! Thar wasn't no one! Mother used t' write. But
I never told her th' truth. She ain't a suspicion of what I've been
a-goin' through."

Kate sat and looked at him in silence. His face was seamed, though
far from old. His body was awkward, but impressed her with a sense of
magnificent strength.

"I couldn't ask no woman t' share my hard times," he resumed after a
time. "I always said when I got a woman, it was goin' t' be t' make her
happy. It wer'n't t' be t' ask her t' drudge."

There was another silence. This man out of the solitude seemed to
be elated past expression at his new companionship. He looked with
appreciation at the little pointed toes of Kate's slippers, as they
glanced from below the skirt of her dainty organdie. He noted the band
of pearls on her finger. His eyes rested long on the daisies at her
waist. The wind tossed up little curls of her warm brown hair. Her eyes
suffused with interest, her tender mouth seemed ready to lend itself to
any emotion, and withal she was so small, so compact, so exquisite. The
man wiped his forehead again, in mere exuberance.

"Here's my card," he said, very solemnly, as he drew an engraved bit of
pasteboard from its leather case. Kate bowed and took it.

"Mr. Peter Roeder," she read. "I've no card," she said. "My name is
Shelly. I'm here for my health, as I told you." She rose at this point,
and held out her hand. "I must thank you once more for your kindness,"
she said.

His eyes fastened on hers with an appeal for a less formal word. There
was something almost terrible in their silent eloquence.

"I hope we may meet again," she said.

Mr. Peter Roeder made a very low and awkward bow, and opened the door
into the corridor for her.

That evening the major announced that he was obliged to go to Seattle.
The journey was not an inviting one; Kate was well placed where she was,
and he decided to leave her.

She was well enough now to take longer drives; and she found strange,
lonely canyons, wild and beautiful, where yellow waters burst through
rocky barriers with roar and fury,--tortuous, terrible places, such as
she had never dreamed of. Coming back from one of these drives, two
days after her conversation on the piazza with Peter Roeder, she met
him riding a massive roan. He sat the animal with that air of perfect
unconsciousness which is the attribute of the Western man, and his
attire, even to his English stock, was faultless,--faultily faultless.

"I hope you won't object to havin' me ride beside you," he said,
wheeling his horse. To tell the truth, Kate did not object. She was a
little dull, and had been conscious all the morning of that peculiar
physical depression which marks the beginning of a fit of homesickness.

"The wind gits a fine sweep," said Roeder, after having obtained
the permission he desired. "Now in the gulch we either had a dead
stagnation, or else the wind was tearin' up and down like a wild beast."

Kate did not reply, and they went on together, facing the riotous wind.

"You can't guess how queer it seems t' be here," he said,
confidentially. "It seems t' me as if I had come from some other planet.
Thar don't rightly seem t' be no place fur me. I tell you what it's
like. It's as if I'd come down t' enlist in th' ranks, an' found 'em
full,--every man marchin' along in his place, an' no place left fur me."

Kate could not find a reply.

"I ain't a friend,--not a friend! I ain't complainin'. It ain't th'
fault of any one--but myself. You don' know what a durned fool I've
bin. Someway, up thar in th' gulch I got t' seemin' so sort of important
t' myself, and my makin' my stake seemed such a big thing, that I
thought I had only t' come down here t' Helena t' have folks want t'
know me. I didn't particular want th' money because it wus money. But
out here you work fur it, jest as you work fur other things in other
places,--jest because every one is workin' fur it, and it's the man who
gets th' most that beats. It ain't that they are any more greedy than
men anywhere else. My pile's a pretty good-sized one. An' it's likely to
be bigger; but no one else seems t' care. Th' paper printed some pieces
about it. Some of th' men came round t' see me; but I saw their game. I
said I guessed I'd look further fur my acquaintances. I ain't spoken to
a lady,--not a real lady, you know,--t' talk with, friendly like, but
you, fur--years."

His face flushed in that sudden way again. They were passing some of
those pretentious houses which rise in the midst of Helena's ragged
streets with such an extraneous air, and Kate leaned forward to look at
them. The driver, seeing her interest, drew up the horses for a moment.

"Fine, fine!" ejaculated Roeder. "But they ain't got no garden. A house
don't seem anythin' t' me without a garden. Do you know what I think
would be th' most beautiful thing in th' world? A baby in a rose-garden!
Do you know, I ain't had a baby in my hands, excep' Ned Ramsey's little
kid, once, for ten year!"

Kate's face shone with sympathy.

"How dreadful!" she cried. "I couldn't live without a baby about."

"Like babies, do you? Well, well. Boys? Like boys?"

"Not a bit better than girls," said Kate, stoutly.

"I like boys," responded Roeder, with conviction. "My mother liked boys.
She had three girls, but she liked me a damned sight the best."

Kate laughed outright.

"Why do you swear?" she said. "I never heard a man swear before,--at
least, not one with whom I was talking. That's one of your gulch habits.
You must get over it."

Roeder's blond face turned scarlet.

"You must excuse me," he pleaded. "I'll cure myself of it! Jest give me
a chance."

This was a little more personal than Kate approved of, and she raised
her parasol to conceal her annoyance. It was a brilliant little fluff
of a thing which looked as if it were made of butterflies' wings. Roeder
touched it with awe.

"You have sech beautiful things," he said. "I didn't know women wore
sech nice things. Now that dress--it's like--I don't know what it's
like." It was a simple little taffeta, with warp and woof of azure and
of cream, and gay knots of ribbon about it.

"We have the advantage of men," she said. "I often think one of the
greatest drawbacks to being a man would be the sombre clothes. I like to
wear the prettiest things that can be found."

"Lace?" queried Roeder. "Do you like lace?"

"I should say so! Did you ever see a woman who didn't?"

"Hu--um! These women I've known don't know lace,--these wives of th' men
out here. They're th' only kind I've seen this long time."

"Oh, of course, but I mean--"

"I know what you mean. My mother has a chest full of linen an' lace. She
showed it t' me th' day I left. 'Peter,' she said, 'some day you bring a
wife home with you, an' I'll give you that lace an' that linen.' An' I'm
goin' t' do it, too," he said quietly.

"I hope so," said Kate, with her eyes moist. "I hope you will, and that
your mother will be very happy."

. . . . . . .

There was a hop at the hotel that night, and it was almost a matter of
courtesy for Kate to go. Ladies were in demand, for there were not very
many of them at the hotel. Every one was expected to do his best to make
it a success; and Kate, not at all averse to a waltz or two, dressed
herself for the occasion with her habitual striving after artistic
effect. She was one of those women who make a picture of themselves as
naturally as a bird sings. She had an opal necklace which Jack had given
her because, he said, she had as many moods as an opal had colors; and
she wore this with a crepe gown, the tint of the green lights in
her necklace. A box of flowers came for her as she was dressing; they
were Puritan roses, and Peter Roeder's card was in the midst of
them. She was used to having flowers given her. It would have seemed
remarkable if some one had not sent her a bouquet when she was going to
a ball.

"I shall dance but twice," she said to those who sought her for a
partner. "Neither more nor less."

"Ain't you goin' t' dance with me at all?" Roeder managed to say to her
in the midst of her laughing altercation with the gentlemen.

"Dance with you!" cried Kate. "How do men learn to dance when they are
up a gulch?"

"I ken dance," he said stubbornly. He was mortified at her chaffing.

"Then you may have the second waltz," she said, in quick contrition.
"Now you other gentlemen have been dancing any number of times these
last fifteen years. But Mr. Roeder is just back from a hard campaign,--a
campaign against fate. My second waltz is his. And I shall dance my
best."

It happened to be just the right sort of speech. The women tried
good-naturedly to make Roeder's evening a pleasant one. They were filled
with compassion for a man who had not enjoyed the society of their sex
for fifteen years. They found much amusement in leading him through the
square dances, the forms of which were utterly unknown to him. But he
waltzed with a sort of serious alertness that was not so bad as it might
have been.

Kate danced well. Her slight body seemed as full of the spirit of the
waltz as a thrush's body is of song. Peter Roeder moved along with
her in a maze, only half-answering her questions, his gray eyes full of
mystery.

Once they stopped for a moment, and he looked down at her, as with
flushed face she stood smiling and waving her gossamer fan, each motion
stirring the frail leaves of the roses he had sent her.

"It's cur'ous," he said softly, "but I keep thinkin' about that black
gulch."

"Forget it," she said. "Why do you think of a gulch when--" She stopped
with a sudden recollection that he was not used to persiflage. But he
anticipated what she was about to say.

"Why think of the gulch when you are here?" he said. "Why, because it
is only th' gulch that seems real. All this,--these pleasant, polite
people, this beautiful room, th' flowers everywhere, and you, and me as
I am, seem as if I was dreamin'. Thar ain't anything in it all that is
like what I thought it would be."

"Not as you thought it would be?"

"No. Different. I thought it would be--well, I thought th' people would
not be quite so high-toned. I hope you don't mind that word."

"Not in the least," she said. "It's a musical term. It applies very well
to people."

They took up the dance again and waltzed breathlessly till the close.
Kate was tired; the exertion had been a little more than she had
bargained for. She sat very still on the veranda under the white glare
of an electric ball, and let Roeder do the talking. Her thoughts,
in spite of the entertainment she was deriving from her present
experiences, would go back to the babies. She saw them tucked well in
bed, each in a little iron crib, with the muslin curtains shielding
their rosy faces from the light. She wondered if Jack were reading alone
in the library or was at the club, or perhaps at the summer concert,
with the swell of the violins in his ears. Jack did so love music.
As she thought how delicate his perceptions were, how he responded to
everything most subtle in nature and in art, of how life itself was a
fine art with him, and joy a thing to be cultivated, she turned with a
sense of deep compassion to the simple man by her side. His rough face
looked a little more unattractive than usual. His evening clothes were
almost grotesque. His face wore a look of solitude, of hunger.

"What were you saying?" she said, dreamily. "I beg your pardon."

"I was sayin' how I used t' dream of sittin' on the steps of a hotel
like this, and not havin' a thing t' do. When I used t' come down here
out of the gulch, and see men who had had good dinners, an' good baths,
sittin' around smokin', with money t' go over there t' th' bookstan' an'
get anythin' they'd want, it used t' seem t' me about all a single man
could wish fur."

"Well, you've got it all now."

"But I didn't any of th' time suppose that would satisfy a man long.
Only I was so darned tired I couldn't help wantin' t' rest. But I'm not
so selfish ur s' narrow as to be satisfied with THAT. No, I'm not goin'
t' spend m' pile that way--quite!"

He laughed out loud, and then sat in silence watching Kate as she lay
back wearily in her chair.

"I've got t' have that there garden," he said, laughingly. "Got t' get
them roses. An' I'll have a big bath-house,--plenty of springs in this
country. You ken have a bath here that won't freeze summer NOR winter.
An' a baby! I've got t' have a baby. He'll go with th' roses an' th'
bath." He laughed again heartily.

"It's a queer joke, isn't it?" Roeder asked. "Talkin' about my baby, an'
I haven't even a wife." His face flushed and he turned his eyes away.

"Have I shown you the pictures of my babies?" Kate inquired. "You'd like
my boy, I know. And my girl is just like me,--in miniature."

There was a silence. She looked up after a moment. Roeder appeared to be
examining the monogram on his ring as if he had never seen it before.

"I didn't understand that you were married," he said gently.

"Didn't you? I don't think you ever called me by any name at all, or I
should have noticed your mistake and set you right. Yes, I'm married. I
came out here to get strong for the babies."

"Got a boy an' a girl, eh?"

"Yes."

"How old's th' boy?"

"Five."

"An' th' girl?"

"She'll soon be four."

"An' yer husband--he's livin'?"

"I should say so! I'm a very happy woman, Mr. Roeder. If only I were
stronger!"

"Yer lookin' much better," he said, gravely, "than when you come. You'll
be all right."

The moon began to come up scarlet beyond the eastern hills. The two
watched it in silence. Kate had a feeling of guilt, as if she had been
hurting some helpless thing.

"I was in hopes," he said, suddenly, in a voice that seemed abrupt and
shrill, "thet you'd see fit t' stay here."

"Here in Helena? Oh, no!"

"I was thinkin' I'd offer you that two hundred thousand dollars, if
you'd stay."

"Mr. Roeder! You don't mean-surely--"

"Why, yes. Why not?" He spoke rather doggedly. "I'll never see no other
woman like you. You're different from others. How good you've been t'
me!"

"Good! I'm afraid I've been very bad--at least, very stupid."

"I say, now--your husband's good t' you, ain't he?"

"He is the kindest man that ever lived."

"Oh, well, I didn't know."

A rather awkward pause followed which was broken by Roeder.

"I don't see jest what I'm goin' t' do with that thar two hundred
thousand dollars," he said, mournfully.

"Do with it? Why, live with it! Send some to your mother."

"Oh, I've done that. Five thousand dollars. It don't seem much here; but
it'll seem a lot t' her. I'd send her more, only it would've bothered
her."

"Then there is your house,--the house with the bath-room. But I suppose
you'll have other rooms?"

Peter laughed a little in spite of himself.

"I guess I won't have a house," he said. "An' I couldn't make a garden
alone."

"Hire a man to help you." Kate was trembling, but she kept talking
gayly. She was praying that nothing very serious would happen. There was
an undercurrent of sombreness in the man's manner that frightened her.

"I guess I'll jest have t' keep on dreamin' of that boy playin' with th'
roses."

"No, no," cried Kate; "he will come true some day! I know he'll come
true."

Peter got up and stood by her chair.

"You don't know nothin' about it," he said. "You don't know, an' you
can't know what it's bin t' me t' talk with you. Here I come out of a
place where there ain't no sound but the water and the pines. Years come
an' go. Still no sound. Only thinkin', thinkin', thinkin'! Missin' all
th' things men care fur! Dreamin' of a time when I sh'd strike th' pile.
Then I seed home, wife, a boy, flowers, everythin'. You're so beautiful,
an' you're so good. You've a way of pickin' a man's heart right out of
him. First time I set my eyes on you I thought you were th' nicest
thing I ever see! And how little you are! That hand of yours,--look at
it,--it's like a leaf! An' how easy you smile. Up th' gulch we didn't
smile; we laughed, but gen'ly because some one got in a fix. Then your
voice! Ah, I've thought fur years that some day I might hear a voice
like that! Don't you go! Sit still! I'm not blamin' you fur anythin';
but I may never, 's long's I live, find any one who will understand
things th' way you understand 'em. Here! I tell you about that gulch
an' you see that gulch. You know how th' rain sounded thar, an' how th'
shack looked, an' th' life I led, an' all th' thoughts I had, an' th'
long nights, an' th' times when--but never mind. I know you know it all.
I saw it in yer eyes. I tell you of mother, an' you see 'er. You know
'er old German face, an' 'er proud ways, an' her pride in me, an' how
she would think I wuz awfully rich. An' you see how she would give out
them linens, all marked fur my wife, an' how I would sit an' watch her
doin' it, an'--you see everything. I know you do. I could feel you doin'
it. Then I say to myself: 'Here is th' one woman in th' world made fur
me. Whatever I have, she shall have. I'll spend my life waitin' on her.
She'll tell me all th' things I ought t' know, an' hev missed knowin';
she'll read t' me; she'll be patient when she finds how dull I've grown.
And thar'll be th' boy--'"

He seized her hand and wrung it, and was gone. Kate saw him no more that
night.

The next morning the major returned. Kate threw her arms around his neck
and wept.

"I want the babies," she explained when the major showed his
consternation. "Don't mind my crying. You ought to be used to seeing me
cry by this time. I must get home, that's all. I must see Jack."

So that night they started.

At the door of the carriage stood Peter Roeder, waiting.

"I'm going t' ride down with you," he said. The major looked nonplussed.

Kate got in and the major followed.

"Come," she said to Roeder. He sat opposite and looked at her as if he
would fasten her image on his mind.

"You remember," he said after a time, "that I told you I used t' dream
of sittin' on the veranda of th' hotel and havin' nothin' t' do?"

"Yes."

"Well, I don't think I care fur it. I've had a month of it. I'm goin'
back up th' gulch."

"No!" cried Kate, instinctively reaching out her hands toward him.

"Why not? I guess you don't know me. I knew that somewhere I'd find a
friend. I found that friend; an' now I'm alone again. It's pretty quiet
up thar in the gulch; but I'll try it."

"No, no. Go to Europe; go to see your mother."

"I thought about that a good deal, a while ago. But I don't seem t' have
no heart fur it now. I feel as if I'd be safer in th' gulch."

"Safer?"

"The world looks pretty big. It's safe and close in th' gulch."

At the station the major went to look after the trunks, and Roeder put
Kate in her seat.

"I wanted t' give you something," he said, seating himself beside her,
"but I didn't dare."

"Oh, my dear friend," she cried, laying her little gloved hand on his
red and knotted one, "don't go back into the shadow. Do not return to
that terrible silence. Wait. Have patience. Fate has brought you wealth.
It will bring you love."

"I've somethin' to ask," he said, paying no attention to her appeal.
"You must answer it. If we 'a' met long ago, an' you hadn't a husband
or--anythin'--do you think you'd've loved me then?"

She felt herself turning white.

"No," she said softly. "I could never have loved you, my dear friend. We
are not the same. Believe me, there is a woman somewhere who will love
you; but I am not that woman--nor could I have ever been."

The train was starting. The major came bustling in.

"Well, good-by," said Roeder, holding out his hand to Kate.

"Good-by," she cried. "Don't go back up the gulch."

"Oh," he said, reassuringly, "don't you worry about me, my--don't worry.
The gulch is a nice, quiet place. An' you know what I told you about th'
ranks all bein' full. Good-by." The train was well under way. He sprang
off, and stood on the platform waving his handkerchief.

"Well, Kate," said the major, seating himself down comfortably and
adjusting his travelling cap, "did you find the Western type?"

"I don't quite know," said she, slowly. "But I have made the discovery
that a human soul is much the same wherever you meet it."

"Dear me! You haven't been meeting a soul, have you?" the major said,
facetiously, unbuckling his travelling-bag. "I'll tell Jack."

"No, I'll tell Jack. And he'll feel quite as badly as I do to think that
I could do nothing for its proper adjustment."

The major's face took on a look of comprehension.

"Was that the soul," he asked, "that just came down in the carriage with
us?"

"That was it," assented Kate. "It was born; it has had its mortal day;
and it has gone back up the gulch."




A Michigan Man

A PINE forest is nature's expression of solemnity and solitude.
Sunlight, rivers, cascades, people, music, laughter, or dancing could
not make it gay. With its unceasing reverberations and its eternal
shadows, it is as awful and as holy as a cathedral.

Thirty good fellows working together by day and drinking together by
night can keep up but a moody imitation of jollity. Spend twenty-five
of your forty years, as Luther Dallas did, in this perennial gloom, and
your soul--that which enjoys, aspires, competes--will be drugged as deep
as if you had quaffed the cup of oblivion. Luther Dallas was counted one
of the most experienced axe-men in the northern camps. He could fell
a tree with the swift surety of an executioner, and in revenge for his
many arboral murders the woodland had taken captive his mind, captured
and chained it as Prospero did Ariel. The resounding footsteps of
Progress driven on so mercilessly in this mad age could not reach his
fastness. It did not concern him that men were thinking, investigating,
inventing. His senses responded only to the sonorous music of the woods;
a steadfast wind ringing metallic melody from the pine-tops contented
him as the sound of the sea does the sailor; and dear as the odors of
the ocean to the mariner were the resinous scents of the forest to him.
Like a sailor, too, he had his superstitions. He had a presentiment that
he was to die by one of these trees,-that some day, in chopping, the
tree would fall upon and crush him as it did his father the day they
brought him back to the camp on a litter of pine boughs.

One day the gang-boss noticed a tree that Dallas had left standing in a
most unwoodmanlike manner in the section which was allotted to him.

"What in thunder is that standing there for?" he asked.

Dallas raised his eyes to the pine, towering in stern dignity a hundred
feet above them.

"Well," he said feebly, "I noticed it, but kind-a left it t' the last."

"Cut it down to-morrow," was the response.

The wind was rising, and the tree muttered savagely. Luther thought it
sounded like a menace, and turned pale. No trouble has yet been found
that will keep a man awake in the keen air of the pineries after he
has been swinging his axe all day, but the sleep of the chopper was so
broken with disturbing dreams that night that the beads gathered on
his brow, and twice he cried aloud. He ate his coarse flap-jacks in the
morning and escaped from the smoky shanty as soon as he could.

"It'll bring bad luck, I'm afraid," he muttered as he went to get his
axe from the rack. He was as fond of his axe as a soldier of his musket,
but to-day he shouldered it with reluctance. He felt like a man with his
destiny before him. The tree stood like a sentinel. He raised his axe,
once, twice, a dozen times, but could not bring himself to make a cut
in the bark. He walked backwards a few steps and looked up. The funereal
green seemed to grow darker and darker till it became black. It was the
embodiment of sorrow. Was it not shaking giant arms at him? Did it not
cry out in angry challenge? Luther did not try to laugh at his fears;
he had never seen any humor in life. A gust of wind had someway crept
through the dense barricade of foliage that flanked the clearing,
and struck him with an icy chill. He looked at the sky; the day was
advancing rapidly. He went at his work with an energy as determined as
despair. The axe in his practised hand made clean straight cuts in the
trunk, now on this side, now on that. His task was not an easy one,
but he finished it with wonderful expedition. After the chopping was
finished, the tree stood firm a moment; then, as the tensely-strained
fibres began a weird moaning, he sprang aside, and stood waiting. In the
distance he saw two men hewing a log. The axe-man sent them a shout
and threw up his arms for them to look. The tree stood out clear and
beautiful against the gray sky; the men ceased their work and watched
it. The vibrations became more violent, and the sounds they produced
grew louder and louder till they reached a shrill wild cry. There came a
pause, then a deep shuddering groan. The topmost branches began to move
slowly, the whole stately bulk swayed, and then shot towards the ground.
The gigantic trunk bounded from the stump, recoiled like a cannon,
crashed down, and lay conquered, with a roar as of an earthquake, in a
cloud of flying twigs and chips.

When the dust had cleared away, the men at the log on the outside of the
clearing could not see Luther. They ran to the spot, and found him
lying on the ground with his chest crushed in. His fearful eyes had not
rightly calculated the distance from the stump to the top of the pine,
nor rightly weighed the power of the massed branches, and so, standing
spell-bound, watching the descending trunk as one might watch his
Nemesis, the rebound came and left him lying worse than dead.

Three months later, when the logs, lopped of their branches, drifted
down the streams, the woodman, a human log lopped of his strength,
drifted to a great city. A change, the doctor said, might prolong
his life. The lumbermen made up a purse, and he started out, not very
definitely knowing his destination. He had a sister, much younger than
himself, who at the age of sixteen had married and gone, he believed, to
Chicago. That was years ago, but he had an idea that he might find her.
He was not troubled by his lack of resources; he did not believe that
any man would want for a meal unless he were "shiftless." He had always
been able to turn his hand to something.

He felt too ill from the jostling of the cars to notice much of anything
on the journey. The dizzy scenes whirling past made him faint, and he
was glad to lie with closed eyes. He imagined that his little sister in
her pink calico frock and bare feet (as he remembered her) would be
at the station to meet him. "Oh, Lu!" she would call from some
hiding-place, and he would go and find her.

The conductor stopped by Luther's seat and said that they were in the
city at last; but it seemed to the sick man as if they went miles after
that, with a multitude of twinkling lights on one side and a blank
darkness, that they told him was the lake, on the other. The conductor
again stopped by his seat.

"Well, my man," said he, "how are you feeling?"

Luther, the possessor of the toughest muscles in the gang, felt a sick
man's irritation at the tone of pity.

"Oh, I'm all right!" he said, gruffly, and shook off the assistance the
conductor tried to offer with his overcoat. "I'm going to my sister's,"
he explained, in answer to the inquiry as to where he was going. The
man, somewhat piqued at the spirit in which his overtures were met, left
him, and Luther stepped on to the platform. There was a long vista of
semi-light, down which crowds of people walked and baggage-men rushed.
The building, if it deserved the name, seemed a ruin, and through the
arched doors Luther could see men--hackmen-dancing and howling like
dervishes. Trains were coming and going, and the whistles and bells
kept up a ceaseless clangor. Luther, with his small satchel and uncouth
dress, slouched by the crowd unnoticed, and reached the street. He
walked amid such an illumination as he had never dreamed of, and paused
half blinded in the glare of a broad sheet of electric light that filled
a pillared entrance into which many people passed. He looked about him.
Above on every side rose great, many-windowed buildings; on the street
the cars and carriages thronged, and jostling crowds dashed headlong
among the vehicles. After a time he turned down a street that seemed to
him a pandemonium filled with madmen. It went to his head like wine, and
hardly left him the presence of mind to sustain a quiet exterior. The
wind was laden with a penetrating moisture that chilled him as the dry
icy breezes from Huron never had done, and the pain in his lungs made
him faint and dizzy. He wondered if his red-cheeked little sister could
live in one of those vast, impregnable buildings. He thought of stopping
some of those serious-looking men and asking them if they knew her;
but he could not muster up the courage. The distressing experience that
comes to almost every one some time in life, of losing all identity in
the universal humanity, was becoming his. The tears began to roll down
his wasted face from loneliness and exhaustion. He grew hungry with
longing for the dirty but familiar cabins of the camp, and staggered
along with eyes half closed, conjuring visions of the warm interiors,
the leaping fires, the groups of laughing men seen dimly through clouds
of tobacco-smoke.

A delicious scent of coffee met his hungry sense and made him really
think he was taking the savory black draught from his familiar tin cup;
but the muddy streets, the blinding lights, the cruel, rushing people,
were still there. The buildings, however, now became different. They
were lower and meaner, with dirty windows. Women laughing loudly crowded
about the doors, and the establishments seemed to be equally divided
between saloon-keepers, pawnbrokers, and dealers in second-hand clothes.
Luther wondered where they all drew their support from. Upon one
signboard he read, "Lodgings 10 cents to 50 cents. A Square Meal for 15
cents," and, thankful for some haven, entered. Here he spent his first
night and other nights, while his purse dwindled and his strength waned.
At last he got a man in a drug-store to search the directory for
his sister's residence. They found a name he took to be his
brother-in-law's. It was two days later when he found the address,--a
great, many-storied mansion on one of the southern boulevards,--and found
also that his search had been in vain. Sore and faint, he staggered back
to his miserable shelter, only to arise feverish and ill in the morning.
He frequented the great shop doors, thronged with brilliantly-dressed
ladies, and watched to see if his little sister might not dash up in
one of those satin-lined coaches and take him where he would be warm and
safe and would sleep undisturbed by drunken, ribald songs and loathsome
surroundings. There were days when he almost forgot his name, and,
striving to remember, would lose his senses for a moment and drift back
to the harmonious solitudes of the North and breathe the resin-scented
frosty atmosphere. He grew terrified at the blood he coughed from his
lacerated lungs, and wondered bitterly why the boys did not come to take
him home.

One day, as he painfully dragged himself down a residence street, he
tried to collect his thoughts and form some plan for the future. He had
no trade, understood no handiwork; he could fell trees. He looked at
the gaunt, scrawny, transplanted specimens that met his eye, and gave
himself up to the homesickness that filled his soul. He slept that night
in the shelter of a stable, and spent his last money in the morning for
a biscuit.

He travelled many miles that afternoon looking for something to which he
might turn his hand. Once he got permission to carry a hod for half an
hour. At the end of that time he fainted. When he recovered, the foreman
paid him twenty-five cents. "For God's sake, man, go home," he said.
Luther stared at him with a white face and went on.

There came days when he so forgot his native dignity as to beg.
He seldom received anything; he was referred to various charitable
institutions the existence of which he had never heard.

One morning, when a pall of smoke enveloped the city and the odors of
coal-gas refused to lift their nauseating poison through the heavy air,
Luther, chilled with dew and famished, awoke to a happier life. The
loneliness at his heart was gone. The feeling of hopeless imprisonment
that the miles and miles of streets had terrified him with gave place
to one of freedom and exaltation. Above him he heard the rasping of
pine boughs; his feet trod on a rebounding mat of decay; the sky was as
coldly blue as the bosom of Huron. He walked as if on ether, singing a
senseless jargon the woodmen had aroused the echoes with,--

          "Hi yi halloo!
          The owl sees you!
          Look what you do!
          Hi yi halloo!"

Swung over his shoulder was a stick he had used to assist his limping
gait, but now transformed into the beloved axe. He would reach the
clearing soon, he thought, and strode on like a giant, while people
hurried from his path. Suddenly a smooth trunk, stripped of its bark and
bleached by weather, arose before him.

"Hi yi halloo!" High went the wasted arm--crash!--a broken staff, a
jingle of wires, a maddened, shouting man the centre of a group of
amused spectators! A few moments later, four broad-shouldered men in
blue had him in their grasp, pinioned and guarded, clattering over the
noisy streets behind two spirited horses. They drew after them a troop
of noisy, jeering boys, who danced about the wagon like a swirl of
autumn leaves. Then came a halt, and Luther was dragged up the steps of
a square brick building with a belfry on the top. They entered a large
bare room with benches ranged about the walls, and brought him before a
man at a desk.

"What is your name?" asked the man at the desk.

"Hi yi halloo!" said Luther.

"He's drunk, sergeant," said one of the men in blue, and the axe-man was
led into the basement. He was conscious of an involuntary resistance, a
short struggle, and a final shock of pain,--then oblivion.

The chopper awoke to the realization of three stone walls and an iron
grating in front. Through this he looked out upon a stone flooring
across which was a row of similar apartments. He neither knew nor cared
where he was. The feeling of imprisonment was no greater than he had
felt on the endless, cheerless streets. He laid himself on the bench
that ran along a side wall, and, closing his eyes, listened to the
babble of the clear stream and the thunder of the "drive" on its
journey. How the logs hurried and jostled! crushing, whirling, ducking,
with the merry lads leaping about them with shouts and laughter.
Suddenly he was recalled by a voice. Some one handed a narrow tin cup
full of coffee and a thick slice of bread through the grating. Across
the way he dimly saw a man eating a similar slice of bread. Men in other
compartments were swearing and singing. He knew these now for the voices
he had heard in his dreams. He tried to force some of the bread down his
parched and swollen throat, but failed; the coffee strangled him, and he
threw himself upon the bench.

The forest again, the night-wind, the whistle of the axe through the
air. Once when he opened his eyes he found it dark. It would soon be
time to go to work. He fancied there would be hoar-frost on the trees
in the morning. How close the cabin seemed! Ha!--here came his little
sister. Her voice sounded like the wind on a spring morning. How loud it
swelled now! "Lu! Lu!" she cried.

The next morning the lock-up keeper opened the cell door. Luther lay
with his head in a pool of blood. His soul had escaped from the thrall
of the forest.

"Well, well!" said the little fat police-justice, when he was told of it.
"We ought to have a doctor around to look after such cases."




A Lady of Yesterday

"A LIGHT wind blew from the gates of the sun," the morning she first
walked down the street of the little Iowa town. Not a cloud flecked the
blue; there was a humming of happy insects; a smell of rich and moist
loam perfumed the air, and in the dusk of beeches and of oaks stood the
quiet homes. She paused now and then, looking in the gardens, or at a
group of children, then passed on, smiling in content.

Her accent was so strange, that the agent for real estate, whom she
visited, asked her, twice and once again, what it was she said.

"I want," she had repeated smilingly, "an upland meadow, where clover
will grow, and mignonette."

At the tea-tables that night, there was a mighty chattering. The brisk
village made a mystery of this lady with the slow step, the foreign
trick of speech, the long black gown, and the gentle voice. The men,
concealing their curiosity in presence of the women, gratified it
secretly, by sauntering to the tavern in the evening. There the keeper
and his wife stood ready to convey any neighborly intelligence.

"Elizabeth Astrado" was written in the register,--a name conveying
little, unaccompanied by title or by place of residence.

"She eats alone," the tavern-keeper's wife confided to their eager
ears, "and asks for no service. Oh, she's a curiosity! She's got her
story,--you'll see!"

In a town where every man knew every other man, and whether or not he
paid his taxes on time, and what his standing was in church, and all the
skeletons of his home, a stranger alien to their ways disturbed their
peace of mind.

"An upland meadow where clover and mignonette will grow," she had said,
and such an one she found, and planted thick with fine white clover
and with mignonette. Then, while the carpenters raised her cabin at the
border of the meadow, near the street, she passed among the villagers,
mingling with them gently, winning their good-will, in spite of
themselves.

The cabin was of unbarked maple logs, with four rooms and a rustic
portico. Then all the villagers stared in very truth. They, living
in their trim and ugly little homes, accounted houses of logs as the
misfortune of their pioneer parents. A shed for wood, a barn for the
Jersey cow, a rustic fence, tall, with a high swinging gate, completed
the domain. In the front room of the cabin was a fireplace of rude
brick. In the bedrooms, cots as bare and hard as a nun's, and in the
kitchen the domestic necessaries; that was all. The poorest house-holder
in the town would not have confessed to such scant furnishing. Yet the
richest man might well have hesitated before he sent to France for hives
and hives of bees, as she did, setting them up along the southern border
of her meadow.

Later there came strong boxes, marked with many marks of foreign
transportation lines, and the neighbor-gossips, seeing them, imagined
wealth of curious furniture; but the man who carted them told his wife,
who told her friend, who told her friend, that every box to the last one
was placed in the dry cemented cellar, and left there in the dark.

"An' a mighty ridic'lous expense a cellar like that is, t' put under a
house of that char'cter," said the man to his wife--who repeated it to
her friend.

"But that ain't all," the carpenter's wife had said when she heard about
it all, "Hank says there is one little room, not fit for buttery nor
yet fur closit, with a window high up--well, you ken see yourself-an' a
strong door. Jus' in passin' th' other day, when he was there, hangin'
some shelves, he tried it, an' it was locked!"

"Well!" said the women who listened.

However, they were not unfriendly, these brisk gossips. Two of them,
plucking up tardy courage, did call one afternoon. Their hostess was out
among her bees, crooning to them, as it seemed, while they lighted all
about her, lit on the flower in her dark hair, buzzed vivaciously about
her snow-white linen gown, lighted on her long, dark hands. She came
in brightly when she saw her guests, and placed chairs for them,
courteously, steeped them a cup of pale and fragrant tea, and served
them with little cakes. Though her manner was so quiet and so kind, the
women were shy before her. She, turning to one and then the other, asked
questions in her quaint way.

"You have children, have you not?"

Both of them had.

"Ah," she cried, clasping those slender hands, "but you are very
fortunate! Your little ones,--what are their ages?"

They told her, she listening smilingly.

"And you nurse your little babes--you nurse them at the breast?"

The modest women blushed. They were not used to speaking with such
freedom. But they confessed they did, not liking artificial means.

"No," said the lady, looking at them with a soft light in her eyes, "as
you say, there is nothing like the good mother Nature. The little ones
God sends should lie at the breast. 'Tis not the milk alone that
they imbibe; it is the breath of life,-it is the human magnetism, the
power,-how shall I say? Happy the mother who has a little babe to hold!"

They wanted to ask a question, but they dared not--wanted to ask a
hundred questions. But back of the gentleness was a hauteur, and they
were still.

"Tell me," she said, breaking her reverie, "of what your husbands do.
Are they carpenters? Do they build houses for men, like the blessed
Jesus? Or are they tillers of the soil? Do they bring fruits out of this
bountiful valley?"

They answered, with a reservation of approval. "The blessed Jesus!" It
sounded like popery.

She had gone from these brief personal matters to other things.

"How very strong you people seem," she had remarked. "Both your men
and your women are large and strong. You should be, being appointed to
subdue a continent. Men think they choose their destinies, but indeed,
good neighbors, I think not so. Men are driven by the winds of God's
will. They are as much bidden to build up this valley, this storehouse
for the nations, as coral insects are bidden to make the reefs with
their own little bodies, dying as they build. Is it not so?"

"We are the creatures of God's will, I suppose," said one of her
visitors, piously.

She had given them little confidences in return.

"I make my bread," she said, with childish pride, "pray see if you
do not think it excellent!" And she cut a flaky loaf to display its
whiteness. One guest summoned the bravado to inquire,--

"Then you are not used to doing housework?"

"I?" she said, with a slow smile, "I have never got used to
anything,--not even living." And so she baffled them all, yet won them.

The weeks went by. Elizabeth Astrado attended to her bees, milked her
cow, fed her fowls, baked, washed, and cleaned, like the simple women
about her, saving that as she did it a look of ineffable content lighted
up her face, and she sang for happiness. Sometimes, amid the ballads
that she hummed, a strain slipped in of some great melody, which
she, singing unaware, as it were, corrected, shaking her finger in
self-reproval, and returning again to the ballads and the hymns. Nor
was she remiss in neighborly offices; but if any were ailing, or had a
festivity, she was at hand to assist, condole, or congratulate, carrying
always some simple gift in her hand, appropriate to the occasion.

She had her wider charities too, for all she kept close to her home.
When, one day, a story came to her of a laborer struck down with heat in
putting in a culvert on the railroad, and gossip said he could not
speak English, she hastened to him, caught dying words from his lips,
whispered a reply, and then what seemed to be a prayer, while he
held fast her hand, and sank to coma with wistful eyes upon her face.
Moreover 'twas she who buried him, raising a cross above his grave, and
she who planted rose-bushes about the mound.

"He spoke like an Italian," said the physician to her warily.

"And so he was," she had replied.

"A fellow-countryman of yours, no doubt?"

"Are not all men our countrymen, my friend?" she said, gently. "What are
little lines drawn in the imagination of men, dividing territory, that
they should divide our sympathies? The world is my country--and yours,
I hope. Is it not so?"

Then there had also been a hapless pair of lovers, shamed before their
community, who, desperate, impoverished, and bewildered at the war
between nature and society, had been helped by her into a new part of
the world. There had been a widow with many children, who had found
baskets of cooked food and bundles of well-made clothing on her step.
And as the days passed, with these pleasant offices, the face of the
strange woman glowed with an ever-increasing content, and her dark,
delicate beauty grew.

John Hartington spent his vacation at Des Moines, having a laudable
desire to see something of the world before returning to his native
town, with his college honors fresh upon him. Swiftest of the college
runners was John Hartington, famed for his leaping too, and measuring
widest at the chest and waist of all the hearty fellows at the
university. His blond curls clustered above a brow almost as innocent
as a child's; his frank and brave blue eyes, his free step, his mellow
laugh, bespoke the perfect animal, unharmed by civilization, unperplexed
by the closing century's fallacies and passions. The wholesome oak that
spreads its roots deep in the generous soil, could not be more a part
of nature than he. Conscientious, unimaginative, direct, sincere,
industrious, he was the ideal man of his kind, and his return to town
caused a flutter among the maidens which they did not even attempt to
conceal. They told him all the chat, of course, and, among other things,
mentioned the great sensation of the year,--the coming of the woman
with her mystery, the purchase of the sunny upland, the planting it
with clover and with mignonette, the building of the house of logs,
the keeping of the bees, the barren rooms, the busy, silent life, the
charities, the never-ending wonder of it all. And then the woman--kind,
yet different from the rest, with the foreign trick of tongue, the slow,
proud walk, the delicate, slight hands, the beautiful, beautiful smile,
the air as of a creature from another world.

Hartington, strolling beyond the village streets, up where the sunset
died in daffodil above the upland, saw the little cot of logs, and out
before it, among blood-red poppies, the woman of whom he had heard. Her
gown of white gleamed in that eerie radiance, glorified, her sad great
eyes bent on him in magnetic scrutiny. A peace and plenitude of power
came radiating from her, and reached him where he stood, suddenly, and
for the first time in his careless life, struck dumb and awed. She, too,
seemed suddenly abashed at this great bulk of youthful manhood, innocent
and strong. She gazed on him, and he on her, both chained with
some mysterious enchantment. Yet neither spoke, and he, turning in
bewilderment at last, went back to town, while she placed one hand on
her lips to keep from calling him. And neither slept that night, and in
the morning when she went with milking pail and stool out to the grassy
field, there he stood at the bars, waiting. Again they gazed, like
creatures held in thrall by some magician, till she held out her hand
and said,--

"We must be friends, although we have not met. Perhaps we ARE old
friends. They say there have been worlds before this one. I have not
seen you in these habiliments of flesh and blood, and yet--we may be
friends?"

John Hartington, used to the thin jests of the village girls, and all
their simple talk, rose, nevertheless, enlightened as he was with some
strange sympathy with her, to understand and answer what she said.

"I think perhaps it may be so. May I come in beside you in the field?
Give me the pail. I'll milk the cow for you."

She threw her head back and laughed like a girl from school, and he
laughed too, and they shook hands. Then she sat near him while he
milked, both keeping silence, save for the p-rring noise he made with
his lips to the patient beast. Being through, she served him with a
cupful of the fragrant milk; but he bade her drink first, then drank
himself, and then they laughed again, as if they both had found
something new and good in life.

Then she,--

"Come see how well my bees are doing." And they went. She served him
with the lucent syrup of the bees, perfumed with the mignonette,--such
honey as there never was before. He sat on the broad doorstep, near
the scarlet poppies, she on the grass, and then they talked--was it one
golden hour--or two? Ah, well, 'twas long enough for her to learn all of
his simple life, long enough for her to know that he was victor at the
races at the school, that he could play the pipe, like any shepherd of
the ancient days, and when he went he asked her if he might return.

"Well," laughed she, "sometimes I am lonely. Come see me--in a week."

Yet he was there that day at twilight, and he brought his silver pipe,
and piped to her under the stars, and she sung ballads to him,--songs
of Strephon and times when the hills were young, and flocks were fairer
than they ever be these days.

"To-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow," and still the intercourse,
still her dark loveliness waxing, still the weaving of the mystic spell,
still happiness as primitive and as sweet as ever Eden knew.

Then came a twilight when the sweet rain fell, and on the heavy air the
perfumes of the fields floated. The woman stood by the window of the
cot, looking out. Tall, graceful, full of that subtle power which drew
his soul; clothed in white linen, fragrant from her fields, with breath
freighted with fresh milk, with eyes of flame, she was there to be
adored. And he, being man of manliest type, forgot all that might have
checked the words, and poured his soul out at her feet. She drew herself
up like a queen, but only that she might look queenlier for his sake,
and, bending, kissed his brow, and whispered back his vows.

And they were married.

The villagers pitied Hartington.

"She's more than a match for him in years--an' in some other ways, as
like as not," they said. "Besides, she ain't much inclined to mention
anything about her past. 'Twon't bear the tellin' probably."

As for the lovers, they laughed as they went about their honest tasks,
or sat together arms encircling each at evening, now under the stars,
and now before their fire of wood. They talked together of their farm,
added a field for winter wheat, bought other cattle, and some horses,
which they rode out over the rolling prairies side by side. He never
stopped to chat about the town; she never ventured on the street without
him by her side. Truth to tell, their neighbors envied them, marvelling
how one could extract a heaven out of earth, and what such perfect joy
could mean.

Yet, for all their prosperity, not one addition did they make to that
most simple home. It stood there, with its bare necessities, made
beautiful only with their love. But when the winter was most gone, he
made a little cradle of hard wood, in which she placed pillows of down,
and over which she hung linen curtains embroidered by her hand.

In the long evenings, by the flicker of the fire, they sat together,
cheek to cheek, and looked at this little bed, singing low songs
together.

"This happiness is terrible, my John," she said to him one night,--a
wondrous night, when the eastern wind had flung the tassels out on all
the budding trees of spring, and the air was throbbing with awakening
life, and balmy puffs of breeze, and odors of the earth. "And we are
growing young. Do you not think that we are very young and strong?"

He kissed her on the lips. "I know that you are beautiful," he said.

"Oh, we have lived at Nature's heart, you see, my love. The cattle and
the fowls, the honey and the wheat, the cot-the cradle, John, and you
and me! These things make happiness. They are nature. But then, you
cannot understand. You have never known the artificial--"

"And you, Elizabeth?"

"John, if you wish, you shall hear all I have to tell. 'Tis a long,
long, weary tale. Will you hear it now? Believe me, it will make us
sad."

She grasped his arm till he shrank with pain.

"Tell what you will and when you will, Elizabeth. Perhaps, some
day--when--" he pointed to the little crib.

"As you say." And so it dropped.

There came a day when Hartington, sitting upon the portico, where
perfumes of the budding clover came to him, hated the humming of the
happy bees, hated the rustling of the trees, hated the sight of earth.

"The child is dead," the nurse had said, "as for your wife, perhaps--"
but that was all. Finally he heard the nurse's step upon the floor.

"Come," she said, motioning him. And he had gone, laid cheek against
that dying cheek, whispered his love once more, saw it returned even
then, in those deep eyes, and laid her back upon her pillow, dead.

He buried her among the mignonette, levelled the earth, sowed thick the
seed again.

"'Tis as she wished," he said.

With his strong hands he wrenched the little crib, laid it piece by
piece upon their hearth, and scattered then the sacred ashes on the
wind. Then, with hard-coming breath, broke open the locked door of that
room which he had never entered, thinking to find there, perhaps, some
sign of that unguessable life of hers, but found there only an altar,
with votive lamps before the Blessed Virgin, and lilies faded and fallen
from their stems.

Then down into the cellar went he, to those boxes, with the foreign
marks. And then, indeed, he found a hint of that dead life. Gowns of
velvet and of silk, such as princesses might wear, wonders of lace,
yellowed with time, great cloaks of snowy fur, lustrous robes, jewels
of worth,--a vast array of brilliant trumpery. Then there were books in
many tongues, with rich old bindings and illuminated page, and in them
written the dead woman's name,--a name of many parts, with titles of
impress, and in the midst of all the name, "Elizabeth Astrado," as she
said.

And that was all, or if there were more he might have learned, following
trails that fell within his way, he never learned it, being content, and
thankful that he had held her for a time within his arms, and looked
in her great soul, which, wearying of life's sad complexities, had
simplified itself, and made his love its best adornment.

========================================
========================================

THE SHAPE OF FEAR

AND OTHER GHOSTLY TALES


By Elia Wilkinson Peattie



Original Transcriber's Note:

 I have omitted signature indicators and italicization of the
 running heads.  In addition, I have made the following changes
 to the text:

 PAGE  LINE  ORIGINAL      CHANGED TO
  156     1  where as      were as
  156     4  mouth         mouth.
  165     5  Wedgwood      Wedgewood
  166     9  Wedgwood      Wedgewood
  167     6  surperfluous  superfluous
  172    11  every         ever
  173    17  Bogg          Boggs


CONTENTS


     THE SHAPE OF FEAR

     ON THE NORTHERN ICE

     THEIR DEAR LITTLE GHOST

     A SPECTRAL COLLIE

     THE HOUSE THAT WAS NOT

     STORY OF AN OBSTINATE CORPSE

     A CHILD OF THE RAIN

     THE ROOM OF THE EVIL THOUGHT

     STORY OF THE VANISHING PATIENT

     THE PIANO NEXT DOOR

     AN ASTRAL ONION

     FROM THE LOOM OF THE DEAD

     A GRAMMATICAL GHOST




THE SHAPE OF FEAR

TIM O'CONNOR--who was descended from the O'Conors with one N---- started
life as a poet and an enthusiast. His mother had designed him for
the priesthood, and at the age of fifteen, most of his verses had an
ecclesiastical tinge, but, somehow or other, he got into the newspaper
business instead, and became a pessimistic gentleman, with a literary
style of great beauty and an income of modest proportions. He fell in
with men who talked of art for art's sake,--though what right they had
to speak of art at all nobody knew,--and little by little his view of
life and love became more or less profane. He met a woman who sucked
his heart's blood, and he knew it and made no protest; nay, to the great
amusement of the fellows who talked of art for art's sake, he went the
length of marrying her. He could not in decency explain that he had
the traditions of fine gentlemen behind him and so had to do as he did,
because his friends might not have understood. He laughed at the days
when he had thought of the priesthood, blushed when he ran across any of
those tender and exquisite old verses he had written in his youth,
and became addicted to absinthe and other less peculiar drinks, and to
gaming a little to escape a madness of ennui.

As the years went by he avoided, with more and more scorn, that part of
the world which he denominated Philistine, and consorted only with the
fellows who flocked about Jim O'Malley's saloon. He was pleased with
solitude, or with these convivial wits, and with not very much else
beside. Jim O'Malley was a sort of Irish poem, set to inspiring measure.
He was, in fact, a Hibernian Maecenas, who knew better than to put
bad whiskey before a man of talent, or tell a trite tale in the presence
of a wit. The recountal of his disquisitions on politics and other
current matters had enabled no less than three men to acquire national
reputations; and a number of wretches, having gone the way of men who
talk of art for art's sake, and dying in foreign lands, or hospitals,
or asylums, having no one else to be homesick for, had been homesick for
Jim O'Malley, and wept for the sound of his voice and the grasp of his
hearty hand.

When Tim O'Connor turned his back upon most of the things he was born
to and took up with the life which he consistently lived till the
unspeakable end, he was unable to get rid of certain peculiarities. For
example, in spite of all his debauchery, he continued to look like the
Beloved Apostle. Notwithstanding abject friendships he wrote limpid and
noble English. Purity seemed to dog his heels, no matter how violently
he attempted to escape from her. He was never so drunk that he was
not an exquisite, and even his creditors, who had become inured to his
deceptions, confessed it was a privilege to meet so perfect a gentleman.
The creature who held him in bondage, body and soul, actually came to
love him for his gentleness, and for some quality which baffled her,
and made her ache with a strange longing which she could not define.
Not that she ever defined anything, poor little beast! She had skin the
color of pale gold, and yellow eyes with brown lights in them, and great
plaits of straw-colored hair. About her lips was a fatal and sensuous
smile, which, when it got hold of a man's imagination, would not let it
go, but held to it, and mocked it till the day of his death. She was
the incarnation of the Eternal Feminine, with all the wifeliness and the
maternity left out--she was ancient, yet ever young, and familiar as joy
or tears or sin.

She took good care of Tim in some ways: fed him well, nursed him back
to reason after a period of hard drinking, saw that he put on overshoes
when the walks were wet, and looked after his money. She even prized his
brain, for she discovered that it was a delicate little machine which
produced gold. By association with him and his friends, she learned that
a number of apparently useless things had value in the eyes of certain
convenient fools, and so she treasured the autographs of distinguished
persons who wrote to him--autographs which he disdainfully tossed in the
waste basket. She was careful with presentation copies from authors, and
she went the length of urging Tim to write a book himself. But at that
he balked.

"Write a book!" he cried to her, his gentle face suddenly white with
passion. "Who am I to commit such a profanation?"

She didn't know what he meant, but she had a theory that it was
dangerous to excite him, and so she sat up till midnight to cook a chop
for him when he came home that night.

He preferred to have her sitting up for him, and he wanted every
electric light in their apartments turned to the full. If, by any
chance, they returned together to a dark house, he would not enter till
she touched the button in the hall, and illuminated the room. Or if it
so happened that the lights were turned off in the night time, and
he awoke to find himself in darkness, he shrieked till the woman came
running to his relief, and, with derisive laughter, turned them on
again. But when she found that after these frights he lay trembling and
white in his bed, she began to be alarmed for the clever, gold-making
little machine, and to renew her assiduities, and to horde more
tenaciously than ever, those valuable curios on which she some day
expected to realize when he was out of the way, and no longer in a
position to object to their barter.

O'Connor's idiosyncrasy of fear was a source of much amusement among the
boys at the office where he worked. They made open sport of it, and
yet, recognizing him for a sensitive plant, and granting that genius was
entitled to whimsicalities, it was their custom when they called for
him after work hours, to permit him to reach the lighted corridor before
they turned out the gas over his desk. This, they reasoned, was but a
slight service to perform for the most enchanting beggar in the world.

"Dear fellow," said Rick Dodson, who loved him, "is it the Devil you
expect to see? And if so, why are you averse? Surely the Devil is not
such a bad old chap."

"You haven't found him so?"

"Tim, by heaven, you know, you ought to explain to me. A citizen of the
world and a student of its purlieus, like myself, ought to know what
there is to know! Now you're a man of sense, in spite of a few
bad habits--such as myself, for example. Is this fad of yours
madness?--which would be quite to your credit,--for gadzooks, I like a
lunatic! Or is it the complaint of a man who has gathered too much
data on the subject of Old Rye? Or is it, as I suspect, something more
occult, and therefore more interesting?"

"Rick, boy," said Tim, "you're too--inquiring!" And he turned to his
desk with a look of delicate hauteur.

It was the very next night that these two tippling pessimists spent
together talking about certain disgruntled but immortal gentlemen, who,
having said their say and made the world quite uncomfortable, had now
journeyed on to inquire into the nothingness which they postulated. The
dawn was breaking in the muggy east; the bottles were empty, the
cigars burnt out. Tim turned toward his friend with a sharp breaking of
sociable silence.

"Rick," he said, "do you know that Fear has a Shape?"

"And so has my nose!"

"You asked me the other night what I feared. Holy father, I make my
confession to you. What I fear is Fear."

"That's because you've drunk too much--or not enough.

  "'Come, fill the cup, and in the fire of Spring
    Your winter garment of repentance fling--'"

"My costume then would be too nebulous for this weather, dear boy. But
it's true what I was saying. I am afraid of ghosts."

"For an agnostic that seems a bit--"

"Agnostic! Yes, so completely an agnostic that I do not even know that
I do not know! God, man, do you mean you have no ghosts--no--no things
which shape themselves? Why, there are things I have done--"

"Don't think of them, my boy! See, 'night's candles are burnt out, and
jocund day stands tiptoe on the misty mountain top.'"

Tim looked about him with a sickly smile. He looked behind him and there
was nothing there; stared at the blank window, where the smoky dawn
showed its offensive face, and there was nothing there. He pushed away
the moist hair from his haggard face--that face which would look like
the blessed St. John, and leaned heavily back in his chair.

"'Yon light is not daylight, I know it, I,'" he murmured drowsily, "'it
is some meteor which the sun exhales, to be to thee this night--'"

The words floated off in languid nothingness, and he slept. Dodson arose
preparatory to stretching himself on his couch. But first he bent over
his friend with a sense of tragic appreciation.

"Damned by the skin of his teeth!" he muttered. "A little more, and he
would have gone right, and the Devil would have lost a good fellow. As
it is"--he smiled with his usual conceited delight in his own sayings,
even when they were uttered in soliloquy--"he is merely one of those
splendid gentlemen one will meet with in hell." Then Dodson had a
momentary nostalgia for goodness himself, but he soon overcame it, and
stretching himself on his sofa, he, too, slept.

That night he and O'Connor went together to hear "Faust" sung, and
returning to the office, Dodson prepared to write his criticism. Except
for the distant clatter of telegraph instruments, or the peremptory
cries of "copy" from an upper room, the office was still. Dodson wrote
and smoked his interminable cigarettes; O' Connor rested his head in
his hands on the desk, and sat in perfect silence. He did not know when
Dodson finished, or when, arising, and absent-mindedly extinguishing the
lights, he moved to the door with his copy in his hands. Dodson gathered
up the hats and coats as he passed them where they lay on a chair, and
called:

"It is done, Tim. Come, let's get out of this."

There was no answer, and he thought Tim was following, but after he had
handed his criticism to the city editor, he saw he was still alone, and
returned to the room for his friend. He advanced no further than the
doorway, for, as he stood in the dusky corridor and looked within the
darkened room, he saw before his friend a Shape, white, of perfect
loveliness, divinely delicate and pure and ethereal, which seemed as the
embodiment of all goodness. From it came a soft radiance and a perfume
softer than the wind when "it breathes upon a bank of violets stealing
and giving odor." Staring at it, with eyes immovable, sat his friend.

It was strange that at sight of a thing so unspeakably fair, a coldness
like that which comes from the jewel-blue lips of a Muir crevasse
should have fallen upon Dodson, or that it was only by summoning all the
manhood that was left in him, that he was able to restore light to
the room, and to rush to his friend. When he reached poor Tim he was
stone-still with paralysis. They took him home to the woman, who nursed
him out of that attack--and later on worried him into another.

When he was able to sit up and jeer at things a little again, and help
himself to the quail the woman broiled for him, Dodson, sitting beside
him, said:

"Did you call that little exhibition of yours legerdemain, Tim, you
sweep? Or are you really the Devil's bairn?"

"It was the Shape of Fear," said Tim, quite seriously.

"But it seemed mild as mother's milk."

"It was compounded of the good I might have done. It is that which I
fear."

He would explain no more. Later--many months later--he died patiently
and sweetly in the madhouse, praying for rest. The little beast with
the yellow eyes had high mass celebrated for him, which, all things
considered, was almost as pathetic as it was amusing.

Dodson was in Vienna when he heard of it.

"Sa, sa!" cried he. "I wish it wasn't so dark in the tomb! What do you
suppose Tim is looking at?"

As for Jim O'Malley, he was with difficulty kept from illuminating the
grave with electricity.




ON THE NORTHERN ICE


THE winter nights up at Sault Ste. Marie are as white and luminous as
the Milky Way. The silence which rests upon the solitude appears to be
white also. Even sound has been included in Nature's arrestment, for,
indeed, save the still white frost, all things seem to be obliterated.
The stars have a poignant brightness, but they belong to heaven and not
to earth, and between their immeasurable height and the still ice rolls
the ebon ether in vast, liquid billows.

In such a place it is difficult to believe that the world is actually
peopled. It seems as if it might be the dark of the day after Cain
killed Abel, and as if all of humanity's remainder was huddled in
affright away from the awful spaciousness of Creation.

The night Ralph Hagadorn started out for Echo Bay--bent on a pleasant
duty--he laughed to himself, and said that he did not at all object
to being the only man in the world, so long as the world remained as
unspeakably beautiful as it was when he buckled on his skates and shot
away into the solitude. He was bent on reaching his best friend in time
to act as groomsman, and business had delayed him till time was at its
briefest. So he journeyed by night and journeyed alone, and when the
tang of the frost got at his blood, he felt as a spirited horse feels
when it gets free of bit and bridle. The ice was as glass, his skates
were keen, his frame fit, and his venture to his taste! So he laughed,
and cut through the air as a sharp stone cleaves the water. He could
hear the whistling of the air as he cleft it.

As he went on and on in the black stillness, he began to have fancies.
He imagined himself enormously tall--a great Viking of the Northland,
hastening over icy fiords to his love. And that reminded him that he had
a love--though, indeed, that thought was always present with him as a
background for other thoughts. To be sure, he had not told her that she
was his love, for he had seen her only a few times, and the auspicious
occasion had not yet presented itself. She lived at Echo Bay also, and
was to be the maid of honor to his friend's bride--which was one more
reason why he skated almost as swiftly as the wind, and why, now and
then, he let out a shout of exultation.

The one cloud that crossed Hagadorn's sun of expectancy was the
knowledge that Marie Beaujeu's father had money, and that Marie lived in
a house with two stories to it, and wore otter skin about her throat
and little satin-lined mink boots on her feet when she went sledding.
Moreover, in the locket in which she treasured a bit of her dead
mother's hair, there was a black pearl as big as a pea. These things
made it difficult--perhaps impossible--for Ralph Hagadorn to say
more than, "I love you." But that much he meant to say though he were
scourged with chagrin for his temerity.

This determination grew upon him as he swept along the ice under the
starlight. Venus made a glowing path toward the west and seemed eager to
reassure him. He was sorry he could not skim down that avenue of light
which flowed from the love-star, but he was forced to turn his back upon
it and face the black northeast.

It came to him with a shock that he was not alone. His eyelashes were
frosted and his eyeballs blurred with the cold, so at first he thought
it might be an illusion. But when he had rubbed his eyes hard, he
made sure that not very far in front of him was a long white skater in
fluttering garments who sped over the ice as fast as ever werewolf went.

He called aloud, but there was no answer. He shaped his hands and
trumpeted through them, but the silence was as before--it was complete.
So then he gave chase, setting his teeth hard and putting a tension on
his firm young muscles. But go however he would, the white skater went
faster. After a time, as he glanced at the cold gleam of the north star,
he perceived that he was being led from his direct path. For a moment
he hesitated, wondering if he would not better keep to his road, but his
weird companion seemed to draw him on irresistibly, and finding it sweet
to follow, he followed.

Of course it came to him more than once in that strange pursuit, that
the white skater was no earthly guide. Up in those latitudes men see
curious things when the hoar frost is on the earth. Hagadorn's own
father--to hark no further than that for an instance!--who lived up
there with the Lake Superior Indians, and worked in the copper mines,
had welcomed a woman at his hut one bitter night, who was gone by
morning, leaving wolf tracks on the snow! Yes, it was so, and John
Fontanelle, the half-breed, could tell you about it any day--if he were
alive. (Alack, the snow where the wolf tracks were, is melted now!)

Well, Hagadorn followed the white skater all the night, and when the ice
flushed pink at dawn, and arrows of lovely light shot up into the cold
heavens, she was gone, and Hagadorn was at his destination. The sun
climbed arrogantly up to his place above all other things, and as
Hagadorn took off his skates and glanced carelessly lakeward, he beheld
a great wind-rift in the ice, and the waves showing blue and hungry
between white fields. Had he rushed along his intended path, watching
the stars to guide him, his glance turned upward, all his body at
magnificent momentum, he must certainly have gone into that cold grave.

How wonderful that it had been sweet to follow the white skater, and
that he followed!

His heart beat hard as he hurried to his friend's house. But he
encountered no wedding furore. His friend met him as men meet in houses
of mourning.

"Is this your wedding face?" cried Hagadorn. "Why, man, starved as I am,
I look more like a bridegroom than you!"

"There's no wedding to-day!"

"No wedding! Why, you're not--"

"Marie Beaujeu died last night--"

"Marie--"

"Died last night. She had been skating in the afternoon, and she came
home chilled and wandering in her mind, as if the frost had got in it
somehow. She grew worse and worse, and all the time she talked of you."

"Of me?"

"We wondered what it meant. No one knew you were lovers."

"I didn't know it myself; more's the pity. At least, I didn't know--"

"She said you were on the ice, and that you didn't know about the big
breaking-up, and she cried to us that the wind was off shore and the
rift widening. She cried over and over again that you could come in by
the old French creek if you only knew--"

"I came in that way."

"But how did you come to do that? It's out of the path. We thought
perhaps--"

But Hagadorn broke in with his story and told him all as it had come to
pass.

That day they watched beside the maiden, who lay with tapers at her head
and at her feet, and in the little church the bride who might have been
at her wedding said prayers for her friend. They buried Marie Beaujeu in
her bridesmaid white, and Hagadorn was before the altar with her, as he
had intended from the first! Then at midnight the lovers who were to
wed whispered their vows in the gloom of the cold church, and walked
together through the snow to lay their bridal wreaths upon a grave.

Three nights later, Hagadorn skated back again to his home. They wanted
him to go by sunlight, but he had his way, and went when Venus made her
bright path on the ice.

The truth was, he had hoped for the companionship of the white skater.
But he did not have it. His only companion was the wind. The only voice
he heard was the baying of a wolf on the north shore. The world was as
empty and as white as if God had just created it, and the sun had not
yet colored nor man defiled it.




THEIR DEAR LITTLE GHOST


THE first time one looked at Elsbeth, one was not prepossessed. She was
thin and brown, her nose turned slightly upward, her toes went in just
a perceptible degree, and her hair was perfectly straight. But when one
looked longer, one perceived that she was a charming little creature.
The straight hair was as fine as silk, and hung in funny little braids
down her back; there was not a flaw in her soft brown skin, and her
mouth was tender and shapely. But her particular charm lay in a look
which she habitually had, of seeming to know curious things--such as it
is not allotted to ordinary persons to know. One felt tempted to say to
her:

"What are these beautiful things which you know, and of which others are
ignorant? What is it you see with those wise and pellucid eyes? Why is
it that everybody loves you?"

Elsbeth was my little godchild, and I knew her better than I knew any
other child in the world. But still I could not truthfully say that I
was familiar with her, for to me her spirit was like a fair and fragrant
road in the midst of which I might walk in peace and joy, but where I
was continually to discover something new. The last time I saw her quite
well and strong was over in the woods where she had gone with her two
little brothers and her nurse to pass the hottest weeks of summer. I
followed her, foolish old creature that I was, just to be near her, for
I needed to dwell where the sweet aroma of her life could reach me.

One morning when I came from my room, limping a little, because I am
not so young as I used to be, and the lake wind works havoc with me, my
little godchild came dancing to me singing:

"Come with me and I'll show you my places, my places, my places!"

Miriam, when she chanted by the Red Sea might have been more exultant,
but she could not have been more bewitching. Of course I knew what
"places" were, because I had once been a little girl myself, but unless
you are acquainted with the real meaning of "places," it would be
useless to try to explain. Either you know "places" or you do not--just
as you understand the meaning of poetry or you do not. There are things
in the world which cannot be taught.

Elsbeth's two tiny brothers were present, and I took one by each hand
and followed her. No sooner had we got out of doors in the woods than
a sort of mystery fell upon the world and upon us. We were cautioned to
move silently, and we did so, avoiding the crunching of dry twigs.

"The fairies hate noise," whispered my little godchild, her eyes
narrowing like a cat's.

"I must get my wand first thing I do," she said in an awed undertone.
"It is useless to try to do anything without a wand."

The tiny boys were profoundly impressed, and, indeed, so was I. I felt
that at last, I should, if I behaved properly, see the fairies, which
had hitherto avoided my materialistic gaze. It was an enchanting moment,
for there appeared, just then, to be nothing commonplace about life.

There was a swale near by, and into this the little girl plunged. I
could see her red straw hat bobbing about among the tall rushes, and I
wondered if there were snakes.

"Do you think there are snakes?" I asked one of the tiny boys.

"If there are," he said with conviction, "they won't dare hurt her."

He convinced me. I feared no more. Presently Elsbeth came out of the
swale. In her hand was a brown "cattail," perfectly full and round. She
carried it as queens carry their sceptres--the beautiful queens we dream
of in our youth.

"Come," she commanded, and waved the sceptre in a fine manner. So we
followed, each tiny boy gripping my hand tight. We were all three a
trifle awed. Elsbeth led us into a dark underbrush. The branches, as
they flew back in our faces, left them wet with dew. A wee path, made by
the girl's dear feet, guided our footsteps. Perfumes of elderberry and
wild cucumber scented the air. A bird, frightened from its nest, made
frantic cries above our heads. The underbrush thickened. Presently the
gloom of the hemlocks was over us, and in the midst of the shadowy green
a tulip tree flaunted its leaves. Waves boomed and broke upon the
shore below. There was a growing dampness as we went on, treading very
lightly. A little green snake ran coquettishly from us. A fat and glossy
squirrel chattered at us from a safe height, stroking his whiskers with
a complaisant air.

At length we reached the "place." It was a circle of velvet grass,
bright as the first blades of spring, delicate as fine sea-ferns. The
sunlight, falling down the shaft between the hemlocks, flooded it with
a softened light and made the forest round about look like deep purple
velvet. My little godchild stood in the midst and raised her wand
impressively.

"This is my place," she said, with a sort of wonderful gladness in her
tone. "This is where I come to the fairy balls. Do you see them?"

"See what?" whispered one tiny boy.

"The fairies."

There was a silence. The older boy pulled at my skirt.

"Do YOU see them?" he asked, his voice trembling with expectancy.

"Indeed," I said, "I fear I am too old and wicked to see fairies, and
yet--are their hats red?"

"They are," laughed my little girl. "Their hats are red, and as
small--as small!" She held up the pearly nail of her wee finger to give
us the correct idea.

"And their shoes are very pointed at the toes?"

"Oh, very pointed!"

"And their garments are green?"

"As green as grass."

"And they blow little horns?"

"The sweetest little horns!"

"I think I see them," I cried.

"We think we see them too," said the tiny boys, laughing in perfect
glee.

"And you hear their horns, don't you?" my little godchild asked somewhat
anxiously.

"Don't we hear their horns?" I asked the tiny boys.

"We think we hear their horns," they cried. "Don't you think we do?"

"It must be we do," I said. "Aren't we very, very happy?"

We all laughed softly. Then we kissed each other and Elsbeth led us out,
her wand high in the air.

And so my feet found the lost path to Arcady.

The next day I was called to the Pacific coast, and duty kept me there
till well into December. A few days before the date set for my return to
my home, a letter came from Elsbeth's mother.

"Our little girl is gone into the Unknown," she wrote--"that Unknown in
which she seemed to be forever trying to pry. We knew she was going, and
we told her. She was quite brave, but she begged us to try some way to
keep her till after Christmas. 'My presents are not finished yet,' she
made moan. 'And I did so want to see what I was going to have. You can't
have a very happy Christmas without me, I should think. Can you arrange
to keep me somehow till after then?' We could not 'arrange' either with
God in heaven or science upon earth, and she is gone."

She was only my little godchild, and I am an old maid, with no business
fretting over children, but it seemed as if the medium of light and
beauty had been taken from me. Through this crystal soul I had perceived
whatever was loveliest. However, what was, was! I returned to my home
and took up a course of Egyptian history, and determined to concern
myself with nothing this side the Ptolemies.

Her mother has told me how, on Christmas eve, as usual, she and
Elsbeth's father filled the stockings of the little ones, and hung them,
where they had always hung, by the fireplace. They had little heart for
the task, but they had been prodigal that year in their expenditures,
and had heaped upon the two tiny boys all the treasures they thought
would appeal to them. They asked themselves how they could have been
so insane previously as to exercise economy at Christmas time, and what
they meant by not getting Elsbeth the autoharp she had asked for the
year before.

"And now--" began her father, thinking of harps. But he could not
complete this sentence, of course, and the two went on passionately and
almost angrily with their task. There were two stockings and two piles
of toys. Two stockings only, and only two piles of toys! Two is very
little!

They went away and left the darkened room, and after a time they
slept--after a long time. Perhaps that was about the time the tiny boys
awoke, and, putting on their little dressing gowns and bed slippers,
made a dash for the room where the Christmas things were always placed.
The older one carried a candle which gave out a feeble light. The other
followed behind through the silent house. They were very impatient and
eager, but when they reached the door of the sitting-room they stopped,
for they saw that another child was before them.

It was a delicate little creature, sitting in her white night gown, with
two rumpled funny braids falling down her back, and she seemed to be
weeping. As they watched, she arose, and putting out one slender
finger as a child does when she counts, she made sure over and over
again--three sad times--that there were only two stockings and two piles
of toys! Only those and no more.

The little figure looked so familiar that the boys started toward it,
but just then, putting up her arm and bowing her face in it, as Elsbeth
had been used to do when she wept or was offended, the little thing
glided away and went out. That's what the boys said. It went out as a
candle goes out.

They ran and woke their parents with the tale, and all the house was
searched in a wonderment, and disbelief, and hope, and tumult! But
nothing was found. For nights they watched. But there was only the
silent house. Only the empty rooms. They told the boys they must have
been mistaken. But the boys shook their heads.

"We know our Elsbeth," said they. "It was our Elsbeth, cryin' 'cause she
hadn't no stockin' an' no toys, and we would have given her all ours,
only she went out--jus' went out!"

Alack!

The next Christmas I helped with the little festival. It was none of
my affair, but I asked to help, and they let me, and when we were all
through there were three stockings and three piles of toys, and in the
largest one was all the things that I could think of that my dear child
would love. I locked the boys' chamber that night, and I slept on the
divan in the parlor off the sitting-room. I slept but little, and the
night was very still--so windless and white and still that I think I
must have heard the slightest noise. Yet I heard none. Had I been in my
grave I think my ears would not have remained more unsaluted.

Yet when daylight came and I went to unlock the boys' bedchamber door,
I saw that the stocking and all the treasures which I had bought for my
little godchild were gone. There was not a vestige of them remaining!

Of course we told the boys nothing. As for me, after dinner I went home
and buried myself once more in my history, and so interested was I that
midnight came without my knowing it. I should not have looked up at all,
I suppose, to become aware of the time, had it not been for a faint,
sweet sound as of a child striking a stringed instrument. It was so
delicate and remote that I hardly heard it, but so joyous and tender
that I could not but listen, and when I heard it a second time it seemed
as if I caught the echo of a child's laugh. At first I was puzzled. Then
I remembered the little autoharp I had placed among the other things in
that pile of vanished toys. I said aloud:

"Farewell, dear little ghost. Go rest. Rest in joy, dear little ghost.
Farewell, farewell."

That was years ago, but there has been silence since. Elsbeth was always
an obedient little thing.




A SPECTRAL COLLIE

WILLIAM PERCY CECIL happened to be a younger son, so he left home--which
was England--and went to Kansas to ranch it. Thousands of younger sons
do the same, only their destination is not invariably Kansas.

An agent at Wichita picked out Cecil's farm for him and sent the deeds
over to England before Cecil left. He said there was a house on the
place. So Cecil's mother fitted him out for America just as she had
fitted out another superfluous boy for Africa, and parted from him
with an heroic front and big agonies of mother-ache which she kept to
herself.

The boy bore up the way a man of his blood ought, but when he went out
to the kennel to see Nita, his collie, he went to pieces somehow, and
rolled on the grass with her in his arms and wept like a booby. But the
remarkable part of it was that Nita wept too, big, hot dog tears which
her master wiped away. When he went off she howled like a hungry baby,
and had to be switched before she would give any one a night's sleep.

When Cecil got over on his Kansas place he fitted up the shack as
cosily as he could, and learned how to fry bacon and make soda biscuits.
Incidentally, he did farming, and sunk a heap of money, finding out
how not to do things. Meantime, the Americans laughed at him, and were
inclined to turn the cold shoulder, and his compatriots, of whom there
were a number in the county, did not prove to his liking. They consoled
themselves for their exiled state in fashions not in keeping with
Cecil's traditions. His homesickness went deeper than theirs, perhaps,
and American whiskey could not make up for the loss of his English home,
nor flirtations with the gay American village girls quite compensate
him for the loss of his English mother. So he kept to himself and had
nostalgia as some men have consumption.

At length the loneliness got so bad that he had to see some living thing
from home, or make a flunk of it and go back like a cry baby. He had
a stiff pride still, though he sobbed himself to sleep more than one
night, as many a pioneer has done before him. So he wrote home for Nita,
the collie, and got word that she would be sent. Arrangements were made
for her care all along the line, and she was properly boxed and shipped.

As the time drew near for her arrival, Cecil could hardly eat. He
was too excited to apply himself to anything. The day of her expected
arrival he actually got up at five o'clock to clean the house and make
it look as fine as possible for her inspection. Then he hitched up and
drove fifteen miles to get her. The train pulled out just before he
reached the station, so Nita in her box was waiting for him on the
platform. He could see her in a queer way, as one sees the purple centre
of a revolving circle of light; for, to tell the truth, with the long
ride in the morning sun, and the beating of his heart, Cecil was only
about half-conscious of anything. He wanted to yell, but he didn't.
He kept himself in hand and lifted up the sliding side of the box and
called to Nita, and she came out.

But it wasn't the man who fainted, though he might have done so, being
crazy homesick as he was, and half-fed and overworked while he was yet
soft from an easy life. No, it was the dog! She looked at her master's
face, gave one cry of inexpressible joy, and fell over in a real
feminine sort of a faint, and had to be brought to like any other lady,
with camphor and water and a few drops of spirit down her throat. Then
Cecil got up on the wagon seat, and she sat beside him with her head on
his arm, and they rode home in absolute silence, each feeling too much
for speech. After they reached home, however, Cecil showed her all over
the place, and she barked out her ideas in glad sociability.

After that Cecil and Nita were inseparable. She walked beside him
all day when he was out with the cultivator, or when he was mowing or
reaping. She ate beside him at table and slept across his feet at night.
Evenings when he looked over the Graphic from home, or read the books
his mother sent him, that he might keep in touch with the world, Nita
was beside him, patient, but jealous. Then, when he threw his book or
paper down and took her on his knee and looked into her pretty eyes, or
frolicked with her, she fairly laughed with delight.

In short, she was faithful with that faith of which only a dog is
capable--that unquestioning faith to which even the most loving women
never quite attain.

However, Fate was annoyed at this perfect friendship. It didn't give her
enough to do, and Fate is a restless thing with a horrible appetite for
variety. So poor Nita died one day mysteriously, and gave her last
look to Cecil as a matter of course; and he held her paws till the last
moment, as a stanch friend should, and laid her away decently in a pine
box in the cornfield, where he could be shielded from public view if he
chose to go there now and then and sit beside her grave.

He went to bed very lonely, indeed, the first night. The shack seemed
to him to be removed endless miles from the other habitations of men.
He seemed cut off from the world, and ached to hear the cheerful little
barks which Nita had been in the habit of giving him by way of good
night. Her amiable eye with its friendly light was missing, the gay wag
of her tail was gone; all her ridiculous ways, at which he was never
tired of laughing, were things of the past.

He lay down, busy with these thoughts, yet so habituated to Nita's
presence, that when her weight rested upon his feet, as usual, he felt
no surprise. But after a moment it came to him that as she was dead the
weight he felt upon his feet could not be hers. And yet, there it was,
warm and comfortable, cuddling down in the familiar way. He actually
sat up and put his hand down to the foot of the bed to discover what
was there. But there was nothing there, save the weight. And that stayed
with him that night and many nights after.

It happened that Cecil was a fool, as men will be when they are young,
and he worked too hard, and didn't take proper care of himself; and so
it came about that he fell sick with a low fever. He struggled around
for a few days, trying to work it off, but one morning he awoke only to
the consciousness of absurd dreams. He seemed to be on the sea, sailing
for home, and the boat was tossing and pitching in a weary circle, and
could make no headway. His heart was burning with impatience, but the
boat went round and round in that endless circle till he shrieked out
with agony.

The next neighbors were the Taylors, who lived two miles and a half
away. They were awakened that morning by the howling of a dog before
their door. It was a hideous sound and would give them no peace. So
Charlie Taylor got up and opened the door, discovering there an excited
little collie.

"Why, Tom," he called, "I thought Cecil's collie was dead!"

"She is," called back Tom.

"No, she ain't neither, for here she is, shakin' like an aspin, and a
beggin' me to go with her. Come out, Tom, and see."

It was Nita, no denying, and the men, perplexed, followed her to Cecil's
shack, where they found him babbling.

But that was the last of her. Cecil said he never felt her on his
feet again. She had performed her final service for him, he said.
The neighbors tried to laugh at the story at first, but they knew the
Taylors wouldn't take the trouble to lie, and as for Cecil, no one would
have ventured to chaff him.




THE HOUSE THAT WAS NOT


BART FLEMING took his bride out to his ranch on the plains when she
was but seventeen years old, and the two set up housekeeping in three
hundred and twenty acres of corn and rye. Off toward the west there was
an unbroken sea of tossing corn at that time of the year when the bride
came out, and as her sewing window was on the side of the house which
faced the sunset, she passed a good part of each day looking into that
great rustling mass, breathing in its succulent odors and listening
to its sibilant melody. It was her picture gallery, her opera, her
spectacle, and, being sensible,--or perhaps, being merely happy,--she
made the most of it.

When harvesting time came and the corn was cut, she had much
entertainment in discovering what lay beyond. The town was east, and it
chanced that she had never ridden west. So, when the rolling hills of
this newly beholden land lifted themselves for her contemplation, and
the harvest sun, all in an angry and sanguinary glow sank in the veiled
horizon, and at noon a scarf of golden vapor wavered up and down
along the earth line, it was as if a new world had been made for her.
Sometimes, at the coming of a storm, a whip-lash of purple cloud, full
of electric agility, snapped along the western horizon.

"Oh, you'll see a lot of queer things on these here plains," her husband
said when she spoke to him of these phenomena. "I guess what you see is
the wind."

"The wind!" cried Flora. "You can't see the wind, Bart."

"Now look here, Flora," returned Bart, with benevolent emphasis, "you're
a smart one, but you don't know all I know about this here country. I've
lived here three mortal years, waitin' for you to git up out of your
mother's arms and come out to keep me company, and I know what there is
to know. Some things out here is queer--so queer folks wouldn't believe
'em unless they saw. An' some's so pig-headed they don't believe their
own eyes. As for th' wind, if you lay down flat and squint toward th'
west, you can see it blowin' along near th' ground, like a big ribbon;
an' sometimes it's th' color of air, an' sometimes it's silver an' gold,
an' sometimes, when a storm is comin', it's purple."

"If you got so tired looking at the wind, why didn't you marry some
other girl, Bart, instead of waiting for me?"

Flora was more interested in the first part of Bart's speech than in the
last.

"Oh, come on!" protested Bart, and he picked her up in his arms and
jumped her toward the ceiling of the low shack as if she were a little
girl--but then, to be sure, she wasn't much more.

Of all the things Flora saw when the corn was cut down, nothing
interested her so much as a low cottage, something like her own, which
lay away in the distance. She could not guess how far it might be,
because distances are deceiving out there, where the altitude is high
and the air is as clear as one of those mystic balls of glass in which
the sallow mystics of India see the moving shadows of the future.

She had not known there were neighbors so near, and she wondered for
several days about them before she ventured to say anything to Bart
on the subject. Indeed, for some reason which she did not attempt to
explain to herself, she felt shy about broaching the matter. Perhaps
Bart did not want her to know the people. The thought came to her,
as naughty thoughts will come, even to the best of persons, that some
handsome young men might be "baching" it out there by themselves, and
Bart didn't wish her to make their acquaintance. Bart had flattered her
so much that she had actually begun to think herself beautiful, though
as a matter of fact she was only a nice little girl with a lot of
reddish-brown hair, and a bright pair of reddish-brown eyes in a white
face.

"Bart," she ventured one evening, as the sun, at its fiercest, rushed
toward the great black hollow of the west, "who lives over there in that
shack?"

She turned away from the window where she had been looking at the
incarnadined disk, and she thought she saw Bart turn pale. But then,
her eyes were so blurred with the glory she had been gazing at, that she
might easily have been mistaken.

"I say, Bart, why don't you speak? If there's any one around to
associate with, I should think you'd let me have the benefit of their
company. It isn't as funny as you think, staying here alone days and
days."

"You ain't gettin' homesick, be you, sweetheart?" cried Bart, putting
his arms around her. "You ain't gettin' tired of my society, be yeh?"

It took some time to answer this question in a satisfactory manner, but
at length Flora was able to return to her original topic.

"But the shack, Bart! Who lives there, anyway?"

"I'm not acquainted with 'em," said Bart, sharply. "Ain't them biscuits
done, Flora?"

Then, of course, she grew obstinate.

"Those biscuits will never be done, Bart, till I know about that house,
and why you never spoke of it, and why nobody ever comes down the road
from there. Some one lives there I know, for in the mornings and at
night I see the smoke coming out of the chimney."

"Do you now?" cried Bart, opening his eyes and looking at her with
unfeigned interest. "Well, do you know, sometimes I've fancied I seen
that too?"

"Well, why not," cried Flora, in half anger. "Why shouldn't you?"

"See here, Flora, take them biscuits out an' listen to me. There ain't
no house there. Hello! I didn't know you'd go for to drop the biscuits.
Wait, I'll help you pick 'em up. By cracky, they're hot, ain't they?
What you puttin' a towel over 'em for? Well, you set down here on my
knee, so. Now you look over at that there house. You see it, don't yeh?
Well, it ain't there! No! I saw it the first week I was out here. I was
jus' half dyin', thinkin' of you an' wonderin' why you didn't
write. That was the time you was mad at me. So I rode over there one
day--lookin' up company, so t' speak--and there wa'n't no house there. I
spent all one Sunday lookin' for it. Then I spoke to Jim Geary about
it. He laughed an' got a little white about th' gills, an' he said he
guessed I'd have to look a good while before I found it. He said that
there shack was an ole joke."

"Why--what--"

"Well, this here is th' story he tol' me. He said a man an' his wife
come out here t' live an' put up that there little place. An' she was
young, you know, an' kind o' skeery, and she got lonesome. It worked on
her an' worked on her, an' one day she up an' killed the baby an' her
husband an' herself. Th' folks found 'em and buried 'em right there on
their own ground. Well, about two weeks after that, th' house was burned
down. Don't know how. Tramps, maybe. Anyhow, it burned. At least, I
guess it burned!"

"You guess it burned!"

"Well, it ain't there, you know."

"But if it burned the ashes are there."

"All right, girlie, they're there then. Now let's have tea."

This they proceeded to do, and were happy and cheerful all evening,
but that didn't keep Flora from rising at the first flush of dawn and
stealing out of the house. She looked away over west as she went to
the barn and there, dark and firm against the horizon, stood the
little house against the pellucid sky of morning. She got on Ginger's
back--Ginger being her own yellow broncho--and set off at a hard pace
for the house. It didn't appear to come any nearer, but the objects
which had seemed to be beside it came closer into view, and Flora
pressed on, with her mind steeled for anything. But as she approached
the poplar windbreak which stood to the north of the house, the little
shack waned like a shadow before her. It faded and dimmed before her
eyes.

She slapped Ginger's flanks and kept him going, and she at last got him
up to the spot. But there was nothing there. The bunch grass grew tall
and rank and in the midst of it lay a baby's shoe. Flora thought of
picking it up, but something cold in her veins withheld her. Then she
grew angry, and set Ginger's head toward the place and tried to drive
him over it. But the yellow broncho gave one snort of fear, gathered
himself in a bunch, and then, all tense, leaping muscles, made for home
as only a broncho can.




STORY OF AN OBSTINATE CORPSE


VIRGIL HOYT is a photographer's assistant up at St. Paul, and enjoys
his work without being consumed by it. He has been in search of the
picturesque all over the West and hundreds of miles to the north, in
Canada, and can speak three or four Indian dialects and put a canoe
through the rapids. That is to say, he is a man of adventure, and no
dreamer. He can fight well and shoot better, and swim so as to put up a
winning race with the Indian boys, and he can sit in the saddle all day
and not worry about it to-morrow.

Wherever he goes, he carries a camera.

"The world," Hoyt is in the habit of saying to those who sit with him
when he smokes his pipe, "was created in six days to be photographed.
Man--and particularly woman--was made for the same purpose. Clouds
are not made to give moisture nor trees to cast shade. They have been
created in order to give the camera obscura something to do."

In short, Virgil Hoyt's view of the world is whimsical, and he likes to
be bothered neither with the disagreeable nor the mysterious. That
is the reason he loathes and detests going to a house of mourning to
photograph a corpse. The bad taste of it offends him, but above all,
he doesn't like the necessity of shouldering, even for a few moments, a
part of the burden of sorrow which belongs to some one else. He dislikes
sorrow, and would willingly canoe five hundred miles up the cold
Canadian rivers to get rid of it. Nevertheless, as assistant
photographer, it is often his duty to do this very kind of thing.

Not long ago he was sent for by a rich Jewish family to photograph the
remains of the mother, who had just died. He was put out, but he was
only an assistant, and he went. He was taken to the front parlor, where
the dead woman lay in her coffin. It was evident to him that there was
some excitement in the household, and that a discussion was going on.
But Hoyt said to himself that it didn't concern him, and he therefore
paid no attention to it.

The daughter wanted the coffin turned on end in order that the corpse
might face the camera properly, but Hoyt said he could overcome the
recumbent attitude and make it appear that the face was taken in the
position it would naturally hold in life, and so they went out and left
him alone with the dead.

The face of the deceased was a strong and positive one, such as
may often be seen among Jewish matrons. Hoyt regarded it with some
admiration, thinking to himself that she was a woman who had known
what she wanted, and who, once having made up her mind, would prove
immovable. Such a character appealed to Hoyt. He reflected that he
might have married if only he could have found a woman with strength of
character sufficient to disagree with him. There was a strand of hair
out of place on the dead woman's brow, and he gently pushed it back.
A bud lifted its head too high from among the roses on her breast and
spoiled the contour of the chin, so he broke it off. He remembered these
things later with keen distinctness, and that his hand touched her chill
face two or three times in the making of his arrangements.

Then he took the impression, and left the house.

He was busy at the time with some railroad work, and several days passed
before he found opportunity to develop the plates. He took them from
the bath in which they had lain with a number of others, and went
energetically to work upon them, whistling some very saucy songs he had
learned of the guide in the Red River country, and trying to forget that
the face which was presently to appear was that of a dead woman. He had
used three plates as a precaution against accident, and they came
up well. But as they developed, he became aware of the existence of
something in the photograph which had not been apparent to his eye
in the subject. He was irritated, and without attempting to face the
mystery, he made a few prints and laid them aside, ardently hoping that
by some chance they would never be called for.

However, as luck would have it,--and Hoyt's luck never had been
good,--his employer asked one day what had become of those photographs.
Hoyt tried to evade making an answer, but the effort was futile, and he
had to get out the finished prints and exhibit them. The older man sat
staring at them a long time.

"Hoyt," he said, "you're a young man, and very likely you have never
seen anything like this before. But I have. Not exactly the same thing,
perhaps, but similar phenomena have come my way a number of times since
I went in the business, and I want to tell you there are things in
heaven and earth not dreamt of--"

"Oh, I know all that tommy-rot," cried Hoyt, angrily, "but when anything
happens I want to know the reason why and how it is done."

"All right," answered his employer, "then you might explain why and how
the sun rises."

But he humored the young man sufficiently to examine with him the baths
in which the plates were submerged, and the plates themselves. All was
as it should be; but the mystery was there, and could not be done away
with.

Hoyt hoped against hope that the friends of the dead woman would somehow
forget about the photographs; but the idea was unreasonable, and one
day, as a matter of course, the daughter appeared and asked to see the
pictures of her mother.

"Well, to tell the truth," stammered Hoyt, "they didn't come out
quite--quite as well as we could wish."

"But let me see them," persisted the lady. "I'd like to look at them
anyhow."

"Well, now," said Hoyt, trying to be soothing, as he believed it was
always best to be with women,--to tell the truth he was an ignoramus
where women were concerned,--"I think it would be better if you didn't
look at them. There are reasons why--" he ambled on like this, stupid
man that he was, till the lady naturally insisted upon seeing the
pictures without a moment's delay.

So poor Hoyt brought them out and placed them in her hand, and then
ran for the water pitcher, and had to be at the bother of bathing her
forehead to keep her from fainting.

For what the lady saw was this: Over face and flowers and the head of
the coffin fell a thick veil, the edges of which touched the floor in
some places. It covered the features so well that not a hint of them was
visible.

"There was nothing over mother's face!" cried the lady at length.

"Not a thing," acquiesced Hoyt. "I know, because I had occasion to touch
her face just before I took the picture. I put some of her hair back
from her brow."

"What does it mean, then?" asked the lady.

"You know better than I. There is no explanation in science. Perhaps
there is some in--in psychology."

"Well," said the young woman, stammering a little and coloring, "mother
was a good woman, but she always wanted her own way, and she always had
it, too."

"Yes."

"And she never would have her picture taken. She didn't admire her own
appearance. She said no one should ever see a picture of her."

"So?" said Hoyt, meditatively. "Well, she's kept her word, hasn't she?"

The two stood looking at the photographs for a time. Then Hoyt pointed
to the open blaze in the grate.

"Throw them in," he commanded. "Don't let your father see them--don't
keep them yourself. They wouldn't be agreeable things to keep."

"That's true enough," admitted the lady. And she threw them in the fire.
Then Virgil Hoyt brought out the plates and broke them before her eyes.

And that was the end of it--except that Hoyt sometimes tells the story
to those who sit beside him when his pipe is lighted.




A CHILD OF THE RAIN


IT was the night that Mona Meeks, the dressmaker, told him she didn't
love him. He couldn't believe it at first, because he had so long been
accustomed to the idea that she did, and no matter how rough the weather
or how irascible the passengers, he felt a song in his heart as he
punched transfers, and rang his bell punch, and signalled the driver
when to let people off and on.

Now, suddenly, with no reason except a woman's, she had changed her
mind. He dropped in to see her at five o'clock, just before time for the
night shift, and to give her two red apples he had been saving for her.
She looked at the apples as if they were invisible and she could not see
them, and standing in her disorderly little dressmaking parlor, with its
cuttings and scraps and litter of fabrics, she said:

"It is no use, John. I shall have to work here like this all my
life--work here alone. For I don't love you, John. No, I don't. I
thought I did, but it is a mistake."

"You mean it?" asked John, bringing up the words in a great gasp.

"Yes," she said, white and trembling and putting out her hands as if to
beg for his mercy. And then--big, lumbering fool--he turned around
and strode down the stairs and stood at the corner in the beating rain
waiting for his car. It came along at length, spluttering on the wet
rails and spitting out blue fire, and he took his shift after a gruff
"Good night" to Johnson, the man he relieved.

He was glad the rain was bitter cold and drove in his face fiercely.
He rejoiced at the cruelty of the wind, and when it hustled pedestrians
before it, lashing them, twisting their clothes, and threatening their
equilibrium, he felt amused. He was pleased at the chill in his bones
and at the hunger that tortured him. At least, at first he thought it
was hunger till he remembered that he had just eaten. The hours passed
confusedly. He had no consciousness of time. But it must have been
late,--near midnight,--judging by the fact that there were few persons
visible anywhere in the black storm, when he noticed a little figure
sitting at the far end of the car. He had not seen the child when she
got on, but all was so curious and wild to him that evening--he himself
seemed to himself the most curious and the wildest of all things--that
it was not surprising that he should not have observed the little
creature.

She was wrapped in a coat so much too large that it had become frayed
at the bottom from dragging on the pavement. Her hair hung in unkempt
stringiness about her bent shoulders, and her feet were covered with old
arctics, many sizes too big, from which the soles hung loose.

Beside the little figure was a chest of dark wood, with curiously
wrought hasps. From this depended a stout strap by which it could be
carried over the shoulders. John Billings stared in, fascinated by the
poor little thing with its head sadly drooping upon its breast, its thin
blue hands relaxed upon its lap, and its whole attitude so suggestive
of hunger, loneliness, and fatigue, that he made up his mind he would
collect no fare from it.

"It will need its nickel for breakfast," he said to himself. "The
company can stand this for once. Or, come to think of it, I might
celebrate my hard luck. Here's to the brotherhood of failures!" And
he took a nickel from one pocket of his great-coat and dropped it in
another, ringing his bell punch to record the transfer.

The car plunged along in the darkness, and the rain beat more viciously
than ever in his face. The night was full of the rushing sound of the
storm. Owing to some change of temperature the glass of the car became
obscured so that the young conductor could no longer see the little
figure distinctly, and he grew anxious about the child.

"I wonder if it's all right," he said to himself. "I never saw living
creature sit so still."

He opened the car door, intending to speak with the child, but just
then something went wrong with the lights. There was a blue and green
flickering, then darkness, a sudden halting of the car, and a great
sweep of wind and rain in at the door. When, after a moment, light and
motion reasserted themselves, and Billings had got the door together, he
turned to look at the little passenger. But the car was empty.

It was a fact. There was no child there--not even moisture on the seat
where she had been sitting.

"Bill," said he, going to the front door and addressing the driver,
"what became of that little kid in the old cloak?"

"I didn't see no kid," said Bill, crossly. "For Gawd's sake, close the
door, John, and git that draught off my back."

"Draught!" said John, indignantly, "where's the draught?"

"You've left the hind door open," growled Bill, and John saw him
shivering as a blast struck him and ruffled the fur on his bear-skin
coat. But the door was not open, and yet John had to admit to himself
that the car seemed filled with wind and a strange coldness.

However, it didn't matter. Nothing mattered! Still, it was as well no
doubt to look under the seats just to make sure no little crouching
figure was there, and so he did. But there was nothing. In fact, John
said to himself, he seemed to be getting expert in finding nothing where
there ought to be something.

He might have stayed in the car, for there was no likelihood of more
passengers that evening, but somehow he preferred going out where the
rain could drench him and the wind pommel him. How horribly tired he
was! If there were only some still place away from the blare of the city
where a man could lie down and listen to the sound of the sea or the
storm--or if one could grow suddenly old and get through with the bother
of living--or if--

The car gave a sudden lurch as it rounded a curve, and for a moment it
seemed to be a mere chance whether Conductor Billings would stay on
his platform or go off under those fire-spitting wheels. He caught
instinctively at his brake, saved himself, and stood still for a moment,
panting.

"I must have dozed," he said to himself.

Just then, dimly, through the blurred window, he saw again the little
figure of the child, its head on its breast as before, its blue hands
lying in its lap and the curious box beside it. John Billings felt a
coldness beyond the coldness of the night run through his blood. Then,
with a half-stifled cry, he threw back the door, and made a desperate
spring at the corner where the eerie thing sat.

And he touched the green carpeting on the seat, which was quite dry
and warm, as if no dripping, miserable little wretch had ever crouched
there.

He rushed to the front door.

"Bill," he roared, "I want to know about that kid."

"What kid?"

"The same kid! The wet one with the old coat and the box with iron
hasps! The one that's been sitting here in the car!"

Bill turned his surly face to confront the young conductor.

"You've been drinking, you fool," said he. "Fust thing you know you'll
be reported."

The conductor said not a word. He went slowly and weakly back to his
post and stood there the rest of the way leaning against the end of the
car for support. Once or twice he muttered:

"The poor little brat!" And again he said, "So you didn't love me after
all!"

He never knew how he reached home, but he sank to sleep as dying men
sink to death. All the same, being a hearty young man, he was on duty
again next day but one, and again the night was rainy and cold.

It was the last run, and the car was spinning along at its limit, when
there came a sudden soft shock. John Billings knew what that meant. He
had felt something of the kind once before. He turned sick for a moment,
and held on to the brake. Then he summoned his courage and went around
to the side of the car, which had stopped. Bill, the driver, was before
him, and had a limp little figure in his arms, and was carrying it to
the gaslight. John gave one look and cried:

"It's the same kid, Bill! The one I told you of!"

True as truth were the ragged coat dangling from the pitiful body, the
little blue hands, the thin shoulders, the stringy hair, the big arctics
on the feet. And in the road not far off was the curious chest of dark
wood with iron hasps.

"She ran under the car deliberate!" cried Bill. "I yelled to her, but
she looked at me and ran straight on!"

He was white in spite of his weather-beaten skin.

"I guess you wasn't drunk last night after all, John," said he.

"You--you are sure the kid is--is there?" gasped John.

"Not so damned sure!" said Bill.

But a few minutes later it was taken away in a patrol wagon, and with it
the little box with iron hasps.




THE ROOM OF THE EVIL THOUGHT


THEY called it the room of the Evil Thought. It was really the
pleasantest room in the house, and when the place had been used as the
rectory, was the minister's study. It looked out on a mournful clump
of larches, such as may often be seen in the old-fashioned yards in
Michigan, and these threw a tender gloom over the apartment.

There was a wide fireplace in the room, and it had been the young
minister's habit to sit there hours and hours, staring ahead of him at
the fire, and smoking moodily. The replenishing of the fire and of his
pipe, it was said, would afford him occupation all the day long, and
that was how it came about that his parochial duties were neglected so
that, little by little, the people became dissatisfied with him, though
he was an eloquent young man, who could send his congregation away drunk
on his influence. However, the calmer pulsed among his parish began to
whisper that it was indeed the influence of the young minister and not
that of the Holy Ghost which they felt, and it was finally decided
that neither animal magnetism nor hypnotism were good substitutes for
religion. And so they let him go.

The new rector moved into a smart brick house on the other side of the
church, and gave receptions and dinner parties, and was punctilious
about making his calls. The people therefore liked him very much--so
much that they raised the debt on the church and bought a chime of
bells, in their enthusiasm. Every one was lighter of heart than under
the ministration of the previous rector. A burden appeared to be lifted
from the community. True, there were a few who confessed the new man
did not give them the food for thought which the old one had done, but,
then, the former rector had made them uncomfortable! He had not only
made them conscious of the sins of which they were already guilty, but
also of those for which they had the latent capacity. A strange and
fatal man, whom women loved to their sorrow, and whom simple men could
not understand! It was generally agreed that the parish was well rid of
him.

"He was a genius," said the people in commiseration. The word was an
uncomplimentary epithet with them.

When the Hanscoms moved in the house which had been the old rectory,
they gave Grandma Hanscom the room with the fireplace. Grandma was well
pleased. The roaring fire warmed her heart as well as her chill old
body, and she wept with weak joy when she looked at the larches, because
they reminded her of the house she had lived in when she was first
married. All the forenoon of the first day she was busy putting things
away in bureau drawers and closets, but by afternoon she was ready to
sit down in her high-backed rocker and enjoy the comforts of her room.

She nodded a bit before the fire, as she usually did after luncheon, and
then she awoke with an awful start and sat staring before her with such
a look in her gentle, filmy old eyes as had never been there before.
She did not move, except to rock slightly, and the Thought grew and grew
till her face was disguised as by some hideous mask of tragedy.

By and by the children came pounding at the door.

"Oh, grandma, let us in, please. We want to see your new room, and mamma
gave us some ginger cookies on a plate, and we want to give some to
you."

The door gave way under their assaults, and the three little ones stood
peeping in, waiting for permission to enter. But it did not seem to be
their grandma--their own dear grandma--who arose and tottered toward
them in fierce haste, crying:

"Away, away! Out of my sight! Out of my sight before I do the thing I
want to do! Such a terrible thing! Send some one to me quick, children,
children! Send some one quick!"

They fled with feet shod with fear, and their mother came, and Grandma
Hanscom sank down and clung about her skirts and sobbed:

"Tie me, Miranda. Make me fast to the bed or the wall. Get some one to
watch me. For I want to do an awful thing!"

They put the trembling old creature in bed, and she raved there all
the night long and cried out to be held, and to be kept from doing the
fearful thing, whatever it was--for she never said what it was.

The next morning some one suggested taking her in the sitting-room
where she would be with the family. So they laid her on the sofa, hemmed
around with cushions, and before long she was her quiet self again,
though exhausted, naturally, with the tumult of the previous night.
Now and then, as the children played about her, a shadow crept over
her face--a shadow as of cold remembrance--and then the perplexed tears
followed.

When she seemed as well as ever they put her back in her room. But
though the fire glowed and the lamp burned, as soon as ever she was
alone they heard her shrill cries ringing to them that the Evil Thought
had come again. So Hal, who was home from college, carried her up to his
room, which she seemed to like very well. Then he went down to have a
smoke before grandma's fire.

The next morning he was absent from breakfast. They thought he might
have gone for an early walk, and waited for him a few minutes. Then
his sister went to the room that looked upon the larches, and found him
dressed and pacing the floor with a face set and stern. He had not been
in bed at all, as she saw at once. His eyes were bloodshot, his face
stricken as if with old age or sin or--but she could not make it out.
When he saw her he sank in a chair and covered his face with his hands,
and between the trembling fingers she could see drops of perspiration on
his forehead.

"Hal!" she cried, "Hal, what is it?"

But for answer he threw his arms about the little table and clung to
it, and looked at her with tortured eyes, in which she fancied she saw
a gleam of hate. She ran, screaming, from the room, and her father came
and went up to him and laid his hands on the boy's shoulders. And then
a fearful thing happened. All the family saw it. There could be no
mistake. Hal's hands found their way with frantic eagerness toward his
father's throat as if they would choke him, and the look in his eyes was
so like a madman's that his father raised his fist and felled him as he
used to fell men years before in the college fights, and then dragged
him into the sitting-room and wept over him.

By evening, however, Hal was all right, and the family said it must have
been a fever,--perhaps from overstudy,--at which Hal covertly smiled.
But his father was still too anxious about him to let him out of his
sight, so he put him on a cot in his room, and thus it chanced that the
mother and Grace concluded to sleep together downstairs.

The two women made a sort of festival of it, and drank little cups of
chocolate before the fire, and undid and brushed their brown braids,
and smiled at each other, understandingly, with that sweet intuitive
sympathy which women have, and Grace told her mother a number of things
which she had been waiting for just such an auspicious occasion to
confide.

But the larches were noisy and cried out with wild voices, and the flame
of the fire grew blue and swirled about in the draught sinuously, so
that a chill crept upon the two. Something cold appeared to envelop
them--such a chill as pleasure voyagers feel when a berg steals beyond
Newfoundland and glows blue and threatening upon their ocean path.

Then came something else which was not cold, but hot as the flames of
hell--and they saw red, and stared at each other with maddened eyes, and
then ran together from the room and clasped in close embrace safe beyond
the fatal place, and thanked God they had not done the thing that they
dared not speak of--the thing which suddenly came to them to do.

So they called it the room of the Evil Thought. They could not account
for it. They avoided the thought of it, being healthy and happy folk.
But none entered it more. The door was locked.

One day, Hal, reading the paper, came across a paragraph concerning the
young minister who had once lived there, and who had thought and
written there and so influenced the lives of those about him that they
remembered him even while they disapproved.

"He cut a man's throat on board ship for Australia," said he, "and then
he cut his own, without fatal effect--and jumped overboard, and so ended
it. What a strange thing!"

Then they all looked at one another with subtle looks, and a shadow fell
upon them and stayed the blood at their hearts.

The next week the room of the Evil Thought was pulled down to make way
for a pansy bed, which is quite gay and innocent, and blooms all the
better because the larches, with their eternal murmuring, have been laid
low and carted away to the sawmill.




STORY OF THE VANISHING PATIENT


THERE had always been strange stories about the house, but it was a
sensible, comfortable sort of a neighborhood, and people took pains to
say to one another that there was nothing in these tales--of course
not! Absolutely nothing! How could there be? It was a matter of common
remark, however, that considering the amount of money the Nethertons had
spent on the place, it was curious they lived there so little. They
were nearly always away,--up North in the summer and down South in the
winter, and over to Paris or London now and then,--and when they did
come home it was only to entertain a number of guests from the city. The
place was either plunged in gloom or gayety. The old gardener who kept
house by himself in the cottage at the back of the yard had things much
his own way by far the greater part of the time.

Dr. Block and his wife lived next door to the Nethertons, and he and his
wife, who were so absurd as to be very happy in each other's company,
had the benefit of the beautiful yard. They walked there mornings when
the leaves were silvered with dew, and evenings they sat beside the lily
pond and listened for the whip-poor-will. The doctor's wife moved her
room over to that side of the house which commanded a view of the yard,
and thus made the honeysuckles and laurel and clematis and all the
masses of tossing greenery her own. Sitting there day after day with
her sewing, she speculated about the mystery which hung impalpably yet
undeniably over the house.

It happened one night when she and her husband had gone to their room,
and were congratulating themselves on the fact that he had no very sick
patients and was likely to enjoy a good night's rest, that a ring came
at the door.

"If it's any one wanting you to leave home," warned his wife, "you must
tell them you are all worn out. You've been disturbed every night this
week, and it's too much!"

The young physician went downstairs. At the door stood a man whom he had
never seen before.

"My wife is lying very ill next door," said the stranger, "so ill that
I fear she will not live till morning. Will you please come to her at
once?"

"Next door?" cried the physician. "I didn't know the Nethertons were
home!"

"Please hasten," begged the man. "I must go back to her. Follow as
quickly as you can."

The doctor went back upstairs to complete his toilet.

"How absurd," protested his wife when she heard the story. "There is no
one at the Nethertons'. I sit where I can see the front door, and no one
can enter without my knowing it, and I have been sewing by the window
all day. If there were any one in the house, the gardener would have the
porch lantern lighted. It is some plot. Some one has designs on you. You
must not go."

But he went. As he left the room his wife placed a revolver in his
pocket.

The great porch of the mansion was dark, but the physician made out that
the door was open, and he entered. A feeble light came from the bronze
lamp at the turn of the stairs, and by it he found his way, his feet
sinking noiselessly in the rich carpets. At the head of the stairs the
man met him. The doctor thought himself a tall man, but the stranger
topped him by half a head. He motioned the physician to follow him, and
the two went down the hall to the front room. The place was flushed with
a rose-colored glow from several lamps. On a silken couch, in the midst
of pillows, lay a woman dying with consumption. She was like a lily,
white, shapely, graceful, with feeble yet charming movements. She looked
at the doctor appealingly, then, seeing in his eyes the involuntary
verdict that her hour was at hand, she turned toward her companion with
a glance of anguish. Dr. Block asked a few questions. The man answered
them, the woman remaining silent. The physician administered something
stimulating, and then wrote a prescription which he placed on the
mantel-shelf.

"The drug store is closed to-night," he said, "and I fear the druggist
has gone home. You can have the prescription filled the first thing in
the morning, and I will be over before breakfast."

After that, there was no reason why he should not have gone home. Yet,
oddly enough, he preferred to stay. Nor was it professional anxiety that
prompted this delay. He longed to watch those mysterious persons, who,
almost oblivious of his presence, were speaking their mortal farewells
in their glances, which were impassioned and of unutterable sadness.

He sat as if fascinated. He watched the glitter of rings on the woman's
long, white hands, he noted the waving of light hair about her temples,
he observed the details of her gown of soft white silk which fell about
her in voluminous folds. Now and then the man gave her of the stimulant
which the doctor had provided; sometimes he bathed her face with water.
Once he paced the floor for a moment till a motion of her hand quieted
him.

After a time, feeling that it would be more sensible and considerate
of him to leave, the doctor made his way home. His wife was awake,
impatient to hear of his experiences. She listened to his tale in
silence, and when he had finished she turned her face to the wall and
made no comment.

"You seem to be ill, my dear," he said. "You have a chill. You are
shivering."

"I have no chill," she replied sharply. "But I--well, you may leave the
light burning."

The next morning before breakfast the doctor crossed the dewy sward to
the Netherton house. The front door was locked, and no one answered to
his repeated ringings. The old gardener chanced to be cutting the grass
near at hand, and he came running up.

"What you ringin' that door-bell for, doctor?" said he. "The folks ain't
come home yet. There ain't nobody there."

"Yes, there is, Jim. I was called here last night. A man came for me to
attend his wife. They must both have fallen asleep that the bell is not
answered. I wouldn't be surprised to find her dead, as a matter of fact.
She was a desperately sick woman. Perhaps she is dead and something has
happened to him. You have the key to the door, Jim. Let me in."

But the old man was shaking in every limb, and refused to do as he was
bid.

"Don't you never go in there, doctor," whispered he, with chattering
teeth. "Don't you go for to 'tend no one. You jus' come tell me when you
sent for that way. No, I ain't goin' in, doctor, nohow. It ain't part
of my duties to go in. That's been stipulated by Mr. Netherton. It's my
business to look after the garden."

Argument was useless. Dr. Block took the bunch of keys from the old
man's pocket and himself unlocked the front door and entered. He mounted
the steps and made his way to the upper room. There was no evidence of
occupancy. The place was silent, and, so far as living creature went,
vacant. The dust lay over everything. It covered the delicate damask of
the sofa where he had seen the dying woman. It rested on the pillows.
The place smelled musty and evil, as if it had not been used for a long
time. The lamps of the room held not a drop of oil.

But on the mantel-shelf was the prescription which the doctor had
written the night before. He read it, folded it, and put it in his
pocket.

As he locked the outside door the old gardener came running to him.

"Don't you never go up there again, will you?" he pleaded, "not unless
you see all the Nethertons home and I come for you myself. You won't,
doctor?"

"No," said the doctor.

When he told his wife she kissed him, and said:

"Next time when I tell you to stay at home, you must stay!"




THE PIANO NEXT DOOR


BABETTE had gone away for the summer; the furniture was in its summer
linens; the curtains were down, and Babette's husband, John Boyce, was
alone in the house. It was the first year of his marriage, and he missed
Babette. But then, as he often said to himself, he ought never to
have married her. He did it from pure selfishness, and because he was
determined to possess the most illusive, tantalizing, elegant, and
utterly unmoral little creature that the sun shone upon. He wanted her
because she reminded him of birds, and flowers, and summer winds,
and other exquisite things created for the delectation of mankind. He
neither expected nor desired her to think. He had half-frightened her
into marrying him, had taken her to a poor man's home, provided her with
no society such as she had been accustomed to, and he had no reasonable
cause of complaint when she answered the call of summer and flitted
away, like a butterfly in the morning sunshine, to the place where the
flowers grew.

He wrote to her every evening, sitting in the stifling, ugly house, and
poured out his soul as if it were a libation to a goddess. She sometimes
answered by telegraph, sometimes by a perfumed note. He schooled himself
not to feel hurt. Why should Babette write? Does a goldfinch indict
epistles; or a humming-bird study composition; or a glancing, red-scaled
fish in summer shallows consider the meaning of words?

He knew at the beginning what Babette was--guessed her
limitations--trembled when he buttoned her tiny glove--kissed her dainty
slipper when he found it in the closet after she was gone--thrilled at
the sound of her laugh, or the memory of it! That was all. A mere case
of love. He was in bonds. Babette was not. Therefore he was in the
city, working overhours to pay for Babette's pretty follies down at the
seaside. It was quite right and proper. He was a grub in the furrow;
she a lark in the blue. Those had always been and always must be their
relative positions.

Having attained a mood of philosophic calm, in which he was prepared to
spend his evenings alone--as became a grub--and to await with
dignified patience the return of his wife, it was in the nature of an
inconsistency that he should have walked the floor of the dull little
drawing-room like a lion in cage. It did not seem in keeping with
the position of superior serenity which he had assumed, that, reading
Babette's notes, he should have raged with jealousy, or that, in the
loneliness of his unkempt chamber, he should have stretched out arms of
longing. Even if Babette had been present, she would only have smiled
her gay little smile and coquetted with him. She could not understand.
He had known, of course, from the first moment, that she could not
understand! And so, why the ache, ache, ache of the heart! Or WAS it the
heart, or the brain, or the soul?

Sometimes, when the evenings were so hot that he could not endure the
close air of the house, he sat on the narrow, dusty front porch and
looked about him at his neighbors. The street had once been smart and
aspiring, but it had fallen into decay and dejection. Pale young men,
with flurried-looking wives, seemed to Boyce to occupy most of the
houses. Sometimes three or four couples would live in one house. Most of
these appeared to be childless. The women made a pretence at fashionable
dressing, and wore their hair elaborately in fashions which somehow
suggested boarding-houses to Boyce, though he could not have told why.
Every house in the block needed fresh paint. Lacking this renovation,
the householders tried to make up for it by a display of lace curtains
which, at every window, swayed in the smoke-weighted breeze. Strips
of carpeting were laid down the front steps of the houses where the
communities of young couples lived, and here, evenings, the inmates of
the houses gathered, committing mild extravagances such as the treating
of each other to ginger ale, or beer, or ice-cream.

Boyce watched these tawdry makeshifts at sociability with bitterness and
loathing. He wondered how he could have been such a fool as to bring
his exquisite Babette to this neighborhood. How could he expect that she
would return to him? It was not reasonable. He ought to go down on his
knees with gratitude that she even condescended to write him.

Sitting one night till late,--so late that the fashionable young wives
with their husbands had retired from the strips of stair carpeting,--and
raging at the loneliness which ate at his heart like a cancer, he heard,
softly creeping through the windows of the house adjoining his own, the
sound of comfortable melody.

It breathed upon his ear like a spirit of consolation, speaking
of peace, of love which needs no reward save its own sweetness, of
aspiration which looks forever beyond the thing of the hour to find
attainment in that which is eternal. So insidiously did it whisper these
things, so delicately did the simple and perfect melodies creep upon the
spirit--that Boyce felt no resentment, but from the first listened
as one who listens to learn, or as one who, fainting on the hot road,
hears, far in the ferny deeps below, the gurgle of a spring.

Then came harmonies more intricate: fair fabrics of woven sound, in
the midst of which gleamed golden threads of joy; a tapestry of sound,
multi-tinted, gallant with story and achievement, and beautiful things.
Boyce, sitting on his absurd piazza, with his knees jambed against
the balustrade, and his chair back against the dun-colored wall of his
house, seemed to be walking in the cathedral of the redwood forest,
with blue above him, a vast hymn in his ears, pungent perfume in his
nostrils, and mighty shafts of trees lifting themselves to heaven, proud
and erect as pure men before their Judge. He stood on a mountain at
sunrise, and saw the marvels of the amethystine clouds below his feet,
heard an eternal and white silence, such as broods among the everlasting
snows, and saw an eagle winging for the sun. He was in a city, and away
from him, diverging like the spokes of a wheel, ran thronging streets,
and to his sense came the beat, beat, beat of the city's heart. He saw
the golden alchemy of a chosen race; saw greed transmitted to progress;
saw that which had enslaved men, work at last to their liberation; heard
the roar of mighty mills, and on the streets all the peoples of earth
walking with common purpose, in fealty and understanding. And then, from
the swelling of this concourse of great sounds, came a diminuendo, calm
as philosophy, and from that, nothingness.

Boyce sat still for a long time, listening to the echoes which this
music had awakened in his soul. He retired, at length, content,
but determined that upon the morrow he would watch--the day being
Sunday--for the musician who had so moved and taught him.

He arose early, therefore, and having prepared his own simple breakfast
of fruit and coffee, took his station by the window to watch for the
man. For he felt convinced that the exposition he had heard was that of
a masculine mind. The long, hot hours of the morning went by, but the
front door of the house next to his did not open.

"These artists sleep late," he complained. Still he watched. He was
too much afraid of losing him to go out for dinner. By three in the
afternoon he had grown impatient. He went to the house next door and
rang the bell. There was no response. He thundered another appeal. An
old woman with a cloth about her head answered the door. She was very
deaf, and Boyce had difficulty in making himself understood.

"The family is in the country," was all she would say. "The family will
not be home till September."

"But there is some one living here?" shouted Boyce.

"_I_ live here," she said with dignity, putting back a wisp of dirty
gray hair behind her ear. "It is my house. I sublet to the family."

"What family?"

But the old creature was not communicative.

"The family that lives here," she said.

"Then who plays the piano in this house?" roared Boyce. "Do you?"

He thought a shade of pallor showed itself on her ash-colored cheeks.
Yet she smiled a little at the idea of her playing.

"There is no piano," she said, and she put an enigmatical emphasis to
the words.

"Nonsense," cried Boyce, indignantly. "I heard a piano being played in
this very house for hours last night!"

"You may enter," said the old woman, with an accent more vicious than
hospitable.

Boyce almost burst into the drawing-room. It was a dusty and forbidding
place, with ugly furniture and gaudy walls. No piano nor any other
musical instrument stood in it. The intruder turned an angry and baffled
face to the old woman, who was smiling with ill-concealed exultation.

"I shall see the other rooms," he announced. The old woman did not
appear to be surprised at his impertinence.

"As you please," she said.

So, with the hobbling creature, with her bandaged head, for a guide, he
explored every room of the house, which being identical with his own, he
could do without fear of leaving any apartment unentered. But no piano
did he find!

"Explain," roared Boyce at length, turning upon the leering old hag
beside him. "Explain! For surely I heard music more beautiful than I can
tell."

"I know nothing," she said. "But it is true I once had a lodger who
rented the front room, and that he played upon the piano. I am poor at
hearing, but he must have played well, for all the neighbors used to
come in front of the house to listen, and sometimes they applauded him,
and sometimes they were still. I could tell by watching their hands.
Sometimes little children came and danced. Other times young men and
women came and listened. But the young man died. The neighbors were
angry. They came to look at him and said he had starved to death. It was
no fault of mine. I sold his piano to pay his funeral expenses--and it
took every cent to pay for them too, I'd have you know. But since then,
sometimes--still, it must be nonsense, for I never heard it--folks say
that he plays the piano in my room. It has kept me out of the letting of
it more than once. But the family doesn't seem to mind--the family that
lives here, you know. They will be back in September. Yes."

Boyce left her nodding her thanks at what he had placed in her hand, and
went home to write it all to Babette--Babette who would laugh so merrily
when she read it!




AN ASTRAL ONION


WHEN Tig Braddock came to Nora Finnegan he was red-headed and freckled,
and, truth to tell, he remained with these features to the end of his
life--a life prolonged by a lucky, if somewhat improbable, incident, as
you shall hear.

Tig had shuffled off his parents as saurians, of some sorts, do their
skins. During the temporary absence from home of his mother, who was at
the bridewell, and the more extended vacation of his father, who, like
Villon, loved the open road and the life of it, Tig, who was not a
well-domesticated animal, wandered away. The humane society never heard
of him, the neighbors did not miss him, and the law took no cognizance
of this detached citizen--this lost pleiad. Tig would have sunk into
that melancholy which is attendant upon hunger,--the only form of
despair which babyhood knows,--if he had not wandered across the path of
Nora Finnegan. Now Nora shone with steady brightness in her orbit,
and no sooner had Tig entered her atmosphere, than he was warmed and
comforted. Hunger could not live where Nora was. The basement room where
she kept house was redolent with savory smells; and in the stove in her
front room--which was also her bedroom--there was a bright fire glowing
when fire was needed.

Nora went out washing for a living. But she was not a poor washerwoman.
Not at all. She was a washerwoman triumphant. She had perfect health, an
enormous frame, an abounding enthusiasm for life, and a rich abundance
of professional pride. She believed herself to be the best washer of
white clothes she had ever had the pleasure of knowing, and the value
placed upon her services, and her long connection with certain families
with large weekly washings, bore out this estimate of herself--an
estimate which she never endeavored to conceal.

Nora had buried two husbands without being unduly depressed by the
fact. The first husband had been a disappointment, and Nora winked at
Providence when an accident in a tunnel carried him off--that is to
say, carried the husband off. The second husband was not so much of a
disappointment as a surprise. He developed ability of a literary order,
and wrote songs which sold and made him a small fortune. Then he ran
away with another woman. The woman spent his fortune, drove him to
dissipation, and when he was dying he came back to Nora, who received
him cordially, attended him to the end, and cheered his last hours by
singing his own songs to him. Then she raised a headstone recounting his
virtues, which were quite numerous, and refraining from any reference to
those peculiarities which had caused him to be such a surprise.

Only one actual chagrin had ever nibbled at the sound heart of Nora
Finnegan--a cruel chagrin, with long, white teeth, such as rodents have!
She had never held a child to her breast, nor laughed in its eyes; never
bathed the pink form of a little son or daughter; never felt a tugging
of tiny hands at her voluminous calico skirts! Nora had burnt many
candles before the statue of the blessed Virgin without remedying this
deplorable condition. She had sent up unavailing prayers--she had, at
times, wept hot tears of longing and loneliness. Sometimes in her sleep
she dreamed that a wee form, warm and exquisitely soft, was pressed
against her firm body, and that a hand with tiniest pink nails crept
within her bosom. But as she reached out to snatch this delicious little
creature closer, she woke to realize a barren woman's grief, and turned
herself in anguish on her lonely pillow.

So when Tig came along, accompanied by two curs, who had faithfully
followed him from his home, and when she learned the details of his
story, she took him in, curs and all, and, having bathed the three of
them, made them part and parcel of her home. This was after the demise
of the second husband, and at a time when Nora felt that she had done
all a woman could be expected to do for Hymen.

Tig was a preposterous baby. The curs were preposterous curs. Nora had
always been afflicted with a surplus amount of laughter--laughter which
had difficulty in attaching itself to anything, owing to the lack of the
really comic in the surroundings of the poor. But with a red-headed and
freckled baby boy and two trick dogs in the house, she found a good and
sufficient excuse for her hilarity, and would have torn the cave where
echo lies with her mirth, had that cave not been at such an immeasurable
distance from the crowded neighborhood where she lived.

At the age of four Tig went to free kindergarten; at the age of six he
was in school, and made three grades the first year and two the next. At
fifteen he was graduated from the high school and went to work as
errand boy in a newspaper office, with the fixed determination to make a
journalist of himself.

Nora was a trifle worried about his morals when she discovered his
intellect, but as time went on, and Tig showed no devotion for any woman
save herself, and no consciousness that there were such things as bad
boys or saloons in the world, she began to have confidence. All of his
earnings were brought to her. Every holiday was spent with her. He told
her his secrets and his aspirations. He admitted that he expected to
become a great man, and, though he had not quite decided upon the nature
of his career,--saving, of course, the makeshift of journalism,--it was
not unlikely that he would elect to be a novelist like--well, probably
like Thackeray.

Hope, always a charming creature, put on her most alluring smiles for
Tig, and he made her his mistress, and feasted on the light of her eyes.
Moreover, he was chaperoned, so to speak, by Nora Finnegan, who listened
to every line Tig wrote, and made a mighty applause, and filled him up
with good Irish stew, many colored as the coat of Joseph, and pungent
with the inimitable perfume of "the rose of the cellar." Nora Finnegan
understood the onion, and used it lovingly. She perceived the difference
between the use and abuse of this pleasant and obvious friend of hungry
man, and employed it with enthusiasm, but discretion. Thus it came
about that whoever ate of her dinners, found the meals of other cooks
strangely lacking in savor, and remembered with regret the soups
and stews, the broiled steaks, and stuffed chickens of the woman who
appreciated the onion.

When Nora Finnegan came home with a cold one day, she took it in such a
jocular fashion that Tig felt not the least concern about her, and when,
two days later, she died of pneumonia, he almost thought, at first, that
it must be one of her jokes. She had departed with decision, such as had
characterized every act of her life, and had made as little trouble for
others as possible. When she was dead the community had the opportunity
of discovering the number of her friends. Miserable children with faces
which revealed two generations of hunger, homeless boys with vicious
countenances, miserable wrecks of humanity, women with bloated faces,
came to weep over Nora's bier, and to lay a flower there, and to scuttle
away, more abjectly lonely than even sin could make them. If the cats
and the dogs, the sparrows and horses to which she had shown kindness,
could also have attended her funeral, the procession would have been,
from a point of numbers, one of the most imposing the city had ever
known. Tig used up all their savings to bury her, and the next week, by
some peculiar fatality, he had a falling out with the night editor of
his paper, and was discharged. This sank deep into his sensitive
soul, and he swore he would be an underling no longer--which foolish
resolution was directly traceable to his hair, the color of which, it
will be recollected, was red.

Not being an underling, he was obliged to make himself into something
else, and he recurred passionately to his old idea of becoming a
novelist. He settled down in Nora's basement rooms, went to work on
a battered type-writer, did his own cooking, and occasionally pawned
something to keep him in food. The environment was calculated to further
impress him with the idea of his genius.

A certain magazine offered an alluring prize for a short story, and Tig
wrote one, and rewrote it, making alterations, revisions, annotations,
and interlineations which would have reflected credit upon Honore;
Balzac himself. Then he wrought all together, with splendid brevity and
dramatic force,--Tig's own words,--and mailed the same. He was convinced
he would get the prize. He was just as much convinced of it as Nora
Finnegan would have been if she had been with him.

So he went about doing more fiction, taking no especial care of himself,
and wrapt in rosy dreams, which, not being warm enough for the weather,
permitted him to come down with rheumatic fever.

He lay alone in his room and suffered such torments as the condemned
and rheumatic know, depending on one of Nora's former friends to come in
twice a day and keep up the fire for him. This friend was aged ten, and
looked like a sparrow who had been in a cyclone, but somewhere inside
his bones was a wit which had spelled out devotion. He found fuel for
the cracked stove, somehow or other. He brought it in a dirty sack which
he carried on his back, and he kept warmth in Tig's miserable body.
Moreover, he found food of a sort--cold, horrible bits often, and Tig
wept when he saw them, remembering the meals Nora had served him.

Tig was getting better, though he was conscious of a weak heart and a
lamenting stomach, when, to his amazement, the Sparrow ceased to visit
him. Not for a moment did Tig suspect desertion. He knew that only
something in the nature of an act of Providence, as the insurance
companies would designate it, could keep the little bundle of bones away
from him. As the days went by, he became convinced of it, for no Sparrow
came, and no coal lay upon the hearth. The basement window fortunately
looked toward the south, and the pale April sunshine was beginning
to make itself felt, so that the temperature of the room was not
unbearable. But Tig languished; sank, sank, day by day, and was kept
alive only by the conviction that the letter announcing the award of the
thousand-dollar prize would presently come to him. One night he reached a
place, where, for hunger and dejection, his mind wandered, and he seemed
to be complaining all night to Nora of his woes. When the chill dawn
came, with chittering of little birds on the dirty pavement, and an
agitation of the scrawny willow "pussies," he was not able to lift his
hand to his head. The window before his sight was but "a glimmering
square." He said to himself that the end must be at hand. Yet it was
cruel, cruel, with fame and fortune so near! If only he had some food,
he might summon strength to rally--just for a little while! Impossible
that he should die! And yet without food there was no choice.

Dreaming so of Nora's dinners, thinking how one spoonful of a stew such
as she often compounded would now be his salvation, he became conscious
of the presence of a strong perfume in the room. It was so familiar
that it seemed like a sub-consciousness, yet he found no name for this
friendly odor for a bewildered minute or two. Little by little, however,
it grew upon him, that it was the onion--that fragrant and kindly bulb
which had attained its apotheosis in the cuisine of Nora Finnegan of
sacred memory. He opened his languid eyes, to see if, mayhap, the plant
had not attained some more palpable materialization.

Behold, it was so! Before him, in a brown earthen dish,--a most familiar
dish,--was an onion, pearly white, in placid seas of gravy, smoking and
delectable. With unexpected strength he raised himself, and reached for
the dish, which floated before him in a halo made by its own steam. It
moved toward him, offered a spoon to his hand, and as he ate he heard
about the room the rustle of Nora Finnegan's starched skirts, and now
and then a faint, faint echo of her old-time laugh--such an echo as one
may find of the sea in the heart of a shell.

The noble bulb disappeared little by little before his voracity, and in
contentment greater than virtue can give, he sank back upon his pillow
and slept.

Two hours later the postman knocked at the door, and receiving no
answer, forced his way in. Tig, half awake, saw him enter with no
surprise. He felt no surprise when he put a letter in his hand bearing
the name of the magazine to which he had sent his short story. He was
not even surprised, when, tearing it open with suddenly alert hands, he
found within the check for the first prize--the check he had expected.

All that day, as the April sunlight spread itself upon his floor, he
felt his strength grow. Late in the afternoon the Sparrow came back,
paler, and more bony than ever, and sank, breathing hard, upon the
floor, with his sack of coal.

"I've been sick," he said, trying to smile. "Terrible sick, but I come
as soon as I could."

"Build up the fire," cried Tig, in a voice so strong it made the Sparrow
start as if a stone had struck him. "Build up the fire, and forget you
are sick. For, by the shade of Nora Finnegan, you shall be hungry no
more!"





FROM THE LOOM OF THE DEAD


WHEN Urda Bjarnason tells a tale all the men stop their talking to
listen, for they know her to be wise with the wisdom of the old people,
and that she has more learning than can be got even from the great
schools at Reykjavik. She is especially prized by them here in this
new country where the Icelandmen are settled--this America, so new in
letters, where the people speak foolishly and write unthinking books.
So the men who know that it is given to the mothers of earth to be
very wise, stop their six part singing, or their jangles about the
free-thinkers, and give attentive ear when Urda Bjarnason lights her
pipe and begins her tale.

She is very old. Her daughters and sons are all dead, but her
granddaughter, who is most respectable, and the cousin of a physician,
says that Urda is twenty-four and a hundred, and there are others who
say that she is older still. She watches all that the Iceland people do
in the new land; she knows about the building of the five villages on
the North Dakota plain, and of the founding of the churches and the
schools, and the tilling of the wheat farms. She notes with suspicion
the actions of the women who bring home webs of cloth from the store,
instead of spinning them as their mothers did before them; and she
shakes her head at the wives who run to the village grocery store every
fortnight, imitating the wasteful American women, who throw butter in
the fire faster than it can be turned from the churn.

She watches yet other things. All winter long the white snows reach
across the gently rolling plains as far as the eye can behold. In the
morning she sees them tinted pink at the east; at noon she notes
golden lights flashing across them; when the sky is gray--which is not
often--she notes that they grow as ashen as a face with the death shadow
on it. Sometimes they glitter with silver-like tips of ocean waves. But
at these things she looks only casually. It is when the blue shadows
dance on the snow that she leaves her corner behind the iron stove, and
stands before the window, resting her two hands on the stout bar of her
cane, and gazing out across the waste with eyes which age has restored
after four decades of decrepitude.

The young Icelandmen say:

"Mother, it is the clouds hurrying across the sky that make the dance of
the shadows."

"There are no clouds," she replies, and points to the jewel-like blue of
the arching sky.

"It is the drifting air," explains Fridrik Halldersson, he who has
been in the Northern seas. "As the wind buffets the air, it looks blue
against the white of the snow. 'Tis the air that makes the dancing
shadows."

But Urda shakes her head, and points with her dried finger, and
those who stand beside her see figures moving, and airy shapes, and
contortions of strange things, such as are seen in a beryl stone.

"But Urda Bjarnason," says Ingeborg Christianson, the pert young wife
with the blue-eyed twins, "why is it we see these things only when we
stand beside you and you help us to the sight?"

"Because," says the mother, with a steel-blue flash of her old eyes,
"having eyes ye will not see!" Then the men laugh. They like to hear
Ingeborg worsted. For did she not jilt two men from Gardar, and one from
Mountain, and another from Winnipeg?

Not even Ingeborg can deny that Mother Urda tells true things.

"To-day," says Urda, standing by the little window and watching the
dance of the shadows, "a child breathed thrice on a farm at the West,
and then it died."

The next week at the church gathering, when all the sledges stopped
at the house of Urda's granddaughter, they said it was so--that John
Christianson's wife Margaret never heard the voice of her son, but that
he breathed thrice in his nurse's arms and died.

"Three sledges run over the snow toward Milton," says Urda; "all are
laden with wheat, and in one is a stranger. He has with him a strange
engine, but its purpose I do not know."

Six hours later the drivers of three empty sledges stop at the house.

"We have been to Milton with wheat," they say, "and Christian Johnson
here, carried a photographer from St. Paul."

Now it stands to reason that the farmers like to amuse themselves
through the silent and white winters. And they prefer above all things
to talk or to listen, as has been the fashion of their race for a
thousand years. Among all the story-tellers there is none like Urda, for
she is the daughter and the granddaughter and the great-granddaughter
of storytellers. It is given to her to talk, as it is given to John
Thorlaksson to sing--he who sings so as his sledge flies over the snow
at night, that the people come out in the bitter air from their doors to
listen, and the dogs put up their noses and howl, not liking music.

In the little cabin of Peter Christianson, the husband of Urda's
granddaughter, it sometimes happens that twenty men will gather about
the stove. They hang their bear-skin coats on the wall, put their fur
gauntlets underneath the stove, where they will keep warm, and then
stretch their stout, felt-covered legs to the wood fire. The room is
fetid; the coffee steams eternally on the stove; and from her chair in
the warmest corner Urda speaks out to the listening men, who shake their
heads with joy as they hear the pure old Icelandic flow in sweet rhythm
from between her lips. Among the many, many tales she tells is that of
the dead weaver, and she tells it in the simplest language in all
the world--language so simple that even great scholars could find no
simpler, and the children crawling on the floor can understand.

"Jon and Loa lived with their father and mother far to the north of the
Island of Fire, and when the children looked from their windows they saw
only wild scaurs and jagged lava rocks, and a distant, deep gleam of the
sea. They caught the shine of the sea through an eye-shaped opening in
the rocks, and all the long night of winter it gleamed up at them, like
the eye of a dead witch. But when it sparkled and began to laugh, the
children danced about the hut and sang, for they knew the bright summer
time was at hand. Then their father fished, and their mother was gay.
But it is true that even in the winter and the darkness they were happy,
for they made fishing nets and baskets and cloth together,--Jon and Loa
and their father and mother,--and the children were taught to read in
the books, and were told the sagas, and given instruction in the part
singing.

"They did not know there was such a thing as sorrow in the world, for no
one had ever mentioned it to them. But one day their mother died. Then
they had to learn how to keep the fire on the hearth, and to smoke the
fish, and make the black coffee. And also they had to learn how to live
when there is sorrow at the heart.

"They wept together at night for lack of their mother's kisses, and in
the morning they were loath to rise because they could not see her face.
The dead cold eye of the sea watching them from among the lava rocks
made them afraid, so they hung a shawl over the window to keep it out.
And the house, try as they would, did not look clean and cheerful as it
had used to do when their mother sang and worked about it.

"One day, when a mist rested over the eye of the sea, like that which
one beholds on the eyes of the blind, a greater sorrow came to them, for
a stepmother crossed the threshold. She looked at Jon and Loa, and made
complaint to their father that they were still very small and not likely
to be of much use. After that they had to rise earlier than ever, and to
work as only those who have their growth should work, till their hearts
cracked for weariness and shame. They had not much to eat, for their
stepmother said she would trust to the gratitude of no other woman's
child, and that she believed in laying up against old age. So she put
the few coins that came to the house in a strong box, and bought little
food. Neither did she buy the children clothes, though those which their
dear mother had made for them were so worn that the warp stood apart
from the woof, and there were holes at the elbows and little warmth to
be found in them anywhere.

"Moreover, the quilts on their beds were too short for their growing
length, so that at night either their purple feet or their thin
shoulders were uncovered, and they wept for the cold, and in the
morning, when they crept into the larger room to build the fire, they
were so stiff they could not stand straight, and there was pain at their
joints.

"The wife scolded all the time, and her brow was like a storm sweeping
down from the Northwest. There was no peace to be had in the house.
The children might not repeat to each other the sagas their mother had
taught them, nor try their part singing, nor make little doll cradles of
rushes. Always they had to work, always they were scolded, always their
clothes grew thinner.

"'Stepmother,' cried Loa one day,--she whom her mother had called the
little bird,--'we are a-cold because of our rags. Our mother would have
woven blue cloth for us and made it into garments.'

"'Your mother is where she will weave no cloth!' said the stepmother,
and she laughed many times.

"All in the cold and still of that night, the stepmother wakened, and
she knew not why. She sat up in her bed, and knew not why. She knew not
why, and she looked into the room, and there, by the light of a burning
fish's tail--'twas such a light the folk used in those days--was a
woman, weaving. She had no loom, and shuttle she had none. All with
her hands she wove a wondrous cloth. Stooping and bending, rising and
swaying with motions beautiful as those the Northern Lights make in a
midwinter sky, she wove a cloth. The warp was blue and mystical to see,
the woof was white, and shone with its whiteness, so that of all the
webs the stepmother had ever seen, she had seen none like to this.

"Yet the sight delighted her not, for beyond the drifting web, and
beyond the weaver she saw the room and furniture--aye, saw them through
the body of the weaver and the drifting of the cloth. Then she knew--as
the haunted are made to know--that 'twas the mother of the children come
to show her she could still weave cloth. The heart of the stepmother was
cold as ice, yet she could not move to waken her husband at her side,
for her hands were as fixed as if they were crossed on her dead breast.
The voice in her was silent, and her tongue stood to the roof of her
mouth.

"After a time the wraith of the dead mother moved toward her--the wraith
of the weaver moved her way--and round and about her body was wound the
shining cloth. Wherever it touched the body of the stepmother, it was as
hateful to her as the touch of a monster out of sea-slime, so that her
flesh crept away from it, and her senses swooned.

"In the early morning she awoke to the voices of the children,
whispering in the inner room as they dressed with half-frozen fingers.
Still about her was the hateful, beautiful web, filling her soul with
loathing and with fear. She thought she saw the task set for her, and
when the children crept in to light the fire--very purple and thin were
their little bodies, and the rags hung from them--she arose and held out
the shining cloth, and cried:

"'Here is the web your mother wove for you. I will make it into
garments!' But even as she spoke the cloth faded and fell into
nothingness, and the children cried:

"'Stepmother, you have the fever!'

"And then:

"'Stepmother, what makes the strange light in the room?'

"That day the stepmother was too weak to rise from her bed, and the
children thought she must be going to die, for she did not scold as they
cleared the house and braided their baskets, and she did not frown at
them, but looked at them with wistful eyes.

"By fall of night she was as weary as if she had wept all the day, and
so she slept. But again she was awakened and knew not why. And again
she sat up in her bed and knew not why. And again, not knowing why, she
looked and saw a woman weaving cloth. All that had happened the night
before happened this night. Then, when the morning came, and the
children crept in shivering from their beds, she arose and dressed
herself, and from her strong box she took coins, and bade her husband go
with her to the town.

"So that night a web of cloth, woven by one of the best weavers in all
Iceland, was in the house; and on the beds of the children were blankets
of lamb's wool, soft to the touch and fair to the eye. After that the
children slept warm and were at peace; for now, when they told the sagas
their mother had taught them, or tried their part songs as they sat
together on their bench, the stepmother was silent. For she feared
to chide, lest she should wake at night, not knowing why, and see the
mother's wraith."




A GRAMMATICAL GHOST


THERE was only one possible objection to the drawing-room, and that was
the occasional presence of Miss Carew; and only one possible objection
to Miss Carew. And that was, that she was dead.

She had been dead twenty years, as a matter of fact and record, and to
the last of her life sacredly preserved the treasures and traditions of
her family, a family bound up--as it is quite unnecessary to explain to
any one in good society--with all that is most venerable and heroic in
the history of the Republic. Miss Carew never relaxed the
proverbial hospitality of her house, even when she remained its sole
representative. She continued to preside at her table with dignity and
state, and to set an example of excessive modesty and gentle decorum to
a generation of restless young women.

It is not likely that having lived a life of such irreproachable
gentility as this, Miss Carew would have the bad taste to die in any way
not pleasant to mention in fastidious society. She could be trusted to
the last, not to outrage those friends who quoted her as an exemplar of
propriety. She died very unobtrusively of an affection of the heart, one
June morning, while trimming her rose trellis, and her lavender-colored
print was not even rumpled when she fell, nor were more than the tips of
her little bronze slippers visible.

"Isn't it dreadful," said the Philadelphians, "that the property should
go to a very, very distant cousin in Iowa or somewhere else on the
frontier, about whom nobody knows anything at all?"

The Carew treasures were packed in boxes and sent away into the Iowa
wilderness; the Carew traditions were preserved by the Historical
Society; the Carew property, standing in one of the most umbrageous
and aristocratic suburbs of Philadelphia, was rented to all manner
of folk--anybody who had money enough to pay the rental--and society
entered its doors no more.

But at last, after twenty years, and when all save the oldest
Philadelphians had forgotten Miss Lydia Carew, the very, very distant
cousin appeared. He was quite in the prime of life, and so agreeable and
unassuming that nothing could be urged against him save his patronymic,
which, being Boggs, did not commend itself to the euphemists. With him
were two maiden sisters, ladies of excellent taste and manners, who
restored the Carew china to its ancient cabinets, and replaced the Carew
pictures upon the walls, with additions not out of keeping with
the elegance of these heirlooms. Society, with a magnanimity almost
dramatic, overlooked the name of Boggs--and called.

All was well. At least, to an outsider all seemed to be well. But,
in truth, there was a certain distress in the old mansion, and in
the hearts of the well-behaved Misses Boggs. It came about most
unexpectedly. The sisters had been sitting upstairs, looking out at the
beautiful grounds of the old place, and marvelling at the violets,
which lifted their heads from every possible cranny about the house, and
talking over the cordiality which they had been receiving by those upon
whom they had no claim, and they were filled with amiable satisfaction.
Life looked attractive. They had often been grateful to Miss Lydia Carew
for leaving their brother her fortune. Now they felt even more grateful
to her. She had left them a Social Position--one, which even after
twenty years of desuetude, was fit for use.

They descended the stairs together, with arms clasped about each other's
waists, and as they did so presented a placid and pleasing sight. They
entered their drawing-room with the intention of brewing a cup of tea,
and drinking it in calm sociability in the twilight. But as they entered
the room they became aware of the presence of a lady, who was already
seated at their tea-table, regarding their old Wedgewood with the air of
a connoisseur.

There were a number of peculiarities about this intruder. To begin with,
she was hatless, quite as if she were a habitue; of the house, and
was costumed in a prim lilac-colored lawn of the style of two decades
past. But a greater peculiarity was the resemblance this lady bore to a
faded daguerrotype. If looked at one way, she was perfectly discernible;
if looked at another, she went out in a sort of blur. Notwithstanding
this comparative invisibility, she exhaled a delicate perfume of sweet
lavender, very pleasing to the nostrils of the Misses Boggs, who stood
looking at her in gentle and unprotesting surprise.

"I beg your pardon," began Miss Prudence, the younger of the Misses
Boggs, "but--"

But at this moment the Daguerrotype became a blur, and Miss Prudence
found herself addressing space. The Misses Boggs were irritated. They
had never encountered any mysteries in Iowa. They began an impatient
search behind doors and portieres, and even under sofas, though
it was quite absurd to suppose that a lady recognizing the merits of the
Carew Wedgewood would so far forget herself as to crawl under a sofa.

When they had given up all hope of discovering the intruder, they saw
her standing at the far end of the drawing-room critically examining a
water-color marine. The elder Miss Boggs started toward her with stern
decision, but the little Daguerrotype turned with a shadowy smile,
became a blur and an imperceptibility.

Miss Boggs looked at Miss Prudence Boggs.

"If there were ghosts," she said, "this would be one."

"If there were ghosts," said Miss Prudence Boggs, "this would be the
ghost of Lydia Carew."

The twilight was settling into blackness, and Miss Boggs nervously lit
the gas while Miss Prudence ran for other tea-cups, preferring, for
reasons superfluous to mention, not to drink out of the Carew china that
evening.

The next day, on taking up her embroidery frame, Miss Boggs found a
number of oldfashioned cross-stitches added to her Kensington. Prudence,
she knew, would never have degraded herself by taking a cross-stitch,
and the parlor-maid was above taking such a liberty. Miss Boggs
mentioned the incident that night at a dinner given by an ancient friend
of the Carews.

"Oh, that's the work of Lydia Carew, without a doubt!" cried the
hostess. "She visits every new family that moves to the house, but she
never remains more than a week or two with any one."

"It must be that she disapproves of them," suggested Miss Boggs.

"I think that's it," said the hostess. "She doesn't like their china, or
their fiction."

"I hope she'll disapprove of us," added Miss Prudence.

The hostess belonged to a very old Philadelphian family, and she shook
her head.

"I should say it was a compliment for even the ghost of Miss Lydia Carew
to approve of one," she said severely.

The next morning, when the sisters entered their drawing-room there were
numerous evidences of an occupant during their absence. The sofa pillows
had been rearranged so that the effect of their grouping was less
bizarre than that favored by the Western women; a horrid little Buddhist
idol with its eyes fixed on its abdomen, had been chastely hidden behind
a Dresden shepherdess, as unfit for the scrutiny of polite eyes; and
on the table where Miss Prudence did work in water colors, after the
fashion of the impressionists, lay a prim and impossible composition
representing a moss-rose and a number of heartsease, colored with that
caution which modest spinster artists instinctively exercise.

"Oh, there's no doubt it's the work of Miss Lydia Carew," said Miss
Prudence, contemptuously. "There's no mistaking the drawing of that
rigid little rose. Don't you remember those wreaths and bouquets framed,
among the pictures we got when the Carew pictures were sent to us? I
gave some of them to an orphan asylum and burned up the rest."

"Hush!" cried Miss Boggs, involuntarily. "If she heard you, it would
hurt her feelings terribly. Of course, I mean--" and she blushed. "It
might hurt her feelings--but how perfectly ridiculous! It's impossible!"

Miss Prudence held up the sketch of the moss-rose.

"THAT may be impossible in an artistic sense, but it is a palpable
thing."

"Bosh!" cried Miss Boggs.

"But," protested Miss Prudence, "how do you explain it?"

"I don't," said Miss Boggs, and left the room.

That evening the sisters made a point of being in the drawing-room
before the dusk came on, and of lighting the gas at the first hint of
twilight. They didn't believe in Miss Lydia Carew--but still they meant
to be beforehand with her. They talked with unwonted vivacity and in
a louder tone than was their custom. But as they drank their tea even
their utmost verbosity could not make them oblivious to the fact that
the perfume of sweet lavender was stealing insidiously through the room.
They tacitly refused to recognize this odor and all that it indicated,
when suddenly, with a sharp crash, one of the old Carew tea-cups
fell from the tea-table to the floor and was broken. The disaster was
followed by what sounded like a sigh of pain and dismay.

"I didn't suppose Miss Lydia Carew would ever be as awkward as that,"
cried the younger Miss Boggs, petulantly.

"Prudence," said her sister with a stern accent, "please try not to be a
fool. You brushed the cup off with the sleeve of your dress."

"Your theory wouldn't be so bad," said Miss Prudence, half laughing and
half crying, "if there were any sleeves to my dress, but, as you see,
there aren't," and then Miss Prudence had something as near hysterics as
a healthy young woman from the West can have.

"I wouldn't think such a perfect lady as Lydia Carew," she ejaculated
between her sobs, "would make herself so disagreeable! You may
talk about good-breeding all you please, but I call such intrusion
exceedingly bad taste. I have a horrible idea that she likes us and
means to stay with us. She left those other people because she did not
approve of their habits or their grammar. It would be just our luck to
please her."

"Well, I like your egotism," said Miss Boggs.

However, the view Miss Prudence took of the case appeared to be the
right one. Time went by and Miss Lydia Carew still remained. When the
ladies entered their drawing-room they would see the little lady-like
Daguerrotype revolving itself into a blur before one of the family
portraits. Or they noticed that the yellow sofa cushion, toward which
she appeared to feel a peculiar antipathy, had been dropped behind the
sofa upon the floor, or that one of Jane Austen's novels, which none of
the family ever read, had been removed from the book shelves and left
open upon the table.

"I cannot become reconciled to it," complained Miss Boggs to Miss
Prudence. "I wish we had remained in Iowa where we belong. Of course I
don't believe in the thing! No sensible person would. But still I cannot
become reconciled."

But their liberation was to come, and in a most unexpected manner.

A relative by marriage visited them from the West. He was a friendly
man and had much to say, so he talked all through dinner, and afterward
followed the ladies to the drawing-room to finish his gossip. The gas in
the room was turned very low, and as they entered Miss Prudence caught
sight of Miss Carew, in company attire, sitting in upright propriety in
a stiff-backed chair at the extremity of the apartment.

Miss Prudence had a sudden idea.

"We will not turn up the gas," she said, with an emphasis intended to
convey private information to her sister. "It will be more agreeable to
sit here and talk in this soft light."

Neither her brother nor the man from the West made any objection. Miss
Boggs and Miss Prudence, clasping each other's hands, divided their
attention between their corporeal and their incorporeal guests. Miss
Boggs was confident that her sister had an idea, and was willing to
await its development. As the guest from Iowa spoke, Miss Carew bent a
politely attentive ear to what he said.

"Ever since Richards took sick that time," he said briskly, "it seemed
like he shed all responsibility." (The Misses Boggs saw the Daguerrotype
put up her shadowy head with a movement of doubt and apprehension.) "The
fact of the matter was, Richards didn't seem to scarcely get on the way
he might have been expected to." (At this conscienceless split to the
infinitive and misplacing of the preposition, Miss Carew arose trembling
perceptibly.) "I saw it wasn't no use for him to count on a quick
recovery--"

The Misses Boggs lost the rest of the sentence, for at the utterance of
the double negative Miss Lydia Carew had flashed out, not in a blur, but
with mortal haste, as when life goes out at a pistol shot!

The man from the West wondered why Miss Prudence should have cried at so
pathetic a part of his story:

"Thank Goodness!"

And their brother was amazed to see Miss Boggs kiss Miss Prudence with
passion and energy.

It was the end. Miss Carew returned no more.

========================================
========================================

PAINTED WINDOWS

By Elia W. Peattie




     Will you come with me into the chamber of memory
     and lift your eyes to the painted windows where the figures
     and scenes of childhood appear? Perhaps by looking with
     kindly eyes at those from out my past, long wished-for
     visions of your own youth will appear to heal the wounds
     from which you suffer, and to quiet your stormy and
     restless heart.




CONTENTS


       I NIGHT

      II SOLITUDE

     III FRIENDSHIP

      IV FAME

       V REMORSE

      VI TRAVEL




PAINTED WINDOWS




I. NIGHT

YOUNG people believe very little that they hear about the compensations
of growing old, and of living over again in memory the events of the
past. Yet there really are these compensations and pleasures, and
although they are not so vivid and breathless as the pleasures of
youth, they have something delicate and fine about them that must be
experienced to be appreciated.

Few of us would exchange our memories for those of others. They have
become a part of our personality, and we could not part with them
without losing something of ourselves. Neither would we part with our
own particular childhood, which, however difficult it may have been at
times, seems to each of us more significant than the childhood of any
one else. I can run over in my mind certain incidents of my childhood
as if they were chapters in a much-loved book, and when I am wakeful
at night, or bored by a long journey, or waiting for some one in the
railway-station, I take them out and go over them again.

Nor is my book of memories without its illustrations. I can see little
villages, and a great city, and forests and planted fields, and familiar
faces; and all have this advantage: they are not fixed and without
motion, like the pictures in the ordinary book. People are walking up
the streets of the village, the trees are tossing, the tall wheat and
corn in the fields salute me. I can smell the odour of the gathered hay,
and the faces in my dream-book smile at me.

Of all of these memories I like best the one in the pine forest.

I was at that age when children think of their parents as being
all-powerful. I could hardly have imagined any circumstances, however
adverse, that my father could not have met with his strength and wisdom
and skill. All children have such a period of hero-worship, I suppose,
when their father stands out from the rest of the world as the best and
most powerful man living. So, feeling as I did, I was made happier than
I can say when my father decided, because I was looking pale and had a
poor appetite, to take me out of school for a while, and carry me with
him on a driving trip. We lived in Michigan, where there were, in the
days of which I am writing, not many railroads; and when my father, who
was attorney for a number of wholesale mercantile firms in Detroit, used
to go about the country collecting money due, adjusting claims, and so
on, he had no choice but to drive.

And over what roads! Now it was a strip of corduroy, now a piece
of well-graded elevation with clay subsoil and gravel surface, now a
neglected stretch full of dangerous holes; and worst of all, running
through the great forests, long pieces of road from which the stumps had
been only partly extracted, and where the sunlight barely penetrated.
Here the soaked earth became little less than a quagmire.

But father was too well used to hard journeys to fear them, and I felt
that, in going with him, I was safe from all possible harm. The journey
had all the allurement of an adventure, for we would not know from day
to day where we should eat our meals or sleep at night. So, to provide
against trouble, we carried father's old red-and-blue-checked army
blankets, a bag of feed for Sheridan, the horse, plenty of bread, bacon,
jam, coffee and prepared cream; and we hung pails of pure water and
buttermilk from the rear of our buggy.

We had been out two weeks without failing once to eat at a proper
table or to sleep in a comfortable bed. Sometimes we put up at the
stark-looking hotels that loomed, raw and uninviting, in the larger
towns; sometimes we had the pleasure of being welcomed at a little inn,
where the host showed us a personal hospitality; but oftener we were
forced to make ourselves "paying guests" at some house. We cared nothing
whether we slept in the spare rooms of a fine frame "residence" or crept
into bed beneath the eaves of the attic in a log cabin. I had begun to
feel that our journey would be almost too tame and comfortable, when one
night something really happened.

Father lost his bearings. He was hoping to reach the town of Gratiot by
nightfall, and he attempted to make a short cut. To do this he turned
into a road that wound through a magnificent forest, at first of oak and
butternut, ironwood and beech, then of densely growing pines. When we
entered the wood it was twilight, but no sooner were we well within
the shadow of these sombre trees than we were plunged in darkness,
and within half an hour this darkness deepened, so that we could see
nothing--not even the horse.

"The sun doesn't get in here the year round," said father, trying his
best to guide the horse through the mire. So deep was the mud that it
seemed as if it literally sucked at the legs of the horse and the wheels
of the buggy, and I began to wonder if we should really be swallowed,
and to fear that we had met with a difficulty that even my father could
not overcome. I can hardly make plain what a tragic thought that was!
The horse began to give out sighs and groans, and in the intervals of
his struggles to get on, I could feel him trembling. There was a note of
anxiety in father's voice as he called out, with all the authority and
cheer he could command, to poor Sheridan. The wind was rising, and
the long sobs of the pines made cold shivers run up my spine. My teeth
chattered, partly from cold, but more from fright.

"What are we going to do?" I asked, my voice quivering with tears.

"Well, we aren't going to cry, whatever else we do!" answered father,
rather sharply. He snatched the lighted lantern from its place on the
dashboard and leaped out into the road. I could hear him floundering
round in that terrible mire and soothing the horse. The next thing I
realised was that the horse was unhitched, that father had--for the
first time during our journey--laid the lash across Sheridan's back, and
that, with a leap of indignation, the horse had reached the firm ground
of the roadside. Father called out to him to stand still, and a moment
later I found myself being swung from the buggy into father's arms.
He staggered along, plunging and almost falling, and presently I, too,
stood beneath the giant pines.

"One journey more," said father, "for our supper, and then we'll bivouac
right here."

Now that I was away from the buggy that was so familiar to me, and that
seemed like a little movable piece of home, I felt, as I had not felt
before, the vastness of the solitude. Above me in the rising wind tossed
the tops of the singing trees; about me stretched the soft blackness;
and beneath the dense, interlaced branches it was almost as calm and
still as in a room. I could see that the clouds were breaking and the
stars beginning to come out, and that comforted me a little.

Father was keeping up a stream of cheerful talk.

"Now, sir," he was saying to Sheridan, "stand still while I get this
harness off you. I'll tie you and blanket you, and you can lie or stand
as you please. Here's your nose-bag, with some good supper in it, and if
you don't have drink, it's not my fault. Anyway, it isn't so long since
you got a good nip at the creek."

I was watching by the faint light of the lantern, and noticing how
unnatural father and Sheridan looked. They seemed to be blocked out in a
rude kind of way, like some wooden toys I had at home.

"Here we are," said father, "like Robinson Crusoes. It was hard luck for
Robinson, not having his little girl along. He'd have had her to pick up
sticks and twigs to make a fire, and that would have been a great help
to him."

Father began breaking fallen branches over his knee, and I groped round
and filled my arms again and again with little fagots. So after a few
minutes we had a fine fire crackling in a place where it could not catch
the branches of the trees. Father had scraped the needles of the pines
together in such a way that a bare rim of earth was left all around the
fire, so that it could not spread along the ground; and presently the
coffee-pot was over the fire and bacon was sizzling in the frying-pan.
The good, hearty odours came out to mingle with the delicious scent
of the pines, and I, setting out our dishes, began to feel a happiness
different from anything I had ever known.

Pioneers and wanderers and soldiers have joys of their own--joys of
which I had heard often enough, for there had been more stories told
than read in our house. But now for the first time I knew what my
grandmother and my uncles had meant when they told me about the way they
had come into the wilderness, and about the great happiness and freedom
of those first days. I, too, felt this freedom, and it seemed to me as
if I never again wanted walls to close in on me. All my fear was gone,
and I felt wild and glad. I could not believe that I was only a little
girl. I felt taller even than my father.

Father's mood was like mine in a way. He had memories to add to his
emotion, but then, on the other hand, he lacked the sense of discovery
I had, for he had known often such feelings as were coming to me for
the first time. When he was a young man he had been a colporteur for the
American Bible Society among the Lake Superior Indians, and in that
way had earned part of the money for his course at the University of
Michigan; afterward he had gone with other gold-seekers to Pike's Peak,
and had crossed the plains with oxen, in the company of many other
adventurers; then, when President Lincoln called for troops, he had
returned to enlist with the Michigan men, and had served more than three
years with McClellan and Grant.

So, naturally, there was nothing he did not know about making himself
comfortable in the open. He knew all the sorrow and all the joy of
the homeless man, and now, as he cooked, he began to sing the old
songs--"Marching Through Georgia," and "Bury Me Not on the Lone
Prairie," and "In the Prison Cell I Sit." He had been in a Southern
prison after the Battle of the Wilderness, and so he knew how to sing
that song with particular feeling.

I had heard war stories all my life, though usually father told such
tales in a half-joking way, as if to make light of everything he had
gone through. But now, as we ate there under the tossing pines, and the
wild chorus in the treetops swelled like a rising sea, the spirit of the
old days came over him. He was a good "stump speaker," and he knew how
to make a story come to life, and never did all his simple natural gifts
show themselves better than on this night, when he dwelt on his old
campaigns.

For the first time I was to look into the heart of a kindly natured man,
forced by terrible necessity to go through the dread experience of war.
I gained an idea of the unspeakable homesickness of the man who leaves
his family to an unimagined fate, and sacrifices years in the service
of his country. I saw that the mere foregoing of roof and bed is an
indescribable distress; I learned something of what the palpitant
anxiety before a battle must be, and the quaking fear at the first
rattle of bullets, and the half-mad rush of determination with which men
force valour into their faltering hearts; I was made to know something
of the blight of war--the horror of the battlefield, the waste of
bounty, the ruin of homes.

Then, rising above this, came stories of devotion, of brotherhood, of
service on the long, desolate marches, of courage to the death of those
who fought for a cause. I began to see wherein lay the highest joy of
the soldier, and of how little account he held himself, if the principle
for which he fought could be preserved. I heard for the first time the
wonderful words of Lincoln at Gettysburg, and learned to repeat a part
of them.

I was only eight, it is true, but emotion has no age, and I
understood then as well as I ever could, what heroism and devotion and
self-forgetfulness mean. I understood, too, the meaning of the words
"our country," and my heart warmed to it, as in the older times the
hearts of boys and girls warmed to the name of their king. The new
knowledge was so beautiful that I thought then, and I think now, that
nothing could have served as so fit an accompaniment to it as the
shouting of those pines. They sang like heroes, and in their swaying
gave me fleeting glimpses of the stars, unbelievably brilliant in the
dusky purple sky, and half-obscured now and then by drifting clouds.

By and by we lay down, not far apart, each rolled in an army blanket,
frayed with service. Our feet were to the fire--for it was so that
soldiers lay, my father said--and our heads rested on mounds of
pine-needles.

Sometimes in the night I felt my father's hand resting lightly on my
shoulders to see that I was covered, but in my dreams he ceased to be my
father and became my comrade, and I was a drummer boy,--I had seen the
play, "The Drummer Boy of the Rappahannock,"--marching forward, with set
teeth, in the face of battle.

Whatever could redeem war and make it glorious seemed to flood my soul.
All that was highest, all that was noble in that dreadful conflict came
to me in my sleep--to me, the child who had been born when my father
was at "the front." I had a strange baptism of the spirit. I discovered
sorrow and courage, singing trees and stars. I was never again to think
that the fireside and fireside thoughts made up the whole of life.

My father lies with other soldiers by the Pacific; the forest sings
no more; the old army blankets have disappeared; the memories of the
terrible war are fading,--happily fading,--but they all live again,
sometimes, in my memory, and I am once more a child, with thoughts as
proud and fierce and beautiful as Valkyries.




II. SOLITUDE

AMONG the pictures that I see when I look back into the past, is the one
where I, a sullen, egotistic person nine years old, stood quite alone
in the world. To be sure, there were father and mother in the house, and
there were the other children, and not one among them knew I was
alone. The world certainly would not have regarded me as friendless or
orphaned. There was nothing in my mere appearance, as I started away to
school in my clean ginghams, with my well-brushed hair, and embroidered
school-bag, to lead any one to suppose that I was a castaway. Yet I
was--I had discovered this fact, hidden though it might be from others.

I was no longer loved. Father and mother loved the other children; but
not me. I might come home at night, fairly bursting with important news
about what had happened in class or among my friends, and try to relate
my little histories. But did mother listen? Not at all. She would nod
like a mandarin while I talked, or go on turning the leaves of her book,
or writing her letter. What I said was of no importance to her.

Father was even less interested. He frankly told me to keep still, and
went on with the accounts in which he was so absurdly interested, or
examined "papers"--stupid-looking things done on legal cap, which he
brought home with him from the office. No one kissed me when I started
away in the morning; no one kissed me when I came home at night. I
went to bed unkissed. I felt myself to be a lonely and misunderstood
child--perhaps even an adopted one.

Why, I knew a little girl who, when she went up to her room at night,
found the bedclothes turned back, and the shade drawn, and a screen
placed so as to keep off drafts. And her mother brushed her hair twenty
minutes by the clock each night, to make it glossy; and then she sat by
her bed and sang softly till the girl fell asleep.

I not only had to open my own bed, but the beds for the other children,
and although I sometimes felt my mother's hand tucking in the bedclothes
round me, she never stooped and kissed me on the brow and said, "Bless
you, my child." No one, in all my experience, had said, "Bless you, my
child." When the girl I have spoken of came into the room, her mother
reached out her arms and said, before everybody, "Here comes my
dear little girl." When I came into a room, I was usually told to do
something for somebody. It was "Please see if the fire needs more wood,"
or "Let the cat in, please," or "I'd like you to weed the pansy bed
before supper-time."

In these circumstances, life hardly seemed worth living. I decided that
I had made a mistake in choosing my family. It did not appreciate me,
and it failed to make my young life glad. I knew my young life ought to
be glad. And it was not. It was drab, as drab as Toot's old rain-coat.

Toot was "our coloured boy." That is the way we described him. Father
had brought him home from the war, and had sent him to school, and
then apprenticed him to a miller. Toot did "chores" for his board and
clothes, but was soon to be his own man, and to be paid money by the
miller, and to marry Tulula Darthula Jones, a nice coloured girl who
lived with the Cutlers.

The time had been when Toot had been my self-appointed slave. Almost my
first recollections were of his carrying me out to see the train pass,
and saying, "Toot, toot!" in imitation of the locomotive; so, although
he had rather a splendid name, I called him "Toot," and the whole town
followed my example. Yes, the time had been when Toot saw me safe to
school, and slipped little red apples into my pocket, and took me out
while he milked the cow, and told me stories and sang me plantation
songs. Now, when he passed, he only nodded. When I spoke to him about
his not giving me any more apples, he said:

"Ah reckon they're your pa's apples, missy. Why, fo' goodness' sake,
don' yo' he'p yo'se'f?"

But I did not want to help myself. I wanted to be helped--not because
I was lazy, but because I wanted to be adored. I was really a sort of
fairy princess,--misplaced, of course, in a stupid republic,--and I
wanted life conducted on a fairy-princess basis. It was a game I wished
to play, but it was one I could not play alone, and not a soul could I
find who seemed inclined to play it with me.

Well, things went from bad to worse. I decided that if mother no longer
loved me, I would no longer tell her things. So I did not. I got a
hundred in spelling for twelve days running, and did not tell her!
I broke Edna Grantham's mother's water-pitcher, and kept the fact a
secret. The secret was, indeed, as sharp-edged as the pieces of the
broken pitcher had been; I cried under the bedclothes, thinking how
sorry Mrs. Grantham had been, and that mother really ought to know.
Only what was the use? I no longer looked to her to help me out of my
troubles.

I had no need now to have father and mother tell me to hurry up and
finish my chatter, for I kept all that happened to myself. I had a new
"intimate friend," and did not so much as mention her. I wrote a poem
and showed it to my teacher, but not to my uninterested parents. And
when I climbed the stairs at night to my room, I swelled with loneliness
and anguish and resentment, and the hot tears came to my eyes as I heard
father and mother laughing and talking together and paying no attention
to my misery. I could hear Toot, who used to be making all sorts of
little presents for me, whistling as he brought in the wood and water,
and then "cleaned up" to go to see his Tulula, with never a thought of
me. And I said to myself that the best thing I could do was to grow up
and get away from a place where I was no longer wanted.

No one noticed my sufferings further than sometimes to say impatiently,
"What makes you act so strange, child?" And to that, of course,
I answered nothing, for what I had to say would not, I felt, be
understood.

One morning in June I left home with my resentment burning fiercely
within me. I had not cared for the things we had for breakfast, for I
was half-ill with fretting and with the closeness of the day, but my
lack of appetite had been passed by with the remark that any one
was likely not to have an appetite on such a close day. But I was so
languid, and so averse to taking up the usual round of things, that I
begged mother to let me stay at home. She shook her head decidedly.

"You've been out of school too many days already this term," she said.
"Run along now, or you'll be late!"

"Please--" I began, for my head really was whirling, although, quite as
much, perhaps, from my perversity as from any other cause. Mother turned
on me one of her "last-word" glances.

"Go to school without another word," she said, quietly.

I knew that quiet tone, and I went. And now I was sure that all was over
between my parents and myself. I began to wonder if I need really wait
till I was grown up before leaving home. So miserably absorbed was I
in thinking of this, and in pitying myself with a consuming pity,
that everything at school seemed to pass like the shadow of a dream. I
blundered in whatever I tried to do, was sharply scolded for not hearing
the teacher until she had spoken my name three times, and was holding on
to myself desperately in my effort to keep back a flood of tears, when I
became aware that something was happening.

There suddenly was a perfect silence in the room--the sort of silence
that makes the heart beat too fast. The mist swimming before me did not,
I perceived, come from my own eyes, but from the changing colour of the
air, the usual transparency of which was being tinged with yellow. The
sultriness of the day was deepening, and seemed to carry a threat with
it.

"Something is going to happen," thought I, and over the whole room
spread the same conviction. Electric currents seemed to snap from one
consciousness to another. We dropped our books, and turned our eyes
toward the western windows, to look upon a changed world. It was as if
we peered through yellow glass. In the sky soft-looking, tawny clouds
came tumbling along like playful cats--or tigers. A moment later we saw
that they were not playful, but angry; they stretched out claws, and
snarled as they did so. One claw reached the tall chimneys of the
schoolhouse, another tapped at the cupola, one was thrust through the
wall near where I sat.

Then it grew black, and there was a bellowing all about us, so that the
commands of the teacher and the screams of the children barely could be
heard. I knew little or nothing. My shoulder was stinging, something had
hit me on the side of the head, my eyes were full of dust and mortar,
and my feet were carrying me with the others along the corridor, down
the two flights of wide stairs. I do not think we pushed each other or
were reckless. My recollection is only of many shadowy figures flying on
with sure feet out of the building that seemed to be falling in upon us.

Presently we were out on the landing before the door, with one more
flight of steps before us, that reached to the street. Something so
strong that it might not be denied gathered me up in invisible arms,
whirled me round once or twice and dropped me, not ungently, in the
middle of the road. And then, as I struggled to my knees and, wiping the
dust from my eyes, looked up, I saw dozens of others being lifted in
the same way, and blown off into the yard or the street. The larger
ones were trying to hold on to the smaller, and the teachers were
endeavouring to keep the children from going out of the building, but
their efforts were of no avail. The children came on, and were blown
about like leaves.

Then I saw what looked like a high yellow wall advancing upon me--a
roaring and fearsome mass of driven dust, sticks, debris. It came over
me that my own home might be there, in strips and fragments, to beat me
down and kill me; and with the thought came a swift little vision out of
my geography of the Arabs in a sand-storm on the desert. I gathered up
my fluttering dress skirt, held it tight about my head, and lay flat
upon the ground.

It seemed as if a long time passed, a time in which I knew very little
except that I was fighting for my breath as I never had fought for
anything. There were more hurts and bruises now, but they did not
matter. Just to draw my own breath in my own way seemed to be the only
thing in the world that was of any account. And then there was a shaft
of flame, an earsplitting roar, and the rain was upon us in sheets, in
streams, in visible rivers.

I imagined that it would last a long time, and wondered in a daze how
I could get home in a rain like that--for I should have to face it. I
could see that in a few seconds the gutters had begun to race, the road
where I lay was a stream, and then--then the rain ceased. Never was
anything so astonishing. The sky came out blue, tattered rags of cloud
raced across it, and I had time to conclude that, whipped and almost
breathless though I was, I was still alive.

And then I saw a curious sight. Down the street in every direction came
rushing hatless men and women. Here and there a wild-eyed horse was
being lashed along. All the town was coming. They were in their work
clothes, in their slippers, in their wrappers--they were in anything
and everything. Some of them sobbed as they ran, some called aloud names
that I knew. They were fathers and mothers looking for their children.

And who was that--that woman with a white face, with hair falling about
her shoulders, where it had fallen as she ran--that woman whose breath
came between her teeth strangely and who called my name over and
over, bleatingly, as a mother sheep calls its lamb? At first I did not
recognise her, and then, at last, I knew. And that creature with the
rolling eyes and the curious ash-coloured face who, mumbling something
over and over in his throat, came for me, and snatched me up and wiped
my face free of mud, and felt of me here and there with trembling
hands--who was he?

And breaking out of the crowd of men who had come running from the
street of stores and offices, was another strange being, with a sort of
battle light in his eyes, who, seeing me, gathered me to him and bore me
away toward home. Looking back, I could see the woman I knew following,
leaning on the arm of the boy with the rolling eyes, whose eyes had
ceased to roll, and who was quite recognisable now as Toot.

A happiness that was almost as terrible as sorrow welled up in my heart.
I did not weep, or laugh, or talk. All I had experienced had carried me
beyond mere excitement into exultation. I exulted in life, in love. My
conceit and sulkiness died in that storm, as did many another thing. I
was alive. I was loved. I said it over and over to myself silently, in
"my heart's deep core," while mother washed me with trembling hands in
my own dear room, bound up my hurts, braided my hair, and put me, in a
fresh night-dress, into my bed. I do not recall that we talked to
each other, but in every caress of her hands as she worked I felt the
unspoken assurances of a love such as I had not dreamed of.

Father had gone running back to the school to see if he could be of any
assistance to his neighbours, and had taken Toot with him, but they were
back presently to say that beyond a few sharp injuries and broken bones,
no harm had been done to the children. It was considered miraculous that
no one had been killed or seriously injured, and I noticed that father's
voice trembled as he told of it, and that mother could not answer, and
that Toot sobbed like a big silly boy.

Then as we talked together, behold, a second storm was upon us--a sharp
black blast of wind and rain, not terrifying, like the other, but with
an "I've-come-to-spend-the-day" sort of aspect.

But no one seemed to mind very much. I was carried down to the
sitting-room. Toot busied himself coming and going on this errand and
on that, fastening the doors, closing the windows, running out to see
to the animals, and coming back again. Father and mother set the table.
They kept close together; and now and then they looked over at me,
without saying anything, but with shining eyes.

The storm died down to a quiet rain. From the roof of the porch the
drops fell in silver strings, like beads. Then the sun came out and
turned them into shining crystal. The birds began to sing again, and
when we threw open the windows delicious odours of fresh earth and
flowering shrub greeted us. Mother began to sing as she worked. And I
sank softly to sleep, thrilled with the marvels of the world--not of the
tempest, but of the peace.

The sweet familiarity of the faces and the walls and the furniture and
the garden was like a blessing. There was not a chair there that I would
have exchanged for any other chair--not a tree that I would have parted
with--not a custom of that simple, busy place that I would have changed.
I knew now all my stupidity--and my good fortune.




III. FRIENDSHIP

WHEN I look back upon the village where I lived as a child, I cannot
remember that there were any divisions in our society. This group went
to the Congregational church, and that to the Presbyterian, but each
family felt itself to be as good as any other, and even if, ordinarily,
some of them withdrew themselves in mild exclusiveness, on all occasions
of public celebration, or when in trouble, we stood together in the
pleasantest and most unaffected democracy.

There were only the "Bad Madigans" outside the pale.

The facts about the Bad Madigans were, no doubt, serious enough, but
the fiction was even more appalling. As to facts, the father drank,
the mother followed suit, the appearance of the house--a ramshackle old
place beyond the fair-grounds--was a scandal; the children could not be
got to go to school for any length of time, and, when they were there,
each class in which they were put felt itself to be in disgrace, and the
dislike focused upon the intruders, sent them, sullen and hateful, back
to their lair. And, indeed, the Madigan house seemed little more than a
lair. It had been rather a fine house once, and had been built for the
occupancy of the man who owned the fairgrounds; but he choosing finally
to live in the village, had permitted the house to fall into decay,
until only a family with no sense of order or self-respect would think
of occupying it.

When there occurred one of the rare burglaries in the village, when
anything was missing from a clothes-line, or a calf or pig disappeared,
it was generally laid to the Madigans. Unaccounted-for fires were
supposed to be their doing; they were accorded responsibility for
vicious practical jokes; and it was generally felt that before we were
through with them they would commit some blood-curdling crime.

When, as sometimes happened, I had met one of the Bad Madigans on the
road, or down on the village street, my heart had beaten as if I was
face to face with a company of banditti; but I cannot say that this
excitement was caused by aversion alone. The truth was, the Bad
Madigans fascinated me. They stood out from all the others, proudly and
disdainfully like Robin Hood and his band, and I could not get over
the idea that they said: "Fetch me yonder bow!" to each other; or, "Go
slaughter me a ten-tined buck!" I felt that they were fortunate in not
being held down to hours like the rest of us. Out of bed at six-thirty,
at table by seven, tidying bedroom at seven-thirty, dusting sitting-room
at eight, on way to school at eight-thirty, was not for "the likes of
them!" Only we, slaves of respectability and of an inordinate appetite
for order, suffered such monotony and drabness to rule. I knew the
Madigan boys could go fishing whenever they pleased, that the Madigan
girls picked the blackberries before any one else could get out to them,
that every member of the family could pack up and go picnicking for days
at a time, and that any stray horse was likely to be ridden bareback,
within an inch of its life, by the younger members of the family.

Only once however, did I have a chance to meet one of these modern
Visigoths face to face, and the feelings aroused by that incident
remained the darling secret of my youth. I dared tell no one, and I
longed, yet feared, to have the experience repeated. But it never was!
It happened in this way:

On a certain Sunday afternoon in May, my father and mother and I went to
Emmons' Woods. To reach Emmons' Woods, you went out the back door,
past the pump and the currant bushes, then down the path to the
chicken-houses, and so on, by way of the woodpile, to the south gate.
After that, you went west toward the clover meadows, past the house
where the Crazy Lady lived--here, if you were alone, you ran--and then,
reaching the verge of the woods, you took your choice of climbing a
seven-rail fence or of walking a quarter of a mile till you came to the
bars. The latter was much better for the lace on a Sunday petticoat.

Once in Emmons' Woods, there was enchantment. An eagle might come--or
a blue heron. There had been bears in Emmons' Woods--bears with rolling
eyes and red mouths from which their tongues lolled. There was one place
for pinky trillium, and another for gentians; one for tawny adders'
tongues, and another for yellow Dutchman's breeches. In the sap-starting
season, the maples dripped their luscious sap into little wooden cups;
later, partridges nested in the sun-burned grass. There was no lake or
river, but there was a pond, swarming with a vivacious population, and
on the hard-baked clay of the pond beach the green beetles aired their
splendid changeable silks and sandpipers hopped ridiculously.

It was, curiously enough, easier to run than to walk in Emmons' Woods,
and even more natural to dance than to run. One became acquainted with
squirrels, established intimacies with chipmunks, and was on some sort
of civil relation with blackbirds. And, oh, the tossing green of the
young willows, where the lilac distance melted into the pale blue of the
sky! And, oh, the budding of the maples and the fringing of the oaks;
and, oh, the blossoming of the tulip trees and the garnering of the
chestnuts! And then, the wriggling things in the grass; the procession
of ants; the coquetries of the robins; and the Beyond, deepening,
deepening into the forest where it was safe only for the woodsmen to go.

On this particular Sunday one of us was requested not to squeal and run
about, and to remember that we wore our best shoes and need not mess
them unnecessarily. It was hard to be reminded just when the dance was
getting into my feet, but I tried to have Sunday manners, and went along
in the still woods, wondering why the purple colours disappeared as
we came on and what had been distance became nearness. There was a
beautiful, aching vagueness over everything, and it was not strange
that father, who had stretched himself on the moss, and mother, who was
reading Godey's Ladies' Book, should presently both of them be nodding.
So, that being a well-established fact--I established it by hanging over
them and staring at their eyelids--it seemed a good time for me to let
the dance out of my toes. Still careful of my fresh linen frock, and
remembering about the best shoes, I went on, demurely, down the green
alleys of the wood. Now I stepped on patches of sunshine, now in pools
of shadow. I thought of how naughty I was to run away like this, and of
what a mistake people made who said I was a good, quiet, child. I knew
that I looked sad and prim, but I really hated my sadness and primness
and goodness, and longed to let out all the interesting, wild, naughty
thoughts there were in me. I wanted to act as if I were bewitched, and
to tear up vines and wind them about me, to shriek to the echoes, and
to scold back at the squirrels. I wanted to take off my clothes and
rush into the pond, and swim like a fish, or wriggle like a pollywog.
I wanted to climb trees and drop from them; and, most of all--oh, with
what longing--did I wish to lift myself above the earth and fly into the
bland blue air!

I came to a hollow where there was a wonderful greenness over
everything, and I said to myself that I would be bewitched at last. I
would dance and whirl and call till, perhaps, some kind of a creature as
wild and wicked and wonderful as I, would come out of the woods and join
me. So I forgot about the fresh linen frock, and wreathed myself with
wild grape-vine; I cared nothing for my fresh braids and wound trillium
in my hair; and I ceased to remember my new shoes, and whirled around
and around in the leafy mould, singing and shouting.

I grew madder and madder. I seemed not to be myself at all, but some
sort of a wood creature; and just when the trees were looking larger
than ever they did before, and the sky higher up, a girl came running
down from a sort of embankment where a tornado had made a path for
itself and had hurled some great chestnuts and oaks in a tumbled mass.
The girl came leaping down the steep sides of this place, her arms
outspread, her feet bare, her dress no more than a rag the colour of the
tree-trunks. She had on a torn green jacket, which made her seem more
than ever like some one who had just stepped out of a hollow tree, and,
to my unspeakable happiness, she joined me in my dance.

I shall never forget how beautiful she was, with her wild tangle of dark
hair, and her deep blue eyes and ripe lips. Her cheeks were flaming red,
and her limbs strong and brown. She did not merely shout and sing; she
whistled, and made calls like the birds, and cawed like a crow, and
chittered like a squirrel, and around and around the two of us danced,
crazy as dervishes with the beauty of the spring and the joy of being
free.

By and by we were so tired we had to stop, and then we sat down panting
and looked at each other. At that we laughed, long and foolishly, but,
after a time, it occurred to us that we had many questions to ask.

"How did you get here?" I asked the girl.

"I was walking my lone," she said, speaking her words as if there was a
rich thick quality to them, "and I heard you screeling."

"Won't you get lost, alone like that?"

"I can't get lost," she sighed. "I 'd like to, but I can't."

"Where do you live?"

"Beyant the fair-grounds."

"You're not--not Norah Madigan?"

She leaned back and clasped her hands behind her head. Then she smiled
at me teasingly.

"I am that," she said, showing her perfect teeth.

I caught my breath with a sharp gasp. Ought I to turn back to my
parents? Had I been so naughty that I had called the naughtiest girl in
the whole county out to me?

But I could not bring myself to leave her. She was leaning forward and
looking at me now with mocking eyes.

"Are you afraid?" she demanded.

"Afraid of what?" I asked, knowing quite well what she meant.

"Of me?" she retorted.

At that second an agreeable truth overtook me. I leaned forward, too,
and put my hand on hers.

"Why, I like you!" I cried. She began laughing again, but this time
there was no mockery in it. She ran her fingers over the embroidery on
my linen frock, she examined the lace on my petticoat, looked at the
bows on my shoes, and played delicately with the locket dangling from
the slender chain around my neck.

"Do you know--other girls?" she almost whispered.

I nodded. "Lots and lots of 'em," I said. "Don't you?"

She shook her head in wistful denial.

"Us Madigans," she said, "keeps to ourselves." She said it so haughtily
that for a moment I was almost persuaded into thinking that they lived
their solitary lives from choice. But, glancing up at her, I saw a blush
that covered her face, and there were tears in her eyes.

"Well, anyway," said I quickly, "we know each other."

"Yes," she cried, "we do that!"

She got up, then, and ran to a great tree from which a stout grape-vine
was swinging, and pulling at it with her strong arms, she soon had it
made into a practical swing.

"Come!" she called--"come, let's swing together!"

She helped me to balance myself on the rope-like vine, and, placing her
feet outside of mine, showed me how to "work up" till we were sweeping
with a fine momentum through the air. We shrieked with excitement, and
urged each other on to more and more frantic exertions. We were like two
birds, but to birds flying is no novelty. With us it was, which made us
happier than birds. But I, for my part, was no more delighted with
my swift flights through the air than I was with the shining eyes and
flashing teeth of the girl opposite me. I liked her strength, and the
way in which her body bent and swayed. Once more, she seemed like a
wood-child--a wild, mad, gay creature from the tree. I felt as if I had
drawn a playmate from elf-land, and I liked her a thousand times
better than those proper little girls who came to see me of a Saturday
afternoon.

Well, there we were, rocking and screaming, and telling each other that
we were hawks, and that we were flying high over the world, when the
anxious and austere voice of my mother broke upon our ears. We tried to
stop, but that was not such an easy matter to do, and as we twisted and
writhed, to bring our grape-vine swing to a standstill, there was a slow
rending and breaking which struck terror to our souls.

"Jump!" commanded Norah--"jump! the vine's breaking!" We leaped at the
same moment, she safely. My foot caught in a stout tendril, and I fell
headlong, scraping my forehead on the ground and tearing a triangular
rent in the pretty, new frock. Mother came running forward, and the
expression on her face was far from being the one I liked to see.

"What have you been doing?" she demanded. "I thought you were getting
old enough and sensible enough to take care of yourself!"

I must have been a depressing sight, viewed with the eyes of a careful
mother. Blood and mould mingled on my face, my dress needed a laundress
as badly as a dress could, and my shoes were scratched and muddy.

"And who is this girl?" asked mother. I had become conscious that Norah
was at my feet, wiping off my shoes with her queer little brown frock.

"It's a new friend of mine," gasped I, beginning to see that I must lose
her, and hoping the lump in my throat wouldn't get any bigger than it
was.

"What is her name?" asked mother. I had no time to answer. The girl did
that.

"I'm Norah Madigan," she said. Her tone was respectful, and, maybe, sad.
At any rate, it had a curious sound.

"Norah Mad-i-gan?" asked mother doubtfully, stringing out the word.

"Yessum," said a low voice. "Goodbye, mum."

"Oh, Norah!" cried I, a strange pain stabbing my heart. "Come to see
me--"

But my mother's voice broke in, firm and kind.

"Good-bye, Norah," said she.

I saw Norah turn and run up among the trees, almost as swiftly and
silently as a hare. Once, she turned to look back. I was watching, and
caught the chance to wave my hand to her.

"Come!" commanded mother, and we went back to where father was sitting.

"What do you think!" said mother. "I found the child playing with one of
the Bad Madigans. Isn't she a sight!"

The lump in my throat swelled to a terrible size; something buzzed in my
ears, and I heard some one weeping. For a second or two I didn't realise
that it was myself.

"Well, never mind, dear," said mother's voice soothingly. "The frock
will wash, and the tear will mend, and the shoes will black. Yes, and
the scratches will heal."

"It isn't that," I sobbed. "Oh, oh, it isn't that!"

"What is it, then, for goodness sake?" asked mother.

But I would not tell. I could not tell. How could I say that the
daughter of the Bad Madigans was the first real and satisfying playmate
I had ever had?




IV. FAME

AS I remember the boys and girls who grew up with me, I think of them as
artists, or actors, or travellers, or rich merchants. Each of us, by the
time we were half through grammar school, had selected a career. So far
as I recollect, this career had very little to do with our abilities.
We merely chose something that suited us. Our energy and our vanity
crystallised into particular shapes. There was a sort of religion abroad
in the West at that time that a person could do almost anything he set
out to do. The older people, as well as the children, had an idea that
the world was theirs--they all were Monte Cristos in that respect.

As for me, I had decided to be an orator.

At the time of making this decision, I was nine years of age, decidedly
thin and long drawn out, with two brown braids down my back, and a
terrific shyness which I occasionally overcame with such a magnificent
splurge that those who were not acquainted with my peculiarities
probably thought me a shamefully assertive child.

I based my oratorical aspirations upon my having taken the prize a
number of times in Sunday-school for learning the most New Testament
verses, and upon the fact that I always could make myself heard to the
farthest corner of the room. I also felt that I had a great message to
deliver to the world when I got around it, though in this, I was in
no way different from several of my friends. I had noticed a number
of things in the world that were not quite right, and which I thought
needed attention, and I believed that if I were quite good and studied
elocution, in a little while I should be able to set my part of
the world right, and perhaps even extend my influence to adjoining
districts.

Meantime I practised terrible vocal exercises, chiefly consisting of a
raucous "caw" something like a crow's favourite remark, and advocated
by my teacher in elocution for no reason that I can now remember; and
I stood before the glass for hours at a time making grimaces so as to
acquire the "actor's face," till my frightened little sisters implored
me to turn back into myself again.

It was a great day for me when I was asked to participate in the Harvest
Home Festival at our church on Thanksgiving Day. I looked upon it as the
beginning of my career, and bought crimping papers so that my hair could
be properly fluted. Of course, I wanted a new dress for the occasion,
and I spent several days in planning the kind of a one I thought best
suited to such a memorable event. I even picked out the particular
lace pattern I wanted for the ruffles. This was before I submitted the
proposition to Mother, however. When I told her about it she said she
could see no use in getting a new dress and going to all the trouble of
making it when my white one with the green harps was perfectly good.

This was such an unusual dress and had gone through so many
vicissitudes, that I really was devotedly attached to it. It had, in the
beginning, belonged to my Aunt Bess, and in the days of its first
glory had been a sheer Irish linen lawn, with tiny green harps on it at
agreeable intervals. But in the course of time, it had to be sent to
the wash-tub, and then, behold, all the little lovely harps followed
the example of the harp that "once through Tara's hall the soul of music
shed," and disappeared! Only vague, dirty, yellow reminders of their
beauty remained, not to decorate, but to disfigure the fine fabric.

Aunt Bess, naturally enough, felt irritated, and she gave the goods to
mother, saying that she might be able to boil the yellow stains out of
it and make me a dress. I had gone about many a time, like love amid the
ruins, in the fragments of Aunt Bess's splendour, and I was not happy in
the thought of dangling these dimmed reminders of Ireland's past around
with me. But mother said she thought I'd have a really truly white
Sunday best dress out of it by the time she was through with it. So
she prepared a strong solution of sodium and things, and boiled the
breadths, and every little green harp came dancing back as if awaiting
the hand of a new Dublin poet. The green of them was even more charming
than it had been at first, and I, as happy as if I had acquired the
golden harp for which I then vaguely longed, went to Sunday-school
all that summer in this miraculous dress of now-you-see-them
and-now-you-don't, and became so used to being asked if I were Irish
that my heart exulted when I found that I might--fractionally--claim to
be, and that one of the Fenian martyrs had been an ancestor. For a year,
even, after that discovery of the Fenian martyr, ancestors were a
favorite study of mine.

Well, though the dress became something more than familiar to the eyes
of my associates, I was so attached to it that I felt no objection to
wearing it on the great occasion; and, that being settled, all that
remained was to select the piece which was to reveal my talents to a
hitherto unappreciative--or, perhaps I should say, unsuspecting--group
of friends and relatives. It seemed to me that I knew better than my
teacher (who had agreed to select the pieces for her pupils) possibly
could what sort of a thing best represented my talents, and so, after
some thought, I selected "Antony and Cleopatra," and as I lagged
along the too-familiar road to school, avoiding the companionship of my
acquaintances, I repeated:

     I am dying, Egypt, dying!
        Ebbs the crimson life-tide fast,
     And the dark Plutonian shadows
        Gather on the evening blast.

Sometimes I grew so impassioned, so heedless of all save my mimic sorrow
and the swing of the purple lines, that I could not bring myself to
modify my voice, and the passers-by heard my shrill tones vibrating
with:

     As for thee, star-eyed Egyptian!
        Glorious sorceress of the Nile!
     Light the path to Stygian horrors
        With the splendour of thy smile.

I wiped dishes to the rhythm of such phrases as "scarred and veteran
legions," and laced my shoes to the music of "Though no glittering
guards surround me."

Confident that no one could fail to see the beauty of these lines, or
the propriety of the identification of myself with Antony, I called upon
my Sunday-school teacher, Miss Goss, to report. I never had thought
of Miss Goss as a blithe spirit. She was associated in my mind with
numerous solemn occasions, and I was surprised to find that on this day
she unexpectedly developed a trait of breaking into nervous laughter.
I had got as far as "Should the base plebeian rabble--" when Miss Goss
broke down in what I could not but regard as a fit of giggles, and I
ceased abruptly.

She pulled herself together after a moment or two, and said if I would
follow her to the library she thought she could find something--here she
hesitated, to conclude with, "more within the understanding of the other
children." I saw that she thought my feelings were hurt, and as I
passed a mirror I feared she had some reason to think so. My face was
uncommonly flushed, and a look of indignation had crept, somehow, even
into my braids, which, having been plaited too tightly, stuck out in
crooks and kinks from the side of my head. Incidentally, I was horrified
to notice how thin I was--thin, even for a dying Antony--and my frock
was so outgrown that it hardly covered my knees. "Ridiculous!" I said
under my breath, as I confronted this miserable figure--so shamefully
insignificant for the vicarious emotions which it had been housing.
"Ridiculous!"

I hated Miss Goss, and must have shown it in my stony stare, for she put
her arm around me and said it was a pity I had been to all the trouble
to learn a poem which was--well, a trifle too--too old--but that she
hoped to find something equally "pretty" for me to speak. At the use of
that adjective in connection with William Lytle's lines, I wrenched away
from her grasp and stood in what I was pleased to think a haughty calm,
awaiting her directions.

She took from the shelves a little volume of Whittier, bound in calf,
handling it as tenderly as if it were a priceless possession. Some
pressed violets dropped out as she opened it, and she replaced them
with devotional fingers. After some time she decided upon a lyric lament
entitled "Eva." I was asked to run over the verses, and found them
remarkably easy to learn; fatally impossible to forget. I presently
arose and with an impish betrayal of the poverty of rhyme and the
plethora of sentiment, repeated the thing relentlessly.

     O for faith like thine, sweet Eva,
     Lighting all the solemn reevah [river],
     And the blessings of the poor,
     Wafting to the heavenly shoor [shore].

"I do think," said Miss Goss gently, "that if you tried, my child, you
might manage the rhymes just a little better."

"But if you're born in Michigan," I protested, "how can you possibly
make 'Eva' rhyme with 'never' and 'believer'?"

"Perhaps it is a little hard," Miss Goss agreed, and still clinging to
her Whittier, she exhumed "The Pumpkin," which she thought precisely
fitted for our Harvest Home festival. This was quite another thing from
"Eva," and I saw that only hours of study would fix it in my mind. I
went to my home, therefore, with "The Pumpkin" delicately transcribed
in Miss Goss's running hand, and I tried to get some comfort from the
foreign allusions glittering through Whittier's kindly verse. As the
days went by I came to have a certain fondness for those homely lines:

     O--fruit loved of boyhood!--the old days recalling,
     When wood grapes were purpling and brown nuts were falling!
     When wild, ugly faces we carved in the skin,
     Glaring out through the dark with a candle within!

     When we laughed round the corn-heap, with hearts all in tune,
     Our chair a broad pumpkin--our lantern the moon,
     Telling tales of the fairy who travelled like steam
     In a pumpkin-shell coach, with two rats for her team!

On all sides this poem was considered very fitting, and I went to the
festival with that comfortable feeling one has when one is moving with
the majority and is wearing one's best clothes.

I sat rigid with expectancy while my schoolmates spoke their "pieces"
and sang their songs. With frozen faces they faced each other in
dialogues, lost their quavering voices, and stumbled down the stairs
in their anguish of spirit. I pitied them, and thought how lucky it was
that my memory never failed me, and that my voice carried so well that I
could arouse even old Elder Waite from his slumbers.

Then my turn came. My crimps were beautiful; the green harps danced on
my freshly-ironed frock, and I had on my new chain and locket. I relied
upon a sort of mechanism in me to say: O greenly and fair in the lands
of the sun, The vines of the gourd and the rich melon run.

In this seemly manner Whittier's ode to the pumpkin began. I meant to
go on to verses which I knew would delight my audience--to references to
the "crook-necks" ripening under the September sun; and to Thanksgiving
gatherings at which all smiled at the reunion of friends and the bounty
of the board.

     What moistens the lip and brightens the eye!
     What calls back the past like the rich pumpkin pie!

I was sure these lines would meet with approval, and having "come down
to the popular taste," I was prepared to do my best to please.

After a few seconds, when the golden pumpkins that lined the stage had
ceased to dance before my eyes, I thought I ought to begin to "get
hold of my audience." Of course, my memory would be giving me the right
words, and my facile tongue running along reliably, but I wished to
demonstrate that "ability" which was to bring me favour and fame. I
listened to my own words and was shivered into silence. I was talking
about "dark Plutonian shadows"; I was begging "Egypt" to let her arms
enfold me--I was, indeed, in the very thick of the forbidden poem. I
could hear my thin, aspiring voice reaching out over that paralysed
audience with:

     Though my scarred and veteran legions
        Bear their eagles high no more;
     And my wrecked and scattered galleys
        Strew dark Actium's fatal shore.

My tongue seemed frozen, or some kind of a ratchet at the base of it
had got out of order. For a moment--a moment can be the little sister
of eternity--I could say nothing. Then I found myself in the clutches of
the instinct for self-preservation. I felt it in me to stop the giggles
of the girls on the front seat; to take the patronising smiles out of
the tolerant eyes of the grown people. Maybe my voice lost something of
its piping insistence and was touched with genuine feeling; perhaps some
faint, faint spark of the divine fire which I longed to fan into a flame
did flicker in me for that one time. I had the indescribable happiness
of seeing the smiles die on the faces of my elders, and of hearing the
giggles of my friends cease.

I went to my seat amid what I was pleased to consider "thunders of
applause," and by way of acknowledgment, I spoke, with chastened
propriety, Whittier's ode to the pumpkin.

I cannot remember whether or not I was scolded. I'm afraid, afterward,
some people still laughed. As for me, oddly enough, my oratorical
aspirations died. I decided there were other careers better fitted to
one of my physique. So I had to go to the trouble of finding another
career; but just what it was I have forgotten.




V. REMORSE

IT is extraordinary, when you come to think of it, how very few days,
out of all the thousands that have passed, lift their heads from
the grey plain of the forgotten--like bowlders in a level stretch of
country. It is not alone the unimportant ones that are forgotten; but,
according to one's elders, many important ones have left no mark in the
memory. It seems to me, as I think it over, that it was the days that
affected the emotions that dwell with me, and I suppose all of us must
be the same in this respect.

Among those which I am never to forget is the day when Aunt Cordelia
came to visit us--my mother's aunt, she was--and when I discovered evil,
and tried to understand what the use of it was.

Great-aunt Cordelia was, as I often and often had been told, not only
much travelled, rich and handsome, but good also. She was, indeed, an
important personage in her own city, and it seemed to be regarded as
an evidence of unusual family fealty that she should go about, now and
then, briefly visiting all of her kinfolk to see how they fared in the
world. I ought to have looked forward to meeting her, but this, for
some perverse reason, I did not do. I wished I might run away and hide
somewhere till her visit was over. It annoyed me to have to clean up the
play-room on her account, and to help polish the silver, and to comb
out the fringe of the tea napkins. I liked to help in these tasks
ordinarily, but to do it for the purpose of coming up to a visiting--and
probably, a condescending--goddess, somehow made me cross.

Among other hardships, I had to take care of my little sister Julie all
day. I loved Julie. She had soft golden-brown curls fuzzing around on her
head, and mischievous brown eyes--warm, extra-human eyes. There was a
place in the back of her neck, just below the point of her curls, which
it was a privilege to kiss; and though she could not yet talk, she had a
throaty, beautiful little exclamation, which cannot be spelled any more
than a bird note, with which she greeted all the things she liked--a
flower, or a toy, or mother. But loving Julie as she sat in mother's
lap, and having to care for her all of a shining Saturday, were two
quite different things. As the hours wore along I became bored with
looking at the golden curls of my baby sister; I had no inclination to
kiss the "honey-spot" in the back of her neck; and when she fretted from
heat and teething and my perfunctory care, I grew angry.

I knew mother was busy making custards and cakes for Aunt Cordelia, and
I longed to be in watching these pleasing operations. I thought--but
what does it matter what I thought? I was bad! I was so bad that I was
glad I was bad. Perhaps it was nerves. Maybe I really had taken care
of the baby too long. But however that may be, for the first time in my
life I enjoyed the consciousness of having a bad disposition--or perhaps
I ought to say that I felt a fiendish satisfaction in the discovery that
I had one.

Along in the middle of the afternoon three of the girls in the
neighbourhood came over to play. They had their dolls, and they wanted
to "keep house" in the "new part" of our home. We were living in a roomy
and comfortable "addition," which had, oddly enough, been built before
the building to which it was finally to serve as an annex. That is to
say, it had been the addition before there was anything to add it to. By
this time, however, the new house was getting a trifle old, as it waited
for the completion of its rather disproportionate splendours; splendours
which represented the ambitions rather than the achievements of the
family. It towered, large, square, imposing, with hints of M. Mansard's
grandiose architectural ideas in its style, in the very centre of a
village block of land. From the first, it exercised a sort of "I dreamt
I dwelt in marble halls" effect upon me, and in a vague way, at the back
of my mind, floated the idea that when we passed from our modest home
into this commanding edifice, well-trained servants mysteriously would
appear, beautiful gowns would be found awaiting my use in the closets,
and father and mother would be able to take their ease, something after
the fashion of the "landed gentry" of whom I had read in Scotch and
English books. The ceilings of the new house were so high, the sweep of
the stairs so dramatic, the size of the drawing-rooms so copious, that
perhaps I hardly was to be blamed for expecting a transformation scene.

But until this new life was realised, the clean, bare rooms made the
best of all possible play-rooms, and with the light streaming in through
the trees, and falling, delicately tinged with green, upon the new
floors, and with the scent of the new wood all about, it was a place
of indefinable enchantment. I was allowed to play there all I
pleased--except when I had Julie. There were unguarded windows and
yawning stair-holes, and no steps as yet leading from the ground to the
great opening where the carved front door was some time to be. Instead,
there were planks, inclined at a steep angle, beneath which lay the
stones of which the foundation to the porch were to be made. Jagged
pieces of yet unhewn sandstone they were, with cruel edges.

But to-day when the girls said, "Oh, come!" my newly discovered badness
echoed their words. I wanted to go with them. So I went.

Out of the corner of my eye I could see father in the distance, but I
wouldn't look at him for fear he would be magnetised into turning my
way. The girls had gone up, and I followed, with Julie in my arms. Did I
hear father call to me to stop? He always said I did, but I think he was
mistaken. Perhaps I merely didn't wish to hear him. Anyway, I went on,
balancing myself as best I could. The other girls had reached the top,
and turned to look at us, and I knew they were afraid. I think they
would have held out their hands to help me, but I had both arms clasped
about Julie. So I staggered on, got almost to the top, then seemed
submerged beneath a wave of fears--mine and those of the girls--and
fell! As I went, I curled like a squirrel around Julie, and when I
struck, she was still in my grasp and on top of me. But she rolled
out of my relaxing clutch after that, and when father and mother came
running, she was lying on the stones. They thought she had fallen that
way, and as the breath had been fairly knocked out of her little body,
so that she was not crying, they were more frightened than ever, and ran
with her to the house, wild with apprehension.

As for me, I got up somehow and followed. I decided no bones were broken,
but I was dizzy and faint, and aching from bruises. I saw my little
friends running down the plank and making off along the poplar drive,
white-faced and panting. I knew they thought Julie was dead and that I'd
be hung. I had the same idea.

When we got to the sitting-room I had a strange feeling of never having
seen it before. The tall stove, the green and oak ingrain carpet, the
green rep chairs, the what-not with its shells, the steel engravings
on the walls, seemed absolutely strange. I sat down and counted the
diamond-shaped figures on the oilcloth in front of the stove; and after
a long time I heard Julie cry, and mother say with immeasurable relief:

"Aside from a shaking up, I don't believe she's a bit the worse."

Then some one brought me a cupful of cold water and asked me if I was
hurt. I shook my head and would not speak. I then heard, in simple and
emphatic Anglo-Saxon the opinions of my father and mother about a girl
who would put her little sister's life in danger, and would disobey her
parents. And after that I was put in my mother's bedroom to pass the
rest of the day, and was told I needn't expect to come to the table with
the others.

I accepted my fate stoically, and being permitted to carry my own chair
into the room, I put it by the western window, which looked across two
miles of meadows waving in buckwheat, in clover and grass, and sat
there in a curious torpor of spirit. I was glad to be alone, for I had
discovered a new idea--the idea of sin. I wished to be left to myself
till I could think out what it meant. I believed I could do that by
night, and, after I had got to the root of the matter, I could cast the
whole ugly thing out of my soul and be good all the rest of my life.

There was a large upholstered chair standing in front of me, and I put
my head down on the seat of that and thought and thought. My thoughts
reached so far that I grew frightened, and I was relieved when I felt
the little soft grey veils drawing about me which I knew meant sleep.
It seemed to me that I really ought to weep--that the circumstances were
such that I should weep. But sleep was sweeter than tears, and not only
the pain in my mind but the jar and bruise of my body seemed to demand
that oblivion. So I gave way to the impulse, and the grey veils wrapped
around and around me as a spider's web enwraps a fly. And for hours I
knew nothing.

When I awoke it was the close of day. Long tender shadows lay across the
fields, the sky had that wonderful clearness and kindness which is like
a human eye, and the soft wind puffing in at the window was sweet with
field fragrance. A glass of milk and a plate with two slices of bread
lay on the window sill by me, as if some one had placed them there
from the outside. I could hear birds settling down for the night, and
cheeping drowsily to each other. My cat came on the scene and, seeing
me, looked at me with serious, expanding eyes, twitched her whiskers
cynically, and passed on. Presently I heard the voices of my family.
They were re-entering the sitting-room. Supper was over--supper, with
its cold meats and shining jellies, its "floating island" and its fig
cake. I could hear a voice that was new to me. It was deeper than my
mother's, and its accent was different. It was the sort of a voice that
made you feel that its owner had talked with many different kinds of
people, and had contrived to hold her own with all of them. I knew it
belonged to Aunt Cordelia. And now that I was not to see her, I felt
my curiosity arising in me. I wanted to look at her, and still more I
wished to ask her about goodness. She was rich and good! Was one the
result of the other? And which came first? I dimly perceived that if
there had been more money in our house there would have been more help,
and I would not have been led into temptation--baby would not have been
left too long upon my hands. However, after a few moments of self-pity,
I rejected this thought. I knew I really was to blame, and it occurred
to me that I would add to my faults if I tried to put the blame on
anybody else.

Now that the first shock was over and that my sleep had refreshed me, I
began to see what terrible sorrow had been mine if the fall had really
injured Julie; and a sudden thought shook me. She might, after all, have
been hurt in some way that would show itself later on. I yearned to look
upon her, to see if all her sweetness and softness was intact. It seemed
to me that if I could not see her the rising grief in me would break,
and I would sob aloud. I didn't want to do that. I had no notion to call
any attention to myself whatever, but see the baby I must. So, softly,
and like a thief, I opened the door communicating with the little
dressing-room in which Julie's cradle stood. The curtain had been drawn
and it was almost dark, but I found my way to Julie's bassinet. I could
not quite see her, but the delicate odour of her breath came up to me,
and I found her little hand and slipped my finger in it. It was gripped
in a baby pressure, and I stood there enraptured, feeling as if a flower
had caressed me. I was thrilled through and through with happiness,
and with love for this little creature, whom my selfishness might have
destroyed. There was nothing in what had happened during this moment or
two when I stood by her side to assure me that all was well with her;
but I did so believe, and I said over and over: "Thank you, God! Thank
you, God!"

And now my tears began to flow. They came in a storm--a storm I could
not control, and I fled back to mother's room, and stood there before
the west window weeping as I never had wept before.

The quiet loveliness of the closing day had passed into the splendour of
the afterglow. Mighty wings as of bright angels, pink and shining white,
reached up over the sky. The vault was purple above me, and paled to
lilac, then to green of unimaginable tenderness. Now I quenched my
tears to look, and then I wept again, weeping no more for sorrow and
loneliness and shame than for gratitude and delight in beauty. So fair a
world! What had sin to do with it? I could not make it out.

The shining wings grew paler, faded, then darkened; the melancholy sound
of cow-bells stole up from the common. The birds were still; a low
wind rustled the trees. I sat thinking my young "night thoughts" of
how marvellous it was for the sun to set, to rise, to keep its place in
heaven--of how wrapped about with mysteries we were. What if the world
should start to falling through space? Where would it land? Was there
even a bottom to the universe? "World without end" might mean that there
was neither an end to space nor yet to time. I shivered at thought of
such vastness.

Suddenly light streamed about me, warm arms enfolded me.

"Mother!" I murmured, and slipped from the unknown to the dear
familiarity of her shoulder.

It was, I soon perceived, a silk-clad shoulder. Mother had on her best
dress; nay, she wore her coral pin and ear-rings. Her lace collar was
scented with Jockey Club, and her neck, into which I was burrowing, had
the indescribable something that was not quite odour, not all softness,
but was compounded of these and meant mother. She said little to me as
she drew me away and bathed my face, brushed and plaited my hair, and
put on my clean frock. But we felt happy together. I knew she was as
glad to forgive as I was to be forgiven.

In a little while she led me, blinking, into the light. A tall stranger,
a lady in prune-coloured silk, sat in the high-backed chair.

"This is my eldest girl, Aunt Cordelia," said my mother. I went forward
timidly, wondering if I were really going to be greeted by this person
who must have heard such terrible reports of me. I found myself caught
by the hands and drawn into the embrace of this new, grand acquaintance.

"Well, I've been wanting to see you," said the rich, kind voice. "They
say you look as I did at your age. They say you are like me!"

Like her--who was good! But no one referred to this difference or said
anything about my sins. When we were sorry, was evil, then, forgotten
and sin forgiven? A weight as of iron dropped from my spirit. I sank
with a sigh on the hassock at my aunt's feet. I was once more a member
of society.




VI. TRAVEL

IT was time to say good-bye.

I had been down to my little brother's grave and watered the sorrel that
grew on it--I thought it was sorrow, and so tended it; and I had walked
around the house and said good-bye to every window, and to the robin's
nest, and to my playhouse in the shed. I had put a clean ribbon on the
cat's neck, and kissed my doll, and given presents to my little sisters.
Now, shivering beneath my new grey jacket in the chill of the May
morning air, I stood ready to part with my mother. She was a little
flurried with having just ironed my pinafores and collars, and with
having put the last hook on my new Stuart plaid frock, and she looked
me over with rather an anxious eye. As for me, I thought my clothes
charming, and I loved the scarlet quill in my grey hat, and the set of
my new shoes. I hoped, above all, that no one would notice that I was
trembling and lay it down to fear.

Of course, I had been away before. It was not the first time I had left
everything to take care of itself. But this time I was going alone, and
that gave rather a different aspect to things. To go into the country
for a few days, or even to Detroit, in the company of a watchful parent,
might be called a "visit"; but to go alone, partly by train and partly
by stage, and to arrive by one's self, amounted to "travel." I had an
aunt who had travelled, and I felt this morning that love of travel ran
in the family. Probably even Aunt Cordelia had been a trifle nervous, at
first, when she started out for Hawaii, say, or for Egypt.

Mother and I were both fearful that the driver of the station 'bus
hadn't really understood that he was to call. First she would ask
father, and then I would ask him, if he was quite sure the man
understood, and father said that if the man could understand English at
all--and he supposed he could--he had understood that. Father was right
about it, too, for just when we--that is, mother and I--were almost
giving up, the 'bus horses swung in the big gate and came pounding
up the drive between the Lombardy poplars, which were out in their
yellow-green spring dress. They were a bay team with a yellow harness
which clinked splendidly with bone rings, and the 'bus was as yellow
as a pumpkin, and shaped not unlike one, so that I gave it my instant
approval. It was precisely the sort of vehicle in which I would have
chosen to go away. So absorbed was I in it that, though I must have
kissed mother, I have really no recollection of it; and it was only when
we were swinging out of the gate, and I looked back and saw her standing
in the door watching us, that a terrible pang came over me, so that for
one crazy moment I thought I was going to jump out and run back to her.

But I held on to father's hand and turned my face away from home with
all the courage I could summon, and we went on through the town and
out across a lonely stretch of country to the railroad. For we were an
obstinate little town, and would not build up to the railroad because
the railroad had refused to run up to us. It was a new station with a
fine echo in it, and the man who called out the trains had a beautiful
voice for echoes. It was created to inspire them and to encourage them,
and I stood fascinated by the thunderous noises he was making till
father seized me by the hand and thrust me into the care of the train
conductor. They said something to each other in the sharp, explosive way
men have, and the conductor took me to a seat and told me I was his girl
for the time being, and to stay right there till he came for me at my
station.

What amazed me was that the car should be full of people. I could not
imagine where they all could be going. It was all very well for me,
who belonged to a family of travellers--as witness Aunt Cordelia--to be
going on a journey, but for these others, these many, many others, to be
wandering around, heaven knows where, struck me as being not right. It
seemed to take somewhat from the glory of my adventure.

However, I noticed that most of them looked poor. Their clothes were
old and ugly; their faces not those of pleasure-seekers. It was very
difficult to imagine that they could afford a journey, which was, as
I believed, a great luxury. At first, the people looked to be all of a
sort, but after a little I began to see the differences, and to notice
that this one looked happy, and that one sad, and another as if he had
much to do and liked it, and several others as if they had very little
idea where they were going or why.

But I liked better to look from the windows and to see the world. The
houses seemed quite familiar and as if I had seen them often before. I
hardly could believe that I hadn't walked up those paths, opened those
doors and seated myself at the tables. I felt that if I went in those
houses I would know where everything was--just where the dishes were
kept, and the Bible, and the jam. It struck me that houses were very
much alike in the world, and that led to the thought that people, too,
were probably alike. So I forgot what the conductor had said to me about
keeping still, and I crossed over the aisle and sat down beside a little
girl who was regrettably young, but who looked pleasant. Her mother and
grandmother were sitting opposite, and they smiled at me in a watery
sort of way as if they thought a smile was expected of them. I meant to
talk to the little girl, but I saw she was almost on the verge of tears,
and it didn't take me long to discover what was the matter. Her little
pink hat was held on by an elastic band, which, being put behind her
ears and under her chin, was cutting her cruelly. I knew by experience
that if the band were placed in front of her ears the tension would
be lessened; so, with the most benevolent intentions in the world, I
inserted my fingers between the rubber and her chubby cheeks, drew it
out with nervous but friendly fingers, somehow let go of it, and snap
across her two red cheeks and her pretty pug nose went the lacerating
elastic, leaving a welt behind it!

"What do you mean, you bad girl?" cried the mother, taking me by the
shoulders with a sort of grip I had never felt before. "I never saw such
a child--never!"

An old woman with a face like a hen leaned over the back of the seat.

"What's she done? What's she done?" she demanded. The mother told her,
as the grandmother comforted the hurt baby.

"Go back to your seat and stay there!" commanded the mother. "See you
don't come near here again!"

My lips trembled with the anguish I could hardly restrain. Never had a
noble soul been more misunderstood. Stupid beings! How dare they! Yet,
not to be liked by them--not to be understood! That was unendurable.
Would they listen to the gentle word that turneth away wrath? I was
inclined to think not. I was fairly panting under my load of dismay and
despondency, when a large man with an extraordinarily clean appearance
sat down opposite me. He was a study in grey--grey suit, tie, socks,
gloves, hat, top-coat--yes, and eyes! He leaned forward ingratiatingly.

"What do you think Aunt Ellen sent me last week?" he inquired.

We seemed to be old acquaintances, and in my second of perplexity I
decided that it was mere forgetfulness that made me unable to recall
just whom he was talking about. So I only said politely: "I don't know,
I'm sure, sir."

"Why, yes, you do!" he laughed. "Couldn't you guess? What should Aunt
Ellen send but some of that white maple sugar of hers; better than ever,
too. I've a pound of it along with me, and I'd be glad to pry off a few
pieces if you'd like to eat it. You always were so fond of Aunt Ellen's
maple sugar, you know."

The tone carried conviction. Of course I must have been fond of it;
indeed, upon reflection, I felt that I had been. By the time the man
was back with a parallelogram of the maple sugar in his hand, I was
convinced that he had spoken the truth.

"Aunt Ellen certainly is a dear," he went on. "I run down to see her
every time I get a chance. Same old rain-barrel! Same old beehives! Same
old well-sweep! Wouldn't trade them for any others in the world. I like
everything about the place--like the 'Old Man' that grows by the gate;
and the tomato trellis--nobody else treats tomatoes like flowers; and
the herb garden, and the cupboard with the little wood-carvings in it
that Uncle Ben made. You remember Uncle Ben? Been a sailor--broke both
legs--had 'em cut off--and sat around and carved while Aunt Ellen taught
school. Happy they were--no one happier. Brought me up, you know. Didn't
have a father or mother--just gathered me in. Good sort, those.
Uncle Ben's gone, but Aunt Ellen's a mother to me yet. Thinks of me,
travelling, travelling, never putting my head down in the same bed two
nights running; and here and there and everywhere she overtakes me with
little scraps out of home. That's Aunt Ellen for you!"

As the delicious sugar melted on my tongue, the sorrows melted in my
soul, and I was just about to make some inquiries about Aunt Ellen,
whose personal qualities seemed to be growing clearer and clearer in my
mind, when my conductor came striding down the aisle.

"Where's my little girl?" he demanded heartily. "Ah, there she is, just
where I left her, in good company and eating maple sugar, as I live."

"Well, she hain't bin there all the time now, I ken tell ye that!" cried
the old woman with a face like a hen.

"Indeed, she ain't!" the other women joined in. "She's a mischief-makin'
child, that's what she is!" said the mother. The little girl was looking
over her grandmother's shoulder, and she ran out a very red, serpent-like
tongue at me.

"She's a good girl, and almost as fond of Aunt Ellen as I am," said the
large man, finding my pocket, and putting a huge piece of maple sugar in
it.

The conductor, meantime, was gathering my things, and with a "Come
along, now! This is where you change," he led me from the car. I glanced
back once, and the hen-faced woman shook her withered brown fist at me,
and the large man waved and smiled. The conductor and I ran as hard as
we could, he carrying my light luggage, to a stage that seemed to be
waiting for us. He shouted some directions to the driver, deposited me
within, and ran back to his train. And I, alone again, looked about me.

We were in the heart of a little town, and a number of men were standing
around while the horses took their fill at the watering-trough. This
accomplished, the driver checked up the horses, mounted to his high
seat, was joined by a heavy young man; two gentlemen entered the inside
of the coach, and we were off.

One of these gentlemen was very old. His silver hair hung on his
shoulders; he had a beautiful flowing heard which gleamed in the light,
the kindest of faces, lit with laughing blue eyes, and he leaned forward
on his heavy stick and seemed to mind the plunging of our vehicle. The
other man was middle-aged, dark, silent-looking, and, I decided, rather
like a king. We all rode in silence for a while, but by and by the old
man said kindly:

"Where are you going, my child?"

I told him.

"And whose daughter are you?" he inquired. I told him that with pride.
"I know people all through the state," he said, "but I don't seem to
remember that name."

"Don't you remember my father, sir?" I cried, anxiously, edging up
closer to him. "Not that great and good man! Why, Abraham Lincoln and my
father are the greatest men that ever lived!"

His head nodded strangely, as he lifted it and looked at me with his
laughing eye.

"It's a pity I don't know him, that being the case," he said gently.
"But, anyway, you're a lucky little girl."

"Yes," I sighed, "I am, indeed."

But my attention was taken by our approach to what I recognised as an
"estate." A great gate with high posts, flat on top, met my gaze, and
through this gateway I could see a drive and many beautiful trees. A
little boy was sitting on top of one of the posts, watching us, and I
thought I never had seen a place better adapted to viewing the passing
procession. I longed to be on the other gatepost, exchanging confidences
across the harmless gulf with this nice-looking boy, when, most
unexpectedly, the horses began to plunge. The next second the air was
filled with buzzing black objects.

"Bees!" said the king. It was the first word he had spoken, and a true
word it was. Swarming bees had settled in the road, and we had driven
unaware into the midst of them. The horses were distracted, and made
blindly for the gate, though they seemed much more likely to run into
the posts than to get through the gate, I thought. The boy seemed to
think this, too, for he shot backward, turned a somersault in the air,
and disappeared from view.

"God bless me!" said the king.

The heavy young man on the front seat jumped from his place and began
beating away the bees and holding the horses by the bridles, and in a
few minutes we were on our way. The horses had been badly stung, and the
heavy young man looked rather bumpy. As for us, the king had shut the
stage door at the first approach of trouble, and we were unharmed.

After this, we all felt quite well acquainted, and the old gentleman
told me some wonderful stories about going about among the Indians and
about the men in the lumber camps and the settlers on the lake islands.
Afterward I learned that he was a bishop, and a brave and holy man whom
it was a great honour to meet, but, at the time, I only thought of how
kind he was to pare apples for me and to tell me tales. The king seldom
spoke more than one word at a time, but he was kind, too, in his way.
Once he said, "Sleepy?" to me. And, again, "Hungry?" He didn't look out
at the landscape at all, and neither did the bishop. But I ran from one
side to the other, and the last of the journey I was taken up between
the driver and the heavy man on the high seat.

Presently we were in a little town with cottages almost hidden among the
trees. A blue stream ran through green fields, and the water dashed over
a dam. I could hear the song of the mill and the ripping of the boards.

"We're here!" said the driver.

The heavy man lifted me down, and my young uncle came running out with
his arms open to receive me. "What a traveller!" he said, kissing me.

"It's been a tremendously long and interesting journey," I said.

"Yes," he answered. "Ten miles by rail and ten by stage. I suppose
you've had a great many adventures!"

"Oh, yes!" I cried, and ached to tell them, but feared this was not the
place. I saw my uncle respectfully helping the bishop to alight, and
heard him inquiring for his health, and the bishop answering in his
kind, deep voice, and saying I was indeed a good traveller and saw all
there was to see--and a little more. The king shook hands with me, and
this time said two words: "Good luck." Uncle had no idea who he was--no
one had seen him before. Uncle didn't quite like his looks. But I did.
He was uncommon; he was different. I thought of all those people in
the train who had been so alike. And then I remembered what unexpected
differences they had shown, and turned to smile at my uncle.

"I should say I have had adventures!" I cried.

"We'll get home to your aunt," he said, "and then we'll hear all about
them."

We crossed a bridge above the roaring mill-race, went up a lane, and
entered Arcadia. That was the way it seemed to me. It was really a
cottage above a stream, where youth and love dwelt, and honour and
hospitality, and the little house was to be exchanged for a greater one
where--though youth departed--love and honour and hospitality were still
to dwell.

"Travel's a great thing," said my uncle, as he helped me off with my
jacket.

"Yes," I answered, solemnly, "it is a great privilege to see the world."

I still am of that opinion. I have seen some odd bits of it, and I
cannot understand why it is that other journeys have not quite come up
to that first one, when I heard of Aunt Ellen, and saw the boy turn
the surprised somersault, and was welcomed by two lovers in a little
Arcadia.

========================================
