========================================

Pillars of Society

A play in four acts.


by

Henrik Ibsen




Translated by R. Farquharson Sharp




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  Karsten Bernick, a shipbuilder.
  Mrs. Bernick, his wife.
  Olaf, their son, thirteen years old.
  Martha Bernick, Karsten Bernick's sister.
  Johan Tonnesen, Mrs. Bernick's younger brother.
  Lona Hessel, Mrs. Bernick's elder half-sister.
  Hilmar Tonnesen, Mrs. Bernick's cousin.
  Dina Dorf, a young girl living with the Bernicks.
  Rorlund, a schoolmaster.
  Rummel, a merchant.
  Vigeland and Sandstad, tradesman
  Krap, Bernick's confidential clerk.
  Aune, foreman of Bernick's shipbuilding yard.
  Mrs. Rummel.
  Hilda Rummel, her daughter.
  Mrs. Holt.
  Netta Holt, her daughter.
  Mrs. Lynge.

Townsfolk and visitors, foreign sailors, steamboat passengers, etc.,
etc.

(The action takes place at the Bernicks' house in one of the smaller
coast towns in Norway)




ACT I.


(SCENE.--A spacious garden-room in the BERNICKS' house. In the
foreground on the left is a door leading to BERNICK'S business room;
farther back in the same wall, a similar door. In the middle of the
opposite wall is a large entrance-door, which leads to the street. The
wall in the background is almost wholly composed of plate-glass; a door
in it opens upon a broad flight of steps which lead down to the garden;
a sun-awning is stretched over the steps. Below the steps a part of the
garden is visible, bordered by a fence with a small gate in it. On the
other side of the fence runs a street, the opposite side of which is
occupied by small wooden houses painted in bright colours. It is
summer, and the sun is shining warmly. People are seen, every now and
then, passing along the street and stopping to talk to one another;
others going in and out of a shop at the corner, etc.

In the room a gathering of ladies is seated round a table. MRS. BERNICK
is presiding; on her left side are MRS. HOLT and her daughter NETTA,
and next to them MRS. RUMMEL and HILDA RUMMEL. On MRS. BERNICK'S right
are MRS. LYNGE, MARTHA BERNICK and DINA DORF. All the ladies are busy
working. On the table lie great piles of linen garments and other
articles of clothing, some half finished, and some merely cut out.
Farther back, at a small table on which two pots of flowers and a glass
of sugared water are standing, RORLUND is sitting, reading aloud from a
book with gilt edges, but only loud enough for the spectators to catch
a word now and then. Out in the garden OLAF BERNICK is running about
and shooting at a target with a toy crossbow.

After a moment AUNE comes in quietly through the door on the right.
There is a slight interruption in the reading. MRS. BERNICK nods to him
and points to the door on the left. AUNE goes quietly across, knocks
softly at the door of BERNICK'S room, and after a moment's pause,
knocks again. KRAP comes out of the room, with his hat in his hand and
some papers under his arm.)

Krap: Oh, it was you knocking?

Aune: Mr. Bernick sent for me.

Krap: He did--but he cannot see you. He has deputed me to tell you--

Aune: Deputed you? All the same, I would much rather--

Krap: --deputed me to tell you what he wanted to say to you. You must
give up these Saturday lectures of yours to the men.

Aune: Indeed? I supposed I might use my own time--

Krap: You must not use your own time in making the men useless in
working hours. Last Saturday you were talking to them of the harm that
would be done to the workmen by our new machines and the new working
methods at the yard. What makes you do that?

Aune: I do it for the good of the community.

Krap: That's curious, because Mr. Bernick says it is disorganising the
community.

Aune: My community is not Mr. Bernick's, Mr. Krap! As President of the
Industrial Association, I must--

Krap: You are, first and foremost, President of Mr. Bernick's
shipbuilding yard; and, before everything else, you have to do your
duty to the community known as the firm of Bernick & Co.; that is what
every one of us lives for. Well, now you know what Mr. Bernick had to
say to you.

Aune: Mr. Bernick would not have put it that way, Mr. Krap! But I know
well enough whom I have to thank for this. It is that damned American
boat. Those fellows expect to get work done here the way they are
accustomed to it over there, and that--

Krap: Yes, yes, but I can't go into all these details. You know now
what Mr. Bernick means, and that is sufficient. Be so good as to go
back to the yard; probably you are needed there. I shall be down myself
in a little while. --Excuse me, ladies! (Bows to the ladies and goes
out through the garden and down the street. AUNE goes quietly out to
the right. RORLUND, who has continued his reading during the foregoing
conversation, which has been carried on in low tones, has now come to
the end of the book, and shuts it with a bang.)

Rorlund: There, my dear ladies, that is the end of it.

Mrs. Rummel: What an instructive tale!

Mrs. Holt: And such a good moral!

Mrs. Bernick: A book like that really gives one something to think
about.

Rorlund: Quite so; it presents a salutary contrast to what,
unfortunately, meets our eyes every day in the newspapers and
magazines. Look at the gilded and painted exterior displayed by any
large community, and think what it really conceals!--emptiness and
rottenness, if I may say so; no foundation of morality beneath it. In a
word, these large communities of ours now-a-days are whited sepulchres.

Mrs. Holt: How true! How true!

Mrs. Rummel: And for an example of it, we need look no farther than at
the crew of the American ship that is lying here just now.

Rorlund: Oh, I would rather not speak of such offscourings of humanity
as that. But even in higher circles--what is the case there? A spirit
of doubt and unrest on all sides; minds never at peace, and instability
characterising all their behaviour. Look how completely family life is
undermined over there! Look at their shameless love of casting doubt on
even the most serious truths!

Dina (without looking up from her work): But are there not many big
things done there too?

Rorlund: Big things done--? I do not understand--.

Mrs. Holt (in amazement): Good gracious, Dina--!

Mrs. Rummel (in the same breath): Dina, how can you--?

Rorlund: I think it would scarcely be a good thing for us if such "big
things" became the rule here. No, indeed, we ought to be only too
thankful that things are as they are in this country. It is true enough
that tares grow up amongst our wheat here too, alas; but we do our best
conscientiously to weed them out as well as we are able. The important
thing is to keep society pure, ladies--to ward off all the hazardous
experiments that a restless age seeks to force upon us.

Mrs. Holt: And there are more than enough of them in the wind,
unhappily.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, you know last year we only by a hair's breadth
escaped the project of having a railway here.

Mrs. Bernick: Ah, my husband prevented that.

Rorlund: Providence, Mrs. Bernick. You may be certain that your husband
was the instrument of a higher Power when he refused to have anything
to do with the scheme.

Mrs. Bernick: And yet they said such horrible things about him in the
newspapers! But we have quite forgotten to thank you, Mr. Rorlund. It
is really more than friendly of you to sacrifice so much of your time
to us.

Rorlund: Not at all. This is holiday time, and--

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, but it is a sacrifice all the same, Mr. Rorlund.

Rorlund (drawing his chair nearer): Don't speak of it, my dear lady.
Are you not all of you making some sacrifice in a good cause?--and that
willingly and gladly? These poor fallen creatures for whose rescue we
are working may be compared to soldiers wounded on the field of battle;
you, ladies, are the kind-hearted sisters of mercy who prepare the lint
for these stricken ones, lay the bandages softly on their wounds, heal
them and cure them.

Mrs. Bernick: It must be a wonderful gift to be able to see everything
in such a beautiful light.

Rorlund: A good deal of it is inborn in one--but it can be to a great
extent acquired, too. All that is needful is to see things in the light
of a serious mission in life. (To MARTHA:) What do you say, Miss
Bernick? Have you not felt as if you were standing on firmer ground
since you gave yourself up to your school work?

Martha: I really do not know what to say. There are times, when I am in
the schoolroom down there, that I wish I were far away out on the
stormy seas.

Rorlund: That is merely temptation, dear Miss Bernick. You ought to
shut the doors of your mind upon such disturbing guests as that. By the
"stormy seas"--for of course you do not intend me to take your words
literally--you mean the restless tide of the great outer world, where
so many are shipwrecked. Do you really set such store on the life you
hear rushing by outside? Only look out into the street. There they go,
walking about in the heat of the sun, perspiring and tumbling about
over their little affairs. No, we undoubtedly have the best of it, who
are able to sit here in the cool and turn our backs on the quarter from
which disturbance comes.

Martha: Yes, I have no doubt you are perfectly right.

Rorlund: And in a house like this, in a good and pure home, where
family life shows in its fairest colours--where peace and harmony
rule-- (To MRS. BERNICK:) What are you listening to, Mrs. Bernick?

Mrs. Bernick (who has turned towards the door of BERNICK'S room): They
are talking very loud in there.

Rorlund: Is there anything particular going on?

Mrs. Bernick: I don't know. I can hear that there is somebody with my
husband.

(HILMAR TONNESEN, smoking a cigar, appears in the doorway on the right,
but stops short at the sight of the company of ladies.)

Hilmar: Oh, excuse me-- (Turns to go back.)

Mrs. Bernick: No, Hilmar, come along in; you are not disturbing us. Do
you want something?

Hilmar: No, I only wanted to look in here--Good morning, ladies. (To
MRS. BERNICK:) Well, what is the result?

Mrs. Bernick: Of what?

Hilmar: Karsten has summoned a meeting, you know.

Mrs. Bernick: Has he? What about?

Hilmar:  Oh, it is this railway nonsense over again.

Mrs. Rummel: Is it possible?

Mrs. Bernick: Poor Karsten, is he to have more annoyance over that?

Rorlund:  But how do you explain that, Mr. Tonnesen? You know that last
year Mr. Bernick made it perfectly clear that he would not have a
railway here.

Hilmar: Yes, that is what I thought, too; but I met Krap, his
confidential clerk, and he told me that the railway project had been
taken up again, and that Mr. Bernick was in consultation with three of
our local capitalists.

Mrs. Rummel: Ah, I was right in thinking I heard my husband's voice.

Hilmar:  Of course Mr. Rummel is in it, and so are Sandstad and Michael
Vigeland, "Saint Michael", as they call him.

Rorlund:  Ahem!

Hilmar: I beg your pardon, Mr. Rorlund?

Mrs. Bernick: Just when everything was so nice and peaceful.

Hilmar: Well, as far as I am concerned, I have not the slightest
objection to their beginning their squabbling again. It will be a
little diversion, any way.

Rorlund: I think we can dispense with that sort of diversion.

Hilmar: It depends how you are constituted. Certain natures feel the
lust of battle now and then. But unfortunately life in a country town
does not offer much in that way, and it isn't given to every one to
(turns the leaves of the book RORLUND has been reading). "Woman as the
Handmaid of Society." What sort of drivel is this?

Mrs. Bernick: My dear Hilmar, you must not say that. You certainly have
not read the book.

Hilmar: No, and I have no intention of reading it, either.

Mrs. Bernick: Surely you are not feeling quite well today.

Hilmar: No, I am not.

Mrs. Bernick:  Perhaps you did not sleep well last night?

Hilmar: No, I slept very badly. I went for a walk yesterday evening for
my health's sake; and I finished up at the club and read a book about a
Polar expedition. There is something bracing in following the
adventures of men who are battling with the elements.

Mrs. Rummel:  But it does not appear to have done you much good, Mr.
Tonnesen.

Hilmar:  No, it certainly did not. I lay all night tossing about, only
half asleep, and dreamt that I was being chased by a hideous walrus.

Olaf (who meanwhile has come up the steps from the garden): Have you
been chased by a walrus, uncle?

Hilmar: I dreamt it, you duffer! Do you mean to say you are still
playing about with that ridiculous bow? Why don't you get hold of a
real gun?

Olaf: I should like to, but--

Hilmar:  There is some sense in a thing like that; it is always an
excitement every time you fire it off.

Olaf: And then I could shoot bears, uncle. But daddy won't let me.

Mrs. Bernick:  You really mustn't put such ideas into his head, Hilmar.

Hilmar:  Hm! It's a nice breed we are educating up now-a-days, isn't
it! We talk a great deal about manly sports, goodness knows--but we
only play with the question, all the same; there is never any serious
inclination for the bracing discipline that lies in facing danger
manfully. Don't stand pointing your crossbow at me, blockhead--it might
go off!

Olaf:  No, uncle, there is no arrow in it.

Hilmar:  You don't know that there isn't--there may be, all the same.
Take it away, I tell you!--Why on earth have you never gone over to
America on one of your father's ships? You might have seen a buffalo
hunt then, or a fight with Red Indians.

Mrs. Bernick:  Oh, Hilmar--!

Olaf: I should like that awfully, uncle; and then perhaps I might meet
Uncle Johan and Aunt Lona.

Hilmar: Hm!--Rubbish.

Mrs. Bernick: You can go down into the garden again now, Olaf.

Olaf: Mother, may I go out into the street too?

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, but not too far, mind.

(OLAF runs down into the garden and out through the gate in the fence.)

Rorlund: You ought not to put such fancies into the child's head, Mr.
Tonnesen.

Hilmar:  No, of course he is destined to be a miserable stay-at-home,
like so many others.

Rorlund:  But why do you not take a trip over there yourself?

Hilmar: I? With my wretched health? Of course I get no consideration on
that account. But putting that out of the question, you forget that one
has certain obligations to perform towards the community of which one
forms a part. There must be some one here to hold aloft the banner of
the Ideal.--Ugh, there he is shouting again!

The Ladies: Who is shouting?

Hilmar: I am sure I don't know. They are raising their voices so loud
in there that it gets on my nerves.

Mrs. Bernick: I expect it is my husband, Mr. Tonnesen. But you must
remember he is so accustomed to addressing large audiences.

Rorlund: I should not call the others low-voiced, either.

Hilmar:  Good Lord, no!--not on any question that touches their
pockets. Everything here ends in these petty material considerations.
Ugh!

Mrs. Bernick: Anyway, that is a better state of things than it used to
be when everything ended in mere frivolity.

Mrs. Lynge: Things really used to be as bad as that here?

Mrs. Rummel: Indeed they were, Mrs. Lynge. You may think yourself lucky
that you did not live here then.

Mrs. Holt:  Yes, times have changed, and no mistake, when I look back
to the days when I was a girl.

Mrs. Rummel: Oh, you need not look back more than fourteen or fifteen
years. God forgive us, what a life we led! There used to be a Dancing
Society and a Musical Society--

Mrs. Bernick:  And the Dramatic Club. I remember it very well.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that was where your play was performed, Mr. Tonnesen.

Hilmar (from the back of the room): What, what?

Rorlund: A play by Mr. Tonnesen?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, it was long before you came here, Mr. Rorlund. And it
was only performed once.

Mrs. Lynge: Was that not the play in which you told me you took the
part of a young man's sweetheart, Mrs. Rummel?

Mrs. Rummel (glancing towards RORLUND): I? I really cannot remember,
Mrs. Lynge. But I remember well all the riotous gaiety that used to go
on.

Mrs. Holt: Yes, there were houses I could name in which two large
dinner-parties were given in one week.

Mrs. Lynge: And surely I have heard that a touring theatrical company
came here, too?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that was the worst thing of the lot.

Mrs. Holt (uneasily):  Ahem!

Mrs. Rummel: Did you say a theatrical company? No, I don't remember
that at all.

Mrs. Lynge: Oh yes, and I have been told they played all sorts of mad
pranks. What is really the truth of those stories?

Mrs. Rummel: There is practically no truth in them, Mrs. Lynge.

Mrs. Holt: Dina, my love, will you give me that linen?

Mrs. Bernick (at the same time): Dina, dear, will you go and ask
Katrine to bring us our coffee?

Martha: I will go with you, Dina. (DINA and MARTHA go out by the
farther door on, the left.)

Mrs. Bernick (getting up): Will you excuse me for a few minutes? I
think we will have our coffee outside. (She goes out to the verandah
and sets to work to lay a table. RORLUND stands in the doorway talking
to her. HILMAR sits outside, smoking.)

Mrs. Rummel (in a low voice): My goodness, Mrs. Lynge, how you
frightened me!

Mrs. Lynge: I?

Mrs. Holt: Yes, but you know it was you that began it, Mrs. Rummel.

Mrs. Rummel: I? How can you say such a thing, Mrs. Holt? Not a syllable
passed my lips!

Mrs. Lynge: But what does it all mean?

Mrs. Rummel:  What made you begin to talk about--? Think--did you not
see that Dina was in the room?

Mrs. Lynge:  Dina? Good gracious, is there anything wrong with--?

Mrs. Holt: And in this house, too! Did you not know it was Mrs.
Bernick's brother--?

Mrs. Lynge: What about him? I know nothing about it at all; I am quite
new to the place, you know.

Mrs. Rummel: Have you not heard that--? Ahem! (To her daughter) Hilda,
dear, you can go for a little stroll in the garden?

Mrs. Holt: You go too, Netta. And be very kind to poor Dina when she
comes back. (HILDA and NETTA go out into the garden.)

Mrs. Lynge: Well, what about Mrs. Bernick's brother?

Mrs. Rummel: Don't you know the dreadful scandal about him?

Mrs. Lynge: A dreadful scandal about Mr. Tonnesen?

Mrs. Rummel: Good Heavens, no. Mr. Tonnesen is her cousin, of course,
Mrs. Lynge. I am speaking of her brother--

Mrs. Holt: The wicked Mr. Tonnesen--

Mrs. Rummel: His name was Johan. He ran away to America.

Mrs. Holt: Had to run away, you must understand.

Mrs. Lynge: Then it is he the scandal is about?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes; there was something--how shall I put it?--there was
something of some kind between him and Dina's mother. I remember it all
as if it were yesterday. Johan Tonnesen was in old Mrs. Bernick's
office then; Karsten Bernick had just come back from Paris--he had not
yet become engaged--

Mrs. Lynge:  Yes, but what was the scandal?

Mrs. Rummel: Well, you must know that Moller's company were acting in
the town that winter--

Mrs. Holt: And Dorf, the actor, and his wife were in the company. All
the young men in the town were infatuated with her.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, goodness knows how they could think her pretty. Well,
Dorf came home late one evening--

Mrs. Holt: Quite unexpectedly.

Mrs. Rummel: And found his-- No, really it isn't a thing one can talk
about.

Mrs. Holt: After all, Mrs. Rummel, he didn't find anything, because the
door was locked on the inside.

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, that is just what I was going to say--he found the
door locked. And--just think of it--the man that was in the house had
to jump out of the window.

Mrs. Holt: Right down from an attic window.

Mrs. Lynge: And that was Mrs. Bernick's brother?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, it was he.

Mrs. Lynge: And that was why he ran away to America?

Mrs. Holt: Yes, he had to run away, you may be sure.

Mrs. Rummel: Because something was discovered afterwards that was
nearly as bad; just think--he had been making free with the cash-box...

Mrs. Holt:  But, you know, no one was certain of that, Mrs. Rummel;
perhaps there was no truth in the rumour.

Mrs. Rummel: Well, I must say--! Wasn't it known all over the town? Did
not old Mrs. Bernick nearly go bankrupt as the result of it?  However,
God forbid I should be the one to spread such reports.

Mrs. Holt:  Well, anyway, Mrs. Dorf didn't get the money, because she--

Mrs. Lynge:  Yes, what happened to Dina's parents afterwards?

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, Dorf deserted both his wife and his child. But
madam was impudent enough to stay here a whole year. Of course she had
not the face to appear at the theatre any more, but she kept herself by
taking in washing and sewing--

Mrs. Holt: And then she tried to set up a dancing school.

Mrs. Rummel: Naturally that was no good. What parents would trust their
children to such a woman? But it did not last very long. The fine madam
was not accustomed to work; she got something wrong with her lungs and
died of it.

Mrs. Lynge: What a horrible scandal!

Mrs. Rummel:  Yes, you can imagine how hard it was upon the Bernicks.
It is the dark spot among the sunshine of their good fortune, as Rummel
once put it. So never speak about it in this house, Mrs. Lynge.

Mrs. Holt:  And for heaven's sake never mention the stepsister, either!

Mrs. Lynge:  Oh, so Mrs. Bernick has a step-sister, too?

Mrs. Rummel:  Had, luckily-- for the relationship between them is all
over now. She was an extraordinary person too! Would you believe it,
she cut her hair short, and used to go about in men's boots in bad
weather!

Mrs. Holt:  And when her step-brother, the black sheep, had gone away,
and the whole town naturally was talking about him--what do you think
she did? She went out to America to him!

Mr. Rummel:  Yes, but remember the scandal she caused before she went,
Mrs. Holt.

Mrs. Holt:  Hush, don't speak of it.

Mrs. Lynge: My goodness, did she create a scandal too?

Mrs. Rummel: I think you ought to hear it, Mrs. Lynge. Mr. Bernick had
just got engaged to Betty Tonnesen, and the two of them went arm in arm
into her aunt's room to tell her the news--

Mrs. Holt: The Tonnesens' parents were dead, you know--

Mrs. Rummel:  When, suddenly, up got Lona Hessel from her chair and
gave our refined and well-bred Karsten Bernick such a box on the ear
that his head swam.

Mrs. Lynge:  Well, I am sure I never--

Mrs. Holt: It is absolutely true.

Mrs. Rummel: And then she packed her box and went away to America.

Mrs. Lynge: I suppose she had had her eye on him for herself.

Mrs. Rummel:  Of course she had. She imagined that he and she would
make a match of it when he came back from Paris.

Mrs. Holt:  The idea of her thinking such a thing!  Karsten Bernick--a
man of the world and the pink of courtesy, a perfect gentleman, the
darling of all the ladies...

Mrs. Rummel:  And, with it all, such an excellent young man, Mrs.
Holt--so moral.

Mrs. Lynge:  But what has this Miss Hessel made of herself in America?

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, you see, over that (as my husband once put it) has
been drawn a veil which one should hesitate to lift.

Mrs. Lynge:  What do you mean?

Mrs. Rummel: She no longer has any connection with the family, as you
may suppose; but this much the whole town knows, that she has sung for
money in drinking saloons over there--

Mrs. Holt:  And has given lectures in public--

Mrs. Rummel:  And has published some mad kind of book.

Mrs. Lynge:  You don't say so!

Mrs. Rummel:  Yes, it is true enough that Lona Hessel is one of the
spots on the sun of the Bernick family's good fortune. Well, now you
know the whole story, Mrs. Lynge. I am sure I would never have spoken
about it except to put you on your guard.

Mrs. Lynge:  Oh, you may be sure I shall be most careful. But that poor
child Dina Dorf! I am truly sorry for her.

Mrs. Rummel:  Well, really it was a stroke of good luck for her. Think
what it would have meant if she had been brought up by such parents! Of
course we did our best for her, every one of us, and gave her all the
good advice we could. Eventually Miss Bernick got her taken into this
house.

Mrs. Holt:  But she has always been a difficult child to deal with. It
is only natural--with all the bad examples she had had before her. A
girl of that sort is not like one of our own; one must be lenient with
her.

Mrs. Rummel:  Hush--here she comes. (In a louder voice.) Yes, Dina is
really a clever girl. Oh, is that you, Dina? We are just putting away
the things.

Mrs. Holt:  How delicious your coffee smells, my dear Dina. A nice cup
of coffee like that--

Mrs. Bernick (calling in from the verandah):  Will you come out here?
(Meanwhile MARTHA and DINA have helped the Maid to bring out the
coffee. All the ladies seat themselves on the verandah, and talk with a
great show of kindness to DINA. In a few moments DINA comes back into
the room and looks for her sewing.)

Mrs. Bernick (from the coffee table): Dina, won't you--?

Dina:  No, thank you. (Sits down to her sewing. MRS. BERNICK and
RORLUND exchange a few words; a moment afterwards he comes back into
the room, makes a pretext for going up to the table, and begins
speaking to DINA in low tones.)

Rorlund: Dina.

Dina:  Yes?

Rorlund:  Why don't you want to sit with the others?

Dina:  When I came in with the coffee, I could see from the strange
lady's face that they had been talking about me.

Rorlund:  But did you not see as well how agreeable she was to you out
there?

Dina:  That is just what I will not stand

Rorlund:  You are very self-willed, Dina.

Dina:  Yes.

Rorlund:  But why?

Dina:  Because it is my nature.

Rorlund:  Could you not try to alter your nature?

Dina:  No.

Rorlund:  Why not?

Dina (looking at him): Because I am one of the "poor fallen creatures",
you know.

Rorlund:  For shame, Dina.

Dina:  So was my mother.

Rorlund:  Who has spoken to you about such things?

Dina:  No one; they never do. Why don't they? They all handle me in
such a gingerly fashion, as if they thought I should go to pieces if
they---. Oh, how I hate all this kind-heartedness.

Rorlund:  My dear Dina, I can quite understand that you feel repressed
here, but--

Dina:  Yes; if only I could get right away from here. I could make my
own way quite well, if only I did not live amongst people who are
so--so--

Rorlund:  So what?

Dina:  So proper and so moral.

Rorlund:  Oh but, Dina, you don't mean that.

Dina:  You know quite well in what sense I mean it. Hilda and Netta
come here every day, to be exhibited to me as good examples. I can
never be so beautifully behaved as they; I don't want to be. If only I
were right away from it all, I should grow to be worth something.

Rorlund:  But you are worth a great deal, Dina dear.

Dina:  What good does that do me here?

Rorlund:  Get right away, you say? Do you mean it seriously?

Dina:  I would not stay here a day longer, if it were not for you.

Rorlund: Tell me, Dina--why is it that you are fond of being with me?

Dina:  Because you teach me so much that is beautiful.

Rorlund:  Beautiful? Do you call the little I can teach you, beautiful?

Dina: Yes. Or perhaps, to be accurate, it is not that you teach me
anything; but when I listen to you talking I see beautiful visions.

Rorlund: What do you mean exactly when you call a thing beautiful?

Dina: I have never thought it out.

Rorlund: Think it out now, then. What do you understand by a beautiful
thing?

Dina: A beautiful thing is something that is great--and far off.

Rorlund: Hm!--Dina, I am so deeply concerned about you, my dear.

Dina: Only that?

Rorlund: You know perfectly well that you are dearer to me than I can
say.

Dina: If I were Hilda or Netta, you would not be afraid to let people
see it.

Rorlund: Ah, Dina, you can have no idea of the number of things I am
forced to take into consideration. When it is a man's lot to be a moral
pillar of the community he lives in, he cannot be too circumspect. If
only I could be certain that people would interpret my motives
properly. But no matter for that; you must, and shall be, helped to
raise yourself. Dina, is it a bargain between us that when I come--when
circumstances allow me to come--to you and say: "Here is my hand," you
will take it and be my wife? Will you promise me that, Dina?

Dina: Yes.

Rorlund: Thank you, thank you! Because for my part, too--oh, Dina, I
love you so dearly. Hush! Some one is coming. Dina--for my sake--go out
to the others.(She goes out to the coffee table. At the same moment
RUMMEL, SANDSTAD and VIGELAND come out of BERNICK'S room, followed by
Bernick, who has a bundle of papers in his hand.)

Bernick: Well, then, the matter is settled.

Vigeland: Yes, I hope to goodness it is.

Rummel: It is settled, Bernick. A Norseman's word stands as firm as the
rocks on Dovrefjeld, you know!

Bernick: And no one must falter, no one give way, no matter what
opposition we meet with.

Rummel: We will stand or fall together, Bernick.

Hilmar (coming in from the verandah): Fall? If I may ask, isn't it the
railway scheme that is going to fall?

Bernick: No, on the contrary, it is going to proceed--

Rummel: Full steam, Mr. Tonnesen.

Hilmar (coming nearer): Really?

Rorlund: How is that?

Mrs. Bernick (at the verandah door): Karsten, dear, what is it that--?

Bernick:  My dear Betty, how can it interest you? (To the three men.)
We must get out lists of subscribers, and the sooner the better.
Obviously our four names must head the list. The positions we occupy in
the community makes it our duty to make ourselves as prominent as
possible in the affair.

Sandstad: Obviously, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: The thing shall go through, Bernick; I swear it shall!

Bernick: Oh, I have not the least anticipation of failure. We must see
that we work, each one among the circle of his own acquaintances; and
if we can point to the fact that the scheme is exciting a lively
interest in all ranks of society, then it stands to reason that our
Municipal Corporation will have to contribute its share.

Mrs. Bernick: Karsten, you really must come out here and tell us--

Bernick: My dear Betty, it is an affair that does not concern ladies at
all.

Hilmar: Then you are really going to support this railway scheme after
all?

Bernick: Yes, naturally.

Rorlund: But last year, Mr. Bernick--

Bernick: Last year it was quite another thing. At that time it was a
question of a line along the coast--

Vigeland:  Which would have been quite superfluous, Mr. Rorlund;
because, of course, we have our steamboat service--

Sandstad:  And would have been quite unreasonably costly--

Rummel:  Yes, and would have absolutely ruined certain important
interests in the town.

Bernick: The main point was that it would not have been to the
advantage of the community as a whole. That is why I opposed it, with
the result that the inland line was resolved upon.

Hilmar:  Yes, but surely that will not touch the towns about here.

Bernick: It will eventually touch our town, my dear Hilmar, because we
are going to build a branch line here.

Hilmar: Aha--a new scheme, then?

Rummel: Yes, isn't it a capital scheme? What?

Rorlund: Hm!--

Vigeland: There is no denying that it looks as though Providence had
just planned the configuration of the country to suit a branch line.

Rorlund: Do you really mean it, Mr. Vigeland?

Bernick: Yes, I must confess it seems to me as if it had been the hand
of Providence that caused me to take a journey on business this spring,
in the course of which I happened to traverse a valley through which I
had never been before. It came across my mind like a flash of lightning
that this was where we could carry a branch line down to our town. I
got an engineer to survey the neighbourhood, and have here the
provisional calculations and estimate; so there is nothing to hinder us.

Mrs. Bernick (who is still with the other ladies at the verandah door):
But, my dear Karsten, to think that you should have kept it all a
secret from us!

Bernick: Ah, my dear Betty, I knew you would not have been able to
grasp the exact situation. Besides, I have not mentioned it to a living
soul until today. But now the decisive moment has come, and we must
work openly and with all our might. Yes, even if I have to risk all I
have for its sake, I mean to push the matter through.

Rummel: And we will back you up, Bernick; you may rely upon that.

Rorlund: Do you really promise us so much, then, from this undertaking,
gentlemen?

Bernick: Yes, undoubtedly. Think what a lever it will be to raise the
status of our whole community. Just think of the immense tracts of
forest-land that it will make accessible; think of all the rich
deposits of minerals we shall be able to work; think of the river with
one waterfall above another! Think of the possibilities that open out
in the way of manufactories!

Rorlund: And are you not afraid that an easier intercourse with the
depravity of the outer world--?

Bernick: No, you may make your mind quite easy on that score, Mr.
Rorlund. Our little hive of industry rests now-a-days, God be thanked,
on such a sound moral basis; we have all of us helped to drain it, if I
may use the expression; and that we will continue to do, each in his
degree. You, Mr. Rorlund, will continue your richly blessed activity in
our schools and our homes. We, the practical men of business, will be
the support of the community by extending its welfare within as wide a
radius as possible; and our women--yes, come nearer ladies--you will
like to hear it--our women, I say, our wives and daughters--you,
ladies--will work on undisturbed in the service of charity, and
moreover will be a help and a comfort to your nearest and dearest, as
my dear Betty and Martha are to me and Olaf.(Looks around him.) Where
is Olaf today?

Mrs. Bernick: Oh, in the holidays it is impossible to keep him at home.

Bernick: I have no doubt he is down at the shore again. You will see he
will end by coming to some harm there.

Hilmar: Bah! A little sport with the forces of nature

Mrs. Rummel:  Your family affection is beautiful, Mr. Bernick!

Bernick: Well, the family is the kernel of society. A good home,
honoured and trusty friends, a little snug family circle where no
disturbing elements can cast their shadow-- (KRAP comes in from the
right, bringing letters and papers.)

Krap: The foreign mail, Mr. Bernick--and a telegram from New York.

Bernick (taking the telegram): Ah--from the owners of the "Indian Girl".

Rummel: Is the mail in? Oh, then you must excuse me.

Vigeland:  And me too.

Sandstad: Good day, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Good day, good day, gentlemen. And remember, we have a meeting
this afternoon at five o'clock.

The Three Men: Yes--quite so--of course. (They go out to the right.)

Bernick (who has read the telegram): This is thoroughly American!
Absolutely shocking!

Mrs. Bernick: Good gracious, Karsten, what is it?

Bernick: Look at this, Krap! Read it!

Krap (reading):  "Do the least repairs possible. Send over 'Indian
Girl' as soon as she is ready to sail; good time of year; at a pinch
her cargo will keep her afloat." Well, I must say--

Rorlund: You see the state of things in these vaunted great communities!

Bernick: You are quite right; not a moment's consideration for human
life, when it is a question of making a profit. (To KRAP:) Can the
"Indian Girl" go to sea in four--or five--days?

Krap: Yes, if Mr. Vigeland will agree to our stopping work on the "Palm
Tree" meanwhile.

Bernick: Hm--he won't. Well, be so good as to look through the letters.
And look here, did you see Olaf down at the quay?

Krap: No, Mr. Bernick. (Goes into BERNICK'S room.)

Bernick (looking at the telegram again): These gentlemen think nothing
of risking eight men's lives--

Hilmar: Well, it is a sailor's calling to brave the elements; it must
be a fine tonic to the nerves to be like that, with only a thin plank
between one and the abyss--

Bernick: I should like to see the ship-owner amongst us who would
condescend to such a thing! There is not one that would do it--not a
single one! (Sees OLAF coming up to the house.) Ah, thank Heaven, here
he is, safe and sound. (OLAF, with a fishing-line in his hand, comes
running up the garden and in through the verandah.)

Olaf: Uncle Hilmar, I have been down and seen the steamer.

Bernick: Have you been down to the quay again?

Olaf: No, I have only been out in a boat. But just think, Uncle Hilmar,
a whole circus company has come on shore, with horses and animals; and
there were such lots of passengers.

Mrs. Rummel:  No, are we really to have a circus?

Rorlund: We? I certainly have no desire to see it.

Mrs. Rummel:  No, of course I don't mean we, but--

Dina: I should like to see a circus very much.

Olaf: So should I.

Hilmar: You are a duffer. Is that anything to see? Mere tricks. No, it
would be something quite different to see the Gaucho careering over the
Pampas on his snorting mustang. But, Heaven help us, in these wretched
little towns of ours.

Olaf (pulling at MARTHA'S dress): Look, Aunt Martha! Look, there they
come!

Mrs. Holt:  Good Lord, yes--here they come.

Mrs. Lynge: Ugh, what horrid people!

(A number of passengers and a whole crowd of townsfolk, are seen coming
up the street.)

Mrs. Rummel: They are a set of mountebanks, certainly. Just look at
that woman in the grey dress, Mrs. Holt--the one with a knapsack over
her shoulder.

Mrs. Holt:  Yes--look--she has slung it on the handle of her parasol.
The manager's wife, I expect.

Mrs. Rummel:  And there is the manager himself, no doubt. He looks a
regular pirate. Don't look at him, Hilda!

Mrs. Holt: Nor you, Netta!

Olaf: Mother, the manager is bowing to us.

Bernick: What?

Mrs. Bernick: What are you saying, child?

Mrs. Rummel: Yes, and--good Heavens--the woman is bowing to us too.

Bernick: That is a little too cool--

Martha (exclaims involuntarily):  Ah--!

Mrs. Bernick:  What is it, Martha?

Martha:  Nothing, nothing. I thought for a moment--

Olaf (shrieking with delight): Look, look, there are the rest of them,
with the horses and animals! And there are the Americans, too! All the
sailors from the "Indian Girl"! (The strains of "Yankee Doodle," played
on a clarinet and a drum, are heard.)

Hilmar (stopping his ears): Ugh, ugh, ugh!

Rorlund: I think we ought to withdraw ourselves from sight a little,
ladies; we have nothing to do with such goings on. Let us go to our
work again.

Mrs. Bernick: Do you think we had better draw the curtains?

Rorlund: Yes, that was exactly what I meant.

(The ladies resume their places at the work-table; RORLUND shuts the
verandah door, and draws the curtains over it and over the windows, so
that the room becomes half dark.)

Olaf (peeping out through the curtains): Mother, the manager's wife is
standing by the fountain now, washing her face.

Mrs. Bernick: What? In the middle of the marketplace?

Mrs. Rummel: And in broad daylight, too!

Hilmar: Well, I must say if I were travelling across a desert waste and
found myself beside a well, I am sure I should not stop to think
whether--. Ugh, that frightful clarinet!

Rorlund: It is really high time the police interfered.

Bernick: Oh no; we must not be too hard on foreigners. Of course these
folk have none of the deep-seated instincts of decency which restrain
us within proper bounds. Suppose they do behave outrageously, what does
it concern us? Fortunately this spirit of disorder, that flies in the
face of all that is customary and right, is absolutely a stranger to
our community, if I may say so--. What is this! (LONA HESSEL walks
briskly in from the door on the right.)

The Ladies (in low, frightened tones): The circus woman! The manager's
wife!

Mrs. Bernick: Heavens, what does this mean?

Martha (jumping up):  Ah--!

Lona:  How do you do, Betty dear! How do you do, Martha! How do you do,
brother-in-law!

Mrs. Bernick (with a cry):  Lona--!

Bernick (stumbling backwards):  As sure as I am alive--!

Mrs. Holt:  Mercy on us--!

Mrs. Rummel:  It cannot possibly be--!

Hilmar: Well! Ugh!

Mrs. Bernick:  Lona--! Is it really--?

Lona:  Really me? Yes, indeed it is; you may fall on my neck if you
like.

Hilmar: Ugh, ugh!

Mrs. Bernick:  And coming back here as--?

Mrs. Bernick:  And actually mean to appear in--?

Lona: Appear? Appear in what?

Bernick: Well, I mean--in the circus--

Lona: Ha, ha, ha! Are you mad, brother-in-law? Do you think I belong to
the circus troupe? No, certainly I have turned my hand to a good many
things and made a fool of myself in a good many ways--

Mrs. Rummel:  Hm!

Lona: But I have never tried circus riding.

Bernick: Then you are not--?

Mrs. Bernick:  Thank Heaven!

Lona: No, we travelled like other respectable folk, second-class,
certainly, but we are accustomed to that.

Mrs. Bernick:  We, did you say?

Bernick (taking a step for-ward): Whom do you mean by "we"?

Lona: I and the child, of course.

The Ladies (with a cry): The child!

Hilmar: What?

Rorlund: I really must say--!

Mrs. Bernick:  But what do you mean, Lona?

Lona: I mean John, of course; I have no other child, as far as I know,
but John, or Johan as you used to call him.

Mrs. Bernick:  Johan--

Mrs. Rummel (in an undertone to MRS. LYNGE): The scapegrace brother!

Bernick (hesitatingly): Is Johan with you?

Lona:  Of course he is; I certainly would not come without him. Why do
you look so tragical? And why are you sitting here in the gloom, sewing
white things? There has not been a death in the family, has there?

Rorlund: Madam, you find yourself in the Society for Fallen Women.

Lona (half to herself): What? Can these nice, quiet-looking ladies
possibly be--?

Mrs. Rummel: Well, really--!

Lona: Oh, I understand! But, bless my soul, that is surely Mrs. Rummel?
And Mrs. Holt sitting there too! Well, we three have not grown younger
since the last time we met. But listen now, good people; let the Fallen
Women wait for a day--they will be none the worse for that. A joyful
occasion like this--

Rorlund:  A home-coming is not always a joyful occasion.

Lona: Indeed? How do you read your Bible, Mr. Parson?

Rorlund: I am not a parson.

Lona: Oh, you will grow into one, then. But--faugh!--this moral linen
of yours smells tainted, just like a winding-sheet. I am accustomed to
the air of the prairies, let me tell you.

Bernick (wiping his forehead): Yes, it certainly is rather close in
here.

Lona: Wait a moment; we will resurrect ourselves from this vault.
(Pulls the curtains to one side) We must have broad daylight in here
when the boy comes. Ah, you will see a boy then that has washed himself.

Hilmar: Ugh!

Lona (opening the verandah door and window): I should say, when he has
washed himself, up at the hotel--for on the boat he got piggishly dirty.

Hilmar: Ugh, ugh!

Lona: Ugh? Why, surely isn't that--? (Points at HILDAR and asks the
others): Is he still loafing about here saying "Ugh"?

Hilmar: I do not loaf; it is the state of my health that keeps me here.

Rorlund: Ahem! Ladies, I do not think--

Lona (who has noticed OLAF): Is he yours, Betty? Give me a paw, my boy!
Or are you afraid of your ugly old aunt?

Rorlund (putting his book under his arm): Ladies, I do not think any of
us is in the mood for any more work today. I suppose we are to meet
again tomorrow?

Lona (while the others are getting up and taking their leave): Yes, let
us. I shall be on the spot.

Rorlund: You? Pardon me, Miss Hessel, but what do you propose to do in
our Society?

Lona: I will let some fresh air into it, Mr. Parson.




ACT II


(SCENE.--The same room. MRS. BERNICK is sitting alone at the
work-table, sewing. BERNICK comes in from the right, wearing his hat
and gloves and carrying a stick.)

Mrs. Bernick: Home already, Karsten?

Bernick: Yes, I have made an appointment with a man.

Mrs. Bernick (with a sigh): Oh yes, I suppose Johan is coming up here
again.

Bernick: With a man, I said. (Lays down his hat.) What has become of
all the ladies today?

Mrs. Bernick: Mrs. Rummel and Hilda hadn't time to come.

Bernick: Oh!--did they send any excuse?

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, they had so much to do at home.

Bernick: Naturally. And of course the others are not coming either?

Mrs. Bernick: No, something has prevented them today, too.

Bernick: I could have told you that, beforehand. Where is Olaf?

Mrs. Bernick: I let him go out a little with Dina.

Bernick: Hm--she is a giddy little baggage. Did you see how she at once
started making a fuss of Johan yesterday?

Mrs. Bernick: But, my dear Karsten, you know Dina knows nothing
whatever of--

Bernick: No, but in any case Johan ought to have had sufficient tact
not to pay her any attention. I saw quite well, from his face, what
Vigeland thought of it.

Mrs. Bernick (laying her sewing down on her lap): Karsten, can you
imagine what his objective is in coming here?

Bernick: Well--I know he has a farm over there, and I fancy he is not
doing particularly well with it; she called attention yesterday to the
fact that they were obliged to travel second class--

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, I am afraid it must be something of that sort. But
to think of her coming with him! She! After the deadly insult she
offered you!

Bernick: Oh, don't think about that ancient history.

Mrs. Bernick: How can I help thinking of it just now? After all, he is
my brother--still, it is not on his account that I am distressed, but
because of all the unpleasantness it would mean for you. Karsten, I am
so dreadfully afraid!

Bernick: Afraid of what?

Mrs. Bernick: Isn't it possible that they may send him to prison for
stealing that money from your mother?

Bernick: What rubbish! Who can prove that the money was stolen?

Mrs. Bernick: The whole town knows it, unfortunately; and you know you
said yourself.

Bernick: I said nothing. The town knows nothing whatever about the
affair; the whole thing was no more than idle rumour.

Mrs. Bernick: How magnanimous you are, Karsten!

Bernick: Do not let us have any more of these reminiscences, please!
You don't know how you torture me by raking all that up. (Walks up and
down; then flings his stick away from him.) And to think of their
coming home now--just now, when it is particularly necessary for me
that I should stand well in every respect with the town and with the
Press. Our newspaper men will be sending paragraphs to the papers in
the other towns about here. Whether I receive them well, or whether I
receive them ill, it will all be discussed and talked over. They will
rake up all those old stories--as you do. In a community like
ours--(Throws his gloves down on the table.) And I have not a soul here
to whom I can talk about it and to whom I can go for support.

Mrs. Bernick: No one at all, Karsten?

Bernick: No--who is there? And to have them on my shoulders just at
this moment! Without a doubt they will create a scandal in some way or
another--she, in particular. It is simply a calamity to be connected
with such folk in any way!

Mrs. Bernick: Well, I can't help their--

Bernick: What can't you help? Their being your relations? No, that is
quite true.

Mrs. Bernick: And I did not ask them to come home.

Bernick: That's it--go on! "I did not ask them to come home; I did not
write to them; I did not drag them home by the hair of their heads!"
Oh, I know the whole rigmarole by heart.

Mrs. Bernick (bursting into tears): You need not be so unkind--

Bernick: Yes, that's right--begin to cry, so that our neighbours may
have that to gossip about too. Do stop being so foolish, Betty. Go and
sit outside; some one may come in here. I don't suppose you want people
to see the lady of the house with red eyes? It would be a nice thing,
wouldn't it, if the story got out about that--. There, I hear some one
in the passage. (A knock is heard at the door.) Come in! (MRS. BERNICK
takes her sewing and goes out down the garden steps. AUNE comes in from
the right.)

Aune: Good morning, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Good morning. Well, I suppose you can guess what I want you
for?

Aune: Mr. Krap told me yesterday that you were not pleased with--

Bernick: I am displeased with the whole management of the yard, Aune.
The work does not get on as quickly as it ought. The "Palm Tree" ought
to have been under sail long ago. Mr. Vigeland comes here every day to
complain about it; he is a difficult man to have with one as part owner.

Aune: The "Palm Tree" can go to sea the day after tomorrow.

Bernick: At last. But what about the American ship, the "Indian Girl,"
which has been laid up here for five weeks and--

Aune: The American ship? I understood that, before everything else, we
were to work our hardest to get your own ship ready.

Bernick: I gave you no reason to think so. You ought to have pushed on
as fast as possible with the work on the American ship also; but you
have not.

Aune: Her bottom is completely rotten, Mr. Bernick; the more we patch
it, the worse it gets.

Bernick: That is not the reason. Krap has told me the whole truth. You
do not understand how to work the new machines I have provided--or
rather, you will not try to work them.

Aune: Mr. Bernick, I am well on in the fifties; and ever since I was a
boy I have been accustomed to the old way of working--

Bernick:  We cannot work that way now-a-days. You must not imagine,
Aune, that it is for the sake of making profit; I do not need that,
fortunately; but I owe consideration to the community I live in, and to
the business I am at the head of. I must take the lead in progress, or
there would never be any.

Aune: I welcome progress too, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Yes, for your own limited circle--for the working class. Oh, I
know what a busy agitator you are; you make speeches, you stir people
up; but when some concrete instance of progress presents itself--as
now, in the case of our machines--you do not want to have anything to
do with it; you are afraid.

Aune: Yes, I really am afraid, Mr. Bernick. I am afraid for the number
of men who will have the bread taken out of their mouths by these
machines. You are very fond, sir, of talking about the consideration we
owe to the community; it seems to me, however, that the community has
its duties too. Why should science and capital venture to introduce
these new discoveries into labour, before the community has had time to
educate a generation up to using them?

Bernick: You read and think too much, Aune; it does you no good, and
that is what makes you dissatisfied with your lot.

Aune: It is not, Mr. Bernick; but I cannot bear to see one good workman
dismissed after another, to starve because of these machines.

Bernick: Hm! When the art of printing was discovered, many a
quill-driver was reduced to starvation.

Aune: Would you have admired the art so greatly if you had been a
quill-driver in those days, sir?

Bernick: I did not send for you to argue with you. I sent for you to
tell you that the "Indian Girl" must be ready to put to sea the day
after tomorrow.

Aune: But, Mr. Bernick--

Bernick: The day after tomorrow, do you hear?--at the same time as our
own ship, not an hour later. I have good reasons for hurrying on the
work. Have you seen today's paper? Well, then you know the pranks these
American sailors have been up to again. The rascally pack are turning
the whole town upside down. Not a night passes without some brawling in
the taverns or the streets--not to speak of other abominations.

Aune: Yes, they certainly are a bad lot.

Bernick: And who is it that has to bear the blame for all this
disorder? It is I! Yes, it is I who have to suffer for it. These
newspaper fellows are making all sorts of covert insinuations because
we are devoting all our energies to the "Palm Tree." I, whose task in
life it is to influence my fellow-citizens by the force of example,
have to endure this sort of thing cast in my face. I am not going to
stand that. I have no fancy for having my good name smirched in that
way.

Aune: Your name stands high enough to endure that and a great deal
more, sir.

Bernick: Not just now. At this particular moment I have need of all the
respect and goodwill my fellow-citizens can give me. I have a big
undertaking on, the stocks, as you probably have heard; but, if it
should happen that evil-disposed persons succeeded in shaking the
absolute confidence I enjoy, it might land me in the greatest
difficulties. That is why I want, at any price, to avoid these shameful
innuendoes in the papers, and that is why I name the day after tomorrow
as the limit of the time I can give you.

Aune: Mr. Bernick, you might just as well name this afternoon as the
limit.

Bernick: You mean that I am asking an impossibility?

Aune: Yes, with the hands we have now at the yard.

Bernick: Very good; then we must look about elsewhere.

Aune: Do you really mean, sir, to discharge still more of your old
workmen?

Bernick: No, I am not thinking of that.

Aune: Because I think it would cause bad blood against you both among
the townsfolk and in the papers, if you did that.

Bernick: Very probably; therefore, we will not do it. But, if the
"Indian Girl" is not ready to sail the day after tomorrow, I shall
discharge you.

Aune (with a start): Me! (He laughs.) You are joking, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: I should not be so sure of that, if I were you.

Aune: Do you mean that you can contemplate discharging me?--Me, whose
father and grandfather worked in your yard all their lives, as I have
done myself--?

Bernick: Who is it that is forcing me to do it?

Aune: You are asking what is impossible, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Oh, where there's a will there's a way. Yes or no; give me a
decisive answer, or consider yourself discharged on the spot.

Aune (coming a step nearer to him): Mr. Bernick, have you ever realised
what discharging an old workman means? You think he can look about for
another job? Oh, yes, he can do that; but does that dispose of the
matter? You should just be there once, in the house of a workman who
has been discharged, the evening he comes home bringing all his tools
with him.

Bernick: Do you think I am discharging you with a light heart? Have I
not always been a good master to you?

Aune: So much the worse, Mr. Bernick. Just for that very reason those
at home will not blame you; they will say nothing to me, because they
dare not; but they will look at me when I am not noticing, and think
that I must have deserved it. You see, sir, that is--that is what I
cannot bear. I am a mere nobody, I know; but I have always been
accustomed to stand first in my own home. My humble home is a little
community too, Mr. Bernick--a little community which I have been able
to support and maintain because my wife has believed in me and because
my children have believed in me. And now it is all to fall to pieces.

Bernick: Still, if there is nothing else for it, the lesser must go
down before the greater; the individual must be sacrificed to the
general welfare. I can give you no other answer; and that, and no
other, is the way of the world. You are an obstinate man, Aune! You are
opposing me, not because you cannot do otherwise, but because you will
not exhibit 'the superiority of machinery over manual labour'.

Aune: And you will not be moved, Mr. Bernick, because you know that if
you drive me away you will at all events have given the newspapers
proof of your good will.

Bernick: And suppose that were so? I have told you what it means for
me--either bringing the Press down on my back, or making them
well-disposed to me at a moment when I am working for an objective
which will mean the advancement of the general welfare. Well, then, can
I do otherwise than as I am doing? The question, let me tell you, turns
upon this--whether your home is to be supported, as you put it, or
whether hundreds of new homes are to be prevented from
existing--hundreds of homes that will never be built, never have a fire
lighted on their hearth, unless I succeed in carrying through the
scheme I am working for now. That is the reason why I have given you
your choice.

Aune: Well, if that is the way things stand, I have nothing more to say.

Bernick: Hm--my dear Aune, I am extremely grieved to think that we are
to part.

Aune: We are not going to part, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: How is that?

Aune: Even a common man like myself has something he is bound to
maintain.

Bernick: Quite so, quite so--then I presume you think you may promise--?

Aune: The "Indian Girl" shall be ready to sail the day after tomorrow.
(Bows and goes out to the right.)

Bernick: Ah, I have got the better of that obstinate fellow! I take it
as a good omen. (HILMAR comes in through the garden door, smoking a
cigar.)

Hilmar (as he comes up the steps to the verandah): Good morning, Betty!
Good morning, Karsten!

Mrs. Bernick: Good morning.

Hilmar: Ah, I see you have been crying, so I suppose you know all about
it too?

Mrs. Bernick: Know all about what?

Hilmar: That the scandal is in full swing. Ugh!

Bernick: What do you mean?

Hilmar (coming into the room): Why, that our two friends from America
are displaying themselves about the streets in the company of Dina Dorf.

Mrs. Bernick (coming in after him): Hilmar, is it possible?

Hilmar: Yes, unfortunately, it is quite true. Lona was even so wanting
in tact as to call after me, but of course I appeared not to have heard
her.

Bernick: And no doubt all this has not been unnoticed.

Hilmar: You may well say that. People stood still and looked at them.
It spread like wildfire through the town--just like a prairie fire out
West. In every house people were at the windows waiting for the
procession to pass, cheek by jowl behind the curtains--ugh! Oh, you
must excuse me, Betty, for saying "ugh"--this has got on my nerves. If
it is going on, I shall be forced to think about getting right away
from here.

Mrs. Bernick: But you should have spoken to him and represented to him
that--

Hilmar: In the open street? No, excuse me, I could not do that. To
think that the fellow should dare to show himself in the town at all!
Well, we shall see if the Press doesn't put a stopper on him;
yes--forgive me, Betty, but--

Bernick: The Press, do you say? Have you heard a hint of anything of
the sort?

Hilmar: There are such things flying about. When I left here yesterday
evening I looked in at the club, because I did not feel well. I saw at
once, from the sudden silence that fell when I went in, that our
American couple had been the subject of conversation. Then that
impudent newspaper fellow, Hammer, came in and congratulated me at the
top of his voice on the return of my rich cousin.

Bernick: Rich?

Hilmar: Those were his words. Naturally I looked him up and down in the
manner he deserved, and gave him to understand that I knew nothing
about Johan Tonnesen's being rich. "Really," he said, "that is very
remarkable. People usually get on in America when they have something
to start with, and I believe your cousin did not go over there quite
empty-handed."

Bernick: Hm--now will you oblige me by--

Mrs. Bernick (distressed): There, you see, Karsten!

Hilmar: Anyhow, I have spent a sleepless night because of them. And
here he is, walking about the streets as if nothing were the matter.
Why couldn't he disappear for good and all? It really is insufferable
how hard some people are to kill.

Mrs. Bernick: My dear Hilmar, what are you saying P

Hilmar: Oh, nothing. But here this fellow escapes with a whole skin
from railway accidents and fights with California grizzlies and
Blackfoot Indians--has not even been scalped--. Ugh, here they come!

Bernick (looking down the street): Olaf is with them too!

Hilmar: Of course! They want to remind everybody that they belong to
the best family in the town. Look there!--look at the crowd of loafers
that have come out of the chemist's to stare at them and make remarks.
My nerves really won't stand it; how a man is to be expected to keep
the banner of the Ideal flying under such circumstances, I--

Bernick: They are coming here. Listen, Betty; it is my particular wish
that you should receive them in the friendliest possible way.

Mrs. Bernick: Oh, may I, Karsten.

Bernick: Certainly, certainly--and you too, Hilmar. It is to be hoped
they will not stay here very long; and when we are quite by
ourselves--no allusions to the past; we must not hurt their feelings in
any way.

Mrs. Bernick: How magnanimous you are, Karsten!

Bernick: Oh, don't speak of that.

Mrs. Bernick: But you must let me thank you; and you must forgive me
for being so hasty. I am sure you had every reason to--

Bernick: Don't talk about it, please.

Hilmar: Ugh!

(JOHAN TONNESEN and DINA come up through the garden, followed by LONA
and OLAF.)

Lona: Good morning, dear people!

Johan: We have been out having a look round the old place, Karsten.

Bernick: So I hear. Greatly altered, is it not?

Lona: Mr. Bernick's great and good works everywhere. We have been up
into the Recreation Ground you have presented to the town.

Bernick: Have you been there?

Lona: "The gift of Karsten Bernick," as it says over the gateway. You
seem to be responsible for the whole place here.

Johan: Splendid ships you have got, too. I met my old schoolfellow, the
captain of the "Palm Tree."

Lona: And you have built a new school-house too; and I hear that the
town has to thank you for both the gas supply and the water supply.

Bernick: Well, one ought to work for the good of the community one
lives in.

Lona: That is an excellent sentiment, brother-in-law, but it is a
pleasure, all the same, to see how people appreciate you. I am not
vain, I hope; but I could not resist reminding one or two of the people
we talked to that we were relations of yours.

Hilmar: Ugh!

Lona: Do you say "ugh" to that?

Hilmar: No, I said "ahem."

Lona: Oh, poor chap, you may say that if you like. But are you all by
yourselves today?

Bernick: Yes, we are by ourselves today.

Lona: Ah, yes, we met a couple of members of your Morality Society up
at the market; they made out they were very busy. You and I have never
had an opportunity for a good talk yet. Yesterday you had your three
pioneers here, as well as the parson.

Hilmar: The schoolmaster.

Lona: I call him the parson. But now tell me what you think of my work
during these fifteen years? Hasn't he grown a fine fellow? Who would
recognise the madcap that ran away from home?

Hilmar: Hm!

Johan: Now, Lona, don't brag too much about me.

Lona: Well, I can tell you I am precious proud of him. Goodness knows
it is about the only thing I have done in my life; but it does give me
a sort of right to exist. When I think, Johan, how we two began over
there with nothing but our four bare fists.

Hilmar: Hands.

Lona: I say fists; and they were dirty fists.

Hilmar: Ugh!

Lona: And empty, too.

Hilmar: Empty? Well, I must say--

Lona: What must you say?

Bernick: Ahem!

Hilmar: I must say--ugh! (Goes out through the garden.)

Lona: What is the matter with the man?

Bernick: Oh, do not take any notice of him; his nerves are rather upset
just now. Would you not like to take a look at the garden? You have not
been down there yet, and I have got an hour to spare.

Lona: With pleasure. I can tell you my thoughts have been with you in
this garden many and many a time.

Mrs. Bernick: We have made a great many alterations there too, as you
will see. (BERNICK, MRS. BERNICK, and LONA go down to the garden, where
they are visible every now and then during the following scene.)

Olaf (coming to the verandah door): Uncle Hilmar, do you know what
uncle Johan asked me? He asked me if I would go to America with him.

Hilmar: You, you duffer, who are tied to your mother's apron strings--!

Olaf: Ah, but I won't be that any longer. You will see, when I grow big.

Hilmar: Oh, fiddlesticks! You have no really serious bent towards the
strength of character necessary to--.

(They go down to the garden. DINA meanwhile has taken off her hat and
is standing at the door on the right, shaking the dust off her dress.)

Johan (to DINA): The walk has made you pretty warm.

Dina: Yes, it was a splendid walk. I have never had such a splendid
walk before.

Johan: Do you not often go for a walk in the morning?

Dina: Oh, yes--but only with Olaf.

Johan: I see.--Would you rather go down into the garden than stay here?

Dina: No, I would rather stay here.

Johan: So would I. Then shall we consider it a bargain that we are to
go for a walk like this together every morning?

Dina: No, Mr. Tonnesen, you mustn't do that.

Johan: What mustn't I do? You promised, you know.

Dina: Yes, but--on second thought--you mustn't go out with me.

Johan: But why not?

Dina: Of course, you are a stranger--you cannot understand; but I must
tell you--

Johan: Well?

Dina: No, I would rather not talk about it.

Johan: Oh, but you must; you can talk to me about whatever you like.

Dina: Well, I must tell you that I am not like the other young girls
here. There is something--something or other about me. That is why you
mustn't.

Johan: But I do not understand anything about it. You have not done
anything wrong?

Dina: No, not I, but--no, I am not going to talk any more about it now.
You will hear about it from the others, sure enough.

Johan: Hm!

Dina: But there is something else I want very much to ask you.

Johan: What is that?

Dina: I suppose it is easy to make a position for oneself over in
America?

Johan: No, it is not always easy; at first you often have to rough it
and work very hard.

Dina: I should be quite ready to do that.

Johan: You?

Dina: I can work now; I am strong and healthy; and Aunt Martha taught
me a lot.

Johan: Well, hang it, come back with us!

Dina: Ah, now you are only making fun of me; you said that to Olaf too.
But what I wanted to know is if people are so very--so very moral over
there?

Johan: Moral?

Dina: Yes; I mean are they as--as proper and as well-behaved as they
are here?

Johan: Well, at all events they are not so bad as people here make out.
You need not be afraid on that score.

Dina: You don't understand me. What I want to hear is just that they
are not so proper and so moral.

Johan: Not? What would you wish them to be, then?

Dina: I would wish them to be natural.

Johan: Well, I believe that is just what they are.

Dina: Because in that case I should get on if I went there.

Johan: You would, for certain!--and that is why you must come back with
us.

Dina: No, I don't want to go with you; I must go alone. Oh, I would
make something of my life; I would get on--

Bernick (speaking to LONA and his wife at the foot of the garden
steps): Wait a moment--I will fetch it, Betty dear; you might so easily
catch cold. (Comes into the room and looks for his wife's shawl.)

Mrs. Bernick (from outside): You must come out too, Johan; we are going
down to the grotto.

Bernick: No, I want Johan to stay here. Look here, Dina; you take my
wife's shawl and go with them. Johan is going to stay here with me,
Betty dear. I want to hear how he is getting on over there.

Mrs. Bernick: Very well--then you will follow us; you know where you
will find us. (MRS. BERNICK, LONA and DINA go out through the garden,
to the left. BERNICK looks after them for a moment, then goes to the
farther door on the left and locks it, after which he goes up to JOHAN,
grasps both his hands, and shakes them warmly.)

Bernick: Johan, now that we are alone, you must let me thank you.

Johan: Oh, nonsense!

Bernick: My home and all the happiness that it means to me--my position
here as a citizen--all these I owe to you.

Johan: Well, I am glad of it, Karsten; some good came of that mad story
after all, then.

Bernick (grasping his hands again): But still you must let me thank
you! Not one in ten thousand would have done what you did for me.

Johan: Rubbish! Weren't we, both of us, young and thoughtless? One of
us had to take the blame, you know.

Bernick: But surely the guilty one was the proper one to do that?

Johan: Stop! At the moment the innocent one happened to be the proper
one to do it. Remember, I had no ties--I was an orphan; it was a lucky
chance to get free from the drudgery of the office. You, on the other
hand, had your old mother still alive; and, besides that, you had just
become secretly engaged to Betty, who was devoted to you. What would
have happened between you and her if it had come to her ears?

Bernick: That is true enough, but still--

Johan: And wasn't it just for Betty's sake that you broke off your
acquaintance with Mrs. Dorf? Why, it was merely in order to put an end
to the whole thing that you were up there with her that evening.

Bernick: Yes, that unfortunate evening when that drunken creature came
home! Yes, Johan, it was for Betty's sake; but, all the same, it was
splendid of you to let all the appearances go against you, and to go
away.

Johan: Put your scruples to rest, my dear Karsten. We agreed that it
should be so; you had to be saved, and you were my friend. I can tell
you, I was uncommonly proud of that friendship. Here was I, drudging
away like a miserable stick-in-the-mud, when you came back from your
grand tour abroad, a great swell who had been to London and to Paris;
and you chose me for your chum, although I was four years younger than
you--it is true it was because you were courting Betty, I understand
that now--but I was proud of it! Who would not have been? Who would not
willingly have sacrificed himself for you?--especially as it only meant
a month's talk in the town, and enabled me to get away into the wide
world.

Bernick: Ah, my dear Johan, I must be candid and tell you that the
story is not so completely forgotten yet.

Johan: Isn't it? Well, what does that matter to me, once I am back over
there on my farm again?

Bernick: Then you mean to go back?

Johan: Of course.

Bernick: But not immediately, I hope?

Johan: As soon as possible. It was only to humour Lona that I came over
with her, you know.

Bernick: Really? How so?

Johan: Well, you see, Lona is no longer young, and lately she began to
be obsessed with home-sickness; but she never would admit it. (Smiles.)
How could she venture to risk leaving such a flighty fellow as me
alone, who before I was nineteen had been mixed up in...

Bernick: Well, what then?

Johan: Well, Karsten, now I am coming to a confession that I am ashamed
to make.

Bernick: You surely haven't confided the truth to her?

Johan: Yes. It was wrong of me, but I could not do otherwise. You can
have no conception what Lona has been to me. You never could put up
with her; but she has been like a mother to me. The first year we were
out there, when things went so badly with us, you have no idea how she
worked! And when I was ill for a long time, and could earn nothing and
could not prevent her, she took to singing ballads in taverns, and gave
lectures that people laughed at; and then she wrote a book that she has
both laughed and cried over since then--all to keep the life in me.
Could I look on when in the winter she, who had toiled and drudged for
me, began to pine away? No, Karsten, I couldn't. And so I said, "You go
home for a trip, Lona; don't be afraid for me, I am not so flighty as
you think." And so--the end of it was that she had to know.

Bernick: And how did she take it?

Johan: Well, she thought, as was true, that as I knew I was innocent
nothing need prevent me from taking a trip over here with her. But make
your mind easy; Lona will let nothing out, and I shall keep my mouth
shut as I did before.

Bernick: Yes, yes I rely on that.

Johan: Here is my hand on it. And now we will say no more about that
old story; luckily it is the only mad prank either of us has been
guilty of, I am sure. I want thoroughly to enjoy the few days I shall
stay here. You cannot think what a delightful walk we had this morning.
Who would have believed that that little imp, who used to run about
here and play angels' parts on the stage--! But tell me, my dear
fellow, what became of her parents afterwards?

Bernick: Oh, my boy, I can tell you no more than I wrote to you
immediately after you went away. I suppose you got my two letters?

Johan: Yes, yes, I have them both. So that drunken fellow deserted her?

Bernick: And drank himself to death afterwards.

Johan: And she died soon afterwards, too?

Bernick: She was proud; she betrayed nothing, and would accept nothing.

Johan: Well, at all events you did the right thing by taking Dina into
your house.

Bernick: I suppose so. As a matter of fact it was Martha that brought
that about.

Johan: So it was Martha? By the way, where is she today?

Bernick: She? Oh, when she hasn't her school to look after, she has her
sick people to see to.

Johan: So it was Martha who interested herself in her.

Bernick: Yes, you know Martha has always had a certain liking for
teaching; so she took a post in the boarding-school. It was very
ridiculous of her.

Johan: I thought she looked very worn yesterday; I should be afraid her
health was not good enough for it.

Bernick: Oh, as far as her health goes, it is all right enough. But it
is unpleasant for me; it looks as though I, her brother, were not
willing to support her.

Johan: Support her? I thought she had means enough of her own.

Bernick: Not a penny. Surely you remember how badly off our mother was
when you went away? She carried things on for a time with my
assistance, but naturally I could not put up with that state of affairs
permanently. I made her take me into the firm, but even then things did
not go well. So I had to take over the whole business myself, and when
we made up our balance-sheet, it became evident that there was
practically nothing left as my mother's share. And when mother died
soon afterwards, of course Martha was left penniless.

Johan: Poor Martha!

Bernick: Poor! Why? You surely do not suppose I let her want for
anything? No, I venture to say I am a good brother. Of course she has a
home here with us; her salary as a teacher is more than enough for her
to dress on; what more could she want?

Johan: Hm--that is not our idea of things in America.

Bernick: No, I dare say not--in such a revolutionary state of society
as you find there. But in our small circle--in which, thank God,
depravity has not gained a footing, up to now at all events--women are
content to occupy a seemly, as well as modest, position. Moreover, it
is Martha's own fault; I mean, she might have been provided for long
ago, if she had wished.

Johan: You mean she might have married?

Bernick: Yes, and married very well, too. She has had several good
offers--curiously enough, when you think that she is a poor girl, no
longer young, and, besides, quite an insignificant person.

Johan: Insignificant?

Bernick: Oh, I am not blaming her for that. I most certainly would not
wish her otherwise. I can tell you it is always a good thing to have a
steady-going person like that in a big house like this--some one you
can rely on in any contingency.

Johan: Yes, but what does she--?

Bernick: She? How? Oh well, of course she has plenty to interest
herself in; she has Betty and Olaf and me. People should not think
first of themselves--women least of all. We have all got some
community, great or small, to work for. That is my principle, at all
events. (Points to KRAP, who has come in from the right.) Ah, here is
an example of it, ready to hand. Do you suppose that it is my own
affairs that are absorbing me just now? By no means. (Eagerly to KRAP.)
Well?

Krap (in an undertone, showing him a bundle of papers): Here are all
the sale contracts, completed.

Bernick: Capital! Splendid!--Well, Johan, you must really excuse me for
the present. (In a low voice, grasping his hand.) Thanks, Johan,
thanks! And rest assured that anything I can do for you-- Well, of
course you understand. Come along, Krap. (They go into BERNICK'S room.)

Johan (looking after them for a moment): Hm!-- (Turns to go down to the
garden. At the same moment MARTHA comes in from the right, with a
little basket over her arm.) Martha!

Martha: Ah, Johan--is it you?

Johan: Out so early?

Martha: Yes. Wait a moment; the others are just coming. (Moves towards
the door on the left.)

Johan: Martha, are you always in such a hurry?

Martha: I?

Johan: Yesterday you seemed to avoid me, so that I never managed to
have a word with you--we two old playfellows.

Martha: Ah, Johan; that is many, many years ago.

Johan: Good Lord--why, it is only fifteen years ago, no more and no
less. Do you think I have changed so much?

Martha: You? Oh yes, you have changed too, although--

Johan: What do you mean?

Martha: Oh, nothing.

Johan: You do not seem to be very glad to see me again.

Martha: I have waited so long, Johan--too long.

Johan: Waited? For me to come?

Martha: Yes.

Johan. And why did you think I would come?

Martha: To atone for the wrong you had done.

Johan: I?

Martha: Have you forgotten that it was through you that a woman died in
need and in shame? Have you forgotten that it was through you that the
best years of a young girl's life were embittered?

Johan: And you can say such things to me? Martha, has your brother
never--?

Martha: Never what?

Johan: Has he never--oh, of course, I mean has he never so much as said
a word in my defence?

Martha: Ah, Johan, you know Karsten's high principles.

Johan: Hm--! Oh, of course; I know my old friend Karsten's high
principles! But really this is--. Well, well. I was having a talk with
him just now. He seems to me to have altered considerably.

Martha: How can you say that? I am sure Karsten has always been an
excellent man.

Johan: Yes, that was not exactly what I meant--but never mind. Hm! Now
I understand the light you have seen me in; it was the return of the
prodigal that you were waiting for.

Martha: Johan, I will tell you what light I have seen you in. (Points
down to the garden.) Do you see that girl playing on the grass down
there with Olaf? That is Dina. Do you remember that incoherent letter
you wrote me when you went away? You asked me to believe in you. I have
believed in you, Johan. All the horrible things that were rumoured
about you after you had gone must have been done through being led
astray--from thoughtlessness, without premeditation.

Johan: What do you mean?

Martha: Oh! you understand me well enough--not a word more of that. But
of course you had to go away and begin afresh--a new life. Your duties
here which you never remembered to undertake--or never were able to
undertake--I have undertaken for you. I tell you this, so that you
shall not have that also to reproach yourself with. I have been a
mother to that much-wronged child; I have brought her up as well as I
was able.

Johan: And have wasted your whole life for that reason.

Martha: It has not been wasted. But you have come late, Johan.

Johan: Martha--if only I could tell you--. Well, at all events let me
thank you for your loyal friendship.

Martha (with a sad smile): Hm.--Well, we have had it out now, Johan.
Hush, some one is coming. Goodbye, I can't stay now. (Goes out through
the farther door on the left. LONA comes in from the garden, followed
by MRS. BERNICK.)

Mrs. Bernick: But good gracious, Lona--what are you thinking of?

Lona: Let me be, I tell you! I must and will speak to him.

Mrs. Bernick: But it would be a scandal of the worst sort! Ah,
Johan--still here?

Lona: Out with you, my boy; don't stay here in doors; go down into the
garden and have a chat with Dina.

Johan: I was just thinking of doing so.

Mrs. Bernick: But--

Lona: Look here, Johan--have you had a good look at Dina?

Johan: I should think so!

Lona: Well, look at her to some purpose, my boy. That would be somebody
for you!

Mrs. Bernick: But, Lona!

Johan: Somebody for me?

Lona: Yes, to look at, I mean. Be off with you!

Johan: Oh, I don't need any pressing. (Goes down into the garden.)

Mrs. Bernick: Lona, you astound me! You cannot possibly be serious
about it?

Lona: Indeed I am. Isn't she sweet and healthy and honest? She is
exactly the wife for Johan. She is just what he needs over there; it
will be a change from an old step-sister.

Mrs. Bernick: Dina? Dina Dorf? But think--

Lona: I think first and foremost of the boy's happiness. Because, help
him I must; he has not much idea of that sort of thing; he has never
had much of an eye for girls or women.

Mrs. Bernick: He? Johan? Indeed I think we have had only too sad proofs
that--

Lona: Oh, devil take all those stupid stories! Where is Karsten? I mean
to speak to him.

Mrs. Bernick: Lona, you must not do it, I tell you.

Lona: I am going to. If the boy takes a fancy to her--and she to
him--then they shall make a match of it. Karsten is such a clever man,
he must find some way to bring it about.

Mrs. Bernick: And do you think these American indecencies will be
permitted here?

Lona: Bosh, Betty!

Mrs. Bernick: Do you think a man like Karsten, with his strictly moral
way of thinking--

Lona: Pooh! he is not so terribly moral.

Mrs. Bernick: What have you the audacity to say?

Lona: I have the audacity to say that Karsten is not any more
particularly moral than anybody else.

Mrs. Bernick: So you still hate him as deeply as that! But what are you
doing here, if you have never been able to forget that? I cannot
understand how you, dare look him in the face after the shameful insult
you put upon him in the old days.

Lona: Yes, Betty, that time I did forget myself badly.

Mrs. Bernick: And to think how magnanimously he has forgiven you--he,
who had never done any wrong! It was not his fault that you encouraged
yourself with hopes. But since then you have always hated me too.
(Bursts into tears.) You have always begrudged me my good fortune. And
now you come here to heap all this on my head--to let the whole town
know what sort of a family I have brought Karsten into. Yes, it is me
that it all falls upon, and that is what you want. Oh, it is abominable
of you! (Goes out by the door on the left, in tears.)

Lona (looking after her): Poor Betty! (BERNICK comes in from his room.
He stops at the door to speak to KRAP.)

Bernick: Yes, that is excellent, Krap--capital! Send twenty pounds to
the fund for dinners to the poor. (Turns round.) Lona! (Comes forward.)
Are you alone? Is Betty not coming in?

Lona: No. Would you like me to call her?

Bernick: No, no--not at all. Oh, Lona, you don't know how anxious I
have been to speak openly to you--after having begged for your
forgiveness.

Lona: Look here, Karsten--do not let us be sentimental; it doesn't suit
us.

Bernick: You must listen to me, Lona. I know only too well how much
appearances are against me, as you have learnt all about that affair
with Dina's mother. But I swear to you that it was only a temporary
infatuation; I was really, truly and honestly, in love with you once.

Lona: Why do you think I have come home?

Bernick: Whatever you have in your mind, I entreat, you to do nothing
until I have exculpated myself. I can do that, Lona; at all events I
can excuse myself.

Lona: Now you are frightened. You once were in love with me, you say.
Yes, you told me that often enough in your letters; and perhaps it was
true, too--in a way--as long as you were living out in the great, free
world which gave you the courage to think freely and greatly. Perhaps
you found in me a little more character and strength of will and
independence than in most of the folk at home here. And then we kept it
secret between us; nobody could make fun of your bad taste.

Bernick: Lona, how can you think--?

Lona: But when you came back--when you heard the gibes that were made
at me on all sides--when you noticed how people laughed at what they
called my absurdities...

Bernick: You were regardless of people's opinion at that time.

Lona: Chiefly to annoy the petticoated and trousered prudes that one
met at every turn in the town. And then, when you met that seductive
young actress--

Bernick: It was a boyish escapade--nothing more; I swear to you that
there was no truth in a tenth part of the rumours and gossip that went
about.

Lona: Maybe. But then, when Betty came home--a pretty young girl,
idolised by every one--and it became known that she would inherit all
her aunt's money and that I would have nothing!

Bernick: That is just the point, Lona; and now you shall have the truth
without any beating about the bush. I did not love Betty then; I did
not break off my engagement with you because of any new attachment. It
was entirely for the sake of the money. I needed it; I had to make sure
of it.

Lona: And you have the face to tell me that?

Bernick: Yes, I have. Listen, Lona.

Lona: And yet you wrote to me that an unconquerable passion for Betty
had overcome you--invoked my magnanimity--begged me, for Betty's sake,
to hold my tongue about all that had been between us.

Bernick: I had to, I tell you.

Lona: Now, by Heaven, I don't regret that I forgot myself as I did that
time--

Bernick: Let me tell you the plain truth of how things stood with me
then. My mother, as you remember, was at the head of the business, but
she was absolutely without any business ability whatever. I was
hurriedly summoned home from Paris; times were critical, and they
relied on me to set things straight. What did I find? I found--and you
must keep this a profound secret--a house on the brink of ruin. Yes--as
good as on the brink of ruin, this old respected house which had seen
three generations of us. What else could I--the son, the only son--do
than look about for some means of saving it?

Lona: And so you saved the house of Bernick at the cost of a woman.

Bernick: You know quite well that Betty was in love with me.

Lona: But what about me?

Bernick: Believe me, Lona, you would never have been happy with me.

Lona: Was it out of consideration for my happiness that you sacrificed
me?

Bernick: Do you suppose I acted as I did from selfish motives? If I had
stood alone then, I would have begun all over again with cheerful
courage. But you do not understand how the life of a man of business,
with his tremendous responsibilities, is bound up with that of the
business which falls to his inheritance. Do you realise that the
prosperity or the ruin of hundreds--of thousands--depends on him? Can
you not take into consideration the fact that the whole community in
which both you and I were born would have been affected to the most
dangerous extent if the house of Bernick had gone to smash?

Lon: Then is it for the sake of the community that you have maintained
your position these fifteen years upon a lie?

Bernick: Upon a lie?

Lona: What does Betty know of all this...that underlies her union with
you?

Bernick: Do you suppose that I would hurt her feelings to no purpose by
disclosing the truth?

Lona: To no purpose, you say? Well, well--You are a man of business;
you ought to understand what is to the purpose. But listen to me,
Karsten--I am going to speak the plain truth now. Tell me, are you
really happy?

Bernick: In my family life, do you mean?

Lona: Yes.

Bernick: I am, Lona. You have not been a self-sacrificing friend to me
in vain. I can honestly say that I have grown happier every year. Betty
is good and willing; and if I were to tell you how, in the course of
years, she has learned to model her character on the lines of my own--

Lona: Hm!

Bernick: At first, of course, she had a whole lot of romantic notions
about love; she could not reconcile herself to the idea that, little by
little, it must change into a quiet comradeship.

Lona: But now she is quite reconciled to that?

Bernick: Absolutely. As you can imagine, daily intercourse with me has
had no small share in developing her character. Every one, in their
degree, has to learn to lower their own pretensions, if they are to
live worthily of the community to which they belong. And Betty, in her
turn, has gradually learned to understand this; and that is why our
home is now a model to our fellow citizens.

Lona: But your fellow citizens know nothing about the lie?

Bernick: The lie?

Lona: Yes--the lie you have persisted in for these fifteen years.

Bernick: Do you mean to say that you call that--?

Lona: I call it a lie--a threefold lie: first of all, there is the lie
towards me; then, the lie towards Betty; and then, the lie towards
Johan.

Bernick: Betty has never asked me to speak.

Lona: Because she has known nothing.

Bernick: And you will not demand it--out of consideration for her.

Lona: Oh, no--I shall manage to put up with their gibes well enough; I
have broad shoulders.

Bernick: And Johan will not demand it either; he has promised me that.

Lona: But you yourself, Karsten? Do you feel within yourself no impulse
urging you to shake yourself free of this lie?

Bernick: Do you suppose that of my own free will I would sacrifice my
family happiness and my position in the world?

Lona: What right have you to the position you hold?

Bernick: Every day during these fifteen years I have earned some little
right to it--by my conduct, and by what I have achieved by my work.

Lona: True, you have achieved a great deal by your work, for yourself
as well as for others. You are the richest and most influential man in
the town; nobody in it dares do otherwise than defer to your will,
because you are looked upon as a man without spot or blemish; your home
is regarded as a model home, and your conduct as a model of conduct.
But all this grandeur, and you with it, is founded on a treacherous
morass. A moment may come and a word may be spoken, when you and all
your grandeur will be engulfed in the morass, if you do not save
yourself in time.

Bernick: Lona--what is your object in coming here?

Lona: I want to help you to get firm ground under your feet, Karsten.

Bernick: Revenge!--you want to revenge yourself! I suspected it. But
you won't succeed! There is only one person here that can speak with
authority, and he will be silent.

Lona: You mean Johan?

Bernick: Yes, Johan. If any one else accuses me, I shall deny
everything. If any one tries to crush me, I shall fight for my life.
But you will never succeed in that, let me tell you! The one who could
strike me down will say nothing--and is going away.

(RUMMEL and VIGELAND come in from the right.)

Rummel: Good morning, my dear Bernick, good morning. You must come up
with us to the Commercial Association. There is a meeting about the
railway scheme, you know.

Bernick: I cannot. It is impossible just now.

Vigeland: You really must, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: Bernick, you must. There is an opposition to us on foot.
Hammer, and the rest of those who believe in a line along the coast,
are declaring that private interests are at the back of the new
proposals.

Bernick: Well then, explain to them--

Vigeland: Our explanations have no effect, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: No, no, you must come yourself. Naturally, no one would dare to
suspect you of such duplicity.

Lona: I should think not.

Bernick: I cannot, I tell you; I am not well. Or, at all events,
wait--let me pull myself together. (RORLUND comes in from the right.)

Rorlund: Excuse me, Mr. Bernick, but I am terribly upset.

Bernick: Why, what is the matter with you?

Rorlund. I must put a question to you, Mr. Bernick. Is it with your
consent that the young girl who has found a shelter under your roof
shows herself in the open street in the company of a person who--

Lona: What person, Mr. Parson?

Rorlund: With the person from whom, of all others in the world, she
ought to be kept farthest apart!

Lona: Ha! ha!

Rorlund: Is it with your consent, Mr. Bernick?

Bernick (looking for his hat and gloves). I know nothing about it. You
must excuse me; I am in a great hurry. I am due at the Commercial
Association.

(HILMAR comes up from the garden and goes over to the farther door on
the left.)

Hilmar: Betty--Betty, I want to speak to you.

Mrs. Bernick (coming to the door): What is it?

Hilmar: You ought to go down into the garden and put a stop to the
flirtation that is going on between a certain person and Dina Dorf! It
has quite got on my nerves to listen to them.

Lona: Indeed! And what has the certain person been saying?

Hilmar: Oh, only that he wishes she would go off to America with him.
Ugh!

Rorlund: Is it possible?

Mrs. Bernick: What do you say?

Lona: But that would be perfectly splendid!

Bernick: Impossible! You cannot have heard right.

Hilmar: Ask him yourself, then. Here comes the pair of them. Only,
leave me out of it, please.

Bernick (to RUMMEL and VIGELAND): I will follow you--in a moment.
(RUMMEL and VIGELAND go out to the right. JOHAN and DINA come up from
the garden.)

Johan: Hurrah, Lona, she is going with us!

Mrs. Bernick: But, Johan--are you out of your senses?

Rorlund: Can I believe my ears! Such an atrocious scandal! By what arts
of seduction have you--?

Johan: Come, come, sir--what are you saying?

Rorlund: Answer me, Dina; do you mean to do this--entirely of your own
free will?

Dina: I must get away from here.

Rorlund: But with him!--with him!

Dina: Can you tell me of any one else here who would have the courage
to take me with him?

Rorlund: Very well, then--you shall learn who he is.

Johan: Do not speak!

Bernick: Not a word more!

Rorlund: If I did not, I should be unworthy to serve a community of
whose morals I have been appointed a guardian, and should be acting
most unjustifiably towards this young girl, in whose upbringing I have
taken a material part, and who is to me--

Johan: Take care what you are doing!

Rorlund: She shall know! Dina, this is the man who was the cause of all
your mother's misery and shame.

Bernick: Mr. Rorlund--?

Dina:  He! (TO JOHAN.) Is this true?

Johan: Karsten, you answer.

Bernick: Not a word more! Do not let us say another word about it today.

Dina: Then it is true.

Rorlund: Yes, it is true. And more than that, this fellow--whom you
were going to trust--did not run away from home empty-handed; ask him
about old Mrs. Bernick's cash-box.... Mr. Bernick can bear witness to
that!

Lona: Liar

Bernick: Ah!

Mrs. Bernick: My God! my God!

Johan (rushing at RORLUND with uplifted arm): And you dare to--

Lona (restraining him): Do not strike him, Johan!

Rorlund: That is right, assault me! But the truth will out; and it is
the truth--Mr. Bernick has admitted it--and the whole town knows it.
Now, Dina, you know him. (A short silence.)

Johan (softly, grasping BERNICK by the arm): Karsten, Karsten, what
have you done?

Mrs. Bernick (in tears): Oh, Karsten, to think that I should have mixed
you up in all this disgrace!

Sandstad (coming in hurriedly from the right, and calling out, with his
hand still on the door-handle): You positively must come now, Mr.
Bernick. The fate of the whole railway is hanging by a thread.

Bernick (abstractedly): What is it? What have I to--

Lona (earnestly and with emphasis): You have to go and be a pillar of
society, brother-in-law.

Sandstad: Yes, come along; we need the full weight of your moral
excellence on our side.

Johan (aside, to BERNICK): Karsten, we will have a talk about this
tomorrow. (Goes out through the garden. BERNICK, looking half dazed,
goes out to the right with SANDSTAD.)




ACT III


(SCENE--The same room. BERNICK, with a cane in his hand and evidently
in a great rage, comes out of the farther room on the left, leaving the
door half-open behind him.)

Bernick (speaking to his wife, who is in the other room): There! I have
given it him in earnest now; I don't think he will forget that
thrashing! What do you say?--And I say that you are an injudicious
mother! You make excuses for him, and countenance any sort of rascality
on his part--Not rascality? What do you call it, then? Slipping out of
the house at night, going out in a fishing boat, staying away till well
on in the day, and giving me such a horrible fright when I have so much
to worry me! And then the young scamp has the audacity to threaten that
he will run away! Just let him try it!--You? No, very likely; you don't
trouble yourself much about what happens to him. I really believe that
if he were to get killed--! Oh, really? Well, I have work to leave
behind me in the world; I have no fancy for being left childless--Now,
do not raise objections, Betty; it shall be as I say--he is confined to
the house. (Listens.) Hush; do not let any one notice anything. (KRAP
comes in from the right.)

Krap: Can you spare me a moment, Mr. Bernick?

Bernick (throwing away the cane): Certainly, certainly. Have you come
from the yard?

Krap: Yes. Ahem--!

Bernick: Well? Nothing wrong with the "Palm Tree," I hope?

Krap: The "Palm Tree" can sail tomorrow, but

Bernick: It is the "Indian Girl," then? I had a suspicion that that
obstinate fellow--

Krap: The "Indian Girl" can sail tomorrow, too; but I am sure she will
not get very far.

Bernick: What do you mean?

Krap: Excuse me, sir; that door is standing ajar, and I think there is
some one in the other room--

Bernick (shutting the door): There, then! But what is this that no one
else must hear?

Krap: Just this--that I believe Aune intends to let the "Indian Girl"
go to the bottom with every mother's son on board.

Bernick: Good God!--what makes you think that?

Krap: I cannot account for it any other way, sir.

Bernick: Well, tell me as briefly as you can

Krap: I will. You know yourself how slowly the work has gone on in the
yard since we got the new machines and the new inexperienced hands?

Bernick: Yes, yes.

Krap: But this morning, when I went down there, I noticed that the
repairs to the American boat had made extraordinary progress; the great
hole in the bottom--the rotten patch, you know--

Bernick: Yes, yes--what about it?

Krap: Was completely repaired--to all appearance at any rate, covered
up--looked as good as new. I heard that Aune himself had been working
at it by lantern light the whole night.

Bernick: Yes, yes--well?

Krap: I turned it over in my head for a bit; the hands were away at
their breakfast, so I found an opportunity to have a look around the
boat, both outside and in, without anyone seeing me. I had a job to get
down to the bottom through the cargo, but I learned the truth. There is
something very suspicious going on, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: I cannot believe it, Krap. I cannot and will not believe such
a thing of Aune.

Krap: I am very sorry--but it is the simple truth. Something very
suspicious is going on. No new timbers put in, as far as I could see,
only stopped up and tinkered at, and covered over with sailcloth and
tarpaulins and that sort of thing--an absolute fraud. The "Indian Girl"
will never get to New York; she will go to the bottom like a cracked
pot.

Bernick: This is most horrible! But what can be his object, do you
suppose?

Krap: Probably he wants to bring the machines into discredit--wants to
take his revenge--wants to force you to take the old hands on again.

Bernick: And to do this he is willing to sacrifice the lives of all on
board.

Krap: He said the other day that there were no men on board the "Indian
Girl"--only wild beasts.

Bernick: Yes, but--apart from that--has he no regard for the great loss
of capital it would mean?

Krap: Aune does not look upon capital with a very friendly eye, Mr.
Bernick.

Bernick: That is perfectly true; he is an agitator and a fomenter of
discontent; but such an unscrupulous thing as this--Look here, Krap;
you must look into the matter once more. Not a word of it to any one.
The blame will fall on our yard if any one hears anything of it.

Krap: Of course, but--

Bernick: When the hands are away at their dinner you must manage to get
down there again; I must have absolute certainty about it.

Krap: You shall, sir; but, excuse me, what do you propose to do?

Bernick: Report the affair, naturally. We cannot, of course, let
ourselves become accomplices in such a crime. I could not have such a
thing on my conscience. Moreover, it will make a good impression, both
on the press and on the public in general, if it is seen that I set all
personal interests aside and let justice take its course.

Krap: Quite true, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: But first of all I must be absolutely certain. And meanwhile,
do not breathe a word of it.

Krap: Not a word, sir. And you shall have your certainty. (Goes out
through the garden and down the street.)

Bernick (half aloud): Shocking!--But no, it is impossible!
Inconceivable!

(As he turns to go into his room, HILMAR comes in from the right.)

Hilmar: Good morning, Karsten. Let me congratulate you on your triumph
at the Commercial Association yesterday.

Bernick: Thank you.

Hilmar: It was a brilliant triumph, I hear; the triumph of intelligent
public spirit over selfishness and prejudice--something like a raid of
French troops on the Kabyles. It is astonishing that after that
unpleasant scene here, you could--

Bernick: Yes, yes--quite so.

Hilmar: But the decisive battle has not been fought yet.

Bernick: In the matter of the railway, do you mean?

Hilmar: Yes; I suppose you know the trouble that Hammer is brewing?

Bernick (anxiously): No, what is that?

Hilmar: Oh, he is greatly taken up with the rumour that is going
around, and is preparing to dish up an article about it.

Bernick: What rumour?

Hilmar: About the extensive purchase of property along the branch line,
of course.

Bernick: What? Is there such a rumour as that going about?

Hilmar: It is all over the town. I heard it at the club when I looked
in there. They say that one of our lawyers has quietly bought up, on
commission, all the forest land, all the mining land, all the
waterfalls--

Bernick: Don't they say whom it was for?

Hilmar: At the club they thought it must be for some company, not
connected with this town, that has got a hint of the scheme you have in
hand, and has made haste to buy before the price of these properties
went up. Isn't it villainous?--ugh!

Bernick: Villainous?

Hilmar: Yes, to have strangers putting their fingers into our pie--and
one of our own local lawyers lending himself to such a thing! And now
it will be outsiders that will get all the profits!

Bernick: But, after all, it is only an idle rumour.

Hilmar: Meanwhile people are believing it, and tomorrow or the next
day, I have no doubt Hammer will nail it to the counter as a fact.
There is a general sense of exasperation in the town already. I heard
several people say that if the rumour were confirmed they would take
their names off the subscription lists.

Bernick: Impossible!

Hilmar: Is it? Why do you suppose these mercenary-minded creatures were
so willing to go into the undertaking with you? Don't you suppose they
have scented profit for themselves--

Bernick: It is impossible, I am sure; there is so much public spirit in
our little community--

Hilmar: In our community? Of course you are a confirmed optimist, and
so you judge others by yourself. But I, who am a tolerably experienced
observer--! There isn't a single soul in the place--excepting
ourselves, of course--not a single soul in the place who holds up the
banner of the Ideal. (Goes towards the verandah.) Ugh, I can see them
there--

Bernick: See whom?

Hilmar: Our two friends from America. (Looks out to the right.) And who
is that they are walking with? As I am alive, if it is not the captain
of the "Indian Girl." Ugh!

Bernick: What can they want with him?

Hilmar. Oh, he is just the right company for them. He looks as if he
had been a slave-dealer or a pirate; and who knows what the other two
may have been doing all these years.

Bernick: Let me tell you that it is grossly unjust to think such things
about them.

Hilmar: Yes--you are an optimist. But here they are, bearing down upon
us again; so I will get away while there is time. (Goes towards the
door on the left. LONA comes in from the right.)

Lona: Oh, Hilmar, am I driving you away?

Hilmar: Not at all; I am in rather a hurry; I want to have a word with
Betty. (Goes into the farthest room on the left.)

Bernick (after a moment's silence): Well, Lona?

Lona: Yes?

Bernick: What do you think of me today?

Lona: The same as I did yesterday. A lie more or less--

Bernick: I must enlighten you about it. Where has Johan gone?

Lona: He is coming; he had to see a man first.

Bernick: After what you heard yesterday, you will understand that my
whole life will be ruined if the truth comes to light.

Lona: I can understand that.

Bernick: Of course, it stands to reason that I was not guilty of the
crime there was so much talk about here.

Lona: That stands to reason. But who was the thief?

Bernick: There was no thief. There was no money stolen--not a penny.

Lona: How is that?

Bernick: Not a penny, I tell you.

Lona: But those rumours? How did that shameful rumour get about that
Johan--

Bernick: Lona, I think I can speak to you as I could to no one else. I
will conceal nothing from you. I was partly to blame for spreading the
rumour.

Lona: You? You could act in that way towards a man who for your sake--!

Bernick: Do not condemn me without bearing in mind how things stood at
that time. I told you about it yesterday. I came home and found my
mother involved in a mesh of injudicious undertakings; we had all
manner of bad luck--it seemed as if misfortunes were raining upon us,
and our house was on the verge of ruin. I was half reckless and half in
despair. Lona, I believe it was mainly to deaden my thoughts that I let
myself drift into that entanglement that ended in Johan's going away.

Lona: Hm--

Bernick: You can well imagine how every kind of rumour was set on foot
after you and he had gone. People began to say that it was not his
first piece of folly--that Dorf had received a large sum of money to
hold his tongue and go away; other people said that she had received
it. At the same time it was obvious that our house was finding it
difficult to meet its obligations. What was more natural than that
scandal-mongers should find some connection between these two rumours?
And as the woman remained here, living in poverty, people declared that
he had taken the money with him to America; and every time rumour
mentioned the sum, it grew larger.

Lona: And you, Karsten--?

Bernick: I grasped at the rumour like a drowning man at a straw.

Lona: You helped to spread it?

Bernick: I did not contradict it. Our creditors had begun to be
pressing, and I had the task of keeping them quiet. The result was the
dissipating of any suspicion as to the stability of the firm; people
said that we had been hit by a temporary piece of ill-luck--that all
that was necessary was that they should not press us--only give us time
and every creditor would be paid in full.

Lona: And every creditor was paid in full?

Bernick: Yes, Lona, that rumour saved our house and made me the man I
now am.

Lona: That is to say, a lie has made you the man you now are.

Bernick: Whom did it injure at the time? It was Johan's intention never
to come back.

Lona: You ask whom it injured. Look into your own heart, and tell me if
it has not injured you.

Bernick: Look into any man's heart you please, and you will always
find, in every one, at least one black spot which he has to keep
concealed.

Lona: And you call yourselves pillars of society!

Bernick: Society has none better.

Lona: And of what consequence is it whether such a society be propped
up or not? What does it all consist of? Show and lies--and nothing
else. Here are you, the first man in the town, living in grandeur and
luxury, powerful and respected--you, who have branded an innocent man
as a criminal.

Bernick: Do you suppose I am not deeply conscious of the wrong I have
done him? And do you suppose I am not ready to make amends to him for
it?

Lona: How? By speaking out?

Bernick: Would you have the heart to insist on that?

Lona: What else can make amends for such a wrong?

Bernick: I am rich, Lona; Johan can demand any sum he pleases.

Lona: Yes, offer him money, and you will hear what he will say.

Bernick: Do you know what he intends to do?

Lona: No; since yesterday he has been dumb. He looks as if this had
made a grown man of him all at once.

Bernick: I must talk to him.

Lona: Here he comes. (JOHAN comes in from the right.)

Bernick (going towards hint): Johan--!

Johan (motioning him away): Listen to me first. Yesterday morning I
gave you my word that I would hold my tongue.

Bernick: You did.

Johan: But then I did not know--

Bernick: Johan, only let me say a word or two to explain the
circumstances--

Johan: It is unnecessary; I understand the circumstances perfectly. The
firm was in a dangerous position at the time; I had gone off, and you
had my defenceless name and reputation at your mercy. Well, I do not
blame you so very much for what you did; we were young and thoughtless
in those days. But now I have need of the truth, and now you must speak.

Bernick: And just now I have need of all my reputation for morality,
and therefore I cannot speak.

Johan: I don't take much account of the false reports you spread about
me; it is the other thing that you must take the blame of. I shall make
Dina my wife, and here--here in your town--I mean to settle down and
live with her.

Lona: Is that what you mean to do?

Bernick: With Dina? Dina as your wife?--in this town?

Johan: Yes, here and nowhere else. I mean to stay here to defy all
these liars and slanderers. But before I can win her, you must
exonerate me.

Bernick: Have you considered that, if I confess to the one thing, it
will inevitably mean making myself responsible for the other as well?
You will say that I can show by our books that nothing dishonest
happened? But I cannot; our books were not so accurately kept in those
days. And even if I could, what good would it do? Should I not in any
case be pointed at as the man who had once saved himself by an untruth,
and for fifteen years had allowed that untruth and all its consequences
to stand without having raised a finger to demolish it? You do not know
our community very much, or you would realise that it would ruin me
utterly.

Johan: I can only tell you that I mean to make Mrs. Dorf's daughter my
wife, and live with her in this town.

Bernick (wiping the perspiration from his forehead): Listen to me,
Johan--and you too, Lona. The circumstances I am in just now are quite
exceptional. I am situated in such a way that if you aim this blow at
me you will not only destroy me, but will also destroy a great future,
rich in blessings, that lies before the community which, after all, was
the home of your childhood.

Johan: And if I do not aim this blow at you, I shall be destroying all
my future happiness with my own hand.

Lona: Go on, Karsten.

Bernick: I will tell you, then. It is mixed up with the railway
project, and the whole thing is not quite so simple as you think. I
suppose you have heard that last year there was some talk of a railway
line along the coast? Many influential people backed up the
idea--people in the town and the suburbs, and especially the press; but
I managed to get the proposal quashed, on the ground that it would have
injured our steamboat trade along the coast.

Lona: Have you any interest in the steamboat trade?

Bernick: Yes. But no one ventured to suspect me on that account; my
honoured name fully protected me from that. For the matter of that, I
could have stood the loss; but the place could not have stood it. So
the inland line was decided upon. As soon as that was done, I assured
myself--without saying anything about it--that a branch line could be
laid to the town.

Lona: Why did you say nothing about it, Karsten?

Bernick: Have you heard the rumours of extensive buying up of forest
lands, mines and waterfalls--?

Johan: Yes, apparently it is some company from another part of the
country.

Bernick: As these properties are situated at present, they are as good
as valueless to their owners, who are scattered about the
neighbourhood; they have therefore been sold comparatively cheap. If
the purchaser had waited till the branch line began to be talked of,
the proprietors would have asked exorbitant prices.

Lona: Well--what then?

Bernick: Now I am going to tell you something that can be construed in
different ways--a thing to which, in our community, a man could only
confess provided he had an untarnished and honoured name to take his
stand upon.

Lona: Well?

Bernick: It is I that have bought up the whole of them.

Lona: You?

Johan: On your own account?

Bernick: On my own account. If the branch line becomes an accomplished
fact, I am a millionaire; if it does not, I am ruined.

Lona: It is a big risk, Karsten.

Bernick: I have risked my whole fortune on it.

Lona: I am not thinking of your fortune; but if it comes to light that--

Bernick. Yes, that is the critical part of it. With the unblemished and
honoured name I have hitherto borne, I can take the whole thing upon my
shoulders, carry it through, and say to my fellow-citizens: "See, I
have taken this risk for the good of the community."

Lona: Of the community?

Bernick: Yes; and not a soul will doubt my motives.

Lona: Then some of those concerned in it have acted more
openly--without any secret motives or considerations.

Bernick: Who?

Lona: Why, of course, Rummel and Sandstad and Vigeland.

Bernick: To get them on my side I was obliged to let them into the
secret.

Lona: And they?

Bernick: They have stipulated for a fifth part of the profits as their
share.

Lona: Oh, these pillars of society.

Bernick: And isn't it society itself that forces us to use these
underhanded means? What would have happened if I had not acted
secretly? Everybody would have wanted to have a hand in the
undertaking; the whole thing would have been divided up, mismanaged and
bungled. There is not a single man in the town except myself who is
capable of directing so big an affair as this will be. In this country,
almost without exception, it is only foreigners who have settled here
who have the aptitude for big business schemes. That is the reason why
my conscience acquits me in the matter. It is only in my hands that
these properties can become a real blessing to the many who have to
make their daily bread.

Lona: I believe you are right there, Karsten.

Johan: But I have no concern with the many, and my life's happiness is
at stake.

Bernick: The welfare of your native place is also at stake. If things
come out which cast reflections on my earlier conduct, then all my
opponents will fall upon me with united vigour. A youthful folly is
never allowed to be forgotten in our community. They would go through
the whole of my previous life, bring up a thousand little incidents in
it, interpret and explain them in the light of what has been revealed;
they would crush me under the weight of rumours and slanders. I should
be obliged to abandon the railway scheme; and, if I take my hand off
that, it will come to nothing, and I shall be ruined and my life as a
citizen will be over.

Lona: Johan, after what we have just heard, you must go away from here
and hold your tongue.

Bernick: Yes, yes, Johan--you must!

Johan: Yes, I will go away, and I will hold my tongue; but I shall come
back, and then I shall speak.

Bernick: Stay over there, Johan; hold your tongue, and I am willing to
share with you--

Johan: Keep your money, but give me back my name and reputation.

Bernick: And sacrifice my own!

Johan: You and your community must get out of that the best way you
can. I must and shall win Dina for my wife. And therefore, I am going
to sail tomorrow in the "Indian Girl"--

Bernick: In the "Indian Girl"?

Johan: Yes. The captain has promised to take me. I shall go over to
America, as I say; I shall sell my farm, and set my affairs in order.
In two months I shall be back.

Bernick: And then you will speak?

Johan: Then the guilty man must take his guilt on himself.

Bernick: Have you forgotten that, if I do that, I must also take on
myself guilt that is not mine?

Johan: Who is it that for the last fifteen years has benefited by that
shameful rumour?

Bernick: You will drive me to desperation! Well, if you speak, I shall
deny everything! I shall say it is a plot against me--that you have
come here to blackmail me!

Lona: For shame, Karsten!

Bernick: I am a desperate man, I tell you, and I shall fight for my
life. I shall deny everything--everything!

Johan: I have your two letters. I found them in my box among my other
papers. This morning I read them again; they are plain enough.

Bernick: And will you make them public?

Johan: If it becomes necessary.

Bernick: And you will be back here in two months?

Johan: I hope so. The wind is fair. In three weeks I shall be in New
York--if the "Indian Girl" does not go to the bottom.

Bernick (with a start): Go to the bottom? Why should the "Indian Girl"
go to the bottom?

Johan: Quite so--why should she?

Bernick (scarcely audibly): Go to the bottom?

Johan: Well, Karsten, now you know what is before you. You must find
your own way out. Good-bye! You can say good-bye to Betty for me,
although she has not treated me like a sister. But I must see Martha.
She shall tell Dina---; she shall promise me--(Goes out through the
farther door on the left.)

Bernick (to himself): The "Indian Girl"--? (Quickly.)  Lona, you must
prevent that!

Lona: You see for yourself, Karsten--I have no influence over him any
longer. (Follows JOHAN into the other room.)

Bernick (a prey to uneasy thoughts): Go to the bottom--?

(AUNE comes in from the right.)

Aune: Excuse me, sir, but if it is convenient--

Bernick (turning round angrily): What do you want?

Aune: To know if I may ask you a question, sir.

Bernick: Be quick about it, then. What is it?

Aune: I wanted to ask if I am to consider it as certain--absolutely
certain--that I should be dismissed from the yard if the "Indian Girl"
were not ready to sail tomorrow?

Bernick: What do you mean? The ship is ready to sail?

Aune: Yes--it is. But suppose it were not, should I be discharged?

Bernick: What is the use of asking such idle questions?

Aune: Only that I should like to know, sir. Will you answer me
that?--should I be discharged?

Bernick: Am I in the habit of keeping my word or not?

Aune: Then tomorrow I should have lost the position I hold in my house
and among those near and dear to me--lost my influence over men of my
own class--lost all opportunity of doing anything for the cause of the
poorer and needier members of the community?

Bernick: Aune, we have discussed all that before.

Aune: Quite so--then the "Indian Girl" will sail.

(A short silence.)

Bernick: Look here--it is impossible for me to have my eyes
everywhere--I cannot be answerable for everything. You can give me your
assurance, I suppose, that the repairs have been satisfactorily carried
out?

Aune: You gave me very short grace, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: But I understand you to warrant the repairs?

Aune: The weather is fine, and it is summer.

(Another pause.)

Bernick: Have you anything else to say to me?

Aune: I think not, sir.

Bernick: Then--the "Indian Girl" will sail...

Aune: Tomorrow?

Bernick: Yes.

Aune: Very good. (Bows and goes out. BERNICK stands for a moment
irresolute; then walks quickly towards the door, as if to call AUNE
back; but stops, hesitatingly, with his hand on the door-handle. At
that moment the door is opened from without, and KRAP comes in.)

Krap (in a low voice): Aha, he has been here. Has he confessed?

Bernick: Hm--; have you discovered anything?

Krap: What need of that, sir? Could you not see the evil conscience
looking out of the man's eyes?

Bernick: Nonsense--such things don't show. Have you discovered
anything, I want to know?

Krap: I could not manage it; I was too late. They had already begun
hauling the ship out of the dock. But their very haste in doing that
plainly shows that--

Bernick: It shows nothing. Has the inspection taken place, then?

Krap: Of course; but--

Bernick: There, you see! And of course they found nothing to complain
of?

Krap: Mr. Bernick, you know very well how much this inspection means,
especially in a yard that has such a good name as ours has.

Bernick: No matter--it takes all responsibility off us.

Krap: But, sir, could you really not tell from Aune's manner that--?

Bernick: Aune has completely reassured me, let me tell you.

Krap: And let me tell you, sir, that I am morally certain that--

Bernick: What does this mean, Krap? I see plainly enough that you want
to get your knife into this man; but if you want to attack him, you
must find some other occasion. You know how important it is to me--or,
I should say, to the owners--that the "Indian Girl" should sail
to-morrow.

Krap: Very well--so be it; but if ever we hear of that ship again--hm!

(VIGELAND comes in from the right.)

Vigeland: I wish you a very good morning, Mr. Bernick. Have you a
moment to spare?

Bernick: At your service, Mr. Vigeland.

Vigeland: I only want to know if you are also of opinion that the "Palm
Tree" should sail tomorrow?

Bernick: Certainly; I thought that was quite settled.

Vigeland: Well, the captain came to me just now and told me that storm
signals have been hoisted.

Bernick: Oh! Are we to expect a storm?

Vigeland: A stiff breeze, at all events; but not a contrary wind--just
the opposite.

Bernick: Hm--well, what do you say?

Vigeland: I say, as I said to the captain, that the "Palm Tree" is in
the hands of Providence. Besides, they are only going across the North
Sea at first; and in England, freights are running tolerably high just
now, so that--

Bernick: Yes, it would probably mean a loss for us if we waited.

Vigeland: Besides, she is a stout ship, and fully insured as well. It
is more risky, now, for the "Indian Girl"--

Bernick: What do you mean?

Vigeland: She sails tomorrow, too.

Bernick: Yes, the owners have been in such a hurry, and, besides--

Vigeland:  Well, if that old hulk can venture out--and with such a
crew, into the bargain--it would be a disgrace to us if we--

Bernick: Quite so. I presume you have the ship's papers with you.

Vigeland: Yes, here they are.

Bernick: Good; then will you go in with Mr. Krap?

Krap: Will you come in here, sir, and we will dispose of them at once.

Vigeland: Thank you.--And the issue we leave in the hands of the
Almighty, Mr. Bernick. (Goes with KRAP into BERNICK'S room. RORLUND
comes up from the garden.)

Rorlund:  At home at this time of day, Mr. Bernick?

Bernick (lost in thought): As you see.

Rorlund: It was really on your wife's account I came. I thought she
might be in need of a word of comfort.

Bernick: Very likely she is. But I want to have a little talk with you,
too.

Rorlund: With the greatest of pleasure, Mr. Bernick. But what is the
matter with you? You look quite pale and upset.

Bernick: Really? Do I? Well, what else could you expect--a man so
loaded with responsibilities as I am? There is all my own big
business--and now the planning of this railway.--But tell me something,
Mr. Rorlund, let me put a question to you.

Rorlund: With pleasure, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: It is about a thought that has occurred to me. Suppose a man
is face to face with an undertaking which will concern the welfare of
thousands, and suppose it should be necessary to make a sacrifice of
one--?

Rorlund: What do you mean?

Bernick: For example, suppose a man were thinking of starting a large
factory. He knows for certain--because all his experience has taught
him so--that sooner or later a toll of human life will be exacted in
the working of that factory.

Rorlund: Yes, that is only too probable.

Bernick: Or, say a man embarks on a mining enterprise. He takes into
his service fathers of families and young men in the first flush of
their youth. Is it not quite safe to predict that all of them will not
come out of it alive?

Rorlund: Yes, unhappily that is quite true.

Bernick: Well--a man in that position will know beforehand that the
undertaking he proposes to start must undoubtedly, at some time or
other, mean a loss of human life. But the undertaking itself is for the
public good; for every man's life that it costs, it will undoubtedly
promote the welfare of many hundreds.

Rorlund: Ah, you are thinking of the railway--of all the dangerous
excavating and blasting, and that sort of thing--

Bernick: Yes--quite so--I am thinking of the railway. And, besides, the
coming of the railway will mean the starting of factories and mines.
But do not think, nevertheless--

Rorlund: My dear Mr. Bernick, you are almost over-conscientious. What I
think is that, if you place the affair in the hands of Providence--

Bernick: Yes--exactly; Providence--

Rorlund: You are blameless in the matter. Go on and build your railway
hopefully.

Bernick: Yes, but now I will put a special instance to you. Suppose a
charge of blasting-powder had to be exploded in a dangerous place, and
that unless it were exploded the line could not be constructed? Suppose
the engineer knew that it would cost the life of the workman who lit
the fuse, but that it had to be lit, and that it was the engineer's
duty to send a workman to do it?

Rorlund: Hm--

Bernick: I know what you will say. It would be a splendid thing if the
engineer took the match himself and went and lit the fuse. But that is
out of the question, so he must sacrifice a workman.

Rorlund: That is a thing no engineer here would ever do.

Bernick: No engineer in the bigger countries would think twice about
doing it.

Rorlund: In the bigger countries? No, I can quite believe it. In those
depraved and unprincipled communities.

Bernick: Oh, there is a good deal to be said for those communities.

Rorlund: Can you say that?--you, who yourself--

Bernick: In the bigger communities a man finds space to carry out a
valuable project--finds the courage to make some sacrifice in a great
cause; but here, a man is cramped by all kinds of petty considerations
and scruples.

Rorlund: Is human life a petty consideration?

Bernick: When that human life threatens the welfare of thousands.

Rorlund: But you are suggesting cases that are quite inconceivable, Mr.
Bernick! I do not understand you at all today. And you quote the bigger
countries--well, what do they think of human life there? They look upon
it simply as part of the capital they have to use. But we look at
things from a somewhat different moral standpoint, I should hope. Look
at our respected shipping industry! Can you name a single one of our
ship-owners who would sacrifice a human life for the sake of paltry
gain? And then think of those scoundrels in the bigger countries, who
for the sake of profit send out freights in one unseaworthy ship after
another--

Bernick: I am not talking of unseaworthy ships!

Rorlund: But I am, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Yes, but to what purpose? They have nothing to do with the
question--Oh, these small, timid considerations! If a General from this
country were to take his men under fire and some of them were shot, I
suppose he would have sleepless nights after it! It is not so in other
countries. You should bear what that fellow in there says--

Rorlund: He? Who? The American--?

Bernick: Yes. You should hear how in America--

Rorlund: He, in there? And you did not tell me? I shall at once--

Bernick: It is no use; you won't be able to do anything with him.

Rorlund: We shall see. Ah, here he comes. (JOHAN comes in from the
other room.)

Johan (talking back through the open door): Yes, yes, Dina--as you
please; but I do not mean to give you up, all the same. I shall come
back, and then everything will come right between us.

Rorlund: Excuse me, but what did you mean by that? What is it you
propose to do?

Johan: I propose that that young girl, before whom you blackened my
character yesterday, shall become my wife.

Rorlund: Your wife? And can you really suppose that--?

Johan: I mean to marry her.

Rorlund: Well, then you shall know the truth. (Goes to the half-open
door.) Mrs. Bernick, will you be so kind as to come and be a
witness--and you too, Miss Martha. And let Dina come. (Sees LONA at the
door.) Ah, you here too?

Lona: Shall I come too?

Rorlund: As many as you please--the more the better.

Bernick: What are you going to do? (LONA, MRS. BERNICK, MARTHA, DINA
and HILMAR come in from the other room.)

Mrs. Bernick: Mr. Rorlund, I have tried my hardest, but I cannot
prevent him...

Rorlund: I shall prevent him, Mrs. Bernick. Dina, you are a thoughtless
girl, but I do not blame you so greatly. You have too long lacked the
necessary moral support that should have sustained you. I blame myself
for not having afforded you that support.

Dina: You mustn't speak now!

Mrs. Bernick: What is it?

Rorlund: It is now that I must speak, Dina, although your conduct
yesterday and today has made it ten times more difficult for me. But
all other considerations must give way to the necessity for saving you.
You remember that I gave you my word; you remember what you promised
you would answer when I judged that the right time had come. Now I dare
not hesitate any longer, and therefore--. (Turns to JOHAN.) This young
girl, whom you are persecuting, is my betrothed.

Mrs. Bernick: What?

Bernick: Dina!

Johan: She? Your--?

Martha: No, no, Dina!

Lona: It is a lie!

Johan: Dina--is this man speaking the truth?

Dina (after a short pause): Yes.

Rorlund: I hope this has rendered all your arts of seduction powerless.
The step I have determined to take for Dina's good, I now wish openly
proclaimed to every one. I cherish the certain hope that it will not be
misinterpreted. And now, Mrs. Bernick, I think it will be best for us
to take her away from here, and try to bring back peace and
tranquillity to her mind.

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, come with me. Oh, Dina--what a lucky girl you are!
(Takes DINA Out to the left; RORLUND follows them.)

Martha: Good-bye, Johan! (Goes out.)

Hilmar (at the verandah door): Hm--I really must say...

Lona (who has followed DINA with her eyes, to JOHAN): Don't be
downhearted, my boy! I shall stay here and keep my eye on the parson.
(Goes out to the right.)

Bernick: Johan, you won't sail in the "Indian Girl" now?

Johan: Indeed I shall.

Bernick: But you won't come back?

Johan: I am coming back.

Bernick: After this? What have you to do here after this?

Johan: Revenge myself on you all; crush as many of you as I can. (Goes
out to the right. VIGELAND and KRAP come in from BERNICK'S room.)

Vigeland: There, now the papers are in order, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Good, good.

Krap (in a low voice): And I suppose it is settled that the "Indian
Girl" is to sail tomorrow?

Bernick: Yes. (Goes into his room. VIGELAND and KRAP go out to the
right. HILMAR is just going after them, when OLAF puts his head
carefully out of the door on the left.)

Olaf: Uncle! Uncle Hilmar!

Hilmar: Ugh, is it you? Why don't you stay upstairs? You know you are
confined to the house.

Olaf (coming a step or two nearer): Hush! Uncle Hilmar, have you heard
the news?

Hilmar: Yes, I have heard that you got a thrashing today.

Olaf (looking threateningly towards his father's room): He shan't
thrash me any more. But have you heard that Uncle Johan is going to
sail tomorrow with the Americans?

Hilmar: What has that got to do with you? You had better run upstairs
again.

Olaf: Perhaps I shall be going for a buffalo hunt, too, one of these
days, uncle.

Hilmar: Rubbish! A coward like you--

Olaf: Yes--just you wait! You will learn something tomorrow!

Hilmar: Duffer! (Goes out through the garden. OLAF runs into the room
again and shuts the door, as he sees KRAP coming in from the right.)

Krap (going to the door of BERNICK'S room and opening it slightly):
Excuse my bothering you again, Mr. Bernick; but there is a tremendous
storm blowing up. (Waits a moment, but there is no answer.) Is the
"Indian Girl" to sail, for all that? (After a short pause, the
following answer is heard.)

Bernick (from his room): The "Indian Girl" is to sail, for all that.

(KRAP Shuts the door and goes out again to the right.)




ACT IV


(SCENE--The same room. The work-table has been taken away. It is a
stormy evening and already dusk. Darkness sets in as the following
scene is in progress. A man-servant is lighting the chandelier; two
maids bring in pots of flowers, lamps and candles, which they place on
tables and stands along the walls. RUMMEL, in dress clothes, with
gloves and a white tie, is standing in the room giving instructions to
the servants.)

Rummel: Only every other candle, Jacob. It must not look as if it were
arranged for the occasion--it has to come as a surprise, you know. And
all these flowers--? Oh, well, let them be; it will probably look as if
they stood there everyday. (BERNICK comes out of his room.)

Bernick (stopping at the door): What does this mean?

Rummel: Oh dear, is it you? (To the servants.) Yes, you might leave us
for the present. (The servants go out.)

Bernick: But, Rummel, what is the meaning of this?

Rummel: It means that the proudest moment of your life has come. A
procession of his fellow citizens is coming to do honour to the first
man of the town.

Bernick: What!

Rummel: In procession--with banners and a band! We ought to have had
torches too; but we did not like to risk that in this stormy weather.
There will be illuminations--and that always sounds well in the
newspapers.

Bernick: Listen, Rummel--I won't have anything to do with this.

Rummel: But it is too late now; they will be here in half-an-hour.

Bernick: But why did you not tell me about this before?

Rummel: Just because I was afraid you would raise objections to it. But
I consulted your wife; she allowed me to take charge of the
arrangements, while she looks after the refreshments.

Bernick (listening): What is that noise? Are they coming already? I
fancy I hear singing.

Rummel (going to the verandah door): Singing? Oh, that is only the
Americans. The "Indian Girl" is being towed out.

Bernick: Towed out? Oh, yes. No, Rummel, I cannot this evening; I am
not well.

Rummel: You certainly do look bad. But you must pull yourself together;
devil take it--you must! Sandstad and Vigeland and I all attach the
greatest importance to carrying this thing through. We have got to
crush our opponents under the weight of as complete an expression of
public opinion as possible. Rumours are getting about the town; our
announcement about the purchase of the property cannot be withheld any
longer. It is imperative that this very evening--after songs and
speeches, amidst the clink of glasses--in a word, in an ebullient
atmosphere of festivity--you should inform them of the risk you have
incurred for the good of the community. In such an ebullient atmosphere
of festivity--as I just now described it--you can do an astonishing lot
with the people here. But you must have that atmosphere, or the thing
won't go.

Bernick: Yes, yes.

Rummel: And especially when so delicate and ticklish a point has to be
negotiated. Well, thank goodness, you have a name that will be a tower
of strength, Bernick. But listen now; we must make our arrangements, to
some extent. Mr. Hilmar Tonnesen has written an ode to you. It begins
very charmingly with the words: "Raise the Ideal's banner high!" And
Mr. Rorlund has undertaken the task of making the speech of the
evening. Of course you must reply to that.

Bernick: I cannot tonight, Rummel. Couldn't you--?

Rummel: It is impossible, however willing I might be; because, as you
can imagine, his speech will be especially addressed to you. Of course
it is possible he may say a word or two about the rest of us; I have
spoken to Vigeland and Sandstad about it. Our idea is that, in
replying, you should propose the toast of "Prosperity to our
Community"; Sandstad will say a few words on the subject of harmonious
relations between the different strata of society; then Vigeland will
express the hope that this new undertaking may not disturb the sound
moral basis upon which our community stands; and I propose, in a few
suitable words, to refer to the ladies, whose work for the community,
though more inconspicuous, is far from being without its importance.
But you are not listening to me.

Bernick: Yes--indeed I am. But, tell me, do you think there is a very
heavy sea running outside?

Rummel: Why, are you nervous about the "Palm Tree"? She is fully
insured, you know.

Bernick: Yes, she is insured; but--

Rummel: And in good repair--and that is the main thing.

Bernick: Hm--. Supposing anything does happen to a ship, it doesn't
follow that human life will be in danger, does it? The ship and the
cargo may be lost--and one might lose one's boxes and papers--

Rummel: Good Lord--boxes and papers are not of much consequence.

Bernick: Not of much consequence! No, no; I only meant--. Hush--I hear
voices again.

Rummel: It is on board the "Palm Tree."

(VIGELAND comes in from the right.)

Vigeland: Yes, they are just towing the "Palm Tree" out. Good evening,
Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: And you, as a seafaring man, are still of opinion that--

Vigeland: I put my trust in Providence, Mr. Bernick. Moreover, I have
been on board myself and distributed a few small tracts which I hope
may carry a blessing with them.

(SANDSTAD and KRAP come in from the right.)

Sandstad (to some one at the door): Well, if that gets through all
right, anything will. (Comes in.) Ah, good evening, good evening!

Bernick: Is anything the matter, Krap?

Krap: I say nothing, Mr. Bernick.

Sandstad: The entire crew of the "Indian Girl" are drunk; I will stake
my reputation on it that they won't come out of it alive. (LONA comes
in from the right.)

Lona: Ah, now I can say his good-byes for him.

Bernick: Is he on board already?

Lona: He will be directly, at any rate. We parted outside the hotel.

Bernick: And he persists in his intention?

Lona: As firm as a rock.

Rummel (who is fumbling at the window): Confound these new-fangled
contrivances; I cannot get the curtains drawn.

Lona: Do you want them drawn? I thought, on the contrary--

Rummel: Yes, drawn at first, Miss Hessel. You know what is in the wind,
I suppose?

Lona: Yes. Let me help you. (Takes hold of the cords.) I will draw down
the curtains on my brother-in-law--though I would much rather draw them
up.

Rummel:  You can do that too, later on. When the garden is filled with
a surging crowd, then the curtains shall be drawn back, and they will
be able to look in upon a surprised and happy family. Citizens' lives
should be such that they can live in glass houses! (BERNICK opens his
mouth, as though he were going to say something; but he turns hurriedly
away and goes into his room.)

Rummel: Come along, let us have a final consultation. Come in, too, Mr.
Krap; you must assist us with information on one or two points of
detail. (All the men go into BERNICK'S room. LONA has drawn the
curtains over the windows, and is just going to do the same over the
open glass door, when OLAF jumps down from the room above on to the
garden steps; he has a wrap over his shoulders and a bundle in his
hand.)

Lona: Bless me, child, how you frightened me!

Olaf (hiding his bundle): Hush, aunt!

Lona: Did you jump out of the window? Where are you going?

Olaf: Hush!--don't say anything. I want to go to Uncle Johan--only on
to the quay, you know--only to say goodbye to him. Good-night, aunt!
(Runs out through the garden.)

Lona: No--stop! Olaf--Olaf!

(JOHAN, dressed for his journey, with a bag over his shoulder, comes
warily in by the door on the right.)

Johan: Lona!

Lona (turning round): What! Back again?

Johan: I have still a few minutes. I must see her once more; we cannot
part like this. (The farther door on the left opens, and MARTHA and
DINA, both with cloaks on, and the latter carrying a small travelling
bag in her hand, come in.)

Dina: Let me go to him! Let me go to him!

Martha: Yes, you shall go to him, Dina!

Dina: There he is!

Johan: Dina!

Dina: Take me with you!

Johan: What--!

Lona: You mean it?

Dina: Yes, take me with you. The other has written to me that he means
to announce to everyone this evening.

Johan: Dina--you do not love him?

Dina: I have never loved the man! I would rather drown myself in the
fjord than be engaged to him! Oh, how he humiliated me yesterday with
his condescending manner! How clear he made it that he felt he was
lifting up a poor despised creature to his own level! I do not mean to
be despised any longer. I mean to go away. May I go with you?

Johan: Yes, yes--a thousand times, yes!

Dina: I will not be a burden to you long. Only help me to get over
there; help me to go the right way about things at first.

Johan: Hurrah, it is all right after all, Dina!

Lona (pointing to BERNICK'S door): Hush!--gently, gently!

Johan: Dina, I shall look after you.

Dina: I am not going to let you do that. I mean to look after myself;
over there, I am sure I can do that. Only let me get away from here.
Oh, these women!--you don't know--they have written to me today,
too--exhorting me to realise my good fortune--impressing on me how
magnanimous he has been. Tomorrow, and every day afterwards, they would
be watching me to see if I were making myself worthy of it all. I am
sick and tired of all this goodness!

Johan: Tell me, Dina--is that the only reason you are coming away? Am I
nothing to you?

Dina: Yes, Johan, you are more to me than any one else in the world.

Johan: Oh, Dina--!

Dina: Every one here tells me I ought to hate and detest you--that it
is my duty; but I cannot see that it is my duty, and shall never be
able to.

Lona: No more you shall, my dear!

Martha: No, indeed you shall not; and that is why you shall go with him
as his wife.

Johan: Yes, yes!

Lona: What? Give me a kiss, Martha. I never expected that from you!

Martha: No, I dare say not; I would not have expected it myself. But I
was bound to break out some time! Ah, what we suffer under the tyranny
of habit and custom! Make a stand against that, Dina. Be his wife. Let
me see you defy all this convention.

Johan: What is your answer, Dina?

Dina: Yes, I will be your wife.

Johan: Dina!

Dina: But first of all I want to work--to make something of myself--as
you have done. I am not going to be merely a thing that is taken.

Lona: Quite right--that is the way.

Johan: Very well; I shall wait and hope--

Lona: And win, my boy! But now you must get on board!

Johan: Yes, on board! Ah, Lona, my dear sister, just one word with you.
Look here-- (He takes her into the background and talks hurriedly to
her.)

Martha: Dina, you lucky girl, let me look at you, and kiss you once
more--for the last time.

Dina: Not for the last time; no, my darling aunt, we shall meet again.

Martha: Never! Promise me, Dina, never to come back! (Grasps her hands
and looks at her.) Now go to your happiness, my dear child--across the
sea. How often, in my schoolroom, I have yearned to be over there! It
must be beautiful; the skies are loftier than here--a freer air plays
about your head--

Dina: Oh, Aunt Martha, some day you will follow us.

Martha: I? Never--never. I have my little vocation here, and now I
really believe I can live to the full the life that I ought.

Dina: I cannot imagine being parted from you.

Martha: Ah, one can part from much, Dina. (Kisses her.) But I hope you
may never experience that, my sweet child. Promise me to make him happy.

Dina: I will promise nothing; I hate promises; things must happen as
they will.

Martha: Yes, yes, that is true; only remain what you are--true and
faithful to yourself.

Dina: I will, aunt.

Lona (putting into her pocket some papers that JOHAN has given her):
Splendid, splendid, my dear boy. But now you must be off.

Johan: Yes, we have no time to waste now. Goodbye, Lona, and thank you
for all your love. Goodbye, Martha, and thank you, too, for your loyal
friendship.

Martha: Goodbye, Johan! Goodbye, Dina! And may you be happy all your
lives! (She and LONA hurry them to the door at the back. JOHAN and DINA
go quickly down the steps and through the garden. LONA shuts the door
and draws the curtains over it.)

Lona: Now we are alone, Martha. You have lost her and I him.

Martha: You--lost him?

Lona: Oh, I had already half lost him over there. The boy was longing
to stand on his own feet; that was why I pretended to be suffering from
homesickness.

Martha: So that was it? Ah, then I understand why you came. But he will
want you back, Lona.

Lona: An old step-sister--what use will he have for her now? Men break
many very dear ties to win their happiness.

Martha: That sometimes is so.

Lona: But we two will stick together, Martha.

Martha: Can I be anything to you?

Lona: Who more so? We two foster-sisters--haven't we both lost our
children? Now we are alone.

Martha: Yes, alone. And therefore, you ought to know this too--I loved
him more than anything in the world.

Lona: Martha! (Grasps her by the arm.) Is that true?

Martha: All my existence lies in those words. I have loved him and
waited for him. Every summer I waited for him to come. And then he
came--but he had no eyes for me.

Lona: You loved him! And it was you yourself that put his happiness
into his hands.

Martha: Ought I not to be the one to put his happiness into his hands,
since I loved him? Yes, I have loved him. All my life has been for him,
ever since he went away. What reason had I to hope, you mean? Oh, I
think I had some reason, all the same. But when he came back--then it
seemed as if everything had been wiped out of his memory. He had no
eyes for me.

Lona: It was Dina that overshadowed you, Martha?

Martha: And it is a good thing she did. At the time he went away, we
were of the same age; but when I saw him again--oh, that dreadful
moment!--I realised that now I was ten years older than he. He had gone
out into the bright sparkling sunshine, and breathed in youth and
health with every breath; and here I sat meanwhile, spinning and
spinning--

Lona: Spinning the thread of his happiness, Martha.

Martha: Yes, it was a golden thread I spun. No bitterness! We have been
two good sisters to him, haven't we, Lona?

Lona (throwing her arms round her): Martha!

(BERNICK comes in from his room.)

Bernick (to the other men, who are in his room): Yes, yes, arrange it
any way you please. When the time comes, I shall be able to--. (Shuts
the door.) Ah, you are here. Look here, Martha--I think you had better
change your dress; and tell Betty to do the same. I don't want anything
elaborate, of course--something homely, but neat. But you must make
haste.

Lona: And a bright, cheerful face, Martha; your eyes must look happy.

Bernick: Olaf is to come downstairs too; I will have him beside me.

Lona: Hm! Olaf.

Martha: I will give Betty your message. (Goes out by the farther door
on the left.)

Lona: Well, the great and solemn moment is at hand.

Bernick (walking uneasily up and down): Yes, it is.

Lona: At such a moment I should think a man would feel proud and happy.

Bernick (looking at her): Hm!

Lona: I hear the whole town is to be illuminated.

Bernick: Yes, they have some idea of that sort.

Lona: All the different clubs will assemble with their banners--your
name will blaze out in letters of fire--tonight the telegraph will
flash the news to every part of the country: "In the bosom of his happy
family, Mr. Bernick received the homage of his fellow citizens, as one
of the pillars of society."

Bernick: That is so; and they will begin to cheer outside, and the
crowd will shout in front of my house until I shall be obliged to go
out and bow to them and thank them.

Lona: Obliged to?

Bernick. Do you suppose I shall feel happy at that moment?

Lona: No, I don't suppose you will feel so very happy.

Bernick: Lona, you despise me.

Lona: Not yet.

Bernick: And you have no right to; no right to despise me! Lona, you
can have no idea how utterly alone I stand in this cramped and stunted
community--where I have had, year after year, to stifle my ambition for
a fuller life. My work may seem many-sided, but what have I really
accomplished? Odds and ends--scraps. They would not stand anything else
here. If I were to go a step in advance of the opinions and views that
are current at the moment, I should lose all my influence. Do you know
what we are--we who are looked upon as pillars of society? We are
nothing more, nor less, than the tools of society.

Lona: Why have you only begun to realise that now?

Bernick: Because I have been thinking a great deal lately--since you
came back--and this evening I have thought more seriously than ever
before. Oh, Lona, why did not I really know you then--in the old days,
I mean?

Lona: And if you had?

Bernick: I should never have let you go; and, if I had had you, I
should not be in the position I am in tonight.

Lona: And do you never consider what she might have been to you--she
whom you chose in my place?

Bernick: I know, at all events, that she has been nothing to me of what
I needed.

Lona: Because you have never shared your interests with her; because
you have never allowed her full and frank exchange of thoughts with
you; because you have allowed her to be borne under by self-reproach
for the shame you cast upon one who was dear to her.

Bernick: Yes, yes; it all comes from lying and deceit.

Lona: Then why not break with all this lying and deceit?

Bernick: Now? It is too late now, Lona.

Lona: Karsten, tell me--what gratification does all this show and
deception bring you?

Bernick: It brings me none. I must disappear someday, and all this
community of bunglers with me. But a generation is growing up that will
follow us; it is my son that I work for--I am providing a career for
him. There will come a time when truth will enter into the life of the
community, and on that foundation he shall build up a happier existence
than his father.

Lona: With a lie at the bottom of it all? Consider what sort of an
inheritance it is that you are leaving to your son.

Bernick (in tones of suppressed despair): It is a thousand times worse
than you think. But surely some day the curse must be lifted; and
yet--nevertheless--. (Vehemently.) How could I bring all this upon my
own head! Still, it is done now; I must go on with it now. You shall
not succeed in crushing me! (HILMAR comes in hurriedly and agitatedly
from the right, with an open letter in his hand.)

Hilmar: But this is--Betty, Betty.

Bernick: What is the matter? Are they coming already?

Hilmar: No, no--but I must speak to some one immediately. (Goes out
through the farther door on the left.)

Lona: Karsten, you talk about our having come here to crush you. So let
me tell you what sort of stuff this prodigal son, whom your moral
community shuns as if he had the plague, is made of. He can do without
any of you--for he is away now.

Bernick: But he said he meant to come back

Lona: Johan will never come back. He is gone for good, and Dina with
him.

Bernick: Never come back?--and Dina with him?

Lona: Yes, to be his wife. That is how these two strike your virtuous
community in the face, just as I did once--but never mind that.

Bernick: Gone--and she too--in the "Indian Girl"--

Lona: No; he would not trust so precious a freight to that rascally
crew. Johan and Dina are on the "Palm Tree."

Bernick: Ah! Then it is all in vain-- (Goes hurriedly to the door of
his room, opens it and calls in.) Krap, stop the "Indian Girl"--she
must not sail tonight!

Krap (from within): The "Indian Girl" is already standing out to sea,
Mr. Bernick.

Bernick (shutting the door and speaking faintly): Too late--and all to
no purpose--

Lona: What do you mean?

Bernick: Nothing, nothing. Leave me alone!

Lona: Hm!--look here, Karsten. Johan was good enough to say that he
entrusted to me the good name and reputation that he once lent to you,
and also the good name that you stole from him while he was away. Johan
will hold his tongue; and I can act just as I please in the matter.
See, I have two letters in my hand.

Bernick: You have got them! And you mean now--this very evening-perhaps
when the procession comes--

Lona: I did not come back here to betray you, but to stir your
conscience so that you should speak of your own free will. I did not
succeed in doing that--so you must remain as you are, with your life
founded upon a lie. Look, I am tearing your two letters in pieces. Take
the wretched things--there you are. Now there is no evidence against
you, Karsten. You are safe now; be happy, too--if you can.

Bernick (much moved): Lona--why did you not do that sooner! Now it is
too late; life no longer seems good to me; I cannot live on after today.

Lona: What has happened?

Bernick: Do not ask me--But I must live on, nevertheless! I will
live--for Olaf's sake. He shall make amends for everything--expiate
everything.

Lona: Karsten--! (HILMAR comes hurriedly back.)

Hilmar: I cannot find anyone; they are all out--even Betty!

Bernick: What is the matter with you?

Hilmar: I daren't tell you.

Bernick: What is it? You must tell me!

Hilmar: Very well--Olaf has run away, on board the "Indian Girl."

Bernick (stumbling back): Olaf--on board the "Indian Girl"! No, no!

Lona: Yes, he is! Now I understand--I saw him jump out of the window.

Bernick (calls in through the door of his room in a despairing voice):
Krap, stop the "Indian Girl" at any cost!

Krap: It is impossible, sir. How can you suppose--?

Bernick: We must stop her; Olaf is on board!

Krap: What!

Rummel (coming out of BERNICK'S room): Olaf, run away? Impossible!

Sandstad (following him): He will be sent back with the pilot, Mr.
Bernick.

Hilmar: No, no; he has written to me. (Shows the letter.) He says he
means to hide among the cargo till they are in the open sea.

Bernick: I shall never see him again!

Rummel: What nonsense!--a good strong ship, newly repaired...

Vigeland (who has followed the others out of BERNICK'S room): And in
your own yard, Mr. Bernick!

Bernick: I shall never see him again, I tell you. I have lost him,
Lona; and--I see it now--he never was really mine. (Listens.) What is
that?

Rummel: Music. The procession must be coming.

Bernick. I cannot take any part in it--I will not.

Rummel: What are you thinking of! That is impossible.

Sandstad: Impossible, Mr. Bernick; think what you have at stake.

Bernick: What does it all matter to me now? What have I to work for now?

Rummel: Can you ask? You have us and the community.

Vigeland: Quite true.

Sandstad: And surely, Mr. Bernick, you have not forgotten that
we--.(MARTHA comes in through the farther door to the left. Music is
heard in the distance, down the street.)

Martha: The procession is just coming, but Betty is not in the house. I
don't understand where she--

Bernick: Not in the house! There, you see, Lona--no support to me,
either in gladness or in sorrow.

Rummel: Draw back the curtains! Come and help me, Mr. Krap--and you,
Mr. Sandstad. It is a thousand pities that the family should not be
united just now; it is quite contrary to the program. (They draw back
all the curtains. The whole street is seen to be illuminated. Opposite
the house is a large transparency, bearing the words: "Long live
Karsten Bernick, Pillar of our Society ")

Bernick (shrinking back): Take all that away! I don't want to see it!
Put it out, put it out!

Rummel: Excuse me, Mr. Bernick, but are you not well?

Martha: What is the matter with him, Lona?

Lona: Hush! (Whispers to her.)

Bernick: Take away those mocking words, I tell you! Can't you see that
all these lights are grinning at us?

Rummel: Well, really, I must confess--

Bernick: Oh, how could you understand--! But I, I--! It is all like
candles in a dead-room!

Rummel: Well, let me tell you that you are taking the thing a great
deal too seriously.

Sandstad: The boy will enjoy a trip across the Atlantic, and then you
will have him back.

Vigeland: Only put your trust in the Almighty, Mr. Bernick.

Rummel: And in the vessel, Bernick; it is not likely to sink, I know.

Krap: Hm--

Rummel: Now if it were one of those floating coffins that one hears are
sent out by men in the bigger countries--

Bernick: I am sure my hair must be turning grey--

(MRS. BERNICK comes in from the garden, with a shawl thrown over her
head.)

Mrs. Bernick: Karsten, Karsten, do you know--?

Bernick: Yes. I know; but you--you, who see nothing that is going
on--you, who have no mother's eyes for your son--!

Mrs. Bernick: Listen to me, do!

Bernick: Why did you not look after him? Now I have lost him. Give him
back to me, if you can.

Mrs. Bernick: I can! I have got him.

Bernick: You have got him!

The Men: Ah!

Hilmar: Yes, I thought so.

Martha: You have got him back, Karsten.

Lona: Yes--make him your own, now.

Bernick: You have got him! Is that true? Where is he?

Mrs. Bernick: I shall not tell you, till you have forgiven him.

Bernick: Forgiven! But how did you know--?

Mrs. Bernick: Do you not think a mother sees? I was in mortal fear of
your getting to know anything about it. Some words he let fall
yesterday--and then his room was empty, and his knapsack and clothes
missing...

Bernick: Yes, yes?

Mrs. Bernick: I ran, and got hold of Aune; we went out in his boat; the
American ship was on the point of sailing. Thank God, we were in
time--got on board--searched the hold--found him! Oh, Karsten, you must
not punish him!

Bernick: Betty!

Mrs. Bernick: Nor Aune, either!

Bernick: Aune? What do you know about him? Is the "Indian Girl" under
sail again?

Mrs. Bernick: No, that is just it.

Bernick: Speak, speak!

Mrs. Bernick: Aune was just as agitated as I was; the search took us
some time; it had grown dark, and the pilot made objections; and so
Aune took upon himself--in your name--

Bernick: Well?

Mrs. Bernick: To stop the ship's sailing till tomorrow.

Krap: Hm--

Bernick: Oh, how glad I am!

Mrs. Bernick: You are not angry?

Bernick: I cannot tell you how glad I am, Betty

Rummel: You really take things far too seriously.

Hilmar: Oh yes, as soon as it is a question of a little struggle with
the elements--ugh!

Krap (going to the window): The procession is just coming through your
garden gate, Mr. Bernick.

Bernick: Yes, they can come now.

Rummel: The whole garden is full of people.

Sandstad: The whole street is crammed.

Rummel: The whole town is afoot, Bernick. It really is a moment that
makes one proud.

Vigeland: Let us take it in a humble spirit, Mr. Rummel.

Rummel: All the banners are out! What a procession! Here comes the
committee with Mr. Rorlund at their head.

Bernick: Yes, let them come in!

Rummel: But, Bernick--in your present agitated frame of mind--

Bernick: Well, what?

Rummel: I am quite willing to speak instead of you, if you like.

Bernick: No, thank you; I will speak for myself tonight.

Rummel: But are you sure you know what to say?

Bernick: Yes, make your mind easy, Rummel--I know now what to say.

(The music grows louder. The verandah door is opened. RORLUND comes in,
at the head of the Committee, escorted by a couple of hired waiters,
who carry a covered basket. They are followed by townspeople of all
classes, as many as can get into the room. An apparently endless crowd
of people, waving banners and flags, are visible in the garden and the
street.)

Rorlund: Mr. Bernick! I see, from the surprise depicted upon your face,
that it is as unexpected guests that we are intruding upon your happy
family circle and your peaceful fireside, where we find you surrounded
by honoured and energetic fellow citizens and friends. But it is our
hearts that have bidden us come to offer you our homage--not for the
first time, it is true, but for the first time on such a comprehensive
scale. We have on many occasions given you our thanks for the broad
moral foundation upon which you have, so to speak, reared the edifice
of our community. On this occasion we offer our homage especially to
the clear-sighted, indefatigable, unselfish--nay, self-sacrificing
citizen who has taken the initiative in an undertaking which, we are
assured on all sides, will give a powerful impetus to the temporal
prosperity and welfare of our community.

Voices: Bravo, bravo!

Rorlund: You, sir, have for many years been a shining example in our
midst. This is not the place for me to speak of your family life, which
has been a model to us all; still less to enlarge upon your unblemished
personal character. Such topics belong to the stillness of a man's own
chamber, not to a festal occasion such as this! I am here to speak of
your public life as a citizen, as it lies open to all men's eyes.
Well-equipped vessels sail away from your shipyard and carry our flag
far and wide over the seas. A numerous and happy band of workmen look
up to you as to a father. By calling new branches of industry into
existence, you have laid the foundations of the welfare of hundreds of
families. In a word--you are, in the fullest sense of the term, the
mainstay of our community.

Voices: Hear, hear! Bravo!

Rorlund: And, sir, it is just that disinterestedness, which colours all
your conduct, that is so beneficial to our community--more so than
words can express--and especially at the present moment. You are now on
the point of procuring for us what I have no hesitation in calling
bluntly by its prosaic name--a railway!

Voices: Bravo, bravo!

Rorlund: But it would seem as though the undertaking were beset by
certain difficulties, the outcome of narrow and selfish considerations.

Voices: Hear, hear!

Rorlund: For the fact has come to light that certain individuals, who
do not belong to our community, have stolen a march upon the
hard-working citizens of this place, and have laid hands on certain
sources of profit which by rights should have fallen to the share of
our town.

Voices: That's right! Hear, hear!

Rorlund: This regrettable fact has naturally come to your knowledge
also, Mr. Bernick. But it has not had the slightest effect in deterring
you from proceeding steadily with your project, well knowing that a
patriotic man should not solely take local interests into consideration.

Voices: Oh!--No, no!--Yes, yes!

Rorlund: It is to such a man--to the patriot citizen, whose character
we all should emulate--that we bring our homage this evening. May your
undertaking grow to be a real and lasting source of good fortune to
this community! It is true enough that a railway may be the means of
our exposing ourselves to the incursion of pernicious influences from
without; but it gives us also the means of quickly expelling them from
within. For even we, at the present time, cannot boast of being
entirely free from the danger of such outside influences; but as we
have, on this very evening--if rumour is to be believed--fortunately
got rid of certain elements of that nature, sooner than was to be
expected--

Voices: Order, order!

Rorlund:--I regard the occurrence as a happy omen for our undertaking.
My alluding to such a thing at such a moment only emphasises the fact
that the house in which we are now standing is one where the claims of
morality are esteemed even above ties of family.

Voices: Hear, hear! Bravo!

Bernick (at the same moment): Allow me--

Rorlund: I have only a few more words to say, Mr. Bernick. What you
have done for your native place we all know has not been done with any
underlying idea of its bringing tangible profit to yourself. But,
nevertheless, you must not refuse to accept a slight token of grateful
appreciation at the hands of your fellow-citizens--least of all at this
important moment when, according to the assurances of practical men, we
are standing on the threshold of a new era.

Voices: Bravo! Hear, hear!

(RORLUND signs to the servants, who bring forward the basket. During
the following speech, members of the Committee take out and present the
various objects mentioned.)

Rorlund: And so, Mr. Bernick, we have the pleasure of presenting you
with this silver coffee-service. Let it grace your board when in the
future, as so often in the past, we have the happiness of being
assembled under your hospitable roof. You, too, gentlemen, who have so
generously seconded the leader of our community, we ask to accept a
small souvenir. This silver goblet is for you, Mr. Rummel. Many a time
have you, amidst the clink of glasses, defended the interests of your
fellow-citizens in well-chosen words; may you often find similar worthy
opportunities to raise and empty this goblet in some patriotic toast!
To you, Mr. Sandstad, I present this album containing photographs of
your fellow-citizens. Your well-known and conspicuous liberality has
put you in the pleasant position of being able to number your friends
amongst all classes of society. And to you, Mr. Vigeland, I have to
offer this book of Family Devotions, printed on vellum and handsomely
bound, to grace your study table. The mellowing influence of time has
led you to take an earnest view of life; your zeal in carrying out your
daily duties has, for a long period of years, been purified and enobled
by thoughts of higher and holier things. (Turns to the crowd.) And now,
friends, three cheers for Mr. Bernick and his fellow-workers! Three
cheers for the Pillars of our Society!

The whole crowd: Bernick! Pillars of Society! Hurrah-hurrah-hurrah!

Lona: I congratulate you, brother-in-law.

(An expectant hush follows.)

Bernick (speaking seriously and slowly): Fellow citizens--your
spokesman said just now that tonight we are standing on the threshold
of a new era. I hope that will prove to be the case. But before that
can come to pass, we must lay fast hold of truth--truth which, till
tonight, has been altogether and in all circumstances a stranger to
this community of ours. (Astonishment among the audience.) To that end,
I must begin by deprecating the praises with which you, Mr. Rorlund,
according to custom on such occasions, have overwhelmed me. I do not
deserve them; because, until today, my actions have by no means been
disinterested. Even though I may not always have aimed at pecuniary
profit, I at all events recognise now that a craving for power,
influence and position has been the moving spirit of most of my actions.

Rummel (half aloud): What next!

Bernick: Standing before my fellow citizens, I do not reproach myself
for that; because I still think I am entitled to a place in the front
rank of our capable men of affairs.

Voices: Yes, yes, yes!

Bernick: But what I charge myself with is that I have so often been
weak enough to resort to deceitfulness, because I knew and feared the
tendency of the community to espy unclean motives behind everything a
prominent man here undertakes. And now I am coming to a point which
will illustrate that.

Rummel (uneasily): Hm-hm!

Bernick: There have been rumours of extensive purchases of property
outside the town. These purchases have been made by me--by me alone,
and by no one else. (Murmurs are heard: "What does he
say?--He?--Bernick?") The properties are, for the time being, in my
hands. Naturally I have confided in my fellow-workers, Mr. Rummel, Mr.
Vigeland and Mr. Sandstad, and we are all agreed that--

Rummel: It is not true! Prove it--prove it!

Vigeland: We are not all agreed about anything!

Sandstad: Well, really I must say--!

Bernick: That is quite true--we are not yet agreed upon the matter I
was going to mention. But I confidently hope that these three gentlemen
will agree with me when I announce to you that I have tonight come to
the decision that these properties shall be exploited as a company of
which the shares shall be offered for public subscription; any one that
wishes can take shares.

Voices: Hurrah! Three cheers for Bernick!

Rummel (in a low voice, to BERNICK): This is the basest treachery--!

Sandstad (also in an undertone): So you have been fooling us!

Vigeland: Well, then, devil take--! Good Lord, what am I saying?
(Cheers are heard without.)

Bernick: Silence, gentlemen. I have no right to this homage you offer
me; because the decision I have just come to does not represent what
was my first intention. My intention was to keep the whole thing for
myself; and, even now, I am of opinion that these properties would be
worked to best advantage if they remained in one man's hands. But you
are at liberty to choose. If you wish it, I am willing to administer
them to the best of my abilities.

Voices: Yes, yes, yes!

Bernick: But, first of all, my fellow townsmen must know me thoroughly.
And let each man seek to know himself thoroughly, too; and so let it
really come to pass that tonight we begin a new era. The old era--with
its affectation, its hypocrisy and its emptiness, its pretence of
virtue and its miserable fear of public opinion--shall be for us like a
museum, open for purposes of instruction; and to that museum we will
present--shall we not, gentlemen?--the coffee service, and the goblet,
and the album, and the Family Devotions printed on vellum, and
handsomely bound.

Rummel: Oh, of course.

Vigeland (muttering): If you have taken everything else, then--

Sandstad: By all means.

Bernick: And now for the principal reckoning I have to make with the
community. Mr. Rorlund said that certain pernicious elements had left
us this evening. I can add what you do not yet know. The man referred
to did not go away alone; with him, to become his wife, went--

Lona (loudly): Dina Dorf!

Rorlund: What?

Mrs. Bernick: What? (Great commotion.)

Rorlund: Fled? Run away--with him! Impossible!

Bernick: To become his wife, Mr. Rorlund. And I will add more. (In a
low voice, to his wife.) Betty, be strong to bear what is coming.
(Aloud.) This is what I have to say: hats off to that man, for he has
nobly taken another's guilt upon his shoulders. My friends, I want to
have done with falsehood; it has very nearly poisoned every fibre of my
being. You shall know all. Fifteen years ago, I was the guilty man.

Mrs. Bernick (softly and tremblingly): Karsten!

Martha (similarly): Ah, Johan--!

Lona: Now at last you have found yourself!

(Speechless consternation among the audience.)

Bernick: Yes, friends, I was the guilty one, and he went away. The vile
and lying rumours that were spread abroad afterwards, it is beyond
human power to refute now; but I have no right to complain of that. For
fifteen years I have climbed up the ladder of success by the help of
those rumours; whether now they are to cast me down again, or not, each
of you must decide in his own mind.

Rorlund: What a thunderbolt! Our leading citizen--! (In a low voice, to
BETTY.) How sorry I am for you, Mrs. Bernick!

Hilmar: What a confession! Well, I must say--!

Bernick: But come to no decision tonight. I entreat every one to go
home--to collect his thoughts--to look into his own heart. When once
more you can think calmly, then it will be seen whether I have lost or
won by speaking out. Goodbye! I have still much--very much--to repent
of; but that concerns my own conscience only. Good night! Take away all
these signs of rejoicing. We must all feel that they are out of place
here.

Rorlund: That they certainly are. (In an undertone to MRS. BERNICK.)
Run away! So then she was completely unworthy of me. (Louder, to the
Committee.) Yes, gentlemen, after this I think we had better disperse
as quietly as possible.

Hilmar: How, after this, any one is to manage to hold the Ideal's
banner high--Ugh!

(Meantime the news has been whispered from mouth to mouth. The crowd
gradually disperses from the garden. RUMMEL, SANDSTAD and VIGELAND go
out, arguing eagerly but in a low voice. HILMAR slinks away to the
right. When silence is restored, there only remain in the room BERNICK,
MRS. BERNICK, MARTHA, LONA and KRAP.)

Bernick: Betty, can you forgive me?

Mrs. Bernick (looking at him with a smile): Do you know, Karsten, that
you have opened out for me the happiest prospect I have had for many a
year?

Bernick: How?

Mrs. Bernick: For many years, I have felt that once you were mine and
that I had lost you. Now I know that you never have been mine yet; but
I shall win you.

Bernick (folding her in his arms): Oh, Betty, you have won me. It was
through Lona that I first learned really to know you. But now let Olaf
come to me.

Mrs. Bernick: Yes, you shall have him now. Mr. Krap--! (Talks softly to
KRAP in the background. He goes out by the garden door. During what
follows, the illuminations and lights in the houses are gradually
extinguished.)

Bernick (in a low voice): Thank you, Lona--you have saved what was best
in me--and for me.

Lona: Do you suppose I wanted to do anything else?

Bernick: Yes, was that so--or not? I cannot quite make you out.

Lona: Hm--

Bernick: Then it was not hatred? Not revenge? Why did you come back,
then?

Lona: Old friendship does not rust.

Bernick: Lona!

Lona: When Johan told me about the lie, I swore to myself that the hero
of my youth should stand free and true.

Bernick: What a wretch I am!--and how little I have deserved it of you!

Lona. Oh, if we women always looked for what we deserve, Karsten--!
(AUNE comes in with OLAF from the garden.)

Bernick (going to meet them): Olaf!

Olaf: Father, I promise I will never do it again--

Bernick: Never run away?

Olaf: Yes, yes, I promise you, father.

Bernick: And I promise you, you shall never have reason to. For the
future you shall be allowed to grow up, not as the heir to my life's
work, but as one who has his own life's work before him.

Olaf: And shall I be allowed to be what I like, when I grow up?

Bernick: Yes.

Olaf. Oh, thank you! Then I won't be a pillar of society.

Bernick: No? Why not?

Olaf: No--I think it must be so dull.

Bernick: You shall be yourself, Olaf; the rest may take care of
itself--And you, Aune...

Aune: I know, Mr. Bernick; I am dismissed.

Bernick: We remain together, Aune; and forgive me.

Aune: What? The ship has not sailed tonight.

Bernick: Nor will it sail tomorrow, either. I gave you too short grace.
It must be looked to more thoroughly.

Aune: It shall, Mr. Bernick--and with the new machines!

Bernick: By all means--but thoroughly and conscientiously. There are
many among us who need thorough and conscientious repairs, Aune. Well,
good night.

Aune: Good-night, sir--and thank you, thank you. (Goes out.)

Mrs. Bernick: Now they are all gone.

Bernick: And we are alone. My name is not shining in letters of fire
any longer; all the lights in the windows are out.

Lona: Would you wish them lit again?

Bernick: Not for anything in the world. Where have I been! You would be

horrified if you knew. I feel now as if I had come back to my right
senses, after being poisoned. But I feel this that I can be young and
healthy again. Oh, come nearer--come closer round me. Come, Betty!
Come, Olaf, my boy! And you, Martha--it seems to me as if I had never
seen you all these years.

Lona: No, I can believe that. Your community is a community of bachelor
souls; you do not see women.

Bernick: That is quite true; and for that very reason--this is a
bargain, Lona--you must not leave Betty and me.

Mrs. Bernick: No, Lona, you must not.

Lona: No, how could I have the heart to go away and leave you young
people who are just setting up housekeeping? Am I not your
foster-mother? You and I, Martha, the two old aunts-- What are you
looking at?

Martha: Look how the sky is clearing, and how light it is over the sea.
The "Palm Tree" is going to be lucky.

Lona: It carries its good luck on board.

Bernick: And we--we have a long earnest day of work ahead of us; I most
of all. But let it come; only keep close round me you true, loyal
women. I have learned this too, in these last few days; it is you women
that are the pillars of society.

Lona: You have learned a poor sort of wisdom, then, brother-in-law.
(Lays her hand firmly upon his shoulder.) No, my friend; the spirit of
truth and the spirit of freedom--they are the pillars of society.

========================================
========================================

ROSMERSHOLM

A play in four acts


by

HENRIK IBSEN




Translated by R. FARQUHARSON SHARP




DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  John Rosmer, of Rosmersholm, an ex-clergyman.
  Rebecca West, one of his household, originally engaged as
      companion to the late Mrs. Rosmer.
  Kroll, headmaster of the local grammar school, Rosmer's
      brother-in-law.
  Ulrik Brendel.
  Peter Mortensgaard.
  Mrs. Helseth, Rosmer's housekeeper.

(The action takes place at Rosmersholm, an old manor-house in the
neighbourhood of a small town on a fjord in western Norway.)




ACT 1


(SCENE--The sitting-room at Rosmersholm; a spacious room, comfortably
furnished in old-fashioned style. In the foreground, against the
right-hand wall, is a stove decorated with sprigs of fresh birch and
wild flowers. Farther back, a door. In the back wall folding doors
leading into the entrance hall. In the left-hand wall a window, in
front of which is a stand filled with flowers and plants. Near the
stove stand a table, a couch and an easy-chair. The walls are hung
round with portraits, dating from various periods, of clergymen,
military officers and other officials in uniform. The window is open,
and so are the doors into the lobby and the outer door. Through the
latter is seen an avenue of old trees leading to a courtyard. It is a
summer evening, after sunset. REBECCA WEST is sitting by the window
crocheting a large white woollen shawl, which is nearly completed. From
time to time she peeps out of window through the flowers. MRS. HELSETH
comes in from the right.)

Mrs. Helseth. Hadn't I better begin and lay the table for supper, miss?

Rebecca. Yes, do. Mr. Rosmer ought to be in directly.

Mrs. Helseth. Isn't there a draught where you are sitting, miss?

Rebecca. There is a little. Will you shut up, please? (MRS. HELSETH
goes to the hall door and shuts it. Then she goes to the window, to
shut it, and looks out.)

Mrs. Helseth. Isn't that Mr. Rosmer coming there?

Rebecca. Where? (Gets up.) Yes, it is he. (Stands behind the
window-curtain.) Stand on one side. Don't let him catch sight of us.

Mrs. Helseth (stepping back). Look, miss--he is beginning to use the
mill path again.

Rebecca. He came by the mill path the day before yesterday too. (Peeps
out between the curtain and the window-frame). Now we shall see
whether--

Mrs. Helseth. Is he going over the wooden bridge?

Rebecca. That is just what I want to see. (After a moment.) No. He has
turned aside. He is coming the other way round to-day too. (Comes away
from the window.) It is a long way round.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, of course. One can well understand his shrinking
from going over that bridge. The spot where such a thing has happened
is--

Rebecca (folding up her work). They cling to their dead a long time at
Rosmersholm.

Mrs. Helseth. If you ask me, miss, I should say it is the dead that
cling to Rosmersholm a long time.

Rebecca (looking at her). The dead?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, one might almost say that they don't seem to be able
to tear themselves away from those they have left behind.

Rebecca. What puts that idea into your head?

Mrs. Helseth. Well, otherwise I know the White Horses would not be seen
here.

Rebecca. Tell me, Mrs. Helseth--what is this superstition about the
White Horses?

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, it is not worth talking about. I am sure you don't
believe in such things, either.

Rebecca. Do you believe in them?

Mrs. Helseth (goes to the window and shuts it). Oh, I am not going to
give you a chance of laughing at me, miss. (Looks out.) See--is that
not Mr. Rosmer out on the mill path again?

Rebecca (looking out). That man out there? (Goes to the window.) Why,
that is Mr. Kroll, of course!

Mrs. Helseth. So it is, to be sure.

Rebecca. That is delightful, because he is certain to be coming here.

Mrs. Helseth. He actually comes straight over the wooden bridge, he
does for all that she was his own sister. Well, I will go in and get
the supper laid, miss. (Goes out to the right. REBECCA stands still for
a moment, then waves her hand out of the window, nodding and smiling.
Darkness is beginning to fall.)

Rebecca (going to the door on the right and calling through it). Mrs.
Helseth, I am sure you won't mind preparing something extra nice for
supper? You know what dishes Mr. Kroll is especially fond of.

Mrs. Helseth. Certainly, miss. I will.

Rebecca (opening the door into the lobby). At last, Mr. Kroll! I am so
glad to see you!

Kroll (coming into the lobby and putting down his stick). Thank you.
Are you sure I am not disturbing you?

Rebecca. You? How can you say such a thing?

Kroll (coming into the room). You are always so kind. (Looks round the
room.) Is John up in his room?

Rebecca. No, he has gone out for a walk. He is later than usual of
coming in, but he is sure to be back directly. (Points to the sofa.) Do
sit down and wait for him.

Kroll (putting down his hat). Thank you. (Sits down and looks about
him.) How charmingly pretty you have made the old room look! Flowers
everywhere!

Rebecca. Mr. Rosmer is so fond of having fresh flowers about him.

Kroll. And so are you, I should say.

Rebecca. Yes, I am. I think their scent has such a delicious effect on
one--and till lately we had to deny ourselves that pleasure, you know.

Kroll (nodding slowly). Poor Beata could not stand the scent of them.

Rebecca. Nor their colours either. They made her feel dazed.

Kroll. Yes, I remember. (Continues in a more cheerful tone of voice).
Well, and how are things going here?

Rebecca. Oh, everything goes on in the same quiet, placid way. One day
is exactly like another. And how are things with you? Is your wife--?

Kroll. Oh, my dear Miss West, don't let us talk about my affairs. In a
family there is always something or other going awry--especially in
such times as we live in now.

Rebecca (after a short pause, sitting down in an easy-chair near the
sofa). Why have you never once been near us during the whole of your
holidays?

Kroll. Oh, it doesn't do to be importunate, you know.

Rebecca. If you only knew how we have missed you.

Kroll. And, besides, I have been away, you know.

Rebecca. Yes, for a fortnight or so. I suppose you have been going the
round of the public meetings?

Kroll (nods). Yes, what do you say to that? Would you ever have thought
I would become a political agitator in my old age--eh?

Rebecca (smilingly). You have always been a little bit of an agitator,
Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. Oh, yes; just for my own amusement. But for the future it is
going to be in real earnest. Do you ever read the Radical newspapers?

Rebecca. Yes, I won't deny that!

Kroll. My dear Miss West, there is no objection to that--not as far as
you are concerned.

Rebecca. No, that is just what I think. I must follow the course of
events--keep up with what is happening.

Kroll. Well, under any circumstances, I should never expect you, as a
woman, to side actively with either party in the civic dispute--indeed
one might more properly call it the civil war--that is raging here. I
dare say you have read, then, the abuse these "nature's gentlemen" are
pleased to shower upon me, and the scandalous coarseness they consider
they are entitled to make use of?

Rebecca. Yes, but I think you have held your own pretty forcibly.

Kroll. That I have--though I say it. I have tasted blood now, and I
will make them realise that I am not the sort of man to take it lying
down--. (Checks himself.) No, no, do not let us get upon that sad and
distressing topic this evening.

Rebecca. No, my dear Mr. Kroll, certainly not.

Kroll. Tell me, instead, how you find you get on at Rosmersholm, now
that you are alone here--I mean, since our poor Beata--

Rebecca. Oh, thanks--I get on very well here. Her death has made a
great gap in the house in many ways, of course--and one misses her and
grieves for her, naturally. But in other respects--

Kroll. Do you think you will remain here?--permanently, I mean?

Rebecca. Dear Mr. Kroll, I really never think about it at all. The fact
is that I have become so thoroughly domesticated here that I almost
feel as if I belonged to the place too.

Kroll. You? I should think you did!

Rebecca. And as long as Mr. Rosmer finds I can be any comfort or any
use to him, I will gladly remain here, undoubtedly.

Kroll (looking at her, with some emotion). You know, there is something
splendid about a woman's sacrificing the whole of her youth for others.

Rebecca. What else have I had to live for?

Kroll. At first when you came here there was your perpetual worry with
that unreasonable cripple of a foster-father of yours--

Rebecca. You mustn't think that Dr. West was as unreasonable as that
when we lived in Finmark. It was the trying journeys by sea that broke
him up. But it is quite true that after we had moved here there were
one or two hard years before his sufferings were over.

Kroll. Were not the years that followed even harder for you?

Rebecca. No; how can you say such a thing! I, who was so genuinely fond
of Beata--! And she, poor soul was so sadly in need of care and
sympathetic companionship.

Kroll. You deserve to be thanked and rewarded for the forbearance with
which you speak of her.

Rebecca (moving a little nearer to him). Dear Mr. Kroll, you say that
so kindly and so sincerely that I feel sure you really bear me no
ill-will.

Kroll. Ill-will? What do you mean?

Rebecca. Well, it would not be so very surprising if it were rather
painful for you to see me, a stranger, doing just as I like here at
Rosmersholm.

Kroll. How in the world could you think--!

Rebecca. Then it is not so? (Holds out her hand to, him.) Thank you,
Mr. Kroll; thank you for that.

Kroll. But what on earth could make you take such an idea into your
head?

Rebecca. I began to be afraid it might be so, as you have so seldom
been out here to see us lately.

Kroll. I can assure you, you have been on the wrong scent entirely,
Miss West. And, in any case, the situation of affairs is unchanged in
any essential point; because during the last sad years of poor Beata's
life it was you and you alone, even then, that looked after everything
here.

Rebecca. But it was more like a kind of regency in the wife's name.

Kroll. Whatever it was, I--. I will tell you what, Miss West; as far as
I am concerned I should have nothing whatever to say against it if you.
But it doesn't do to say such things.

Rebecca. What things?

Kroll. Well, if it so happened that you were to step into the empty
place--

Rebecca. I have the place I want, already, Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. Yes, as far as material benefits go; but not--

Rebecca (interrupting him, in a serious voice). For shame, Mr. Kroll!
How can you sit there and jest about such things!

Kroll. Oh, well, I dare say our good John Rosmer thinks he has had more
than enough of married life. But, all the same--

Rebecca. Really, you almost make me feel inclined to laugh at you.

Kroll. All the same--Tell me, Miss West, if I may be allowed the
question, how old are you?

Rebecca. I am ashamed to say I was twenty-nine on my last birthday, Mr.
Kroll. I am nearly thirty.

Kroll. Quite so. And Rosmer--how old is he? Let me see. He is five
years younger than me, so he must be just about forty-three. It seems
to me it would be very suitable.

Rebecca. No doubt, no doubt. It would be remarkably suitable--Will you
stop and have supper with us?

Kroll. Thank you. I had meant to pay you a good long visit, because
there is a matter I want to talk over with our excellent friend--Well,
then, Miss West, to prevent your taking foolish ideas into your head
again, I will come out here again from time to time, as in the old days.

Rebecca. Yes, please do. (Holds out her hand to, him.) Thank you, thank
you! You are really uncommonly good-natured.

Kroll (with a little grumble). Am I? I can tell you that is more than
they say at home. (ROSMER comes in by the door on the right.)

Rebecca. Mr. Rosmer, do you see who is sitting here?

Rosmer. Mrs. Helseth told me. (KROLL gets up.) I am so glad to see you
here again, my dear fellow. (Puts his hands on KROLL'S shoulders and
looks him in the face.) Dear old friend! I knew that one day we should
be on our old footing again.

Kroll. My dear fellow, have you that insane idea in your head too, that
any thing could come between us?

Rebecca (to ROSMER). Isn't it delightful to think it was all our
imagination!

Rosmer. Is that really true, Kroll? But why have you kept so
obstinately away from us?

Kroll (seriously, and in, a subdued voice). Because I did not want to
come here like a living reminder of the unhappy time that is past--and
of her who met her death in the mill-race.

Rosmer. It was a very kind thought on your part. You are always so
considerate. But it was altogether unnecessary to keep away from us on
that account. Come along, let us sit down on the sofa. (They sit down.)
I can assure you it is not in the least painful for me to think about
Beata. We talk about her every day. She seems to us to have a part in
the house still.

Kroll. Does she really?

Rebecca (lighting the lamp). Yes, it is really quite true.

Rosmer. She really does. We both think so affectionately of her. And
both Rebecca--both Miss West and I know in our hearts that we did all
that lay in our power for the poor afflicted creature. We have nothing
to reproach ourselves with. That is why I feel there is something sweet
and peaceful in the way we can think of Beata now.

Kroll. You dear good people! In future I am coming out to see you every
day.

Rebecca (sitting down in an arm-chair). Yes, let us see that you keep
your word.

Rosmer (with a slight hesitation). I assure you, my dear fellow, my
dearest wish would be that our intimacy should never suffer in any way.
You know, you have seemed to be my natural adviser as long as we have
known one another, even from my student days.

Kroll. I know, and I am very proud of the privilege. Is there by any
chance anything in particular just now--?

Rosmer. There are a great many things that I want very much to talk
over with you frankly--things that lie very near my heart.

Rebecca. I feel that is so, too, Mr. Rosmer. It seems to me it would be
such a good thing if you two old friends--

Kroll. Well, I can assure you I have even more to talk over with
you--because I have become an active politician, as I dare say you know.

Rosmer. Yes, I know you have. How did that come about?

Kroll. I had to, you see, whether I liked it or not. It became
impossible for me to remain an idle spectator any longer. Now that the
Radicals have become so distressingly powerful, it was high time. And
that is also why I have induced our little circle of friends in the
town to bind themselves more definitely together. It was high time, I
can tell you!

Rebecca (with a slight smile). As a matter of fact, isn't it really
rather late now?

Kroll. There is no denying it would have been more fortunate if we had
succeeded in checking the stream at an earlier point. But who could
really foresee what was coming? I am sure I could not. (Gets up and
walks up and down.) Anyway, my eyes are completely opened now; for the
spirit of revolt has spread even into my school.

Rosmer. Into the school? Surely not into your school?

Kroll. Indeed it has. Into my own school. What do you think of this? I
have got wind of the fact that the boys in the top class--or rather, a
part of the boys in it--have formed themselves into a secret society
and have been taking in Mortensgaard's paper!

Rebecca. Ah, the "Searchlight".

Kroll. Yes, don't you think that is a nice sort of intellectual pabulum
for future public servants? But the saddest part of it is that it is
all the most promising boys in the class that have conspired together
and hatched this plot against me. It is only the duffers and dunces
that have held aloof from it.

Rebecca. Do you take it so much to heart, Mr. Kroll?

Kroll. Do I take it to heart, to find myself so hampered and thwarted
in my life's work? (Speaking more gently.) I might find it in my heart
to say that I could even take that for what it is worth; but I have not
told you the worst of it yet. (Looks round the room.) I suppose nobody
is likely to be listening at the doors?

Rebecca. Oh, certainly not.

Kroll. Then let me tell you that the revolt and dissension has spread
into my own home--into my own peaceful home--and has disturbed the
peace of my family life.

Rosmer (getting up). Do you mean it? In your own home?

Rebecca (going up to Kroll). Dear Mr. Kroll, what has happened?

Kroll. Would you believe it that my own children--. To make a long
story short, my boy Laurits is the moving spirit of the conspiracy at
the school. And Hilda has embroidered a red portfolio to keep the
numbers of the "Searchlight" in.

Rosmer. I should never have dreamed of such a thing; in your family--in
your own house!

Kroll. No, who would ever have dreamed of such a thing? In my house,
where obedience and order have always ruled--where hitherto there has
never been anything but one unanimous will--

Rebecca. How does your wife take it?

Kroll. Ah, that is the most incredible part of the whole thing. She,
who all her days--in great things and small--has concurred in my
opinions and approved of all my views, has actually not refrained from
throwing her weight on the children's side on many points. And now she
considers I am to blame for what has happened. She says I try to coerce
the young people too much. Just as if it were not necessary to--. Well,
those are the sort of dissensions I have going on at home. But
naturally I talk as little about it as possible; it is better to be
silent about such things. (Walks across the floor.) Oh, yes.--Oh, yes.
(Stands by the window, with his hands behind his back, and looks out.)

Rebecca (goes up to ROSMER, and speaks in low, hurried tones, unheard
by KROLL). Do it!

Rosmer (in the same tone). Not to-night.

Rebecca (as before). Yes, this night of all others. (Goes away from him
and adjusts the lamp.)

Kroll (coming back). Yes, my dear John, so now you know the sort of
spirit of the age that has cast its shadow both over my home life and
my official work. Ought I not to oppose this appalling, destructive,
disorganising tendency with all the weapons I can lay my hands upon? Of
course it is certainly my duty--and that both with my pen and my tongue.

Rosmer. But have you any hope that you can produce any effect in that
way?

Kroll. At all events I mean to take my share in the fight as a citizen.
And I consider that it is the duty of every patriotic man, every man
who is concerned about what is right, to do the same. And, I may as
well tell you, that is really the reason why I have come here to see
you to-night.

Rosmer. My dear fellow, what do you mean? What can I--?

Kroll. You are going to help your old friends, and do as we are
doing--take your share in it to the best of your ability.

Rebecca. But, Mr. Kroll, you know how little taste Mr. Rosmer has for
that sort of thing.

Kroll. Then he has got to overcome that distaste now. You do not keep
abreast of the times, John. You sit here and bury yourself in your
historical researches. Goodness knows, I have the greatest respect for
family pedigrees and all that they imply. But this is not the time for
such occupations, unhappily. You have no conception of the state of
affairs that is going on all over the country. Every single idea is
turned upside down, or very nearly so. It will be a hard fight to get
all the errors straightened out again.

Rosmer. I can quite believe it. But that sort of a fight is not in my
line at all.

Rebecca. Besides, I rather fancy that Mr. Rosmer has come to look at
the affairs of life with wider opened eyes than before.

Kroll (with a start). Wider opened eyes?

Rebecca. Yes, or with an opener mind--with less prejudice.

Kroll. What do you mean by that? John--surely you could never be so
weak as to allow yourself to be deluded by the accidental circumstance
that the demagogues have scored a temporary success!

Rosmer. My dear fellow, you know very well that I am no judge of
politics; but it certainly seems to me that of late years individual
thought has become somewhat more independent.

Kroll. Quite so--but do you consider that as a matter of course to be a
good thing? In any case you are vastly mistaken, my friend. Just
inquire a little into the opinions that are current amongst the
Radicals, both out here in the country and in town. You will find them
to be nothing else than the words of wisdom that appear in the
"Searchlight".

Rebecca. Yes, Mortensgaard has a great deal of influence over the
people about here.

Kroll. Yes, just think of it--a man with as dirty a record as his! A
fellow that was turned out of his place as a schoolmaster because of
his immoral conduct! This is the sort of man that poses as a leader of
the people! And successfully, too!--actually successfully! I hear that
he means to enlarge his paper now. I know, on reliable authority, that
he is looking for a competent assistant.

Rebecca. It seems to me surprising that you and your friends do not
start an opposition paper.

Kroll. That is exactly what we intend to do. This very day we have
bought the "County News." There was no difficulty about the financial
side of the matter; but-- (Turns towards ROSMER) Now we have come to
the real purport of my visit. It is the Management of it--the editorial
management--that is the difficulty, you see. Look here, Rosmer--don't
you feel called upon to undertake it, for the sake of the good cause?

Rosmer (in a tone of consternation). I!

Rebecca. How can you think of such a thing!

Kroll. I can quite understand your having a horror of public meetings
and being unwilling to expose yourself to the mercies of the rabble
that frequents them. But an editor's work, which is carried on in much
greater privacy, or rather--

Rosmer. No, no, my dear fellow, you must not ask that of me.

Kroll. It would give me the greatest pleasure to have a try at work of
that sort myself--only it would be quite out of the question for me; I
am already saddled with such an endless number of duties. You, on the
other hand, who are no longer hampered by any official duties, might--.
Of course the rest of us would give you all the help in our power.

Rosmer. I cannot do it, Kroll. I am not fitted for it.

Kroll. Not fitted for it? That was just what you said when your father
got you your living.

Rosmer. I was quite right; and that was why I resigned it, too.

Kroll. Well, if you only make as good an editor as you did a parson, we
shall be quite satisfied.

Rosmer. My dear Kroll--once for all--I cannot do it.

Kroll. Well, then, I suppose you will give us the use of your name, at
all events?

Rosmer. My name?

Kroll. Yes, the mere fact of John Rosmer's name being connected with it
will be a great advantage to the paper. We others are looked upon as
pronounced partisans. I myself even have the reputation of being a
wicked fanatic, I am told. Therefore we cannot count upon our own names
to give us any particular help in making the paper known to the
misguided masses. But you, on the contrary, have always held aloof from
this kind of fighting. Your gentle and upright disposition, your
polished mind, your unimpeachable honour, are known to and appreciated
by every one about here. And then there is the deference and respect
that your former position as a clergyman ensures for you--and, besides
that, there is the veneration in which your family, name is held!

Rosmer. Oh, my family name.

Kroll (pointing to the portraits). Rosmers of Rosmersholm--clergymen,
soldiers, men who have filled high places in the state--men of
scrupulous honour, every one of them--a family that has been rooted
here, the most influential in the place, for nearly two centuries.
(Lays his hand on ROSMER'S shoulder.) John, you owe it to yourself and
to the traditions of your race to join us in defence of all that has
hitherto been held sacred in our community. (Turning to REBECCA.) What
do you say, Miss West?

Rebecca (with a quiet little laugh). my dear Mr. Kroll--it all sounds
so absurdly ludicrous to me.

Kroll. What! Ludicrous?

Rebecca. Yes, because it is time you were told plainly--

Rosmer (hurriedly). No, no--don't! Not now!

Kroll (looking from one to the other). But, my dear friends, what on
earth--? (Breaks off, as MRS. HELSETH comes in, by the door on the
right.) Ahem!

Mrs. Helseth. There is a man at the kitchen door, sir. He says he wants
to see you.

Rosmer (in a relieved voice). Is there? Well, ask him to come in.

Mrs. Helseth. Shall I show him in here, sir?

Rosmer. Certainly.

Mrs. Helseth. But he doesn't look the sort of man one ought to allow in
here.

Rebecca. What does he look like, Mrs. Helseth?

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, he is not much to look at, Miss.

Rosmer. Did he not give you his name?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, I think he said it was Hekman, or something like
that.

Rosmer. I do not know any one of that name.

Mrs. Helseth. And he said his Christian name was Ulrik.

Rosmer (with a start of surprise). Ulrik Hetman! Was that it?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, sir, it was Hetman.

Kroll. I am certain I have heard that name before.

Rebecca. Surely it was the name that strange creature used to write
under--

Rosmer (to Kroll). It is Ulrik Brendel's pseudonym, you know.

Kroll. That scamp Ulrik Brendel. You are quite right.

Rebecca. So he is alive still.

Rosmer. I thought he was travelling with a theatrical company.

Kroll. The last I heard of him was that he was in the workhouse.

Rosmer. Ask him to come in, Mrs. Helseth.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, sir. (Goes out.)

Kroll. Do you really mean to allow this fellow into your house?

Rosmer. Oh, well, you know he was my tutor once.

Kroll. I know that what he did was to stuff your head with
revolutionary ideas, and that in consequence your father turned him out
of the house with a horsewhip.

Rosmer (a little bitterly). Yes, my father was always the commanding
officer--even at home.

Kroll. Be grateful to his memory for that, my dear John. Ah!

(MRS. HELSETH shows ULRIK BRENDEL in at the door, then goes out and
shuts the door after her. BRENDEL is a good-looking man with grey hair
and beard; somewhat emaciated, but active and alert; he is dressed like
a common tramp, in a threadbare frock coat, shoes with holes in them,
and no visible linen at his neck or wrists. He wears a pair of old
black gloves, carries a dirty soft hat under his arm, and has a
walking-stick in his hand. He looks puzzled at first, then goes quickly
up to KROLL and holds out his hand to him.)

Brendel. Good-evening, John!

Kroll. Excuse me

Brendel. Did you ever expect to see me again? And inside these hated
walls, too?

Kroll. Excuse me. (Points to ROSMER.) Over there.

Brendel (turning round). Quite right. There he is. John--my boy--my
favourite pupil!

Rosmer (shaking hands with him). My old tutor!

Brendel. In spite of certain recollections, I could not pass by
Rosmersholm without paying you a flying visit.

Rosmer. You are very welcome here now. Be sure of that.

Brendel. And this charming lady--? (Bows to Rebecca.) Your wife, of
course.

Rosmer. Miss West.

Brendel. A near relation, I presume. And our stranger friend here? A
colleague, I can see.

Rosmer. Mr. Kroll, master of the grammar school here.

Brendel. Kroll? Kroll? Wait a moment. Did you take the Philology course
in your student days?

Kroll. Certainly I did.

Brendel. By Jove, I used to know you, then

Kroll. Excuse me--

Brendel. Were you not--

Kroll. Excuse me--

Brendel. --one of those champions of all the virtues that got me turned
out of the Debating Society?

Kroll. Very possibly. But I disclaim any other acquaintance with you.

Brendel. All right, all right! Nach Belieben, Mr. Kroll. I dare say I
shall get over it. Ulrik Brendel will still be himself in spite of it.

Rebecca. Are you on your way to the town, Mr. Brendel?

Brendel. You have hit the nail on the head, ma'am. At certain intervals
I am obliged to do something for my living. I do not do it
willingly--but, enfin--when needs must--

Rosmer. My dear Mr. Brendel, will you not let me be of assistance to
you? In some way or another, I mean--

Brendel. Ah, what a proposal to come from you! Could you wish to soil
the tie that binds us together? Never, John--never!

Rosmer. But what do you propose to do in the town, then? I assure you,
you won't find it so easy--

Brendel. Leave that to me, my boy. The die is cast. The unworthy
individual who stands before you is started on an extensive
campaign--more extensive than all his former excursions put together.
(To KROLL.) May I venture to ask you, Professor--unter uns--are there
in your esteemed town any fairly decent, respectable and spacious
assembly-rooms?

Kroll. The most spacious is the hall belonging to the Working Men's
Association.

Brendel. May I ask, sir, if you have any special influence with that no
doubt most useful Association?

Kroll. I have nothing whatever to do with it.

Rebecca (to BRENDEL). You ought to apply to Peter Mortensgaard.

Brendel. Pardon, madame--what sort of an idiot is he?

Rosmer. Why do you make up your mind he is an idiot?

Brendel. Do you suppose I can't tell, from the sound of the name, that
it belongs to a plebeian?

Kroll. I did not expect that answer.

Brendel. But I will conquer my prejudices. There is nothing else for
it. When a man stands at a turning-point in his life--as I do--. That
is settled. I shall, put myself into communication with this
person--commence direct negotiations.

Rosmer. Are you in earnest when you say you are standing at a
turning-point in your life?

Brendel. Does my own boy not know that wherever Ulrik Brendel stands he
is always in earnest about it? Look here, I mean to become a new man
now--to emerge from the cloak of reserve in which I have hitherto
shrouded myself.

Rosmer. In what way?

Brendel. I mean to take an active part in life--to step forward--to
look higher. The atmosphere we breathe is heavy with storms. I want now
to offer my mite upon the altar of emancipation.

Kroll. You too?

Brendel (to them all). Has your public here any intimate acquaintance
with my scattered writings?

Kroll. No, I must candidly confess that--

Rebecca. I have read several of them. My foster-father had them.

Brendel. My dear lady, then you have wasted your time. They are simply
trash, allow me to tell you.

Rebecca. Really?

Brendel. Those you have read, yes. My really important works no man or
woman knows anything about. No one--except myself.

Rebecca. How is that?

Brendel. Because they are not yet written.

Rosmer. But, my dear Mr. Brendel--

Brendel. You know, my dear John, that I am a bit of a sybarite--a
gourmet. I have always been so. I have a taste for solitary enjoyment,
because in that way my enjoyment is twice--ten times--as keen. It is,
like this. When I have been wrapped in a haze of golden dreams that
have descended on me--when new, intoxicating, momentous thoughts have
had their birth in my mind, and I have been fanned by the beat of their
wings as they bore me aloft--at such moments I have transformed them
into poetry, into visions, into pictures. In general outlines, that is
to say.

Rosmer. Quite so.

Brendel. You cannot imagine the luxury of enjoyment I have experienced!
The mysterious rapture of creation!--in, general outlines, as I said.
Applause, gratitude, eulogies, crowns of laurel!--all these I have
culled with full hands trembling with joy. In my secret ecstasies I
have steeped myself in a happiness so, intoxicating--

Kroll. Ahem!

Rosmer. But you have never written anything of it down?

Brendel. Not a word. The thought of the dull clerk's work that it would
mean has always moved me to a nauseating sense of disgust. Besides, why
should I profane my own ideals when I could enjoy them, in all their
purity, by myself? But now they shall be sacrificed. Honestly, I feel
as a mother must do when she entrusts her young daughter to the arms of
a husband. But I am going to, sacrifice them nevertheless--sacrifice
them on the altar of emancipation. A series of carefully thought-out
lectures, to be delivered all over the country!

Rebecca (impetuously). That is splendid of you, Mr. Brendel! You are
giving up the most precious thing you possess.

Rosmer. The only thing.

Rebecca (looking meaningly at ROSMER). I wonder how many there are who
would do as much--who dare do it?

Rosmer (returning her look). Who knows?

Brendel. My audience is moved. That refreshes my heart and strengthens
my will--and now I shall proceed upon my task forthwith. There is one
other point, though. (To KROLL.) Can you inform me, sir, whether there
is an Abstainers' Society in the town? A Total Abstainers' Society? I
feel sure there must be.

Kroll. There is one, at your service. I am the president.

Brendel. I could tell that as soon as I saw you! Well, it is not at all
impossible that I may come to you and become a member for a week.

Kroll. Excuse me--we do not accept weekly members.

Brendel. A la bonne heure, my good sir. Ulrik Brendel has never been in
the habit of forcing himself upon societies of that kind. (Turns to go)
But I must not prolong my stay in this house, rich as it is in
memories. I must go into the town and find some suitable lodging. I
shall find a decent hotel of some kind there, I hope?

Rebecca. Will you not have something hot to drink before you go?

Brendel. Of what nature, dear lady?

Rebecca. A cup of tea, or--

Brendel. A thousand thanks to the most generous of hostesses!--but I do
not like trespassing on private hospitality. (Waves his hand.) Good-bye
to you all! (Goes to the door, but turns back.) Oh, by the
way--John--Mr. Rosmer--will you do your former tutor a service for old
friendship's sake?

Rosmer. With the greatest of pleasure.

Brendel. Good. Well, then, lend me--just for a day or two--a starched
shirt.

Rosmer. Nothing more than that!

Brendel. Because, you see, I am travelling on foot--on this occasion.
My trunk is being sent after me.

Rosmer. Quite so. But, in that case, isn't there anything else?

Brendel. Well, I will tell you what--perhaps you have an old, worn-out
summer coat that you could spare?

Rosmer. Certainly I have.

Brendel. And if there happened to be a pair of presentable shoes that
would go with the coat.

Rosmer. I am sure we can manage that, too. As soon as you let us know
your address, we will send the things to you.

Brendel. Please don't think of it! No one must be put to any
inconvenience on my account! I will take the trifles with me.

Rosmer. Very well. Will you come upstairs with me, then?

Rebecca. Let me go. Mrs. Helseth and I will see about it.

Brendel. I could never think of allowing this charming lady--

Rebecca. Nonsense! Come along, Mr. Brendel. (She goes out by the door
on the right.)

Rosmer (holding BRENDEL back). Tell me--is there no other way I can be
of service to you?

Brendel. I am sure I do not know of any. Yes, perdition seize it!--now
that I come to think of it--John, do you happen to have seven or eight
shillings on you?

Rosmer. I will see. (Opens his purse.) I have two half-sovereigns here.

Brendel. Oh, well, never mind. I may as well take them. I can always
get change in town. Thanks, in the meantime. Remember that it was two
half-sovereigns I had. Good-night, my own dear boy! Good-night to you,
sir! (Goes out by the door on the right, where ROSMER takes leave of
him and shuts the door after him.)

Kroll. Good heavens--and that is the Ulrik Brendel of whom people once
thought that he would do great things!

Rosmer. At all events he has had the courage to live his life in his
own way. I do not think that is such a small thing, after all.

Kroll. What? A life like his? I almost believe he would have the power,
even now, to disturb all your ideas.

Rosmer. No, indeed. I have come to a clear understanding with myself
now, upon all points.

Kroll. I wish I could believe it, my dear Rosmer. You are so dreadfully
susceptible to impressions from without.

Rosmer. Let us sit down. I want to have a talk with you.

Kroll. By all means. (They sit down on the couch.)

Rosmer (after a short pause). Don't you think everything here looks
very pleasant and comfortable?

Kroll. Yes, it looks very pleasant and comfortable now--and peaceful.
You have made yourself a real home, Rosmer. And I have lost mine.

Rosmer. My dear fellow, do not say that. There may seem to be a rift
just now, but it will heal again.

Kroll. Never, never. The sting will always remain. Things can never be
as they were before.

Rosmer. I want to ask you something, Kroll. You and I have been the
closest of friends now for so many years--does it seem to you
conceivable that anything could destroy our friendship?

Kroll. I cannot imagine anything that could cause a breach between us.
What has put that into your head?

Rosmer. Well--your attaching such tremendous importance to similarity
of opinions and views.

Kroll. Certainly I do; but then we two hold pretty similar opinions at
all events on the most essential points.

Rosmer (gently). No. Not any longer.

Kroll (trying to jump up from his seat). What is this?

Rosmer (restraining him). No, you must sit still. Please, Kroll.

Kroll. What does it all mean? I do not understand you. Tell me,
straight out!

Rosmer. A new summer has blossomed in my heart--my eyes have regained
the clearness of youth. And, accordingly, I am now standing where--

Kroll. Where? Where are you standing?

Rosmer. Where your children are standing.

Kroll. You? You! The thing is impossible! Where do you say you are
standing?

Rosmer. On the same side as Laurits and Hilda.

Kroll (letting his head drop). An apostate. John Rosmer an apostate.

Rosmer. What you are calling apostasy ought to have made me feel
sincerely happy and fortunate; but for all that I have suffered keenly,
because I knew quite well it would cause you bitter sorrow.

Kroll. Rosmer, Rosmer, I shall never get over this. (Looks at him
sadly.) To think that you, too, could bring yourself to sympathise with
and join in the work of disorder and ruin that is playing havoc with
our unhappy country.

Rosmer. It is the work of emancipation that I sympathise with.

Kroll. Oh yes, I know all about that. That is what it is called, by
both those who are leading the people astray and by their misguided
victims. But, be sure of this--you need expect no emancipation to be
the result of the spirit that relies on the poisoning of the whole of
our social life.

Rosmer. I do not give my allegiance to the spirit that is directing
this, nor to any of those who are leading the fight. I want to try to
bring men of all shades of opinion together--as many as I can
reach--and bind them as closely together as I can. I want to live for
and devote all the strength that is in me to one end only--to create a
real public opinion in the country.

Kroll. So you do not consider that we have sufficient public opinion!
I, for my part, consider that the whole lot of us are on the high road
to be dragged down into the mire where otherwise only the common people
would be wallowing.

Rosmer. It is just for that reason that I have made up my mind as to
what should be the real task of public opinion.

Kroll. What task?

Rosmer. The task of making all our fellow-countrymen into men of
nobility.

Kroll. All our fellow-countrymen--!

Rosmer. As many as possible, at all events.

Kroll. By what means?

Rosmer. By emancipating their ideas and purifying their aspirations, it
seems to me.

Kroll. You are a dreamer, Rosmer. Are you going to emancipate them? Are
you going to purify them?

Rosmer. No, my dear fellow--I can only try to awake the desire for it
in them. The doing of it rests with themselves.

Kroll. And do you think they are capable of it?

Rosmer. Yes.

Kroll. Of their own power?

Rosmer. Yes, of their own power. There is no other that can do it.

Kroll (getting up). Is that speaking as befits a clergyman?

Rosmer. I am a clergyman no longer.

Kroll. Yes, but--what of the faith you were brought up in?

Rosmer. I have it no longer.

Kroll. You have it no longer?

Rosmer (getting up). I have given it up. I had to give it up, Kroll.

Kroll (controlling his emotion). I see. Yes, yes. The one thing implies
the other. Was that the reason, then, why you left the service of the
Church?

Rosmer. Yes. When my mind was clearly made up--when I felt the
certainty that it Was not merely a transitory temptation, but that it
was something that I would neither have the power nor the desire to
dismiss from my mind--then I took that step.

Kroll. So it has been fermenting in your mind as long as that. And
we--your friends--have never been allowed to know anything of it.
Rosmer, Rosmer--how could you hide the sorrowful truth from us!

Rosmer. Because I considered it was a matter that only concerned
myself; and therefore I did not wish to cause you and my other friends
any unnecessary pain. I thought I should be able to live my life here
as I have done hitherto--peacefully and happily. I wanted to read, and
absorb myself in all the works that so far had been sealed books to
me--to familiarise myself thoroughly with the great world of truth and
freedom that has been disclosed to me now.

Kroll. An apostate. Every word you say bears witness to that. But, for
all that, why have you made this confession of your secret apostasy? Or
why just at the present moment?

Rosmer. You yourself have compelled me to it, Kroll.

Kroll. I? I have compelled you?

Rosmer. When I heard of your violent behaviour at public meetings--when
I read the reports of all the vehement speeches you made there of all
your bitter attacks upon those that were on the other side--your
scornful censure of your opponents--oh, Kroll, to think that
you--you--could be the man to do that!--then my eyes were opened to my
imperative duty. Mankind is suffering from the strife that is going on
now, and we ought to bring peace and happiness and a spirit of
reconciliation into their souls. That is why I step forward now and
confess myself openly for what I am--and, besides, I want to put my
powers to the test, as well as others. Could not you--from your
side--go with me in that, Kroll?

Kroll. Never, as long as I live, will I make any alliance with the
forces of disorder in the community.

Rosmer. Well, let us at least fight with honourable weapons, since it
seems we must fight.

Kroll. I can have nothing more to do with any one who does not think
with me on matters of vital importance, and I owe such a man no
consideration.

Rosmer. Does that apply even to me?

Kroll. You yourself have broken with me, Rosmer.

Rosmer. But does this really mean a breach between us?

Kroll. Between us! It is a breach with all those who have hitherto
stood shoulder to shoulder with you. And now you must take the
consequences.

(REBECCA comes in from the room on the right and opens the door wide.)

Rebecca. Well, that is done! We have started him off on the road to his
great sacrifice, and now we can go in to supper. Will you come in, Mr.
Kroll?

Kroll (taking his hat). Good-night, Miss West. This is no longer any
place for me.

Rebecca (excitedly). What do you mean? (Shuts the door and comes nearer
to the two men.) Have you told him--?

Rosmer. He knows now.

Kroll. We shall not let you slip out of our hands, Rosmer. We shall
compel you to come back to us again.

Rosmer. I shall never find myself there any more.

Kroll. We shall see. You are not the man to endure standing alone.

Rosmer. I am not so entirely alone, even now. There are two of us to
bear the solitude together here.

Kroll. Ah! (A suspicion appears to cross his mind.) That too! Beata's
words!

Rosmer. Beata's?

Kroll (dismissing the thought from his mind). No, no--that was odious
of me. Forgive me.

Rosmer. What? What do you mean?

Kroll. Think no more about it. I am ashamed of it. Forgive me--and
good-bye. (Goes out by the door to the hall.)

Rosmer (following him). Kroll! We cannot end everything between us like
this. I will come and see you to-morrow.

Kroll (turning round in the hall). You shall not set your foot in my
house. (Takes his stick and goes.)

(ROSMER stands for a while at the open door; then shuts it and comes
back into the room.)

Rosmer. That does not matter, Rebecca. We shall be able to go through
with it, for all that--we two trusty friends--you and I.

Rebecca. What do you suppose he meant just now when he said he was
ashamed of himself?

Rosmer. My dear girl, don't bother your head about that. He didn't even
believe what he meant, himself. But I will go and see him tomorrow.
Goodnight!

Rebecca. Are you going up so early to-night--after this?

Rosmer. As early to-night as I usually do. I feel such a sense of
relief now that it is over. You see, my dear Rebecca, I am perfectly
calm--so you take it calmly, too. Good-night.

Rebecca. Good-night, dear friend--and sleep well! (ROSMER goes out by
the door to the lobby; then his footsteps are heard as he goes
upstairs. REBECCA goes to the wall and rings a bell, which is answered
by MRS. HELSETH.) You can clear the table again, Mrs. Helseth. Mr.
Rosmer does not want anything, and Mr. Kroll has gone home.

Mrs. Helseth. Gone home? What was wrong with him, miss?

Rebecca (taking up her crochet-work). He prophesied that there was a
heavy storm brewing--

Mrs. Helseth. That is very strange, miss, because there isn't a scrap
of cloud in the sky.

Rebecca. Let us hope he doesn't meet the White Horse. Because I am
afraid it will not be long before we hear something of the family ghost.

Mrs. Helseth. God forgive you, miss--don't talk of such a dreadful
thing!

Rebecca. Oh, come, come!

Mrs. Helseth (lowering her voice). Do you really think, miss, that some
one here is to go soon?

Rebecca. Not a bit of it. But there are so many sorts of white horses
in this world, Mrs. Helseth--Well, good-night. I shall go to my room
now.

Mrs. Helseth. Good-night, miss. (Rebecca takes her work and goes out to
the right. MRS. HELSETH shakes her head, as she turns down the lamp,
and mutters to herself): Lord--Lord!--how queer Miss West does talk
sometimes!




ACT II


(SCENE. ROSMER'S study. The door into it is in the left-hand wall. At
the back of the room is a doorway with a curtain drawn back from it,
leading to his bedroom. On the right, a window, in front of which is a
writing-table strewn with books and papers. Bookshelves and cupboards
on the walls. Homely furniture. On the left, an old-fashioned sofa with
a table in front of it. ROSMER, wearing a smoking-jacket, is sitting at
the writing-table on a high-backed chair. He is cutting and turning
over the leaves of a magazine, and dipping into it here and there. A
knock is heard at the door on the left.)

Rosmer (without turning round). Come in.

(REBECCA comes in, wearing a morning wrapper.)

Rebecca. Good morning.

Rosmer (still turning over the leaves of his book). Good morning, dear.
Do you want anything?

Rebecca. Only to ask if you have slept well?

Rosmer. I went to sleep feeling so secure and happy. I did not even
dream. (Turns round.) And you?

Rebecca. Thanks, I got to sleep in the early morning.

Rosmer. I do not think I have felt so light-hearted for a long time as
I do to-day. I am so glad that I had the opportunity to say what I did.

Rebecca. Yes, you should not have been silent so long, John.

Rosmer. I cannot understand how I came to be such a coward.

Rebecca. I am sure it was not really from cowardice.

Rosmer. Yes, indeed. I can see that at bottom there was some cowardice
about it.

Rebecca. So much the braver of you to face it as you did. (Sits down
beside him on a chair by the writing-table.) But now I want to confess
something that I have done--something that you must not be vexed with
me about.

Rosmer. Vexed? My dear girl, how can you think--?

Rebecca. Yes, because I dare say it was a little presumptuous of me,
but--

Rosmer. Well, let me hear what it was.

Rebecca. Last night, when that Ulrick Brendel was going, I wrote him a
line or two to take to Mortensgaard.

Rosmer (a little doubtfully). But, my dear Rebecca--What did you write,
then?

Rebecca. I wrote that he would be doing you a service if he would
interest himself a little in that unfortunate man, and help him in any
way he could.

Rosmer. My dear, you should not have done that. You have only done
Brendel harm by doing so. And besides, Mortensgaard is a man I
particularly wish to have nothing to do with. You know I have been at
loggerheads once with him already.

Rebecca. But do you not think that now it might be a very good thing if
you got on to good terms with him again?

Rosmer. I? With Mortensgaard? For what reason, do you mean?

Rebecca. Well, because you cannot feel altogether secure now--since
this has come between you and your friends.

Rosmer (looking at her and shaking his head). Is it possible that you
think either Kroll or any of the others would take a revenge on
me--that they could be capable of--

Rebecca. In their first heat of indignation dear. No one can be certain
of that. I think, after the way Mr. Kroll took it--

Rosmer. Oh, you ought to know him better than that. Kroll is an
honourable man, through and through. I will go into town this
afternoon, and have a talk with him. I will have a talk with them all.
Oh, you will see how smoothly everything will go. (MRS. HELSETH comes
in by the door on the left.)

Rebecca (getting up). What is it, Mrs. Helseth?

Mrs. Helseth. Mr. Kroll is downstairs in the hall, miss.

Rosmer (getting up quickly). Kroll!

Rebecca. Mr. Kroll! What a surprise!

Mrs. Helseth. He asks if he may come up and speak to Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer (to REBECCA). What did I say! (To MRS. HELSETH). Of course he
may. (Goes to the door and calls down the stairs.) Come up, my dear
fellow! I am delighted to see you! (He stands holding the door open.
MRS. HELSETH goes out. REBECCA draws the curtain over the doorway at
the back, and then begins to tidy the room. KROLL comes in with his hat
in his hand.)

Rosmer (quietly, and with some emotion). I knew quite well it would not
be the last time--

Kroll. To-day I see the matter in quite a different light from
yesterday.

Rosmer. Of course you do, Kroll! Of course you do! You have been
thinking things over--

Kroll. You misunderstand me altogether. (Puts his hat down on the
table.) It is important that I should speak to you alone.

Rosmer. Why may not Miss West--?

Rebecca. No, no, Mr. Rosmer. I will go.

Kroll (looking meaningly at her). And I see I ought to apologise to
you, Miss West, for coming here so early in the morning. I see I have
taken you by surprise, before you have had time to--

Rebecca (with a start). Why so? Do you find anything out of place in
the fact of my wearing a morning wrapper at home here?

Kroll. By no means! Besides, I have no knowledge of what customs may
have grown up at Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Kroll, you are not the least like yourself to-day.

Rebecca. I will wish you good morning, Mr. Kroll. (Goes out to the
left.)

Kroll. If. you will allow me-- (Sits down on the couch.)

Rosmer. Yes, my dear fellow, let us make ourselves comfortable and have
a confidential talk. (Sits down on a chair facing KROLL.)

Kroll. I have not been able to close an eye since yesterday. I lay all
night, thinking and thinking.

Rosmer. And what have you got to say to-day?

Kroll. It will take me some time, Rosmer. Let me begin with a sort of
introduction. I can give you some news of Ulrick Brendel.

Rosmer. Has he been to see you?

Kroll. No. He took up his quarters in a low-class tavern--in the lowest
kind of company, of course; drank, and stood drinks to others, as long
as he had any money left; and then began to abuse the whole lot of them
as a contemptible rabble--and, indeed, as far as that goes he was quite
right. But the result was, that he got a thrashing and was thrown out
into the gutter.

Rosmer. I see he is altogether incorrigible.

Kroll. He had pawned the coat you gave him, too, but that is going to
be redeemed for him. Can you guess by whom?

Rosmer. By yourself, perhaps?

Kroll. No. By our noble friend Mr. Mortensgaard.

Rosmer. Is that so?

Kroll. I am informed that Mr. Brendel's first visit was paid to the
"idiot" and  "plebeian".

Rosmer. Well, it was very lucky for him--

Kroll. Indeed it was. (Leans over the table, towards ROSMER.) Now I am
coming to a matter of which, for the sake of our old--our
former--friendship, it is my duty to warn you.

Rosmer. My dear fellow, what is that?

Kroll. It is this; that certain games are going on behind your back in
this house.

Rosmer. How can you think that? Is it Rebec--is it Miss West you are
alluding to?

Kroll. Precisely. And I can quite understand it on her part; she has
been accustomed, for such a long time now, to do as she likes here. But
nevertheless--

Rosmer. My dear Kroll, you are absolutely mistaken. She and I have no
secrets from one another about anything whatever.

Kroll. Then has she confessed to you that she has been corresponding
with the editor of the "Searchlight"?

Rosmer. Oh, you mean the couple of lines she wrote to him on Ulrik
Brendel's behalf?

Kroll. You have found that out, then? And do you approve of her being
on terms of this sort with that scurrilous hack, who almost every week
tries to pillory me for my attitude in my school and out of it?

Rosmer. My dear fellow, I don't suppose that side of the question has
ever occurred to her. And in any case, of course she has entire freedom
of action, just as I have myself.

Kroll. Indeed? Well, I suppose that is quite in accordance with the new
turn your views have taken--because I suppose Miss West looks at things
from the same standpoint as you?

Rosmer. She does. We two have worked our way forward in complete
companionship.

Kroll (looking at him and shaking his head slowly). Oh, you blind,
deluded man!

Rosmer. I? What makes you say that?

Kroll. Because I dare not--I WILL not--think the worst. No, no, let me
finish what I want to say. Am I to believe that you really prize my
friendship, Rosmer? And my respect, too? Do you?

Rosmer. Surely I need not answer that question.

Kroll. Well, but there are other things that require answering--that
require full explanation on your part. Will you submit to it if I hold
a sort of inquiry--?

Rosmer. An inquiry?

Kroll. Yes, if I ask you questions about one or two things that it may
be painful for you to recall to mind. For instance, the matter of your
apostasy--well, your emancipation, if you choose to call it so--is
bound up with so much else for which, for your own sake, you ought to
account to me.

Rosmer. My dear fellow, ask me about anything you please. I have
nothing to conceal.

Kroll. Well, then, tell me this--what do you yourself believe was the
real reason of Beata's making away with herself?

Rosmer. Can you have any doubt? Or perhaps I should rather say, need
one look for reasons for what an unhappy sick woman, who is
unaccountable for her actions, may do?

Kroll. Are you certain that Beata was so entirely unaccountable for her
actions? The doctors, at all events, did not consider that so
absolutely certain.

Rosmer. If the doctors had ever seen her in the state in which I have
so often seen her, both night and day, they would have had no doubt
about it.

Kroll. I did not doubt it either, at the time.

Rosmer. Of course not. It was impossible to doubt it, unfortunately.
You remember what I told you of her ungovernable, wild fits of
passion--which she expected me to reciprocate. She terrified me! And
think how she tortured herself with baseless self-reproaches in the
last years of her life!

Kroll. Yes, when she knew that she would always be childless.

Rosmer. Well, think what it meant--to be perpetually in the clutches of
such--agony of mind over a thing that she was not in the slightest
degree responsible for--! Are you going to suggest that she was
accountable for her actions?

Kroll. Hm!--Do you remember whether at that time you had, in the house
any books dealing with the purport of marriage--according to the
advanced views of to-day?

Rosmer. I remember Miss West's lending me a work of the kind. She
inherited Dr. West's library, you know. But, my dear Kroll, you surely
do not suppose that we were so imprudent as to let the poor sick
creature get wind of any such ideas? I can solemnly swear that we were
in no way to blame. It was the overwrought nerves of her own brain that
were responsible for these frantic aberrations.

Kroll. There is one thing, at any rate, that I can tell you now, and
that is that your poor tortured and overwrought Beata put an end to her
own life in order that yours might be happy--and that you might be free
to live as you pleased.

Rosmer (starting half up from his chair). What do you mean by that?

Kroll. You must listen to me quietly, Rosmer--because now I can speak
of it. During the last year of her life she came twice to see me, to
tell me what she suffered from her fears and her despair.

Rosmer. On that point?

Kroll. No. The first time she came she declared that you were on the
high road to apostasy--that you were going to desert the faith that
your father had taught you.

Rosmer (eagerly). What you say is impossible, Kroll!--absolutely
impossible! You must be wrong about that.

Kroll. Why?

Rosmer. Because as long as Beata lived I was still doubting and
fighting with myself. And I fought out that fight alone and in the
completest secrecy. I do not imagine that even Rebecca--

Kroll. Rebecca?

Rosmer. Oh, well--Miss West. I call her Rebecca for the sake of
convenience.

Kroll. So I have observed.

Rosmer. That is why it is so incomprehensible to me that Beata should
have had any suspicion of it. Why did she never speak to me about
it?--for she never did, by a single word.

Kroll. Poor soul--she begged and implored me to speak to you.

Rosmer. Then why did you never do so?

Kroll. Do you think I had a moment's doubt, at that time, that her mind
was unhinged? Such an accusation as that, against a man like you! Well,
she came to see me again, about a month later. She seemed calmer then;
but, as she was going away, she said: "They may expect to see the White
Horse soon at Rosmersholm."

Rosmer. Yes, I know--the White Horse. She often used to talk about that.

Kroll. And then, when I tried to distract her from such unhappy
thoughts, she only answered: "I have not much time left; for John must
marry Rebecca immediately now."

Rosmer (almost speechless). What are you saying! I marry--!

Kroll. That was on a Thursday afternoon. On the Saturday evening she
threw herself from the footbridge into the millrace.

Rosmer. And you never warned us!

Kroll. Well, you know yourself how constantly she used to say that she
was sure she would die before long.

Rosmer. Yes, I know. But, all the same, you ought to have warned us!

Kroll. I did think of doing so. But then it was too late.

Rosmer. But since then, why have you not--? Why have you kept all this
to yourself?

Kroll. What good would it have done for me to come here and add to your
pain and distress? Of course I thought the whole thing was merely wild,
empty fancy--until yesterday evening.

Rosmer. Then you do not think so any longer?

Kroll. Did not Beata see clearly enough, when she saw that you were
going to fall away from your childhood's faith?

Rosmer (staring in front of him). Yes, I cannot understand that. It is
the most incomprehensible thing in the world to me.

Kroll. Incomprehensible or not, the thing is true. And now I ask you,
Rosmer, how much truth is there in her other accusation?--the last one,
I mean.

Rosmer. Accusation? Was that an accusation, then?

Kroll. Perhaps you did not notice how it was worded. She said she meant
to stand out of the way. Why? Well?

Rosmer. In order that I might marry Rebecca, apparently.

Kroll. That was not quite how it was worded. Beata expressed herself
differently. She said "I have not much time left; for John must marry
Rebecca IMMEDIATELY now."

Rosmer (looks at him for a moment; then gets up). Now I understand you,
Kroll.

Kroll. And if you do? What answer have you to make?

Rosmer (in an even voice, controlling himself). To such an
unheard-of--? The only fitting answer would be to point to the door.

Kroll (getting up). Very good.

Rosmer (standing face to face with him). Listen to me. For considerably
more than a year to be precise, since Beata's death--Rebecca West and I
have lived here alone at Rosmersholm. All that time you have known of
the charge Beata made against us; but I have never for one moment seen
you appear the least scandalised at our living together here.

Kroll. I never knew, till yesterday evening, that it was a case of an
apostate man and an "emancipated" woman living together.

Rosmer. Ah! So then you do not believe in any purity of life among
apostates or emancipated folk? You do not believe that they may have
the instinct of morality ingrained in their natures?

Kroll. I have no particular confidence in the kind of morality that is
not rooted in the Church's faith.

Rosmer. And you mean that to apply to Rebecca and myself?--to my
relations with Rebecca?

Kroll. I cannot make any departure, in favour of you two, from my
opinion that there is certainly no very wide gulf between free thinking
and--ahem!

Rosmer. And what?

Kroll. And free love, since you force me to say it.

Rosmer (gently). And you are not ashamed to say that to me!--you, who
have known me ever since I was a boy.

Kroll. It is just for that reason. I know how easily you allow yourself
to be influenced by those you associate with. And as for your
Rebecca--well, your Miss West, then--to tell the truth, we know very
little about her. To cut the matter short, Rosmer--I am not going to
give you up. And you, on your part, ought to try and save yourself in
time.

Rosmer. Save myself? How--? (MRS. HELSETH looks in through the door on
the left.) What do you want?

Mrs. Helseth. I wanted to ask Miss West to come down, sir.

Rosmer. Miss West is not up here.

Mrs. Helseth. Indeed, sir? (Looks round the room.) That is very
strange. (Goes out.)

Rosmer. You were saying--?

Kroll. Listen to me. As to what may have gone on here in secret while
Beata was alive, and as to what may be still going on here, I have no
wish to inquire more closely. You were, of course, extremely unhappy in
your marriage--and to some extent that may be urged in your excuse--

Rosmer. Oh, how little you really know me!

Kroll. Do not interrupt me. What I want to say is this. If you
definitely must continue living with Miss West, it is absolutely
necessary that you should conceal the revolution of opinion--I mean the
distressing apostasy--that she has beguiled you into. Let me speak! Let
me speak! I say that, if you are determined to go on with this folly,
for heaven's sake hold any variety of ideas or opinions or beliefs you
like--but keep your opinions to yourself. It is a purely personal
matter, and there is not the slightest necessity to go proclaiming it
all over the countryside.

Rosmer. It is a necessity for me to abandon a false and equivocal
position.

Kroll. But you have a duty towards the traditions of your family,
Rosmer! Remember that! From time immemorial Rosmersholm has been a
stronghold of discipline and order, of respect and esteem for all that
the best people in our community have upheld and sanctioned. The whole
neighbourhood has taken its tone from Rosmersholm. If the report gets
about that you yourself have broken with what I may call the Rosmer
family tradition, it will evoke an irreparable state of unrest.

Rosmer. My dear Kroll, I cannot see the matter in that light. It seems
to me that it is my imperative duty to bring a little light and
happiness into the place where the race of Rosmers has spread darkness
and oppression for all these long years.

Kroll (looking severely at him). Yes, that would be a worthy action for
the man with whom the race will disappear. Let such things alone, my
friend. It is no suitable task for you. You were meant to lead the
peaceful life of a student.

Rosmer. Yes, that may be so. But nevertheless I want to try and play my
humble part in the struggles of life.

Kroll. The struggles of life! Do you know what that will mean for you?
It will mean war to the death with all your friends.

Rosmer (quietly). I do not imagine they are all such fanatics as you.

Kroll. You are a simple-minded creature, Rosmer--an inexperienced
creature. You have no suspicion of the violence of the storm that will
burst upon you. (MRS. HELSETH slightly opens the door on the left.)

Mrs. Helseth. Miss West wishes me to ask you, sir

Rosmer. What is it?

Mrs. Helseth. There is some one downstairs that wishes to speak to you
for a minute, sir.

Rosmer. Is it the gentleman that was here yesterday afternoon, by any
chance?

Mrs. Helseth. No, it is that Mr. Mortensgaard.

Rosmer. Mortensgaard?

Kroll. Aha! So matters have got as far as that already, have they!

Rosmer. What does he want with me? Why did you not send him away?

Mrs. Helseth. Miss West told me to ask you if he might come up.

Rosmer. Tell him I am engaged, and--

Kroll (to MRS. HELSETH). No; show him up, please. (MRS. HELSETH goes
out. KROLL takes up his hat.) I quit the field--temporarily. But we
have not fought the decisive action yet.

Rosmer. As truly as I stand here, Kroll, I have absolutely nothing to
do with Mortensgaard.

Kroll. I do not believe you any longer on any point. Under no
circumstances shall I have any faith in you after this. It is war to
the knife now. We shall try if we cannot make you powerless to do any
harm.

Rosmer. Oh, Kroll--how you have sunk! How low you have sunk!

Kroll. I? And a man like you has the face to say so? Remember Beata!

Rosmer. Are you harking back to that again!

Kroll. No. You must solve the riddle of the millrace as your conscience
will allow you--if you have any conscience still left. (PETER
MORTENSGAARD comes in softly and quietly, by the door on the left. He
is a short, slightly built man with sparse reddish hair and beard.
KROLL gives him a look of hatred.) The "Searchlight" too, I see.
Lighted at Rosmersholm! (Buttons up his coat.) That leaves me no doubt
as to the course I should steer.

Mortensgaard (quietly). The "Searchlight" will always be ready burning
to light Mr. Kroll home.

Kroll. Yes, you have shown me your goodwill for a long time. To be sure
there is a Commandment that forbids us to bear false witness against
our neighbour--

Mortensgaard. Mr. Kroll has no need to instruct me in the Commandments.

Kroll. Not even in the sixth?

Rosmer. Kroll--!

Mortensgaard. If I needed such instruction, Mr. Rosmer is the most
suitable person to give it me.

Kroll (with scarcely concealed scorn). Mr. Rosmer? Oh yes, the Reverend
Mr. Rosmer is undoubtedly the most suitable man for that! I hope you
will enjoy yourselves, gentlemen. (Goes out and slams the door after
him.)

Rosmer (stands looking at the door, and says to himself). Yes, yes--it
had to be so. (Turns round.) Will you tell me, Mr. Mortensgaard, what
has brought you out here to see me?

Mortensgaard. It was really Miss West I wanted to see. I thought I
ought to thank her for the kind letter I received from her yesterday.

Rosmer. I know she has written to you. Have you had a talk with her?

Mortensgaard. Yes, a little. (Smiles slightly.) I hear that there has
been a change of views in certain respects at Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. My views have changed to a very considerable extent; I might
almost say entirely.

Mortensgaard. That is what Miss West said. And that was why she thought
I ought to come up and have a little chat with you about this.

Rosmer. About what, Mr. Mortensgaard?

Mortensgaard. May I have your permission to announce in the
"Searchlight" that you have altered your opinions, and are going to
devote yourself to the cause of free thought and progress?

Rosmer. By all means. I will go so far as to ask you to make the
announcement.

Mortensgaard. Then it shall appear to-morrow. It will be a great and
weighty piece of news that the Reverend Mr. Rosmer of Rosmersholm has
made up his mind to join the forces of light in that direction too.

Rosmer. I do not quite understand you.

Mortensgaard. What I mean is that it implies the gain of strong moral
support for our party every time we win over an earnest,
Christian-minded adherent.

Rosmer (with some astonishment). Then you don't know--? Did Miss West
not tell you that as well?

Mortensgaard. What, Mr. Rosmer? Miss West was in a considerable hurry.
She told me to come up, and that I would hear the rest of it from
yourself.

Rosmer. Very well, then; let me tell you that I have cut myself free
entirely--on every side. I have now, no connection of any kind with the
tenets of the Church. For the future such matters have not the smallest
signification for me.

Mortensgaard (looking at him in perplexity). Well, if the moon had
fallen down from the sky, I could not be more--! To think that I should
ever hear you yourself renounce--!

Rosmer. Yes, I stand now where you have stood for a long time. You can
announce that in the "Searchlight" to-morrow too.

Mortensgaard. That, too? No, my dear Mr. Rosmer--you must excuse
me--but it is not worth touching on that side of the matter.

Rosmer. Not touch on it?

Mortensgaard. Not at first, I think.

Rosmer. But I do not understand--

Mortensgaard. Well, it is like this, Mr. Rosmer. You are not as
familiar with all the circumstances of the case as I am, I expect. But
if you, too, have joined the forces of freedom--and if you, as Miss
West says you do, mean to take part in the movement--I conclude you do
so with the desire to be as useful to the movement as you possibly can,
in practice as well as, in theory.

Rosmer. Yes, that is my most sincere wish.

Mortensgaard. Very well. But I must impress on you, Mr. Rosmer, that if
you come forward openly with this news about your defection from the
Church, you will tie your own hands immediately.

Rosmer. Do you think so?

Mortensgaard. Yes, you may be certain that there is not much that you
would be able to do hereabouts. And besides, Mr. Rosmer, we have quite
enough freethinkers already--indeed, I was going to say we have too
many of those gentry. What the party needs is a Christian
element--something that every one must respect. That is what we want
badly. And for that reason it is most advisable that you should hold
your tongue about any matters that do not concern the public. That is
my opinion.

Rosmer. I see. Then you would not risk having anything to do with me if
I were to confess my apostasy openly?

Mortensgaard (shaking his head). I should not like to, Mr. Rosmer.
Lately I have made it a rule never to support anybody or anything that
is opposed to the interests of the Church.

Rosmer. Have you, then, entered the fold of the Church again lately?

Mortensgaard. That is another matter altogether.

Rosmer. Oh, that is how it is. Yes, I understand you now.

Mortensgaard. Mr. Rosmer--you ought to remember that I, of all people,
have not absolute freedom of action.

Rosmer. What hampers you?

Mortensgaard. What hampers me is that I am a marked man.

Rosmer. Ah--of course.

Mortensgaard. A marked man, Mr. Rosmer. And you, of all people, ought
to remember that--because you were responsible, more than any one else,
for my being branded.

Rosmer. If I had stood then where I stand now, I should have handled
the affair more judiciously.

Mortensgaard. I think so too. But it is too late now; you have branded
me, once for all--branded me for life. I do not suppose you can fully
realise what such a thing means. But it is possible that you may soon
feel the smart of it yourself now, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. I?

Mortensgaard. Yes. You surely do not suppose that Mr. Kroll and his
gang will be inclined to forgive a rupture such as yours? And the
"County News" is going to be pretty bloodthirsty, I hear. It may very
well come to pass that you will be a marked man, too.

Rosmer. On personal grounds, Mr. Mortensgaard, I feel myself to be
invulnerable. My conduct does not offer any point of attack.

Mortensgaard (with a quiet smile). That is saying a good deal, Mr.
Rosmer.

Rosmer. Perhaps it is. But I have the right to say as much.

Mortensgaard. Even if you were inclined to overhaul your conduct as
thoroughly as you once overhauled mine?

Rosmer. You say that very strangely. What are you driving at?--is it
anything definite?

Mortensgaard. Yes, there is one definite thing--no more than a single
one. But it might be quite awkward enough if malicious opponents got a
hint of it.

Rosmer. Will you have the kindness to tell me what on earth it is?

Mortensgaard. Can you not guess, Mr. Rosmer?

Rosmer. No, not for a moment.

Mortensgaard. All right. I must come out with it, then. I have in my
possession a remarkable letter, that was written here at Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Miss West's letter, you mean? Is it so remarkable?

Mortensgaard. No, that letter is not remarkable. But I received a
letter from this house on another occasion.

Rosmer. From Miss West?

Mortensgaard. No, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. Well, from whom, then? From whom?

Mortensgaard. From your late wife.

Rosmer. From my wife? You had a letter from my wife?

Mortensgaard. Yes, I did.

Rosmer. When?

Mortensgaard. It was during the poor lady's last days. It must be about
a year and a half ago now. And that is the letter that is so remarkable.

Rosmer. Surely you know that my wife's mind was affected at that time?

Mortensgaard. I know there were a great many people who thought so.
But, in my opinion, no one would have imagined anything of the kind
from the letter. When I say the letter is a remarkable one, I mean
remarkable in quite another way.

Rosmer. And what in the world did my poor wife find to write to you
about?

Mortensgaard. I have the letter at home. It begins more or less to the
effect that she is living in perpetual terror and dread, because of the
fact that there are so many evilly disposed people about her whose only
desire is to do you harm and mischief.

Rosmer. Me?

Mortensgaard. Yes, so she says. And then follows the most remarkable
part of it all. Shall I tell you, Mr. Rosmer?

Rosmer. Of course! Tell me everything, without any reserve.

Mortensgaard. The poor lady begs and entreats me to be magnanimous. She
says that she knows it was you, who got me dismissed from my post as
schoolmaster, and implores me most earnestly not to revenge myself upon
you.

Rosmer. What way did she think you could revenge yourself, then?

Mortensgaard. The letter goes on to say that if I should hear that
anything sinful was going on at Rosmersholm, I was not to believe a
word of it; that it would be only the work of wicked folk who were
spreading the rumours on purpose to do you harm.

Rosmer. Does the letter say that?

Mortensgaard. You may read it at your convenience, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. But I cannot understand--? What did she imagine there could be
any wicked rumours about?

Mortensgaard. In the first place, that you had broken away from the
faith of your childhood. Mrs. Rosmer denied that absolutely--at that
time. And, in the next place--ahem!

Rosmer. In the next place?

Mortensgaard. Well, in the next place she writes--though rather
confusedly--that she has no knowledge of any sinful relations existing
at Rosmersholm; that she has never been wronged in any way; and that if
any rumours of that sort should get about, she entreats me not to
allude to them in the "Searchlight".

Rosmer. Does she mention any names?

Mortensgaard. No.

Rosmer. Who brought you the letter?

Mortensgaard. I promised not to tell that. It was brought to me one
evening after dark.

Rosmer. If you had made inquiries at the time, you would have learnt
that my poor unhappy wife was not fully accountable for her actions.

Mortensgaard. I did make inquiries, Mr. Rosmer; but I must say I did
not get exactly that impression.

Rosmer. Not?--But why have you chosen this moment to enlighten me as to
the existence of this old crazy letter?

Mortensgaard. With the object of advising you to be extremely cautious,
Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. As to my way of life, do you mean?

Mortensgaard. Yes. You must remember that for the future you will not
be unassailable.

Rosmer. So you persist in thinking that I have something to conceal
here?

Mortensgaard. I do not see any reason why a man of emancipated ideas
should refrain from living his life as fully as possible. Only, as I
have already said, you should be cautious in future. If rumours should
get about of anything that offends people's prejudices, you may be
quite certain that the whole cause of freedom of thought will suffer
for it. Good-bye, Mr. Rosmer.

Rosmer. Good-bye.

Mortensgaard. I shall go straight to the printing-office now and have
the great piece of news inserted in the "Searchlight".

Rosmer. Put it all in.

Mortensgaard. I will put in as much as there is any need for the public
to know. (Bows, and goes out. ROSMER stands at the door, while
MORTENSGAARD goes downstairs. The front door is heard shutting.)

Rosmer (still standing in the doorway, calls softly). Rebecca!
Reb--ahem! (Calls loudly.) Mrs. Helseth--is Miss West downstairs?

Mrs. Helseth (from below). No, sir, she is not here.

(The curtain at the end of the room is drawn back, disclosing REBECCA
standing in the doorway.)

Rebecca. John!

Rosmer (turning round). What! Were you in there, in my bedroom! My
dear, what were you doing there?

Rebecca (going up to him). I have been listening.

Rosmer. Rebecca! Could you do a thing like that?

Rebecca. Indeed I could. It was so horrid the way he said that--about
my morning wrapper.

Rosmer. Ah, so you were in there too when Kroll--?

Rebecca. Yes. I wanted to know what was at the bottom of his mind.

Rosmer. You know I would have told you.

Rebecca. I scarcely think you would have told me everything--certainly
not in his own words.

Rosmer. Did you hear everything, then?

Rebecca. Most of it, I think. I had to go down for a moment when
Mortensgaard came.

Rosmer. And then came up again?

Rebecca. Do not take it ill of me, dear friend.

Rosmer. Do anything that you think right and proper. You have full
freedom of action.--But what do you say to it all, Rebecca? Ah, I do
not think I have ever stood so much in need of you as I do to-day.

Rebecca. Surely both you and I have been prepared for what would happen
some day.

Rosmer. No, no--not for this.

Rebecca. Not for this?

Rosmer. It is true that I used to think that sooner or later our
beautiful pure friendship would come to be attacked by calumny and
suspicion--not on Kroll's part, for I never would have believed such a
thing of him--but on the part of the coarse-minded and ignoble-eyed
crowd. Yes, indeed; I had good reason enough for so jealously drawing a
veil of concealment over our compact. It was a dangerous secret.

Rebecca. Why should we pay any heed to what all these other people
think? You and I know that we have nothing to reproach ourselves with.

Rosmer. I? Nothing to reproach myself with? It is true enough that I
thought so until to-day. But now, now, Rebecca--

Rebecca. Yes? Now?

Rosmer. How am I to account to myself for Beata's horrible accusation?

Rebecca (impetuously). Oh, don't talk about Beata! Don't think about
Beata any more! She is dead, and you seemed at last to have been able
to get away from the thought of her.

Rosmer. Since I have learnt of this, it seems just as if she had come
to life again in some uncanny fashion.

Rebecca. Oh no--you must not say that, John! You must not!

Rosmer. I tell you it is so. We must try and get to the bottom of it.
How can she have strayed into such a woeful misunderstanding of me?

Rebecca. Surely you too are not beginning to doubt that she was very
nearly insane?

Rosmer. Well, I cannot deny it is just of that fact that I feel I
cannot be so altogether certain any longer. And besides if it were so--

Rebecca. If it were so? What then?

Rosmer. What I mean is--where are we to look for the actual cause of
her sick woman's fancies turning into insanity?

Rebecca. What good can it possibly do for you to indulge in such
speculations!

Rosmer. I cannot do otherwise, Rebecca. I cannot let this doubt go on
gnawing at my heart, however unwilling I may be to face it.

Rebecca. But it may become a real danger to you to be perpetually
dwelling on this one lugubrious topic.

Rosmer (walking about restlessly and absorbed in the idea). I must have
betrayed myself in some way or other. She must have noticed how happy I
began to feel from the day you came to us.

Rebecca. Yes; but dear, even if that were so--

Rosmer. You may be sure she did not fail to notice that we read the
same books; that we sought one another's company, and discussed every
new topic together. But I cannot understand it--because I was always so
careful to spare her. When I look back, it seems to me that I did
everything I could to keep her apart from our lives. Or did I not,
Rebecca?

Rebecca. Yes, yes--undoubtedly you did.

Rosmer. And so did you, too. And notwithstanding that--! Oh, it is
horrible to think of! To think that here she was--with her affection
all distorted by illness--never saying a word--watching us--noticing
everything and--and--misconstruing everything.

Rebecca (wringing her hands). Oh, I never ought to have come to
Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Just think what she must have suffered in silence! Think of all
the horrible things her poor diseased brain must have led her to
believe about us and store up in her mind about us! Did she never speak
to you of anything that could give you any kind of clue?

Rebecca (as if startled). To me! Do you suppose I should have remained
here a day longer, if she had?

Rosmer. No, no--that is obvious. What a fight she must have fought--and
fought alone, Rebecca! In despair, and all alone. And then, in the end,
the poignant misery of her victory--which was also her accusation of
us--in the mill-race! (Throws himself into a chair, rests his elbows on
the table, and hides his face in his hands.)

Rebecca (coming quietly up behind him). Listen to me, John. If it were
in your power to call Beata back--to you--to Rosmersholm--would you do
it?

Rosmer. How can I tell what I would do or what I would not do! I have
no thoughts for anything but the one thing which is irrevocable.

Rebecca. You ought to be beginning to live now, John. You were
beginning. You had freed yourself completely on all sides. You were
feeling so happy and so light-hearted

Rosmer. I know--that is true enough. And then comes this overwhelming
blow.

Rebecca (standing behind him, with her arms on the back of his chair).
How beautiful it was when we used to sit there downstairs in the
dusk--and helped each other to plan our lives out afresh. You wanted to
catch hold of actual life--the actual life of the day, as you used to
say. You wanted to pass from house to house like a guest who brought
emancipation with him--to win over men's thoughts and wills to your
own--to fashion noble men all around you, in a wider and wider
circle--noble men!

Rosmer. Noble men and happy men.

Rebecca. Yes, happy men.

Rosmer. Because it is happiness that gives the soul nobility, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Do you not think suffering too? The deepest suffering?

Rosmer. Yes, if one can win through it--conquer it--conquer it
completely.

Rebecca. That is what you must do.

Rosmer (shaking his head sadly). I shall never conquer this completely.
There will always be a doubt confronting me--a question. I shall never
again be able to lose myself in the enjoyment of what makes life so
wonderfully beautiful.

Rebecca (speaking over the back of his chair, softly). What do you
mean, John?

Rosmer (looking up at her). Calm and happy innocence.

Rebecca (taking a step backwards). Of course. Innocence. (A short
silence.)

Rosmer (resting his head on his hands with his elbows on the table, and
looking straight in front of him). How ingeniously--how
systematically--she must have put one thing together with another!
First of all she begins to have a suspicion as to my orthodoxy. How on
earth did she get that idea in her mind? Any way, she did; and the idea
grew into a certainty. And then--then, of course, it was easy for her
to think everything else possible. (Sits up in his chair and, runs his
hands through his hair.) The wild fancies I am haunted with! I shall
never get quit of them. I am certain of that--certain. They will always
be starting up before me to remind me of the dead.

Rebecca. Like the White Horse of Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Yes, like that. Rushing at me out of the dark--out of the
silence.

Rebecca. And, because of this morbid fancy of yours, you are going to
give up the hold you had just gained upon real life?

Rosmer. You are right, it seems hard--hard, Rebecca. But I have no
power of choice in the matter. How do you think I could ever get the
mastery over it?

Rebecca (standing behind his chair). By making new ties for yourself.

Rosmer (starts, and looks up). New ties?

Rebecca. Yes, new ties with the outside world. Live, work, do
something! Do not sit here musing and brooding over insoluble
conundrums.

Rosmer (getting up). New ties! (Walks across the room, turns at the
door and comes back again.) A question occurs to my mind. Has it not
occurred to you too, Rebecca?

Rebecca (catching her breath). Let me hear what it is.

Rosmer. What do you suppose will become of the tie between us, after
to-day?

Rebecca. I think surely our friendship can endure, come what may.

Rosmer. Yes, but that is not exactly what I meant. I was thinking of
what brought us together from the first, what links us so closely to
one another--our common belief in the possibility of a man and a woman
living together in chastity.

Rebecca. Yes, yes--what of it?

Rosmer. What I mean is--does not such a tie as that--such a tie as
ours--seem to belong properly to a life lived in quiet, happy
peacefulness?

Rebecca. Well?

Rosmer. But now I see stretching before me a life of strife and unrest
and violent emotions. For I mean to live my life, Rebecca! I am not
going to let myself be beaten to the ground by the dread of what may
happen. I am not going to have my course of life prescribed for me,
either by any living soul or by another.

Rebecca. No, no--do not! Be a free man in everything, John!

Rosmer. Do you understand what is in my Mind, then? Do you not know? Do
you not see how I could best win my freedom from all these harrowing
memories from the whole sad past?

Rebecca. Tell me!

Rosmer. By setting up, in opposition to them, a new and living reality.

Rebecca (feeling for the back of the chair). A living--? What do you
mean?

Rosmer (coming closer to her). Rebecca--suppose I asked you now--will
you be my second wife?

Rebecca (is speechless for a moment, then gives a cry of joy). Your
wife! Yours--! I!

Rosmer. Yes--let us try what that will do. We two shall be one. There
must no longer be any empty place left by the dead in this house.

Rebecca. I--in Beata's place--?

Rosmer. And then that chapter of my life will be closed--completely
closed, never to be reopened.

Rebecca (in a low, trembling voice). Do you think so, John?

Rosmer. It must be so! It must! I cannot--I will not--go through life
with a dead body on my back. Help me to throw it off, Rebecca; and then
let us stifle all memories in our sense of freedom, in joy, in passion.
You shall be to me the only wife I have ever had.

Rebecca (controlling herself). Never speak of this, again. I will never
be your wife.

Rosmer. What! Never? Do you think, then, that you could not learn to
love me? Is not our friendship already tinged with love?

Rebecca (stopping her ears, as if in fear). Don't speak like that,
John! Don't say such things!

Rosmer (catching her by the arm). It is true! There is a growing
possibility in the tie that is between us. I can see that you feel
that, as well as I--do you not, Rebecca?

Rebecca (controlling herself completely). Listen. Let me tell you
this--if you persist in this, I shall leave Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Leave Rosmersholm! You! You cannot do that. It is impossible.

Rebecca. It is still more impossible for me to become your wife. Never,
as long as I live, can I be that.

Rosmer (looks at her in surprise). You say "can"--and you say it so
strangely. Why can you not?

Rebecca (taking both his hands in hers). Dear friend--for your own
sake, as well as for mine, do not ask me why. (Lets go of his hands.)
So, John. (Goes towards the door on the left.)

Rosmer. For the future the world will hold only one question for
me--why?

Rebecca (turns and looks at him). In that case everything is at an end.

Rosmer. Between you and me?

Rebecca. Yes.

Rosmer. Things can never be at an end between us two. You shall never
leave Rosmersholm.

Rebecca (with her hand on the door-handle). No, I dare say I shall not.
But, all the same, if you question me again, it will mean the end of
everything.

Rosmer. The end of everything, all the same? How--?

Rebecca. Because then I shall go the way Beata went. Now you know, John.

Rosmer. Rebecca--!

Rebecca (stops at the door and nods: slowly). Now you know. (Goes out.)

Rosmer (stares in bewilderment at the shut door, and says to himself):
What can it mean?




ACT III


(SCENE. The sitting-room at Rosmersholm. The window and the hall-door
are open. The morning sun is seen shining outside. REBECCA, dressed as
in ACT I., is standing by the window, watering and arranging the
flowers. Her work is lying on the armchair. MRS. HELSETH is going round
the room with a feather brush, dusting the furniture.)

Rebecca (after a short pause). I wonder why Mr. Rosmer is so late in
coming down to-day?

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, he is often as late as this, miss. He is sure to be
down directly.

Rebecca. Have you seen anything of him?

Mrs. Helseth. No, miss, except that as I took his coffee into his study
he went into his bedroom to finish dressing.

Rebecca. The reason I ask is that he was not very well yesterday.

Mrs. Helseth. No, he did not look well. It made me wonder whether
something had gone amiss between him and his brother-in-law.

Rebecca. What do you suppose could go amiss between them?

Mrs. Helseth. I can't say, miss. Perhaps it was that fellow
Mortensgaard set them at loggerheads.

Rebecca. It is quite possible. Do you know anything of this Peter
Mortensgaard?

Mrs. Helseth. Not I! How could you think so, miss--a man like that!

Rebecca. Because of that horrid paper he edits, you mean?

Mrs. Helseth. Not only because of that, miss. I suppose you have heard
that a certain married woman, whose husband had deserted her, had a
child by him?

Rebecca. I have heard it; but of course that was long before I came
here.

Mrs. Helseth. Bless me, yes--he was quite a young man then. But she
might have had more sense than he had. He wanted to marry her, too, but
that could not be done; and so he had to pay heavily for it. But since
then--my word!--Mortensgaard has risen in the world. There are lots of
people who run after him now.

Rebecca. I believe most of the poor people turn to him first when they
are in any trouble.

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, not only the poor people, miss--

Rebecca (glancing at her unobserved). Indeed?

Mrs. Helseth (standing at the sofa, dusting vigorously). People you
would least expect, sometimes, miss.

Rebecca (arranging the flowers). Yes, but that is only an idea of
yours, Mrs. Helseth. You cannot know that for certain.

Mrs. Helseth. You think I don't know anything about that for certain,
do you, miss? Indeed I do. Because--if I must let out the secret at
last--I carried a letter to Mortensgaard myself once.

Rebecca (turns round). No--did you!

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, that I did. And that letter, let me tell you, was
written here--at Rosmersholm.

Rebecca. Really, Mrs. Helseth?

Mrs. Helseth. I give you my word it was, miss. And it was written on
good note-paper--and sealed with beautiful red sealing-wax.

Rebecca. And you were entrusted with the delivery of it? Dear Mrs.
Helseth, it is not very difficult to guess whom it was from.

Mrs. Helseth. Who, then?

Rebecca. Naturally, it was something that poor Mrs. Rosmer in her
invalid state--

Mrs. Helseth. Well, you have mentioned her name, miss--not I.

Rebecca. But what was in the letter?--No, of course, you cannot know
that.

Mrs. Helseth. Hm!--it is just possible I may know, all the same.

Rebecca. Did she tell you what she was writing about, then?

Mrs. Helseth. No, she did not do that. But when Mortensgaard had read
it, he set to work and cross-questioned me, so that I got a very good
idea of what was in it.

Rebecca. What do you think was in it, then? Oh, dear, good Mrs.
Helseth, do tell me!

Mrs. Helseth. Certainly not, miss. Not for worlds.

Rebecca. Oh, you can tell me. You and I are such friends, you know.

Mrs. Helseth. Heaven forbid I should tell you anything about that,
miss. I shall not tell you anything, except that it was some dreadful
idea that they had gone and put into my poor sick mistress's head.

Rebecca. Who had put it into her head?

Mrs. Helseth. Wicked people, miss. Wicked people.

Rebecca. Wicked--?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, I say it again--very wicked people, they must have
been.

Rebecca. And what do you think it could be?

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, I know what I think--but, please Heaven, I'll keep my
mouth shut. At the same time, there is a certain lady in the town--hm!

Rebecca. I can see you mean Mrs. Kroll.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, she is a queer one, she is. She has always been very
much on the high horse with me. And she has never looked with any
friendly eye on you, either, miss.

Rebecca. Do you think Mrs. Rosmer was quite in her right mind when she
wrote that letter to Mortensgaard?

Mrs. Helseth. It is so difficult to tell, miss. I certainly don't think
she was quite out of her mind.

Rebecca. But you know she seemed to go quite distracted when she learnt
that she would never be able to have a child. That was when her madness
first showed itself.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, that had a terrible effect on her, poor lady.

Rebecca (taking up her work, and sitting down on a chair by the
window). But, in other respects, do you not think that was really a
good thing for Mr. Rosmer, Mrs. Helseth?

Mrs. Helseth. What, miss?

Rebecca. That there were no children?

Mrs. Helseth. Hm!--I really do not know what to say to that.

Rebecca. Believe me, it was best for him. Mr. Rosmer was never meant to
be surrounded by crying children.

Mrs. Helseth. Little children do not cry at Rosmersholm, Miss West.

Rebecca (looking at her). Not cry?

Mrs. Helseth. No. In this house, little children have never been known
to cry, as long as any one can remember.

Rebecca. That is very strange.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, isn't it, miss? But it runs in the family. And there
is another thing that is just as strange; when they grow up they never
laugh--never laugh, all their lives.

Rebecca. But that would be extraordinary

Mrs. Helseth. Have you ever once heard or seen Mr. Rosmer laugh, miss?

Rebecca. No--now that I think of it, I almost believe you are right.
But I fancy most of the folk hereabouts laugh very little.

Mrs. Helseth. That is quite true. People say it began at Rosmersholm,
and I expect it spread like a sort of infection.

Rebecca. You are a sagacious woman, Mrs. Helseth!

Mrs. Helseth. Oh, you mustn't sit there and make game of me, miss.
(Listens.) Hush, hush--Mr. Rosmer is coming down. He doesn't like to
see brooms about. (Goes out by the door on the right. ROSMER, with his
stick and hat in his hand, comes in from the lobby.)

Rosmer. Good-morning, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Good-morning, dear. (She goes on working for a little while in
silence.) Are you going out?

Rosmer. Yes.

Rebecca. It is such a lovely day.

Rosmer. You did not come up to see me this morning.

Rebecca. No--I didn't. Not to-day.

Rosmer. Don't you mean to do so in future, either? Rebecca. I cannot
say yet, dear.

Rosmer. Has anything come for me?

Rebecca. The "County News" has come.

Rosmer. The "County News"!

Rebecca. There it is, on the table.

Rosmer (putting down his hat and stick). Is there anything--?

Rebecca. Yes.

Rosmer. And you did not send it up to me

Rebecca. You will read it quite soon enough.

Rosmer. Well, let us see. (Takes up the paper and stands by the table
reading it.) What!--"cannot pronounce too emphatic a warning against
unprincipled deserters." (Looks at her.) They call me a deserter,
Rebecca.

Rebecca. They mention no names at all.

Rosmer. It comes to the same thing. (Goes on reading.) "Secret traitors
to the good cause."--"Judas-like creatures, who shamelessly confess
their apostasy as soon as they think the most opportune and most
profitable moment has arrived."--"A reckless outrage on the fair fame
of honoured ancestors"--"in the expectation that those who are enjoying
a brief spell of authority will not disappoint them of a suitable
reward." (Lays the paper down on the table.) And they write that of
me--these men who have known me so long and so intimately--write a
thing that they do not even believe themselves! They know there is not
a single word of truth in it--and yet they write it.

Rebecca. There is more of it yet.

Rosmer (taking up the paper again). "Make some allowance for
inexperience and want of judgment"--"a pernicious influence which, very
possibly, has extended even to matters which for the present we will
refrain from publicly discussing or condemning." (Looks at her.) What
does that mean?

Rebecca. That is a hit at me, obviously.

Rosmer (laying down the paper). Rebecca, this is the conduct of
dishonourable men.

Rebecca. Yes, it seems to me they have no right to talk about
Mortensgaard.

Rosmer (walking up and down the room). They must be saved from this
sort of thing. All the good that is in men is destroyed, if it is
allowed to go on. But it shall not be so! How happy--how happy I should
feel if I could succeed in bringing a little light into all this murky
ugliness.

Rebecca (getting up). I am sure of it. There is something great,
something splendid, for you to live for!

Rosmer. Just think of it--if I could wake them to a real knowledge of
themselves--bring them to be angry with and ashamed of
themselves--induce them to be at one with each other in toleration, in
love, Rebecca!

Rebecca. Yes! Give yourself up entirely to that task, and you will see
that you will succeed.

Rosmer. I think it might be done. What happiness it would be to live
one's life, then! No more hateful strife--only emulation; every eye
fixed on the same goal; every man's will, every man's thoughts moving
forward-upward--each in its own inevitable path Happiness for all--and
through the efforts of all! (Looks out of the window as he speaks, then
gives a start and says gloomily:) Ah! not through me.

Rebecca. Not--not through you?

Rosmer. Nor for me, either.

Rebecca. Oh, John, have no such doubts.

Rosmer. Happiness, dear Rebecca, means first and foremost the calm,
joyous sense of innocence.

Rebecca (staring in front of her). Ah, innocence--

Rosmer. You need fear nothing on that score. But I--

Rebecca. You least of all men!

Rosmer (pointing out of the window). The mill-race.

Rebecca. Oh, John!--(MRS. HELSETH looks in in through the door on the
left.)

Mrs. Helseth. Miss West!

Rebecca. Presently, presently. Not now.

Mrs. Helseth. Just a word, miss! (REBECCA goes to the door. MRS.
HELSETH tells her something, and they whisper together for a moment;
then MRS. HELSETH nods and goes away.)

Rosmer (uneasily). Was it anything for me?

Rebecca. No, only something about the housekeeping. You ought to go out
into the open air now, John dear. You should go for a good long walk.

Rosmer (taking up his hat). Yes, come along; we will go together.

Rebecca. No, dear, I can't just now. You must go by yourself. But shake
off all these gloomy thoughts--promise me that!

Rosmer. I shall never be able to shake them quite off, I am afraid.

Rebecca. Oh, but how can you let such groundless fancies take such a
hold on you!

Rosmer. Unfortunately they are not so groundless as you think, dear. I
have lain, thinking them over, all night. Perhaps Beata saw things
truly after all.

Rebecca. In what way do you mean?

Rosmer. Saw things truly when she believed I loved you, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Truly in THAT respect?

Rosmer (laying his hat down on the table). This is the question I have
been wrestling with--whether we two have deluded ourselves the whole
time, when we have been calling the tie between us merely friendship.

Rebecca. Do you mean, then, that the right name for it would have
been--?

Rosmer. Love. Yes, dear, that is what I mean. Even while Beata was
alive, it was you that I gave all my thoughts to. It was you alone I
yearned for. It was with you that I experienced peaceful, joyful,
passionless happiness. When we consider it rightly, Rebecca, our life
together began like the sweet, mysterious love of two children for one
another--free from desire or any thought of anything more. Did you not
feel it in that way too? Tell me.

Rebecca (struggling with herself). Oh, I do not know what to answer.

Rosmer. And it was this life of intimacy, with one another and for one
another, that we took to be friendship. No, dear--the tie between us
has been a spiritual marriage--perhaps from the very first day. That is
why I am guilty. I had no right to it--no right to it for Beata's sake.

Rebecca. No right to a happy life? Do you believe that, John?

Rosmer. She looked at the relations between us through the eyes of HER
love--judged them after the nature of HER love. And it was only
natural. She could not have judged them otherwise than she did.

Rebecca. But how can you so accuse yourself for Beata's delusions?

Rosmer. It was for love of me--in her own way that--she threw herself
into the mill-race. That fact is certain, Rebecca. I can never get
beyond that.

Rebecca. Oh, do not think of anything else but the great, splendid task
that you are going to devote your life to!

Rosmer (shaking his head). It can never be carried through. Not by me.
Not after what I know now.

Rebecca. Why not by you?

Rosmer. Because no cause can ever triumph which has its beginnings in
guilt.

Rebecca (impetuously). Oh, these are nothing but prejudices you have
inherited--these doubts, these fears, these scruples! You have a legend
here that your dead return to haunt you in the form of white horses.
This seems to me to be something of that sort.

Rosmer. Be that as it may, what difference does it make if I cannot
shake it off? Believe me, Rebecca, it is as I say--any cause which is
to win a lasting victory must be championed by a man who is joyous and
innocent.

Rebecca. But is joy so absolutely indispensable to you, John?

Rosmer. Joy? Yes, indeed it is.

Rebecca. To you, who never laugh?

Rosmer. Yes, in spite of that. Believe me, I have a great capacity for
joy.

Rebecca. Now you really must go out, dear--for a long walk--a really
long one, do you hear? There is your hat, and there is your stick.

Rosmer (taking them from her). Thank you. And you won't come too?

Rebecca. No, no, I can't come now.

Rosmer. Very well. You are none the less always with me now. (Goes out
by the entrance hall. After a moment REBECCA peeps out from behind the
door which he has left open. Then she goes to the door on the right,
which she opens.)

Rebecca (in a whisper). Now, Mrs. Helseth. You can let him come in now.
(Crosses to the window. A moment later, KROLL comes in from the right.
He bows to her silently and formally and keeps his hat in his hand.)

Kroll. Has he gone, then?

Rebecca. Yes.

Kroll. Does he generally stay out long?

Rebecca. Yes. But to-day he is in a very uncertain mood--so, if you do
not want to meet him--

Kroll. Certainly not. It is you I wish to speak to--and quite alone.

Rebecca. Then we had better make the best of our time. Please sit down.
(She sits down in an easy-chair by the window. KROLL takes a chair
beside her.)

Kroll. Miss West, you can scarcely have any idea how deeply pained and
unhappy I am over this revolution that has taken place in John Rosmer's
ideas.

Rebecca. We were prepared for that being so--at first.

Kroll. Only at first?

Rosmer. Mr. Rosmer hoped confidently that sooner or later you would
take your place beside him.

Kroll. I?

Rebecca. You and all his other friends.

Kroll. That should convince you how feeble his judgment is on any
matter concerning his fellow-creatures and the affairs of real life.

Rebecca. In any case, now that he feels the absolute necessity of
cutting himself free on all sides--

Kroll. Yes; but, let me tell you, that is exactly what I do not believe.

Rebecca. What do you believe, then?

Kroll. I believe it is you that are at the bottom of the whole thing.

Rebecca. Your wife put that into your head, Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. It does not matter who put it into my head. The point is this,
that I feel grave doubts--exceedingly grave doubts--when I recall and
think over the whole of your behaviour since you came here.

Rebecca (looking at him). I have a notion that there was a time when
you had an exceedingly strong BELIEF in me, dear Mr. Kroll--I might
almost say, a warm belief.

Kroll (in a subdued voice). I believe you could bewitch any one--if you
set yourself to do it.

Rebecca. And you say I set myself to do it!

Kroll. Yes, you did. I am no longer such a simpleton as to suppose that
sentiment entered into your little game at all. You simply wanted to
secure yourself admission to Rosmersholm--to establish yourself here.
That was what I was to help you to. I see it now.

Rebecca. Then you have completely forgotten that it was Beata that
begged and entreated me to come and live here.

Kroll. Yes, because you had bewitched her too. Are you going to pretend
that friendship is the name for what she came to feel towards you? It
was idolatry--adoration. It degenerated into a--what shall I call,
it?--a sort of desperate passion. Yes, that is just the word for it.

Rebecca. Have the goodness to remember the condition your sister was
in. As far as I am concerned I do not think I can be said to be
particularly emotional in any way.

Kroll. No, you certainly are not. But that makes you all the more
dangerous to those whom you wish to get into your power. It comes easy
to you to act with deliberation and careful calculation, just because
you have a cold heart.

Rebecca. Cold? Are you so sure of that?

Kroll. I am certain of it now. Otherwise you could not have pursued
your object here so unswervingly, year after year. Yes, yes--you have
gained what you wanted. You have got him and everything else here into
your power. But, to carry out your schemes, you have not scrupled to
make him unhappy.

Rebecca. That is not true. It is not I; it is you yourself that have
made him unhappy.

Kroll. I!

Rebecca. Yes, by leading him to imagine that he was responsible for the
terrible end that overtook Beata.

Kroll. Did that affect him so deeply, then?

Rebecca. Of course. A man of such gentle disposition as he--

Kroll. I imagined that one of your so-called "emancipated" men would
know how to overcome any scruples. But there it is! Oh, yes--as a
matter of fact it turned out just as I expected. The descendant of the
men who are looking at us from these walls need not think he can break
loose from what has been handed down as an inviolable inheritance from
generation to generation.

Rebecca (looking thoughtfully in front of her). John Rosmer's nature is
deeply rooted in his ancestors. That is certainly very true.

Kroll. Yes, and you ought to have taken that into consideration, if you
had had any sympathy for him. But I dare say you were incapable of that
sort of consideration. Your starting-point is so very widely-removed
from his, you see.

Rebecca. What do you mean by my starting-point?

Kroll. I mean the starting-point of origin--of parentage, Miss West.

Rebecca. I see. Yes, it is quite true that my origin is very humble.
But nevertheless--

Kroll. I am not alluding to rank or position. I am thinking of the
moral aspect of your origin.

Rebecca. Of my origin? In what respect?

Kroll. In respect of your birth generally.

Rebecca. What are you saying!

Kroll. I am only saying it because it explains the whole of your
conduct.

Rebecca. I do not understand. Be so good as to tell me exactly what you
mean.

Kroll. I really thought you did not need telling. Otherwise it would
seem a very strange thing that you let yourself be adopted by Dr. West.

Rebecca (getting up). Oh, that is it! Now I understand.

Kroll. And took his name. Your mother's name was Gamvik.

Rebecca (crossing the room). My father's name was Gamvik, Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. Your mother's occupation must, of course, have brought her
continually into contact with the district physician.

Rebecca. You are quite right.

Kroll. And then he takes you to live with him, immediately upon your
mother's death. He treats you harshly, and yet you stay with him. You
know that he will not leave you a single penny--as a matter of fact you
only got a box of books--and yet you endure living with him, put up
with his behaviour, and nurse him to the end.

Rebecca (comes to the table and looks at him scornfully). And my doing
all that makes it clear to you that there was something
immoral--something criminal about my birth!

Kroll. What you did for him, I attributed to an unconscious filial
instinct. And, as far as the rest of it goes, I consider that the whole
of your conduct has been the outcome of your origin.

Rebecca (hotly). But there is not a single word of truth in what you
say! And I can prove it! Dr. West had not come to Finmark when I was
born.

Kroll. Excuse me, Miss West. He went there a year before you were born.
I have ascertained that.

Rebecca. You are mistaken, I tell you! You are absolutely mistaken!

Kroll. You said here, the day before yesterday, that you were
twenty-nine--going on for thirty.

Rebecca. Really? Did I say that?

Kroll. Yes, you did. And from that I can calculate--

Rebecca. Stop! That will not help you to calculate. For, I may as well
tell you at once, I am a year older than I give myself out to be.

Kroll (smiling incredulously). Really? That is something new. How is
that?

Rebecca. When I had passed my twenty-fifth birthday, I thought I was
getting altogether too old for an unmarried girl, so I resolved to tell
a lie and take a year off my age.

Kroll. You--an emancipated woman--cherishing prejudices as to the
marriageable age!

Rebecca. I know it was a silly thing to do--and ridiculous, too. But
every one has some prejudice or another that they cannot get quite rid
of. We are like that.

Kroll. Maybe. But my calculation may be quite correct, all the same;
because Dr. West was up in Finmark for a flying visit the year before
he was appointed.

Rebecca (impetuously). That is not true

Kroll. Isn't it?

Rebecca. No. My mother never mentioned it.

Kroll. Didn't she, really!

Rebecca. No, never. Nor Dr. West, either. Never a word of it.

Kroll. Might that not be because they both had good reason to jump over
a year?--@just as you have done yourself, Miss West? Perhaps it is a
family failing.

Rebecca (walking about, wringing her hands). It is impossible. It is
only something you want to make me believe. Nothing in the world will
make me believe it. It cannot be true! Nothing in the world--

Kroll (getting up). But, my dear Miss West, why in Heaven's name do you
take it in this way? You quite alarm me! What am I to believe and think?

Rebecca. Nothing. Neither believe nor think anything.

Kroll. Then you really must give me some explanation of your taking
this matter--this possibility--so much to heart.

Rebecca (controlling herself). It is quite obvious, I should think, Mr.
Kroll. I have no desire for people here to think me an illegitimate
child.

Kroll. Quite so. Well, well, let us be content with your explanation,
for the present. But you see that is another point on which you have
cherished a certain prejudice.

Rebecca. Yes, that is quite true.

Kroll. And it seems to me that very much the same applies to most of
this "emancipation" of yours, as you call it. Your reading has
introduced you to a hotch-potch of new ideas and opinions; you have
made a certain acquaintance with researches that are going on in
various directions--researches that seem to you to upset a good many
ideas that people have hitherto considered incontrovertible and
unassailable. But all this has never gone any further than knowledge in
your case, Miss West--a mere matter of the intellect. It has not got
into your blood.

Rebecca (thoughtfully). Perhaps you are right.

Kroll. Yes, only test yourself, and you will see! And if it is true in
your case, it is easy to recognise how true it must be in John
Rosmer's. Of course it is madness, pure and simple. He will be running
headlong to his ruin if he persists in coming openly forward and
proclaiming himself an apostate! Just think of it--he, with his shy
disposition! Think of HIM disowned--hounded out of the circle to which
he has always belonged--exposed to the uncompromising attacks of all
the best people in the place. Nothing would ever make him the man to
endure that.

Rebecca. He MUST endure it! It is too late now for him to draw back.

Kroll. Not a bit too late--not by any means too late. What has happened
can be hushed up--or at any rate can be explained away as a purely
temporary, though regrettable, aberration. But--there is one step that
it is absolutely essential he should take.

Rebecca. And that is?

Kroll. You must get him to legalise his position, Miss West.

Rebecca. The position in which he stands to me?

Kroll. Yes. You must see that you get him to do that.

Rebecca. Then you can't rid yourself of the conviction that the
relations between us need "legalising," as you say?

Kroll. I do not wish to go any more precisely into the question. But I
certainly have observed that the conditions under which it always seems
easiest for people to abandon all their so-called prejudices are
when--ahem!

Rebecca. When it is a question of the relations between a man and a
woman, I suppose you mean?

Kroll. Yes--to speak candidly--that is what I mean.

Rebecca (walks across the room and looks out of the window). I was on
the point of saying that I wish you had been right, Mr. Kroll.

Kroll. What do you mean by that? You say it so strangely!

Rebecca. Oh, nothing! Do not let us talk any more about it. Ah, there
he is!

Kroll. Already! I will go, then.

Rebecca (turning to him). No--stay here, and you will hear something.

Kroll. Not now. I do not think I could bear to see him.

Rebecca. I beg you to stay. Please do, or you will regret it later. It
is the last time I shall ever ask you to do anything.

Kroll (looks at her in surprise, and lays his hat down). Very well,
Miss West. It shall be as you wish. (A short pause. Then ROSMER comes
in from the hall.)

Rosmer (stops at the door, as he sees KROLL). What! you here?

Rebecca. He wanted to avoid meeting you, John.

Kroll (involuntarily). "John?"

Rebecca. Yes, Mr. Kroll. John and I call each other by our Christian
names. That is a natural consequence of the relations between us.

Kroll. Was that what I was to hear if I stayed?

Rebecca. Yes, that and something else.

Rosmer (coming into the room). What is the object of your visit here
to-day?

Kroll. I wanted to make one more effort to stop you, and win you back.

Rosmer (pointing to the newspaper). After that?

Kroll. I did not write it.

Rosmer. Did you take any steps to prevent its appearing?

Kroll. That would have been acting unjustifiably towards the cause I
serve. And, besides that, I had no power to prevent it.

Rebecca (tears the newspaper into pieces, which she crumples up and
throws into the back of the stove). There! Now it is out of sight; let
it be out of mind too. Because there will be no more of that sort of
thing, John.

Kroll. Indeed, I wish you could ensure that.

Rebecca. Come, and let us sit down, dear--all three of us. Then I will
tell you all about it.

Rosmer (sitting down involuntarily). What has come over you, Rebecca?
You are so unnaturally calm--What is it?

Rebecca. The calmness of determination. (Sits down.) Please sit down
too, Mr. Kroll. (He takes a seat on the couch.)

Rosmer. Determination, you say. Determination to do what?

Rebecca. I want to give you back what you need in order to live your
life. You shall have your happy innocence back, dear friend.

Rosmer. But what do you mean?

Rebecca. I will just tell you what happened. That is all that is
necessary.

Rosmer. Well?

Rebecca. When I came down here from Finmark with Dr. West, it seemed to
me that a new, great, wide world was opened to me. Dr. West had given
me an erratic sort of education--had taught me all the odds and ends
that I knew about life then. (Has an evident struggle with herself, and
speaks in barely audible tones.) And then--

Kroll. And then?

Rosmer. But, Rebecca--I know all this.

Rebecca (collecting herself). Yes--that is true enough. You know it
only too well.

Kroll (looking fixedly at her). Perhaps it would be better if I left
you.

Rebecca. No, stay where you are, dear Mr. Kroll. (To ROSMER.) Well,
this was how it was. I wanted to play my part in the new day that was
dawning--to have a share in all the new ideas. Mr. Kroll told me one
day that Ulrik Brendel had had a great influence over you once, when
you were a boy. I thought it might be possible for me to resume that
influence here.

Rosmer. Did you come here with a covert design?

Rebecca. What I wanted was that we two should go forward together on
the road towards freedom--always forward, and further forward! But
there was that gloomy, insurmountable barrier between you and a full,
complete emancipation.

Rosmer. What barrier do you mean?

Rebecca. I mean, John, that you could never have attained freedom
except in the full glory of the sunshine. And, instead of that, here
you were--ailing and languishing in the gloom of such a marriage as
yours.

Rosmer. You have never spoken to me of my marriage in that way, before
to-day.

Rebecca. No, I did not dare, for fear of frightening you.

Kroll (nodding to ROSMER). You hear that!

Rebecca (resuming). But I saw quite well where your salvation lay--your
only salvation. And so I acted.

Rosmer. How do you mean--you acted?

Kroll. Do you mean that?

Rebecca. Yes, John. (Gets up.) No, do not get up. Nor you either, Mr.
Kroll. But we must let in the daylight now. It was not you, John. You
are innocent. It was I that lured--that ended by luring--Beata into the
tortuous path--

Rosmer (springing up). Rebecca!

Kroll (getting up). Into the tortuous path!

Rebecca. Into the path that--led to the mill-race. Now you know it,
both of you.

Rosmer (as if stunned). But I do not understand--What is she standing
there saying? I do not understand a word--

Kroll. Yes, yes. I begin to understand.

Rosmer. But what did you do? What did you find to tell her? Because
there was nothing--absolutely nothing!

Rebecca. She got to know that you were determined to emancipate
yourself from all your old prejudices.

Rosmer. Yes, but at that time I had come to no decision.

Rebecca. I knew that you soon would come to one.

Kroll (nodding to ROSMER). Aha!

Rosmer. Well--and what more? I want to know everything now.

Rebecca. Some time afterwards, I begged and implored her to let me
leave Rosmersholm.

Rosmer. Why did you want to leave here--then?

Rebecca. I did not want to. I wanted to remain where I was. But I told
her that it would be best for us all if I went away in time. I let her
infer that if I remained here any longer I could not tell
what-what-might happen.

Rosmer. That is what you said and did, then?

Rebecca. Yes, John.

Rosmer. That is what you referred to when you said that you "acted"?

Rebecca (in a broken voice). Yes, that was it.

Rosmer (after a pause). Have you confessed everything now, Rebecca?

Rebecca. Yes.

Kroll. Not everything.

Rebecca (looking at him in terror). What else can there be?

Kroll. Did you not eventually lead Beata to believe that it was
necessary--not merely that it should be best--but that it was
necessary, both for your own sake and for John's, that you should go
away somewhere else as soon as possible?--Well?

Rebecca (speaking low and indistinctly). Perhaps I did say something of
the sort.

Rosmer (sinking into a chair by the window). And she, poor sick
creature, believed in this tissue of lies and deceit! Believed in it so
completely--so absolutely! (Looks up at REBECCA.) And she never came to
me about it--never said a word! Ah, Rebecca--I see it in your face--YOU
dissuaded her from doing so.

Rebecca. You know she had taken it into her head that she, a childless
wife, had no right to be here. And so she persuaded herself that her
duty to you was to give place to another.

Rosmer. And you--you did nothing to rid her mind of such an idea?

Rebecca. No.

Kroll. Perhaps you encouraged her in the idea? Answer! Did you not do
so?

Rebecca. That was how she understood me, I believe.

Rosmer. Yes, yes--and she bowed to your will in everything. And so she
gave place. (Springs up.) How could you--how could you go on with this
terrible tragedy!

Rebecca. I thought there were two lives here to choose between, John.

Kroll (severely and with authority). You had no right to make any such
choice.

Rebecca (impetuously). Surely you do not think I acted with cold and
calculating composure! I am a different woman now, when I am telling
you this, from what I was then. And I believe two different kinds of
will can exist at the same time in one person. I wanted Beata away--in
one way or the other; but I never thought it would happen, all the
same. At every step I ventured and risked, I seemed to hear a voice in
me crying: "No further! Not a step further!" And yet, at the same time,
I COULD not stop. I HAD to venture a little bit further--just one step.
And then another--and always another--and at last it happened. That is
how such things go of themselves. (A short silence.)

Rosmer (to REBECCA). And how do you think it will go with YOU in the
future?--after this?

Rebecca. Things must go with me as they can. It is of very little
consequence.

Kroll. Not a word suggestive of remorse! Perhaps you feel none?

Rebecca (dismissing his remark coldly). Excuse me, Mr. Kroll, that is a
matter that is no concern of any one else's. That is an account I must
settle with myself.

Kroll (to ROSMER). And this is the woman you have been living under the
same roof with--in relations of the completest confidence. (Looks up at
the portraits on the walls.) If only those that are gone could look
down now!

Rosmer. Are you going into the town?

Kroll (taking up his hat). Yes. The sooner the better.

Rosmer (taking his hat also). Then I will go with you.

Kroll. You will! Ah, I thought we had not quite lost you.

Rosmer. Come, then, Kroll. Come! (They both go out into the hall
without looking at REBECCA. After a minute REBECCA goes cautiously to
the window and peeps out between the flowers.)

Rebecca (speaking to herself, half aloud). Not over the bridge to-day
either. He is going round. Never over the millrace--never. (Comes away
from the window.) As I thought! (She goes over to the bell, and rings
it. Soon afterwards MRS. HELSETH comes in from the right.)

Mrs. Helseth. What is it, miss?

Rebecca. Mrs. Helseth, will you be so good as to fetch my travelling
trunk down from the loft?

Mrs. Helseth. Your trunk?

Rebecca. Yes, the brown hair-trunk, you know.

Mrs. Helseth. Certainly, miss. But, bless my soul, are you going away
on a journey, miss?

Rebecca. Yes--I am going away on a journey, Mrs. Helseth.

Mrs. Helseth. And immediately!

Rebecca. As soon as I have packed.

Mrs. Helseth. I never heard of such a thing! But you are coming back
again soon, I suppose, miss?

Rebecca. I am never coming back again.

Mrs. Helseth. Never! But, my goodness, what is to become of us at
Rosmersholm if Miss West is not here any longer? Just as everything was
making poor Mr. Rosmer so happy and comfortable!

Rebecca. Yes, but to-day I have had a fright, Mrs. Helseth.

Mrs. Helseth. A fright! Good heavens-how?

Rebecca. I fancy I have had a glimpse of the White Horse.

Mrs. Helseth. Of the White Horse! In broad daylight!

Rebecca. Ah! they are out both early and late, the White Horses of
Rosmersholm. (Crosses the room.) Well--we were speaking of my trunk,
Mrs. Helseth.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, miss. Your trunk.

(They both go out to the right.)




ACT IV


(SCENE.--The same room in the late evening. The lamp, with a shade on
it, is burning on the table. REBECCA is standing by the table, packing
some small articles in a travelling-bag. Her cloak, hat, and the white
crochetted shawl are hanging on the back of the couch. MRS. HELSETH
comes in from the right.)

Mrs. Helseth (speaking in low tones and with a reserved manner). Yes,
all your things have been taken down, miss. They are in the kitchen
passage.

Rebecca. Thank you. You have ordered the carriage?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, miss. The coachman wants to know what time he shall
bring it round.

Rebecca. I think at about eleven o'clock. The boat goes at midnight.

Mrs. Helseth (with a little hesitation). But what about Mr. Rosmer?
Suppose he is not back by that time?

Rebecca. I shall start, all the same. If I should not see him, you can
tell him I will write to him--a long letter, say that.

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, I dare say it will be all right to write. But, poor
dear, I really think that you ought to try and have a talk with him
once more.

Rebecca. Perhaps I ought--Or perhaps not, after all.

Mrs. Helseth. Dear, dear! I never thought I should, live to see such a
thing as this!

Rebecca. What did you think, then, Mrs. Helseth?

Mrs. Helseth. To tell the truth, miss, I thought Mr. Rosmer was an
honester man than that.

Rebecca. Honester?

Mrs. Helseth. Yes, miss, that is the truth.

Rebecca. But, my dear Mrs. Helseth, what do you mean by that?

Mrs. Helseth. I mean what is true and right, miss. He should not get
out of it in this way--that he shouldn't.

Rebecca (looking at her). Now look here, Mrs. Helseth. Tell me,
honestly and frankly, why you think I am going away.

Mrs. Helseth. Good Lord, miss--because it is necessary, I suppose.
Well, well!--Still, I certainly do not think Mr. Rosmer has behaved
well. There was some excuse in Mortensgaard's case, because the woman's
husband was still alive; so that it was impossible for them to marry,
however much they wished it. But Mr. Rosmer, he could--ahem!

Rebecca (with a faint smile). Is it possible that you could think such
things about me and Mr. Rosmer?

Mrs. Helseth. Not for a moment--until to-day, I mean.

Rebecca. But why to-day?

Mrs. Helseth. Well, after all the horrible things they tell me one may
see in the papers about Mr. Rosmer--

Rebecca. Ah!

Mrs. Helseth. What I mean is this--if a man can go over to
Mortensgaard's religion, you may believe him capable of anything. And
that's the truth.

Rebecca. Yes, very likely. But about me? What have you got to say about
me?

Mrs. Helseth. Well, I am sure, miss--I do not think you are so greatly
to be blamed. It is not always so easy for a lone woman to resist, I
dare say. We are all human after all, Miss West.

Rebecca. That is very true, Mrs. Helseth. We are all human, after
all.--What are you listening to?

Mrs. Helseth (in a low voice). Good Lord!--I believe that is him coming
now.

Rebecca (with a start). In spite of everything, then--! (Speaks with
determination.) Very well. So be it. (ROSMER comes in from the hall. He
sees the luggage, and turns to REBECCA.)

Rosmer. What does this mean?

Rebecca. I am going away.

Rosmer. At once?

Rebecca. Yes. (To MRS. HELSETH.) Eleven o'clock, then.

Mrs. Helseth. Very well, miss. (Goes out to the right.)

Rosmer (after a short pause). Where are you going, Rebecca?

Rebecca. I am taking the boat for the north.

Rosmer. North? What are you going there for?

Rebecca. It is where I came from.

Rosmer. But you have no more ties there now.

Rebecca. I have none here, either.

Rosmer. What do you propose to do?

Rebecca. I do not know. I only want to make an end of it.

Rosmer. Make an end of what?

Rebecca. Rosmersholm has broken me.

Rosmer (more attentively). What is that?

Rebecca. Broken me utterly. I had a will of my own, and some courage,
when I came here. Now I am crushed under the law of strangers. I do not
think I shall have the courage to begin anything else in the world
after this.

Rosmer. Why not? What do you mean by being crushed under a law--?

Rebecca. Dear friend, do not let us talk about that now--Tell me what
passed between you and Mr. Kroll.

Rosmer. We have made our peace.

Rebecca. Quite so. So it came to that.

Rosmer. He got together all our old circle of friends at his house.
They convinced me that the work of ennobling men's souls was not in my
line at all. Besides, it is such a hopeless task, any way. I shall let
it alone.

Rebecca. Well, perhaps it is better so.

Rosmer. Do you say THAT now? Is that what your opinion is now?

Rebecca. I have come to that opinion--in the last day or two.

Rosmer. You are lying, Rebecca.

Rebecca. Lying--?

Rosmer. Yes, lying. You have never believed in me. You have never
believed me to be the man to lead the cause to victory.

Rebecca. I have believed that we two together would be equal to it.

Rosmer. That is not true. You have believed that you could accomplish
something big in life yourself--that you could use me to further your
plans--that I might be useful to you in the pursuit of your object.
That is what you have believed.

Rebecca. Listen to me, John

Rosmer (sitting down wearily on the couch). Oh, let me be! I see the
whole thing clearly now. I have been like a glove in your hands.

Rebecca. Listen to me, John. Let us talk this thing over. It will be
for the last time. (Sits down in a chair by the couch.) I had intended
to write to you about it all--when I had gone back north. But it is
much better that you should hear it at once.

Rosmer. Have you something more to tell, then?

Rebecca. The most important part of it all.

Rosmer. What do you mean?

Rebecca. Something that you have never suspected. Something that puts
all the rest in its true light.

Rosmer (shaking his head). I do not understand, at all.

Rebecca. It is quite true that at one time I did play my cards so as to
secure admission to Rosmersholm. My idea was that I should succeed in
doing well for myself here--either in one way or in another, you
understand.

Rosmer. Well, you succeeded in carrying your scheme through, too.

Rebecca. I believe I could have carried anything through--at that time.
For then I still had the courage of a free will. I had no one else to
consider, nothing to turn me from my path. But then began what has
broken down my will and filled the whole of my life with dread and
wretchedness.

Rosmer. What--began? Speak so that I can understand you.

Rebecca. There came over me--a wild, uncontrollable passion--Oh, John--!

Rosmer. Passion? You--! For what?

Rebecca. For you.

Rosmer (getting up). What does this mean!

Rebecca (preventing him). Sit still, dear. I will tell you more about
it.

Rosmer. And you mean to say--that you have loved me--in that way!

Rebecca. I thought I might call it loving you--then. I thought it was
love. But it was not. It was what I have said--a wild, uncontrollable
passion.

Rosmer (speaking with difficulty). Rebecca--is it really you--you--who
are sitting here telling me this?

Rebecca. Yes, indeed it is, John.

Rosmer. Then it was as the outcome of this--and under the influence of
this--that you "acted," as you called it.

Rebecca. It swept over me like a storm over the sea--like one of the
storms we have in winter in the north. They catch you up and rush you
along with them, you know, until their fury is expended. There is no
withstanding them.

Rosmer. So it swept poor unhappy Beata into the mill-race.

Rebecca. Yes--it was like a fight for life between Beata and me at that
time.

Rosmer. You proved the strongest of us all at Rosmersholm--stronger
than both Beata and me put together.

Rebecca. I knew you well enough to know that I could not get at you in
any way until you were set free--both in actual circumstances and in
your soul.

Rosmer. But I do not understand you, Rebecca. You--you yourself and
your whole conduct--are an insoluble riddle to me. I am free now--both
in my soul and my circumstances. You are absolutely in touch with the
goal you set before yourself from the beginning. And nevertheless--

Rebecca. I have never stood farther from my goal than I do now.

Rosmer. And nevertheless, I say, when yesterday I asked you--urged
you--to become my wife, you cried out that it never could be.

Rebecca. I cried out in despair, John.

Rosmer. Why?

Rebecca. Because Rosmersholm has unnerved me. All the courage has been
sapped out of my will here--crushed out! The time has gone for me to
dare risk anything whatever. I have lost all power of action, John.

Rosmer. Tell me how that has come about.

Rebecca. It has come about through my living with you.

Rosmer. But how? How?

Rebecca. When I was alone with you here--and you had really found
yourself--

Rosmer. Yes, yes?

Rebecca. For you never really found yourself as long as Beata was
Alive--

Rosmer. Alas, you are right in that.

Rebecca. When it came about that I was living together with you here,
in peace and solitude--when you exchanged all your thoughts with me
unreservedly--your every mood, however tender or intimate--then the
great change happened in me. Little by little, you understand. Almost
imperceptibly--but overwhelmingly in the end, till it reached the
uttermost depths of my soul.

Rosmer. What does this mean, Rebecca?

Rebecca. All the other feeling--all that horrible passion that had
drowned my better self--left me entirely. All the violent emotions that
had been roused in me were quelled and silenced. A peace stole over my
soul--a quiet like that of one of our mountain peaks up under the
midnight sun.

Rosmer. Tell me more of it--all that you can.

Rebecca. There is not much more to tell. Only that this was how love
grew up in my heart--a great, self-denying love--content with such a
union of hearts as there has been between us two.

Rosmer. Oh, if only I had had the slightest suspicion of all this!

Rebecca. It is best as it is. Yesterday, when you asked me if I would
be your wife, I gave a cry of joy--

Rosmer. Yes, it was that, Rebecca, was it not! I thought that was what
it meant.

Rebecca. For a moment, yes-I forgot myself for a moment. It was my
dauntless will of the old days that was struggling to be free again.
But now it has no more strength--it has lost it for ever.

Rosmer. How do you explain what has taken place in you?

Rebecca. It is the Rosmer attitude towards life-or your attitude
towards life, at any rate--that has infected my will.

Rosmer. Infected?

Rebecca. Yes, and made it sickly--bound it captive under laws that
formerly had no meaning for me. You--my life together with you--have
ennobled my soul--

Rosmer. Ah, if I dared believe that to be true!

Rebecca. You may believe it confidently. The Rosmer attitude towards
life ennobles. But-(shakes her head)-but-but--

Rosmer. But? Well?

Rebecca. But it kills joy, you know.

Rosmer. Do you say that, Rebecca?

Rebecca. For me, at all events.

Rosmer. Yes, but are you so sure of that? If I asked you again now--?
Implored you--?

Rebecca. Oh, my dear--never go back to that again! It is impossible.
Yes, impossible--because I must tell you this, John. I have a--past
behind me.

Rosmer. Something more than you have told me?

Rebecca. Yes, something more and something different.

Rosmer (with a faint smile). It is very strange, Rebecca, but--do you
know--the idea of such a thing has occurred to me more than once.

Rebecca. It has? And yet--notwithstanding that, you--?

Rosmer. I never believed in it. I only played with the idea-nothing
more.

Rebecca. If you wish, I will tell you all about it at once.

Rosmer (stopping her). No, no! I do not want to hear a word about it.
Whatever it is, it shall be forgotten, as far as I am concerned.

Rebecca. But I cannot forget it.

Rosmer. Oh, Rebecca--!

Rebecca. Yes, dear--that is just the dreadful part of it-that now, when
all the happiness of life is freely and fully offered to me, all I can
feel is that I am barred out from it by my past.

Rosmer. Your past is dead, Rebecca. It has no longer any hold on
you--has nothing to do with you--as you are now.

Rebecca. Ah, my dear, those are mere words, you know. What about
innocence, then? Where am I to get that from?

Rosmer (gloomily). Ah, yes--innocence.

Rebecca. Yes, innocence--which is at the root of all joy and happiness.
That was the teaching, you know, that you wanted to see realised by all
the men you were going to raise up to nobility and happiness.

Rosmer. Ah, do not remind me of that. It was nothing but a half-dreamt
dream, Rebecca--a rash suggestion that I have no longer any faith in.
Human nature cannot be ennobled by outside influences, believe me.

Rebecca (gently). Not by a tranquil love, do you think?

Rosmer (thoughtfully). Yes, that would be a splendid thing--almost the
most glorious thing in life, I think if it were so. (Moves restlessly.)
But how am I ever to clear up the question?--how am I to get to the
bottom of it?

Rebecca. Do you not believe in me, John?

Rosmer. Ah, Rebecca, how can I believe you entirely--you whose life
here has been nothing but continual concealment and secrecy!--And now
you have this new tale to tell. If it is cloaking some design of yours,
tell me so--openly. Perhaps there is something or other that you hope
to gain by that means? I will gladly do anything that I can for you.

Rebecca (wringing her hands). Oh, this killing doubt! John, John--!

Rosmer. Yes, I know, dear--it is horrible--but I cannot help it. I
shall never be able to free myself from it--never be able to feel
certain that your love for me is genuine and pure.

Rebecca. But is there nothing in your own heart that bears witness to
the transformation that has taken place in me--and taken place through
your influence, and yours alone!

Rosmer. Ah, my dear, I do not believe any longer in my power to
transform people. I have no belief in myself left at all. I do not
believe either in myself or in you.

Rebecca (looking darkly at him). How are you going to live out your
life, then?

Rosmer. That is just what I do not know--and cannot imagine. I do not
believe I can live it out. And, moreover, I do not know anything in the
world that would be worth living for.

Rebecca. Life carries a perpetual rebirth with it. Let us hold fast to
it, dear. We shall be finished with it quite soon enough.

Rosmer (getting up restlessly). Then give me my faith back again!--my
faith in you, Rebecca--my faith in your love! Give me a proof of it! I
must have some proof!

Rebecca. Proof? How can I give you a proof--!

Rosmer. You must! (Crosses the room.) I cannot bear this desolate,
horrible loneliness--this-this--. (A knock is heard at the hall door.)

Rebecca (getting up from her chair). Did you hear that?

(The door opens, and ULRIK BRENDEL comes in. Except that he wears a
white shirt, a black coat and, a good pair of high boots, he is dressed
as in the first act. He looks troubled.)

Rosmer. Ah, it is you, Mr. Brendel!

Brendel. John, my boy, I have come to say good-bye to you!

Rosmer. Where are you going, so late as this?

Brendel. Downhill.

Rosmer. How--?

Brendel. I am on my way home, my beloved pupil. I am homesick for the
great Nothingness.

Rosmer. Something has happened to you, Mr. Brendel! What is it?

Brendel. Ah, you notice the transformation, then? Well, it is evident
enough. The last time I entered your doors I stood before you a man of
substance, slapping a well-filled pocket.

Rosmer. Really? I don't quite understand--

Brendel. And now, as you see me to-night, I am a deposed monarch
standing over the ashes of my burnt-out palace.

Rosmer. If there is any way I can help you

Brendel. You have preserved your childlike heart, John--can you let me
have a loan?

Rosmer. Yes, most willingly!

Brendel. Can you spare me an ideal or two?

Rosmer. What do you say?

Brendel. One or two cast-off ideals? You will be doing a good deed. I
am cleaned out, my dear boy, absolutely and entirely.

Rebecca. Did you not succeed in giving your lecture?

Brendel. No, fair lady. What do you think?--just as I was standing
ready to pour out the contents of my horn in plenty, I made the painful
discovery that I was bankrupt.

Rebecca. But what of all your unwritten works, then?

Brendel. For five and twenty years I have been like a miser sitting on
his locked money-chest. And then to-day, when I opened it to take out
my treasure--there was nothing there! The mills of time had ground it
into dust. There was not a blessed thing left of the whole lot.

Rosmer. But are you certain of that?

Brendel. There is no room for doubt, my dear boy. The President has
convinced me of that.

Rosmer. The President?

Brendel. Oh, well--His Excellency, then. Ganz nach Belieben.

Rosmer. But whom do you mean?

Brendel. Peter Mortensgaard, of course.

Rosmer. What!

Brendel (mysteriously). Hush, hush, hush! Peter Mortensgaard is Lord
and Chieftain of the Future. I have never stood in a more august
presence. Peter Mortensgaard has the power of omnipotence in him. He
can do whatever he wants.

Rosmer. Oh, come--don't you believe that!

Brendel. It is true, my boy--because Peter Mortensgaard never wants to
do more than he can. Peter Mortensgaard is capable of living his life
without ideals. And that, believe me, is precisely the great secret of
success in life. It sums up all the wisdom of the world. Basta!

Rosmer (in a low voice). Now I see that you are going away from here
poorer than you came.

Brendel. Bien! Then take an example from your old tutor. Erase from
your mind everything that he imprinted there. Do not build your castle
upon the shifting sand. And look well ahead, and be sure of your
ground, before you build upon the charming creature who is sweetening
your life here.

Rebecca. Do you mean me?

Brendel. Yes, most attractive mermaid!

Rebecca. Why am I not fit to build upon?

Brendel (taking a step nearer to her). I understood that my former
pupil had a cause which it was his life's work to lead to victory.

Rebecca. And if he has--?

Brendel. He is certain of victory--but, be it distinctly understood, on
one unalterable condition.

Rebecca. What is that?

Brendel (taking her gently by the wrist). That the woman who loves him
shall gladly go out into the kitchen and chop off her dainty, pink and
white little finger--here, just at the middle joint. Furthermore, that
the aforesaid loving woman shall--also gladly--clip off her
incomparably moulded left ear. (Lets her go, and turns to ROSMER.)
Good-bye, John the Victorious!

Rosmer. Must you go now--in this dark night?

Brendel. The dark night is best. Peace be with you! (He goes out.
Silence in the room for a short time.)

Rebecca (breathing heavily). How close and sultry it is in here! (Goes
to the window, opens it and stands by it.)

Rosmer (sitting down on a chair by the stove). There is nothing else
for it after all, Rebecca--I can see that. You must go away.

Rebecca. Yes, I do not see that I have any choice.

Rosmer. Let us make use of our last hour together. Come over here and
sit beside me.

Rebecca (goes and sits down on the couch). What do you want, John?

Rosmer. In the first place I want to tell you that you need have no
anxiety about your future.

Rebecca (with a smile). Hm! My future!

Rosmer. I have foreseen all contingencies--long ago. Whatever may
happen, you are provided for.

Rebecca. Have you even done that for me, dear?

Rosmer. You might have known that I should.

Rebecca. It is many a long day since I thought about anything of the
kind.

Rosmer. Yes, of course. Naturally, you thought things could never be
otherwise between us than as they were.

Rebecca. Yes, that was what I thought.

Rosmer. So did I. But if anything were to happen to me now--

Rebecca. Oh, John, you will live longer than I shall.

Rosmer. I can dispose of my miserable existence as I please, you know.

Rebecca. What do you mean? You surely are never thinking of--!

Rosmer. Do you think it would be so surprising? After the pitiful,
lamentable defeat I have suffered? I, who was to have made it my life's
work to lead my cause to victory--! And here I am, a deserter before
the fight has even really begun!

Rebecca. Take up the fight again, John! Only try--and you will see that
you will conquer. You will ennoble hundreds--thousands--of souls. Only
try!

Rosmer. I, Rebecca, who no longer believe even in my having a mission
in life?

Rebecca. But your mission has stood the test. You have at all events
ennobled one of your fellow-creatures for the rest of her life--I mean
myself.

Rosmer. Yes--if I dared believe you about that.

Rebecca (wringing her hands). But, John, do you know of
nothing--nothing--that would make you believe that?

Rosmer (starts, as if with fear). Don't venture on that subject! No
further, Rebecca! Not a single word more!

Rebecca. Indeed, that is just the subject we must venture upon. Do you
know of anything that would stifle your doubts? For I know of nothing
in the world.

Rosmer. It is best for you not to know. Best for us both.

Rebecca. No, no, no--I have no patience with that sort of thing! If you
know of anything that would acquit me in your eyes, I claim it as my
right that you should name it.

Rosmer (as if impelled against his will). Well, let us see. You say
that you have great love in your heart; that your soul has been
ennobled through me. Is that so? Have you counted the cost? Shall we
try and balance our accounts? Tell me.

Rebecca. I am quite ready.

Rosmer. Then when shall it be?

Rebecca. Whenever you like. The sooner the better.

Rosmer. Then let me see, Rebecca, whether you--for my sake-this very
night--. (Breaks off.) Oh, no, no!

Rebecca. Yes, John! Yes, yes! Say it, and you shall see.

Rosmer. Have you the courage--are you willing--gladly, as Ulrik Brendel
said--for my sake, to-night--gladly--to go the same way--that Beata
went!

Rebecca (gets up slowly from the couch, and says almost inaudibly):
John--!

Rosmer. Yes, dear--that is the question I shall never be able to rid my
thoughts of, when you have gone away. Every hour of the day I shall
come back to it. Ah, I seem to see you bodily before me--standing out
on the foot-bridge-right out in the middle. Now you lean out over the
railing! You grow dizzy as you feel drawn down towards the mill-race!
No--you recoil. You dare not do--what she dared.

Rebecca. But if I had the courage?--and willingly and gladly? What then?

Rosmer. Then I would believe in you. Then I should get back my faith in
my mission in life--my faith in my power to ennoble my fellow men--my
faith in mankind's power to be ennobled.

Rebecca (takes up her shawl slowly, throws it over her head, and says,
controlling herself): You shall have your faith back.

Rosmer. Have you the courage and the strength of will for that, Rebecca?

Rebecca. Of that you must judge in the morning--or later--when they
take up my body.

Rosmer (burying his head in his hands). There is a horrible temptation
in this--!

Rebecca. Because I should not like to be left lying there--any longer
than need be. You must take care that they find me.

Rosmer (springing up). But all this is madness, you know. Go away, or
stay! I will believe you on your bare word this time too.

Rebecca. Those are mere words, John. No more cowardice or evasion! How
can you believe me on my bare word after today?

Rosmer. But I do not want to see your defeat, Rebecca.

Rebecca. There will be no defeat.

Rosmer. There will. You will never have the heart to go Beata's way.

Rebecca. Do you believe that?

Rosmer. Never. You are not like Beata. You are not under the influence
of a distorted view of life.

Rebecca. But I am under the influence of the Rosmersholm view of
Life--now. Whatever my offences are--it is right that I should expiate
them.

Rosmer (looking at her fixedly). Have you come to that decision?

Rebecca. Yes.

Rosmer. Very well. Then I too am under the influence of our unfettered
view of life, Rebecca. There is no one that can judge us. And therefore
we must be our own judges.

Rebecca (misunderstanding his meaning). That too. That too. My leaving
you will save the best that is in you.

Rosmer. Ah, there is nothing left to save in me.

Rebecca. There is. But I--after this I should only be like some
sea-sprite hanging on to the barque you are striving to sail forward
in, and, hampering its progress. I must go overboard. Do you think I
could go through the world bearing the burden of a spoiled
life--brooding for ever over the happiness which I have forfeited by my
past? I must throw up the game, John.

Rosmer. If you go--then I go with you.

Rebecca (looks at him with an almost imperceptible smile, and says more
gently): Yes, come with me, dear--and be witness--

Rosmer. I go with you, I said.

Rebecca. As far as the bridge--yes. You never dare go out on to it, you
know.

Rosmer. Have you noticed that?

Rebecca (in sad and broken tones). Yes. That was what made my love
hopeless.

Rosmer. Rebecca--now I lay my hand on your head. (Does as he says.) And
I take you for my true and lawful wife.

Rebecca (taking both his hands in hers, and bowing her head on to his
breast). Thank you, John. (Lets him go.) And now I am going--gladly.

Rosmer. Man and wife should go together.

Rebecca. Only as far as the bridge, John.

Rosmer. And out on to it, too. As far as you go--so far I go with you.
I dare do it now.

Rebecca. Are you absolutely certain that way is the best for you?

Rosmer. I know it is the only way.

Rebecca. But suppose you are only deceiving yourself? Suppose it were
only a delusion--one of these White Horses of Rosmersholm?

Rosmer. It may be so. We can never escape from them--we of my race.

Rebecca. Then stay, John!

Rosmer. The man shall cleave to his wife, as the wife to her husband.

Rebecca. Yes, but first tell me this--is it you that go with me, or I
that go with you?

Rosmer. We shall never get to the bottom of that.

Rebecca. Yet I should dearly like to know.

Rosmer. We two go with each other, Rebecca. I with you, and you with me.

Rebecca. I almost believe that is true.

Rosmer. For now we two are one.

Rebecca. Yes. We are one now. Come! We can go gladly now. (They go out,
hand in hand, through the hall, and are seen to turn to the left. The
door stands open after them. The room is empty for a little while. Then
MRS. HELSETH opens the door on the right.)

Mrs. Helseth. The carriage, miss, is--. (Looks round the room.) Not
here? Out together at this time of night? Well, well--I must say--! Hm!
(Goes out into the hall, looks round and comes in again.) Not sitting
on the bench--ah, well! (Goes to the window and looks out.) Good
heavens! What is that white thing--! As I am a living soul, they are
both out on the foot-bridge! God forgive the sinful creatures--if they
are not in each other's arms! (Gives a wild scream.) Ah!--they are
over--both of them! Over into the mill-race! Help! help! (Her knees
tremble, she holds on shakily to the back of a chair and can scarcely
get her words out.) No. No help here. The dead woman has taken them.

========================================
